JANUAE CLAVIS: OR, Lilly's SYNTAX EXPLAINED, Its Elegancy from good Authors
cleared; its Fundamentals compared with the ACCIDENCE, and the Rules thereof
more fitted to the Capacity of CHILDREN.

(...). Plut. Nisi Grammatices fundamenta fideliter jeceris, quicquid
Superstruxeris, corruet, Quint. Latinae Linguae docendae rationem a vulgari
aliam esse lubens agnoseo, Voss. -- Inutilis olim
Ne videar vixisse,
Hor. Nihil quidquam tam probe aut provide dici potest, quod non vellicare
malignitas possit, Lips. By JONATHAN BANKS.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Benjamin Clarke in
George-Yard in Lumbard-Street, Anno Dom. 1679.

THE PREFACE.
IN School-Didactics, there are three grand things considered, Grammar,
Exercise and Authors: Whereof the first is an Introduction to the last, and the
second an Imitation of it, according to the Precepts of the first. And, as
there is nothing more necessary (not only to a perfect knowledge of the
Tongues, but of all Learning in general) than Grammar: so there has been
scarce any thing in most Centuries and Countries more variously pursued than it.
Neither is it a thing so contemptible, but that Persons of Worth and Grandeur
have been employed therein; Witness the Egyptian Philadelphus, (for Learning
the Glory of that Nation) who blushed not to Write his (...). And the Heroic
Prince Charlemain, (truly so Styled, for the Foundation of the Western Empire)
who wrote a Grammar for his own Subjects. And though our Nation, before the
Happy Conjunction of the Two Roses, had few or none dextrous in this Art; as if
the Pens of the Learned had been sufficiently employed, to Write Characters of
the Blood, which was effus'd in that quarrel. Yet afterward whole Squadrons
(not to mention the Compilers of our Royal Grammar) appeared in the world, as
Inveterate Champions against that Ignorance, which the middle Clerici adeo
literarum care^ant, ut caeteris stuporiesset, qui Grammaticam didicisset, Math.
Paris.
Ages had adored. To enumerate which, I shall forbear, and proceed to give the
Reasons inducing me to this Attempt, which are these.

1. The English-Tongue in its natural Idiom, is so far different from that of
the Latin, in comparison of most Modern Languages, (which seem to be the
products of its Corruption,) that it had need (in case of Particles or Signs)
to have some subsidiary, to further a Progress therein. And though the
Accidence be an English Introduction, and (as by the Learned Dr. Colet
designed) may serve as such to the Grammar: Yet will a Subsidiary thereto be
not unnecessary. Which supplying its defects with apposite Particles, and
clearing some Obscurities, may, without Inconvenience to the Royal Grammar or
it, both Explain their Rules, and adapt them to the Elegancy and Idiom of
Signs. As a demonstration of which necessity, we have Mr. Walker's Treatise of
Particles, (a Tract which acquired him that Fame in the World which his Merit
may justly challenge,) and the late exquisite Dictionary of Ingenious Mr.
Coals, (which both for apposite Phrases, and Idiomatical Elegancies, seems to
have put a Ne plus ultra) which also by their acceptance abroad, do evidence
(as See Brinsl^y's posing of Parts, and Danes's Grammar.
Mr. Brinsly and Mr. Danes of old, and of late Mr. Wase) the utility redounding
from the use and knowledge of Particles: But all without reference to the
public Institution established.

And if the Grammar Imposed by Authority (to obey which, Duty commands us) be
still to be taught: It Is our Province to facilitate our Didactics, and to apply
and conform them to those enjoined by Law. For suppose a Boy can make good
Latin by these Particles, by the assistance of Mr. Walker's, and Mr. Coles's
Tract, and knows not to what Rule in his Accidence or Grammar they do belong
(which, as it was not proper, by their Books, he cannot) then he must either be
at a loss, or neglect his Grammar: Which is here remedied.

2. A ranking of the Rules in the Accidence, and Grammar together, the better
to understand them both; and that by way of Comparison e regione, may be a good
mean to facilitate a Progress. Which likewise is the use of most of our
Grammarians in the Modern Tongues, comparing that which is to be Learned, with
that which is already understood. That great Regulator of School-Polity,
Comenius in his Idiomatical Precepts of Elegancy does use it: And Mr. Hill (in
his Preface to Schrevelius's Lexicon) passes an Encomium on it. Not to speak of
Mr. Lewis, who makes it his grand and fundamental Principle.

3. A placing of Rules for plain Latin first, and then Rules for Elegancy
(according to the Pattern of Nature) will expedite a proficiency; the contrary
to which creates confusion.

4. In handling of Government, first Rules ought to be given, and then
Exceptions; because the first coming frequently should be first instilled:
according to the direction of the famed Stagirite, (...)

5. Genesis is more easy than Analysis. A Boy will sooner understand his Rules
by making Latin, than by parsing. The Preface to the Royal Grammar enjoins
this. And Mr. Clark is of the same Opinion. * Prefa^e to Duoe Gram.
Which thing may easily be effected by Syncrisis, even in those which have lost
their knowledge in the Latin Tongue. To which may be added, a great facility of
Construing Latin into English: All which are here endeavored to be performed.
The better to understand this proposed method, I shall offer these following
particulars.

The Accidence and Grammar (after the giving of the general Rule for a Sign)
are compared with Particles; and that Rule by Rule, and Figure by Figure:
Unless there remain a major number of Figures or Rules, to which the other
Column wants parallels, and only has blanks.

The Rules, Haec variam habent constructionem, etc. are explained by adding the
Verbs (excepted from the Rules not mentioned in the Grammar, or however not
explained therein,) whose variety is shown, and whose difficulties are cleared
by contracted Sentences out of the Classics. Though to all other Rules English
Examples are subjoined, to be translated, by beginners, as an Exercise. In this
Case Grammarians have been of diverse Opinions; Radmus puts his Examples without
Rules, and Comenius puts them before his Rules.

Conjunctions, Prepositions, (governing both Cases) Interjections, and Rules
for Verbs of different significations, are placed after those for words wanting
proper Signs, because they do not aptly fall in with the other.

Rules for the Case of the Relative in specie, Gerundia sive Gerundivae, etc.
Eidem Verbo, etc. Participia regunt Casus, etc. are omitted, because those for
the Relative (mentioned in the Accidence) are comprehended under At si
Nominativus, etc. And the rest are of a second Consideration, and by
Consequence, not necessary; since all their difficulties may be unravelled by
Particles, or Signs. The like omission is made of Rules, when Participles
become Nouns, Adverbs Prepositions, and those for Modal Government, (for which
last, when understood, see farther Oxford Grammar, and Mr. Walker's Particles)
as being not altogether necessary for beginners.

The two Exceptions in the first Supine, See Dux Grammat. p. 243.
At hoc Supinum, etc. and Ponitur absolute cum Verbo est, etc. are rejected, as
two grand Errors. No Rules of the Anomalous Syntax are explained, but four,
which served to be parallels to those of the like Signification in the
Accidence.

An, See lib 2 de Em. Stru.
is, where the Exception does but rarely occur, according to the caution of the
Critical ^inacer. And (Note) without an, signifies Variation of the precedent
Government.

An, See lib. 2. de Em. Stru.
denotes Reference, or Explanation. The rest are obvious.

If any object, that the use of this Book may obstruct that of the Royal
Grammar: I answer, that both it is end, (as is already shown) and it is Method
(which only expresses so much of the Rules, as whereby they may be understood)
do sufficiently evidence the contrary.

To conclude, after the understanding these Praecognita, (proposed as an Essay)
the Accidence and Grammar, to consult Mr. Coles's Dictionary, (that excellent
Epitome of the Roman Eloquence) Mr. Walker's Phrases, Despauter (published at
Roan by Jesuit Behourt) Vossius de Art Grammatica, Scioppius, Comenius's
Elegant Grammar and Atrium, and the elaborate Grammar of Oxford, will be the
best way, to avoid the Scylla's of Barbarism, and to obtain the Haven of polite
Literature.

General Directions for making Latin.
Substantives have Number by the English. Case by a Sign or Particle, or
without a Sign. Gender by the Signification or Termination in Latin. Declension
by the Latin.
Adject. have Number, Case and Gender. By the Substantive following: Except
they be Participles, or govern a Genit. Declension by the Latin. See further in
the Book it self, Mr. Coles's Nolens Volens and Dr. Busby's Introduction.

Verbs have Voice, Mood, and Tense by the English. Number and Person by the
Nom. Case. Conjugation by the Latin.

JANVAE CLAVIS, OR, LILLY'S SYNTAX, etc.
SYntax is that part of Grammar, which joyneth the Parts of Speech according to
Rules.

In Syntax there are two Parts Concord, and Government.
There are three Concords, the first between the Nominative Case and the Verb;
the second between the Substantive and the Adjective; and the third between the
Antecedent and the Relative.

The First Concord.
Rule 1. Accidence. Grammar. A Verb agrees with his Nominative Case in Number
and Person: As, God made the World. A Verb Personal, etc Verbum Personale
cohaeret, etc. That word which answers to the Question Who? or What? made by
the Verb, shall be the Nominative Case to the Verb. When you have found out the
Verb, etc. The Nominative Case always naturally comes before the Verb. And the
Nominative Case shall in making, etc. Except. 1. When a Question is asked: As,
Love thou? Except a Question be asked, etc. 2. When the Verb is of the
Imperative mood: As, Read thou. Likewise if the Verb be of the Imperat. mood
etc 3. When Nor, Neither, It, or There, go before the Verb: As There lives the
Master. And sometimes when this Sign It, etc. 4. When the Nominative supplies
the place of the English Particle, IF: As, Had he lived, I had died, i. e. if
he had lived. Then the Nominative Case is placed after the Verb, or after the
Sign of the Mood, or Tense. And then the Nominative Case is set after the Verb,
etc. See Mr. Walker's Art of Teaching, etc.
The Nominative Case is often understood in the first, second, or third person
in the Latin Tongue* when it belongs to Men, or Women. Unless it be expressed
1. Nominativus primae, etc. 2. In verbis quorum, etc. in the first or second
person, for Emphasis sake. Rule 2. Two, or more Nominative Cases Singular
having a Conjunction Copulative between them, will have a Verb Plural, which
Verb Plural shall agree with the Nominative Case of the most worthy person: As,
I and thou do learn. Many Nom. Cases Singular, etc. ut supra. Copulatum per
Conjunctionem, etc. ut supra. The first person is more worthy than the second,
and the second more worthy than the third. Where Note, that the first person,
etc. In Figura Dignior autem est primae persona, etc. A Verb being placed
between two Nom. Cases of different Numbers, may agree with either of them
indifferently: so that they be both of one person: As, the Contentions of
Christians are a joy to the Turks. When a Verb comes between two Nom. Cases,
etc. Verbum inter duos Nominativos diversorum, etc The Nominative Case may be
1. a whole Sentence. 2. a member of a Sentence. 3. an Infinitive 1. Here Note
also, that the Infinitive Mood, etc. 1. Non sempervox casualis, etc. 2.
Aliquando Mood. 4. an Adverb with a Genesis Case. 5. a Relative, and yet still it
is counted a Substantive in Latin. 2. Where there comes no Nominative Case
between the Relative, etc Oration, ut etc. 3. Aliquando Adverbium cum Genitiv.
4. Quoties nullus Nominativus, etc. A Verb There are no such Verbs properly, as
Impersonals, Vulgarly so called. See Oxs. Gramm. Ed. 2.
Impersonal has no Nom. Case before it: As, it grieveth me. A Verb Impersonal
has no, etc. Impersonalia praecodentem, etc. A Noun of multitude of the
Singular Number, will have in Latin sometimes a Verb Plural. Nomen
multitudinis, etc The Adjective agrees with the The Substant. answers to the
Question Who? or What? made by the Adject.
Substant. in Case, Gender, and Number: As, a good Man. 1. The Adjective,
whether it be, Noun, etc. 2. But when possession is, signified, etc. 3. When
you have an Adjective, etc. 1. Adjectivum cum Substantivo, etc. 2. Ad eundem
modum participia, etc. 3. Meus, tuus, suus, etc. An Adjective in Concord is
Noun, Pronoun, or Participle. Note 1. When the English word part This is taken
from the Idiom of the Greek, where (...) is understood.
is the Substantive; the Adjective in Latin, is usually put in the Neuter
Gender: As, part of the Wallet. Note 2. Negotium is understood according to the
Latin; or (...), or (...) according to the Greek.
If Thing be a Substantive; there needs no Latin be made for Thing: But turn
the Adjective (to which it is joined) into the Neuter Gender, and it becomes a
Substantive: As, I did this thing. The Adjective always goes before the
Substantive in English: As, a Fair Woman. 1. Except Substantives to
Participles, which always come before: As, a King loving; about to love; loved;
or to be loved. 2. When the Adjective governs a Case; or when it passes its
signification to another word following it: As, a Boy desirous of Play. Two or
more Substantives Singular having a Conjunct. Copulative coming between them,
will have an Adjective Plural, which Adjective Plural shall agree with Many
Substantives, Singular having, etc. In Figura Copulatum per Conjunctionem Et,
etc. the Substantive of the most worthy Gender in the Latin Tongue. Linater and
Alvarez deny the Femin. to be more worthy than the Neuter.
In thing a that have Life, the Masculine is more worthy than the Feminine, and
the Feminine more worthy than the Neuter. Where note that the Masculine Gender,
etc. In Figura Dignius etiam est Masculinum genus, etc. But in things not
having Life, the Neuter Gender is the most worthy; though the Substantive be of
the Masculine or Feminine Gender. But in things not apt, to have, etc. In
Figura, At eum Substantiva res inanimatas, etc. Here the Genit. Case of the
Primitive is included in the Possessive.
Sometimes the Adjective or Relative (in Concord) being included in a
Possessive; do answer to the Primitive. 1. Aliquando Relativum, etc. 2. Haec
Poss^ssiva Meus, etc. I have objoyned no Examples, because of their
irregularity.
A whole Sentence may be the Substantive to the Adjective, and the Antecedent
to the Relative. 1. Sometimes the Relative has, etc. 2. But if the Relative be
referred, etc 1. Aliquando oration supplet, etc. 2. Nec uni^^ von solum, etc. In
giving an Ans. to a Quest. the Ans. in Latin must be given in the same Case of
a Noun; and in the same Tense When a Question is asked, etc. Interrogativum,
and ejus Reddi^ivum, etc, of a Verb that the Question was demanded in: As, who
gave you this Book? My Master: That is, my Master gave me it. The Answer shall
always agree with the Question: If that be supplied in the Answer, which was
expressed in the Question: As, In what is there no satisfaction? In the vanity
of the World. 1. Except a Question be asked by cujus, cuja, cujum. 2. Or by a
word that may govern, etc. 1. Fallit haec Regula; quoties interrogatio fit,
etc. 2. Aut per dictionem variae, etc. Observe, that, [ Who?] commonly finds
out the Substantive; and [ What?] finds out the Verb, or Adjective. 3. Or
except I must answer by one, etc. Fallit denique cum per Possessiva, etc. See
Fax Nova Printed 1666.
Mr. Jasz-Berenyi, considering the difficulty of this part of Syntax, calls it
the 4th. Concord.

The third Concord.
Accidence. Grammar. Rule 1. The Relative agrees with his Antecedent in
Gender, Number, and Person: As, the man is dead who brought me hither. The
Relative agrees with, etc. Relativum cum Antecedente, etc. The Antecedent is a
word that goes before the Relative, and is rehearsed again of the Relative.
The Antecedent is a word, etc. The Relative and the Antecedent differ nothing
from the Substantive and the Adjective in Concord, but only in Person, in which
they do not agree. The Antecedent answers to the Question Who? or What? made by
the Relative: As, in the last Example. When you have a Relative ask, etc. Rule
2. If a Relative come between two Substantives, (called Antecedents) though of
different Numbers or Genders, it may indifferently agree with either the
former, or the latter: as, the City which is called Paris. When a Relative
comes between two Substantives etc. Relativum inter duo Antecedentia
diversorum generum, etc. See Dr. Busbies Introd. p. 42.
Observe, that in asking a Question, the Relative needs not, [ Who] or [ What;]
but it self is to be made an Interrogative.

Government.
ALl Mr. Danes's Grammar.
Substantives are governed (or directed in Case) by the word going before them,
on which they do depend according to the Sign of a Case; or they are governed
of the word going before them, without a Sign.

Accidence. Grammar. But Relatives, Indefinites, Interrogatives, and Partitives
(whose Substantives in Latin are often understood) being expressed by [Which]
[Whom] [What;] in Latin, by qui, quae, etc. Whether uter; how great, how much
quantus: How many quotus: How little quantillus. But when there comes a
Nominative Case between the Relative, etc. At si Nominativus, etc.

These, or their Substantives (if expressed) are governed of the Word following
them, as if it went before them; unless they be the Nominative Case to the
Verb: as what do thou read?

Signs of Cases.
THe Particles, or Signs in English, by which a Substantive is properly
governed (or directed in Case) are [O^.] [To, [For,] [By,] [In,] [At,] [On.]
[From.] [Than] and [ With.]

[A,] [An,] or [ The] are no distinct proper Signs of C^ses; because they are
common to all Cases, and do sometimes come between the proper Sign, and its
Case: As from the School.

Rule 1. Accidence. Grammar. Of So is ('s) See Nolens Volens, p. 9.
After a Noun Substantive, or a Noun Adjective, or an Adverb: As, desirous of
play. 1. After a Noun Substantive: As, the voice of a King. When two
Substantives come together, etc. Quum duo Substantiva, etc. Note,] The Genitive
after a Substantive signifying Possession, may be changed into an Adjective
Possessive, which Adjective (both in English and Latin) is made of that
Substantive, and shall agree with the Substantive coming after, in Case, Number
and Gender: As, my Master's Proinde hic Genitivus saepissime, etc. Servant, for
the Servant of my Master. See Mr. Walkers's Particles p. 233. Printed, 1662.
And Mr. Coles's Dictionary
The like Variation may be used after Substantives, signifying the matter of
which a thing is made, by a material Adjective: As, the Staff of Gold, or a
Golden Staff. 2. After Adjectives signifying Desire, Skill, or Knowledge,
Remembrance, Carefulness, Mindfulness, Fearfulness, and things contrary to
them: As, Covetous of Money. Adjectives, that signify desire, etc. Adjectiv^
quae desiderium, etc. Note,] [Of] Is a Sign of a Genitive, in [mei,] [tui,]
[sui,] [nostr.] and [vestr^;] and in [nostrum] and [vestrum:] as, the love of
me. Some of us. 1. These Genitive Cases of the Primitives, etc. 2. These Genesis
Cases, nostrum, etc. 1. Mei, tui, etc. 2. Nostrum, and vestrum, etc. The first
is after Substantives, and the other after Adjectives. 3. After English
Adjectives made in Latin by Verbal Nouns, Adjectives in Ax: As, bold of wit,
audax ingenii. Adjectiva Verbalia in ax, etc. 4. After Nouns Interrogatives
Nouns of Number, and after all Adjectives, Partitives: as, none of the Boys.
Nouns, Partives and certain Interrogatives etc. Nomina Partitiva, aut Partitive
posita, etc. 5. After Nouns of the Comparative, and Superlative degree: as,
Varro the most Learned Grammarian of the Romans. Nouns of the Comparative and
Superlative degree, being, etc. 1. Comparativa and Superlativa accepta
Partitive, etc. 2. Comparativum autem ad duo, etc. Note,] These Genitives after
Interrogatives, Partitives, Comparatives, and Superlatives, may be varied by
these Prepositions, [a,] [e,] [ex,] with an Abl. or with the Preposition
[inter,] and with an Accus. 1. Vsurpanturautem cum his Praepositionibus, etc.
2. Accipi. untur autem Partive, etc. 6. After Participles: as, loving of a
Book; greedy of Wine. Participles, when they be changed into Nouns, etc.
Participiorum voces, cum fiunt nomina, etc. Sometimes [ of] comes after Adverbs
of quantity, time and place; and when it does so, it is a Sign of a Genitive:
as, in what part of the Earth. Adverbs of quantity, time, etc. Quaedam Adverbia
loci, etc. Exceptions. 1. Excep. [ Of] Before words signifying the praise or
dispraise of any thing, is a Sign of an Ablat. or a Genitive: As, a man of a
great Prudence. Words importing induement of any quality, etc. Laus, and
Vituperium rei, etc. 2. Excep. [ Of] After Adjectives, signifying Fullness or
Plenty, Emptiness or Want, is a Sign of an Ablative, or a Genative: as, full of
Riches. Adjectives signifying Fullness, etc. Adjectiva, quae ad copiam, etc. 3.
Except. [ Of] After the English Adjectives, Worthy, Unworthy, made by Dignus,
Indignus; after the Latin Adjectives Viduus, and Orbus; and after Opus and
Usus, is a Sign of an Ablative: as, Worthy of Honor. 1. These Adjectives
Dignus, Indignus, etc. 2. Opus and Usus when they be, etc. 1. Dignus, Indignus,
etc 2. Opus, and Vsus, etc. Note,] So after Adjectives of Joy or Pride.
Sometimes the Latin Adjectives Dignus, and Indignus have a* Genitive; but this
is mostly in Poets, and a Grecism, which rarely happens. Horum nonnulla
interdum, etc. 4. Excep. [Of] After Verbal Nouns ending in Bilis;after
Participles of the Preterperfect Tense, and Participles of the Future in Dus,
is a Sign of a Dative: as, to be lamented of me. Likewise Nouns Adjectives in
Bilis, and Participials in Dus. 1. Verbalia in bilis, etc. 2. Quorum Participia
frequentius, etc. 3. Quamvis in his Vsitatior est Datius. 4. Exosus, and
perosus etiam cum dandi casu, etc. Note,] That this Dative, may be changed into
an Ablative with the Prepositions [a,] [ab,] [de.] Rule 2. [Of] After a Verb,
is made by one of these Prepositions, [a,] [ab,] [e,] [ex] (expressed, or
understood) or by [de,] if it may be turned into [concerning] foyned to an
Ablative Case: as, he is beloved of all men. 1. After Verbs Pasives: as, I am
hated of thee. A Verb Passive will have after him an Ablative, etc. 1. Passivis
additur Ablativus agenti^. etc. Note,] This Ablative Case after Passives, may
be turned into a Dative. And when it is so, it is a Grecism. -- Sometimes a
Dative of the doer. 2. -- Interdum Dativus. 3. Caeteri Casus manent etc. 2.
After Verbs of receiving, or distance: as, London is far distant from Athens.
Verbs that betoken Receiving, etc. Quaedam accipiendi, and distandi, etc. 3.
After Verbs of loading or unloading, filling, depriving or easing: as, I shall
ease thee of this weight. Verbs of filling, loading, etc. Verba -- implendi
onerandi, etc. 4. After the Verb Mereor, to deserve, being foyned with the
words, well, better, best; or badly, worser, worst: as, Aristotle deserved well
of Alexander. Mereor, cum Adverbiis been, etc. 5. After Verbs Impersonals of
the Passive voice: as, it was studied of him. A Verb Impersonal of the Passive
voice, etc. Verbum Impersonale Passivae vo^is, etc. Note, [Of,] After Passives,
and Impersonals, may be varied by the Sign, [By.] The Preposition after
Impersonal Passives, is not always expressed; but sometimes understood. Yet
many times the Case is not expressed, etc Qui quidem Casus, etc. Impersonals
derived from Regular Personals, do govern the Cases of the Verbs, of which they
are derived. Verbs Impersonals of the Passive Voice, being formed, etc. 6.
After Neuter Passives having a Passive Signification in English, with an Active
Termination, and a Passive Preterperfect Tense in Latin: as, I am Beaten of the
Master. Vapulo, veneo, liceo, exulo, fio, etc. Exceptions. 1. Except. [Of]
After the Verb [Sum,] when Possession is signified, is a Sign of a Genitive:
as, the Duty of a young Man. This Verb Sum, when it betokens etc. Sum
Genitivum postulat, etc. Note,] This Genitive after Sum, is changed into a
Nominative, when the Adjectives, mine, Except, that these Pronouns, Meus etc:
1. Excipiuntur hi Nominativi, Meum, etc. thine, his, hers, ours, yours; or when
these Phrases, the part of a man, or a man's part; the part of a beast, or a
beastly part, are expressed. And these Nominatives, are made of these
Possessive Pronouns, meus, tuus, etc. And those Phrases rendered by humanum
belluinum. Which two last do agree with the Substantive Officium for the most
part ellipted. 2. At hi^ subintelligi videtur Offi^ium, etc. Note,] See Far.
Eng. Rud. p. 21.
The former Substantive is to be repeated after the Verb: As, Pecus est Pecus
Johannis. 2. Except. [Of] After Verbs of accusing, condemning, admonishing and
absolving, is a Sign of a Genitive, or of an Ablative with a Preposition: as,
Cicero accused Catiline of Rebellion. Verbs of accusing, etc Verba accusandi,
etc. Note,] That always these words, the same, whether, neither, both, 1.
Vtitur hic Genitivus aliquando in another, and Nouns of the Superlative degree,
are changed, (after these Verbs of accusing, etc.) Or made by the Ablat: Case,
with the Preposition [de,] or without it: as, thou accused me of Folly. in
Ablatinum, etc. 2. Vterque, nullus, alter, etc. 3. Except. [Of] After these
Verbs it repents, it irketh, it shameth, it wearieth, it pitieth, being made
by the Latin Impersonals paenitet, piget, pudet; taedet, miseret, miserescit,
is a Sign of a Genitive: as, it pitieth me of thy misfortune. Some besides the
Accusative will have also a Genesis His Impersonalibus subjicitur Accusativ^s cum
Geniti^^ 3. Rule, [Of] Coming after a Substantive or Adjective, and before the
English of the Participle of the present Tense, is a Sign of the Gerund in di:
as, desirous of loving. 1. When the English of the Infinitive Mood, etc. 2. And
the same Gerund in di, etc. Gerundia in di pendent etc.

See Mr. Coles's Dict.
To, or For, before a Noun.
1. Rule, Accidence. Grammar. [To, or For] After a Substantive, Adjective,
Verb, or Adverb, are Signs of a Dative Case: as, good for me. 1. After a
Substantive: as, a Father to thee. Est etiam ubi in Davum, etc. 2. After
Adjectives, signifying profit, or disprofit, likeness or unlikeness, pleasure,
or submission: as, pleasant to all. Adjectives that betoken profit, etc.
Adjectiva quibus commodum, etc. 3. After Opus, when it is Adjectively put for
[necessary:] as, necessary for the house. Opus autem Adjective, etc. 4. After
Substantives compounded with [con:] as, a Chamber-fellow to him. Huc referuntur
Nomina ex Con, etc. 5. After these Adjectives, common, strange free, made in
Latin by communis, alienus, immunis: as, death is common to all men. Communis,
alienus, etc. Note, [To] Is sometime made by [ad] after instar, and after
natus, commodus, incommodus, utilis, inutilis, vehemens, and aptus, with an
Accus. as, born to Glory. But this is very rare, and a Grecism. 1. Hic
apponitur interdum Pr^positio, ad. 2. Natus commodus, incommodus, etc. 6, After
Interrogatives, Distributives, Partitives, and Nouns of Number: as, second to
none. In alio vero sensu Dativ. 7. After Adjectives of difference or
contrariety: as, contrary to him. Nonunquam etiam Dativ. 8. After Verbs put
acquisitively: as, I did it for thee. All manner of Verbs put acquisitively,
etc. Omnia Verba acquisitive posita, etc. 9. After Verbs of profit, or
disprofit: as, all things answered to my mind. To this Rule, do also belong
Verbs betokening to profit, etc. Imprimis, Verba significantia comm^dum, etc.
10. After Verbs of giving or restoring: as, I give this Book to thee. To give
or restore. Verba dandi, etc. 11. After Verbs of promising, or paying: as, I
paid a Shilling to him. To Promise, or to Pay. Verba promitendi, ac solvendi,
etc. 12. After Verbs of Showing: as, I showed my mind to my Lord. To Show.
Verba nunciandi, etc. 13. After Verbs of Trusting: as, thou trusted to him. To
Trust. Verba ^idendi, etc. 14. After Verbs of Threatening: as, he Threatened
Death to the Citizens. To Threaten etc. Verba minandi, etc. 15. After the Verb
[Sum] with all its Compounds (Possum only excepted:) as, thou art awanting to
thy self. Also Sum with its Compounds except Possum. Sum cum Compositis,
praeter Possum, etc. 16. After Verbs Compounded with the Adverbs been, and
male: as, I have done well for thee. Also Verbs Compounded with been, and male.
17. After many Neuters, and Passives Compounded with the Prepositions, prae,
ad, con, sub, ante, post, ob, in, and inter: as, conducit laudi, it avails to
thy praise. Finally certain Verbs Compounded with pre, ad, etc. Dativum
postulant Verba composita, etc. 18. After the Verb [Suppetit:] as, Money
abounds to the Richman. Huic confine est suppetit. 19. After Verbs Impersonals:
as, it is lawful for me. Certain Impersoanls require a Dat. In Dativum feruntur
haec Impersonalia etc. 20. After the Participles, or Participal Nouns, exosus,
and perosus: as, hateful to me. Exosus, perosus etiam cum d^ndi, etc. 21. Note,
Gellius has exosus in the Signification of the present Tense. And this often
happens in Participles of Verbs Deponents; Yet in that sense, because they have
no Proper Sign in English, they do govern an Accusative. 22. After Adverbs
which do come of Nouns: as, he spoke like his Father. Certain Adverbs will have
a Dat. etc. Quaedam Dativum admittunt; etc. Note,] Though these Adverbs which
are derived from Nouns have no Sign; Yet will have the Cases of their Nouns.
Exceptions. 1. Except. [To] after attinet, pertinet, spectat; and after Verbs
of motion, applying, inviting, exhorting, calling, provoking, speaking to, or
adding: Expressed by loquor; hortor, invito, provoco, voco, addo; and words of
the like signification: As also after words signifying fitness, readiness,
forwardness, or inclinableness, it is made by [ad] with an Accusative Case: as,
prone to Lust. 1. After attinet, pertinet, and spectat: as, it appertains to
(or unto) me. His vero attinet, etc. Note, So sometimes, after confero, and
conduco. 2. After Verbs of motion, and before many Appellatives, and names of
great places: as, he went to Troy. Nouns Appellatives, or names of great
places, etc. Nomina Appellative, and Nomina majorum, etc. Note, The Preposition
[ad,] is often understood after Verbs of motion. 3. After Verbs of motion, when
they come before the proper name of a place. To a place, if the place, etc.
Verbis Significantibus motum ad, etc. 4. After Verbs of motion, when they come
before [ rus,] and [ domus:] as Peter went to his house. Likewise confero me
Domum, etc Ad hunc modum utimur rus, and domus. Note] The Preposition [ad,] is
usually ellipted in these two last Rules. 2. Except. [ For] Signifying the
Cause, and coming after an Adjective, or a Verb, is a Sign of an Ablative Case:
as, I Swounded for fear. 1. After an Adjective, as, Pale for Anger. Adjectiv^
regunt Ablativum, etc. Note, [For,] here may be varied by, [ with.] 2. After a
Verb: as, he grew dumb for admiration. All Verbs require an Ablative, etc.
Quodvis Verbum, etc. 3. Exc. [ For] After Verbs of Price, is Sign of an
Ablative: as, I sold it for a Shilling. The Word of Price, etc. 1. Quibuslibet
Verbis subjicitur, etc 2. Vili, Paulo, etc. 3. Sin addantur, and^, 1. Note,
[For,] is sometime understood in the word of Price, and and yet it is made in
the Ablative, as if, [For] were expressed. 2. Note, [For] coming after, the
English Adjectives, so much, how much, as much, more, less, how much soever,
(being put without Substantives) is a Sign of a Genitive: as, he bought it for
less. Except these Genitive Cases when they be put, etc. Excipiuntur hi
Genitivi, etc. But if these Adjectives be joined with Substantives they are put
in the Ablative Case. 3 Note, Sometime [Carius dearer,] [Vilius cheaper,]
[Melius better,] [Pejus worse,] ^are used in the word of Price. Saving that
after Verbs of Price. [For,] otherwise is a Preposition. 2. Rule, [To] After a
Verb. and before another Verb, is Sign of the Infinitive Mood Active: as, I
desire to read. Also when two Verbs, etc. 1. Quibusdam tum Verbis, etc. 2.
Ponuntur interdum figurate, etc. 3. Poetice Infinitivus modus, etc. Note.
Sometime, [To] is ^llipted, and yet the latter Verb is the Infinitive Mood.
Exceptions. 1. Except. [To] After a Substantive of time, place or desire; or
after any Substantive, which does not signify a matter of which a thing is
made; and after Adjectives governing a Genit. Case, is made by the Gerund in
[di:] as, desirous to play. 1. When the English of the Infinitive, etc. 2. And
the same Gerund in di, etc. Gerundia in di, etc. Note, This Gerund among the
Poets is often turned into the Infinitive mood. 2. Except. To. and For (the use
of another) are Signs of a Dat. according to ^r. Wase.
[To] or [For] After Substantives of things material, or the matter (of which a
1. The English of the Infinitive mood coming Gerundia in dum pendent ab his
Praeposititionibus, a thing is made,) as Silver; after these Adjectives; slow,
ready, strong, good, fit, apt; after Verbs of exhorting, as hortor; of
prevailing, as vale, of belonging or appertaining to; as specto, pertineo,
attineo; of persuading, ^s moneo, suadeo; of alluring, as allicio; of inciting,
as voco, invito, provoco. after a Reason, etc. 2. The Gerund in dum is used
after one of these Prepositions etc. inter, [ How,] before [ To,] after I know,
or I know not, etc. Is very Elegant. [ For] before [ To,] is often redundant.
etc. Then [To,] or [For] are made by a Gerund in [dum,] with the Prepositions
[ad, ob, inter, ante, or propter:] as, slow to learn. Except. [To] coming after
the English Particle [About,] is made by the Participle of the Future in Rus:
as, about to read. Note,] So, in [like to,] [ready to.] 4. Except. [To] coming
after a Verb, and sometime after a Participle of the preter Tense, betokening
Motion, with the Cause of that motion, is made by the first Supine: as, I went
to see her. The first Supine has his Active signification, etc. Prius Supinum
Active Significat, etc. 1. Note, The first Supine may be changed into a Gerund
in di, with ergo, gratia, or causa. Or Vide Phrases Wint. p. 396.
if it have an Accusative after it, it may be made by a Gerundive Adjective (as
they call it,) and causa, or gratia. 2. Note, [To] After a Gerund in dum, when
necessity is signified, may be made by the Subjunctive mood, and ut. 3. Rule,
[To be] coming after a Verb and before another Verb, is a Sign, that the latter
Verb be put in the Infinitive Mood Passive: as, I desire to be loosed. In the
Etymogy. 1. Also when two Verbs come together etc. 2. These Adjectives,
[dignus, indignus, and contentus,] may, etc. 1. Quibusdam tum Verbis, etc. 2.
Ponuntur interdum figurate, etc. Exceptions. 1. Except. [To be] After an
Adjective, may be made by the latter Supine: as, slow to be taught. The latter
Supine has his Passive, etc. Posterius Supinum Passive significat, etc. Note,]
[To be] coming after the English Adjective [meet;] both it, and that Adjective,
are made by a Participle of the Future in dus. 2. Note, This latter Supine, is
also often varied by the Infinitive mood, which is a Grecism. For the Greeks
having no Supines, do render them, by the Infinitive mood. And the same Supine
may also, etc. 2. Except. [To be] After a Substantive, or the Mr. Danes says,
that no Grammarian before Priscian, divided the Pronouns into Demonstratives,
etc.
Relative [which] (made in Latin by qui,) or after the Verb Sum, is made either
by a Participle of the Future in dus, or an Adjective Verbal in bilis: as, he
is to be commended. Note, To, or For, are made by several Prepositions: See
their Idiom in Treat. of Particles, p 314. an^. 106.
[To be] may be made by esse, or the Subjunctive Mood of Sum; if it come before
a Substantive, or a Participle of the Future in dus, or before a Preposition
with its Case. [By.] Rule, [By] Signifying the Instrumental Cause, manner, or
See Mr. Coals Dictionary
Condition, * So Dr. Hammond in Pract. Catech. p. 46.
coming after a Substantive, Adjective, or an Adverb, is a Sign of an Ablative
Case: as, she is fairer by much. ^. After an Substantive: as, a better man by a
great deal. 1. A Verb Passive, etc. 2. Verbs of comparing, etc. 1. Passivis
additur, etc. 2. Forma, vel modus, etc. Note. [By] after many Verbs, is varied
by [Of.] 2. After the Adjectives of the Comparative, and the Superlative
degree: as, more glorious by much. Nouns of the Comparative degree: having By,
etc. 1. Adsciscunt and alterum, etc. 2. Tanto, quanto, etc. 4. After Adverbs of
Diversity or Difference: as, otherwise by far. Adverbia diversitatis, etc. 5.
After Adverbs of the Comparative, or the Superlative degree: as, he was wounded
more easily by much. Adverbia comparativi, and Superlativi, etc. Exceptions. 1.
Except. [By] Before a Substantive, and after a Verb Passive, or a Participle
Passive, is sometimes made by a Dative: as, he is seen of none. A Verb Passive
will have after him sometimes a Dat. Passivis additur -- interdum Dativus.
Note,] Herein, it may be varied in English, by the Sign, [Of,] But [By,] after
Passives, is idiomatically made by, [par,] with an Accusative. 2. Except, [By,]
Before the English of the Participle of the present Tense, is made by the
Gerund in [do] with one of these Prepositions, [a,] [ab] [e,] or [ex]
expressed, or understood: as, the Romans won by yielding. Also the English of
the Participle of the Present Tense, etc. 1. Gerundia in do pendent, etc. 2.
Ponuntur and absque etc. [ See Mr. Coles's Dict.
From.] Rule, [From] After an Adjective, or a Verb, is a Sign of an Ablat. or
it is made by the same Case with one of these Prepositions, [a,] [ab,] [e,] or
[ex:] as, he went from me. 1. After Nouns, It is rarely used after Part. and
Interrog. and when it is so; it is forced.
Partitives, Interrogatives, and Nouns of Number: as, the first from Adam.
Numeralia in alio sensu Ablativum, etc. 2. After the Adjectives, strange, free:
as, free from vice. -- Alienus, immunis etc. 3. Before a word of time, order,
age, or noting original, or term of Action; and after Adjectives of difference
or diversity: as, different from me. Nomina diversitatis Ablativum, etc. 4.
After the words* born, descended sprung* created, it is made by natus, etc. as,
descended from the Conqueror. Natus, prognatus, etc. Note, 1. Here [From,] may
be varied, by [Of,] as, it may be mostly after Verbs. Note, 2. All these
Ablatives are governed of a Preposition ellipted. 5. After Verbs of
rereceiving, distance, carrying away, differing, delivering, sending, fetching,
saving, keeping, hearing, and after Verbs having [away] joined to them: as, God
delivered thee from thy Immortal Enemy. Verbs that betoken receiving, or
distance, etc. Quaedam accipiendi, etc. 6. After Verbs of motion, and before
the proper name of a Place: as, Peter went to Antioch. From a place. etc.
Verbis significantibus motum a loco etc. 7. And [from] before the English
words, Country, and home, made by rus, and domus: as, John went from home.
Domus, and Rus likewise be used. Adeundem modum usurpantur Domus and Rus. Note,
The Preposition by which the Sign [From] is rendered in Latin, is often omitted
before Proper names of Places, and before Rus, and Domus. Exceptions. 1.
Except. [From] After Verbs of taking away, is a Sign of a Dative: as, Paul took
away a girdle from me. And this Ablative after Verbs of taking away may be,
etc. Vertitur hie Ablativus aliquando in Dativum. 2. Except. [From] Before the
English of the Participle of the Present Tense, is made by the Gerund in do,
with the Prepositions [a] [ab,] [e] [ex,] expressed or understood: as, he was
hindered from running. And the same Gerund in do is used, etc. 1. Ponuntur and
absque Praepositione. 2. Gerundia in do pendent, etc. Rule, [In,] [At,] and
[On,] [In,] See Mr. Coles's Dict. ^
[At,] and [On,] Before Substantives of value, time, or occasion, before words
of Place, Meat, or Food, Musical-Instruments, and before the Substantives
[will] or [pleasure,] [term] or [condition;] are Signs of an Ablative Case: as,
in no place. 1. [In,] or [At,] Before the proper names of Places: as, at or in
London. Nouns Appellatives, etc. Nomina Appellativa, etc. Note, The
Preposition, [In,] governing an Ablative, is here understood, which is sometime
expressed for more emphasis, or elegancy. Sometimes the Preposition In, etc. 1.
Praepositio subaudita, etc. 2. In, cum significatur, etc. 2. [In,] or [At,]
Signifying Time: as, in, or at that Time. Nouns that betoken part of, etc. Quae
Significant partem, etc. Note, But these Signs are not often expressed in this
sense. Exceptions. 1. Except. [In,] or [At,] After Verbs of And after consulo
pendo, and facio.
Esteeming, are Signs of a Genitive: as, he valued thee at nothing. Verbs that
betoken to esteem, or regard, etc. 1. Verba aestimandi, etc. 2. Flocci, nauci,
etc. 3. Singularia. sunt ista, etc. But the Verb, Aestimo will have a Genitive,
or an Ablative: as, I esteem thee much. Aestimo vel Genitivum, etc. 2. Except.
[In,] or [At,] Before proper names of Places, of the first or second
Declension, and Singular Number, are Signs of the Genitive: as, born at Rome.
In a Place, or at a Place, etc. Omne Verbum admittit Genitivum, etc. Note, But
if the Proper name want the Singular, it is put in the Ablative: as, bred up at
Athens. 3. Except. So [In,] * See Mr. Lewis's Essay, p. 27.
or [At,] before home, ground, war, or warfare, are made by a Genitive: as,
Crassus is at the War. And these Nouns, humi, domi, etc. 1. Hi Genitivi, humi,
etc. 2. Domi non alios secum, etc. Note, But if an Adjective be joined to these
words, they are put in the Ablative: as, Crassus was slain in the Parthian war.
4. Except. [In,] or [At,] Before the Proper name of a place of the third
Declension, and Plural Number; are Signs See Syst. Gram.
of an Ablative: as, Cicero lived at Tybur. But if the Place be of the third,
etc Verum si proprium loc^ nomen, etc. 5. Except. [In,] or [At,] Before the
English of the Participle of Present Tense, is made by the Gerund in do: as,
glorious in Fighting. Also the English of the Participle of the Present Tense,
etc. 1. Ponuntur, and absque etc. 2. Gerundia in do, etc. [ In my Opinion, [
Than,] ought to be only used after the Comparative degree, and [ Then] in other
Senses: Let the Learned judge. See Mr. Butlers Eng Gram and Mr. Walker's Part.
Printed 1662.
Than.] Rule, [Than,] After Nouns and Adverbs of the Comparative degree in the
same Sentence, is made by quam, or it is a Sign of the Ablative Case: as, more
Victorious than Alexander, more Eloquent than Tully, and more Fortunate than
Caesar. Nouns of the Comparative degree having than, etc. 1. Comparativa cum
exponuntur perquam, etc. 2. Adverbia Comparativi, and Superlativi, etc. Note 1.
Where quam is used, the word following must be the same Case with the word,
that goes before quam. But, if neither the Ablative, nor quam ^e expressed,
then mensura, or numero are ellipted, if the word following be the Genitive
Case. Note, 2. But [Than] after the Adject. [more,] made in Latin by [plus,] is
found with a Nominative, Genitive, Accusative, and an Ablative: as, there were
more than twenty men. Plus Nominativo, etc. But this is not to be imitated.
[Prae,] See Mr. Coles's Nolens Volens.
is thought to be ellipted or understood before the Ablative, for the Sign,
[Than.] [With.] Rule, [With,] Signifying the Cause, Manner, or Instrument, is a
Sign of an Ablative, when it follows an Adjective, or a Verb: as, my Father
went from hence with sorrow. 1. After Adjectives Signifying the Cause: as,
great with pride. Adjectiva regunt Ablativum Significantem, etc. Note, Here,
[With,] may be varied by the Sign, [For.] 2. After the Adjectives, endued,
taken, content: as, content with slavery. These Adjectives Praeditus, etc.
Praeditus, captus, contentus. 3 After Verbs of abounding, filling, or loading:
as, John abounds with Riches. Verbs of Plenty, filling, etc. Verba abundandi
implendi, etc. 4. After any Verb Signifying the Instrument, or manner: as, he
was slain with a Sword. 1. All Verbs require an Ablative, etc 2. Afficio,
prosequor, etc. 1. Quodvis Verbum, etc. 2. Prosequor afficio, etc. Exceptions.
1. Except. [With,] after the Verbs of comparing or equalling; meeting with,
being angry, mingling, and contending, is a Sign of a Dative: as, I met with my
Brother. 1. To Compare. 2. To be Angry with. 3. Certain Adverbs will have a
Dative, etc. 1. Verba comparand, etc. 2. Verba irascendi, etc. 3. Quaedam
Dativum admittunt Nominum. Note, [With,] after aequo or adaequo, may be varied
by the Sign, [To.] Most of these Datives (except in Verbs of comparing) be
Grecisms, and generally Poetical. 2. Except. [With,] coming before the English
of the Participle of the Present Tense, is a Sign of the Gerund in do: as, hot
with running. When the English of the Participle of the Present, etc. 1.
Gerundia in do, etc* 2. Ponuntur absque Praepositione, etc. 3. Except. [With,]
Signifying [Soc^^ty,] is made by [^um.] (...)ly if (...) Particle, [together,]
^^me after i^ Dignifying [from,] i^ made by, [a:] signifying [at,] is made by,
[apud.] Ablativo modi actio^is, etc.

Words having no Proper Sign.
Rule, Accidence. Grammar. Every Substant. coming without the Signs, [Of,]
[To,] [For,] [By,] So Super.
[In,] [At,] [On,] [From,] [Than,] or [With;] or with these general Signs* [A,]
[An,] or [The,] after Nouns, Verbs, Gerunds, Supines, Participles, or Adverbs,
shall be the Accusative Case: as, I love the Master. And that casual word,
which comes next after the Verb, etc And also after these Prepositions,
Farnab. Syst Gram
Ad, penes, adversus, cis, circa, circiter, extra. Ultra, post, praeter,
propter, prope, pone, secundum. Per, Circum, circa, contra, juxta, inter, ob,
infra. Erga, apud, ante, secus, trans, supra, versus, and intra. 1. In
Relatives, which (as is above said) do always go before the word, which governs
them: as, what Book do you read? But when there comes a Nominat. Case between
the Relative, etc. as above At fi Nominativus, etc. as above. The two opposite
Rul^ in the Gram. and Accid. are mentioned after in the Exceptions
2. After Adjectives signifying the measure of length, breadth, or thickness of
any thing: as, a Tree a foot thick. 2. After Verbs transitives: as, death
conquers all men. Verbs transitives, etc. Verba transitiva, etc. 3. After Verbs
Neuters, as, I have slept a long sleep. Also Verbs Neuters may have, etc. 1.
Quin etiam Verba, etc. 2. Sunt quae figurate, etc. 3. Sed praeeo, etc. Note,]
S^^ Ox^. Gram. p. 129. Ed. 1.
This Accus. is often changed into an Ablative, which i^ governed of a
Preposition. Hunc Accusativum mutant, etc. 4. After Verbs of [asking,]
[teaching,] [arraying,] and [beseeching:] as, I ask thee this Question. Verbs
of asking, etc. Verba rogandi, etc. Note,] That is the Accus. of the Person.
One of these Accus. Cases after Verbs of [asking,] may be changed into an
Ablat. wi^h, [a,] or [ab,] Rogandi Verba interdum, etc. But then they vary
their signification.
As also Verbs of [arraying,] change their Accus. into an Ablative or a Dative.
Vestiendi Verba, etc. Note,] See Mr. Wase's Gram.
[Induor,] [mendor,] [poscor,] [doc^or,] [rogor,] will have an Accus. without a
Sign: as, Anaxgoras taught strange things. 5. After the Verb [valeo,]
signifying, I am worth, or, I am esteemed at so much: as, the Book is not worth
that Money. Valeo etiam interdum cum Accusativo, etc. Note,] sometimes a
Genitive is set after [valeo:] But then it is governed of an Accusative
ellipter. 6. After these Impersonals, [delectat,] [decet,] [juvat,] [^portet,]
with the Compounds of [juvat,] and [decer:] as, it delights a Delphin, to
hear Music. 1. Some will have an Accusative Case: as [d^lectat,] etc. 2. But
if he has neither of these words, etc. Haec Impersonalia: accusandi casum,
etc. 7. After the Impersonals. [paenitet,] [tae det] [miseret,] [miserescit,]
[pudet,] [piget:] as, it irketh a raw Scholar of his Book. Some besides the
Accusative will etc. 1. Illis Impersonalibus subjicitur Accusativus, etc. 2.
N^nnulla Impersonalia reminalia remigrant, etc. Note, That a Genit. for the
most part is joined to this Accusative. 8. After Gerunds, and Supines: as, God
loving mankind, sent his Son to redeem us. Gerunds and Supines will have, etc
Gerundia sive Gerundivae voces and Supina, etc. 9. After Participles: as, thou
art ready to love thy destruction. Participles govern such Cases, etc.
Participia regunt casus, etc. So after [Exosus,] hating, [perosus,] hating,
[pertaesus,] weary These Participial voices, perosus, exosus, pertesus, etc.
Exosus, perosus, pertesus, active significant, etc. 10. After Adverbs of
[shewing.] or [upbraiding,] [en,] or [ecce:] as, behold him, [en illum] 1. En,
and ecce Adverbia demonstrandi, etc. 2. En, and ^ece exprobrantis aec. Note See
Mr. Lewis's Essay Printed 1674 p. 22.
That [ecce] is judged a Verb defective, and so is [en,] too, and sometimes,
when they betoken demonstration, or showing they may have a Nominative, as well
as an Accusative by a Grecism. Note,] That these Adverbs be all Datives,
[Tempori,] [luci,] [vesperi, are judged Ablatives, Ox^. Gram. p. 146,
and then they are resolved by [in,] or [by.] These Datives be used
adverbially, tempori, etc. Sunt and hi Dativi Adverbiales, etc 11. After the
Adverb [cedo,] (though it be by some called a Verb defective:) as, choose what
man thou will. Cedo flagitantis exhiberi, etc. 12. After Adverbs derived from
Prepositions: as, nearer the City. Certain Adverbs will have an Accusative,
etc. Sunt quae accusandi casum, etc. Exceptions. 1. Except* One Substantive
after another, without any Sign belonging to the same; the Substantive coming
after, shall be the same Case with the Substantive going before by apposition:
as, I being a a Scholar do learn. But if they belong both to one thing, they,
etc. Excipiuntur quae in eodem casu, etc. See Mr. Walkers'^ Particles p. 58.
[Being] does sometimes come between two Substantives, and the former of those
Substantives, having a Verb agreeing with it, is a mark o^ Apposition. 2.
Except. A Substantive joined with a Participle, and having no Verb depending on
it, is made by the Ablative Case absolute: as, The Master threatening, the
Scholars are quiet. A Noun or a Pronoun Substantive, joined, etc. Quibus libet
Verbis additur, etc. The Sea M^. Lewis's Essay.
Ablative Case (by some) is said, properly to be governed of nothing. 3.
Except. The word coming without any Sign after Adjectives of measure in
[length,] [breadth,] or [thickness,] may be, either an Ablative, or an
Accusative: as, a well, three yards deep. The measure of length, breadth, etc.
1. Magnitudinis mensura, etc. 2. Interdum and in Ablativo. Note] Sometime it is
put in the Genitive; but then it is a Grecism, or an ellipted Latinism. But
this happens carely, and ought not to be imitated. Interdum etiam in Genitivo.
4. Except. The word coming without any Sign, signifying the space between
places, may be either the Accusative, or the Ablative, as, London is twenty
Miles distant. Nouns that betoken space, etc. Spatium loci in Accusativo, etc.
5. Except. The word coming without any Sign, signifying part of time, may be
the Ablative* as, no man is wise every day. Nouns that betoken part of time,
etc. Quae significant partem, etc. Sometime, it is an Accusative, but very
rarely. The Preposition, [per] in the Accusative, and [sub] in the Ablative,
seem to be ellipted. Quanquam hic ellipsis, etc. 6. Except. The word coming
without any Sign, signifying continuance of time, without ceasing, or
intermission, is the Accusative, or the Ablative: as, he lived fifty years. But
Nouns that betoken continual term, etc. Quae autem durationem, etc. 7. Except.
The word coming without any Sign, after certain Adverbs of quantity, time, and
place, and after [instar,] is the Genitive: as, he is no where to be found.
Adverbs of quantity, etc. 1. Quaedam Adverbia loci, etc. 2. Instar,
aequiparationem, etc. Note, 1. Words of quantity, time, or place, having not
the Signs, [A,] [An,] or [The,] are Adverbs; otherwise they are Substantives.
Note, 2. There is a great elegancy in these Adverbs, to which the
English-Tongue is a stranger* 8. Except. [Ergo] for [causa,] or [gratia,]
signifying the sake or cause, will have a Genitive: as, for his sake, ejus
ergo. Note, That as [To] is sometime ellipted after the English of [Instar;] so
is [For] before [Ergo.] 9. Except. The word coming without any Sign after Verbs
Substantives; sum, forem, fio, existo; most Passives, and Verbs of gesture,
which is the Nominat. Case if there be a Nomin. Case before them: as, God is
good. 1. Sum, forem, fio, etc. 2. Also Verbs that betoken bodlly, etc. 3. And
generally, when the word, etc. 1. Verba Substantiva, etc. 2. Denique omuia
fere, etc. Note, But if any of those Verbs have an Accusative before them; then
the word without a Sign, shall be the Accusative: as, I judge him to be a good
man. And this is mediate Apposition. And likewise in the Accusative Case: as,
non decet, etc* 1. Infinitum quoque utrinque, etc. 2. Quamvis in his postremis
Exemplis, etc. 10. Except. The word coming without any Sign after the Verbs [to
dispatch,] or [to be busy Vide Treatise of Part. p. 249.
about,] [to pity] or [to take pity on,] is the Genitive: as, I pity his
condition, misereor status sui. Satago, misereor, miseresco, require, etc.
Satago, misereor, etc. But misereor, and miseresco, sometimes govern a Dative;
but very seldom, and not to be imitated. At misereor and miseresco rarius, etc.
11. Except. The word coming without any Sign after [interest, and refert,]
shall be the Genitive. Put in, [me,] [thee,] [him,] [her,] [us,] [you] [whom,]
it is made by, [mea*] [tua] [sua,] [nostra,] [vestra,] [cuja,] which are
Ablatives Feminine: as, it concerns my life. Interest, refert etc. 1. Haec
tria Impersonalia interest. 2. Adjiciuntur and illi Genitivi, etc. 12. Except.
The word coming without any Sign after Reminiscor, obliviscor, recordor,
memini, shall be the Accusative or Genitive: as, I remember thy kindness.
Reminiscor, obliviscor, etc. Reminiscor, obliuiscor, etc 13. Except. The word
coming without any Sign after [Potior,] and Verbs of want* is an Ablative, or a
Genitive: as, I want money. 1. Egeo, or indigeo, tui vel te. 2. Verbs of
scarceness, etc. 3. Potior urbis, potior, voto. 1. Verb^ abundandi and his
diversa, etc: 2. Ex quibus, quaedam nonunquam, etc. 3. Potior, aut Genesis aut
Ablat. 14. Except. The word coming without any Sign after fungor, feuor, utor,
nitor, sto, (to abide) vescor, victito, and vivo for victito, is an Ablative:
as, I use virtue. Likewise Cotor, etc. Fungor, fru^r, and utor etc. 15. Except.
The word The apposite Rules in the Accidence and Grammar, are mentioned under
To, and For, p. 20. etc.
coming without a Sign, to which any thing is gotten, as the end, object, or
subject; after Verbs signifying (juvo, adjuvo, laedo, offendo, governing an
Accus. being excepted) profit, disprofit, giving, restoring, promising, paying,
commending, showing, trusting or believing, obeying or serving, resisting,
threatening, pardoning; after Studeo, Suadere alium Tert a Grecism, and not to
be imitated.
suadeo, faveo, parco, placeo, adulor, dominor, respondeo, indulgeo, medeor,
sum, (with his Compounds) libet, vacat, dolet, (taken Impersonally;) and after
most Verbs, Neuters and Passives, (except those mentioned, p. 67.) Compounded
Ex praeeo, praecedo, praevinco, praeverto, or praevertor, geverning an Accus.
with the Prepositions, [prae,] [ad,] [con,] [sub,] [ante,] [post,] [ob,] [in,]
and [inter,] is a Dative: as it profits me nothing. Note, Studeo [to
endeavor,] has an Accus. as, Studer rem ad arma deduci, Caes. signifying, to
care for, a Genitive: as, non tui Studet, Cic. Note, Many of these
Prepositions, [A] [ab,] [abs,] [absque] [cum,] [coram,] [de,] [e] [ex] [prae,]
[pro,] [sine,] are used without a proper Sign; and they all govern an Ablative,
which, or without a Sign. Conjunctions. Rule Conjunctions Copulatives,
Disjunctives, and [quam,] [nisi,] [praeterquam,] [an,] do govern like Cases in
Nouns, and like Moods and Tenses in Verbs: as, John and Peter did play and
learn together. 1. Conjunctions Copulatives, Disjunctives, and these etc. 2.
Conjunctions Copulatives, Disjunctives most, etc. 1. Conjunctiones Copulativae,
and Disjunctivae, cum etc. 2. Conjunctiones Copulativae, and Disjunctivae
aliquoties, etc. Exceptions. 1. Except. When the government is different, they
couple diverse Cases, in Nouns. And sometime they be put between, etc. Excepto
si casualis, etc. 2. When Verbs have the same Mood, and yet different Tenses in
the same Mood. And sometime diverse, etc. Aliquoties autem similes, etc.
Prepositions. A Verb, Compounded with a Preposition, has often the Case of the
Preposition, with which it is Compounded. A Verb Compound, sometimes requires,
etc Praeposit i^ in Compositione, etc. The Prepositions [a,] [ab,] [abs,] [ad,]
[^um,] [de,] [e,] [ex,] [in,] and [con,] are sometime repeaced after a Verb
Compounded with one of them. Verba Composita cum, a, ab, etc. [In,] signifying
barely, [in,] governs an Ablative; but signifying [into,] [towards,] [for,]
[against,] or [amongst,] it governs an Accusative. Sometimes this Preposition
[In,] etc. 1. In pro ergo, etc. 2. Idem cum Accusativo, etc. 3. In, cum
significatur, etc. [Sub,] [under,] governs an Ablative; but [Sub,] [about,]
[to,] [a little before,] [a little after,] requires an Accusative. 1. Sub pro
ad, etc. 2. Alias Ablativum, admittit. [Super] [beyond] [above,] [at,] has an
Accusative; but [Super,] [in,] [of,] or [concerning,] an Ablative. 1. Super pro
ultra, etc. 2. Super pro de, etc. [Subter,] [under,] [clam*] and [procu^*] have
either an Accusative, or an Ablative. Subter uno Significatu, etc. [Tenus,]
governs an Ablative; but in words signifying two (by nature) or wanting the
Singular, it has a Genitive. In the Etymology. Where Note, that if the casual
word joined with Tenus, etc. 1. Tenus gaudet Ablativo, etc. 2. At Genitivo
tantum, etc. Prepositions are usually understood, especially when we may
understand the Sense without them. Prepositions, when they want their Cases,
are Adverbs. In the Etymology. 1. Note, also that the voices, etc. 2. Also the
voices of, etc Praepositions cum casum amittunt etc. Interjections.
Interjections, have usually no Case. Interjectiones non rar^ absolute, etc. But
the Interjection [O,] governs a Nominative, an Accusative and a Vocative.
Certain Interjections, require a Nominat. O exclamentis, etc. Heu, and Sic
V^ssi^s in ^ynt. and ^ at. p 9^
Proh (or Pro,) govern an Accusative, and a Nominat. 1. Certain an Accusat. 2.
And the same Proh, 3. Certain a Vocative. Heu, and Pro nu^e Nominativo, etc.
Hei, and vae govern a Dative: as, woe is me! bei mihi. Certain a Dative: as,
hei mihi. Hei, and vae Dativa apponuntur. Ohe, (signifying O) governs a
Vocative; but ah, vah; and hem (signifying the same) govern a Nominative, or an
Accusative: as, vah, Stultitiam.

Rules for more Elegant Latin, according to the Accidence and Grammar.
Rule, 1. Accidence. Grammar. THe Conjunction, That, may be made by, [quod,] or
[ut,] and the Verb put into the Subjunctive Mood, agreeing with its Nominative
Case. When the English that, may be, etc. Resolvi potest hic modus, etc. But it
may be more elegantly cast away, by turning that which was the Nominative into
the Accusative, and the Subjunctive But if Sum be the Infitive Mood, etc. 1.
Verba Infiniti modi, etc 2 Quamvis in his postremis, etc Mood into the
Infinitive: as, I am glad that thou art safe. Rule, 2. The English word, [to
Have,] which may be made by [habeo,] with a Nominative Case, may be more
elegantly made by [Est,] in the Singular, and [Sunt,] in the Plural; and then
the Nominative is turned into the Dative, and the Accusative into the
Nominative: as, I have a Son. est mihi filius. This Verb sum, es, fui, may,
etc. Est pro habeo, etc. Rule, 3. The Nominative, or Accusative, after sum, do,
verto, (to impute) expedio, and some others, is elegantly changed into the
Dative of the Farnab. Syst. Gram
Person: as, Death is an enemy to wicked men. 1. Also when Sum has after him a
Nominat. etc. 2. And not only Sum, etc 1. Sum cum multis, etc. Note, Often,
tibi, sibi, and mihi, are added to those Verbs, though there be another Dative.
Est ubi hic Dativus, tibi, etc. Rule, 4. These English Particles, whilst, when,
if, though, after that, before a Nominative Case, may be left out, and the
Nominative Case be turned into the Ablative, and the Verb into a Participle
agreeing with the same: as, if Caesar overcome, Caesarevincene. And it may be
resolved by, etc. Quibuslibet Verbis additur Ablativus absolute, etc. Note, The
Particle, being, often comes before the Participle, and is understood in the
Latin. Rule, 5. Nouns Adjectives signifying manner, or propriety, and Verbs
Neuters, and Passives, betokening Sickness, or defect in the body, may have an
Accusative, or an Ablative: as, wounded in Body; sacius corpus or corpore. 1.
Verbis quibusdam additur, etc. In Figura per Synecdochen omnia, etc. Note, But
Verbs of vexing, fretting, or disturbing, may have a Quaedam tamen efferuntur,
etc. Genitive: as, the Master is vexed in ^ind. This is an ellipsis. Sec Oxf.
Gramm. Note, that in citing that Book, I always mean the first Edition, except
p. 3.
Rule, 6. Must, or Ought, is used only in the Present Tense, and may be made by
debeo: but it is elegantly made by oportet, with an Accusative, or by the
Gerund in dum; and the Nominative (to debeo) turned into the Dative, and the
word following (debeo,) which is the Infinitive Mood, is made by the Gerund in
dum: as, I must go. And when you have this English must, etc. Cum signi*
ficatur necessitas, etc. Note, Here the Verb, Est, is set Impersonally with the
Gerund in dum. Rule, 7. Gerunds, if they have an Accusat. after them, are
changed into Participles of the Future in Dus. The Gerund in di into the
Genitive, the Gerund in do into the Dative or Ablative, and Vertuntur Gerundi^
voces, etc. the Gerund in dum* They may be so used in either Number.
into the Accusative, and agree with the Substantive following after them: as,
desirous of getting gain. 1. Note, These Gerundives, differ from Adjectives and
Participles, because they express not the manner of the Substantive. 2. Note, A
Gerund in di, may elegantly have a Genitive Plural joined to it. Interdum non
invenuste etc. Rule. 8. A Verb Impersonal Passive, is elegantly put for all
Persons Active. When a deed is signified to be, etc. Verbum Impersonale
Passivae vocis pro singulis, etc. Rule, 9. Adjectives of likeness in guilt, and
Adjectives of faithfulness (instead of a Dative) may have clegantly a Genitive:
as, faithful to thee. Quaedam ex his quae similitudinem significant, etc. Note,
1. That the Genitive Case of a Substantive after another, is often put (as it
were) absolute; the Substantive which governs it, being ellipted: as, Ter.
Byrrhiam hujus, [serv^m] being ellipted. Ponitur interdum Genitivus tan* tum,
etc. Note, 2. This is a Grecism, and answers to Mr. Camdens Rule, in his Greek
Grammar, Ponitur interdum Genitivus, etc. The English Pronouns [Mine,] [thine,]
[his,] [her,] [ours,] [yours,] do signify Possession, when they have a
Substantive coming after them, and are made by [meus,] [tuus,] etc. as, my
Book, liber meus. But in Classic Authors they are used promiscuously.
Strictly [mei,] [tui,] [sui,] [nostri,] and [vestri.] should be used, when
Passion is signified; and [meus,] [tuus,] etc. when Possession is signified.
Nostrum, and Vest^um (of us, of you) are to be used after Distributives,
Partitives, Comparatives, and Superlatives; and nostri, and vestri otherwise.
The Rules for them in the Accidence and Grammar, are mentioned before. 1. Sui
and suus reciproca sunt, etc. 2 Aut annexa per copulam. [Him] [his] [hers] are
made in Latin by sui, and suus, when they relate to a Substantive before the
Verb; but by ejus, when they relate to a Substantive after the Verb. This is to
avoid ambiguity (which the Latin Tongue abhors;) otherwise we may render them
promiscuously, when there is no danger of being mistaken. Ipse and Idem,
figuratively, are of all Persons. 1. Ipse ex, etc. 2* Et Nominibus pariter,
etc. 3. Idem, etiam omnibus, etc. We express one next us, by hic; one at a
little distance, by iste; and one a great distance, by ille. Haec
Demonstrativa, hic, ille iste, etc. We use ille in Commendation; but iste is
used in Contempt. Ille* tum usurpatur, etc. Ille, is generally referred to the
first Substantive, and more remote; but hic is referred to the latter and
nearer. Hic, and ille, cum ad duo ante posita referuntur, etc.

An Explanation of some Rules in the Grammar, wherein there remains some
difficulty, either through variation of Government; or because the Verbs cannot
be known without enumeration, and so consequently their Regimen cannot be
sufficiently cleared. And first of,
Ex his quaedam efferuntur etiam cum Accusativo. Juvo, adjuvo, So laedere naves
Lucretius
laedo and offendo do belong to this Rule, and govern an Accusative Case: As,
ne pedem in lapidem offendas, Matthew. 4. Bez. Quendam offendebat, Cic. vide
Farn. Systema Grammaticum, p. 63. and Angl. Rud. p. 22. No other Verbs properly
depend on this Rule; and conduco, studeo, incumbo, and confero (put as examples
in the Grammar,) in a strict sense are not of the same signification with these
abovementioned.

Interdum additur Ablativus cum Praepositione.
Aliquando Accusativus cum Praepositione ad.
In these two Rules the Preposition is used for Emphasis, mostly in Orators,
rarely or never in Poets, who rather use a Dative instead of both. In proper
names, [ cum,] in this sense betokens a kind of Society. But Examples of
either, do but rarely occurr. However a beginner ought not to imitate them.

Haec variam habent constructionem. According to this Rule, some Verbs govern
an Accusative, and some a Dative, which are here enumerated and explained.

Impertio, to bestow, or give to, governs a Dative; as, huic rei aliquid
temporis impertias, Cic. But Impertio. to greet with a Salutation, an
Accusative; as, impertit Parmenonem, Ter. Dono, to give, has a Dative; as, cui
donat, Hor. But Dono, to reward, an Accusative; as, quem donavit honor, Virg.
Insterno, to cover, an Accusative; as, tabulis instravit, Virg. But insterno,
to spread upon, a Dative; as, terrae insternitur, Statius. Aspergo, signifying
only to sprinkle or wet, Or Figuratively
has either a Dative with an Accusative; as, dignitati labem aspersit, Cic. or
an Accusative with an Ablative; as, maculis vitam aspergebas, Id. And sometimes
an Accusative alone; as, aspergere cunctos, Hor. Consulo, to give Council or to
provide for, a Dative; as, infido consuluisse, Ovid. But Consulo, to ask
Council, an Accusative; as, consulit exta, Virg. Ae qui, bonique consulo, to
take in good part, is an Elegancy. See Oxs. Gram. p. 120.
Metuo, timeo, and formido, to be afraid or fearful for another safety, have a
Dative, or an Ablative with a Preposition; as metuit tibi, Plaut. Pro aliquibus
Cells. De republic a timeo, Cic. But, when they betoken a fear for a man's self,
they have an Accusative; as, formidat acumen, Hor. Deum timeamus, Paulin.
Episcop.

Dicimus, Tempero, Moderor, etc. The meaning of this Rule is, that these Verbs
do govern different Cases according to different Significations, as follows.
Tempero tibi, i. e. modum impone; tempero te, i. e. rego te.
Tempero, to moderate, govern or restrain, an Accusative; as, temperat iras,
Virg. But, to spare, a Dative; as, caedibus sibi temperat, Live. Cic. Moderor,
to regulate or govern, is used indifferently, either with an Accusative or
Dative; as, moderatur Orationi, Cic. Refero, to relate, return or render, a
Dative; as, retulit mihi, Ovid. But, to resemble, to refer, and (sometimes) to
relate, an Accusative; as, ensem vaginae refer, Sil. So refer ad senatum,
i. e. proponere. Scribo, in Prose, with an Accusative and a Preposition; but in
the Poets it has a Dative: as, nil mihi rescribas, Ovid. So [ mitto] [Do,]
with a Dative, when I give thee for thy own use; but [ do,] with an Accusative,
when I give thee any thing for the use of another: as, dare cuipiam, Plaut.
Dare literas ad aliquem, Cic.

At ex his quaedam, etc. [ Accedo*] to come near, to be added, a Dative, or an
Accusative: as, accesserit oras, Virg. Accedit Deo ad similitudinem, Cic.
Accedere dicuntur, quae tanquam appendices sunt contractus emptionis, Var. In
nominibus propriis oppidorum aut pagorum Accusativum saepius habet, null a
praecedente praepositione, Gouldm. in Verb.

Ausculto, to obey, a Dative: as, ausculta paucis, Ter. But, to behold, or
hear, an Accusative: as, ludos auscultavi, Non. Constat, to be certain or
manifest, an Accusative, with inter; or an Ablative with de: as, constat inter
omnes, Cic. Constat hac de re, Quintil. or a Dative: as, non constat ei color,
Live. Constant campis, Plin. Convenit, to agree or accord, a Dative or Ablative
with de or cum; or an Accusative, with in, ad, inter; and (sometime) an
Accusative without a Preposition: as, de hoc parum convenit, Quint. Aliam
aetatem aliud factum convenit, Plau^. But constat, and convenit, being most an
end used as Impersonals, belong to the Rule, in Dativum feruntur, etc. Certo,
dissideo, and pugno, according to the Greek Idiom, govern a Dative, according
to the Latin, an Ablative with a Preposition ellipted or expressed: as, bello
de re aliqu a certat, Live. Tibi certet Amyntas, Virg. But certo, to aim at, an
Accusative: as certat aliquid, Hor.

Pauca ex his mutant Dativum, etc. The meaning of this Rule is, that certain
Verbs Compounded with these Prepositions prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, ob in
and inter, do change their Dative into another Case: which Verbs I shall
enumerate, to falsify that great ostentation of Lilly's grand Adversary, who
tells the World, that such Verbs cannot be found in rerum nature a.

These following Verbs have no proper Sign in English, unless it be
comprehended in the Latin.

Antecedo, antecello, anteo, and antesto, signifying to excel or surpass; and
antevenio, to excel, come before, prevent, have either an Accusative or a
Dative; but when prevention is signified, mostly an Accusative: as, Metelli
exercitum antevenit, Sal. Tempori anteveni, Plaut. Conscendo, to ascend, to
mount, an Accusative: as, equum conscendere, Live. Inscendo, to climb, an
Accusative: as, Inscendere currum, Plaut. Insilio, to leap upon, an Accusative
or a Dative: as, defessos, tauros insilire, Suet. Interdico, to forbid, has a
Dative, and an Ablative, or a Dative, and an Accusative, or a Dative alone: as,
interdico tibi dom^ me a, Live. cui nemo interdicere possit, Cic. interdicere
vestigiis, Plin. It is seldom read with an Accusative and an Ablative.
Despauter denies, it to have an Accusative; for, says he,

Omne dat activum, toll [interdicere,] quartum: Hoc Verbum sextum pro quarto
soepius optat.

I suppose he means an Accusative of the Person; for otherwise it has one;
as, faeminis usum purpurae interdixit, Live. Insum, placed in the Royal Grammar
as an example of this R^le, cannot properly be so. Obruo, to overwhelm, to
cover, an Accusative: as, nox terram obruit umbris, Lucret.

Praesto and praecelio, to excel, have a Dative or an Accusative: as, magnum
praestet Achillem, Virg. alicui praecellere, Tac. Hem vir viro quid praestet,
Ter. But praesto, to perform or make good, an Accusative: as, principem
praest^re, Suet. Jusjurandum praestare, Psin. Jun. Spem suam praestare Deis,
Lucan. Hence praestare al^quem, to be surety for a man.

Having run through all the difficulties and variations of the Syntax, I will
add a word concerning Government, and so conclude.

Government will easily be understood, if we consider. [1] Whether there be an
Acquisition (to or for) after the Verb. [2.] Whether, if there be none, there
be no Object or Subject of the motion of the Verb; for in both these Cases* the
Substantive must be the Dative. [3.] Whither there be not a Synthysis of those
Substantives, which (...) influenced by the Verb; for if that be not rega^^ed,
it will make the direct subsequent Go^^^^ment be mistaken. And [4.] to observe
which ^^^stantive belongs to the person, and which to (...) thing; for the
stress of the Government ^^ all obliques lies mostly in the Personal
Substantive. And the greatest clashing herein, is generally between the Dative
and the Accusative. A great reason of variation in Government, is Idiom, and
that is twofold; either of the Verb alone, or according to the structure of the
Sentence; and both these are again twofold, either according to the Idiom of
the Latin, or according to that of the Greek. Ex. Gr. Facere See Com. El. Gr.
jacturam, dare damnum, and not vice versa: Both of which have a Transient
Substantive and in the same Case, and yet their Idiom differs. So, nil pudet
capiti non posse pericula cano Pellere, Pers. Vobis decet, Ter. Magno bellare
parenti, Stat. By an imitation of the Greek, for a cano capite, vos decet,
magno parente. Moreover some Verbs formerly governed such Cases^, as we now
dare not use them in: as, nimis me indulgeo, Ter. Indulgent patientiam
flagello, Mart. Which Verb, if so used now, would be little less than Treason
against the old King of Grammarians, Priscian.

(...)
FINIS.

