SEVERAL INSTANCES OF THE WRONGS and OPPRESSIONS By Q's and R's, suffered by
the Sailers of the English Navy, FROM The beginning of the Late WAR: Most
humbly presented to the Fountain of Justice, the Parliament of ENGLAND.
IT is the Misfortune of the poor Sailers of the English-Navy, to have few or
no Friends to take their Part, or represent their Grievances to the Parliament,
in order to have them Redressed: Justice indeed carries an equal Balance, but
both the Scales hang over the Earth, without any respect to the Sea. Though our
Sailers are as true to their Country as the Needle of their Compass is to the
Course they Steer, as faithful as the Steel to the Loadstone; yet are they
little minded by those in whose Power it is to do them Justice, as if their
Generation were Monstrous, because their lives are Amphibious; are born on the
Land, and do Service on the Water, yet have common Justice on neither: They are
Englishmen but till they are 16 or 18 Years of Age, then arrived to the Ne
plus ultra of their Liberty, their Freedom being in perpetual danger, liable to
be invaded by every Press-Master; and those which were born to the Rights and
Immunities of an Englishman, has all his Property knocked on the head at once,
and hawl'd away and constrained on board Ship, an Honorable sort of Vassalage.
Thus Wives have their Husbands torn from their Arms, Mothers the only hopes of
their Families forced into Confinement more durable and uneasy than that of
their Wombs, Fathers and Sons Imprisoned in one Wooden Goal. But were this all,
the Bondage would seem more easy; the Mariners never think their Service to
their Country too much, they plough the wide Ocean, contend with the raging
Billows of the Deep; and with a Bravery peculier to the Sons of the Sea, meet
and fight their Enemy with a wonderful Contentment and Alacrity, in defense of
their Country, and those Rights and Privileges of which they have so small a
share. Indeed their Country has not been backward in making a Generous
Allowance suitable to the Bravery of Men engaged in such dangerous Enterprises;
but their ill Stars have laid them under such dismal Circumstances, under such
a monstrous and unparalled Conduct, that in the midst of the Plenty provided
for them, they have been in the greatest Wants. It is commonly observed in
dealings amongst Mankind, that the Service of Laborers require present Money,
and the Laws of the Realm have a great respect to the Wages of Servants,
allowing them to be first paid, even before Bonds, or any previous Obligations
of a contrary nature: But some would have every Sailer an Exlex, and would make
us believe that the same decorum of Justice is not to be used in States and
Governments, as is practiced amongst Men of inferior Ranks and Qualities:
However, as the Debts to the Sailers are National, it ought to be a National
Concern; and Grievances of this kind being Un-redress'd, may procure a National
Judgment.

That the Q's and R's upon the Navy-Books, are a common Grievance to the poor
Widows of Sailers, and their Attorneys, will loudly justify to their great
Grief and Loss.

The R, upon the Navy-Books is an immovable Letter, very significant of
Injustice, and serves there as a Period in other Books, putting a full stop to
the Sailors Pay; and though the Person that sets the permanent R, may be but a
Cipher himself in the account of Justice and true Worth, yet his Letter R, is
productive of vast Sums of Money, into the Pocket of some Body or other, to the
Ruin of the Seamen. This R, in Navy Language or Character (which you please)
signifies Run, and this Run is of different Meaning and Signification too, it
is Crambo'd and tortured most damnably, forced to express the meaning of any
thing the Commanders of the Navy please.

If a poor Man be set Sick a Shore, so that he cannot get a Board his Ship
before she Sails, then he is made Run upon the Books: If he be a Shore by the
Captain's Order about the Ship's Business, and some Orders from Above force the
Ship out of Harbor before he can get a Board, the Ship runs away from him, and
he from the Ship at the same time; if he go immediately on Board another Ship,
yet he is Run still. The immovable R, of the Navy, is as fixed as the Law of the
Medes and Persians. If he make Interest at the Admiralty to get the R taken
off, (for it is in the Power of those Men you know to do mighty Wonders) why
then his Petition comes out with this pretty Device at the bottom, read the
11th of February refused, J. Burchett.

But farther to discover the meaning of this significant Letter R, I shall give
an account how it is applied to the poor Sailers upon the Navy-Books.

I. Such as never designed to desert the Service, but being returned from long
Voyages, and their Ships being either in Port or Dock, have adventured to visit
their Friends, in order to provide themselves with Apparel and other
Necessaries, and perhaps have met with Press-Gangs belonging to other Ships,
and forced on Board; this has been esteemed by the Navy a Desertion, and they
have made such Sailers Run, upon their Books.

II. Those that have been turned over from one Ship to another, and after
having served some time in the latter, their Tickets for their service in the
former Ships have been delivered them, and after having served on Board several
other Ships, perhaps two or three Years after being set Sick a Shore, the first
Tickets with the rest, have been made Quaeri'd or Run, and their Wages
Forfeited.

Now, that such Practices as these are contrary to all the Law, Justice and
Reason in the World, is demonstrable.

I. Such as have their Tickets given them, are supposed to be guilty of no
Crime at that Juncture; and such Tickets are and have been esteemed as the
King's Bonds and Bills of Exchange, and were formerly paid upon Sight. Now, it
is very hard, That a Sailer transgressing in one Ship, should become so guilty,
as by that Crime to forfeit all his Wages in former Ships: So that good Service
and bad, according to Navy Justice, are a like Punishable.

II. Many well-affected People to His Majesty's Service, and out of Charity to
their distressed Neighbors, have supplied many Sailers with Money, to the full
value of their Tickets, and when they come to the Navy to be paid, receive
nothing but an R for their Money.

III. The Quaerying and Running of such Tickets, have abominably lessened the
Credit of the Navy in respect of Wages, and made the most Glorious Navy in the
World, the most Scandalous by such barbarous Abuses, insomuch that Tickets
formerly sold at 2 s. 6 d. per Pound, are now Sold for Seven, Eight, Ten and
Twelve Shillings loss.

The next thing to be Considered is the Letter Q. upon the Navy Books, which
stands there as near Injustice, as it does to the Letter R in the Alphabet.
This Q is generally put upon such as are set sick a Shore. And then the poor
Sailer is to quaery for Justice, which he may do till he is Blind, and never
find it. That this Practice is Barbarous and Inhuman, is very evident.

I. It sinks the Laborers Hire into private Pockets, deprives distressed
Families of their Bread, purchased by the hazard of human Life, and brings
unnecessary charge upon Parishes.

II. This Q is a new Letter in the Navy Books, Quaeries being never heard of
till the Year 1690. before which time, every Man set sick a Shore had his Wages
paid him, and was discharged from the Service.

III. The great Sickness which at and since that time happened in the Fleet,
was the Foundation of these Quaeries; a very hard Case, that a Sailer must lose
his Money because he has lost his Health in the Service; must have bad Pay,
because he has been poisoned with bad Provisions.

IV. Many, if not most of those, who have been set sick a Shore, have thought
themselves Discharged, according to former Custom, being altogether ignorant of
the new Practice of the Navy.

V. Many that have been long Voyages, and sick for many Months together, seeing
the Major part of the Ships Crew Buried, have been thereby deshearten'd to go a
board Ship again, Diseases being more dreadful to Sailers than Battle or Storm.

VI. Nor can it be rationally expected, that such as have contracted
Indispositions and Distempers, by unwholsom Provisions, or a contagious Air,
should (after a Month's Refreshment in sick Quarters, or laboring 6 or 12
Months under their Maladies in an Hospital) be fit to return aboard Ship, or be
capable of doing His Majesty service; but the contrary is evident, by the vast
numbers that died soon after their return on Board, as well as those that were
set sick a Shore.

And would it not now be just to pay such Men their Wages? Would it not be for
the Honor of His Majesty, for the Reputation and Credit of the Navy to
consider their Cases and pay the Debts due from the Nation to such?

1. As have been set Sick on Shore since the conclusion of the Peace. 2. To the
Executors and Attorneys of such as died in Sick Quarters, Hospitals or Hospital
Ships. 3. To such as after Recovery entered on Board any of his Majesty's Ships.
4. To such as have been Wounded or hurt, and received Pensions, or Smart-Money
for the same. 5. To such as continued Six Months, or upwards, in Sick Quarters
or Hospitals, or have been discharged from thence as Incurable. 6. To such as
the Captains of Ships have discharged by Tickets, as unserviceable, as being
either Sick, Lame or Blind, etc.
This Usage of free born Englishmen, might move Compassion in any but in those
whose Business it is to cheat them, and raise their own Fortunes out of their
Ruins. This indeed is a miserable Scene of humane Cruelty, unknown to the
Heathen Nations, and yet practiced in a Christian Country, built on the Pillars
of good and wholesome Laws, and under a Government for no other reason that I
know, but on purpose to destroy such Arbitrary Proceedings, and to dispense
common Justice to all Men. There is little more difference betwixt a Gally
Slave and an English Sailer, than that one serves in expectation of Pay, and
the other without it; yet one is sometimes as well paid as the other. This
barbarous usage of Mariners, have made them instead of deserting our Ships of
War, and taking Merchants Service, forsake their Country, and Sailwith
Foreigners, in hopes of better Justice and Usage abroad than they have met with
at home. This barbarous Usage has made many Thousands of them turn Pirates
during the last War; and those that turn Free-booters are generally the Flower
and Youth of the Seamen, so that in time our Ships shall be Manned only with
decrepit old Age, and the refuse of the Sea, to the weakening of the Nation and
Government; for every Sailer lost is a Stone taken out of our National Walls,
which suffering such continual Dilapidations, will at last tumble down, and
leave us exposed to the Insults of any Invader.

And after all, Pray what is become of the Money that was ordered to pay the
Seamen, upon whom the R's and Q's have been put? If it remains still in the
King's Hands, there is yet some hopes of Relief left to the miserable Sailers;
but if it be otherwise disposed of, their Disease seems Incurable. When we look
into the PayOffice and see there some Clerks at 30 l. per Annum purchasing
Estates, others turning Merchants, and employing vast Sums of Money in Trade,
we may give a shrewd Guess what is become of the Poor Sailers Money. And how
shall their Creditors be paid? How shall their Widows and numerous Fatherless
Children be provided for? Will not the charge to the several Parishes, upon
this account, be heavier upon the Subject than the Taxes during the War.

Dwelling so long upon the R's, and Q's, which to me appear like Figures in
Sorcery; for the Projectors of their meaning in Navy Dialect have placed them
backwards, as Witches say their Prayers: I had almost forgot the Injuries daily
committed to those Sailers who have cheerfully Registered themselves, to be the
more ready upon all occasions to serve their Country, the Parliament has
settled on every one of them Forty Shillings a Year for their Encouragement;
and last Year the Officers of that Registry have received 80000 l. to pay off
those Tickets, out of which they have only distributed 35000 l. and refuse to
pay one Farthing more, pretending they have not Money, so that Forty five
thousand Pounds is sunk unaccountably into some bodies Pocket.

All these things are worthy the Consideration of our Representatives in
Parliament, who are the only Persons can redress Grievances of this nature.

Now for some short Account of the Register-Office and conclude; there were
mighty things promised from this Office, and truly had it been well founded and
managed, it might have been of very good Service to the Nation; for it is more
then time, some measures should have been taken to retrieve our sinking Navy;
but this being contrived and governed by the Projectors, who seem rather by
their Carriage to ruin or drive all the Seamen out of the Kingdom, than to
encourage and keep them here, has had the contrary effect expected by
Parliament, that made a large Provision for this Office, and made a Calculation
of 30000 Seamen to be Registered, now of these 30000 there is about 15000
Thousand Registered, which most of them Registered themselves a-Board of Ship
before the Conclusion of the Peace, being chiefly threatened and compelled to it;
but since the Peace there have been a very inconsiderable number have
Registered, and one may believe now the Register-Office may sit down contented,
and save the charge it puts the Kingdom to for any more Men of any sort that
will Register themselves. But now to show what may be depended upon from those
already Registered, half of them are Officers who are forced to do it, or
otherwise lose their Employments; but as they have not the 40 s. a Year,
provided for every Seaman by the Act, so they are not obliged to surrender
themselves to the Service, but they were only compelled to Register themselves,
not for any use they were that way to the Kingdom, but for Encouragement to the
Seamen, or to wheedle them to follow their Example. A moiety of this remaining
7000 are Land Men or wretched Creatures taken or Pressed into the Service, more
to make up the Complement, and rather pester a Ship, when Seamen could not be
got: above half the remainder, which we will suppose to be Seamen, are at Sea
in Merchants service on Foreign Voyages, the Act obliging none to stay at home
to wait a Call; so that in fine, by a modest Calculation, the Nation in the
utmost Exigency cannot rely upon the Register-Office for Two thousand able
Seamen of the 30000 which was expected in six Months time: But to give some
Particulars how this Office is a Discouragement, or rather an Oppression in
many Respects to Seamen than an Encouragement, as was promised to the
Parliament when 'twas Established by Law, at a great charge to the Nation.

I. The Seaman that Registered himself was promised by the Act, 40 s. per Annum,
which is a great deal in a poor Seaman's Pocket, and Estimates given every
Session to the Parliament yearly of this particular Charge, and if I mistake
not, Fonds raised and received for this use: Now the Seamen have never received
a Farthing of this; but on the contrary, the Seaman is glad to sell his
Register Ticket for 10 s. in the Pound, which every Body will not give, for to
my knowledge, People that have made enquiry at the Register-Office how, and
when these Tickets would be paid, 'twas answered, 'twas not yet determined, nor
did they believe ever would; an excellent Encouragement to Seamen; but to help
out the matter, here is a Tax levied upon every Seaman in England of 6 Pence
per Mensem, toward the support of this Establishment, which I never heard any
Seaman the better for: Again, the Act says, the King's Ships shall be Manned
with Registered Seamen; they to have the Preference, and out of them only are
the inferior Officers to be made; now several Captains have been put to a
Plaguey puzzle on this account, for by reason of the discouragements before
mentioned, very few good Seamen have Registered themselves, so that a Captain
cannot find enough, or sufficient out of his Registered Men to make Officers of.

There might be a great deal more said of the ill Usage of these poor
Creatures; but to avoid prolixity I shall omit it now, and humbly hope this
already said, may be worth the Consideration of the Supreme Judicature; it
being designed to no other end, than that in doing Justice, and showing Mercy
to these poor People, it may at last turn to be of the greatest service to the
Nation.

GERRALD BYRNE, A lover of the King and Country.

LONDON. Printed by G. Croom, at the Blew-Ball over against Bridewel near
Fleet-bridge, 1699.

Price 2 d.


