A Short and Plain ACCOUNT Of the Late-Found Balsamic WELLS AT HOXDON. And of
their Excellent Virtues Above other MINERAL WATERS; Which make 'em Effectually
Cure most DISEASES, both Inward and Outward. With Directions how to Use 'em.

By T. BYFIELD, M. D.

London, Printed and are to be sold by Christopher Wilkinson, at the Black-B^y
against St. Dunstons Church in Fleetstreet, (...),at the Angel in
Westminster Hall, and John Harris at the (...) against the Church in the
Poultrey. 1687.

TO THE PROPRIETORS Of the Late-Found Balsamic WELLS, AT THE GOLDEN-HEART, In
HOXDON-Square.
Gentlemen,
ALthough so great a Vein of Medicine be put into your Hands, I presume you
neither intend to commence Doctors your selves, or give Degrees to Others at
those Wells.

I Confess that to be in any measure Entrusted with the General Health of so
Populous a City, whether for its Preservation or Recovery, is no small
Blessing, if rightly Managed. And that You are made Trustees by the Providence
of GOD, for the Public Good, in this Affair, seems better Ordered, than if it
had fell into the Hands of Physicians Themselves, who are too apt to
Monopolize, and make Arcana.

I did last Year observe how Freely, and on what Easy Terms you set Open those
Salutiferous Fountains, so that None could complain for want of their Benefit.
I likewise took Notice of a great deal of Mis-Management in the Use of those
Waters. Least therefore such Wholesome Springs should not be used aright, and
so have their Just Value abated; I have kindly Undertaken to give some Account
of their Nature and Virtues. To which Others, or my Self (after further
Experience of 'em) may add a fuller Character, Adorned with the Observations of
Various Cures.

I have also directed a proper Method for their Medicinal Use, in showing what
Care is requisite in the Drinking of 'em. But how the Body is to be prepared,
and the Method of 'em discreetly carried on, that the Waters may become more
Effectual to so many Various Distempers, and Different Constitutions, recourse
must be had to Physicians.

Now although I have played the Hydrotomist with these Balsamick-Wells, and by
the Rules of Art in my Laboratory strictly examined their Principles; so that I
am tollerably furnished with a fair Account of so New a Discovery; Yet I will
not Post my Self at the Wells, or expose an Apothecary's Shop, as many may do,
to get rid of some Old Medicines, etc. But Reserve at my own House those few
Medicines I judge fit both to Prepare the Body, and Accompany the Use of the
Waters variously designed. For I would have every Industrious Physician
qualify Himself for Real Service, and then it is pity but he should be heard.

And I hope this my Undertaking will heartily be accepted by All, and escape
the abusive Censures of some Physicians, who are not willing to be at so much
Pains, yet shall think their Merchandise hereby obstructed.

I hope, Gentlemen, you will be very Industrious to keep Open these Balsamic
Springs, that they may long Flow to the Advantage of many: And that the Other
Accommodations may be so Disposed, as to be only serviceable to this Great and
Good Design; that no Disrepute may be cast on the Wells, nor Sobriety offended
by contriving the Entertainment of Luxury and Needless Diversions, and so
become an Unhandsome Rendevouz. But I doubt not but under your Prudent Conduct,
their Medicinal Virtues will raise 'em to such a General Good Esteem, that
they will become the Metropolitan Fountain.

That these Rivulets may join together, and become one lasting Spring; And that
the love of so great a Blessing may unite Proprietors and Physicians, in
Contriving 'em the best way to be serviceable to the Public Good, are the
Unfeigned Wishes of,

Gentlemen, Your Real Friend and Servant, T. Byfield.
From my House in New-Street, by Shoe-Lane, near the Five-Bells.
A Short and Plain ACCOUNT Of the Late-Found BALSAMIC WELLS At Hoxdon, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of Water in general.
SInce I am about to demonstrate the Advantages of Medicinal Waters, and to
show how fit a Vehicle this Element is to convey Medicine to the inmost
Recesses of the Body; I think it not besides my business if I a little touch
upon the Excellency of Water, which was Created for the Universal Drink of all
Creatures, and the Health and long Life of the first Ages of the World, may
commend its wholesomness. But if we examine its Nature, we shall find it
consist of those qualities which denote its Salubrity, as Clearness, Thinness,
Lightness, Softness, etc. which Cool, Moisten, Attenuate, Refresh, Allay
Thirst, and are a Pabulum or Recruit to fretted Spirits, and a proper Liquor to
convey and distribute other Aliments. Some of the Ancients called it (...). the
Seed of all things: But I shall not here Discourse of the Productions from
Waters; what Vegetables, Minerals and Animals are generated by it. Neither
shall I treat of the various kinds of Water, as River-Water, Rainwater, Pump,
Lake, Pond-Water, etc. That is the best and most wholesome which is void of
Taste or Odor, and is Clear, Pure, most Light, soon Heated, soon Cold, and in
which Flesh is soonest Boiled. The Living Spring I judge most valuable for
Drinking, and that nearest the Head of it the best. For those living Principles
which actuate all Bodies, and keep 'em not only from Putrefaction, but qualify
'em for Recruits and Sustenance to other Bodies, are in proportion in Waters,
which denote 'em of such and such a strength and purity, and may be used in
quantities accordingly. And it is no small advantage that they are capable of
being received in such large quantities, without fuming or disturbing the
Brain, to irrigate and soften the whole Body, and bedew the fiery Spirits with
their supple Vapors: and when those Airy brisk Particles do extricate
themselves from these soft Lodgments, they are again entangled with more, to
prevent their leaping out, or firing one against another: and such a pretty
bustle or ferment in Nature raises that general Efflorescence and Vigor, which
Plumps, Exhilerates, and makes Gay a Well-tempered Healthy Body.

The dispensing either of Food or Physic in a clear, thin, soft, and gentle
Vehicle, must make a better Digestion, and a more equal Distribution of it,
then in a fiery Chariot, which precipitates Nature, and hurries the crude parts
through those strait and slender Passages beyond their natural Emunctories, and
lodges 'em where neither Nature can expel 'em, nor Art reach 'em; and that
causes Gout, and other Diseases. Whenas the milder Liquors make such easy
gradations, that Nature can secern by her peculiar cleansing Ducts, those Feces
and Crudities, which timely and orderly expelled, prevent innumerable
Obstructions and Distempers to the Body.

I wish for my own particular, who am sometimes afflicted with Stone and Gout,
that I had earlier studied these things. But what I cannot prevent in my self,
I Am willing to do for others.

But to show how excellent a Vehicle Water is, for the distribution of Generous
and Restorative Medicines, is no difficult Task, if its Nature be considered,
as is before mentioned: For by searching out the minutest Passages of the Body,
it promotes a general dispensation of the designed matter to all parts of it.
And I am of the Opinion that fine Chemical Medicines should be delivered to
Bodies in soft gentle Vehicles; yet I would not have 'em conveyed in their own
Terrestial Bodies (as Galenical Physic is) For they are so fitted there in
their position, that our Bodies (especially when Sick) are not able to
Extricate the benign useful parts from the intricate Meatus's of a tough
Compositum, and raise its living Principles from their Domiclis so stiffly
munited and secured. Yet when by great Art and Labor these lively Particles
are set loose and defecated, they are beneficially delivered in another Body,
where they cannot so soon shape a Retirement: And if in thin, light, cooling
Liquors, Nature can with ease gradually fetch out theit help and refreshment,
without any fierce assault from 'em, and this Vehicle admits of quantity enough
for a general and equal distribution of such Generous Medicines as are usually
contracted into very slender quantities. -- But I design brevity.

CHAP II.
Of Mineral Waters.
IN the Mineral Kingdom through which the Veins of Water glide, are amassed
mighty Treasures, from whence may be extracted greater Relief for the
Necessities of Mankind, than is by most imagined.

Excellent Medicines are gained by the due Management of Fire from several
Minerals and Semi-Minerals, etc. But to come to my purpose: By playing the
Hydrotomist, The great Account of Mineral Waters may be Displayed, which
receive their Medicinal Qualities from Subterranean Mines and Oars.

It may be considered that few Mineral Waters are simple, I mean impregnated
only with one Mineral, but compounded as the Minerals and Marcasites lie
confused in the Bowels of the Earth; and those who have been curious to search
into the Nature of Medicinal Springs, have always discovered a mixture, though
perhaps some of 'em have not been so lucky as to assign their Virtues to the
proper Minerals, etc. In the Mineral Kingdom I place Salt, Nitre, Vitriol,
Allom, etc. For in the Salts of many Bodies lie their chief Virtues, either for
purging by Stool or Urine, or for Cleansing, Cooling, Drying, Stimulating,
Opening of Obstructions, Attenuating of gross Humors, or for Astriction,
Corroboration, etc. according to the Nature of the Body. The Learned Helmomt
says, (p. 55.) Semina Salium cuncta in Aquis sita sunt, attamen nondum saporem
induerunt nisi Corporum Principia consentanea Vterosque Terrae debitos
repererunt, etc. viz. That all the Seeds of Salts are placed in Water, yet are
not endued with Taste, unless they find agreeable Principles of Bodies and
suitable Matrices of the Earth; then, and not till then they manifest their
Saltness, and become determined in a Saline Body; in one place into Allom; in
another Sal-marine, in a Third Nitre. etc. To which he adds, Quocirca notandum,
Sal quoddam existere Hermaphroditicum Metallorum quod defectu nominis Esurinum
sive Acetosum re et nomine vocari capit, generale equidem and ad omnia Metalla
accommodabile: (viz) That there is a certain Hermaphroditical Salt of Metals,
which for want of another name is called an Esurine or Acid Salt, which is a
general sort of Salt, and accommodated to all Metals. So that this Esurine
Salt, while such, is no more then Salt, and not a Vitriol: But if it become a
Vitriol, it must espouse a Mineral or Metalline Body. He further says,
Vitriolum praestantissimum naturaliter crescit fodinis, quibus Natura istad Sal
Esurinum peperit, venam aeris feracem, Corrodens, and Fontis labentis liquore
dissolutum; (viz) That the best Vitriol is most naturally brought forth in
those Mines where Nature has begot that Esurine Salt, corroding a strong Vein
of Copper, becomes dissolved in the gliding Current of a Spring. But should I
here enlarge in an account of Nitre, Vitriol, Allom, etc. I should exceed my
present Intention, and prevent a future Design. Yet I think it necessary to my
present Business, to say thus much of Nitre and Vitriol: That the Esurine Salt
discovered in the Air, if it meet with a fat unctuous Glebe, and be preserved
from Rain and Sun, that it spend not its strength in the Production of
Vegetables, breeds great store of Nitre: For it is observed that in these fat
Earths there is at first no Nitrous Taste, neither can any Nitre be extracted
from 'em: But after their continuance a while in the Cool Air, its Magnetic
Power from a Nitrous Principle opens the Unctuous Body of the fat Glebe, a fit
Receptacle for the Esurine Spirit, and is therewith Coagulated and Envellop'd:
And after this manner is the Nativity of Nitre.

It Is commonly observed, That in Cold Weather the Appetite is more keen, and
the Thirst little; which proceeds from the great store of Nitre that is in the
Air.

Vitriol I take to be an Esurine Acid Salt, corroding the Sulphurous Parts of
Metals or Marcasites, by an Acid Subterraneal Spirit, (whereof there is great
quantity in some Mines) Corroding the Veins of Iron, Copper, etc. from whence
are the Varieties of Vitriol. Sometimes from a Vitriol Loam, or Clay diluted
with Water, and set in a cold Cellar, may be gathered an Alluminous
Efflorescence, which shows there may be a Mixture of Allom with Vitriol. But
the Differences or Varieties of Impregnations arise either from the Difference
of the quantity of the Acid Spirit, Corroding the Veins of Copper or Iron, or
from the greater or lesser Continuance of the Course of the Water through those
Metallic Veins.

It need not seem strange to any that there is such Acidity in Water and Air;
from whence else does Iron and Copper, being put into Water, or standing long
in the Air in a cool Cellar, contract such a Rust as they do? Is it not from
the Acid Spirit of Air and Water uniting with the Esurine Salt in those Metals,
exciting its Corrosive Power to destroy the Texture of the Metal? And this Rust
being boiled in Rainwater, will yield a Vitriol.

There are many ways of making Artificial Vitriols: But I shall pass beyond my
Intentention if I now Discourse of 'em.

It Is obvious what Beds of Minerals lie in the Bowels of the Earth, on which
the Currents of Water wash in their Circulating Veins, from which they are
Impregnated with their Medicinal Qualities.

But before I dismiss this Chapter, I think fit to add this, That there is a
universal common Salt of Nature, the first Ens of Salts, which is specificated
according to the diversity of Nature, and receives various forms.

GOD, the Original Founder of all Beings, has Implanted in the Superficies of
the Earth, that great variety of Vegetable Seeds, which propagate themselves in
their Species: So that very Vegetable at its proper Season, by the Instigation
of the Heavenly Insluences, setting at work its Seminals, and by stirring up
its Innate Power, begins to shape it self a Body according to the Laws of
Creation, every Plant in its kind, till they have made up that wonderful
Variety which so richly Adorns the Earth.

In like manner are dispersed the Mineral and Metalline Seeds in the Bowels of
the Earth, determined for Specification, and to become Prolifick by the
Embryonate Sulphur, according to the Purity or Impurity of the Terrestrial
Matrix. And thus the Metallic Order is Completed by the Perfected Metals,
while the Imperfect and middle Minerals arrive but slowly to Metallization.

CHAP. III.
Of the Balsamic Wells at Hoxdon.
HAving Premised thus much of Water in general and of Mineral Waters, the
better to Explain my Essay of these New Discovered Balsamic Wells. I shall now
give a short and plain Account of their constituent Principles, which upon a
strict Examen* many ways in my Laboratory, I have discovered to be only these
following, ( viz.) The first Ens or Mother of Salts, which runs through and is
shut up in all Specificated Salts; though it is not easily made Appear: for it
requires a Laborious and Skilful Hand to resolve the Compage of a Mineral or
Metal.

The Balsamic Principle is a Sulphur well digested and purified by the
Volatile Salt, and retains in it a great deal of the Embryonate Sulphur. But
it is brought to that Height and Volatility in the Bowels of the Earth, that
were it not for the Third Principle, the Vitriol of Mars, to give 'em Fixation,
I believe they would not have been Retained in Water alone. But this being of a
more fixed Nature, and a Salt, has Magnetically caught and entangled the Esurine
Spirit with the first Ens or Mother of Salts, and that fragrant tender Sulphur
in her Belly. So that when the Metalick Oar is unloosed, and you come near to
the Original of Salts, then you will find the tender Sulphur close Locked up in it,
which when it is long digested by Nature or Art, becomes most grateful, and
withal so volatile by the Unition of it with a sublime Salt, that it will
imbody it self without much show, save that of a pleasing gummous Smell: for
all Odor is from Sulphur. But before I pass any further, I think fit to
Explain what I mean by an Embryonate Sulphur, and that is, a fragrant Gas or
Breath containing the beginnings and impressions of Sulphur which are not yet
Imbodyed, but like the first Rays of an Embrio in the Womb, before it has
gathered much Matter. Now that our Waters do contain these Principles, and in
so great Purity, it may thus appear: For where there is no Floating Oil, as in
One of the Wells there is but very little, there is nevertheless a most
pleasing Scent from the Sulphur that is Incorporated with the Waters. Now
wherever there is such an Embryonate pure Sulphur, there must be a Volatile
Salt of the highest Nature, to Attenuate this Sulphur, and carry it on its
Wings through the whole Body. And thus it is in our Waters, which upon Ordinary
Experiments you will find contain these Volatiles: For by Evaporating some of the
Water, you will perceive it lose most of its Grateful Sulphurous Odor, because
so Tender and Volatile: Nay, though you should Distill 'em with never so much
Curiosity, in Glass Vessels exactly fitted and luted, yet would your Sulphur
fly away insensibly, and leave no Footsteps of its presence.

But besides these, we are as forward as any other Mineral Waters: For we have
a pure Vitriol of Iron, depurated and cleansed by Nature from a dangerous
Aerugo, or Ironish Rust, which may be Precipitated in some Mineral Waters. This
shows it self to every one by the Common Experiments made on any Chalybeate
Waters; as by the Powder of Gauls, the Leaves of an Oak, or Tea, etc. Besides
the Blackish Color it leaves on the Ordure: Not to mention here all the
Excellent Medicinal Qualities, which are a Cloud of Witnesses for it. This
Specificated Vitriol entangles the fine Salt and Sulphur, whereby it Enriches
it Self, and Retards those Volatiles, and so become all together Digested, and
more easily Dissolved in the Vein of a Spring. And the further they pass
together in the Meanders and Sabulous or Gravelly Streiners of the Earth, they
become the more purged from the Terrestrial and Sulphurous Feculencies they
contracted in their Solution.

A Parallel to these Waters I believe is not discovered. The more I Examine
'em, the more I wonder, to see such Life in Waters, from Themselves so pure.
It Is usual, especially in the Bowels of the Earth, for the Principles of Life
to Contract great Impurities; Or at least, to become so heavy loaded, and
disappearing, that they seem either not to be, or stifled, beyond smelling of
'em out by any Grateful Odours. Where there are any Sulphurous Spaws, as in
Yorkshire, and other Places, their Oils (by Report) stink like Rotten Eggs in
the Stomach, etc. -- But there is no Unwholesome Glebe, or any dangerous
Mineral or Metal, that casts one Unhappy Ray into this Healing Fountain. So
that it appears to be a most Excellent Composition, ( viz.) No less than the
Original Purity of Salt and Sulphur, digested with the finest Vitriol of Mars.

Now as I can discover by my Art no other Principles in this Water, so I hope
there is no other: For I cannot imagine what is wanting to render 'em highly
valuable, and promising the greatest Benefits to Humane Bodies, if Rightly
Used. It Is true, They are not Farfetch'd, therefore may be disesteem'd by some.
But I have sound out a way to make 'em Grateful even to such Persons: Since
then we cannot Remove the Wells to Germany or Tunbridge, if they will but Remove
Thither, and so send for 'em, or come once a year to 'em, that Squeamish
Distemper will be Cured.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Virtues and Excellency of these Waters.
NOw what Great Things, and Truly too, can I say for These Fountains? They seem
to be a Lively Alkali, or come nearer to it than any thing I know by Nature to
be so. I Am apt to think 'em able, with a little help, to Reccver a Decayed Mass
of Blood, and to dissolve in some measure Tartarous Coagulums, such as STONE
and GOVT: But it must be by a well-governed Method in the Use of 'em, directed
with a great deal of Skill. By the help of the Volatile Salt and Embryonate
Sulphur, I believe a deep-rooted SCVRVEY may be Cured; in Restoring those
Decayed Principles which a Scorbutic Fret of Blood has almost eaten out.

But before I proceed any further, 'twill be necessary to make a little
Digression of the Nature of the SCVRVEY, and its Cure, the better to explain
other Distempers.

The Scurvey then is, when the due Temperament of the Blood is broke up by the
Raging of the Fixed Salts, and their Preying on the True Sulphur or Oleity in
Man eat it out, and subjugate the Pure Volatile Spirit to their own Dominion,
and so becomes a Corrosive fiery Spirit. While this is doing, many Symptoms
appear, as Scorbutic Frets, and Feverish Intermissions, etc. But because it is
done by degrees, and in some time becomes Natural, a Man loses a good habit of
Body he knows not how. Now when this Fixed Salt has in good measure destroyed
the other Vital Principles, it sets up a Corrosive sharp Spirit, which (for
want of the other Principles to purify it) contracts a foul nasty Humor,
which by some is called Bitturn; 'twill look Blackish, Green, and Yellow. By
this time a Man's come to a pretty pass, and fit to complain he is Ill; for
every thing about him begins to tell him so: But 'twill be too tedious to
mention Symptoms here.

Now the Common Cure for this, (after Purging and Bleeding) is, Testaceous
Powders, Crabs Eyes, Pearl, Coral, Amber, Steel, Milk-Water, Asses Milk, going
into the Country, and then to the Grave.

I say that no Dead Alkali will Cure the Scurvey, when come to a height: It
will Palliate, that is, Obtund the sharp Particles of the Blood, and lick 'em
up for a while; But then the Corrosive Scorbutic Spirit breaks through again,
unless suffocated: Just as the Spirits will disentangle themselves from an
Opiate, unless overpowered. But a Lively Alkali will beget a New Mass of
Blood; 'Twill enter into the Fixed Salt, Open its Body, and Raise a New Stock of
Principles, and Ferment off the Course Salts with its Bitturn. Now these indeed
are True Medicines, which alas too few yet know; Yet the Scurvey every Body
knows and Cures.

But I must not digress too far; though I could not well avoid this short
imperfect touch at it; because it is the Radix of most Diseases. Indeed it is the
M^ster that Cuts out; for most other Diseases do but finish its work. And since
few dye of the Scurvey, strictly so called; therefore many will pretend they
Cure it. For it shifts into another Distemper, and the Doctor shifts it off
too, and gives out he Cured him of the Scurvey; for the died of a Consumption,
etc.

Now whatever contains a pure Spirit, seated in a soft Volatile Salt and a Gass
of Embryonate Sulphur, is this Lively Alkali; and such our Waters do in some
degree: Therefore I may pronounce them an ANTI-SCORBVTICK; which, rightly
Considered, is a Proud Medicine. And that such a Medicine is good against STONE
and GOVT, both my Reason and Experience can affirm; for 'twill bid fair for the
Resolving of Tartarous Concretions. And that such Medicines will open
Obstructions, dissolve Congelations, and the manifold Thicknings of the Juyces
up and down the Body, is equally manifest by Reason and fair Practice. For
Coagulums are the Common Effect of the Scurvey: And most of the Diseases of the
Body are caused by the Acid Corosive Spirit, which will inspissate Juyces; just
as Acids turn Milk to Curds and Clottedness. All Imposthumations, Schirrus's,
Ulcers within the Body and without, are from this Scorbutic sharp Salt. From
this Topic I could go through with most Diseases, and give the best Account of
their Cause. -- But I must forbear.

These Waters from their pure Sulphur cannot but be Excellent for all inward
Ulcers and Decays, and to supple the Spirits fretted by many Distempers.

From their Impregnation with the Vitriol of Mars, they are embled for all
those Excellent Operations, which Tunbridge and other Chalybeat Waters perform.
But because they are so commonly known, I will in this short Lecture omit 'em.
It may therefore for the present suffice to mention the Virtues of these Waters
from their Principles United.

They Cleanse, Cool, Stimulate, open Obstructions, dissolve and attenuate all
Gross Humors, and are abstersive of Viscous, Tartarous, and other Humors in
the Stomach, Mesenteries, Hypochondries, Reins, Womb, Bladder, Joints, etc.

They create a great Appetite, by Recovering and Strengthening her Tone. They
Cleanse, Strengthen, and Contract the Womb, which must be of great use to such
as are subject to Miscarriages, Weakness in those parts, and are unapt to
breed. But because I think not fit here to particularize, I Will once for all
say, They are of excellent use for Ladies in all their distinguishing
Circumstances from Men: But not to be used by those with Child. For particular
direction herein, a Physician should be Consulted.

And here (in a Parenthesis) let me say, It Is requisite to the Health and
Happiness of every Person to have Recourse to a Spiritual and Physical Guide,
and that in times of seeming Health, to provide against those Evils, which the
height of a Distemper and the hour of Death make unseasonable for any
considerable Ministration. Principiis obsta, etc.

These Waters are powerful in all Cachectical and Obstinate Diseases. Like an
Alkali, they imbibe the Acidity and Sowerness of the Blood, and consequently
dulcify the same: For by a Natural Propensity uniting Magnetically with the
Salts, they are ejected together with the Obstructive Humors, by a strong
Irritation of Nature (from these Waters) to expel 'em. And from their Diuretic
Nature, after they have Attenuated, Cut, Resolved, and so altered the Mucous
and Tartarous Humors of the Body, and prepared 'em for Excretion, they then
carry them off by Urine, which is the most Safe and Effectual Conveyance (for
all sharp and Saline Humors) of all sorts of Evacuation whatever.

This Water, enriched by my Tinctura Regalis, and some Powders that are Lively
Alkali's, search such Latent Passages, and Abstruse Retirements of the Body, as
other Medicines cannot reach; and after a Discovery made, does not only
dispossess what is Preternatural of its Usurped Power, but also by
Corroborating and Reinforcing Nature, so firmly intitles her to her former
Right of Inheritance, that scarce any thing but an Act of Hostility or Old Age,
can cut off the Entail.

They so Correct and Amend the Juices of the Body, by expelling Watery, Sharp,
Sower, Gnawing, Hot, Foul Humors, etc. that they Cure the Scurvey,, even in
those whose Gums and Teeth, as well by Spots as other Signs, show it to have
deep Rooting.

Admirable against DROPSIES, especially in such as have those Humors fluctuate
up and down, by falling into the Legs and returning again, which prevents sore
Legs, etc.

They are justly Recommended against the Jaundice, Yellow and Black, Melancholy
and Fearful Passions, Cholick, Diarrhaea, and Dysenteria, and the Distemper
called, Vapors offending Head and Heart.

They Open, Cool, Cleanse and Strengthen the Lungs, consequently good against
Asthma's, Coughs, and Consumptions, if not too far spent.

They are Abstersive and Mealing; therefore Consolidate Lungs decaying by
Exulcerations: Likewise Vlcerated Kidneys, they cleanse 'em of Mucous Foul
Matter, the Duelech, Sand, Gravel and Stones.

I may likewise commend 'em to those Subject to Headaches, Vertigo, Megrim,
etc.

And for Gonorrhea's, and the Fruitful Improvements on that Graft; especially
if taken in Method, with a few other things; to speak Modestly, they will
answer Expectation.

It Is too tedious to Enumerate so many Distempers as Authors have found hard
Words for. The preserving the Blood in, or restoring it to a good Temper
(without any more ado) cuts off a Thousand Diseases.

I Will only add, That these Waters are of Use to such as are afflicted with
Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, Sores, Itch, Scabs, Sore-Eyes, Sore-Legs, Leprosy,
etc.

CHAP. V.
Directions to be Observed Before, In, and After the Taking these Waters.
TO them who intend the Use of these Waters for the Removing of any
considerable Distemper, I advise that they prepare their Bodies as shall be
thought most proper by their Physicians.

To those who carefully keep their Bodies from any glut of Humors, and design
only to take 'em for Pleasure, or to remove slighter Indispositions; or if it
be but to dilute and temper the Blood and preserve it from decay, or to create
a good Stomach, etc. I advise but a slighter Preparation, by a gentle Infusion,
or a few Stomach Pills, etc. to clear the first Passages.

But what I have furnished my self with, requisite to be given before and with
these Waters, etc. I shall keep at home, for such who Resort to me. For I would
willingly avoid all Offense; not coveting any Man's Employ.

And thus I hope I shall easily demonstrate my Care to prevent Obloquy, and
satisfy any I design not to Monopolize.

If Prejudice prevent not, these Waters may be Prescribed by Physicians in
Method to their Patients, to the full as well as Other Medicinal Springs: And
by their Skill may become Useful Vehicles for the distribution of such Generous
and Noble Medicines as our Art directs.

These Waters are to be Taken alone, from One Quart to Two; or Five Pints at
most.

The Rules to be observed in the Taking of 'em, are common to other Mineral
Waters, and so generally Known, that almost every one can prevent me in those
Few and Easy Directions that are requisite.

They are to be Taken in the Morning Fasting, and before the Body is heated
with Exercise: Therefore come to these Wells Early, and as Easily as you can.

They are not to be Drank too Quick, nor too Slow: But Convenient Distances are
to be allotted; as once in half an Hour a pint, or rather less, as your Stomach
can bear 'em and pass 'em, till you have taken the Quantity you design. But to
sickly Persons I advise but half a Pint at a Draught; and a little warmed in
cold Weather, by setting a Bottle in a Skillet of Cold Water close stopped, and
so let it warm with the Water.

After you have taken two or three draughts, it is best to use some very gentle
Exercise, to promote 'em by Urine.

Whilst you walk, ride, etc. you may eat Orange-Chips, Citron-Peels,
Carraway-Confects, Elicampane-Roots Candy'd, etc.

When your Waters are almost returned, then you may increase your Exercise ad
ruborem, non ad sudorem; till you be pretty Warm, but not Sweat.

It Is not fit to Dine till the Waters are past; and half an Hour before Dinner
(for some Persons) a Glass of Rhenish, White Wind or Clarret, I think not amiss.

I shall not here prescribe the Quality of your Diet: Every one knows that
Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Chickens, Rabbits, etc. are good Fare. My Care is to
Caution you as to Quantity, and that the rather, because these Waters rightly
used, give a great Appetite:

It Is better both to Dine and Sup Moderately, then to Overcharge at once.

Temperance prevents and helps to Cure many Diseases. He that desires to Eat
much, must Eat little; for by Eating little at a time, he lives long, and so
makes it up.

All Intemperance in Drink should at all times be avoided; But Excess in this
Method may be dangerous: Nevertheless I commend to some Persons, a little good
Wine toward Night with Discretion.

And here I think it kind to Insert this Note; That the Dilutive Cup, or
Evenings Draught so much in Use, is generally taken too late: For to fill the
Body with Liquor and presently to Bed, causes many Diseases. It Is fit it should
as to the greatest part be passed first, which would prevent Gravel, Stone,
Gouts, Dropsies, and many Diseases of the Head, etc.

The Use of these Waters is to be continued as need shall require, and as you
are Advised by your Physicians. A Fortnight or Three-weeks together is long
enough without Intermission. For it is better to Omit 'em Two or Three Weeks,
and then take 'em again, then to continue one long Course of 'em together; for
fear of a Diabetes, or other Injuries.

Now if in this short Tract I have not given some Satisfactory Account of these
Balsamic Wells, as to their Virtues and Use, I shall be ready to give further
Direction to any that are pleased to Require it.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF Water in general. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of Mineral Waters. Page 9.
CHAP. III. Of the Balsamic Wells at Hoxdon. Page 21. CHAP. IV. Of the Virtues
and Excellency of these Waters. Page 31. CHAP. V. Directions to be Observed
Before, In, and after the Taking these Waters. Page 47.
FINIS.

