Horae Subsecivae: OR, Some Long-Vacation Hours Redeemed, For the Discovery of
the True SAL VOLATILE OLEOSUM OF THE Ancient Philosophers.

Now happily regained to the MATERIA MEDICA: AND Distinguished from all other
Preparations, partly by the Senses; but more effectually by its Medicinal
Performances, totally extirpating the Saline Stem of Acids (the Root of most
Diseases) and inferring the Volatile Oleose Temper, The Standard of Health in
Humane Bodies.

By T. Bysield, M. D. and Fellow of the College of Physicians in DVBLIN.

LONDON, Printed: And are to be Sold by J. Whitlook near Stationers' Hall. M DC
XC V.

THE VOLATILE OLEOSE TEMPER, THE Standard of Health IN HUMANE BODIES.
MAN, the accomplished Draught of the Universe, Prince of all Creatures and of
the Lower World; for his super-celestial and divine Soul has an immortal Ray of
the Divine Light, reflected to the same, by the sharp Sight and soaring
Contemplations of his Mind, which show he is a dependent Spirit on the Father
of the Spirits of all Flesh.

And for his Body he has a beautified Composure of the Elements, a perfect
mixture in Life, illuminated with an undiscernable Spark of Celestial Fire, the
Form of a mixed Body, first surrounded with a Radical Moisture, then bound to an
Elementary Body, by the Mediation of the Spirit, giving it individual Being.
And Life thus derived is the most supreme and complete Act of Nature.

For the Souls of Living Creatures are vastly distant from the dark and earthy
Matter of their Bodies, till by this subtle mean of an Aetherial Spirit they
are fastened to 'em by the strictest Tie in Nature.

The former of these two Souls I leave to the Conduct of Divines; the latter
falling within my Sphere, I Will endeavor to direct into an harmonious Union
with the Body, by the help of the Spirit, which is a small portion of the
purest Air, a middle Nature betwixt the Body and Soul; light and invisible,
tempered with Fire, Volatile, and a most pure Substance, begetting Vital
Spirits. Its first Clothing is with an Universal Sperm begot on
Sulphureo-Saline Exhalations drawn up into the Air, rolling up and down in the
Belly of the Wind, till it takes up its proper Residence in the Seeds of
Things. And thus descending to the Lower Region, it assumes the Moisture of a
watery Vapor, and by degrees the Element of Water, which is a mean betwixt the
Air and Earth; a passive yielding Nature, assuming multiplied Shapes, apt to
mix with things, delighted much in motion; fit to receive and preserve every
thing that is subtle; capable of the heavenly Influences, and to convey 'em
through the Pores of our Earth, which is an empty place, into which all the other
Elements project their Virtues, a proper Receptacle for the Spiritual Elements,
a convenient hiding place to conceal the Principles and Operations of Nature.
Here I may take notice, how the four Elements, which upholds the Fabric of the
World, continually acting one upon the other, beget and bring to light the
fundamental Principles of Nature and Philosophy.

The Fire acting on the Air produces Sulphur: The Air acting on the Water
brings forth Mercury: The Water acting on the Earth brings forth Salt: The
Earth having nothing to work upon, brings forth nothing: So that we must take
up with three Principles out of the four Elements. But I must not enter into so
large a Field, since I design but a short Lecture, not so much for Theory, as
to demonstrate a rational Practice from my Sal Volatile sulphureum, which is
the most sensible and beneficial Performance.

I shall therefore consider, that the joining of the Principles well or ill
together makes up a perfect or imperfect Body. And that the prime Agent is the
Fire that is placed in mixed Bodies, and has chosen the Radical Moisture as its
proper seat, the principal residence of which (in Man) is in the Heart, the
Center of the little World, the prime Organ of Life, although it be diffused
through all the parts of the Body. But there commanding from its Castle, does
move concordantly all the Faculties and Organs, and breath Life into the
Spirits, Humors, and the whole elementary Mass. Its Food is a vivi^ical Spirit
flowing down from the Superior Natures through the Air, which becomes a natural
oleose ferment and food of Life, without which, neither Man, nor any living
Creature, could subsist: for Man lives not by Bread alone, but by the heavenly
Food of Air. Yet the Lamp must be fed with the nutritious Juices of corruptible
Bodies, which have in 'em a fixed Fire: But the less we partake of those Meats
and Drinks which have lost their supple nourishing Particles, the more evenly
we feed our vital flame: For salt Meats, sour Drinks, fiery Wines, and strong
Drams, are like so many fireworks thrown into the Magazeen of the Heart, which
will blow up the Man. It Is of dangerous consequence to enrage our Calidum
innatum, making flushings of Wildfire to run about our Bodies, like flashes of
Lightning from the Heavens.

As the Sun is the Center amongst the Spheres of the Planets, and scatters its
beams downward by its motion; so is the Heart the Center of the Body, which by
its perpetual Motion (in Conjunction with the Air in circulating the Blood)
sends heat to the Superficies of the Body, which we allay from day to day with
Liquids that penetrate our Pores, and cool it: In imitation of the Air and
Clouds, which flying round the World, temper and mitigate the heat of the
heavenly Sun. For as the heat of the Sun would destroy all things, and nothing
produced in Nature, if the Air and Clouds did not intervene: so would the
invisible central fire of Bodies consume 'em, if balmy Sulphurs and watery
Vapors coming betwixt did not prevent it.

It Is the universal Fire through the medium of the Air that governs all the
subordinate sixth Fires of Bodies: for Air has ingress into Air, and they join
themselves together, Nature being delighted in Nature. And by how much the
greater are the Pores, by so much the better the Body may be purified. Thus
beams of Light incircled with radical moisture are our spiritual Nourishment:
But that will not support us without corporeal Nutriment; the former will avail
but little without the latter. We stand in need therefore of Food, that the
natural Spirits may be recruited, which do continually slide forth through the
Pores; for thus we must maintain a successive repair of the loss of Nature. Our
nourishing Juices are made by the more succulent substance of our Meat, whereby
the Parts and Humors of the Body are reinforced. The radical Moisture is
renewed out of the purer Particles of Blood, with the celestial Influences
intermingling with 'em by Respiration. Thus the natural Ferment of Man's Body,
as well from his spiritual as his corporeal Diet, seems to consist in a
Sulphureo-Saline Temperament, which Vital Union becomes more inbodied in oleose
Salts, and then assumes a greater Corporeity.

The spiritual Sulphurs are exalted with the Volatile Salts, and beget a mild
and easy Ferment in the happy Concentration of the Principles; from whence the
fixed parts receive their vivid Impregnations, and the insite Fire is fed with
its proper Pabulum, and kept from rebelling.

In all things, near the Principle of Life, is a smooth, supple, oily
Substance: in all Seeds we find it more or less, therefore from so small Bodies
as Seeds, Oils are drawn. The Substance of all animal Sperms, that of Eggs, and
many other things, will help to demonstrate that it is an oleose Body that early
covers the Principles of Life, till they are clothed with our Bodies, as our
Bodies are covered with Clothes.

But when the inbred fire is harsh and enraged, through defect of this Balsom and
Union, and by the contrary abounding of Acids; then the Spirits are inflamed,
the Oil burns, the Stamina Vitae shake: At length the purer Flements fly the
Texture, the mixed Body dissolves, and the Corruption of the frail Elements come
to a loss: The Aetherial Nature returns to its native home, and there is
nothing left in the Carcass, but a perturbation and confusion of the
corruptible Elements, having lost their Governor. Then reigns Corruption,
Death, and Darkness, in the deprived Matter; until the virtue of Heaven does
again slow down into it, and summoning the wandering Elements re-inkindles the
weak light of a new Form, and reassumes the Elements into the methodical
composure of a new mixture.

Life is an harmonious Copulation of Matter and Form, constituting the perfect
Being of an individual Nature; the Health of that Life is a regular Assumption
of the Principles into magnetic Love, wherein our natural Fire, retained by
spiritual Sulphurs, lies well beded in Oleity, rightly seasoned with
Nitro-aereal Salts; not locked up, deprest, or drawn out beyond its Center. And
this I call the Salino-sulphureous Temperament, which to preserve or restore,
is the Scope of Medicine, the Design of Physic and Physicians.

I am warranted in this rational Conjecture from some experimental
Observations, which is as near as humane sight can penetrate. It Is true, these
things in their own nature, are invisible and transacted in secret, which makes
em not understood by the gener^lity of Men, who know not the occuls, much less
to make it manifest; and are altogether unaccustomed to such Contemplations and
Experiments. Nevertheless they are not to be looked upon as Dreams and Fancies;
no more than the Spirit of Life which animates 'em. For although Nature is not
visible, yet she acts visibly from a volatile sulphurous Spirit, which
executes her Office in Bodies.

It Is generally granted, that Life lies eminently in the Blood; and so I say,
and that from its abounding with a pure Sulphur and a volatile Salt, which are
demonstrable. Sulphur illuminates, gives Tincture and Centrality; What Red more
beautiful and more vivid than in good Blood? and what a sibrous Consistence has
it? That there is plenty of volatile Salts appears to an Artist, who can
extract em; besides, it is evident to all, by Sweat and Urine, both which abound
with volatile Salts. But some may say, the Ingesta of Meats and Drinks may
supply those: no, it cannot be, for these Discharges are larger than they
amount to. Be pleased to make the Experiment of living with Bread and Water for
one Week, and use hard Labor, yet you will find your Sweat and Urine well
impregnated with Salts; very few of which proceeded from your Diet. The great
Repairer of these is the ambient Air in which both are eminently, and therefore
plentifully conveyed in breathing through the Lungs to the Blood, helping it to
sanguisie the new Access of Chyle, in bestowing vital Ferment and a vivid
Color.

I Will take it for grant, that by this time we are agreed on the Point, viz.
That the healthful juvenile Temper of our Bodies consists in the Harmony of our
spiritual Sulphurs and volatile Salts, which magnetical ly join to the
subjected Natures, and gives 'em their proper seasoning: These tuned with vital
Air rarisie and illuminate our Bodies, still preserving a due Regimen of our
inbred Fire, and a healthful Government of the whole Economy.

This Temperament presery'd, is an Antidote against all Diseases and Decay.
It Is true, it is very nice to hit and keep it, because we deal so low in the
corruptible World, and depend so much on corporeal Supplies for our
Subsistence, and are liable to so many changes of Seasons, Weather, and Chance,
that it is no wonder so few make up a competent number of Years: Yet it is good
to know the Standard of Health, that we may still be aiming at that Mark, some
near Approaches to which, will preserve Life, although it is not acted with that
Satisfaction and Pleasure the completely healthy do enjoy. But to lie under
riveling Acids, scorbutic Wildfires, Stones in wrong places, Tartar in Joints,
rambling and fixed Pains, and forty more troublesome Distempers, which make the
Body such a Clog to the Soul, that to a generous mind it is the greatest
Punishment in the World to attend upon it, in blowing its Nose, wiping its
Breech, dressing, undressing, washing, combing, cleaning, and coloring it, in
order only to the eating of Water Gruel and drinking Small beer with him. Who
would not rather be at some Pains, and Cost too, to make him a little better
Company for himself and his Friends, by introducing that smooth, oleose Temper
I have already described. And where that does bear sway, the Saline Stem of
Acids cannot set up to play its Pranks. The inbred Fire is kept so truly
delighted and entertained with those Solar Guests, that it cannot turn sour or
ill-natured. For the Sharpness of all Salts arises from the insite Fire of
Mixts: And the more the fixed Fire is urged, the greater the Sharpness; from
both the Blood's corrupted, and many Diseases are derived throughout the whole
Body, which exercise the utmost Skill of Physicians, and notwithstanding all
their Cunning, they are often buffled by 'em.

So great is the Energy of Acids, that it preys upon all the Sulphureity in the
Blood, till it has devoured its whole Tincture, and left it sizy, or turned it
into Matter, at least several Colors; but robbed it of its Life; and
transmuted the other Juices into a Vitriolick Tartness. Such Acids will corrode
Metals, eat Holes in Iron, and make the Sulphurs putrid and stink, to the
offending of your Nose.

But I Will show in particular Distempers some of the many Mischiefs that arise
from this Root of Acids. the grand Enemy of Man's Health. Our natural Fire
divested of its vital Allay grows burning and scorching; and being fed with the
Fires of mixed and disturbed Elements, at length puts on a raging Fit and
sharpens all the Humors; and when it is more intense, enkindles the Aetherial
Spirit, and becomes a strong Fever, more difficult to cure than putrid ones,
and when it becomes mortiferous, usually ends in Convulsions: if it be not
timely understood, and supplied with proper Alkali's in the method, and often
enough repeated to correct the Acids. But when by good Conduct you get it to a
Remission and then an Intermission, it is like to issue well. For in the
Intervals you have time to apply Alkali's, which abate the Fire by absorbing
the acid Fuel: for Acids commonly cause this Fire, and this Fire creates Acids.
This seems to be the Reason of the use of Jesuits Powder: It Is freely given in
Intermissions, serving to good Purposes, because imposed so long, till it shall
do something. Not but that other Alkali's may do as well, nay, it may be better
in some Cases, if administered in as large Doses, as often repeated, and as long
continued, and I doubt not to say, with less injurious Consequences.

But Jesuits Bark at present is got in fashion, and must be so, because it
sometimes does the Feat, tho seldom considered how it comes about; but
reverently looked upon among the occult Qualities, which to examine is reckoned
unmannerly, because difficult. In continued Fevers of pure accension,
Blood-letting is proper in the beginning, and a close Application of Alkali's,
and there are of such sort as may be securely given, although the Fever neither
intermit or remit. But the Jesuit must not be so used, he plays Tricks in a
Paroxysm: for besides his Alkalisate absorbing Quality, he has a churlish
Roughness and Stipticity, which at sometimes recommends him, but at other times
makes him very ill Company. Where the Fever comes Aguishly, or intermittingly,
with Cold and Heat by turns, through the abundance of indigested roapy Humors;
here Jesuits Powder, by its Astringency, Roughness, and Bitterness Sutgeneris,
besides its Alkalious Quality, becomes a very good common Remedy, if well
applied. But in all Fevers arising from Faetid Sulphurs, which are to determine
in seasonable Separations to the Supersicies, there Jesuits Powder is
altogether improper: but the Variety in these sort of Fevers is so great, that
it is not at present to be meddled with.

The Rise of the Scurvy proceeds from the Blood impoverisht and separated; for
when the lively vinous Spirits are exhul'd, what remains divides into two
parts, a wateny and a thick Substance; which latter being of a Tartarous
Nature, is empowered with a faculty of turning the Juices into Acids. The
watery part conveys to the Glands, and by them to the Superficies a fiery,
sharp, thin Humor, which stets and corrodes the Gums and Skin, sometimes
breaking out on the Hands and Legs, and will run a great quantity of clear and
limpid, but sharp Water: and from the Tantarous Fund this is supplied, which
still transmutes the thinner parts of your Aliment into this sort of Acid
Liquor. Until the Blood shall be again brought to its due Mixture, by the
Addition of a sweet Sulphurous Spirit, the Jively Principle that gives
Tincture and keeps it in a just Consistence, and makes it perfect. And thus it
becomes a Mediclnal Fountain from which all parts are supplied, according as
they differ, each by its attractive quality drawing Nourishment peculiar to its
kind. From this decay of lively Principles, and Separation of the Blood, though
with some Alteration, where the slegmatick Humor more abounds, and the
Tartarous Body less, proceeds those Overflowings and inundations of the
Dropsy, which though of fatal consequence, if confirmed, yet taken in time, by
proper Medicines and Methods, may be prevented.

The Gout is a Distemper that owes its Original to Tartar, which in the
extraordinary undue Ferment of the Blood is worked off into the extreme parts,
through* small Meandets, and lodged in the Interstices of Joints, from whence it
cannot return: and by repeated Ferments increases its Mass to a visible chalky
Substance, which is of a dry stiptick Nature, that by degrees drinks up the
Joint-water, and loading the Socket, renders the part crooked and useless: tho*
in all it does not come to this height; nor needs it, if timely care be taken.
The Stone differs but little from it, unless in Situation. Many other Diseases
are derived too from this general Root. But because the Mischiefs from Acids
and sick Blood are more obvious than their Remedies, I shall therefore betake
my self to the Description of a Universal Noble Medicine, abundantly qualified
to bring about the great Design of Health, and rescue Life from the innumerable
Dangers wherewith it is surrounded.

The True SAL VOLATILE OLEOSUM OF THE Ancient Philosophers.
FRom what I have said already it may appear that the Volatile Oleose Temper is
the most natural to our Bodies, and governs best our Calidum innatum; contrary
to the Saline Stem of Acids, which divides and precipitates, enraging the
insite Fire, scattering it up and down, scorching the Body, till it has one way
or other ruined it; like slashes of unbounded consuming Fire from the Heavens.

In order therefore to the preventing of such Destruction, I have laid my
Design in Physic, and liberally expended in preparing two general noble
Remedies; a Panacea, which I formerly treated of, and this Sal Volatile
Oleosum; for extraordinary Directors whereby lesler or greater Aberrations may
be reclaimed to a due state of Health.

For although* all Persons that are declined from a just Temper, are not
immediately turned out of their Beings; yet so many live in pain, decaying, and
wasting away, that it is grievous to a Physician, besides a great Reproach to
Art, to hear 'em complaining and crying out their very Lives are burdensome.

There are indeed some wonderful strong Bodies that will hold out through courses
of Excess to great Ages. But hundreds, for one such, go early to the Grave; and
they too, with such hail Constitutions (in all probability) might have lived
much longer with Temperance: I Am sure they ought to have lived to much better
purposes. But it is not my business to disturb such tranquil Souls, who risque
their Lives in a perpetual Tickle of Sensuality, aways stimulated with the wild
fires of Wines and Drams, to the committing of very odd Actions. Thus the glare
of borrowed ^ights present fantastical Ideas which to represent in Figures to
the view of others require the nicest Artifice of the Sensual Man for their
Equipment. Then appearing very taking with such as are led by the snares of
their Senses, no wonder so many dance after these Ignes fatui, willing rather
(than to be at the pains of serious Thinking) to run secundo flumine, with the
Crowd, chaft and heated with Desires: As tho* the Fall of Man had been their
Happiness, and 'twere a Divine Blessing thus to be brutify'd. But I Will betake
my self to the assistance of the Infirm, and such as through the want of bodily
Health know how to value that. And here, if persons will but contribute one
quarter of that Care about themselves, which I have done faithfully to preserve
and serve em, abundance of complaints would soon be remedied on very easy
terms.

I appeal to every one, whether it is not a fair design in Medicine, to aim at
the right Amendment of the Spirit of Life, which animates the mighty lump of
Matter, the Body. Alas! what are We without it? and by what small invisible
Power is so great a mass of Matter lightly moved about at pleasure? When the
Spirits are rich and well united, how supple, gay, and vivid, are all the
Senses and Organs of the Body, how concordantly, do they move in all their just
Dependencies? no one grieved on a^^^icted to abait the Harmony.

Now a true Sal (...) O^^^sum is the fairest Medicine to lay down for these
purposes: Because every one may be a Judge of what he takes, and of what is
true from false: And to help 'em in this Discovery, and a little elucidate this
Universal Remedy, is my present Business*

But first 'twill be necessary to preamble the great Difference there is
between Comp^s^^^ and M^st^^, the one being a Conjunction of Bodies in place,
the other in quality and consent; the one imperfecte mista, a Confusion, the
other a Union.

Compositio is the joining of Bodies without a new Form, Mistio is the joining
or putting together of Bodies under a new Form. For the new Form is Commune
Vinculum.

Natural Philosophers know that Compositio is Opus hominis, and Mistio, Opus
Naturae. Man makes a fit Application of Bodies together; but the perfect
Fermentation and Incorporation of 'em must be left to Nature, to make that
Continuum which otherwise is but Contiguum.

It Is therefore a great turn of Thought, to find out the Art of compounding in
Life; so that Mixtures at first troubled, may grow after clear and settled, by
the benefit of Rest, Time, etc.

The due Contemplation of Nature, as well above as below, and some competent
Knowledge how the superior act on inferior Bodies, seems to me altogether
needful. For the Heavens do not enrich themselves by the Earth and Seas; nor
keep no dead stock, nor untouched Treasures of that they draw from below: but
what they do take up, they return and spend in Dew and Showers impregnated with
Life and Power.

This Consent in Nature, and some other luckey Hints, have proved sufficient to
beget my Sal Volatile Oleosum, which is a Nitro-aereal volatile Salt
magnetically tied (by the Knot of Love in Nature) to a luminous Sulphur. It Is
more Philosophical to call it Sal Volatile Sulphureum. But to speak it at once,
it is Spirit of Air, and the best seasoning in the whole World of Animal Bodies
in Life. For by Philosophic Management, the truest, purest, and most wholesome
Volatile Salt may be extracted from the Air; and the first begotten Oleity in
the World; which transparent radical Moisture (prior to all specific Lives)
has some portion of the universal Form that animates it: And this may properly
be called a luminous Sulphur, which is the root of all Oleity; for I would have
it take the Name Oleose when the Sulphurs are clothed upon more bodily; and
thus you may descend to the more gross Bodies of Oils and Fats. But to comply
with the common Meanings of Men, I Will call my Medicine no more than Sal
Volatile Oleosum, but then it must be considered as perfectionate. And without
doubt 'twas some quondam great Philosopher (favored with a propitious Birth)
that first discovered this Union in Nature: And some learned Doctor searching
into Sacred Remains, an Admirer of the Disguised Learning of the Ancients, that
robbed the Philosopher of the Name, but not the Secret, and handed it down to
our Age. How could else so many agree in the name, and not understand the
reason or truth of the Medicine. Yet every one can talk of a Sal Volatile
Oleosum, and every little Processmonger can make it. That I expect in a little
while to hear it cried about the Streets like Elixirs made of Brandy, Jalop,
Seeds, and Licorish. Whenas by the name Elixir, the Philosophers of old
mentioned their most Venerable Secret; but now it is profaned and affixed to a
parcel of murdering Trash. And the World finding such sorry Stuff under the
highest Titles in Philosophy, have of late damned and ridiculed the whole
Science. But I admire the Wisdom of the Ancients in vailing such glorious
Knowledge under their Hieroglyphical Figures and Aenigmatical Expressions, to
secure it from barbarous and profane hands. No, let all their Followers, the
true Sons of Art, become worthy of useful Rarities, by imitating their Piety
and Honesty: then I wish they may find Ariadnes Thread to conduct 'em through the
delusive Windings of this intricate Philosophy.

It Is one of the greatest Misfortunes of latter times, that all Medicinal
Experiments are put out to making. The Physician must by no means nowadays
know more than half of his Art, having nothing to show but multitudo librorum.
The compleatest Medicine would stigmatize him with Quackery, although it is the
Accomplishment of all his Learning.

Nothing's more difficult than to hit a Curiosity aright, which the best of
Authors have difficultly enough discovered: And he is a very sensible person
that can correct twenty mistakes in a Preparation, and by them grow wise enough
to bring about his end. And it is not a low educated person can thus improve, he
will take quid pro quo, and if the Physician is not experimentally skillful he
must be put upon, and consequently his Patients: Thus we become full of
Medicines but no Remedies.

For if any one can but raise a Volatile Salt from Horns or Bones, and join
therewith some Aromatic Oils, which for Odor and Thinness couple to the best
advantage with his Salt, then he cries out presently, it is a Sal Volatile
Oleosum, although it is no more a Medicine than a gilt Shilling is a Guinea. And
Mistakes herein are of fatal consequence to them that rely on such
Preparations: for they are at once banter'd out of their money, the time of
helping themselves, and thus by delay out of Life too sometimes.

(...) affirm, it is not from Horns, Hoofs, nor Bones, which abound with Salts;
no, nor from Sal Ammoniac that this Remedy can be drawn. For although there be
plenty of Volatile Salts, which Chemists call so, that by the force of Fire
will come over the Helm; yet they bring with 'em somewhat of Fixity, petrifying
Dispositions, and caustic Qualities. And as for Horns and Bones, they are
endowed with very faetid, corporal Oils: so that from these they borrow only a
little pungent Salt dilated in a Phlegm, which is so poor a Vehicle, that the
Salts will drop through to the bottom of the Glass. Now having made a shift for
his Salt, the Chemist is to seek for the Spiritual Sulphurs or oleose part,
which constitutes the Medicine. Here he is at a loss in Philosophy, and bluntly
takes an oily body to join to his Salt; and because he finds the grosser bodies
of Oil are greasy, and wont mix well, he wittily turns one Thought to the
purer Oils of Seeds or Aromaticks, and there he gets a Scent too, and finding
they will hang about his Salts, he then pronounces ore rotundo that it is the
right Sal Volatile Oleosum of Silvius de le Boe, or of some other cry'd-up
Doctor, whose Reputation can support it; not regarding Science, or the
Medicinal Virtues, so long as 'twill pass for a Commodity in Trade.

I must confess, it is very difficult, and a great piece of Art, to prepare this
Medicine, so as to answer learned Tests and Physical Intentions. For the Salts,
as well as the Sulphurs, are deeply concealed in Nature, and their Union is a
great mystery, as nice as the Subtle mixtions in Life; not to be received into
one another by the Philosophers adjoining, although he must have a hand in the
business, till his Design is wrought about by Art.

The Sulphurs must be spiritualized that mix with Volatile Salts, and be united
by the mean of an Aetherial Spirit, and held to view illuminated and perfectly
united. As in sine fermented Ale the Water, Malt, and Hop, are so entirely one,
that Art can never more show the Ingredients apart; all three make up one
thing, called Ale.

I have well considered the Vegetable nature, and in the Mineral Kingdom have
much pleased my self with fine Sulphurs, difficultly enough obtained from
Antimony; but yet am disappointed in both. Animals methinks should seem to
yield the best Sulphurous Volatile, as nearest of kin to our Natures: but so
subtle are the Spiritual Elements, that they wing away with Life in one
quintessential form to the Aereal Mansions, and leave you only their
corruptible Natures to work upon.

I cannot imagine where to apply my self in Nature for a very wholesome
Salino-Sulphureous Volatile, unless it be from the Atmospherical Air, where
Nature forms the Universal Sperm of the World by her heavenly fire on the
gentle and soft Sublimations of the purer Elements, and incorporates 'em to
your hand, beyond the profoundest skill of the most inquisitive Philosopher,
although he have laminated the greatest part of Nature on Vulcan's Anvil.

For amidst all the Variety of Salts and Sulphurs in the World, which are as
many as there be Species of things, none can be more agreeable than what is
drawn from this general Bank of Nature; whence I borrow not only my Matter, but
therewith some portion of the Universal Form, and that is a lively Touch indeed.

And since I can find here what I want, why need I look any farther. I have
roved and searched as well as others, but reckon I have anchored well at last,
considering I had no Pilot. And he will prove a luckey man that hits my Knack,
or rather discovers such a Terra incognita in Philosophy, although I give him
here that aim which I never received. But should he find my Bait, yet one half
of the Skill does not lie in catching my starry Volatiles: for I do assure him,
he must well understand, and have long labored in Experimental Philosophy,
before he shall be Master of this Rarity in Nature. Dii omnia laboribus vendunt.

However, it is curious to know the Operation of Nature, and how she produces
things by her Workings which requires subtilness and quickness of Mind; for she
is not perceived by vulgar eyes. It Is necessary to learn first with the Brain
and Imagination, if 'twere but to save labor and charges in Fires and Glasses.
Besides, there is no pleasure in the dull composition of things. Give me vital
Principles wreathed together by a magnetic Virtue, whence they become a sure
food of Life, and security from the hasty separation by Death, which is nothing
else but Life separating it self, by its self, from a Corruptible Body. But if
any petulant Sophister, stiff in his Opinion, shall oppose these Experiments,
let him know, that what he assumes on Trust, I make good by Trial.

Now in describing more particularly the Virtues and Use of this Remedy, I Will
begin from its first entrance into the Body. In the Stomach these
Sulphureo-Saline Volatiles do loosen and cleanse away all viscid clammy Humors
and ill Digestions; they correct the austere and acid Ferment, which gives
Heart-burn, Sourness, Pains in the Stomach, Flatulencies, Collicks,
Convulsions, and ill Vapors offending the Head. And they bring in that Oleose
Volatile Temper, which causes a good Digestion, well governed Bowels, and a
right nutritious Chyle wherewith the Body is supplied throughout with wholesome
Juices. The food precipitated and hardened by Acids sticks to the folds of the
Stomach like Glue, and being too long detained, turns putrilaginous and
austere, becoming a Load on Nature, to the great disturbance of the Spirit of
Life and Temperies of the part; from whence great Oppressions, Strugglings,
Faintings, Flushings of Heat, Palpitations, and sometimes very dangerous and
sudden Mischiefs ensue^ but if they do not arise to such hasty destruction, yet
these Acids will by degrees so debauch the true design of the Stomach, and
corrupt all your Aliment, that instead of a well-digested wholesome Nourishment,
you must be supplied with sharp, corrosive Juices throughout the whole Body.
Till at length you will find the Blood and all things spoilt, and all the Bowels
and Organs grieved. And then supply your Bodies with the softest things in
Nature, and the greatest Art in Cookery, all is presently spoil't in this
vitiated Stomach.

But here you may again remedy these contrary Ferments and abounding Acids, and
vanquish the Root of 'em: and not only so, but in lieu thereof regain a
well-condition'd Stomach, oily Bowels, a true natural Ferment; and a Supply of
Oleose Volatile Particles, which mixing with the Chyle renders it not barely
nutritious, but medicinal and balsamic. And this is not all, for they give a
lasting Vigor and Strength to all the nervous Texture, causing a round Ability
of the whole Body. Besides, pleasing Gas's ascend the Brain and recreate the
Senses, instead of cloudy noxious Fumes.

And because so many Diseases are to be remedied in the first Digestion, from a
well-governed Stomach. And that it is the most sociable and entertaining Organ:
I must have one Bout at him more; but first show, that the Glandules glutted
with these Sulphurous Volatiles, convey in chewing a very wholesome Saliva into
the Stomach with your Food, instead of a Scorbutic, Vitriolic Phlegm. And that
these subtle Particles enable the Stomach to such pleasant agreeable Actions,
that he plays the Wanton with all his Pabulum.

This Medicine keeps the Orifice of the Stomach clean, and as tite as that of
the Anus, folds up all the expanded Wrinkles, reimpregnates remaining Food, and
gives a thousand pretty pleasing Touches (besides substantial Services) to the
whole Body. It suffers no canine Appetite which ravenously devours what it
cannot concoct, sometimes to disgorging; but gives a well-bred Desire, which
will equip you for all the Dainties of a Luxurious Table, and warrant the
decent carrying off thr Largesses of Friendship.

The Lungs, and all its Pipes, are herewith cleans'd of tough foul Spittings,
thickened by a praeternatural Heat, which causes Consumptive P^hisical Coughs,
Asthmatick Weasings, and straitness of the Chest, not to be reached by Syrups,
Oils, Licks, Slops, or Lozenges, which offend the Stomach, and feed the
unnatural Fire. But this Sal Volatile Oleosum subtly and sweetly insinuates
it self by the Blood, and through the Pores, into the minutest Passages, and there
nobly and evidently displays its Virtues.

It Is the greatest Antiscorbutick yet discovered, which is obvious to every one
that considers how it deals with the Saline Stem, and all its Productions. It
meets with it in every Form, by its powerful penetrating Nature, closely
pursuing the most malign Atoms, clipping the wings of all fiery flying Acids,
which sting the Body, and deface it. But my Paper will not admit of enlarging
on every Distemper.

In all Fluxes of Blood by the Nose, Lungs, or downwards, occasioned from
Acids, it is the most prevailing Medicine. It Is a powerful Dissolvent of
petrified tartarous Salts, therefore of singular benefit to such as are
afflicted with Goul and Stone; for herewith they may (at least) prevent the
Increase of either, and keep off the Fits of both. And I have reason to
believe, waste away the petrified Matter already lodged.

For that teizing Distemper called Vapors among the Ladies, and Hypocondriac
Flatus and Stretchings among the Gentlemen, it is a non pareil in their Claret,
Cider, Ale, or other Liquors drank ad libitum.

It Is a great Restorative of Age, from Rheums and Wind, Decay, and Wear and
Tear.

'Twou'd save a thousand Children in a Year from dying of Convulsion-Fits.

'Twill secure from, or cure all the Diseases of the Brain, as Coma, Lethargy,
Carus, Apoplexy, Palsy, Falling Sickness, Vertigo, Madness, Catarihs etc.

All Aguish Distempers, Rheumatisms, Dropsies, Jaundies, etc. are Remedied
herewith. But I hate to enumerate Diseases at this rate: It Is so rank Quackish.
I need not here mention the many Cases in Surgery that are derived from such
an unwholsom Fountain, not to be cured by the Plaister-box only, without
eradicating this Saline Stock, and renovating the Blood, by some such balmy
Medicine, that disposes all the dependent Juices, Flesh and Organs to healing.
I shall only say in general, that to restore the Vital Sulphurs of the Blood is
absolutely necessary to a sound and speedy Cure of Wounds, Ulcers, and other
sharp Eruptions on any parts of the body, of whatsoever Name or Nature they be.
And if I suggest this Sal Volatile Oleosum as a prime Remedy for such internal
Services, it may be taken by the by, for a friendly Item.

For all the Drinkers of Bath, Tunbridge, or Epsom waters, or any others, it is
a worthy Companion. And so it is for all engaged in long Journeys or Voiages,
aptly suiting every Climate. Useful to all the World of whatsoever Language,
Nation, or Country, provided they are Animal Bodies, and not Stooks or Stones,
or condensed Air.

It Is useful from the birth to a hundred years of Age, to cherish and uphold
that vital Congruity we desire to maintain with the Superior Natures. All
shagreen Constitutions and Tendencies to Corrutpion, a qua^^^^que causa, may be
releiv'd hereby.

In the great variety of acute cases, it manifestly shows its power in its
homogeneal Virtues, standing by Life in all the Attacks of mortiferous
Diseases. But it is impossible I should here, at a random guess, prescibe the
proper Seasons, Doses and Repetitions of the Medicine, although I may pronounce
it the most effectual Remedy: I protest, I know not what to Substiute in its
place. And I may be thought as competent a Judge of good Medicine as any other,
having been many Years very curious in the Materia Medica. After all, I care
not Ninepence for the Opinion of those that decry what they cannot understand.
I shall content my self to be the sole Possessor of so excellent a Remedy.
Farewell. Excuse him however, who desires to deserve well. And so, long may ye
enjoy these my Labors to the Glory of God.

From my House in Great Carter-Lane near St. Paul's.
FINIS.

