JOHN BARCLAY HIS VINDICATION Of the Intercession of SAINTS, The Veneration of
RELICS AND MIRACLES, AGAINST THE Sectaries of the Times,

BOOK II. CHAP. VII.

Englished by a Person of Quality.

With Allowance.

Printed by Mary Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross: And Sold by Matthew Turner at the Holy-Lamb in Holbourn: And
John Lane at the Corner of Wild-street, 1688.

CONCERNING THE Intercession of SAINTS, The Veneration of RELICS AND MIRACLES.
BOOK II. CHAP. VII.
IT IS one and the same Church of GOD, which, Triumphing in Heaven, enjoys the
Fruits of its Victory; which, Militant on Earth, is exposed to the Assaults of
its Enemies; and which, freed from Danger, though not yet from Punishment, is
cleansing by Purgatory Pains. And this whole Church is in Charity, because it
is in GOD. Now it is the Office of Charity, that the Inferiors rejoice at the
Prosperity of their Superiors; and that the Superiors, as far as in them lies,
be assistant to their Inferiors. We therefore give our Brethren, who are now in
Heaven, what Honor we lawfully may, and in return desire the Assistance of
their Prayers, of which we often find the Effects. And as for those, who, being
shut up in the Prison of Purgatory, cannot help themselves, we give them, what
succor we can, by pouring forth our Prayers for them to the common Father of
us all, who is well pleased with this Brotherly Affection, we mutually bear one
another in him. But these Bonds of Love the Sectaries would have broken
asunder. They say, that the Saints mind only their own Happiness, neither
Hearing nor being any ways moved by our Prayers: To which they farther add;
that, whatever help we expect from their Suffrages, we so much derogate from
the Honor of CHRIST: They moreover affirm, that there are not (contrary to
what we with the most Ancient Fathers believe) any Punishments, by which such
of the Elect, as are not yet perfectly clean, are Purified after Death. All
these things are briefly to be asserted against them.

It has ever from the most Ancient Times, been the Custom of the Orthodox
Church, to request of the Blessed Spirits, the Holy Martyrs, and all others,
whom the Majesty of Miracles manifested to be in the Fruition of GOD and
Heavenly Joys, that they would Pray for us to our Lord. What do ye, O
Sectaries, dislike in this? The Scriptures, you say, teach it not. If I should
answer, That neither do the Scriptures forbid it, what could you farther reply?
Why, shall I not rather believe a thing to be lawful, which, not being
prohibited by the Scriptures, is practiced by the Church; than to be unlawful,
because it is not expressly commanded in Scripture? But we seek not to shelter
our selves under this Excuse. For we rely on the Scriptures, by which the
Faithful are frequently commanded mutually to Pray for each other; and in which
we often find Holy Men requesting the Prayers of their Brethren? It Is so, thou will say; but these were living Men, and desired the Prayers of the Living.
Show me, Sectary, this difference in Scripture, that it is lawful to desire GODS
Favor by the Prayers of Holy Men yet Living, and unlawful so to do by the
Prayers of the Deceased, and I will yield up the Cause. Certainly Moses was
Dead, and so was Samuel, when GOD declared, That they were wont to Pray for the
Jews, Jer. 15. v. 1. Jeremiah also was dead, when 'twas revealed to Judas
Maccabeus, That he Prayed for the People and the Temple, 2 Maccab. 5.

But thou will say; There is one Mediator between GOD and Men, which is CHRIST
JESUS; Why then do ye make so many Mediators, so many Intercessors for us?
There can scarce be a more stupid Argument: So that it is to be wondered, you
should so often press to have it heard. There is indeed one CHRIST, by whose
Mediation Salvation is granted; but Mediators of Intercession (such as we
affirm the Saints to be) you your selves do not deny, that there are as many,
as there are Believers. For do not you desire the Prayers of one another? And
is not he, whose Prayers are desired, as much a Mediator for you, as the Saints
are for us? Why therefore do you cry out, that we injure CHRIST: Why do you
accuse us of esteeming his Merits insufficient? The Controversy lies in this
Point; whether we may desire the Prayers of that Person now triumphing in
Heaven, whose Intercession we might lawfully have requested, when living here
on Earth. This is, to wit, the great Injury, we do to CHRIST; this is our
Impiety, this is our Forgetfulness of CHRIST's Passion.

But thou will reply, The Saints neither see, nor hear their Suppliants; that
it is a very vain thing to Address our Discourse to these, who are so far off.
Were it so, O Sectary, We Catholics might indeed be accused of Folly, in
taking such unnecessary pains to offer up our Petitions to those, who are,
though not unworthy; yet wholly ignorant of the Addresses, made to them; yet
this would not render us guilty of Impiety. But we are by Scriptures, Fathers,
and the practice of the Church assured the contrary. If Moses, (says our Lord
by the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 15. v. 1.) and Samuel shall stand before me, my
Soul is not toward this People. Now how vain would this have been, had not
Moses and Samuel then often stood before him, and been accustomed according to
the exigency of Affairs and Times, to intercede for the Jews. I omit its being
most clearly said in the Maccabees, Chap. 15. That Hieremias and Onias, who
were then departed out of this World, Prayed for all the People of the Jews.
And throughout the whole Apocalypse it is said, That the Angels and Saints, do
by the Power of God, behold these Earthly things. Moreover the Angel Raphael,
(as we find it in Tobias, Chap- 12.) when he was standing before Almighty GOD,
Offered up to our Lord the Prayers of Tobias; it is not therefore to be
questioned, but he heard them.

Finally, do thou believe, that thou art wiser in this matter, than the much
to be Venerated Primitive Church? Whose Custom and Doctrine in the time of St.
Augustine and St. Ambrose, I shall in their words set before thee: The Angels,
(says St. Ambrose in his Book, De viduis) are to be Supplicated, who are given
us for a Guard, of whom we may seem to challenge some sort of Patronage, from
the Pledge of their Bodies. They can Pray for our Sins, who have with their own
Blood washed away, what Sins themselves have had. For they are GOD 's Martyrs,
our Prelates, the Beholders of our Lives and Actions. Let us not be ashamed to
use them, as Intercessors for our Infirmities; because they themselves well
knew the Infirmity of the Body, even when they overcame it. St. Augustine in
his Book, De cura pro Mortuis, Chap. 4. has these words, When ever therefore
the Mind reflects on the Place, where the Body of a most dear Friend is Buried,
if this Place be more over Venerable for the Name of some Martyr, the Affection
of the Rememberer recommends by its Prayers the beloved Soul to the same
Martyr, which Affection, shown to the Deceased by their most dear and faithful
Friends, undoubtedly profits those, who, whilst they were living in the Body,
deserved, that such things should after this Life be profitable to them. There
is in this no Exclamation; no Apostrophe. These Fathers sincerely and plainly
declare their own and the Churches sense.

I would here (says my Author) willingly Address my Discourse to the Almoner of
the most Serene King of Great Britain. James Stuart the 1st.
Him does the King; him do many others believe; and he is so often in fault, as
he causes others to offend. Let him therefore consider, how great his Error is
in denying it to be St. Augustin's Opinion, that the Martyrs should be
Invocated. In his answer to the Apology of the most Illustrious Cardinal
Bellarmine, he speaks thus. Now we consent to St. Augustine, that the Body of
the Protomartyr should be conveniently Honored, since Almighty GOD was pleased
to work some Miracles by it: But that he wrought those Miracles by the
Invocation of Saints, is an Addition of the Cardinals own: For the Martyrs are
not Invocated by St. Augustine. Nay, the Martyrs are Invocated by St.
Augustine, unless we refuse to believe Augustine himself: For what can be
plainer than that Sentence, It Is not to be doubted, but the Affection of the
Faithful profits the Deceased, when they recommend their Souls to the Martyrs.
Why do you persuade the King, why do you persuade your self otherwise? I call
upon the Martyrs, whom you will not have called upon; I willingly with
Reverence beseech them, that they would obtain for you from our Lord this
Faith, which you reject, and that the last Night may not close your Eyes,
before you have abjured the darkness of Heresy in the Light of the Church.

But we are commanded in the Scriptures to have recourse to GOD. Why then
should we Address our selves to Saints? O brave new Wisdom! Was the Church
Ignorant of this? Did not the Fathers know it? Nay, we are admonished, that we
may very much be assisted by the Prayers of good Men; and when we repair to the
Saints, we go to GOD. For far be it from us to expect any thing from the
Saints, but what they shall obtain for us of our Lord. They can do nothing of
themselves. We desire nothing from them but their Prayers. And why should St.
Peter and St. Paul, famous for the Purity of their Lives, and their triumphant
Constancy at their Death, be less prevalent Advocates with Almighty GOD, than
such contemptible Wretches, as you, or I, who are daily guilty of new Offenses?

What shall I say of the Angel, whom GOD has placed as a Guardian over every
one of us? Would thou have an Assistant of so great Power, and, so great
Splendor, be Unsaluted? Would not thou of thy own accord recommend thy self
to him, to whom thou art committed by Almighty GOD. But some of you indeed
deny, others are ignorant, that there are any such Spirits present with us. I
have seen an Aged Sectary, who, though fierce, and daily disputing against us,
yet denied, he had ever before heard it to be the Papists Opinion, that there
was an Angel Assigned for the keeping of every particular Person. Nor is to be
doubted, said he, but this Fiction had its Original from the Domestic and
Familiar Gods of the Gentiles. Forbear, Sectary, thy ill Language. We have this
Belief from the Holy Scriptures, and not from the Fooleries of the Heathen. For
that People and Provinces have their Angels, who take care of their Affairs,
thou findst in Daniel, Chap. 10. Where Michael is said to be Prince of the
Jews, another of the Persians, and another of the Grecians. And that such
Spirits are given to every particular Person, we are Taught in St. Matthew
Chap. 18. ver. 10. Where our Savior says, See, that he despise not one of
these little ones, for I say to you, that their Angels in Heaven do always see
the Face of my Father, which is in Heaven. Upon which place St. Hierom in his
Commentary on St. Matthew has these Words, Great is the Dignity of Souls, that
every one of them from its first Being should have an Angel appointed for its
Guardian. The same Father on the Death of Paula says, I take to witness our
Lord JESUS, and his Saints, and the very Angel himself, who was Keeper and
Assistant of this admirable Woman, that I speak nothing Partially, after the
custom of Flatterers.

But you complain of the Veneration and Respect, we give the Saints: Because
GOD alone, say you, is to be Worshipped. And St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Colossians, chap. 11. v. 18. Forbids Christians to be seduced in the Humility
and Religion of Angels. In fine, the Angel which showed St. John the Vision of
the Apocalypse, suffered not himself to be Worshipped by him. These Objections,
O Sectaries, are frequently in your Mouths, and as often and as often answered
by Us. To Worship, is a Word of dubious signification. Some Worship is due to
GOD alone: Whoever bestows this on Man, Angel, or Saint, can never avoid being
guilty of Idolatry. There is another Worship, or Reverence, Paid by the
Inferior to the Superior, without either believing him to be GOD, or Venerating
him as such. With this all Princes, Kings, Angels, and Saints are to be
respected according to their Degrees and Dignities: The one, as the Images of
GOD on Earth; the other, as the Domestics of GOD in Heaven. And that thou
may not doubt, but the Word Worship is in the Scriptures applied to those
Honors, which may be Lawfully given to Creatures, thou find in written of
Abraham, Genesis 23. v. 7. And Abraham Arose, and Worshipped (Adoravit) the People
of the Land, to wit, the Children of Heth. And of Nathan the Prophet it is said,
3 Kings chapter 1. v. 23. And when he was come in before the King, and had
Worshipped (adorasset) him, with his Face to the Ground.

To the Words of the Apostle, forbiding the Humility and Religion of Angels,
St. Chrysostom has long since answered in his seventh Homily on the Epistle to
the Colossians, telling us, That by these words is forbidden the Heresy, which
reputed Angels for Inferior Gods, as if by them, and not by CHRIST, we must be
reconciled; and have Access to the Father. Which Heresy was by the Ancients
attributed to Simon Magus.

Nor has St. Augustine more slightly answered the Argument, you bring out of the
Apocalypse, who in his 51st. Question on Genesis, says, that from the Majesty
of the Expressions, which the Angel used (for he had before chapter 1. v. 11. said,
in the Person of our Lord, I am the first and the last, etc. St. John thought,
'twas Christ, and not an Angel, that spoke to him. And that the Angel therefore
forbad St. John to give him the Honor, which was due to Christ. Others, and
those very great men, thus expound it, that St. John erred not in Worshipping
the Angel; but that the Angel refused to receive this Honor from St. John, who
was an Apostle, a Prophet, and most dearly Beloved by JESUS CHRIST: So that
there was on both sides an Holy Humility, both in the Giver and in the Refuser
of this Worship. Now this indeed is both easy to Prove, and not hard to
Believe. For can we imagine, St. John to have been Ignorant, that GOD alone,
and no Angel, is to be Worshipped with Latria, or Divine Honor? Or can it be
thought, that he understood not, with what sort of Respect Angels were to be
Venerated, who was not only CHRIST's Apostle, but his Beloved, who, leaning on
the Breast of our Lord at his last Supper, was there taught the Mysteries of
his Divinity, to whom our Saviors Mother was recommended as his own; and who
at that very time, when the Mysteries of the Apocalypse were revealed to him in
the Island of Pathmos, had been above threescore years Preaching the Gospel
through the World? Can thou conceit, that the Christians were till that time
Ignorant, whether, or after what manner Angels are to be Reverenced; or that
the very Apostle knew not this, who, Teaching, Preaching, and writing the
Gospel, was believed by all Christians?

If therefore St. John offered the Worship of Latria to the Angel, undoubtedly
he believed him not to be an Angel, but our Lord. But if he knew him to be an
Angel, it is certain, both that he gave him not Divine Honor, and that it is
lawful in such Manner to Worship the Angels, as he then did. For 'twere
ridiculous to say, that our Lord had not till then revealed to Christians, what
sort of Respect should be given to Angels, whom before that time all the
Apostles, except St. John alone, were by Martyrdom taken out of the World. But
let us suppose, what is most absurd, that St. John the Apostle knew not, what
no Christian ought at that time to have been ignorant of, to wit, what
Reverence was to be shown to Angels; 'twas yet at least sufficient for him to
have been once instructed in it by the Angel. But we find him notwithstanding,
again attempting the same. For when (as we have it Chap. 19.) St. John fell
down to worship, the Angel refused it with these words: See thou do it not, for
I am thy fellow Servant. Nevertheless, we find St. John again (chap. 21)
falling down to worship him, and again hearing the same words from the Angel.
Was St. John so ignorant of CHRIST's Laws? Do thou think he had so soon
forgot, what he had but a little before learnt of the Angel? Nay, this repeated
falling down of St. John at the Angels feet sufficiently shows, that this pious
veneration of his Friends and Messengers is not unacceptable to Almighty GOD.

We therefore together with the Church, and the Psalmist, sing; But to me, O
GOD, thy Friends are become honorable exceedingly. We admine their happiness,
we desire their help. But thou, O Sectary, should thou meet some Holy Martyr,
or some one of the Order of Prophets, or of the Choirs of the Angels, should
thou see him, should thou speak to him, what Countenance would thou put on,
what Words, what Gesture would thou use? For however thou deny'st, that they
dst now appear in this manner, yet will thou never deny, but that they may so
do, if Almighty GOD shall see it fit? Would thou act with such a Spirit, as
if he were thy equal? Or would thou not rather show him Honor, that is, in
the sense, of which we here speak, worship him? For certainly thou, who art
often moved with human Greatness, could not forbear venerating that Dignity,
which is far more Yublime than all Earthly Honor. Why therefore may we not
honor them, whom wa see not, yet we know them to be, and to be happy, united
to GOD, the Friends of GOD, triumphing in a most secure Immortality? Why should
it be unlawful to have the same Respect for those we see not, which we may
lawfully have for those we see?

Nor are you contented only to take away all Honor from the Souls of the
Blessed, but you make war also on their Bodies. I tremble to relate how many
Relics of Saints you have scattered in the wind, thrown into the water,
consumed with Fire; how often you have in scorn plucked their sacred Limbs out
of the Gold, and Gems, in which they were enclosed, to expose them to Contempt.
Posterity will lament their loss, we are ashamed for the Infamy of our Age. For
what caused all this Impiety, but that the Devils who set up Heresy, no less
hate the Sanctity of Relics, by which they have been often tormented, than
the Antiochian Appollo did the Bones of the Martyr Babilas, near which he was
prohibited to give his Oracles.

I know what you would say; to wit, that our Idolatry could not be restrained
but by the Destruction of those things, which we worshipped. Let us see, what
Idolatry this was, which must be cured by so desperate a Remedy, or how we have
in the Veneration of Relics exceeded the Custom of the most Primitive Church.
If any Relics of Saints are removed from one place to another, we make the
Streets ring with Hymns and Psalms; the action is performed with a great
Conflux of People, who come to see and reverence these holy Remains. We
diligently and devoutly apply our Handkerchiefs and Garments to the Coffin, or
Bier, in or on which these Sacred Bones are laid, that secret Blessings may
flow upon us. We divide their Bodies and Bones into Parts, that more may be
partakers of their Happiness and Help. We lay up these Relics in the
Churches, and under the Altars, from whence the most holy Sacrifice is
dispensed, or enchase them in the richest Metals and Jewels. We often repair to
them, supplicating Almighty GOD by these Pledges of his Friends, and sometimes
also craving the Intercession of them, whose Remains we behold. We prostrate
our selves, and kiss this venerable Dust, which heretofore served Almighty GOD,
and shall hereafter rise again, be changed and reign with CHRIST. We believe
that the Devils tremble, and are perplexed at these holy Bodies, and that GOD is
sometimes pleased to assert by Miracles as well this our Piety, as the Honor
of Relics. I have the more at large declared this kind of Worship, that thou.
O Sectary, might know, Christians are not ashamed of their Profession. We
publicly own, that these things are done, and carefully observed by us. All
which if we shall demonstrate to have exactly practiced in the first Ages of
the Church, what remains, but that thou should wonder at thy having been so
bewitched by Heresy, as to account this pious Custom of thy Ancestors for
monstrous.

How great Honor was by the Ancients given to Relics, thou may learn from
Socrates lib. 3. cap. 16. from Theodoret lib. 3. cap. 9. and from Sozomen lib.
5. cap. 18. There thou will read, what a concourse of Christians there was,
when in the Reign of Julian the Apostate the Bones of St. Babilas were to be
removed from the Suburb Daphne to Antioch; and that together with the Women and
Children, rejoicing and singing Psalms they carried the Coffin. Yea, that Every
one of them going before began to dance; and that there were present at the
Solemnity Men and Women, young Men and Maids, Old Men and Children, Evagrius,
(lib. 1. cap. 16.) writes, that the Bones of St. Ignatius were at the Command
of Theodosius the Great, Translated with exceeding Honor to Antioch: For which
cause, says he, there is even to our Age kept a Solemn Feast of common Joy.
See, how great, and how much approved this Veneration was, of which 'twas
thought fit to keep an Annual Commemoration. Thou findst in St. Hierom against
Vigilantius, that the Bones of the Prophet Samuel were in his time brought from
Palastine to Constantinople by the Command of Arcadius. All the Bishops, says
he, carried in a golden Vessel those Relics, wrapped in Silk. He adds, That the
People of all the Churches, went to meet the Holy Relics, which they received
with as much Joy, as if they had seen the Prophet present and alive: So that
from Palastine even to Chalcedon the Swarms of People were joined together,
sounding forth with one voice the Praises of CHRIST. With what Reverence also
the Bones of St. Chrysostom were received, when they were thirty five years
after his Decease Translated to Constantinople, thou have related by Theodoret,
a Writer of that Age; who in his Ecclesiastical History (lib. 5. cap. 36.) says
thus, The Faithful Assembly of Men, making the Sea as it were a Continent by
the Multitude of their Ships, covered with the Lights the mouth of the
Bosphorus, lying near Propontis.

Nor may thou say, that these were as Funural Honors, which were in this
manner given to the Saints; and that Relics were not in that Age removed,
unless it were from one Monument to another. Nay, Sectary, these Sacred Pledges
were for the avoiding of danger, and the more Solemn Invocating of Almighty
GOD, brought forth of the Churches, and sometimes carried even into the Camp.
Evagrius (lib. 1. cap. 13.) relates, That he saw the Head of St. Simeon the
Monk, sent to Philippicus the Emperors Son-in-Law, who desired, that some
Relics of Saints should be sent him, To the end he might more successfully
perform his Military Expeditions in the East. And hence you see, that it is
neither new, nor any way Injurious to the Saints, if their Relics are divided
into parts, that they may be distributed to many. For that Simeon was not
Beheaded; but having died a Natural Death, his Body was by the Christians not
Disrespectfully torn in Pieces, but Reverently and Piously divided. Thou
read moreover in St. Augustine ( de Civit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8.) that the
Relics of St. Stephen were dispersed in several places up and down Africa, as
at the Tibilitan Waters, in the Castle of Synes, at Calama, Audituras, Vzali,
and Hippo: That they were Reverenced, that Miracles were every where wrought at
them, By the Martyr, by the Martyrs help, at the Martyrs Request. These are the
Words of St. Augustine.

A person of very great Quality, but (alas!) a Sectary, in whose Presence there
was accidentally some Discourse concerning this so great Consent of our
Ancestors in Venerating Relics; desirous not to dissolve, but captiously to
elude this Argument, said, that these were some Remains of the Idolatry, then
newly Abolished; at which the Bishops of those times connived, that they might
not seem altogether to oppose the Peoples Inclination. O, whoever thou art,
acknowledge the Vitiousness of Heresy, which forces her Patrons on these
Absurdities. For if this had its Original from the Evil of Idolatry, and not
from Christian Virtue, why did the Bishops themselves not only suffer it in the
People, but Instruct them in it, as a part of Religious Piety? Why did they
refer the Rites and Solemnities of this Veneration to Almighty GOD, as their
Author? Why also did GOD assert these things by Miracles? For thou may hear
no Unlearned, nor Ignorant Person, but the great St. Augustine, who in his
Confessions, (lib. 9. cap. 7.) says thus: Then did thou in a Vision discover
to thy aforementioned Prelate (St. Ambrose) in what place lay concealed the
Bodies of thy Holy Mortyrs, St. Protasius and St. Gervasius, which thou had
for so many years reserved uncorrupted in Secret, that thou might seasonably
bring them forth to restrain a Feminine; but Royal Fury (to wit, of Justina
Augusta, Mother to Valentinian, who was an Arian, and a great Enemy to the
Catholics.) For when these Bodies being dug up, and brought forth, were
with fitting Honor Translated to Ambrose 's Cathedral, not only those, who
were tormented with unclean Spirits, as the same Devils confessed, were Cured;
but a certain Citizen also, well known in the City, who had been many years
blind, having inquired, and being told the Cause of the Multitudes rejoicing,
started up on a sudden, and desired his Guide to lead him thither: Whether
being brought, he besought Admission to touch with an Hankerchief the Bier of
thy Saints, whose Death was Precious in thy Sight. Which he had no sooner done,
and put it to his Eyes, but they were presently opened. The same St. Augustine
in his Treatise of the City of GOD, (lib. 22. cap. 8.) has these words, When
Bishop Projectus brought the Relics of the most glorious Martyr St. Stephen
to the Tibilitan Waters, there was a great Meeting and Flocking of the People
to that place in Honor and Memory of the Saint. There it happened, that a
certain Blind-woman begged, she might be led to the Bishop, as he was carrying
those Holy Pledges: She gave him some Flowers, which she had brought along with
her: They were again returned to her: She put them to her Eyes, and immediately
saw. All the Company being in a maze, she joyfully led the way alone, having
now no need of any one to guide her.

In the same place he relates many very great Miracles; and, as he says, well
known to himself, wrought in several places at the Relics of St. Stephen:
Amongst the rest, five raised from the Dead, some of which carried to the
Relics, whilst to others their Garments, having first touched the Relics,
were applied to them after their Deaths.

How would ye, O Sectaries, hiss at these Stories, related in the same style,
and after the same manner, were they Penned by any Writer of these Times; when
as now, through Veneration to so great an Author, ye Blush at them? Recollect
thy self, O Sectary, and thou will see, that the Bones of the Martyrs were
taken up, not through any Idolatrous Custom, but by the Command of Almighty
GOD. Thou will see, that it is not only a lawful, but also a Pious Action, to
apply Clothes and Handkerchiefs to their Bodies; and from such an Application
both to expect Help, and desire it. Thou will see in fine, that all these
things are, as right and sincere, approved by Miracles.

These Relics we either deposite under the Altars, or lay up in Beautified
Coffers: And both these according to Ancient Custom. St. Hierom against
Vigilantius has these words. Is it therefore ill done of the Roman Bishop, to
offer Sacrifices to our Lord over the Venerable Bones, as we esteem them, of
St. Peter and St. Paul, who are Dead; though in thy Opinion it is only useless
Dust? And in the same place he says of the same Vigilantius; He grieves, that
the Relics of the Martyrs are covered with costly Vails, and not rather bound
up in Rags, or Haircloth.

We go also to the places, where these Relics are kept, there to Pray to GOD,
or speak to the Saints, and falling down, we Kiss their Sepulchers. These
things also we have from Ancient Institution. For St. Hierom calls Vigilantius
a Moster, deserving to be Banished to the farthest parts of the Earth, for
daring to write these words: The Souls of the Martyrs therefore love their
Bodies, and hover about them; and are always present, lest, if an Orator should
perhaps come, they, being absent, might not hear him. Now who can believe,
either that Vigilantius would have written those things, had it not been at
that time usual with the Christians to crave the Martyrs Intercession at the
Places, where their Relics were reserved; or that the most Learned St. Hierom
would have been so highly offended with Vigilantius for scoffing at this
Practice, had not he, who was educated in the Church, and thoroughly versed in
Antiquity, well known, that this was Piously to GOD's Honor, and with the
Churches Approbation, performed by Christians. The same St. Hierom in the Life
of St. Hilarion writes thus of one Constantia, whom he calls, A most Holy
Woman: She was wont to watch whole Nights at his ( St. Hilarion's) Sepulcher,
and there to Discourse with him, as if he were present to hear her Prayers. And
St. Augustine in his Treatise of the City of GOD, ( lib. 22. chapter 8.) relates,
that one Pauladia was by a very great Miracles Cured of a most dreadful
Disease, who, says he, Went to make her Prayers to the Holy Martyr St. Stephen.

We believe in fine, That at the presence of such Relics, the Devils are
vexed and tormented. Nor may thou therefore call us simple and credulous
Coxcombs. For in this we have the Church for our Mistress, and the most Ancient
Fathers for our Authors. Was the Emperor Constantine, says St. Hierom against
Vigilantius, guilty of Sacrilege in Translating to Constantinople the Holy
Relics of St. Andrew, St. Luke, and St. Timothy, in whose presence the Devils
roar? There is a remarkable Passage in St. Augustin's 137 Epistle to the Clergy
and People of Hippo, which I will for thy sake, O Sectary, here transcribe. GOD
indeed, who created all things, is every where, being contained or included in
no place, and he must by all true Worshipers be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth;
that hearing in Secret, he may also Justify and Crown in Secret. Nevertheless
as to those things, which are visibly known to men, who can search into his
Counsel, why these Miracles are Wrought in some places, and not in others? For
the Sanctity of the place where the Body of Blessed Felix of Nola is Buried, is
known to many, whether I desired, that they (to wit, Boniface the Priest,
accused of an heinous Crime, together with his Accuser) should go, because from
hence it may more easily and Faithfully be written to us, what shall be
manifested in either of them. For we know, that in Milain at the Sepulchers of
the Saints, where the Devils wonderfully and Terribly Confess; acertain Thief,
who came to that place with a full intent to deceive by Swearing a Falsehood;
was forced to confess his Theft, and restore what he had stolen.

The Matter being sufficiently asserted by such eminent Persons, by so Ancient
a Practice and Belief: I shall conclude with the Opinion of Gennadius of
Marseilles, which he himself thus delivers among the Ecclesiastical Decrees (
Lib. de Ecclesiast. Dogmat. cap. 73.) We believe, that the Bodies of the
Saints, and especially the Relics of the Blessed Martyrs, are most sincerely
to be Honored, as Members of CHRIST; and that the Churches called by their
Names, are with most Pious Affection and Faithful Devotion to be frequented, as
Holy Places, Dedicated to Divine Worship. Whosoever shall oppose this Sentence,
is not to be thought a Christian, but an Eunomian and Vigilantian. Tell me,
Sectary, if Gennadius had lived in this Age, would he not have added you to
Eunomians and Vigilantians, and said: He is not to be thought a Christian, but
a Puritan or Protestant?

Matters are so connex'd, that, whilst we assert one thing, we at the same time
Plead for another. For you deny all Belief to Miracles, which you say to have
seen frequent in the Churches Infancy; but that now, the Christian Faith being
Established, they are ceased. But consider, O Sectary, that this Faith was in
St. Augustin's time received and settled throughout the World: And that the
frequency of Miracles was then ceased, by which the Foundations of the Church
in the Apostles time Increased; and yet He, as thou see, acknowledges, that
Miracles were wrought in his Age, especially at the Relics of the Saints, nor
that only in these Places, we have already cited; but in many others also.
Likewise, (says he, Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 13.) Whereas I said in my Book
concerning true Religion: That these Miracles were not permitted to continue to
our Times, lest the Soul should always seek visible things, and Mankind now
grow cold by their frequency, which was heretofore inflamed by their Novelty:
This indeed is true; for they do not now when Hands are laid on the Baptized,
so receive the Holy Ghost, as to speak with the Tongues of all Nations: Nor are
the Sick now Cured by the Shadow CHRIST's Preachers, as they pass along: The
same may be said of such other things, as were then done, and have since
manifestly ceased. But what I said, is not so to be understood, that no
Miracles should be now believed to be done in the Name of CHRIST. For I my
self, when I writ that very Book, well knew, that a Blind-man in the City of
Millain received his Sight at the Bodies of certain Martyrs there; with several
other Miracles, of which there are even in our Times so many wrought, that we
can neither know them all, nor reckon those, which we know. In the same Book (
chapter 14.) he says: In another place, having related the Miracles which our Lord
JESUS did, when he was here in the Flesh, I added these words. You will say,
why are not these things done now? And answered, Because they would not move,
if they were not wonders; and they would not be wonders, if they were frequent.
Now this I said, because neither all those, nor yet so great Miracles are now
wrought; and not, because there are now none at all.

He has related also at large the Miracles of his Age in his Tract of the City
of GOD, ( lib. 22. cap. 8.) What, how great, and how many are the Miracles
there recited! And those indeed certain, clear, done in his own Memory, and of
which he himself was for the most part also a Witness. Nor did he commit to
Writing all, that he then knew to have happened, being in a manner overcome
with their Multitude. For he says, The desire, I have of finishing, according
to my Promise, this my Treatise, permits me not to mention all, I know of this
kind; and without doubt most of my Friends, who shall happen to read, what I
have here set down, will be sorry that I have omitted so many, which they know,
as well as I. Whose pardon I now beg, desiring them to reflect, what a Toil it
would be for me to do that, which the Work, I have here undertaken, will by no
means allow. For to say nothing of others, should I but set down the Miraculous
Cures, wrought by (...) Martyr, the most glorious St. Stephen, in the Town of
Calama, as also in our own, it would require the Writing of many Books, and yet
they would not all be collected.

Why therefore should our Age be thought destitute of Miracles? What use was
there then for them, which may not happen now? What Scripture, what word of GOD
banishes from us these Works of the Almighty? If thou have regard to those
frequent, and, as I may say, daily Miracles, by which the Church was in her
beginning asserted, they were already, as St. Augustine confesses, ceased in his
time; but as for such, as are more seldom, though no less certain, neither was
that Age, nor is ours, without them. But it is no wonder, you would have those
Miracles removed from the Minds and Eyes of Men, by which your Cause is
overthrown: since there are none wrought amongst you, but such, by which you
may learn that you are in Error; since you are Enemies to Holy Relics, at
which CHRIST often does these Supernatural Works; since lastly as many
Miracles, as are wrought amongst us, are so many Thunderbolts of Almighty GOD,
by which he confounds your Heresy.

The End of the Seventh Chapter.

