LICENSED.

Novemh. 3. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

DIRECTIONS FOR LOVE AND MARRIAGE.

In two Books.

Written Originally by Franciscus Barbarus a Venetian Senator.

And now Translated into English by a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for John Leigh at the Bell, and Tho. Burrell at the
Golden-Ball, under St. Dunstans Church, in Fleetstreet. 1677.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
TReatises of this nature perhaps may not be very welcome to some who too much
inclining to the licentious humor of this depraved Age, decry Marriage as a
restraint upon their Liberty. Their more refined wits scorning to tread one
step in the beaten paths of their wiser Ancestors, and utterly explode that
which all Nations, and all Ages, the wisest Men, and even God himself has
allowed as sacred. Though I fear it will not please some, yet I hope it may not
be unseasonable to prevent others, from adhering to see pernitions and
impolitick an opinion. This Treatise was first written in Italian, and so well
liked of that it was translated into Latin, and printed in Holland, where it
has gained an Universal Applause. It is now at last translated for the benefit
of the English Reader, from the generality of whom it hopes for a favorable
reception.

The Table of the Chapters of the first Book. Concerning the Endowments of a
Wife.
CHAP. I. WHat Wedlock is, and what are its advantages. CHAP. II. With what
qualifications and manners a Wife should be chosen. CHAP. III. Concerning the
Age of a Wife to be chosen. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Nobility of a Wife to be
chosen. CHAP. V. Concerning the Beauty of a Wife to be chosen. CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Riches of a Wife to be chosen. CHAP. VII. Concerning the
importance of time and of other things to change our purposes. CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Nuptial Solemnities.
The Table of the Chapters of the second Book. Concerning the Duty of a Wife.
CHAP. I. Concerning Gonjugal Love. CHAP. II. Concerning the moderation of a
Wife. CHAP. III. Concerning the speech and silence of Women. CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Apparel and Attire of a Wife. CHAP. V. Concerning the Food of a
Wife. CHAP. VI. Concerning the regulation of Congress. CHAP. VII. Concerning
Domestic care. CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Education of Children.
DIRECTIONS FOR Love and Marriage.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. What Wedlock is, and what are its advantages.
I Shall first treat of a few things before I begin to discourse concerning the
choice and duty of a Wife. First I purpose to define in this place what Wedlock
is, that (after the Example of Learned Persons) it may in the beginning be
understood what will be the Subject of our future Discourse. For so, the Sum of
the Matter being known, we may more easily, and rightly judge of the rest.
Wedlock is therefore a perpetual Conjunction of Man and Wife, lawfully
instituted, for the propagating of Issue, or avoiding Fornication; whereof
there have been many and diverse Opinions. It would be tedious to enquire and to
argue which of these is the true; but the Opinion as well of the Eminent Pagans
as of the Christians, which by the consent of almost all Men is accounted
praiseworthy, seems better to me.

For the Romans (that the City might be replenished with Legitimate Issue)
enacted that those who lived a single Life until old Age, should be obliged to
pay Money (called Mulcts) into the Treasury; for they would follow Nature it
self, by which a desire of Congress for Procreation sake is communicated to
every kind of Animals, and which accounts her happiness to consist in those
which are Procreated. For the Sense of Generation also is apparent in Beasts:
For truly (that I be not tedious in speaking of other things) we all see a
desire in Birds of building their Nests, in which is observable a certain
Representation of Wedlock to beget and nourish their like. By this means even
as the Body is nourished by Meat, so the Offspring of Men and Beasts is
perpetuated.

Lycurgus (by whose excellent Laws the Republic of the Lacedaemonians
flourished, but being neglected was overthrown) has branded them with
Ignominy, who continued their Celibacy thirty seven years; and he prohibited
them, who as yet had not attained the Nuptial State to appear at the
Wrestling-Schools, that they being inflamed with a desire either of shunning
Reproach, or by the nobleness of the Reward, the City might become greater and
more glorious with Freemen. Wherefore a certain young Man, who for his honor
sake departed not from the Theater, did very wittily apply this saying to
Calicla the famous Emperor, who had no Children at Lacedaemon where was the
honorable Harbor of his old Age, Neither have you O Calicla begotten me to
depart.

It has been experienced that by Legitimate Marriages Children are more
disposed by Birth to honesty, more gravely educated, and become better
Citizens, of whom the City consisting, will be more acceptable to its Friends
in Justice, more terrible to its Enemies in Valor: For Experience (that
Mistress) has made it most evident, that those who are unlawfully and
intemperately Begotten, for the most part are flagitious and dishonest, and
more propense to wickedness. The Luster of their paternal glory does not permit
them who are Legitimately born to be obscure, who are sensible that the
Trophies of their Parents brings more Burden than Honor, unless their own
Virtue correspond to the Dignity and Amplitude of their Ancestors. Neither
truly are they ignorant, that expectation and (as it were) the repetition of
Hereditary Virtue turns the Eyes of all upon themselves: So we may term those,
who are Born to Repute, The Walls of a City. When a certain Person complained
(Agesilaus being present) that Lacedaemon wanted Walls, he said, O ye Gods
grant better things! Our City it self is its own strongest Wall. For indeed it
is fit that we preserve and defend our Country, Gods, Houshold-Gods, Altars,
Houses, Parents, Wives and Children, not by Wood or Brick, but by Valor. What
also is more pleasant than to prevent a common want by domestic care? and to
have a chaste Woman, who may be a sociable and friendly Wife in prosperous and
adverse Affairs? To whom you may disclose your most secret thoughts concerning
her Affairs? To whom you may commit your little and mutual Children? In whose
speech and pleasantness you may lay aside all your cares and griefs? Whom you
may so love, that you esteem some part of your Life included in her welfare?
Cato the Censor thought that there was so much Respect and Veneration due to
this state, that whosoever should offer violence to his Wife, he publicly
affirmed, was equally to be prosecuted and detested with the violators of the
Images of the Goddesses; and it is related that he was wont to say, that he
thought it more difficult to be a good Husband, than to be a good Senator. By
this tie Cadusius reconciled the most seditious Carians amongst themselves; by
this alliance Cyrus appeased the Chaldeans that were at enmity with their
Borderers; and at Rome in the same day the Sabins were both Enemies and
Citizens. This same thing appeased the minds of Pompey and Caesar that were
estranged. And what is more incredible to be spoken, Alexander by this
affinity, (but not by that stately Bridge) allied Asia to Europe. I should
never make an end if I should commemorate how much Philosophers, how much
Historians, Poets, Kings, Cities, and Princes (whom we may produce out of the
Monuments of Learning, as out of the Trojan Horse) attribute to this Alliance,
to this Love, to this Piety; but these things are obvious, and I will be more
brief, especially since in so plain a case, we need not allege unnecessary
witnesses. Yet the Christian Institution is not to be passed by in silence,
whose Dignity is deservedly so great, that its Authority might prevail without
the aid of Reason. According to the Institutes hereof Marriages which are
confirmed by Oath, Faith, and Issue, if they be performed as they were first
commanded, will afterward easily be allowed; which how approvable they are,
Christ our Lord has confirmed in the Gospel, as well because he forbad to
divorce a Wife, as because being invited he went to a Wedding. Of which things
we must so think, that although Marriages are not desirable of themselves, yet,
in my opinion, they are to be referred to that which is good in it self. We
pursue Wisdom, Friendship, and Health for themselves: We desire Wit, Learning,
Knowledge, and a comely agreeableness of Manners, conjugal Embraces, Meat,
Drink, and Sleep, as necessary to the other. Therefore we believe Marriages to
be good, both for the sake of issue and the Society of both Sexes, which Nature
has recommended wonderfully to us; otherwise among old People the Dignity of
Wedlock would be extinguished, if they either wanted Children, or if they were
deprived of the hopes of Propagation; in all which there is this great praise,
that the lawfulness of Begeting Issue secures Men from the turpitude of
Incontinence; wherefore Man and Wife are united by that Law, by that Covenant,
and by that Alliance that they may not be severed by any separation. Although
at the present I seem to see some obstructing me in the very entrance, who
object the froward Manners of Xantippe, and delight in the wit of that Laco,
who when he had Married a Wife of great frowardness, and for that matter was
calumniated, he said to the Assertors, it is an ancient and excellent Proverb,
That of Evils, if it may be, the least is to be chosen. To which we answer many
other things, and that of Socrates chiefly, who when he had brought home
Euthidemus from the School, that he might join the Sacred Rite of Hospitality
to his good Will; Xantippe being angry overthrew the Table. When Socrates
understood this to be troublesome to his Guest, he said, Be of good courage, we
oftentimes endure more grievous things from tame Creatures, that we may receive
far more inconsiderable Fruits, as Eggs and Chickens, than from a Wife. Hither
refers the Discourse of that famous Person and Censor Metellus Numidicus, in
which when he discoursed concerning Marriage, these things are commemorated to
be said by him; If we Romans could live without Wives, we should be freed from
that trouble; but because Nature has so ordered it, that we can neither live
commodiously with them, nor in any manner without them, we should rather
provide for a perpetual happiness than a short pleasure. But these things shall
suffice concerning Wedlock, because they are treated of more copiously by most
Learned Men: But that we might handle the most necessary matters, we have
collected these things. Now we will briefly explain the Wifes duty, laid open
as it were to one view, which we never find digested into Method by our
Forefathers. Although before we enter that Point, we will direct what a Wife
ought to be chosen; only we will premonish this, that there should be no
excellency of Marriage so great, to which the Will of the Father should not be
preferred, even by the instruction of Cyrus, who when he was invited by
Cyapares to take an excellent Woman with a large Portion of Gold, said, That he
would not accept the offer till he was assured that the Match was approved by
his Parents.

CHAP. II. With what Qualifications and Manners a Wife should be -- chosen.
THE Ancients, whose Authority is in much use for their great Learning, have
thought that we ought to regard in a Wife, Age, Manners, Descent, Beauty and
Riches; which things if we neglect we shall always bring disgrace and trouble
to our Families, and oftentimes affliction to our selves: but if we shall
diligently observe them, we shall provide for our Domestic Praise, and our
Dignity and perpetual Pleasure. But Virtue ought chiefly to be considered, the
Efficacy and Dignity whereof is such, that if there were a deficiency in other
things, the Nuptials would be acceptable; but if the other things were enjoyed,
they would certainly become most pleasant: for Domestic Affairs which are
committed to the care of the Wife cannot be well regulated, unless they be
Managed, Governed, and Composed by the Prudence, Care, and Industry of the
Woman. Citizens are prone to imitate the Manners of their Kings, Soldiers of
their Emperors, Children of their Parents, and Maids of their Mistresses.
Homer is a noble Witness to us, who relates that the chaste Maids of Andromache
seemed so governed that they excelled and far transcended the Maids of Helena
in Chastity, Vigilance, and Labor; therefore the Woman of whom we now speak
may easily rule her Maids, if she can govern her self. Neither do I approve
them in this place who only search after, and earnestly desire, such admirable
things, in a Wife which they would choose, that are scarce to be found in many
Ages. We read and hear many things, we always judge them to be praiseworthy
who, although inferior, endeavor to follow the Example of those who are most
laudable in the practice of Virtue.

It is remembered that in the Olympic Games Philomena obtained the reward, not
because she overcame the noble Glaucus that most famous Wrestler, but because
she excelled the Champions of her Age in Virtue. So although the Porcia's,
Cornelia's, and Panthia's, those Lights of Female Glory, are acknowledged, not
to be of our Age; yet if we diligently search, we may find those who may be
ornamental, useful, and delightful to us. After what manner they may be
discovered will be found easy upon search. Marcus Cato the Consul and Censor,
when he was old, Married a Virgin, whose purpose I shall chiefly repeat,
because I acquiesce in his Narrations taken out of a Greek Monument, as in a
pleasant Inn. Therefore Marcus Cato being old, having often seen the Daughter
of his Client Salonius, was wonderfully delighted with her Wit and Manners.
Salonius the Scribe, as he was wont, came upon a time with Cato to the Court;
as they were going Cato said, O Salonius, I have found out a Husband for your
Daughter, and I think that you will approve all things, unless his great age be
an Obstacle. After those speeches which are wont to be used in such matters at
the first meeting, Cato professes himself to be that old Man, and promises
that (as much as was in his power) he would take his Daughter to Wife.
Whereupon Salonius admired that the Virtue of his Daughter should so much
attract Cato's esteem, that he would take to Wife one meanly Born, into that
Family which was adorned with consulary and triumphal Trophies. What should I
say more? He Married his Daughter. M. Cato the Son, than whom none was better,
if we credit his Father, nor excelled him in Piety, was much troubled, and
begged his pardon if he had done any thing against his Father, which should
induce him to bring him a Mother-in-Law; but he having applauded the Manners of
that Virgin, answered, that she pleased him wonderfully well; neither O dearest
Son should you think that it was done to bring you a Mother-in-Law, but that I
might have many Children like you, and leave behind me the best Citizens of the
Commonwealth. For this cause Pisistratus (as it is said) took to Wife a Woman
endued with singular modesty, his Sons being adult and instructed in the
Liberal Sciences; because the eminent Piety of his Children daily enflamed his
desire of Begetting the like. It is apparent by the judgment of M. Cato (than
which nothing can be more Grave) and of Pisistratus, how highly we ought to
esteem Manners. Our City is full of Examples of this kind, of which it shall
suffice to instance in a few. Andreas Barbarus, the Father of our Renowned
Mark, a famous Citizen, and of a most honorable Order, took Lucia Viaria to
Wife; whose worth was so perspicuous and known to him, that he brought her home
from her most endearing acquaintance, saying, That if he could gain her
consent, the Marriage should be Celebrated between them without any
consideration of Money. Therefore neglecting the Riches of others he Married
her for Virtue and Goodness. This matter did correspond with the judgment of
that prudent Person: For truly she educated his Sons-in-Law with that Care and
that Piety that nothing could be more advantageous, nothing more tranquil in
Domestic Affairs. Many years after, that most famous Person and excellent
Citizen Justus Contarinus imitated this Barbarus my Kinsman, for being
certified of the moderation, modesty, and singular beauty of Franciscus
Panthalion Barbus his Daughter, the Spectators being withdrawn, he first spoke
to her Father, and declared to him that his Daughter pleased him more and more,
and that he earnestly desired to have her, although poor, to Wife, if it might
be with his approbation. Wherefore Panthalion, most excellent by Birth and
great Learning, is pleased therewith, he requires time of deliberation, he
Summons, according to Custom, his usual Friends; the matter being declared, it
was by the consent of all judged happy, prosperous, and fortunate; and Justus
being now ancient is adjudged deserving of that most noble Virgin, though of a
small Portion, for so the state of her Family required. I may call those
Marriages happy which are desired and pursued for the splendour of Virtue, and
continue inviolated with great faithfulness and love; for (that I may omit in
this place her other Commendations) she so tenderly and courteously treated the
Children of his former Wife, that in her daily Conversation, many of her
Sons-in-Law remarked nothing of a Mother-in-Law in her, besides the Name. Above
all things therefore, as I would have you to observe, my dearest Laurentius,
let the Manners of your Wife please you, without which I do not understand what
can be hoped for in Domestic Affairs. Agesilaus being asked what the
Lacedaemonians should do, being conquerours, answered, If a prudent Emperor
manage the matter, we may refer that to our concern. What composes, regulates,
and renders commendable the Family Affairs, but chiefly the diligence,
frugality, and dignity of the Wife? As a Prince shall not well govern a City
unless he be expert in the Common Law, the Customs of his Ancestors, and the
Public Affairs. Neither can a Pilot, which is ignorant of the Marine Art,
reduce a Ship into the Haven out of a cruel Storm. Neither shall a Charioteer
which is unskilful in his Employment be rewarded. So neither can Domestic
Affairs be rightly managed, unless the excellency of the Mistress of the Family
be a singular Example to the rest. And even as Soldiers which have an
excellent Commander are ashamed to desert that place which is appointed them;
so Men and Maidservants will not forsake that part of the Family concern, the
Custody of which is committed to them by a chaste and prudent Mistress. Plato,
that most Grave Philosopher, in those Books which he has excellently written
concerning the Commonwealth, has instituted that Magistracies should be
bestowed on the most excellent, not the most ambitious Citizens; for he foresaw
that in a short time very few would strive for it, if not those who were well
deserving, but those who were ambitious Champions should enjoy the Dignity.
Wherefore he proposed a public Reward to the Magistrates, lest the damage
which may accrue to their private Affairs, should impede the public Duties of
the Commonwealth; for we should so greatly esteem Prudence in a Wife (that if
our fortunes will permit) we should even neglect a Wifes Portion, or willingly
be content with very little, that we may obtain Domestic praise and peace.
This very thing will bring us greater glory than if we had Wives adorned with
Jewels and Gold, but void of Honesty. A certain Ionian Woman when she proudly
boasted of her Treasures and Riches, was thus answered by the Wife of Phocion,
Phocion is my Riches and Treasure who has been Prince of the Athenians now
this twenty years, for his merits to his Country. After the same manner we may
glory in the worth of a Wife, and pretermit them, who being enriched with the
Wealth and Possessions of a Wife are liable to innumerable troubles. These
things are fading, but those former firm and stable things do truly unite the
minds of Married Persons. Philip* the Father of Alexander, whom Theophrastus
styles a King excellent in Fortune and Valor, fervently and wonderfully loved
Thessala to that degree, that it was said he was induced by Love-potions;
wherefore Olympias used her utmost endeavor that Thessala her self might be
brought into his power: whom when she beheld adorned with a modest Countenance
and Deportment, she said, The Calumnies avail little against you, for you bear
the Enchantments of Love about you, and Love-potions are prepared by the
sweetness of your goodness. What need I say more? Let us choose a Wife of good
behavior, whose Frugality joined to Honor, Profit, and Pleasure may be
esteemed, delighted in, and loved by us.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Age of a Wife to be chosen.
SInce I have already treated of the qualifications of a Wife, which if she be
rightly educated, she has, or may easily obtain: I shall now briefly discourse
of her Age, those things which have been handled and taught by Zachary and many
Learned Persons. But I think that this is first to be premonished, that you
choose a Virgin, not a Widow; a young, not an elderly Woman: for she will more
easily learn those things which are necessary and commodious, and if she has
contracted any Vices they may more speedily be eradicated; For we can easily
make impressions upon soft Wax, but we can scarce deface those which are
impressed upon hard and solid. We may affix upon tender minds what institutes
we please. We can scarce with great ingeny, elaborate industry, and singular
care, reduce Widows, formed both to their own and others humors, to our own
customs: for who can hope to straighten old Vines, which were at first
crooked? Who will conceive that a young Man nourished in Alexandrian pleasures,
will change his course of life to that of an abstemious old Man? Who will think
that he will be well qualified in old age, who in his youth was obstinate,
lustful, audacious, and cruel? So Widows if they have imbibed any vicious
habits, we may almost despair of reducing them to our course of life: Wherefore
excellently, Timotheus, that noble Trumpeter, was wont to require a double
reward from them, who formerly had received instructions from other Masters of
that Art, and a single one from them who were ignorant of that Art: for as
these are to be taught, so those are to be untaught before they are capable of
instruction. To this refers that reason which is approved by use, and produced
by Nature. For those relate, who enquire exquisitely into the hidden causes of
things, that Nature her self intends that which is the best, and that when she
cannot produce a Male, she conceives a Female, which is ennobled and perfected
by the union of the Male; and therefore that Women love those most to whom they
are joined in the first congress. Why is it so? Because a Virgin will more
easily entertain good Manners, and renounce her depraved, and will love more
ardently. Moreover the Marriages of Widows amongst the Romans could not escape
the imputation of levity and impudence, who also permitted a Divorce; but those
whom they observed to be content with one only Husband, they highly admired for
their modesty. Neither did they defraud the Matrons of their due praise, who
preserved purely, and with a sincere faithfulness, their affections devoted to
their former Husbands, although defunct. Who will not deservedly condemn her of
intemperance, whose fervent desires are not capable of an allay by the embraces
of many Husbands? Who will not admire with great delight the chaste Dido, who
said, He who first joined me to himself, has engrossed my love, he shall enjoy
and possess it in his Sepulcher? Which none should wonder at, since Crows and
Turtles, by Natures instinct, when their Mates are dead, continue chaste, and
in a manner Widows.

I have expatiated too much, while I reprove the Marriages, and accuse the
Incontinence of Widows. Let us therefore return to the Subject of our
Discourse: It chiefly conduces to Domestic Peace that a parity of
dispositions, and similitude of desires do unite Husbands and Wives, or retain
them being united. For this reason prudent Antiquity together with Venus has
placed in the Temples Mercury and the Graces and Obsequence; because conformity
of minds, concord and complaisance claim to themselves a chief place in the
duty of a Wife. Henceforth we are to treat at what time a Woman is Marriageable
and of years adapted to the Nuptial state. Hesiod that most ancient Poet, and
Xenophon that most sweet Philosopher have ascribed the fourteenth year to a
Woman, the thirtieth to a Man; but Lycurgus has appointed the eighteenth year
for Women, but the thirtyseventh for Men: chiefly accounting it advantageous to
Posterity in the propagation whereof he did not so much regard the number as
the strength. In this place (O most pleasant Laurentius) I desire thee to give
me leave to digress freely, which I know will not be unpleasant to thee. For
this cause therefore he appointed, that his Citizens should not lodge with
their Wives in the same Beds; but that they should privately join embraces with
them in the daytime, that they being restrained from a perpetual and (as I may
so say) unlimited congress, they might take care of their health, and that
their Children might be more robust. For that most prudent Person foresaw, that
mortals were apt to delight in fond sensual pleasures, from the allurements
whereof he hoped for the greatest part to defend his Citizens by restraining
them from a continual volupty. To this matter the Female Discipline much
contributed, for he took care by many Sports and Games that the Wives Dignity
might not incur any disgrace by sloth or idleness; for he appointed a School of
Running, Shooting, Discipline, and of Wrestling for the Spartane Women, that
they being frequently exercised therein, their Sons and Daughters might obtain
a Natural strength from their Parents. He also declared that he was therefore
the Author of that Law, that the Spartane Women might more undauntedly endure
the pains of Travail, and if at any time any contention arose they might fight
courageously for their Children. I suppose and conjecture that these years of
Marriage were limited by him that as much as could be the weakness of that Sex
might be defended from the snares of pleasures: whereby it came to pass, that
the Laconian Women greatly excelled as in all kind of glory, so especially in
modesty. The most noble answer of Geradata the Lacedemonian is a solemn
Testimony hereof, whom when Xentus asked, what punishment by the Laws of
Lycurgus were inflicted upon Adulterers, he answered, That Lycurgus had not
enacted any thing concerning them; since it is apparent that we have not one
Adulterer amongst us; neither, O Xentus, would I have thee admire at it since
amongst us Luxury, Riches, Ornaments, and the other allurements of Pleasure are
disesteemed; but Frugality, Modesty, and Chastity cannot be sufficiently
applauded. In which Laws the Spartan Women being born and educated, they alone
seemed to bring forth not only Men, but excellent Persons, whi^^ it is reported
that Gorgon the Wife of Leonides did assert. For when a certain Guest of her
Husband blamed the Lacedemonian Women because (unlike to others) they ruled
their Husbands, Gorgon said, I confess it, neither do we wrong them therein,
because we alone bring forth excellent Men. But perchance I have insisted
longer on these things than is needful. I think it unnecessary now to pronounce
a definitive Sentence which of these Opinions is the true. Truly in the
Sentiments of a prudent Judge each defends it self. For neither (as I hope) do
you desire of me that I should prescribe certain Laws, as it were, framed by
inevitable necessity (as they say by Parliamentary Rolls) concerning Wives; but
I will chiefly insist upon those things which I find approved either by precept
or use; yet we allow that most of these things may be changed by the causes,
times and conjunctures of things: for Judgment and Prudence (which the Ancients
defined to be the Production of Experience and Memory) are necessary for us.
Since therefore we have already treated of the Age of a Wife, in the next place
we design to discourse of her Nobility, upon which we shall insist more largely.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Nobility of a Wife -- to be chosen.
I Wish (O dear Laurentius) the Matter would suffer to speak all I can
excogitate concerning Descent it self; I could more abundantly evidence (as I
suppose) that the Arms of our Ancestors ought to be more esteemed than that
Custom will permit which now daily grows more and more in use among us. Yet
for the present we shall relate some things which seem most advantageous and
excellent, other things perhaps we shall handle more largely hereafter:
Therefore I intend to begin herein from Nature it self. A Pasture flourishing,
Planted and Sown Field does greatly assure us, that for the sake of our
Posterity we should celebrate the Nuptial Rites with Women nobly born. Seeds
are reduced into their proper origins; and we find that those are the best
Crops which are produced by the most excellent Corn; and we know that very
many, and those the best sorts of Berries, Nuts and Shrubs, will not grow but
in their proper and fertile Soils; and if they be transplanted to a more barren
Soil they lose their Natural Virtue, and Apples losing their former juice
degenerate: also excellent Ciens if they be Ingrafted in bad Stocks, bear worse
Fruits. Which is also incident to Men themselves, that they expect far more
Illustrious Children from Noble Women. Hence chiefly we discern in them the
representations of their Mothers bodies and minds (as we see in most Children)
and it is certain that a Woman is of great concern in the Generation of
Children. For as some judicious Physicians assert, that a Female is chiefly
procreated by the Woman. It is very noble that the Civil Law allows Children to
enjoy honor from their Mothers; for (as it is instituted by the Roman Laws) it
is certain that all those were accounted free born, who had Noble Mothers,
although their Fathers were Slaves: which also we observe that the Lawgivers of
the Lycians enacted, among whom if any Noble Woman Married an Ignoble Servant,
yet the Children begotten of her were Noble. Poets testify this to us, who
affirm that those who have a Goddess for their Mother are Divine. We should
want time, if we should enumerate particulars; but Aeneas, Achilles, and
Orpheus chiefly for this reason are accounted Deities. Neither does the
Nobleness of the Mother avail only to the procreation, but much to the
education of the Children: who is so ignorant that he does not perceive that
this matter is of great importance to them that are born? For the choicest
Seeds being Sown (that we may use an Analogy of the same kind) unless the Field
be Tilled with great care and industry, the Corn will be obnoxious to many
hazards. No body can doubt that any thing is more esteemed by renowned Women
than that the honor of the Parents may be more and more illustrated by the
splendour of the Children: of whom unless there be diligent care taken they will
rather seem infamous in Vice than noble in Extraction. Moreover the dignity and
excellency of Ancestors often causes that the Posterity is, and is accounted
worthy of the greatest honors: also let them rely upon their own Virtues, as
they are obliged by the Laws of Nature; for unless that their Virtues be
evident in them, they will perceive themselves degenerate with the greatest
contumelies of all Men. And as the remembrance of former glory incites
Soldiers accustomed to triumphs to be valiant and ardent; so the remembrance
of Domestic Renown will stimulate them who were before spontaneously earnest
in the pursuit thereof. They have an easy passage to honor who are of noble
descent. Who is not assured (so that they be not excelled in worth in other
things) that those should be preferred before mean Persons by the Suffrages of
all? Who is ignorant, that although they are unworthy of honor by their own
merits, yet oftentimes many things are conceded to them for the sake of those
most worthy Persons their Ancestors? We read of many who would die for their
Country, both that they might perform their duty, and leave a large Patrimony
to their Children with the Memory of their Name: for at Athens their Children
were maintained at the public charge, who died for their Country. At Rome a
pedestral Statue was appointed to be erected in the Marketplace, for them who
died in Embassage (if that Office caused their death) that it might be a
Monument of their honorable death, and add a luster to their Children for
ever. Amongst us if in the troublesome and perilous times of our republic, the
earnest desire, endeavor and vigilance of any is evident, they are rewarded
according to their deserts, either with power, or riches, or honor, and not
they alone, but also their Children and Posterity. On some a City, and the most
honorable esteem in that City is conferred. These things are spoken for this
cause that it may be apparent that Parents should be advantageous and
ornamental to their Children. Neither would I have this to be understood as
spoken of Fathers only, but also of Mothers; whose Virtue and Merit have
oftentimes obtained much Renown for their Children with Posterity. But the
misfortune of an Ignoble Birth has been so adverse to many, that they could
neither attain the state of Nobility, nor from the obscurity of their Ancestors
appear in luster. For the envy of others is always an obstacle to the
advancements of mean Persons. Dogs (as the Proverb relates) although they bark
and are fierce against strangers, yet are tractable to the Domestics.
Therefore we are to retain the dignity of our Parents, and communicate it to
our Children; which when other things are uncertain, fading, and transitory,
being firmly Rooted, can by no force be subverted nor overthrown. Neither yet
therefore do I approve their Opinion, who being meanly born, endeavor to
obtain most Noble Wives. We may most aptly compare those Persons to them, who
when they cannot mount upon the tall Camels, teach them after the Syrian manner
to kneel and lie down; for such Persons being incapable of advancement, render
the women more debased. Therefore we will chiefly approve those Marriages,
whereby we being made more honorable, shall render our Children more eminent
and potent. Whence that ancient Roman Custom is thought to arise, whereby it
is prohibited to marry wives related to them, lest the love whereto we are
obliged by the right of this relation should be confined in narrow bounds, and
should in a manner deprive Posterity of much Felicity, which might be attained
by other affinities: hither refers that union of friendship, whereby a City is
compacted by these kinds of amities, as by some certainties. But Claudius Nero,
that Plague and Pestilence of the Roman Empire, extorted a Decree from the
Senate, whereby it was enacted, that the marriages of Uncles and Neeces were
lawful, that he might maintain his unruly and unbridled Luxury, by public
Authority: Yet there were none of any rank did pollute themselves with this
incest, except one Callidius Severus, a Roman Knight, whom yet, very many most
noble Authors did assert, was allured thereunto for the sake of Agrippina.
Therefore (as you O Laurentius have already excellently done) let us choose
noble wives, that our Society may be more pleasant, and having Children more
noble by Nature and Education, that we may fortify them who are pursuing
glory, abundantly with honor and power, by our Domestic Examples: For eminent
Persons will vigilantly remember, always consider, and be mindful of their
Parents, and to restore carefully and entirely their dignity, as an
Inheritance, which they have received not from their Father only, but also from
their Mother, to their Children.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Beauty of a Wife to be chosen.
NOW here we shall enter upon that part with which others are wont to begin who
omitted the former: we shall now treat concerning Beauty, which (as many think)
consists in the Composure of the Body, and chiefly in the amiableness of the
Hair, Eyes, Face, Neck, and Hands. I think women of a low stature (although the
Composure of the Body be proportionable) are rather adapted to unlawful
venerial pleasures than the function of a wife, for they seem rather
accommodated to those delights, than the dignity of propagating Issue.
Wherefore at Lacedemon the Ephori fined Archidamus their King in a great sum of
money, because he married a wife of a small stature; thinking that his
surviving Issue would be Children not Kings. And (lest my discourse should be
more prolix in its other parts) the Hair is so comely in a woman, that it
incited Homer often to term Hellen her self beautiful from this one Ornament of
her Hair. And does not our Virgil, when he describes a wise Person, and would
in few words style him beautiful, add this part of decency, saying, his Face
and Shoulders were like unto the Gods? for the Goddess favored her Son with a
comely Head of Hair and bestowed a bright Eye upon his youth, and honors
delightful to it. Believe me (O Laurentius) if Mars had beheld Venus shaven,
that ardour, wherewith that most warlike God was possessed, had forthwith
vanished, so that he had never been ensnared by the arts of Vulcan. A certain
Citizen of thine (whom for the sake of his honor I name not) ascribes either
the only, or the greatest excellency of a wife to this beauty whereof I now
discourse. But as I will not deprive this matter of its praise, so I cannot
concede the greatest to it; whose power truly is such that it has and may
overcome the Victours of all Nations. Jupiter himself, who by the Suffrages of
the Poets is termed the Father of Gods and Men, has often appeared in the
likeness of a Shower, a Swan, and manifold appearances, that he might enjoy
that beauty by which he was captivated: but I shall say nothing of the others,
whom the Multitude have made Gods, over whom (as Anacreon says) Cupid
triumphs. Antiquity testifies to us, that very many are believed to be
immortal for the only excellency of their beauty. Moreover Paris himself
contemned the Empire of Asia, and the victory in wars, that he might obtain
Hellen, whom he esteemed most beautiful, when he beheld the Goddess Juno,
Minerva and Venus most earnestly contending concerning the luster of beauty,
and which were most excellent in his judgment: Also it is a great most amiable
thing that this beauty seems a certain Divine things and most worthy of great
honors. Who is so void of humanity that Beauty it self may not delight him?
Almost all Men love beautiful Persons, esteem them worthy to govern, and most
willingly obey them; therefore most aptly that most prudent Poet Virgil, says,
Virtue seated in a fair Body is more acceptable and advantageous. For although
Virtue be not more estimable, yet (I know not how) it is more pleasing. The
Multitude rather reveres than loves valiant, wise, and just Persons, if they be
deformed: whence, wittily, Plato was wont to advise Xenocrates (who was
remarkably deformed in Body) that he should often do good things spontaneously;
for his Wisdom, being joined to his deformed Body, was unpleasant to very
many, and of it self very dear to few. But wherefore should I rehearse so many
of these things? that we may rather choose to live with handsome Wives (for whom
many would die:) Neither do I rehearse this for the sake of pleasure (which is
repelled by a great and sober mind, as a Wave by a Stone) but I think it meet
to be referred to the Propagation of Issue, and the pleasant Society of each
others life. Juno has wisely asserted it in Virgil, when she thus endeavored
to persuade Aeolus, even with the hope of a reward: I have fourteen handsome
Nymphs, whereof I will Marry you to Deiope the fairest, and she shall be yours,
that she may all her days live with you in recompense of such merits, and make
you a Father of a fair Offspring. In which place it may easily be observed
(unless the Tale be told to a deaf Man) wherefore we ought greatly to esteem
handsome Wives. But I perceive that, in the earnestness of speaking, I have
farther expatiated than the Matter it self did require; wherefore I shall
desist, and now approach nearer to our purpose. Although above I have written
many things concerning Beauty, yet I would so be understood, that I highly
value it, if it be accompanied with good manners, and other excellencies; but
separated from these, I do by no means approve it: for as Fire that is easily
kindled of Straw, will suddenly be extinguished, unless more durable Fuel be
added thereto; so the love between Husband and Wife, proceeding from the Beauty
of the Body, will suddenly vanish, unless the renown of Ingeny, composure of
manners and holiness of life, correspond thereto. When it was reported to
Olympias, that one of the Royal Family had Married a Wife, who, it was said,
seemed most fair, but was of ill report, she said; This young Man, if he had
oftener consulted with those prudent Persons his Ancestors, than with himself,
he would not have Married a Wife solely by the guidance of his Eyes: for this
Ornament of Beauty deserves no praise, nor no remembrance, unless a firm and
express appearance of Virtue be annexed to it: which Homer, that most great
Philosopher, and Poet, plainly evidenceth, who once reported, that Nireus (the
fairest of all the Greeks, Achilles only excepted) came, together with others,
to Aulis, after which he is in no place remembered: for truly he brought no
valor to Troy, the proper reward of which is glory, whereby Homer determined
for ever to adorn those Half-Gods. Neither can Beauty only cause love to Wives,
but also to unchaste Women: concerning which I remember that of one Philip of
Padua; He being the Son of a rich and noble Father, fervently loved a wanton
Woman of extraordinary Beauty, from whose love he could not be withdrawn by the
authority and kindness of his Father; when his Father observed these things,
with the great hazard of his Sons reputation, he resolved to apply a Remedy to
his Distemper; he hires that mercenary unchaste Woman, addicted to venereal
pleasures, keeps her at home with his Son; the wretched young man lodges with
her, embraces her, and for some days injoyes that sensual pleasure, which he
accounted the chief and only good: not long after when satiety began to assuage
his unlawful love, and he began to disdain her with a greater freedom, that
which he was wont to love so ardently in her, he despises, and by little and
little the youth recovered and was freed, by the care of his Father, from that
cruel and furious distemper. What happiness can we expect in a Wife, if beauty
alone shall attract our affections to her, to whom worth and the society of a
comfortable life should unite us? Truly we can hope for no better success, than
Menelaus had with Helen; or (if we observe fables) Vulcan with Venus, or Minos
with Pasiphae, or Theseus with Phaedra, or (that I may look homeward) Claudius
Caesar with Messalina. But why should I with many words, so long insist upon
these things, as concerning obscure matters? let us love fair Wives (if they be
correspondent in other things) that the Nuptials may be delightful to us,
honorable and advantageous to our Posterity.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Riches of a Wife to be chosen.
I Have sufficiently discoursed concerning Manners, Age, Extraction, and
Beauty; furthermore, according to our purpose, we shall speak a few things
which seem not impertinent to this matter, concerning Riches, which is the
remaining part to be treated of in the choice of a Wife. Since therefore we
pursue all things which appertain to the Honor and Ornament of Wedlock, and to
the plenty, wealth, riches, and conveniences of life, we must be careful of our
honor and profit, which produce gratitude, liberality, and magnificence; in
which truly the greatest splendor of Virtue consists: Although we may be
liberal by the inclinations of a grateful mind, yet (even as Emperors,
Orators, and Physicians) we shall not seem highly praiseworthy, unless we
manifest our desires by our actions: Wherefore Riches are useful for many
things; for we may give to every one according to their desert, and bestow much
upon our Neighbors and Friends, whereby we shall fortify our Children with
the riches, assistance, and love of those to whom we have been liberal, for
Parents are remarked and loved in their Children; and no duty should seem more
honorable than Gratitude, wherein whoever is voluntarily deficient, he must
necessarily be impious against the immortal God, his Country, Parents, Kindred,
and Friends; finally he offends against all those by whose bounty he being
obliged, is neither thankful to them, nor remunerates them. Whence, very nobly,
by the Persian Laws ungrateful Persons were severely punished; for (as
Herodotus relates) they accounted it the greatest fault to lie, but the next,
to be indebted. Why not? They rightly conceived, that he who was not ashamed to
owe to another, would both often err against the duty of a good man in many
things, and deceive him, and lie most often: Therefore we should so highly
value Riches, which although we our selves have little need of, yet the most
honorable use thereof most largely extends to our Friends, and to all sorts of
Persons. Alexander sent a great deal of Gold to that excellent person Phocion;
that most severe and most constant person refused the Gift, because he had no
need of that Money: Afterward he was asked, whether he had no Friends, whom
the society of their most noble Studies and similitude of life had joined to
himself? it being most equitable that he should be bountiful and liberal to
them: but you may see (O Phocion) what you have determined of your self. Indeed
the almost incredible Riches of Darius scarce sufficed Alexander liberally to
relieve their Fortunes whose worth was dear to him. This will be a great
advantage to your Children, that (which should be esteemed most noble) generous
young men should be instructed and taught excellent Studies and Arts; wherewith
being endued, they may become Children worthy of those renowned Persons their
Parents, and may render their Ancestors more illustrious: (Which since it is
so) we must be diligently careful of our wealth, lest we be judged and thought,
by them who envy us, to have ill provided for our Profit and Honor. But as if
Wine be mingled with Water, and if there be the greater part and portion of the
Water than of the Wine, yet we call it Wine; so we term Plenty and Riches the
Husbands not the Wives, although the woman brought the greater and more
valuable part thereof; although I think he most consults his own interest, not
who accumulates the most to, but who makes the best provision for his Family
concerns.

Moreover (as the Physicians assert) it is necessary to our perfect health,
that moisture be dispersed through all the parts of the body: so we instruct
them who marry that they should unite not Money (whereof we speak) but Minds
and Friends and mutual Relations one to another: wherefore it was enacted by
the Roman Laws that the Man and Wife should not receive any Gifts of each
other, that they might be assured that nothing was peculiar, but all things
common to each other, whereby the domestic Affairs might be managed with a
greater care, diligence, and faithfulness. That of Dion to Dionysius is true,
Every one is more diligent in his own than in others concerns. Whence wisely
Princes are wonted to be admonished to consider, that their Cities are their
Houses, their Citizens their Children, and themselves the Prefects of their
Family, that they may provide for the safety and welfare of those Concerns over
which they preside, by care, judgment, industry, and vigilance, and desire
their felicity. But of these things hitherto. I would our Age had happened in
that time, in which Youth had been to be taught, not untaught, that it should
not greatly esteem Riches and Money in Wedlock; truly the society and union of
men had been best preserved: But the most, even from their infancy, are so
inclined and instructed to a vain hope of lucre, that they will omit nothing
which they can endeavor or perform by labor and perils, that they think can
contribute to this their servile avarice. Wherefore I resolved not to incite
nor inflame the Youth of our Age highly to value Riches with Wives, but rather
to exhort them (if their Estates will permit) to deliberate hereof (even as I
have written) after all other things. I fear I have offended very many, but yet
I will speak what I think. I cannot enough blame those, who by how much the
richer they are, so much more earnestly they affect Wives, who are capable of
nothing less than the duty of a wife: for as Looking-Glasses embellished with
Gold and Pearls are unuseful to us, unless they pourtray a like representation;
so furthermore I think the Riches of the wife unprofitable, unless the Pattern
of her Husbands Discipline shall appear easy to her, even in penury it self.
Alexander is applauded, because he took to wife Barsines (as some say) of whom
he begat Hercules, the modest Daughter of Artabazus, sprung of a Royal Family,
learned in Greek Letters, although poor; greatly contemning the Nuptials of
Darius's Daughter with an infinite mass of Gold. There were many, both Princes
and private Persons, who were and are accounted great, as well in other things,
as in the despising of Wives Portions, with whose Praises, as with Stars,
History is resplendent. But no satiety of Possessions, or Tenements, or
precious Household Stuff can satisfy those above mentioned Persons; and in the
midst of much riches they are poor; they covet richer not worthier Matches. And
as persons unskilful of Horsemanship highly value Horses with splendid Reins,
and persons unskilled in Military Affairs Golden Helmets, and illiterate men
depraved Books with most adorned Bosses; so many wish for Wives with full
Purses. My most learned and pleasant Guarinus was wont rightly to compare them
to stately Sepulchers: For in them, whereas their appearance is most splendid,
joined with various Ornaments, within there is nothing comely, but great
filthiness, turpitude, and corruption, and many things which are the products
of death. Aesop that most ancient Phrygian Writer (in whose Fable a singular
gravity is joined to an equal courtesy) in a manner ingeniously professes to
advise us herein, who relates that a Fox entering into the Shop of a certain
Musician, found a Harp, the top whereof was the Head of a man fashioned
wonderfully with ingeny, Art, industry, Jewels, and Gold, which when he had
leisurely admired, he said, This is a rich H^ad, but it has no brains. We may
say the same of the richest women, unless they be sufficiently fit to perform
the duty of a Wife.

That rash Paris enjoyed the rich Hellen: The most prudent Ulysses espoused the
chaste Penelope, than whom none of her time was more chaste, none more modest:
Antiquity admired, loved, and most highly extolled this marriage; on the
contrary, it has stigmatized the other to the memory of posterity, with most
grievous ignominies, even as that which was the Firebrand, Desolation, Plague,
and destruction of Asia: It is evident that it happened because he sought helps
and assistances of his unlawful passion. Wherefore Lycurgus prudently ordained
that Wives should be espoused without portions, that the Spartan women might
not remain unmarried for their Poverty, nor be married for their Riches; for so
he foresaw that the Spartanes would seek virtue not riches in Wives, and that
the women would be far more diligent in the acquisition of virtues: which that
it might more easily be effected, those former half-Gods (placed as in a
certain watch Tower, that they might afar off provide for posterity) decreed
not (as in this age) that women should bring a portion to their Husbands, but
they dowries to their Wives, lest their husbands should covet their wealth, but
that they might consider more diligently to whom they were to communicate
themselves, their children, and all their concerns: this above named Law
(unless Custom has changed our minds, and pleasures have by degrees rendered
us effeminate) is to be renewed, and not to remain any longer repealed: for if
we rent Lands and hire Servants that we may mutually profit them, who are
advantageous to us; why shall we not judge that we should do the same with
wives, from whom we expect so necessary, so sweet fruits? But unless we be
first freed from pleasures (those alluring inducements) and precious ornaments,
Garments fit for luxurious persons, and other unnecessary things, necessity it
self, and that covetousness which is restrained within no bounds be removed, we
shall never deliberate seriously and freely of a Wife: which since it is most
evident I will insist no longer upon in this place: therefore our youth should
recollect themselves, and consider more cautiously than covetously (even by
your example) of their Marriages, lest for the hope of lucre, or the sake of
obtaining gain, making themselves the slaves of a portion, they kindle a
domestic Flame, which they cannot easily extinguish. Therefore (in my
judgment) if they would do what may conduce to the benefit of them and theirs,
let them choose Wives endued with Virtue, Age, Beauty, and Riches; of which
things, if any thing be disputable, we will ere long declare which should be
preferred; but first, which seems the best and also necessary, we will a little
confute some things.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the importance of time, and of other things to change
our purposes.
PErchance some will say what do you do? Who having undertaken to give precepts
concerning the chocie of a Wife, so omit mean and poor men, that you instruct
only fortunate persons? To this I may easily answer, that I earnestly wish,
that these our short commentaries may be common and useful to all; but if any
either by the misfortune of their extraction or penury, are not in a capacity
to make use of our advice, let them blame their fortune not our precepts: let
us therefore return to our purpose. I seem to see some who although they may
concur with me, that all those requisites whereof I have disputed should be
chiefly regarded, yet they may object that those things are rather to be wished
than hoped for: wherefore they will more earnestly require me to introduce this
comparison; neither can they expect that all should be Laurentius's, most
excellent in the endowments of Mind, Body, and Fortune, to whom Wives of all
ranks and of all degrees are offered; but I conceive that I have sufficiently
answered these persons, by those things which are before said, when I above
discoursed what I most esteemed; of other things we shall treat hereafter: yet
oftentimes there happen many causes either of time or necessity or occasion;
for which (as learned men say) we may consent to change our precepts. For we
ought to consult with time (as Pericles advises Colmides, that most prudent
councellor:) for as the Woers of Penelope despairing of her embraces freely and
voluntarily enjoyed her Maids, so if we cannot obtain them who in every respect
are most excellent, let us acquiesce with those who are suitable to our
dignities. Neither should we imitate children who make sport for the spectators
by putting on their Parents Shoes: So they will seem ridiculous, who being mean
and abject, industriously seek for wives in whom every proportion of an
absolute and perfect renown is observed. Therefore I admonish them, that they
be not like to Aesop's Camels with the great derision of all men; for when in a
Council of Beasts they desired the Horns of a Heart, their Ears were almost
plucked off, that those who remained content within their bounds might be an
example to them. Therefore let our young men marry wives according to their
abilities. The misfortunes of others may sufficiently admonish them; let them
take heed, lest they themselves become Examples to others. Wherefore we judge
that Proverb, as well useful to many things, as chiefly apposite to this; Like
best accords with like. For what is more equal? what is more convenient? what
is more facil? what is more easy, than to choose a wife suitable to themselves?
But I do not assent to them, to whom nothing appears more equal, than
inequality it self. Moreover we must have a regard to her Manners, to which we
always concede the preference in this matter: For if her Genins incline her to
other things, without virtue, or a propensity to good manners, I shall not
therefore applaud it. Demosthenes that excellent Orator being asked what was
the chief thing in Eloquence, answered Pronunciation; he also assigned the
second and third place to it, that he might more easily manifest, that as to
the persuasive part the precedence is to be chiefly yielded to it. Hither
refers that grave witness Hortensius, who being inferior to many in other
things, is believed to have excelled almost all in Oratory. What Demosthenes
attributes to pronunciation in Oratory, we may ascribe to Virtue it self in a
wife. Wherefore let us chiefly regard good manners which we have placed in the
first rank, because without these, Marriages cannot be rightly approved; in
which above all things obedience, courtesy, and compliance should be
considered, that there may be no differences, nor divorces, nor finally no need
of the appeasing Goddess.

A certain Roman divorced a noble, rich, and beautiful Wife, at which all
admired, and complained of him; to whom when he would approve his judgment, he
said, concerning his Shoo, This in appearance is fair and new; but where it
hurts me none knows besides my self. Therefore I would have Husbands not so
much esteem Portion, Extraction, and Beauty, as Virtue and agreeableness of
Disposition in a Wife, to whom nothing should be more estimable than the will
of her Husband; but if with Nobility a Virgin shall preserve approved manners,
we shall the less need the Ornament of Beauty. Socrates exhorted young Men to
behold themselves in a Looking-glass, for so if they beheld themselves deformed
they might render themselves fair and acceptable by Virtue: but if beautiful,
to take heed lest they subverted that endowment of Nature by their wickedness.
So I advise Husbands, if they have not handsome Wives, to think it sufficient
for them, that they are undoubtedly fair in Chastity, Age, and Nobility: let
them consent to the opinion of Gorgias, who afferted that the renown of the
Wife, not the favor of Fortune ought to be regarded; but if they be beautiful,
let them be so much dearer to them. If they excel in other things, but are
poor or indigent, their Nuptials will not be disapproved even by the Example of
Agamemnon, that most excellent King, for he preferred Cryseides the Captive
before Clytemnestra the Daughter of Jupiter, esteeming her Superior in
Stature, Countenance, Prudence, and lastly in many Sciences. Who ever covets to
accumulate Riches, will find himself to be in an error, and should think that
he had better espouse a good Wife, than a rich. Themistocles testifies this
unto us, who being asked by a certain Father whether he should Marry his only
Daughter to a good Man, but poor, or to one dishonest, but rich? he answered, I
had much rather you should have a Son-in-Law who wants Riches, than Riches
without the Man. That which that Prince of Greece instructed concerning
Husbands, we give in Precept concerning Wives; for it is fit that we choose to
our selves Wives, not Riches for our Wives. Wherefore (the Ephori being Judges)
those Lacedaemonians were deservedly punished, who promised (Lysander being
living) to Marry his Daughters, but after his death they refused it; for
although they Courted them when rich, they manifested their contempt of them
being poor, although well educated. What shall I say more? My opinion is, that
we should do our endeavor to be united to those Women, who may be in all
respects honorable, dear, and pleasant to us. For if it shall come into
debate, let us be careful to Steer our Course in every particular according to
the dignity of each Person, and (as Automedon and other Masters of the Horse
affirm) we call those excellent and good Horses, in which more things may be
approved than disapproved; so we may esteem those Women worthy of the praise of
good Wives, in whom we perceive either the most or the chief of these things,
whereof we have discoursed. Neither may I impose such an Obstacle especially
upon the Men of our Age (for it would be a hard, and almost endless thing,
although that I may wish and desire it) as to restrain them from demanding all
things, but they should chiefly search for Virtue: and with it they may assure
themselves that they may obtain all things, upon which I intend no longer to
particularize; for the rest are obvious, and will easily be demonstrated by Wit
and Prudence.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Nuptial Solemnities.
IT remains that I now speak concerning the Marriage Rites, in which all things
are so pleasant, so amiable, lovely, and in every respect so delightful to our
knowledge, that being hurried away by the vehemence of discourse, I had almost
omitted this one thing which was chiefly necessary to be written. I shall
(before I proceed to the other part) briefly recite a few things concerning
Marriages themselves, which being now obsolete, and in a manner forgotten, I
shall dig out of the Monuments of Antiquity; for it conduces much to the
matter concerning which we now treat to ponder diligently in our minds, what
those ancient wise Men thought concerning the pomp and splendor of Marriages,
whom even herein we seem for the greatest part to imitate; concerning which
many things ingeniously are, and more may be taught, the regard whereof is not
to be neglected: because that being representations of the greatest matters, we
believe them judiciously instituted. Therefore lest perchance any one should
demand of me in these commentaries in what manner he should bring home his
chosen Wife, I shall subjoin some few things collected out of the ancient
Annals. I determine to take my beginning from God, from whom Reason has
prescribed Learned Persons, Necessity the Barbarians, Custom the Gentiles, and
Nature it self has in a manner instructed us to begin. At the first therefore
the Ancients solemnized those most holy things with a certain care, that God
himself might more openly and evidently be a witness of that most holy
Covenant. Where, as with us the immortal God, and at Athens Hymenaeus, so at
Rome Thalassius was invocated that the Marriage might be good, happy,
prosperous, and fortunate; For Thalassius that much esteemed young Man, and one
of the most dear fellow Soldiers of Romulus, and excelling in the glory of a
Warlike praise, was the discourse, love, and delight of all Men: for at the
Rape of the Sabines a certain most excellent Virgin, although she was preserved
by his Authority, was snatched away from him by his almost unknown Companions;
but the amiable and popular commemoration of Thalassius delivered her from that
imminent peril: with whom when he was happily married, the Custom of invocating
him was introduced in Nuptials. Therefore (that my discourse may return from
whence I digressed) there is such an efficacy, such an union in this Nuptial
Compact, that the illustrious duty to Parents is obscured by the splendor of
this alliance; for the husband may, as well by the Authority of the Ancients as
of our Religion, so confine his Affections to the love of his wife, that
(others being omitted) he may esteem, delight in, and please her. Hither refers
that most grave witness Homer, who asserts, that Hector although he could
undauntedly sustain the loss of his Parents, Brethren, and lastly of his
Country, yet he could not bear the thoughts of the future dangers of Andromache
his well deserving wife. Herein Barbarus that most valiant Hero is so meek and
so mild, that verily he may be thought to have been another person: For being
exalted with the glory of his past actions, he anxiously, pensively, and sadly
complained, nothing concerning his own, many things concerning the event of his
wife. Therefore, lest I be tedious, we will acquiesce in this one Example; for
truly the frequent (and many more than I wish) Examples hereof every where,
which are often unworthily compacted, do asperse the Authors with many stains
of infamy. I omit now the Garlands wherewith both the Spouse and the Post^ were
wont to be adorned. I now pass by the Furniture and other Preparations, which
as herein I do not disapprove, so I judge them accommodated to magnificence. It
was a Custom, that those Fingers of the wife should be adorned with Gold Rings,
which were next to the little Fingers of the left hand, whence it is believed
that they are called Ring Fingers, that it might be a perpetual monument before
their Eyes of great love to their Husbands; for from those Fingers (as some
Authors affirm) some particular Nerves extend themselves to the heart. It was a
Custom that water and fire should be carried before the Bride, and that she
should touch them both, that it might be evident that the wife was chiefly for
the sake of propagation of Issue: for as heat and moisture (which excel in
those Elements) are the causes of Generation; so the union of man and woman is
chiefly introduced for the propagation of Issue. Brides are wont to be careful,
lest they should touch their Husbands Threshold with their Feet, but they
enter, being carried over, that they may signify that they lose their
solicited Virginity, not voluntarily, but in a manner by compulsion; wherefore
among those Ancients it was not lawful that Virgins should be espoused as well
on certain days, as also on all the Calends dedicated to Janus, because a
violence in a manner seemed to be done to them, which then was a heinous
offense; yet at these times no Religion prohibited the Marriages of Widow;
because (as Verrius Flaccus asserts) we may on Holy Days scour old Ditches, but
we may not make new. The ignorant Heathens have dedicated the Threshold to
Janus, who lest in the first access he should seem, as it were, to be spurned
and neglected, it was the Custom to be lifted over, not to go over the
Threshold: Also on Holy Days wherein the multitude of people were entertained
with Lupercal, or Megalensian, or Circensian Sports, or with some other
spectacle, the Marriages of Virgins were prohibited; but they were permitted to
Widows. Some think that this was chiefly instituted for this reason, that
Virgins might observe those days, remembering that the Sabines were ravished
upon a day of Sports; which matter attracted much dishonor, and was the
beginning of a grievous and perilous War: But it was not prohibited to Widows,
or to them who were divorced, for they had no cause to blush, if (their former
Husbands being either dead or living) all the people were absent, being
attentive in the Theater whilst they celebrated their Nuptials.

It is expedient (if our Estates will permit) that our Marriages be splendid,
neither should we deprive them of this part of praise; for many worthy persons
have applauded Banquets, and the Sports of Gladiators, and the preparations of
Pastimes for the people; with which Theophrastus was so pleased, that he termed
the Expenses of this sort, which appertained to the entertainment of the
multitude, the most delightful product of riches. Why should I now mention Q
Mulius, C. Appius, Hortensius Syllanus, P. Lentulus, Scaurus, Pompey, those
Crassus's and Lucilius's, who delightfully ended the Curule Office with the
most magnificent Festivals and Solemnities? which yet have been and are
reproved by many most grave persons: But I can find none who disapprove the
splendor of Nuptials, many who approve it. Aristotle, that most learned
person, who is wont to be styled the principal and chief of the Philosophers,
in those Books which he has written concerning Manners, approves this kind of
magnificence even in the best men. That excellent person and most famous
Philosopher, Manuel Chrysoloras, espoused to a Wife his most learned Nephew,
and that most excellent Gentleman, John; for whose Nuptials when there was a
most splendid preparation, and therefore the dignity of that grave Philosopher
was reproached by one of his Familiars, he said, O ye Gods grant better things,
it is permitted us to be magnificently joyful in the most delightful things,
and unless we be injurious to our Neighbors, that splendor which is suitable
to the dignity of our Family can no where be omitted. Why should we say more?
the matter it self, which always avails most, speaks for it self, and needs
not a longer discourse: But large Banquets, which elsewhere are disapproved,
here they are not disliked. Moreover we know that the Custom of the Sabines was
to introduce pleasant discourse, that no occasion may be omitted of
exhilarating body and mind; for the same reason Stage Players were admitted,
who were so much esteemed in the City of Rome, that, all the Masters of that
Art being dead, they sent for Players out of Hetruria, that most flourishing
Province of Italy; of whom he who was the eldest, and most skilful in his Art,
was called Histrus (as Claudius Ruffus relates) from whom afterward all the
other were termed Histriones, as the Epicureans, Pythagoreans, and Gnathons,
are so nominated from their Authors. It is most certain, that Neighbors and
Kindred were invited to Marriages, both in the former, and our Age, that all,
to whom either the honor or the pleasure of the Nuptials should extend, might
rejoice with them. Solon (one of the seven Wise men) instituted, that when a
Wife is joined to her Husband, she should eat a Quince, that he might in a
manner signify, that the sweet voice and pleasant speech of the Wife should be
approved by the Husband. A Bridegroom when he enters the Bridal Bed, to
complete the Marriage Rites the Brides face is hidden under a Vail, and the
Bridegroom embraces her in the dark, Venus being the Bride-maid; and having
laid himself on his Brides lap, expects a pleasant sleep; which we conjecture
to be appointed, lest her Virgin-like modesty should more obstinately resist
his lawful embraces than is meet; and lest any sadness should intervene in that
most joyful Solemnity, they had a Custom to scatter Nuts, that the great
multitude might not hear the cries which the Bride utters either for grief or
modesty, for the Childrens earnestness in gathering and cracking their Nuts.
Many things restrain me from proceeding farther upon this subject. First, lest,
if I should relate these things more largely, I should offend your ears, which,
when you have applied your mind, care, and endeavor to these excellent Studies
of humanity, nothing but an innocent speech, and a grave discourse, and well
composed things can satisfy. Moreover, because I think I have said enough
courteously to admonish our young men, wherein they may imitate those Ancients
whose Virtues are illustrated in Authors, and resemble them as well in other
things, as chiefly in this, as much as the sanctity of our Religion permits.
Which that I may more easily concede to them, I have not discoursed of all
things; but that alsot variety it self may be added to the benefi hereof, out
of many things I have assigned a few to this matter. Therefore I cease not to
exhort them that they pay the greatest gratitude to those Ancients, by whose
vigilance and writings (unless they be deficient to themselves) they will both
be advantaged themselves, and will obtain better instructed Wives, and more
ornate Nuptials.

Enough of these things, let us come to greater matters.

DIRECTIONS FOR Love and Marriage. BOOK II.
Concerning the duty of a Wife.
THE next thing is that we should diligently consider that point, (viz. the
Wives duty) to which long since our discourse did tend; for this second place
is appointed for it in the first Book; for so I promised that I would first
treat concerning the choice, afterward concerning the duty of a Wife: this is
the remaining part, this action remains, in which if wives, either of their own
accord, or by the precepts of their Husbands, shall obey me, no body will be so
unjust a Judge of things, but may think that I have so established the wives
duty, that the young persons may enjoy a secure tranquillity and repose
through the whole course of their lives. Therefore there are three things which
being well performed by the wife make the marriage most laudable and admirable;
love to her Husband, Modesty of Life, and a great and diligent care of the
domestic affairs: we will explain the former, but first we will say some
things concerning the facility of obedience, which should be her guide and
assistant, than which nothing is more acceptable, nothing is more desired;
which those most wise ancients well considered, by whom it was instituted, that
when a Sacrifice was offered to Juno (who was called Gamelia from her
government of marriages) the gall was taken out of the victime; that they might
wisely admonish, as it were by Laws, that all contention and anger should be
excluded from the conjugal state: wherefore the answer of a Spartan woman is
approved by many learned men; for when she was provoked by the slanderous
reproaches of a certain doting old Woman against her Husband, she said,
Mischief light on thee! when I was but a Child I learnt to obey my Parents, now
it is chiefly necessary for me to obey my Husband, if I will be what I ought to
be; for a Husband may command, to whose will it is most fit that the Wife
conform her manners. Wherefore Gorgon may deservedly be blamed, who, being
asked whether or no she would go to her Husband, said, no truly, but let him
come to me. Cyrus that great Person and Emperor, said to his Soldiers, that
if their Enemies should clamorously assault them, they should silently sustain
their fury; but, on the contrary, if they were silent, that they should engage
with them with noise and shouting: So we instruct Wives, if their Husbands
being angry shall more severely chide them, than their Ears have been
accustomed to endure, let them silently sustain their wrath; but if grief makes
them silent, they may speak, to excite, exhort, comfort, and please their
Husbands, with sweet and affectionate discourses. They who are conversant with
Elephants do not wear white Garments, nor they red who are with wild Oxen; for
by such colors those Beasts are more and more enraged. Many Authors assert
that Tigers are disquieted with Bells, and greatly disturbed therewith: So it
is expedient to exhort Wives; for truly if any Garment shall seem offensive to
their Husbands, we advise them to abstain from it; that they may not disagree
with some Husbands, they must live mildly and pleasingly: I think that the Ears
defenses (for so they are called, from covering the Ears) to be far more
necessary for Wives than Wrestlers; for these, their Ears only are liable to
blows, but Bills of Divorce, accompanied with grievous Ignominy, are obvious to
the others; wherefore they must be very careful not to entertain suspicion,
jealousy, and anger by the conveyance of their Ears: to which matter it
conduces much, if we imitate the prudence of King Alexander, for he when any
one was calumniated to him was wont always to stop one of his Ears that he
might afterward open it to him who desired to defend himself: truly Hermione
seems to relate the truth, who acknowledges, and apparently testifies, that
she was ruined by wicked Women, with whom she was familiar: Wives therefore if
at any time they fall into suspicions, let them not regard slanderous Women,
let their Ears be stopped, let mutterings be exploded, neither (as the Proverb
says) let Fire be added to Fire: let them learn and discourse of the
expression of Philip that most famous King, he, some of his Family sometimes
urging him to be more greatly angry with the Grecians, who althou^h they had
received many benefits from him, yet they slandered and reproached him, said,
What will they do then if we also injure them? In like manner when seditious
Women say, Your Husband little esteems you, who are affectionate and most
loving to him; the Wife should answer, What if with my modesty I should forsake
my chastity, and with my love should wittingly and willingly withdraw from him
my great observance toward him?

A certain Master found a Fugitive Servant in a House of Correction, and as if
he had now been punished enough, he said, Where had I rather find thee than in
this very place? A Wife, who is grievous to her Husband by reason of her
jealousy, and thinks and considers of a Divorce, I would she would so think
with her self; Where will a Whore, (whom I always hate) be more joyful and
fortunate, than if she shall see me almost Shipwracked, whilst in the mean
time, she, Sailing with prosperous Winds, securely casts Anchor in my
Marriage Bed? Euripides, according to his Custom, severely chideth them who at
Supper were accustomed to use a Harp; for that sound is apt to incite anger and
sadness, rather than to recreate them who are pleasant: so I may blame those
Wives, who although, when a^ amity and concord, they often sleep with their
Husbands, yet anger intervening they lie asunder, and reject conjugal embraces,
by the delectableness and artifice whereof they might easily be reconciled.
Juno, in Homer, to whose care the Nuptial ties are committed, signifies the
same; for (if I well remember) when she spoke of Thetis and Oceanus she
professed that she would compose their differences and unite them by love and
mutual embraces. But at Rome when any difference arose between Husband and
Wife, they entered into the Temple of the appeasing Goddess, where (the
Spectators being withdrawn) having discoursed together freely, they returned
home in concord: it conduces to domestic care and peace, if a Wife shall
preserve the love of her Husband, with singular diligence. When Gorgias
Leontinus made an Oration, concerning the reconciliation of the Grecians in the
Olympic Games, which were celebrated, with the concourse of all Greece, to the
most great and most worthy Jupiter, Melanthus said, That our Orator endeavors
to persuade us, that we should all be reconciled by a League, who yet cannot
induce himself and his Wife and his Maid (three only) mutually to agree; for
his Wife was jealous, because Gorgias wonderfully loved his Maid. Philip was
long displeased with Olympias and Alexander, in the mean time Demaradus
Corinthius returned out of Greece, whom when Philip had diligently and
earnestly asked concerning the agreement of the Grecians, he said, O Philip, I
esteem it a most dishonorable thing that you should manifestly evidence your
care of the peace and concord of all Greece, when as yet you are not reconciled
to your Wife and Son: therefore if any Woman desire to regulate her Children
and Servants, in the first place she should agree with her Husband, lest she be
thought willing to imitate that which she reproves in them: that therefore by
her duty she may take care for their mutual peace and perpetual repose, she
must chiefly regard this, that she by no means disagree with her Husband. But
of these things hitherto.

CHAP. I. Concerning Conjugal Love.
NOW let us speak of conjugal love, the great efficacy and dignity whereof (as
worthy Men assure us) in a manner expresses the Pattern of a perfect
friendship; wherein I shall pass by many things, that I may speedily discourse
what is chiefly to be observed: therefore I would have a Woman love her Husband
with so great delight, faithfulness and affection, that nothing of diligence,
love and good will may be absent; and let her be so conversant with him, that
it may be most certain that nothing will be good to her, nothing pleasant,
without her Husband; indeed I conceive that Love it self will be the greatest
assistance to this matter; for in all things it is no better, nor no shorter
course to seem, than to be.

How much labor, how much industry is necessary for a slothful Husbandman to
exhibit, if he would seem skilful? How much wit, how many arts have unskilful
Physicians, horse-riders, and harpers need of, that they may seem to excel
others, if they would be employed in those things which they can least do? For
the most part many things happen whereby the eounterfeit praise of Agriculture,
Physic, Horsmanship, and Music vanishes: these persons (if they will take my
advice) shall more easily, more speedily, and more certainly attain a solid and
express repute, than if they shall suborn proclaimers of their ambitious and
feigned praise; and because in every respect truth overcomes imitation, the
Husbandman should take care to till his Field by art and labor, the Physician
to heal the distempers of men, the Horse-rider to manage his unruly Horses at
his pleasure, and the Musician so to delight with his melody, that nothing may
be more sweet, nothing more pleasant to the Ears: wherefore if Wives desire to
seem to love their Husbands cordially, let them love them in their hearts. Let
them endeavor in the first place that their Husbands may clearly perceive them
to be both pensive and joyful according to the various state of their affairs:
for both congratulation is pleasant in prosperous, and consolation is
acceptable in adverse affairs; whatsoever things are troublesome to them (so
that they be worthy to be told to a prudent person) let them mutually impart,
let them feign nothing, let them dissemble nothing, let them conceal nothing;
oftentimes sorrow and trouble of mind is mitigated by Counsel and Discourse
(which ought to be most pleasant with her Husband) he in a manner participating
and partaking of all the pressures and difficulties of all her anxieties, will
extinguish or alleviate them; but if they shall be very grievous and more
deeply fixed, she should make a truce with her sorrows even so long, as will be
expedient for her to desire the private society of her Husband: finally I would
that Wives should so live with their Husbands, that in a manner they might be
of one mind, and if it could be done (as Pythagoras would have it in
friendship) that two should become one. That this might more easily be
effected, the Cretenses (who now for many Ages have been under our Dominion)
permitted their daughters to be married to none but those to whom the Virgins
themselves had expressed signs of love: for they believed, that those would be
more beloved by their Wives, who were beloved even before the Nuptial Union;
for they affirm that it is appointed by Nature and approved by Custom, that all
actions (besides a very few) are done in a course of time; for neither when we
touch the fire are we presently burned, nor does wood thrown into the fire
instantly flame; wherefore they think it necessary for them, that (as in the
loving of Friends, so also) in Husbands they should judiciously choose the
resemblance of their own minds; for they believe that they can neither be
rightly known, nor ardently loved on a sudden. Let them consider how much this
Custom should be approved. But truly it will not be denied to be accommodated
to the concord and constancy of love. Neither may I pass by those in silence,
who by amorous Potions and love Enchantments extort their Husbands love, whom I
am wont to compare to Fishers, who render the Fishes taken by poison (as they
use to do in some places of Hetruria) insipid and almost useless: Also they
seem like Travelers who had rather lead the blind, than follow them who see:
Therefore mutual love should be diligently and voluntarily acquired, preserved,
and augmented.

These things are illustrated by the lives and most noble actions of Women; in
the imitation whereof Panthia making trial of her self, and the constancy of
her virtue and love, wonderfully loved and delighted in her Husband Abradatus
Prince of Susa, and being a Captive preserved her Faith to him, and made Cyrus
his Friend, and did not riotously wasted, but employed all her riches, all her
treasures in adorning him; he fighting most valiantly against the Egyptians,
the Associates of Croesus, both that he might be grateful to Cyrus, and might
seem a Husband worthy of Panthia his Wife, he generously dyed, having performed
the duty of a valiant Commander and stout Soldier; whose Obsequies that she
might most nobly celebrate, she slew her self upon his dead body, sought with
singular diligence. Cassandane so loved Cyrus, that when she dyed it was more
grievous to her to depart from Cyrus than from her life; wherefore Cyrus, lest
he should be an ungrateful Husband, lamented her a long time after her death,
and for her honors sake, commanded all those whom he governed to mourn.
Themistocles his Wife loved him so well, that she was believed to think of
nothing but the affection and love of her Husband; whereby it came to pass,
that that most famous Governor of Grecia might yield to her in all things, and
it may be truly said, that she could do more than the other Grecians of her
time; for whatsoever she desired, the same Themistocles did desire; whatsoever
Themistocles, that the Athenians wished; whatsoever the Athenians, that all
Grecia desired. Thesta, the Sister of Dionysius the elder, was married to
Polyxenus; he afterward being offended by the Tyrant fled for fear out of
Sicily; Dionysius calls for his Sister, and blames her because she knowing of
her Husbands flight, did not acquaint him therewith; Thesta, relying upon her
constancy and singular virtue, answered, O Dionysius do you think me such a
vile and base Woman, that if I had known of my Husbands flight, I would have
refused to have been a Companion and partaker of his Fortune? it would truly
have been more acceptable to me to be called Polyxenus his Wife, though
banished, than the Sister of Dionysius the Tyrant. The Syracusians admiring her
noble mind, after the Tyrants were expelled, dignified her with Royal Honors;
and when she was dead, all ranks, all sorts of people, and finally all the
Syracusians were present at her Funeral Solemnities. Armenia the Wife of
Tigranes is a noble Example to Women, for truly in that Expedition which Cyrus
made against the Assyrians, being by no means able to endure the absence of her
Husband, she followed him with a most willing mind every where, as an unwearied
Companion through so great perils. Andromache, in Homer, how much she is
delighted with her Hector, upon whom she placed all her love, she even declares
by this expression; You are my only Father, reverend Mother, and sweet Brother,
and Husband, in all respects amiable: At length being distracted by reason of
his death, she wildly runs through the multitude and views the Walls. Cania, an
excellent Woman, has obtained a commemoration of her Virtue in this place (for
although the narration thereof will be long, yet the dignity, novelty, and
variety, will be pleasant, both to you, and to those who shall peruse these
things) whose remarkable Enterprise we will begin to relate more copiously.
Sinatus and Sinorix united in Kindred to each other undoubtedly excelled the
other Tetrarchs of France in puissance, renown, and glory: of whom Sinatus
espoused Cania, who not only excelled in beauty of Body, but also in singular
Virtue; she, being endued with chastity, goodness, prudence, and magnanimity,
obliged the hearts of all Persons to her self with a certain admirable love:
The Priesthood of Diana (whom the French especially worship) rendered her more
famous, in which both for the sake of her own and her Ancestors dignity, she
had the chief Authority; for at the Sacrifices being always exceedingly adorned
she attracted the Eyes of all upon her self: First Sinorix began to love her
fervently, afterward he intends the death of his Kinsman, because he feared
that whilst the other was safe, his desires could not be effected, therefore
that wicked Man, blinded with the great love of his Mistress, privately slays
the negligent Sinatus: Not long after he earnestly desires to Marry Cania, who,
courageously sustaining the misfortune of her Husband, vehemently endeavored,
and prudently expected an occasion and opportunity to revenge the wicked Fact
of Sinorix. Sinorix urges that the Marriage (indeed deadly) may be
accomplished; he alleges honest causes of his mistake (if we may think that
honest which is contaminated with the greatest wickedness) at the first Cania
rejects his entreaties, afterward her Relations, (that they might for ever
oblige that most potent Prince to themselves) earnestly urge her to be content
to Marry him; then, as if persuaded, she promises that she would, and
henceforth she entertains familiarly the young Man that was brought to her, and
they entered together the Temple of Diana, that (that French Goddess being
witness) their Covenant and Promise might be established: afterward
deliberately taking a Cup in her Hands she first drinks, the remainder she gave
to Sinorix to drink; but there was in the Cup Metheglin mixed with Poison,
which when she perceived Sinorix had drunk she manifested her joy by her Eyes,
Countenace, and Forehead, and turning to the Image of Diana, she spoke after
this manner, O Divine Parent, I call you to witness, that I would not have
survived Sinatus (in good truth) for the love of life (which being retained
indeed afflicted me with sorrows, but being laid down may deliver me from
troubles) but that I determined to live to atchieve the transactions of this
day; nor that I should have perceived any pleasure in my life after the Funeral
of my Husband, which was mournful to me, and lamentable to his Country, unless
a certain hope of revenge had now and then comforted me; which being now
effected, I now willingly descend to my dearest and best Husband Sinatus; O
most cruel Sinorix, instead of Marriage Beds and Nuptials, Sepulchers may be
prepared for you: a little while after, when as now the Poison had largely
spread it self through their Bodies, Sinorix first, then Cania died. Stratonica
so loved her Husband Dejotarus that she thought that nothing appertained to
her, but how she should fulfill his will and therefore she greatly grieved (or
rather lamented) to see Dejotarus afflicted, because he perceived that he
neither had issue by her, nor that she could succeed him in the Kingdom; she
therefore of her own accord provides a woman comely in countenance and manners
(called Electra) and persuades, desires, and urges her Husband (who admired the
affection and constancy of his Wife) to a privacy with her: Afterward she took
care of, educated, and most honorably governed the Children begotten of her,
even as her own. I should be too tedious if I should repeat the earnest
affection of Tertia Emilia to P. Cornelius Scipio, or if I should remember the
exceeding great love of Julia Porcia, Artemisia, Hipsicratea, and the other
Examples of lawful love, which are obvious to all who are conversant in
History. There are also many things which might be given in precept, concerning
the love of Wives, which we purposely omit; for we wholly confide to their
ingenuity, both that of their own accord they will find out how they should
esteem, and also diligently and exactly love their Husbands. Yet those things
which they shall discover, we hope will be little different from those Precepts
whereof we have discoursed.

CHAP. II. Concerning the moderation of a Wife.
THe remaining part is concerning Moderation, from which most often a perpetual
love between Man and Wife is begun, kept, and preserved. This ornament is not
only most pleasing to Husbands, but also it seems most noble to all who hear
thereof. Moderation in a Wife is believed chiefly to consist in her
countenance, behavior, apparel, food, and embraces, of which we will briefly
treat, if we any way understand them either by our own invention or learning or
experience, and we will speak of the two former things together, which are
almost of the same nature. Above all things the countenance is the most certain
Image of the mind, which is in no living creature but in man, that he may
esteem those indications of an honest, comely, and abstemious mind: for in it
the manners which nature has otherwise wholly hidden are easily discovered. It
truly declares and shows many other things without Speech: for by the
countenance, and manner of walking, the disposition of the mind may be known.
Also in mute creatures we perceive Anger, Joy, and such sort of passions as
well by other signs of the Body, as by their Eyes, which by their motion
testify and clearly manifest how their minds are affected; whence chiefly many
depending upon the lineaments of the face have given precepts to discover the
nature of every one: but I too much digress. Therefore I would have Wives
clearly evidence their modesty in all places and at all times. They may perform
this by observing an equality and gravity in their Eyes in their Walking, and
finally in the motion of their whole Body: for the wandering of the Eyes, hasty
manner of going, and the overmuch motion of the hands, and of all the other
parts of the body, cannot be done without disgrace, and are always joined with
vanity and a great signification of levity. Wherefore they should be careful
that their forehead, countenance, and gesture (whereby we penetrate with a
judicious observation into the most secret affections) be applied to the
observance of decency: for by their diligence herein they may acquire delight
and honor, but by negligence they cannot avoid disquiets and censures. Yet I
would by no means have her face to be unpleasant, because neither her aspect
should seem rough but mild, neither should the motion of her body seem light
but pleasantly grave. I earnestly give this in precept, that she forbear
immoderate laughter, which being undecent in all persons is certainly most
hateful in a Woman: Although when there happens facetious Jests they are not to
be blamed, if they do somewhat deviate from a serious gesture by a modest
laughter. Demosthenes was wont to compose his deportment at home in a
Looking-Glass, that by his Eyes he might judge what he should do and what he
should avoid in the earnestness of his Oratory. We may well apply this to the
concern of a Wife. I wish they would daily consider and think what the dignity
and gravity of a Wife requires, lest they should be deficient in a comely
deportment. We know that the Spartan Wives were wont to go with their Faces
covered; but the Virgins with their Faces uncovered; whereof Carillus the
Lacedemonian being asked, he answered, Our Ancestors permitted this liberty to
young Virgins that they might get Husbands, but prohibited it to married Women,
that they might understand that it belonged not to them to seek Husbands, but
to preserve and keep those which they had. Which Custom indeed our Cretenses
allow, who permit their young Virgins to stand at their doors and sing; and by
many other ways to jest and play with their Woers. But they who are married (as
they who are dedicated to the holy services of Vesta) should stay at home, they
should scarce ever go abroad, so that in a manner it may seem unlawful for them
to behold other men. Who will not affirm, that they might extract such a Custom
from Xenophon? Who how much he would have the Women's aspects to be restrained,
is evidently perceived: For when Tigranes returned home together with his
Parents and his most loving Wife Armenia, from Cyrus, others applauding as well
his shape as manners, and magnitude of body, and beauty, Tigranes asked Armenia
what she thought of the beauty of Cyrus; but Armenia calling the immortal Gods
to witness, said, I never withdrew my eyes from you, therefore what the beauty
or shape of Cyrus is, I am altogether ignorant. That of Gorgias concords
hereto, who would have them shut up at home, so that nothing might be known of
them beside report. But Thucydides thought not this fit to be allowed of; for
he declares her to be the best Wife of whose praise or dispraise the least
report is disperied. But we who follow a mediocrity do establish more free Laws
for them: For they are not to be confined in their Bed-chambers, as in Prisons;
but they should so go abroad, that this liberty which we allow them may be an
evidence of their Virtue and Chastity: Yet Wives should far otherwise comport
themselves to their Husbands, than the Moon to the Sun, for when it is nigh to
the Sun it is never discerned, but being at a distance from it, appears every
where resplendent; therefore I would have them to be seen in the presence of
their Husbands, but in their absence they should be retired at home. Wherefore
they should retain an honest decency in their eyes (whereof we have a most
lively perception even in a Picture, which is called a tacit Poetry) and in
the motion of the head, and in the other demeanours of their bodies. I have
discoursed concerning the countenance and gesture, now I shall treat concerning
their speech.

CHAP. III. Concerning the speech and silence of Women.
I Socrates exhorts men to speak either those things which they certainly
know, or which, with their honor, they cannot conceal: We enjoin women to
concede the former as proper to men, but they may believe the latter also
common to themselves; in whom loquacity cannot be enough reproved, by the most
prudent and learned persons, nor taciturnity sufficiently applauded. Whence by
the excellent Institutes of the Romans it was prohibited them to plead public
or private Causes; from which when both Amasia, and Affrania, and Hortensia,
deviated, it was reproved, blamed, and rebuked in their Annals. Marcus Cato the
elder when he observed the Roman women, contrary to the order of Nature, and
the modesty of the Female Sex, sometimes to be conversant in the Courts of
Judicature, and ambitiously to pursue honor, and to discourse with Strangers,
he inveighed against, reproved, and restrained them, as the honor of that most
grave Citizen and of that Empire required. We know that the Pythagoreans were
commanded to be silent for no less a time than two years at their first
entrance, lest (which is a shameful thing) they should seem to be circumvented,
deceived, and to err, or lest that they should obstinately defend that which
as yet they had not perfectly comprehended: But we appoint to Wives a perpetual
time and space of silence, wheresoever any access to levity, dishonesty, and
impudence shall appear; being spoken to, they should answer most modestly to
their familiar Friends, and make them civil salutations, and they should so
briefly dispatch those things which place and occasion shall offer, that they
may rather be thought to be provoked to, than to provoke discourse; they should
also endeavor to be rather praised for a discreet brevity, than an eloquent
prolixity of speech. Theano, when she put forth her hand to take her Mantle, a
certain young man turning to his Companions, said, How handsome is that Arm! to
whom she answered, It is not a common one. Wherefore it is expedient, that not
only the arms, but indeed the discourses of a woman should not be common; for
the speech of such a woman is not less to be feared, than the nakedness of the
body; truly they must avoid the converse of Strangers, whereby they are wont to
discover their manners and affections with great facility; silence also is
often commended in the most excellent persons. Pindarus highly extols that most
excellent Prince of Greece, Epaminondas, because knowing much he said little;
for he herein (as in many other things) observed the excellent dictates of
Nature, who, being the director of life, evidently demonstrates her thoughts o
silence; for she has prudently bestowed on us two Ears, and but one Tongue,
guarded indeed with the double defense of Lips and Teeth; for this is chiefly
granted to us (as Theophrastus and many learned men say) because that property
placed in us produces the best and most pleasant fruits, whereas Foundations
of Knowledge often, most often of ignorance are laid through the other senses
Nature has granted to us, as Agents* and Officers: yet a certain Citizen of
ours (whom for the present I need not name to you) commends silence only in
those, by whom neither applause can be obtained by wit, nor authority by
prudence, nor repute by their ornate orations; whom I am wont to answer, that
the chiefest considerations in every respect are to be referred as well to the
persons and places as to the times; for if I should grant, according to his
Opinion, that it were sometimes expedient for men, yet I should judge it, for
the most part, repugnant to the modesty, gravity and stability of a Wife:
wherefore Sophocles (in my Opinion truly not worse than this Citizen of whom I
now speak, all men affirm him to be better) has termed silence a singular
ornament in Women: therefore they should think that they shall obtain the glory
of Eloquence, if they adorn themselves with the famous ornament of silence; for
neither the praise of a declamatory Play, nor the applause and flattery of an
Oration, but an eloquent, and well behaved, and grave silence is required of
them. But what do I do? I must take heed, especially since I treat of silence,
lest perchance I seem to thee too talkative.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Apparel and Attire of a Wife.
IT remains that we discourse concerning the apparel, and the other attire of
the Body, the proportion whereof being neglected, not only the Matrimony, but
oftentimes the Patrimony is destroyed; all evidence this to me, who are careful
in considering these things: but if the never enough praised mediocrity shall
delight them, and if they shall approve themselves to be modest, they will both
provide for their domestic wealth, and otherwise in a manner, instruct the
whole City: in this place that worthy precept should be most esteemed, that
they should be careful in this matter of splendor, rather to shun ignominy,
than to acquire applause; for those who are nobly born (if their estates
permit) should not wear mean and despicable garments: truly we judge that this
is chiefly to be referred to the regard of the Estate, and Place, and Person,
and Time. Who can without-laughter behold a Pope clothed in a Soldiers habit,
or one wearing a Senators Garment in a School, or one in a Gown at a Horse
race? But yet neither one who is too curious, nor one who is very negligent
shall be approved, but they who shall observe a decency in their Habits; for
first an over great indulgence herein argues much vanity; moreover it is wont
to evidence and to occasion a deviation from their Husbands to other Lovers.
King Cyrus may be an Example to our Women, that they should not with so much
earnestness seek costly Attire for themselves, who truly seemed, as well for
his admirable wisdom, as for the splendor of his moderation, correspondent to
his noble Name; for in the Persian Language the Sun is called Cyrus: To whose
Uncle Cyaxares Ambassadors came from an Indian King to treat of Peace with the
Assyrians, to whom that he might show himself with the choicest of his Army, he
sent order to his General Cyrus to appear very speedily with all his Troops in
the Royal Palace-yard, and the most large Marketplace; he obeyed the Command,
and having put on a slight Garment, he came both with discipline and valor,
and admirable celerity, although Cyaxares had sent him a Purple Robe and a
precious Chain, and other Ornaments, that that Nephew and General of the King
might be more adorned and splendid; but Cyrus magnanimously contemned all these
things, and seemed sufficiently adorned both to himself and others, when like a
warlike person he was perceived to arrive with his well disciplined Army almost
as soon as the Royal Pursuivant was returned to Cyaxares: So a disesteem of
such Apparel will be a great honor to Wives. Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily
gave two most precious Garments to Lysander, that his Daughters might be more
adorned; they having refused them, Lysander commanded them to be returned to
Dionysius, saying, that his Daughters would be more ornate without them. Julia
the Daughter of Augustus Caesar imagining that her gorgeous Attire was
sometimes offensive to her Father, the next day having put on ordinary Habit,
she came to see and to pay her duty to her Father; which when Caesar greatly
approved, she then acknowledged that she then indeed sought Attire pleasing to
the Eyes of her Father, but before of her Husband Agrippa. Every one may think
as he will, yet I believe that others are chiefly esteemed, and that all those
vain Ornaments are delighted in, rather that they may, by so great care and
vigilance, please others, than their Husbands; for these things are disregarded
at home, but abroad this Ruiner of our Estates cannot be sufficiently decked
nor adorned. Truly variety of precious Garments is seldom useful, but often
grievous to Husbands; yet they are always pleasing to Lovers, for whose sake
these things are invented. I am wont to compare those who allow these
superfluous Ornaments to their Wives, to them, who appear so splendid, and have
such pleasant Houses, that although they omit necessary expenses within their
Houses, yet their exterior form will seem glorious, and their Houses delectable
to their Neighbors and to Passengers; they are also like to unskilful, but
rich, Barbers to whom young men never go but to be trimmed; neither are their
Ivory and curiously polished Looking-Glasses advantageous, but rather
troublesome to them, when they may daily see and behold, to their great grief,
most noble young men in their neighboring Barbers Shops: Also this most
sumptuous Attire, this most magnificent splendor, this most luxurious Apparel
makes it most pleasant to them to frequent Porches, Entries, and Walks, and
very often to ramble through the whole City: Wherefore most wisely it was
prohibited the Egyptian Women to wear fine Shoes, that they might be restrained
from wandering. Truly if we take away from most Women their precious Ornaments,
they will voluntarily and willingly stay at home: Yet I think this Custom (for
as much as it is so much degenerated) should be imitated, to adorn them (if our
Estates will permit) with Gold, Jewels, and Pearls; for such signs rather of a
rich, than luxurious Woman, rather evidence the magnificence of the Husband,
than ensnare wanton Eyes. I omit that this sort of riches is more durable, and
portends less danger of indigence, than the other; they may often also, with
greater facility, be great assistants to both private and public Affairs: Who
is ignorant how advantageous this sort of magnificence was in time past to the
Romans? out of which, in the most grievous Punick War, the City raised money,
(which the Ancients termed the sinews of War) by the Appian Law: yet I Judge
that it is fit for them not to allow themselves so great a liberty in these
things as those Laws permitted. Wherefore I would have them to abstain from a
too licentious Apparel and other Attire of the body, that it may be thought
that they are not restrained from it by necessity, but deserve the reward of
praise for refusing what they might have had. This shall suffice concerning
Apparel.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Food of a Wife.
NOW we shall discourse concerning Food, wherein all who consider these things
do accord with me that there is the greatest efficacy in every respect. Who
doubts that the strength of Virtue is truly enervated and destroyed by those
Luxuries, wherein the multitude believe they may live delightfully? What
severity is so great which in a short time cannot be corrupted? Who is so
involved in ensuality that he cannot by sobriety, care, and vigilance, acquire
the pleasure and praise of a moderate life? That therefore Wives may be
deficient in no part of modesty, I would have them to be careful chiefly to
abstain from these things whereby sensuality is wont to be generated,
established, and increased: The holy Virgins were instructed by the best and
most prudent persons to watchings, and to abstain from meat and drink, lest
luxury should stain their pure thoughts, and debilitate their firm minds. In
time past the use of Wine was unknown to the Roman Women, and now also is
prohibited to the Syrians and Persians; which that it might more easily be
discovered by observation, a Kiss was appointed at Rome amongst Kindred, that
the smell might be an argument against those who were intemperate; but those
Women who transgressed the Law, not only were deservedly accounted infamous,
but (as Cato asserts) it was the Law that they should be grievously fined; for
this kind of intemperance very often allures and induces to unlawful pleasures:
Whence wisely some Heathens placed together the Images of Bacchus and Venus in
the same Temple, that they who came with an earnest desire to see the Image of
Venus, might first honor the Statue of Bacchus; truly the minds and spirits of
such persons being become impotent can think of nothing that is difficult,
remember nothing honorable, nor understand any thing divine, but being void of
judgment and reason, they through a certain inclination of their Senses
conceive that to be their chiefest good, which (as Cicero writes) if brutes
could speak they would call sensuality. Cyrus easily overthrew the preparations
of Spargapises the Son of Tomyres with his most excellent Army, extinguished
his ardour, and repressed his boldness, when he, being valiant and prepared,
chased, ensnared, and put to flight Spargapises (weakened with riotous
Banquettings and Wine) from his Enterprise. Did not the effeminacies of Capua
more debilitate the strength of Hannibal, than the slaughter of Canna consumed
the Romans? What need we Examples? Unless a most moderate care of their Food
shall be their conduct, the shipwracked mind having forsaken the limits of
temperance, will be precipitated into ruin. Of so many kinds and natural
inclinations of people, there is scarce any, who if he was delicately educated
in a voluptuous obscurity, could attain to even so much as a counterfeit
moderation, or the appearance of a decent deportment. They who follow the
guidance of Nature are content with a little; but they who pursue delights with
a certain sumptuous satiety, always desire that which is immense and infinite.
I am pleased with the frugality of that Lacon, who having got little Fishes,
gave them to the Cook to be dressed; the Cook according to his Custom desires
Cheese, Oil, Vinegar, and many other things, that they might be seasoned more
deliciously; to whom Lacon said, if I had those things which you demand, I
should have no need of the little Fishes. Filthy lust and unchaste embraces not
only attend upon, but also eagerly pursue Alexandrian delights, and Syracusian
Feasts. Most excellently the Lacedaemonians, that they might manifest to their
Wives and Children the deformity of intemperate drinking, exhibited drunken
Servants at their Banquets, where when according to their Custom, they had, by
their follies, attracted the Eyes of all the Spectators upon themselves, they
not only seemed worthy of pity, but also they seemed miserable and unhappy;
neither do I believe that those famous persons were delighted with the miseries
of those Servants, but they judged whatsoever was filthy in them would be
detestable in Freemen: So Wives should exactly observe drunken Maidservants,
that they may consider what they should chiefly avoid; for although (as Homer
says) Wine unto wearied bodies a great vigor gives; yet being taken
immoderately, it both renders the Mind feeble, and leaves the Senses decayed to
old age; for the excellency of its ardour causes that that heat which Nature
has bestowed on us being vanquished by a more violent force is not maturely
but suddenly consumed. How much also that dangerous and unruly vapor impedes
the perception of affairs, is evident, for truly as their opinions are not
rational, so they can neither argue, nor refute, nor well discourse. Why should
I say more? The Poets report, that very many, by this matter chiefly, have of
Men become Swine, Asses, and Lions; which that it may be avoided, they must be
so much more diligently careful, because both by the stupidity of their wit,
and vacation from weighty Affairs (as Aristotle evidenceth to us) they are more
propense to these kinds of Vices; also the disposition of the Mother, and the
moderation of her life, will be an aid to the Children, to whom all these
things for the greatest part are declared. Therefore Diogenes, very aptly, when
he beheld a drunken Boy, said, Drunken Parents begat you. How much the
education of a temperate Mother may avail them when born, we will a little
after discourse. Therefore we ought to admonish and exhort our Wives to follow
the instinct of Nature, and to disesteem and reject sensual pleasures (within
whose Dominion Virtue can by no means consist) and rather to approve and
imitate the frugal Tables of Lucretia, than the sumptuous delicacies of the
Tarquins, and of Cleopatra; whereby they will provide for both their own
honor, and for their Children, to whom they owe all things. Now in its place
we will briefly treat concerning Congress.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the regulation of Congress.
SO truly the matter is, that what rules of meat and drink, such a proportion
of congress should in a manner be observed: for truly congress it self
follows the rules of life) as a young Chicken her dam; and this may be
unodrstood by many reasons and examples: we cannot, in this place, begin more
wisely and more aptly to the purpose of our discourse than from nature it self,
that we may briefly declare whatsoever we think. First indeed, because the
union of Man and Wife (as we have above said) was chiefly ordained and ought to
be esteemed for the sake of Children, they must use conjugal embraces chiefly
with the hope of propagating Issue; we sufficiently understand and perceive
what manner of nature there is in most Beasts, which for this reason has
appointed them certain Laws of Congress, that the mortal kinds of living
creatures might in a manner be rendered immortal by a perpetual succession;
wherein they may be examples to us (to whom a more free and noble desire is
given) that we should not mutually embrace for the sake of pleasure, but of
generating Issue; wherefore we admonish (that I may use the words of Julia the
daughter of Augustus) that when a Ship is full, they admit no other passenger;
neither therefore should they think Beasts are chiefly upon that account
Beasts, because never when great with young, but always for the sake of
generation, they exhibit their Venereal Appetites; but if Women shall pass
these limits, even at least let them govern themselves so that they may be, and
be accounted, modest in this part of moderation, from which modesty is
nominated, to which matter we think it may chiefly conduce, if, at the first,
Husbands shall accustom them to seem to be helpers, not of lust, but of
necessity: but they should so evidence their Nuptial Honor and Modesty, that
in their congress decency may accompany their embraces, lest by their avidity,
and immodesty, they be both defective in their Honor, and also less acceptable
to their tacit Husbands. Herodotus writes that Women lay aside their Modesty
together with their inner garments; if they embrace adulterers, we plainly
confess it, but if their Husbands, they will always observe a decency. When a
certain Woman was drawn by force from the presence of Philip because of her
lust and fury, she said, every Woman, if thou take away the light, is like
and the same with others; this may truly be said to adulterers; but wives,
although the light be far removed, should not make themselves like to vile
Women. What is it which Hesiod forbids to be absolutely disclosed in the night?
because (as he says) the nights belong to the immortal Gods; for a Wife ought
at no time to be deficient in her duty, and although her body cannot be beheld,
yet she should preserve a modesty in all places, that she may deservedly seem
well behaved to her Husband even in the dark: Wherefore very excellently
Commodus Caesar, when his Wife endeavored to persuade him to use unusual and
disallowed pleasures with her, answered, How much it is fit to obey other Women
in these things, let them look to it, a Wife certainly is a Name of honor, not
of pleasure. Wherefore Cato the Censor ejected Manilius out of the Senate,
because he kissed his Wife in the presence of his Daughter: If so be that it is
most undecent to kiss a Wife or amorously embrac^ her in the presence of their
Chil^r^n, how much more expedient is it, that nothing immoderate, nothing
wanton, should be offered before the Eyes of Husbands, whom Wives ought chiefly
to please? Hieron f^ned Epicharmus, the Comedian, a great sum of Money, because
he publicly declared a certain undecent thing in the p^esence of his Wife; for
the dignity of Wedlock is so venerable, that i^ is fit no access should be
apparent to the Eyes and Ears of S^rangers. The moderation of the Athenians
demonstrated this excellent matter, when they restored the intercepted Letters
of Philip, which he had wrote to Olympias, inviolate; for indeed they judged it
unfit for Strangers, or truly Enemies, to partake of the secrets of a Wife: It
is meet therefore that they always be eareful and mindful concerning this
matter, hereby they may acquire praise, triumphs, and a Crown of Gold; nothing
should be so pleasant or delightful to them, as ever to avert them from the
duty of a modest mind: Wherein since they may imitate many most illustrious
women, I know not whether Brasilla be most excellent, whose noble enterprise
ought not to be omitted in this Age; for she (being born of Noble Parents of
Dyrrachium, as it is asserted by approved Authors) being taken in an Excursion
of Enemies, was in danger of being ravished; this woman truly, in that great
peril, purely and entirely preserved her chastity by her most beautiful aspect,
wit, virtue, and magnanimity; for by many words she appeased the violence, and
restrained the fury of Cericus the Conqueror; she undertook if he would defend
her chastity (instead of a Ransom) by a certain Magic Ointment to make him
invulnerable by all military Arms; this discourse of this noble and modest
woman, and his great esteem of Magic obtained his belief, and he anxiously
expected the event of the matter, having placed Guards upon her whilst the
generous Maid gathered some Roots; then she magnanimously came to the Warrior,
and promises that she would make trial not by words, but by Herbs; moreover
when she had anointed his neck with the Juice, she shows him his throat, but
Cericus, as if he would be safely rash, cuts off his head with his Sword, and
admired that testimony of her most chaste mind. Why should I recite more? They
will neither want Examples nor Exhortations, if they would be such as they
ought to be. And lest we should any longer defer those things which are most
diligently to be considered by us, we put a period to these things.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Domestic care.
BOth the time and the place require our discourse concerning Domestic care;
concerning which I would have those few things expected, which we perceive, by
common experience, most expedient; but those things which are written by
learned men I cannot include within this little and narrow place, because
neither do all things appertain to this discourse and time, and every one may
know those things by their Books; it shall suffice out of many things, that
those things which are necessary, and may be treated of very briefly and most
easily, shall not be pretermitted in these our little Commentaries. I would
have therefore the whole care of the Domestic Affairs chiefly employed about
Estates, and Servants (or dependents) and the education of Children; we will
briefly treat of this last, but we will first dispatch those two former points;
for we esteem the care of our Estates, and diligence about our Servants, and
dependents necessary; for we have need of estates and servants, without the
plenty and assistance whereof the family affairs cannot consist; in which
things truly the moderation of domestic affairs is for the most part
contained: and which unless they be established by the Councils and Precepts of
the Wife have no Foundation and are wont to be in great disorder: for as
naturally men are endued with a strength of Body and Mind, as well for other
causes, as that they may enrich their Familes by Industry, Labor, and finally
by many perils; so (as I conjecture) women are naturally weak that they may
more diligently manage their Household concerns: for fear cannot be without
care, nor care without vigilance. What avails it to bring much home, unless
the wife will keep, preserve, and distribute it? for what else is fabulously
written concerning the Daughters of Danaus, who, filling a bored Hogshead, were
tormented with a perpetual and vain labor? My opinion is (which I hope, O
Laurentius, that you will approve) that no small advantages arise from this the
Wives custody: For truly that was well said by Augustus Caesar, that most
prudent person, Alexander would have obtained far more renown and profit, if he
could have kept and defended what he had gotten, than by the assistance of
Fortune to have achieved the greatest matters: wherefore wives ought not to be
defrauded of their praise, if they shall order whatsoever is placed at home, as
it is their duty; therefore they should endeavor to remember that as daily
Pericles at Athens, so they should govern their Families, and should be willing
always to judge themselves, lest they be deficient in their care, performance,
and diligence about Domestic Affairs: It greatly conduces to this matter, if
they (which chiefly belongs to them) accustom themselves to stay at home, and
to take care of all things: where I remember that prudent Groom, who, when he
was asked what chiefly made an Horse fat, said, the Masters Eye. Which duty
that it might be recommended to posterity, an ordinary Shoe, and a Distaff and
Spindle were affixed to the Brazen Statue of Caja Cecilia the Daughter of
Tarquinnius, that those things might in a manner signify, that her diligent
residence at home should be imitated by Posterity. What negligent Farmer can
hope to have industrious Husbandmen? What slothful General can make his
Soldiers vigilant for the Commonwealth? If therefore the Wife would have her
Maids stay at home, she should not only instruct them by words, but she should
demonstrate, show, and declare by her actions, what they ought to perform.
Nothing truly is more excellent in Family Affairs, than that every thing be
placed in its own station, for order, than nothing which is more decent,
nothing more useful, is always of the greatest importance: We may behold a
company of Singers and Armies, amongst whom unless a proportion be aptly
observed, they can be termed nothing less than either Armies or Singers. I
would have Wives to imitate the Ringleaders of Bees, who know, receive, and
preserve whatsoever is placed within their Hives, and, until the necessity of
their concerns shall otherwise require, they are always present with their
Honey-combs, that they may be exquisitely and maturely perfected: Wives may
send abroad their Men and Maidservants, if they perceive it will be
advantageous to them; but if they be useful at home, they may require, urge,
and command their presence. They should judge it to appertain to their duty,
that no damage accrue to their Husbands in the Pantry, Wine-cellar, and
Oyl-cellar: As Generals often view the numbers of their Soldiers; so Wives
should often and most diligently recognize those things which are placed at
home, lest at last, to their great detriment, they should perceive that what
should be of a years, scarce is of a months duration. The Custom of Pericles
greatly deceives unskilful persons, and oftentimes impedes the Family Affairs,
who sold together all the fruits which he received from his fields, and
afterward he provided, from the Market, whatsoever he had need of at home from
day to day: for this daily manner of providing Corn, and Wine, and Wood, is
rather fit for a Traveller, and an unsettled Soldier, than a Citizen, and a
Master of a Family; neither do they so liberally, so splendidly, nor so
profitably provide for their Riches. But if any one shall object, That he has
observed this to be the fault of the Caterer, (even in my opinion) he should
judge, that the negligence of the Agents of the Wife is rather to be blamed,
than the Opinion of the wisest men: I think this should be imitated from the
Roman Custom, That the most noble Women should not be employed in the vilest
things; for the noble Women, by the League that was made with the Sabines, were
enfranchised from the Employments of the Mill, and Kitchen, and servile
Services: But indeed if the sickness of the Husband, or an occasion of
honoring of Guests shall happen, they may undertake such kind of Employment;
for if it may conduce to the health of the Husband, not only nothing should be
pretermitted, but we detest any omission. I am infinitely pleased to see, in
that most Learned Poet and Philosopher Homer, that Andromache had so great love
and affection for her Hector, that she was diligent and exact, even in giving
Hay to his Horses, in which the Honor and Life of her Husband consisted.
Therefore if a Wife applies her mind to her Duty and her Honor, she will
acknowledge, that all things are due to, and she will perform all things for
her Husband: but if a liberal Husband shall purpose nobly to entertain some
Persons at his House, she should not refuse even the Office of the Kitchen:
which was not unknown to those generous and most valiant Persons Achilles and
Patroclus, to whom when Ulysses and Ajax came to be reconciled, having laid by
his Harp, he managed those things with great diligence, which unless they had
been decent for the sake of Friendship or Hospitality, scarce seemed fit for
mean Servants. But enough of these things, forasmuch as we proposed briefly to
recite, but not to instruct in each particular; especially because this Point
is more diligently and more copiously discussed in the Discourses of Learned
Men, than I can now treat of it. Wherefore we shall proceed to the remaining
Matters.

It is meet now (as we have promised) to speak concerning Servants, who, if
they be not neglected, will be very ornamental, profitable, and delightful.
This will be so effected, if they shall instruct them exactly, nor be angry
with them before they discover that they have offended after admonition. I
would have Wives imitate the Ringleaders of the Bees (as in a manner in other
things, so also in this part) who suffer none to be slothful, none negligent
among them.

M. Cato the elder so diligently observed this Precept of domestic care, that
if he perceived that his Servants were deficient in the duty of good Men, he
presently sold those Servants although old, and judged it by no means expedient
to keep unprofitable Servants at his House. Wives should believe it to be an
honorable employment for them to make ignorant Maid servants skilful, and to
her, whom by experience in lesser matters they observe to be endued with
faithfulness and diligence, they may dispose the custody of the Cellar. And
thrifty Persons should constantly search for and approve sober Caterers, and
receive them with courteous words, and be bountiful to them, that by these
great kindnesses they might daily more earnestly excite their diligence. They
should allow such Food to their Servants as may be sufficient for their nature,
and their constant labor. They should so handsomely Cloth their Servants that
they might seem to have a regard to Nature, Place, and Time. Furthermore
according to the Opinion of Hesiod, they should always beware of those Servants
who cannot be separated from Children and Relations; for of necessity they will
nourish themselves together with theirs, even by stealth. Also they should
think it a decent thing, if any one of the Family be sick that the Person be
taken care of with certain extraordinary diligence; for this is a courtesy and
civility by which they will make them all diligent in and desirous of the
welfare of the Family: which (that we may return to the same Example) we
plainly perceive in Bees, who never forsake their Ringleader, because of his
great Providence for, and care over them, and always follow him, wheresoever he
goes, with great indications of their good will to him. This should not seem
strange to any, because also other Creatures are not deficient in an imitation
of gratitude; which evidently appears, as well by very many others, as by the
next Example. The Athenians in the Persian War, that they might provide for
their safety, forsaking their Walls committed the Citizens to the Sea: they
hastily departing from the Shore, the Dog of Xantippus the elder, was grieved
at his absence (which he manifestly showed, by his running, wagging his Tail,
howling, and barking) unless he went along with his Master: therefore whilst he
swimmed in the midst of the waves to his Masters Ship, Xantippus who was flying
stood still and received the sorrowful Dog. Afterward lest this matter, which
was worthy of remembrance, should be forgotten, when his Dog died he erected an
honorable Sepulcher for him, in a certain noble place (which for a long time
after was called Dogs-Grave) that he might leave a perpetual Monument to
Posterity, of a mutual kindness to be preserved between Masters and Servants.
In this manner it will be most expedient, that as in Military Affairs, Legates,
Tribunes, Centurions, and in the City Pretors, Treasurers, and such kind of
Magistrates have the government of peculiar matters: that managing few things
they may exactly per^orm their Offices; so if Wives would take care of their
Family-business, they should so separate the Office of inspection from the
employments of drudgery, that it may be manifest what should be done by every
one, and what may be expected from them. Unless each Persons place be assigned
him in a Ship, all things will be tumultuous, although no Tempest assail them.
We know that Heaven it self (which is an appointed Mansion for us) is composed
with so great a concatenation of things, that one part is linked to another;
and all are aptly fixed together: By the strings of Harps, if they be well
tuned, one Harmony is made of diverse Notes, than which nothing is more
pleasant, nothing more melodious to the Ears; so if Wives shall appoint
Stations to these Concerns, and Offices to their Servants, they will perceive
that those things will greatly conduce to their splendor and profit; therefore
(as I have said before) they should receive, preserve, and distribute with
care, prudence, and decency, those things which are brought home: and they
should most exactly perform, whatsoever things may be set in order and
meliorated, by care and diligence, that the dignity of their Family may be
confirmed and increased. But these things shall suffice.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Education of Children.
THE education of Children, the most commodious, and by far the most important
part of the Wifes duty, remains. Diligence in Family Affairs in the
accumulation of Riches avails, in a manner, nothing (as that ancient Crates
was wont to say) unless a great care, and a certain extraordinary industry be
bestowed in the education and instruction of the Children, to whom they are
left; by this matter also they are greatly obliged to their Parents (to whom
they owe all things) by whom they must necessarily and truly seem deserted and
forsaken, unless their Parents shall perform the duty of maintaining and
instructing them: for truly we must acknowledge that all things are due to the
Authors of our Life, which naturally all Mortals desire, and with great reason
preserve. What great things should we atchieve, if a generous education shall
accompany our noble birth? wherein (if you shall diligently consider all things
in your mind and thoughts) you may observe that (if Mothers do not derogate
from Nature it self) the duty of education so appertains to them, that they
cannot refuse it without the violation of many duties; for it in every respect
denotes a propense love to their Children, whom Nature does not at all neglect:
which that it may be more evidently demonstrated, I should now discourse
concerning the Procreation of Children before their birth: but time will not
permit me to digress more largely, and Nature it self has so secluded and so
obsconded those parts, that those things which cannot be beheld without shame,
can scarce be discoursed of by us with honor. But we will declare those things
which cannot be omitted. Nature it self carefully exhibits aliment to the
Issue, till it attaineth its appointed time of birth; moreover, Nature affords
the nourishment of Milk to all living Creatures which bring forth, and has
given them Breasts, like overflowing Fountains, by which the young one being
nourished, may by degrees be augmented and corroborated in the Parts of its
Body; she has also therefore given them two Paps, that if they brought forth
Twins they might easily suckle and nourish them together; which things although
they are transacted with great wisdom, yet they would seem done in vain, if she
had not Implanted in them a certain stupendous love and affection to their
Issue. Where the peculiar care and diligence of Nature may be observed, for
whereas she has placed other Creatures Paps under their Bellies, she has so
affixed Women's Breasts to their Bosoms, that they might both suckle them with
their Milk and cherish them with their embraces, and easily and conveniently
kiss them, and (as it is said) receive them into their Bosoms; for so she has
assigned to them the capacity of bringing forth, and the duty of education, not
only of necessity, but of her singular love and good will: that which we
perceive in the terrible Bear and savage Beasts is also a great argument (if
they would imitate them) to induce Women to employ their greatest care in
adorning their Children^; who after she has brought forth her misshapen Cub,
forms and polisheth it with her Tongue, as it were with some Instrument, so
that she may most rightly be termed not only the Dam of the Cub, but also the
Artificer. Why should we insist upon these small matters? Nature concedeth so
great a love to Issue, that we may perceive Brutes which of themselves are
fearful, hereby become most bold, and those which were negligent, most subtle,
and those which were greedy, most sparing. Did not also the Bird, in Homer,
suffer hunger that it might provide food for its young ones, and to supply
them, defrauded its own Belly? Therefore Mothers will deserve grievous
reproaches, if they neglect the care of their Children, and live carelessly. I
would have them to refuse no pains to obtain most excellent associates,
assistants, and comforters in their old age: therefore if Mothers would be
innocent they should not neglect their Children, but (that they may provide for
their Souls and Bodies) they should cherish them and suckle them, whom, being
unknown, they nourished with their own Blood, being now born, now Men and
Women, now known, now dear, and they should themselves, as well as they could,
educate them; it is not only the duty of a Nurse, but also of a careful Mother.
The Wife of Marcus Cato the Censor suckled her Infant with her own Milk, which
Custom continues among the Roman Women even to this Age. Moreover because a
Society in Meat and Drink increases love and friendship, that she might render
the Children of her Servants well affected to her Infant, she sometimes gave
them suck: whom we desire and exhort the best W^men to imitate, especially
since it is highly important, that in whose Womb, and of whose Blood the In^ant
was conceived, it should also by her be nourished; for no nourishment seems
more fit, none more wholesome, than that the same aliment, which is endued with
much heat and vigor, and which is a known and familiar Food, should be given
to the Children; whose efficacy is such, that in the forming the properties of
the Body and Mind it is almost equivalent to the Virtue of the spermatick
faculty: this is evidently perceived in many things, Kids being suckled with
Sheeps Milk, their Hair will by degrees become more soft; but if Lambs be
suckled by Goats, it is certain that their Fleeces will become more rough: In
Trees it is certain that there is a greater efficacy both in the Sap and Soil,
than in Children; for although they be pleasant and cheerful, yet if they be
removed to another Lap, you may observe them much endamaged, and greatly
changed by the Milk of the Nurse. Therefore noble Women should endeavor to
suckl^ their Children, left the aliment of a worse and engrafted Milk should
cause them to degenerate; ^ut if (as it often happens) the Mothers cannot, for
just causes, suckle their Children, they should think that they should take,
and substitute in their Office, Nurses, not Slaves, nor strangers, nor drunken,
nor unchaste Women, but them who are free born, well humoured and endued with
curious Language, lest the young Infant should imbibe corrupt manners and
words, and, with the very Milk sucking turpitude, errors, and impure
infirmities, it should, by a degenerate body and mind, be infected with
pernicious contagions: for as the Joints of an Infant may be rightly formed and
joined together, so from their Childhood their Manners may be exactly and aptly
composed; therefore they should be curious in the choice of Nurses; this age
and this as yet pliant mind is most easy to fashion; for as we Imprint a Seal
upon soft Wax, so the dispositions and distempers of the Nurse are wont to be
Engraven upon Children; whose inclination and nature how prevalent it is, that
most prudent Poet Maro demonstrates, who relates, that Dido ^erming Aeneas not
only fierce, but cruel, said, The Hircanian Tigers gave you suck: also that
most pleasant Poet Theocritus complains of the same, detesting the cruel
Cupid, not because he was born of his Mother Venus, but because he had sucked
the Paps of a Lioness. Wherefore they should think it best, and very decent,
and commendable to suckle their Children, whom they should nourish with great
love, faithfulness and diligence, or to commit this part of their duty to well
instructed Nurses, who may esteem and love them, not with a feigned and mernary
diligence.

After they have passed their infancy, the mothers should employ their Wit,
Care, and endeavor to qualify them with excellent endowments of mind and
body; first they should teach them their duty to the immortal God, to their
Country and Parents, that they may accustom them from their infancy to relish
that, which is the Foundation of other virtues; they will approve themselves to
be the most hopeful, who fear God, obey the Laws, honor their Parents,
reverence their Superiors, are affable to their Equals, and courteous to their
Inferiors; therefore they should entertain all men with a civil aspect,
countenance, and finally obliging words; but they should most familiarly
converse with the best Persons; they should so learn Temperance in Meat and
Drink, that they may lay, as it were, the foundation of Abstinence for their
future Lives: Mothers should admonish them to avoid those Pleasures which are
dishonorable: Children should apply their endeavor, mind, and thoughts to
these things, which may be ornamental, useful, and delightful in greater
matters: If Mothers instruct their Children in these things, they will much
better and more easily obtain the assistances of Learning. Oftentimes we see
the Commands and Gifts of Princes most welcome to their Subjects, although yet
the same, proceeding from private Persons, scarce seem acceptable. Who is
ignorant how much authority the mild and jejune speech of a Parent bears with
Children? Wherefore that wise Cato the Elder, that he might not be deficient in
the duty of a Father to his Children, he diligently taught them as well many
other things, as Literature: Also the barbarous Eurydice seems worthy of great
praise; she being now ancient, applied her self to Learning, that Monument of
Virtue and Discipline, that she might not only be the Author of Life to her
Children, but that, by her example, she might leave to them many condiments of
Liberal Sciences. Mothers should often premonish their Children to restrain
themselves from excessive Laughter, and temerarious Speeches; for that denotes
Folly, this Fury. Moreover they should take heed, that they do not ordinarily
discourse of those things which are odious to act: therefore they should
restrain them from filthy and reproachful Speeches; and if they shall speak any
thing too licentiously and obscenely, they should not receive it with mirth or
a kiss, but with a whip. Furthermore, they should instruct them, not to upbraid
any persons with their Poverty, or ignominy of their Ancestors, or other
Calamities, whereby they will both procure to themselves grievous enmities, and
imbibe a custom of arrogating: They should teach them Sports, in which they may
so voluntarily undertake Labors, that, if occasion shall require, they may
more easily sustain those which are more grievous. I would have Mothers to
avoid in the presence of their Children, anger, avarice, and concupiscence,
whereby virtue languisheth, that from their infancy they may contemn, shun, and
hate these most filthy seducers, and that they may be greatly careful to
reverence sacred Names, and be afraid to revile them, for whom being grown up
will they not deride, who at that age contemn the Divine Nature? It is of so
great importance to accustom them in their Childhood, that they must especially
admonish them to abstain from swearing: Neither truly do they deserve belief
who commonly swear, even for the sake of the most vile matter; and they who
ordinarily swear, oftentimes unwarily forswear themselves: Mothers should
accustom their Children to speak the truth; this was most noble among the
Persians, and therefore they ordained, that there should be no Markets of
Merchandise among them, for they believed it to be a place of lying and
forswearing: Mothers should teach them to speak little, unless desired, as well
in other places as at Banquets, lest (which should be most estranged from that
Age) they should become impudent and talkative; for it will be a hindrance to
their knowledge, if they pretend wisely to declare, what they do not
sufficiently comprehend: therefore that was a witty saying of Cato, who, being
then a young Man, when he was blamed for his silence, said, It will not be at
all troublesome to me, until I know those things which are unfit to be
concealed: If they shall learn many things of this kind from their Mothers, as
soon as their age will permit, they may more happily and more easily acquire
the gravity and discipline of their Parents. There are many other things, which
because they are rather proper to Fathers, I for the present omit, and
therefore the rather, because I seem to see some who will term this our Precept
of Wedlock immense and infinite, which the Fathers of our Age can scarce
sufficiently treat of; there is nothing which I can more truly answer to these
Persons than this, truly I never intended to discuss, what might be done, but
to declare, what ought to be done. Who is so unjust a Judge, that if upon just
causes (even as you) he shall approve Marriages, and shall, in the choice of a
Wife, receive a Woman excellent in Manners, Age, Extraction, Beauty, and
Riches, who is loving to her Husband, who is modest, and who is very skillful
in the management of domestic affairs; who, I say, is so mistaken in affairs,
that he can hope for all these great things, and can imagine that such Wives
ought not to perform all greater matters? Therefore (O my Laurentius) your
equals should follow your Example with great diligence (who have taken to Wife
Zinebia, a Virgin flourishing with Virtue, Beauty, a Noble Family, and abundant
Riches) and in the imitation of you they ought to be animated. For what more
illustrious, what more worthy Example can I propose than yours? since you, who
are most worthy of your Father, Grandfather, and your most renowned Ancestors,
have chosen such a Wife, in that most famous City of Italy, Florence, whose
Riches indeed all Persons, but whose continence, faithfulness, and prudence,
all good Men so highly esteem and admire, that they think her blessed and happy
in you alone, and you fortunate and truly happy in such a Wife: who because ye
have obtained the most excellent and adorned conjugal qualifications, they
beseech the immortal God, that ye may have the best Children, and the most
honorable Citizens of the Commonwealth.

These things perchance might seem inconsiderable, because they are treated of
by me, if they were not in a manner recognized in your Nuptials: so truly young
persons, following your example, will profit more, than if they only acquiesce
in my writings, for even as Laws are greatly advantageous to a City, when it is
known that an excellent Prince obeys them; so since your Example also is
consentaneous to our Precepts, we hope that it will be imitated by young
persons. But (O Laurentius) as my discourse began, so it shall be terminated,
in you. You have now my opinion concerning Wedlock, instead of a Present; in
which I hope whatsoever is said by me (not to admonish you, as I said at the
first, but to declare my affection to you) will be kindly accepted by many, but
I certainly know that it will be favorably you in whose name I undertook this
Tract. If any thing perchance in these our little Commentaries shall occur to
you, in the reading, which is wisely and learnedly written, attribute it to
that excellent person in all kind of praise, Zacharias Trivisanus, (for I
willingly commemorate him) and to the Grecian Science, out of which I have
collected some things which pertains to this matter, and have purposely
inserted them here. Having been scarce conversant a few Months in these things
I seem to have gathered great and pleasant advantages. Very great is the ingeny
and diligence of that excellent and most learned Guarinus of Verona (who being
my Schoolmaster and loving Friend I am familiar with) who was my conduct,
together with many of our most worthy persons, both in the undertaking and
beginning the study of the Liberal Sciences; and he was such a Guide, that by
his assistance these noble studies (to which I have applied my self from my
infancy) are become much more profitable and pleasant to me. Therefore you will
willingly accept this (as I may so call it, the Wives Necklace) from me in
these your Marriages, which I know that you will either therefore greatly
esteem, because it is of that sort that it cannot (as other Necklaces may) be
broken and worn out by use, or because it proceeds from the greatest sincerity,
and a most faithful mind entirely devoted to you.

Farewell.
Poggius saluteth Guarinus of Verona.
MAY the Gods beshrow those most wicked Letter-Carriers, who treat us so ill in
delivering our Epistles, and deprive me of the fruit of my Letters, you of the
pleasure, which according to your very great good will to me, you are wont to
receive from them. But I give you many thanks for the little Book which you
sent to me: I had been infinitely indebted to you, if I had been about to marry
a Wife; but before I cared but little for taking a Wife, now not at all,
forasmuch as I see so many and so great things are, in the judgment of wise
men, required in the duty of a Wife, which we may rather wish for than hope to
obtain. But these things in jest. When first the Book was delivered to me, I
read it so hastily, (being pleased as well with the Novelty of the Subject, as
the order and pleasantness of the Discourse) that I read over the whole Book in
one day, but afterward I reviewed it more deliberately; indeed the matter is
pleasant and sweet, and adorned with very many Examples, but so disposed into
order, that nothing could be discussed more methodically; but that which
pleases me most, is the gravity of speech which it constantly retains.
Franciscus Barbarus seems to me to have written another Book of Offices (but
belonging to Wives) he so exactly imitates Cicero in his discourse: You know I
am not a Flatterer, those things I speak come from the thoughts of my mind.
There is a certain dignity in his Sentences, joined with the greatest
eloquence, worthy of any the most grave person. I would have you to exhort our
Franciscus to write, for he publicly produces admirable First Fruits. Our
Gentius has read and approves the Book; moreover Blasius of the Guascons; I
will publish it, where I shall perceive any advantage of Glory and Renown can
be obtained. Furthermore (O my Guarinus) I have received from you a much
worthy, though small, Epistle, wherein you most eloquently describe the Naval
Victory which the Venetians obtained, with exceeding Valor, over the most
wicked Enemies of our whole Race: And when I showed to many persons that that
Epistle infinitely pleased me, to them it seemed that those things were
evidently and nobly declared by you. But of these things elsewhere.

Farewell. From Constance, December. 31.
Paulus Vergerius saluteth the most Learned Person, Nicholaus Leontinus the
Philosopher.
THis day I found a little Book, with my Lord Franciscus, Cardinal of Florence,
when I came to wait upon him, who stays at home to recover his health, which
Franciscus Barbarus, your friend and fellow Student, has lately published
concerning Wedlock, indeed elegant; and even as it is excellent in the beauty
of language, so also it abounds with the best Precepts and most copious
Examples collected out of Greek and Latin History. I admire in this Tract not
so much the wit as the diligence of this person; for I easily perceived that
indeed long since; that dearest person Zacharius Trivisanus long since showing
me a certain Epistle of his, although written, as it were, negligently and
without any study; but that now a young man and one unexperienced in Nuptial
Affairs should write so learnedly and so eloquently concerning Wedlock, and
should be so knowing in that, which he is, experimentally ignorant of, this is
that which I cannot highly enough admire. Therefore now no body will deny that
he is truly a Grecian but an exellent Latinist, he speaks and understands
so well: But he can by no means seem barbarous, who thinks or writes nothing
barbarous; and I wish all other barbarousness may be so barbarous. But I
greatly blame you because you gave me no notice of that little Book, since you,
who were his fellow Student, could not be ignorant of it. I suppose that you
did believe, that the rumor of Fame would bring it to me, and when it had been
common in the hands of all others, then at last it should come to me, which
truly I do not approve; and unless you shall allege a better reason, I cannot
but condemn.

Farewell. From Constance, April 10.
FINIS.

