THE Artificial Spaw, OR MINERAL-WATERS TO DRINK: Imitating the German
Spaw-Water in its Delightful and Medicinal Operations on Humane Bodies, etc.

By T. Byfield, M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians at Dublin.

LONDON, Printed by James Rawlins for the Author, and are to be sold by Matthew
Keinton in Little-Britain, 1684.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM JENNINGS KNIGHT.
Honored Sir,
THE Encouragement these Waters received last Year from your own Experience and
Commendation of 'em to others, did in part Naturalize 'em; by gaining such
Repute, that they were prescribed by several Physicians in Town to their
Patients, and that with good Success. For they alone wrought several Cures, as
by the Testimony of the Doctors does appear.

I have bin therefore very industrious to keep open these Salutiferous Springs,
that they may flow to the advantage of many. And I doubt not but under your
Patronage their Medicinal Virtues will raise 'em to such general good esteem
that they will become the Metropolitan Fountain.

'T will not be difficult (besides Experience) to make it appear from Reason,
that Medicinal Waters thus by Art prepared, will excel the Natural. But that
being part of the ensuing Tract, I Will not here forestal the matter. But
acknowledge your Obligations in permitting a Rivulet of this Fountain to have
its Eruption among your ingenious useful Undertakings, which that they may
continue to prosper, are the unfeigned wishes of

Honored Sir, Your most humble Servant, T. Byfield.
From my House in New-street by Fetter-Lane near the Five Bells.
THE Artificial Spaw, OR MINERAL-WATERS To Drink, etc.
CHAP. I.
THe improvement of Arts and Sciences is the great design os all industrious
Men. I have therefore in imitation of such bin at pains, and cost too in making
some useful improvements within my own Sphere of Physic, of which at present I
shall only discourse of one, viz. The making of Artificial Mineral Waters equal
to, if not exceeding, the Natural, as to their Medicinal qualities. For I have
so strictly examined with what Minerals, Marcasites and Nitrous Glebes the
healing Fountains are impregnated, to make 'em such; that by preparing,
purifying and exalting their Medicinal Virtues, I shall be able not only to
imitate Nature, but herein excel; by defecating and expelling those gross
Terrestrial parts, and often unwholesome, that are commixt with Minerals: from
which to extricate the benign and useful parts, great diligence and curiosity
is requisite.

This boast I hope may be very well allowed within the bounds of Modesty, since
I have brought my undertakings to Perfection.

And since things Natural (especially as to the Materia Medica) are greatly
improved, in regard to their usefulness, by Learning and Industry, why may not
this Mineral Preparation, among the innumerable store of others, be allowed to
challenge the credit it deserves. It has pleased God, for our employment, to
make those things that Minister Food and Physic, capable of improvement by us,
and our Labor and Industry in their preparation necessary e're we can receive
due Benefit and Refreshment from 'em: whenas in those only which serve for
Delight and Pleasure, as rich Fruits and Flowers, etc. He has shown his
infinite skill and excellence; which when we tamper with we only damage. So
that no Artist is so vain and impious to vye with Nature, but only pleased when
he can diligently and curiously perform that Labor and Culture assigned him by
his Maker. But I must not digress; how high therefore this way of Physic is in
vogue, or like to be, shall not be so much my concern to recount, as to make
the usefulness and convenience of it appear. For if persons can with little
expense and trouble be prevailed upon to make a harmless trial of those things
that are productive of great good, such insinuations are no ways culpable.

It Is obvious how many perish for want of timely care, permitting slenderer
indispositions (which might soon be removed) to run to some high Distemper, and
that too often suffered almost to have mischiev'd the Body, e're they will look
out for remedy: being deterred from the use of means, either because the
methods are harsh and unpleasing, or because they are Expensive and too
Chargeable; none of which our Medicinal Waters can be taxed with.

The Theoretick part of Physic being of late so richly adorned with accurate
Anatomical Dissections and a refined Philosophy; I conceive it likewise
requisite that the Practice should bear some proportion to it, otherwise the
Ornament of Languages, and all other Embellishments, are but gilded nothings to
the great Art of preserving and restoring a sound and healthy Constitution. For
to live long and in health, as it is the best thing belonging to this World, so
it is most desired, though the methods conducing thereto are much neglected, it is
not only furnished with delights in it self, but it gives a gust to all others;
for without it all their Excellencies are imperceptible. But this is a Blessing
most relished and best valued by those who sometimes are without it.

It Is a great misfortune of Humane Nature not to discern wherein her happiness
and delights consist, which often are nearer her than she is aware of; and the
farther she wanders in pursuit of 'em, she is at the greater loss. For the
methods to be taken for a happy life are not so difficult, nor to be so far
fetched, as are by most imagined. But it being my business chiefly to direct to
that part which conduces to preserving and restoring a healthy Body, I shall
only concern my self in what tends thereto.

How nice and delicate a thing it is to keep the Body in a just and due mixture
of Principles, and to recover those decaying, is not soon apprehended. For the
subtle vital Breath, or the volatile invisible Spirit of man's Body,
deservedly named Mercury, nourishes, feeds and preserves himself by the
Oleity of Man's Suphur, which is predominant in the Blood; besides these there
is a Salt lying in the Juices, Flesh and Bones; this ministers its noblest part
for nourishment to the Blood, and preserves man's Body from putrefaction, and
is that Vinculum whereby the other two are kept and dwell together. For in the
Salt there lies a Spirit which protects and preserves the Balsoms in their
worth and purity, it savoureth all the rest, and is inexhaustible, unless it
dye quite: for the Air which supports the Spirits with its Vital Breath, does
carry in it a nitrous Spirit, which tempers the whole nourishment, and prevents
the unruly disorders of the other ingesta. Thus is preserved and kept a due
temperament of Principles ad justitiam, which is the great skill of a Physician.

But lest I make too large a Digression, designing at present to discourse only
of the excellent uses of Medicinal Waters, and of my imitation of the
Ultramarine Spaws; I shall rather now say somewhat of Water in general and its
usefulness.

CHAP. II.
Of Water in general.
SInce I am about to demonstrate the advantages of Medicinal Waters, and to
show how fit a Vehicle this Element is to convey Medicine to the inmost
recesses of the Body; I think it not besides my business if I a little touch
upon the Excellency of Water, which was created for the universal Drink of all
Creatures, and the Health and life of the first Ages of the World may commend
its Wholsomeness. But if we examine its Nature, we shall find it consist of
those qualities which denote its Salubrity, as clearness, thinness, lightness,
softness, etc. which cool, moisten, attenuate, refresh, allay Thirst, and are a
pabulum or recruit to fretted Spirits, and a proper Liquor to convey and
distribute other Aliments. Some of the Ancients called it (...) the Seed of all
things: But I shall not here discourse of the productions from Waters; what
Vegetables, Minerals and Animals are generated by it: neither shall I treat of
the various kinds of Water, as River-Water, Rainwater, Pump, Lake, Pond-Water,
etc. That is the best and most wholesome which is void of taste or odor, and is
clear, pure, most light, soon heated, soon cold, and in which Flesh is soonest
Boiled. The living Spring I judge most valuable for Drinking, and that nearest
the head of it the best. For those living Principles which actuate all Bodies,
and keep 'em not only from putrefaction, but qualify 'em for recruits and
sustenance to other Bodies, are in proportion in Waters, which denotes 'em of
such and such a strength and purity, and may be used in quantities accordingly.
And it is no small advantage that they are capable of being received in such
large quantities, without fuming or disturbing the Brain, to irrigate and
soften the whole Body, and bedew the fiery Spirits with their supple Vapors:
And when those Airy brisk Particles do extricate themselves from these soft
lodgments, they are again entangled with more to prevent their leaping out, or
firing one against another: and such a pretty bustle or ferment in Nature
raises that general efflorescence and vigor, which plumps, exhilerates, and
makes gay a well-tempered healthy Body. The dispencing either of Food or
Physic, in a clear, thin, soft and gentle Vehicle, must make a better
digestion, and a more equal distribution of it; then in a fiery Chariot, which
precipitates Nature, and hurries the crude parts through those strait and slender
passages beyond their Natural Emunctories, and lodges 'em where neither Nature
can expel 'em, nor Art reach 'em. Whenas the milder Liquors make such easy
gradations, that Nature can secern by her peculiar cleansing ducts those Feces
and Crudities, which timely and orderly expelled, prevent innumerable
Obstructions and Diseases to the Body.

I wish for my own particular, who am sometimes afflicted with Stone and Gout,
that I had earlier studied these things: but what I cannot prevent in my self, I
wish I may in others.

But to show how excellent a Vehicle Water is for the distribution of generous
and restorative Medicines, is no difficult task, if its Nature be considered,
as is before mentioned: for by searching out the minutest passages of the Body,
it promotes a general dispensation of the designed matter to all parts of it.
And I am of the opinion that fine Chemical Medicines should be delivered to
Bodies in soft gentle Vehicles, but by no means in their own Terrestrial
Bodies; for they are so fitted there in their position, that our Bodies are not
able to extricate the benign useful parts from the intricate meatus's of a
tough Mineral, and raise its living principles from their domicils so stiffly
munited and secured. Yet when by great Art and Labor these are got out and
defecated, they are beneficially delivered in another Body, where they cannot so
soon shape a retirement: and if in thin light cooling Liquors, Nature can with
ease gradually fetch out their help and refreshment; whenas those too hot
fiercely assault Nature, and admit not of quantity enough for their equal
distribution.

CHAP. III.
Of Mineral Waters.
IN the Mineral Kingdom through which the Veins of Water glide, are amas't mighty
Treasures, from whence may be extracted greater relief for the necessities of
Mankind than is by most imagined.

But to come near my purpose, excellent Medicines by the due managementof Fire,
have bin obtained from several Minerals and Semi-minerals, etc.

But to come yet nearer (by playing the Hydrotomist) the great account of
Mineral Waters may be displayed, which besides their own Nature, receive
Medicinal qualities from Subterranean Mines.

It may be considered that few Mineral Waters are simple, I mean impregnated
only with one Mineral, but compounded as the Minerals and Marcasites lie
confused in the Bowels of the Earth; and those who have bin curious to search
into the Nature of Medicinal Springs, have always discovered a mixture of
Minerals; though perhaps some of 'em have not bin so lucky as to assign their
virtues to the proper Minerals, etc. In the Mineral Kingdom I place Salt,
Nitre, Vitriol, Allom, etc. for in the Salts of many Bodies Iye their chief
Virtues, either for Purging by Stool or Urine, or for cleansing, cooling,
drying, stimulating, opening of Obstructions, attenuating of gross humors, or
astriction, corroboration, etc. according to the Nature of the Body. The
Learned Helmont says, (p. 55.) Semina salium cuncta in aquis sita sunt,
attamen nondum saporem induerunt nisi corporum principia consentanea uterosque
terrae debitos repererunt, etc. (viz.) That all the Seeds of Salts are placed
in Water, yet are not endued with taste, unless they find agreeable Principles
of Bodies, and suitable Matrices of the Earth; then, and not till then, they
manifest their Saltness, and become determined in a Saline Body; in one place
into Allom, in another Salmarine, in a third in Nitre, etc. To which he adds,
Quocirca notandum, Sal quoddam existere Hermaphroditicum metallorum quod
defectu nominis esurinum sive acetosum re and nomine vocari capit, generale
equidem and ad omnia metalla accommodabile, (viz.) That there is a certain
Hermaphroditical Salt of Metals, which for want of another name is called an
Esurine or Acid Salt, which is a general sort of Salt, and accommodated to all
Metals. So that this Esurine Salt, while such, is no more than Salt, and not a
Vitriol: but if it become a Vitriol, it must espouse a Mineral or Metalline
Body. He farther says, Vitriolum praestantissimum naturaliter erescit fodinis,
quibus natura istud Sal Esurinum peperit, venam eris feracem, corrodens, and
fontis labentis liquore dissolutum; (viz.) That the best Vitriol is most
naturally brought forth in those Mines where Nature has begot that Esurine
Salt, corroding a strong Vein of Copper, becomes dissolved in the gliding
Current of a Spring. But should I here enlarge in an account of Nitre, Vitriol,
Allom, Bitumen, Arsenick, etc. I should exceed my present intention, and
prevent a future design. Yet I think it necessary to my present business to say
thus much of Nitre and Vitriol. The Esurine Salt discovered in the Air, if it
meet with a fat unctuous Glebe, and be preserved from Rain and Sun, that it
spend not its strength in the production of Vegetables, breeds great store of
Nitre: for it is observed that in these fat Earths there is at first no Nitrous
taste; neither can any Nitre be extracted from 'em; but after their continuance
a while in the cool Air, its magnetic power from a Nitrous Principle, opens
the unctuous Body of the Fat Glebe, a fit receptacle for the Esurine Spirit,
and is therewith coagulated and envellop't, and after this manner is the
Nativity of Nitre.

It Is commonly observed, that in Cold Weather the Appetite is more keen, and
the Thirst little, which proceeds from the great store of Nitre that is in the
Air.

Vitriol I take to be an Esurine Acid Salt corroding the Sulphurous parts of
Metals or Marcasites by an Acid subterraneal Spirit (whereof there is great
quantity in some Mines) corroding the Veins of Iron, Copper, etc. from whence
are the varieties of Vitriol. Sometimes from a Vitriol Loam or Clay diluted
with Water, and set in a cold Cellar, may be gathered an alluminous
efflorescence, which shows there may be a mixture of Allom with Vitriol: But
the differences or varieties of impregnations, arise either from the difference
of the quantity of the Acid Spirit corroding the Veins of Copper or Iron, or
from the greater or lesser continuance of the course of the Water through those
Metallic Veins.

It need not seem strange to any that there is such Acidity in Water and Air:
from whence else does Iron and Copper being put into Water, or standing long in
the Air in a cold Cellar, contract such a Rust as they do? Is it not from the
Acid Spirit of Air and Water uniting with the Esurine Salt in those Metals
exciting its corrosive power to destroy the Texture of the Metal? And this Rust
being Boiled in Rainwater, will yield a Vitriol.

There are many ways of of making Artificial Vitriols: but I shall pass beyond
my intention if I now discourse of 'em.

It Is obvious what Beds of Minerals lie in the Bowels of the Earth, on which
the Currents of Waters wash in their circulating Veins, from which they are
impregnated with their Medicinal qualities.

But before I dismiss this Chapter, I think fit to add this, that there is a
universal common Salt of Nature, the first Ens of Salts which is specificated
according to the diversity of Nature, and receives various forms.

God the Original Founder of all Beings, has implanted in the Superficies of
the Earth that great variety of Vegetable Seeds, which propagate themselves in
their Species: So that every Vegetable at its proper season, by the instigation
of the Heavenly influences, setting at work its seminals, by stirring up its
innate power, begins to shape it self a Body according to the Laws of Creation;
Every Plant in its kind; till they have made up that wonderful variety which so
richly adorns the Earth.

In like manner are dispersed the Mineral and Metalline Seeds in the Bowels of
the Earth, determined for specification, and to become prolifick by the
embryonate Sulphur according to the purity or impurity of the Terrestrial
Matrix: And thus the Metallic Order is completed by the perfected Metals,
while the imperfect and middle Minerals arrive but slowly to Metalization.

Now when Water impregnated with a Spirit, or Vapor from the accensed Body of
Sulphur, passes through a salsuginous Glebe, already endowed with the common
Salt of Nature, it produces Salt, when through Nitrous Veins, Nitre; when
through Alluminous, Allom; when through a Copperas, White Vitriol; when through
a Silver Mine, Blew Vitriol; and when through an Ironish Glebe it shares of
some particles of Iron, and produces Green Vitriol, etc. But these are more or
less, according to the proportion of the Waters Acidity, and the Fertility of
the Veins through which they pass. So that Waters tinged with this Acid Spirit,
become a proper Menstruum for the opening of the Ramenta, and Extraction of the
excellent qualities of Minerals and Marcasites. But to demonstrate the
Artificial performance of this, is the business of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Of our Artificial Waters.
A Physician must learn to Anatomize all things in Nature, as well as Humane
Body, to know what they contain within and without, to separate the Poison from
the Medicinal quality: he must know how to dissolve, separate, exalt and
prepare fully Metals, Minerals, Vegetables and Animals: for Receipts found in
other Men's Writings, cannot sufficiently instruct a Man to the Practice or
Improvement of Physic.

The Field of Nature is very large, it is round and endless, affords room enough
for every industrious Man, so wisely has the great Creator contrived us all
employment, that none need envy or assault another labors, but may go out and
provide for himself; and did he know the Treasures that lie undiscovered,
'twould make him of a busy mind.

Minerals as they yield the noblest and choicest Medicines, so they are of
greater difficulty, and require greater skill in their preparation than either
Vegetables or Animals. I have therefore (out of a desire of useful rarities)
applied my self of late to hard labor in the Mines; from whence I hope to
produce great benefit to others, and a little to my self, which shall suffice.

And having now exactly completed by the necessary Laws of Alchymy my Mineral
healing Waters, I judge it neither Empirical, covetuous, or any ways base to
permit 'em (on such easy terms as I do, for general good) to break up like a
public Fountain, to which every one may resort: Yet I do not impose 'em on
any, let 'em fare according to the success they obtain.

I have made 'em exactly resembling the Ultramarine Spaws; by selecting those
Minerals and Marcasites which give 'em their excellent Medicinal qualities; and
I think the Artificial Preparation of 'em in selecting the useful parts, and
rejecting those more unwholesome with the dregs, cannot but be of great
advantage to the rendering these Waters more effectual and certain in their
Operation, than the Natural.

For instance in Antimony, how churlish and unsafe is it, if given without any
Artificial Preparation: but if dissected, separated, defecated, and by the
rules of Alchymy prepared, what useful, safe, and noble Medicines does it yield?

There is as great reason to except against White Bread, because it is the
Flowers of the Wheat separated from the grosser matter of the Corn, and by the
Baker's skill made Chemical Bread; as there is against Medicinal Preparations,
because discharged of their feces and useless or hurtful parts.

If then the Natural Medicinal Waters receive their Virtues from Minerals and
Marcasites unprepared, only by washing on 'em as they pass through the Caverns
and Veins of the Earth, and are esteemed of so great use: of how much more
certainty then in their operation and usefulness must the Artificial Waters be,
which have their Minerals purged and cleans'd from all their foul and noxious
parts, and those that are Medicinal exalted and made ripe for the service of
Nature.

There is much in the World yet to be discovered, which time and industry may
bring to light.

The Circulation of the Blood, how long lay that hid from Wise Men and great
Physicians, though those Streams were always flowing about 'em; which when
discovered, it seemed strange they could be so long ignorant.

The late great improvement of making Salt Water Fresh, brought to that
perfection that it serves all the intentions of Natural sweet Fountains, has
greatly encouraged me in the prosecution of this design, which is brought too
to that perfection, that it bears all the tests of those Natural Medicinal
Waters it imitates, as the German Spaw, etc. and its operations are of greater
certainty and more manageable.

For our Minerals, etc. are selected from all other, whether unwholesome, or not
serving a Medicinal intention, and are opened, separated, purified, etc. hereby
we know exactly the Doses, especially being freed from all the gleetings of
other Springs and Rainwater.

And the advantages of having 'em daily made fresh are not inconsiderable, nor
the conveniences of contracting the entire Medicinal Dose to what quantity of
Water or other Vehicle you please, by the help of our Tincture; besides many
more, which it is not necessary to enumerate.

CHAP. V.
The Virtues and Use of our Waters.
I Think it not requisite to give an entire account of all the Virtues of those
Minerals, Marcasites and Nitrous Glebes, with which duly prepared, our Waters
are impregnated: For 'twould make too early a discovery of my Art, since it
required so much labor and cost to complete it.

Nevertheless, because I would give a rational account of all my undertakings;
I Will say thus much further with the Learned Kircher, Basis unica and absoluta
origo omnium Aciditatum Mineralium est a Spiritu Sulphuris Acido. It Is apparent
that there is a Spirit of Sulphur in Mineral Glebes, from the Acid taste in
Minerals.

Our Waters having a Vitrioline Ironish Taste and Odor, which appears from
their sharp and piercing pungency somewhat harsh, shows they are Acuated with a
Sulphurous Acidity from the Embryonate Sulphur of the Minerals and Marcasites.

But more plainly, I have carefully prepared my Menstruum, that by the gentle
heat of a digester, I so open the Bodies of my Minerals, etc. that I can with
no less pleasure than labor extricate their Volatile Salubrious Atoms, from
their gross and unwholesome Mixtures; and as easily preserve and convey 'em to
the designed Vehicle.

I give this account, because I can in Glass Vessels Hermetically Luted,
sublime all the Medicinal Particles from their Water, which shows their purity
and aptness for the service of Nature.

Whenas if you deal with the Natural Mineral Waters which soon evaporate their
strength and good qualities, especially if kept a while from their living
Springs, you may precipitate a Vitrioline Ironish Rust, like Powder, but apt to
sement and petrifie, which taken altogether into the Body, is there
precipitated, and by large quantities of potulent matter distributed into the
remote parts of the Body, and becomes fit Minera or Seedlings both for Stone
and Gout.

For the materies morbifica of both is one and the same, the difference only is
in the situation: though I know Rheumatick and Scorbutic pains are often
ignorantly called Arthritick Symptoms: And such who are afflicted with either
of these, and take these Mineral Waters not cleans'd from that sediment, which
I can separate from 'em, in all probability minister much more Fuel than
relief to their Distempers: And though they may by large draughts wash away
some Sand and Gravel, and now and then expel some Stones; yet the question is,
whether they don't lodge as much or more of this matter in the Body, as they
thus drive through; which if, what Divertisement is it thus to be employed?

I Am sure I know by sad experience what hard labor preambles to the Birth of
a Stone.

But to return, our Artificial Waters are so finely prepared, that they afford
no sediment: yet they answer all the tests and intentions of the most refined
Spaw, they tinge of a pale Clarret Color, and a deep Purple with a little
scrapings of Gall, and discolor the Ordure, etc. they cleanse, cool, dry,
stimulate, open obstructions, dissolve and attenuate gross humors; and are
abstersive of Viscous, Tartarous, and other Humors in the Stomach,
Mesenteries, Hypochondries, Reins, Womb, Bladder, and evacuate them sometimes
by Stool, largely by Urine, and other dischargers of Nature.

They create a great Appetite, when the Stomack's cleans'd, by recovering and
strengthening her tone: the like they do by the Womb, which must be of great
use to such who are subject to miscarriages, weakness in those parts, and are
unapt to breed.

But because I think not fit here to particularize, I Will once for all say, They
are of excellent use for Ladies in all their distinguishing circumstances from
Men: But not to be used by those with Child, unless by the Advice of their
Physician: And if further direction be requisite for any, it is fit they should
have recourse to their own Physician.

And here in a Parenthesis, let me say, it is requisite to the health and
happiness of every person to have recourse to a Spiritual and a Physical Guide,
and that in times of Health, to preserve, and provide against those Evils,
which the height of a Distemper, and the hour of Death, make unseasonable for
any considerable Ministration. Principiis obsta, etc.

These Waters are powerful in all Cachectical and obstinate Diseases: like an
Alkali they imbibe the Acidity and Sowreness of the Blood, and consequently
dulcifie the same: for by a Naturul Propensity uniting (magnetically) with the
Esurine Salt, they are ejected together with the obstructive humors, by a
strong irritation of Nature (from these Waters) to expel 'em.

And from their Diuretic Nature, after they have attenuated, cut, resolved,
and so altered the Mucous and Tartarous Humors of the Body, and prepared 'em
for Excretion, they then carry them off by Urine, which is the most safe and
effectual conveyance (for all sharp and saline Humors especially) of all other
sorts of Evacuation whatever.

This Water thus enriched by my Tincture or Essence, searches such latent
passages and abstruse retirements of the Bowels and other parts, as other
Medicines cannot reach, and after a discovery made, does not only dispossess
what is preternatural of its usurped power, but also by corroborating and
re-inforcing Nature, so firmly intitles her to her former right of inheritance,
that scarce any thing but an act of Hostility or Old Age can cut off the Intail.

They so correct and mend the Juices of the Body by expelling watery, sharp,
sour, gnawing, hot, foul Humors, etc. that they are of excellent use to
purify the Blood, cure the Scurvey, even in those whose Gums and Teeth, as
well as by Spots and other Signs, show it to have deep rooting.

Admirable against the Dropsy, especially to such where the humors fluctuate
up and down, by falling into the Legs and returning again, which demonstrates
'em capable of Expulsion by Stool and Urine by things appropriate; and by thus
doing, Sore Legs may be prevented.

They are justly recommended against the Jaundice Yellow and Black, Melancholy
and fearful passions, Cholick, Diarrhaea, and Dysenteria, and the Distemper
called Vapors offending Head and Heart.

They cheer the Heart, prevent palpitations, passions and faintings. They open,
cool, cleanse and strengthen the Lungs, consequently good against Asthma's,
Defluxions, Coughs and Consumptions, if not too far spent.

They are abstersive, cleansing and healing, therefore consolidate Lungs
decaying from Exulcerations; and likewise Ulcerated Kidneys, they cleanse 'em
of mucous foul matter, the Duelech, Sand, Gravel and Stones. I may justly
commend 'em to those subject to Headaches, Vertigo, Megrim, etc. and for
Gonorrhea's and the fruitful improvements upon that Graft; especially if taken
in method with but a few other things, to speak modestly they will answer
expectation.

It Is too tedious to enumerate so many Distempers as Authors have bin pleased
to assign names to.

The preserving and restoring the Blood to a good temper, cuts off a thousand
Diseases.

And so the juice of Nerves rightly purged, purified and enrich't prevents many
there, as does the preserving a good Mass of Blood.

I Will only add, they are of use to such as are afflicted with Wounds, Ulcers,
Itch, Sores, Scabs, Sore-Legs, Leprosy, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Directions to be observed before, in, and after the taking our Waters.

TO them who intend the use of these Waters for the removing of any
considerable Distemper, I advise that they prepare their Bodies with some
gentle Vomit or Purge, which shall be thought most proper by their Physician.

To those who carefully keep their Bodies from any glut of humors, and design
only to take 'em for pleasure, or to remove slighter indispositions; to dilute
and temper the Blood and preserve it from decay or putrefaction in any measure,
or to create a good Stomach, etc. I advise but a slighter preparation, (and
that only before the first taking of 'em) by a few Stomach-Pills to clear the
first passages, or by some gentle purging Tablets, which will finely prepare
the Body, eating a few early in the Morning before you drink the Waters.

But I leave every one to have recourse to their own Physician for such as
these.

What I have furnished my self with requisite to be given before and with the
Waters, etc. I shall keep at home for such who resort to me: For I would
willing avoid all offense, not coveting any man's employ.

And thus I hope I shall easily demonstrate my care to prevent Obloquie, and
satisfy any one I design not to Monopolize.

If prejudice prevent not, these Waters may be prescribed by Physicians in
Method to their Patients as well as the Natural Medicinal Springs; and by their
Skill may be made in every respect a capable and useful Vehicle for the
distribution of such generous and noble Medicines as our Art directs.

The Waters are of excellent use, and serve many intentions taken alone from
one Quart to two, or three at most.

And the rules to be observed in the taking of 'em are common to other Mineral
Waters, and so generally known, that almost every one can prevent me in those
few and easy Directions that are requisite.

They are to be taken in the Morning Fasting (unless a few Tablets, or some
such slight Physical thing preamble) not when the Body is heated with exercise.

They are not to be drank too quick, nor too slow: but convenient distances are
to be allotted, as once in half an hour a Pint, or less, as your Stomach can
bear 'em, and rid 'em, till you have taken the quantity you design; After you
have taken two or three Draughts it is best to use some gentle exercise ad
ruborem only, not ad sudorem, till you be pretty warm, but not sweat.

Whilst you walk or ride, etc. you may eat Orange-chips, Citron-peals, Carraway
Confects, Elicampane Roots Candied, etc.

But if you are advised that it be convenient to pass any of these Waters by
Stool, the Purging Tablets taken with 'em will finely assist, and serve very
well in the room of the Confectionary, and much better on Medicinal accounts.

It Is not fit to Dine till the Waters are passed, and half an hour before
Dinner a Glass of Rhenish, White Wind or Clarret I think not amiss.

I shall not here prescribe the quality of your Diet; Every one knows that
Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Chickins, Rabbits, etc. are good Fare.

My care is to caution you as to quantity, and that the rather, because these
Waters rightly used, give a great Appetite.

It Is better both to Dine and Sup moderately, whilst in this Method, than to
overcharge at once.

Temperance prevents and helps to cure many Diseases. He that desires to eat
much, must eat little; for by eating little at a time, he lives long and so
makes it up.

All intemperance in Drink should at all times be avoided, But excess in this
Method may be of danger: Nevertheless I commend a little good Wine, or Beer and
Ale with discretion, especially an hour or two before you go to Bed.

And here I think it kind to insert this Note, That the dilutive Cup, or
Evenings draught so much in use, is generally taken too late: for to fill the
Body with Liquor and presently to Bed, causes many Diseases. It Is fit it should
as to the greatest part be passed first, which would prevent Gravel, Stone,
Gouts, Dropsies, etc.

Those who take Drops, Powders, and several Physical Preparations in these
Waters, or in Method with 'em, are to observe stricter rules than others,
according to the nature of their Distempers and of the things they take, which
as 'twould not be convenient, so neither can they be here prescribed, recourse
must be had to such as shall dispense their preparations.

The use of these Waters is to be continued as need shall require, or while
they please you.

They may be taken by some with great advantage mixed in their Wines, if they
drink White, Rhenish, or Clarrets: For they finely dilute the Wine, cool and
temper the Body: and very much promote the passing of the Wines by Urine, which
will be of good use to them especially who frequent the Taverns, and sit there
a while.

These Waters will be made fresh every day upon the best and choicest Springs
that can be got.

I shall make it great part of my business to see all those necessary rules
strictly observed that are requisite to their exact preparation.

And if in this short Tract I have not given some satisfactory account of 'em,
as to their Virtues and Use, I shall be ready at seasonable times to give
further direction to any that are pleased to require it.

CHAP. VII.
Of our Spaw-Tincture and its excellent Uses.
THe advantages of our Tincture are not few or mean, if the power be considered
that is put into every ones hands.

For here you have the Medicinal qualities of the wholesome Natural Spaws, by
much Care and Art separated and cleans'd from their gross Terrestrial parts.

Hereby any one never so remote, may have the entire benefit of the Natural
Medicinal Waters.

Any one upon Travel or retirement may with this Tincture furnish himself with
these Waters, and make 'em just as he takes 'em, and to what quantities he
pleases. He may contract or dilate his Vehicle and yet have an entire Dose of
the Virtues, by the ordering of his drops.

And those that drink of my Waters may augment the Dose of the Medicinal part
by this Tincture to what degree they judge fit, or are advised to for their
particular circumstances: Or the Tincture may be dropped into Wine as you drink
it to make it pass the better by Urine.

To those who frequent Tunbridge, or other Mineral Fountains, this Tincture may
be of excellent use to enrich their Virtues, and to make them more certain in
their Operations: For by uniting with their Mineral Principles it will
stimulate 'em to a brisker discharge; and by this help, the great quantities
usually taken may be contracted, which will be of great use to weak Stomachs,
and otherways infirm Bodies.

And the dangers from the ill passing of those Waters may be prevented, and
better by this Tincture, agreeable to their own Nature, than by any opposite
Physic.

Persons unable to frequent the Wells through a low Fortune are here
accommodated at their own Houses: Those unable through sickness, and whose
circumstances require, yet cannot take the quantities, or it may be not Water,
may use this Tincture in appropriate Vehicles.

'Twould be too tedious to enumerate half the benefits of this Tincture; and
from these already mentioned every one may supply many more conveniences,
Especially they whose necessities require, will be inventive.

About Twenty Drops of our Tincture makes a Bottle of Water to that strength
our Waters are of: Now any one may add fewer or more as he desires, and make
what quantities he pleases.

For the improving our Waters or Tunbridge, etc. half the Dose of drops to a
Quart may be used, because they are already impregnated with Minerals.

Unless you design to contract your quantity of Water, then you must increase
proportionably, 10, 15 or 20 Drops may be added to each Quart of Mineral
Waters, and so advance daily, till you arrive to what pitch you purpose, and
then abate by degrees.

It Is not easy to commit any error, for as he that drinks three Bottles makes
'em more potent in operation than he that drinks but two, so it is with the
Tincture.

ANd now I Am come to fix the prices, with which I would rather give content,
than consult my own benefit. I have therefore deliberated well on 'em, desiring
they may be without exception in every particular, and so obtain a good esteem,
and be of general use to answer their designation.

I hope therefore at six pence a Quart our Water will not be accounted dear;
nor our Tincture at Five Shillings the Bottle, which computed by Doses is much
about the rate of the Waters; for one Bottle of Tincture will make Ten or
Eleven Quarts of Water to that strength ours are of.

And if any ones occasion requires the increase of the Dose, he must be content
to be at the extraordinary Expense, which being but little, I hope success will
make him restitution.

They that send for the Waters Sealed up in our Bottles, are desired to send 9
d. for each Bottle, the odd 3 d. being allowed for the Bottle.

These Waters and Tincture are to be had only at the Dukes Bagnio in Long-Acre.

And near the Royal Exchange, as will be directed on two Tables at the South
and North Entrance.

And at my own House in New-street by Fetter-Lane near the Five Bells.

FINIS.
On Monday last died at his House in Salisbury Court, the famous Dr. Byfield,
well known by (...) Medicine called, Sal Volatile Oleosum.

The learned and pious Dr. Byfield, Sen. Fellow (...) the College of Physicians
in Dublin, departed (...) Life the 28th of October (not at his former House
(...) Salisbury Court, as has been published; but) at (...) House in Great
New-street, near Fetter-Lane* (...) he has lived about 11 Years, (...) where
his (...) continues to make the Sal Volatile, which the (...) prepared with her
own Hands, near 30 Years.


