QUAKERISM CONFIRMED, OR A vindication of the chief Doctrines and Principles of
the people called QVAKERS from the arguments and objections of the Students of
divinity (so called) of ABERDEEN in their book entitled QUAKERISM CONVASSED,
By ROBERT BARCLAY, and GEORGE KEITH.



2 Timothy 3: 9. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be
manifest to all men etc.

Printed in the Year. 1676.

Friendly Reader
Had we not more regarded the interest of the Truth, for whose sake we can shun
no abasement, then the significancy of those, with whom we have this
rencountre, we should have rather chused to be silent, then answer them, they
being of so small reputation among their own, that neither teachers nor people
will hold themselves accomptable for any of their positions, and seem zealous
to have it believed they would not bestow time to read it, nor yet hold
themselves obliged to approve it. However since we certainly know that in the
second part of their book (to which this reply is) they have scraped together
most of the chief arguments used against us, and borrowed not a little from G.
Ms. manuscripts, (with whose work, that yet appears not, we have been these
seven years menaced) which, like the materials of a building managed by
unskilful workmen, though they be by them very confusedly put together, yet
being the chief things can be said against us, we have thoroughly handled, for
the Readers satisfaction, which may be serviceable to the Truth, without
respect to the insignificancy of those against whom it is written. As for the
first part of their book, we have also answered it, but distinct from this, it
consisting of many particularityes of matters of fact, which perhaps might have
proved taedious to many Readers that may be this be edified, and think it of no
great consequence, that the Students are proved liars, which even many of their
own party think is not any spot in their religion, so little are they looked
upon among their own, yet those that are curious may also have that first part.
As for this second part, wherein our principles are handled, we judge we deal
with the Clergy in general, however they seek to shift it, and hide themselves,
since their book is licenced by the bishop of Edinburgh, and he being
challenged, said, he did it not without a recommendation from Aberdeen. So that
no man of reason, can deny but they are accountable for the errors, and
impertinencies which we have herein observed, which we leave, Reader, to thy
serious examination, remaining.

Thy Friends R. B. G. K.

The CONTENTS.
SECTION 1. Concerning immediate Revelation. Page 1. SECTION 2. The Students
argument against the Spirits being the rule* proved one with the Jesuit
Dempsters. 12 SECTION 3. Concerning the supper, perfection, and Women's
speaking. 18 SECTION 4. Concerning the necessity of immediate Revelations to the
building up of true faith. 27 SECTION 5. Concerning Worship. 41 SECTION 6.
Concerning Baptism. 56 SECTION 7. Concerning the Ministry. 65 SECTION 8.
Concerning Liberty of Conscience. 75 The CONCLUSION. Wherein their observations
upon R. B. his Offer, and their last Section of the Q. Revileings, as they
term them, are examined. 83
QUAKERISM CONFIRMED,
SECTION FIRST.
Concerning immediate Revelation, wherein the Second part of the Students book
from Page 44. to Page 66. is Answered,

IN their first section, they allege, we do wickedly put many indignities
upon the holy Scriptures, and that we monopolise the Spirit to our selves,
which are gross lies, but that they are against the Spirit, is no malicious
accusation, but a thruth as will appear to any true discerner: Their comparing
us, when we plead for the Spirit, to them, who cried the Temple, the Themple,
is unequal and profane, they that cried the Temple, the Temple, rejected the
Spirit of God, and relied too much on the Temple, and outward privileges, but
dare they blame any for relying too much on the Spirit of God? Again, in their
first subjection they committ a gross deceit in which they follow G. M. their
master, who (uses the same in his manuscript to us) in alleging, they are
more for the Spirit then we, because they affirm, that the efficacy of the
Spirit is insuperable. For we do affirm, that the efficacy of the Spirit is
in a true sense insuperable, as namely where the mind is well disposed, See R.
B. his thesis, where he uses the word insuperably, but that the Spirit does
insuperably move, or irrestibly force the ill disposed minds of all in whom it
operats is false, and contrary to scripture, which says, that some resist the
Spirit, yea and is contrary to the experience of all, who are acquainted with
the Spirits workings, that know, that the Spirit many times works so gently,
that his operation may be resisted, therefore said the Apostle, Quench not the
Spirit. Now that doctrine which is contrary both to Scripture, and experience
is not for the spirit, but against it. Again, how are they more for the spirit
then we, seeing they affirm the Spirits influence is but only effective, as
having no evidence in it self, sufficiently to demonstrat that it is of God; we
say, it has, as being both effective and objective. 2. They say, the influence
of the spirit is only given to some; we say, to all. 3. They say, it is so
weak, that it can bring none to a perfect freedom from sin in this life, though
never so much improved; we say, it can, yea. 4. They say commonly, the
influence of the spirit cannot keep the best Saint one moment from sin, we say,
it can keep them for whole days, yea always, if they improve it, as well as
they can. 5. They say, a Man may and ought to pray without the spirit, which we
deny, and so we leave it to the judicious, if here they do not commit a gross
deceit. Lastly, in their stating the question, they accuse us falsely, as if we
did hold, that all men ought to judge, and examine all the material objects of
faith and Articles of religion by inward revelations, as if all men were bound
to an impossibility, all men have not all the material objects of faith
propounded unto them, for some of the material objects of faith are merely
accidental unto all men's salvation, as to believe that Abraham begat Isaak,
and Isaak Jacob, etc. others although not accidental, yet are but integrall
parts, and not essential of Christian religion, such as the outward history of
Christ, etc. and so by this distinction diverse of these arguments are answered,
without more ado, especially the first two, where they spend much paper
fighting with their own shadow, telling us, that the heathens have no
revelations, showing the birth, passion, resurrection, etc. of Jesus Christ,
which we do grant, for the belief of such things is only necessary to them, to
whom they are propounded, and the Scriptures alleged by them, at most prove no
more, it were a needless labor and not worth the pains to answer particularly
to all their impertinencies, follies, and blasphemies, which they obtrude upon
us as arguments, and in the issue, their last probations resolve into mere
assertions, as much denied by us, as the things they undertake to refute,
therefore upon each section or subsection we shall, but take notice, what their
arguments resolve into at last, and as there is occasion, set down some
propositions that may serve as a key to open the Readers way, through all these
heaps of confusion and blasphemy, wherewith they fill their pages. As for the
Scriptures brought by them Arg. 1. as Isa. 9. 2. Matthew. 4. 16. Psalm. 147. 19.
20. These prove not, that they had no light, for the light shines in darkness
Joh. 1. and Prove. 29. 18. does not import that people have wanted vision from
the beginning, but that for some time, they may want it, to wit, when their day
of visitation is over, which we deny not. And whereas they tell us that the
Greek particle (...) is often to be translated among, and therefore so to be
Col. 1. 26. and other places alleged by us; we deny this consequence. And that
they say, the Apostle is speaking of the outward preaching of Christ Col. 1.
26. is their bare assertion without any proof. Also in their first argument
they allege a gross untruth upon G. K. as if he did hold in his book of
Immediate revelation, page 11. that the Jews generally under the Law had no
immediate revelation in the Seed, let the place be read and it will clear G. K.
where he distinguishes a twofold sort of revelation in the seed, according to
a twofold condition of the seed, the first sort of revelation is more hidd and
obscure, the seed not being completely formed, but as under ground. The second
is more manifest and clear, so as with open face to behold the glory of God.
The first sort of revelation is given universally unto all both Jews and
Gentiles, but the second is only given to the Saints, in whom the seed is
completely formed and brought forth. As to their Queries we answer that
Conscience and Reason are distinguished from the saving light of Christ in all
men, and the revelation thereof, as a natural and supernatural principle are
distinguished, and it was the natural, which Pelagius did exalt too much, as
our adversaries also do, who affirm that men may be lawful preachers without
being renewed by the supernatural principle of Gods saving light and Grace.

In the prosecution of their second argument. 1. They deny the inward blood and
sufferings of Christ, referring us to their proof afterward, which we shall
in its place examine. 2. They allege that we hold an heavenly and spiritual
nature in Christ, which is distinct from the Godhead on the one hand, and from
the Manhood on the other, which they call a third nature in Christ. But this
their alledgance is false, for that heavenly and spiritual nature is not a
third thing distinct from both the Godhead and Manhood of Christ, as shall be
afterward shown. 3. They allege that the Apostle does not speak of any inward
hearing or word, but of the outward. The Contrary is manifest from the Apostles
own words in the same chapter, the word is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy
heart. Nor is their reason valid to prove it, for the words verse. 14, 15. are
not arguments made by Paul, but objections adduced by him, which he afterward
answers, and this is usual with Paul in this Epistle. As to their question,
wherein consists the nature and essence of faith? we say, it is a receiving of
Christ, laying hold upon him, according to whatsoever revelation he makes of
himself in men's hearts, which is in some greater, in others less, but in all is
in some degree.

In their third argument they undertake to prove that according to us the
Scriptures are not necessary secundum quid, or profitable, but all in vain, as
for their example, as they know examples prove not, so is it vain and
impertinent, for we never compared the Scriptures to a mutilated and dim copy,
they are a clear and perfect copy as to all essentialls and necessaries of
Christian religion: but they are not the original; and seeing we have answered
them so many questions, let them answer us this one. Are not all these divinity
books and Commentaries on the Scripture made by men not divinely inspired, as a
mutilated and dim copy in comparison of the Scripture, and whether is the
Scripture or these books more perfect? if they say the Scripture is more
perfect, then what need they the mutilated and dim copy of these divinity
books, or what profit can they have, by them, which they cannot have rather by
the Scripture? Again, here they confound the material and formal object of
faith, as if we did hold that inward revelation without Scripture did propound
unto us the material objects of faith, which is false, for there are many of
the material objects, which are only propounded by the Scripture, to wit,
such as the historical part of the Scripture, and in this respect, we do not
plead that inward revelation is the material object, but the formal.

In their fourth argument, they are so blind as not to take notice how we can
give the same answer that they give, concerning the Law, that we who are under
grace and obedience to the inward Law, are dead as to the condemning power, but
not as to the commanding power thereof. But that it is not the letter or any
outward testimony of the Law that does so powerfully convince a man's
conscience, as of other sins, so of covetousness, as the Spirit of God does in
his inward convictions and smitings upon the conscience, is clear from the
experience of all these, who have known and passed through the state, which the
Apostle spoke of, when he said, I was alive without the Law, but when the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died. Yea what law is that of the mind,
whereof he makes mention Romans 8. but an inward Law, by which the knowledge of
sin comes, and through which both the knowledge, and remembrance of sin sticks
more closely to the soul then through any outward law it can? and did not
Christ say, that the spirit should convince the world of sin? yea how many of
those called Heathens, who had not any outward law, have declared that inward
concupiscence was a sin? As for their malicious accusation against us, of our
lust and covetousness, we reject as not worth the noticing, seeing they assert
it without any color of proof, but it seems they have learned that wicked and
devilish maxim calumni are audacter aliquid adhaerebit. i. e. calumniat boldly
that something may stick.

Their fifth argument is answered in the first as being a branch thereof.

Their sixth argument is built upon a false supposition, that according to our
principle, all would be prophets, and that no difference could be assigned
betwixt prophets, and pastors and teachers, seeing prophets and teachers teach,
both from the spirit. The first is answered at large in the end of G. Ks. book
of Immediate revelation. To the second we answer, that by prophets in the
strickest sense are meant those who prophecy of things to come, as Agapus was;
by teachers, they who instruct the people in doctrine, and this is a manifest
difference, although in the large and common sense prophesying and preaching
are one thing.

Their seventh argument, they pretend to build on that Scripture Jud. 19. but
it is easily answered, that men in one sense may be said not to have the
spirit, and in another to have it, even as a rich man who improveth not his
money, both has, and has it not in diverse senses, according to which Christ
said, from him that has not shall be taken away that which he has. And
whereas R. B. does grant that they whose day of visitation is come to an end,
have not the spirit, so much as to invite and call them unto God; here they
insult as if all were granted they seek, but they are greatly deceived, for
though he grant that some have not the spirit to call and invite them, yet he
grants not that they have not the spirit to reprove them, for even the devils
and damned souls of men and women sin against the Spirit of God witnessing
against them in their hearts, which is in them a law of condemnation, as David
said, if I go down into hell thou art there, yea do we not read not only that
God spak unto Cain a most wicked man, but also unto Satan Job. 1. which
speaking of God to Satan, we suppose the Students will not say, was by an
outward voice, and consequently it was internal. But we ask them if all wicked
Professors of Christianity should burn the Bible and destroy all outward rules
and means of knowledge, should they by this means cease to sin, because they
should have no rule, or should they be excused from gospel duties, because
they have no rule, by this supposition (according to the Students) to require
them?

In their second subsection they spend both their strength and paper, in
laboring to prove some things which we no wise deny, as the sequel of their
Major. 14. but in the proof of their Minor, where the whole stress lies, they
utterly faill in both its branches, as we shall briefly show. As to the first,
they argue thus, they know no such inward objective evidence of inward
revelations of the spirit in themselves, therefore they have none such. We deny
the consequence, they see it not, nor know it, because they will not, their
prejudice against the truth does blind them, and indispose their understanding;
yea might not the unbelieving Jews have reasoned the same way against Christ,
when he was outwardly present with them, we do not know him to be Christ,
Therefore he is not Christ. Again, whereas they querie in a scoffing way, can a
thing that is self evident be hidd from the whole world except a few
Illuminado's? We answer, if it were hidd from the whole world, except a few in
comparison of others, it is no more then what the Scripture says, that the
whole world lies in wickedness, and their wickedness blinds them that they
do not see the light that is in them, yet we could instance many who are not
Quakers, so called both Christians and Gentiles who have acknowledged the
evidence and certainty of divine inspiration in all men, as the surest ground
of knowledge, but we need not digress into this here; we have enough besides to
stop their mouths. For do not they say, that the Scriptures have a
selfevidence, and yet are not the Scriptures and the truths declared in them
hidd from the greatest part of the world? The Mahumetans reject both Old and
New Testament, and the Jews the New; although they read them, and yet according
to our adversaries, they have self evidence, so that it is evident, the same
argument is as much against the Scripture, as the Light within in point of self
evidence, and indeed much more, seeing many who deny the self evidence of the
Scirptures, even heathens have a knowledge of the self evidence of divine
inspiration, as Socrases, Plato, Plotinus, Phocyllides, Seneca and many others.
And here in the close being sensible of their weakness after they have labored
to prove the negative, they tell us, that seeing the negative is theirs, they
are not bound to prove it, and so would roll it over on us to prove the
affirmative against their own law, which would have us to be mere defendents.
As to the maxim, Affirmanti incumbit probatio, it does not help them, for they
have affirmed a negative, and have been at great pains to prove it. But all in
vain. And why may we not put them to prove their Minor being a negative, as
well as their master, I. M. put the Jesuit Dempster to prove his Minor, which
John Meinzies affirmed to be negative?

In their prosecution of the second branch they affirm that the Q. cannot give
any sufficient evidence of their revelations. This we deny and put them to
prove it, but how shamefully they fail here is apparent, for instead of proving
of what they affirm, they put us to prove the contradictory, and so contrary to
their own Law, would urge us to be impugners and defenders at one time, a silly
trick they learned from the Baptists in their dispute at London, as indeed the
Students argument about an evidence is the same upon the matter with that which
the Baptists used against us at London long before them and which the Jesuit
used against I. M. long before them both. So that we may see what sort of
patrons the Students here follow. But it is well to be observed, that when they
seek an evidence from us, they tell us page 57. They mean not an evidence which
will actually and de facto convince a pertinacious adversary, but an objective
evidence or clearness in the thing it self which is apta nata, fit of its own
nature to convince, and will really convince the well disposed. Very well! this
their plain concession destroys their whole building, for seeing they press
upon us by way of Dilemma, either we have the Spirit of God, or we have it not,
which is I. L. his argument. We may very lawfully by his own example press him
and his fellow Students, with the like argument, either they have a well
disposed mind, or they have not. If they say, they have not, then they confess
they are a pertinacious adversary, and so not capable to be convinced of our
evidence, and surely it were great folly in us to seek to convince them of the
truth of a thing, who are not in a capacity to be convinced. If they say, they
have a well disposed mind, then let them prove it to us, or give us an evidence
of it, seeing by their own rule, Affirmanti incumbit probatio. Who is so weak
that does not see that they are entangled in the same difficulty they would
urge upon us, yea into a far greater, for they can not so much as pretend to
any objective evidence, whereby to convince us that they are well disposed,
seeing they altogether deny such a thing. If they answer, that they are not
bound to say either the affirmative or negative, but require of us to prove the
negative, who sees not that we have the same to reply unto them, when they
urge us, either the Q. have the spirit, or they have not, that we are not bound
to say, either the affirmative or negative, for although to have, and not to
have, are contradictory, yet to say, that we have the spirit, and that we have
not the spirit, are not contradictory, being both affirmative: and indeed when
we assert things only in thesi, we do not say, either that we have, or have not
the spirit, but this we say, and we are able to prove from Scripture, that all
good Christians have the Spirit of God, immediately to teach and guide them
into all truth, and all men have it so far as either to justify or condemn
them. By this we stand, and are able to defend it through the help of God, as
consisting both with Scripture, and sound reason, and testimonies of Ancients.
But if they think with their little craft to bring us down from the Thesis to
the Hypothesis, they must know the same will bring them down to it also, for
seeing it is a truth acknowledged both by them and us, that all true Christians
and children of God have the Spirit of God, working in them at lest as an
efficient cause: from this we urge them thus, either they have the Spirit of
God working in them as an efficient cause, or they have not. If they say, they
have not, they confess they are not true Christians, or children of God, which
we suppose they will be loath to say, if they say, they have the Spirit of God
as an efficient cause of faith working in them, and subjectively inlightening
them, let them prove it, or give us an evidence of it. Who does not see, that
poor men they are taken in their own snare? we know all rational and sober men
will acknowledge that we are not bound to receive their affirmations without
proof, more then they are bound to receive ours, nor indeed so much, we being
as the case stands, but defendents.

As touching their answer to R. B. his retortions about an evidence (...)shall
be examined in the next section.

In page 60. they tell, that we assign them at last some shaddows of evidences,
namely first, our own declaration. 2. the Scriptures. 3. the immediate testimony
of the Spirit. But that these are not shaddows, will appear to the judicious
and well disposed, if they consider these two things 1. That by our declaration
we mean not a bare verbal declaration, having no virtue or manifestation of
life in it, for we confess, such might be as good a ground for a heretic in
way of evidence, but by our declaration, we mean such a declaration as does
really proceed from the spirit of God in us, and is therefore a living
declaration having a manifestaaion of life in it, and with it, and which is not
only in words of life, or living words uttered through us from the spirit of
life, but also in works of life or living works, which are the fruits of the
spirit, as said Christ, by their fruits shall ye know them. Now such a
declaration, can no Heretic have, however he may pretend to it. If our
adversaries say, that we only pretend to such a thing. We answer them with
their own rule, Affirmanti incumbit probatio. i. e. The affirmer ought to
prove. Let them prove us only to be pretenders, which yet they have not done,
nor can do; and indeed such a declaration from the Spirit of God in the
Apostles, as when John said, we are of God, etc. was an evidence that no
heretic could justly pretend to; 2. it is a most unjust and unreasonable thing
to require of us any other evidence of our having the spirit, then that which
every true Christian may and ought to give, seeing we pretend to no other
spirit, but that which every true Christian has, nor to any revelations, but
these, which are the privileges of all true Christians, nor to any doctrines,
which are not conform to the Scriptures of Truth, as we are ready to prove, and
as G K. has already showed in his book Immediate Revelation, which neither the
Students nor their Masters have given us any refutation of. Now have not all
good Christians, these three evidences for them? and we can prove by the help
of the Lord that they are as applicable to us, as to any upon earth: and here
note, that when we say the Scripture is the best outward evidence, that can be
given, we mean it not as a particular evidence, but as a general common to all
good Christians, for we grant that the Scripture cannot prove that any
particular man has the Spirit of God in such a way as true Christians have it,
but it proves in general, that all true Christians have it, yea and all men to
convince them at least.

In page 61, 62. They reject the Scriptures testimony as an evidence to us,
because according to us the Scriptures testimony has no evidence without the
Spirit. In answer to which we say. But it has an evidence with the spirit, his
inward evidence going along with it, which inward evidence, we say, does go
along with it, sufficiently to convince every well disposed intellect. And this
we can prove from the Scriptures testimony. Nor is this to commit an unlawful
circle, as they foolishly allege, which is but an old threed-bare alledgance
of Papists against the Protestants, as Turnbull alleged on Paraeus, that he
proved the spirit by the Scripture, and the Scripture by the Spirit. Some
Protestants in our days do miserably seek to extricat themselves of that
circle, that they know the spirit by the Scriptures objectively, and they know
the Scriptures by the spirit effectively, and so indeed they get free of the
circle, as not being, in eodem genere, i. e. in the same kind. But they affirm
a gross untruth that the spirits influence, is only effective and ex part
subjecti, whereas we know it is objective, and can prove both from Scripture
and primitive Protestants, see G. K. his book of immediate Revelation, and
Quakerism no popery. Where the same is at length proved. But we have a most
clear way to extricat our selves of that circle imposed on us by Papists and
these Students, to wit, that we know the Scriptures testimony by the spirit
tanquam a priori, as we know the effect by the cause, and we know the Spirits
testimony by the Scriptures, tanquam a posteriori, as we know the cause by the
effect, and so both are objective, and yet in a diverse kind, because the
objective evidence of the spirit is a self evidence and primary, the objective
evidence of the Scripture is but derived and secondary.

In their answer to G. K. his retortion from the practice of Christ, who though
his own immediate testimony was to be received, referred them unto the testimony
of the Scriptures. They most miserably betake themselves to their old trade of
affirming things without any proof, and yet on the proof of these things the
whole stresse of their answer lies, as 1. They say, the Jews rejected only the
outward immediate testimony of Christ. However dare they say, but that the
outward immediate testimony of Christ was to be believed? and yet he referred
them unto the testimony of the Scriptures. 2. They say, they have no such
testimony themselves as the inward objective testimony of the spirit. 3. They
say, according to Christ, the Scriptures were the rule, meaning the primary
rule, and so, they set the Scripture above Christ, his own immediate outward
testimony, a most gross disorder. All which we reject as mere affirmations
without any proof. Their insinuation that G. K. acts the part of a cunning
sophist, when he spoke these words repeated by them, page 4. is no less without
any real proof, for it is a truth, that no Scripture truth can be savingly
believed but by the illumination of the spirit, which is objective.

In paragraph 28. they think to evade G. K. his argument, that we have
inspiration, because all men have it, that then Papists, Mahumetans, Pagans and
men bodily possessed have inspiration, which we do affirm, viz. that these have
it so far as to convince them, and is sufficient to be a law of condemnation,
and render them without excuse for their sin, and this all men have, not only
within their day, but after their day of visitation is expired. But as to their
imposed glosses and senses, which they say their divines have already
vindicated on these Scriptures cited by G. K. for universal grace and
inspiration, as they refer us to their Divines, so we refer them to our friends
and our books, where their silly and weak reasons are answered against this
gospel truth. As for the word EVERY we acknowledge it is not taken always
universally, but seeing it is taken so most frequently, it lies on them to
prove that it is otherwise taken in the places cited.

Before we close the answer to this subsection, we propose further unto the
Reader these two Considerations. 1. That when we say, inward divine revelations
in the seed are self evident, we do not mean it always in respect of the
material objects, of things revealed, but in respect of the formal object, or
revelation it self. 2. Although we affirm that the illumination and influence
of the spirit, in men's hearts, is both effective and objective, yet we do not
affirm that they are two distinct things, but one and the same thing under
different respects; so that we do not plead for another influence, then that
which in words they seem to grant, but we say, it is a more excellent thing
then they acknowledge it to be, as being in it self perceptible and having a
self evidence, whereas they will have it only a medium incognitum, a thing
altogether undiscernible and inevident of it self, so as to convince or
satisfy the understanding that it is of God. And thus according to our
adversaries sense, and upon their principle, this inward illumination of the
spirit may be said to be fallacious, for want of evidence, seeing according to
their own argument that which has not a sufficient evidence is fallacious.

But whereas the Students in their account grant in words, that the soul has
spiritual sensations and that the work of grace may be felt, this confession
destroys their wholl superstructure; for if the work of grace can be felt or
is perceptible then it is objective, for whatever is perceptible is objective,
ad seeing they grant that the soul has spiritual sensations, we ask them, what
are the objects of the sensations? Are they only words and letters, or things
such as God himself in his heavenly refreshings, waterings and bedewings, if
the first, it is most unreasonable, for it would make the spiritual senses to
fall short of the natural, seeing the natural senses reach beyond words to
natural things themselves, if the second, they must needs with us acknowledge
inward objective revelations, for by them we understand no other thing but as
God, and the things of His Kingdom are felt in us by way of object.

SECTION SECOND.
Where the Students chief argument against the spirits being the rule, is
proved to be one upon the matter with that the Jesuit Dempster used against
their Master I. M. and the same way answered, and their weak endeavors to
evite it examined and refuted.

THere has enough been said heretofore to demonstrat the fallacies in the form
of their arguments in which also it resembled the Jesuits, which to avoid
repetition we shall now omit. Their medium against us, is, that we cannot give
an evidence of our being led by the spirit, but that which may be as good an
evidence for Heretics, for thus they word it in their account, alleging we
wronged them, in saying, they used the words, which Heretics may pretend to,
yet abstracting from this false charge, we shall take is as they now express
it, being indeed equivalent. To prove that it may be as good an evidence for
heretics, they make I. L. argue thus, other Heretics declare and say, they
have the Spirit of God, teaching them as well as you. Therefore, if your saying
you were so taught, were a sufficient evidence, etc. Then their declaring, etc.
Now let the Reader judge, whether this argument amounts to any thing more, then
that, that is not a sufficient evidence to the Q. which other Heretics may
pretend to. Thus the Students dispute against the Q. let us hear how the Jesuit
disputes against I. M. their Master Pap. Lucif^g. page 3. after the Jesuit has
repeated his argument, he adds, May it please the answerer of this syllogism to
remember that the ground or principle, which he shall produce to prove the
truth of his religion must have this property, that it cannot serve nor be
assumed to prove a false religion as the grounds and principles that one
produces to prove that he is an honest man must have this property, that it
cannot serve nor be assumed to prove a knave to be an honest man. etc. Let the
judicious Reader consider whether there be any material difference betwixt
these two argumentations. But to proceed and show that their arguments are no
better then the Jesuits against their Master, and our answers no worse, then
their Masters against the Jesuit; we shall place them together, I. M. answers
the Jesuit thus page 5. of his Pap. Lucifugus. Our Answer to the Students as
themselves acknowledge st page 59. ^s. The true religion has sufficient
grounds in it self, to manifest it self to be the true religion, if it met with
a well disposed intellect (for to use your own similitude) an honest man may
have ground enough to show a distinction betwixt him and a knave, albeit a fool
cannot discern it, so the true religion may have ground enough to prove it self
true (which the false religion has not) though an infidel or Heretic whose
foolish mind is darkened Romans 1. 21. cannot take, it up. That the evidence of
the spirit cannot be assigned, but to the well disposed understandig. This they
call a pitiful subterfuge, alleging that then this evidence can only be
assigned to such, as are of the Q. mind, but not to others, and that any
Heretic in the world may deny evidences upon the same account. Now let the
judicious Reader, determine whether if this answer be a pitiful subterfuge;
the Students with the same breath do not declare their Masters, to the Jesuit
to be the same.

And when they write next, let them show the difference, which they have not
yet done.

In answer to this Retortion, they allege page 67. That R. B. said their
master, ^o. M would not assign the Jesuit a ground, to prove the truth of the
Protestant Religion, and therefore, say they, R. Bs. practices agree exactly
with the Iusuits Moralls, and gives an egregious specimen of his Iesucticall
hones^y, which makes us suspect him to be a Iesuited emissary. This is a (...)
disproved by their own account, where page 8. upon this occsion, They confess
R. B. said only that their master desired the Jesuit to prove that the
Protestant Religion had no ground for it. Will they deny this, let them read
the very first four lines of their masters first answer to the Jesuits paper
page 3. and they will find he put the Jesuit to prove his Minor, which was,
that the Protestant Religion had no such ground. As it does not therefore
follow that I. M assigned not afterward a ground; so neither will R. B. his
repeating this, infer that he said, he did not assign such a ground. Yea in
contradiction to themselves page 60. They acknowledge he told, their master
named the Scripture as a ground, etc. So it is manifest they have given here a
specimen of their Jesuitical honesty, and because they could not answer, they
forged lies to fill up the paper, and things not to the purpose as page 57.
where offering to reply to this retortion, they say: But for answer it is well
known R. B. was brought up in a Popish College, and it is thought by many that
he is a Iesuited emissary, etc. Is not this a pungent answer? Reader, R. B. was
educated in a popish college; ergo, say the Students, our answer is not that
which the Jesuit used against our master. It seems the Students are offended
that R. B. has forsaken popery, or otherwise their charging him with his
education must be very impertinent, as indeed it is no less foolish, then if we
should upbraid Luther, Calvin and all the first Reformers as Papists, for being
so educated, and though it is no wonder their folly and malice led them into
this impertinency, yet it might have been expected that their gratitude to the
Bishop of Edinburgh, who was pleased to permit their book to be printed, might
have hindered them from this folly, seeing he was educated in the same Popish
College R. B. was, and owes some of his Philosophy to it, whereas R. B. learned
only there a little grammar, and came thence in his 15 Year, but the Bishop was
there professing popery in his more mature age. So if this reflect any thing
upon R. B. it will much more against the Bishop, which they will do well to
clear, and be sure not to omit, when they write next, or else acknowledge
their impertinency herein. It seems they wanted strength of reason, to evite
the retortion, which makes them thus rove, offering also to prove that their
master did assign a ground, which was never denied and that he was defendent,
so was R. B. also. what is that to the purpose, unless to make the retortion
the stronger, and show they cannot get by it? but page 60. They say, that
whereas the Jesuit pressed their master that heretics did say, their Religion
was conform to the Scripture, as well as he, and so the Scripture was no
peculiar ground for him, more then for heretics. They say their master
answered, That it was not a pretended, but real conformity unto the Scripture,
that demonstrats a true Religion, etc. and upon this they inquire, what
follows, alleging they argued from being as good and not pretending, and so
fall a railling, saying, that the light of our Consciences is ecclipsed by a
new found light, and that we misrepresent them maliciously. This railing is for
want of better reasoning, but seeing they are so blind as not to see, whether
they will see it or not, we shall tell them, and, we hope, let the Reader
see, what follows here from. Jo. Meinzies the Students master says to the
Jesuit, it is not enough that heretics say the Scripture is a ground for their
Religion, unless it really be so, and that other Heretics saying so does not
infer, that it is as little a ground for his own (to wit J. Ms.) Religion.
Very well! The Quakers tell the Students, That it is not enough that heretics
declare they have the Spirit, unless it be really so, and their saying, they
have it, while they have it not, does not infer, that our saying we have it,
is as little a ground for us. Who but such as are as childish as the Students,
will affirm, there is here any difference? But further, they confound most
ignor antly the Internal testimony of the spirit with the declaration of
having the spirit, which are two different things. It was incumbent upon them
to have proven that the internal testimony of the spirit is as good an
evidence for Heretics, as for us, which they have not offered to do; next,
they have not proved that the declaration of Heretics is as good as ours,
neither can they unless they can prove ours to be false, which they neither
have nor can do. But they have egregiously fallen in that in convenience, they
would fix upon us, page 58. 59. where in answering R. Bs. retortion, showing
them, that if men's being deceived, contradicting themselves, or one another,
who say the spirit is the rule, did infer the spirit not to be a certain rule,
then men's being deceived, contradicting themselves and one another, who say the
Scripture is the rule, would the same way infer that the Scripture is not the
rule. Here they are miserably put to it, and therefore not ashamed to deny that
they plead not against the spirits being a rule, for these Causes. The contrary
for which is known to all that are acquainted with these controversies, and for
example, let them read their so much applauded W. Mitchell his Dialogue and his
sober answer, so called, where he makes this the chief cause, yea themselves
for the same reason within two pages to wit page 60. and 61. plead against the
teaching of the spirit, affirming that But besides, will not their Masters
answer above mentioned meet well with them here, that since these sects and
saints, did as both they and the Q. confess but pretend to the spirit, that
because they did but pretend therefore the Q. do but pretend also, no more then
because some heretics do pretend their religion is conform to the Scripture,
therefore I. M. does so too.
because the Georgians, Familists and pretended Saints as Francis and Loyola,
etc. pretended the inward teaching of the spirit, and had an outward show of
godliness, therefore the spirits teaching to deny ungodliness is as good an
evidence for them as for the Q. Who but the Students would run themselves into
such miserable condictions? but to give the Reader an evident demonstration of
the Students gift of contradicting themselves, take one here in their own
words, they say this above mentioned retortion does not meet their argument,
why? do we conclude that the spirit is not the rule of faith, because they
cannot give an evidence which will actually convince, that they are led by the
spirit, no such thing, compare this with 1. Ls. medium of his second argument,
where he undertaketh to prove that the spirit is not the rule of faith, (as it
is expressed by themselves) because there can be no evidence given of it in the
world, but if they think to creep out here, that there may be evidences given,
though not such as do actually convince, because of the want of: subjective
evidence, or disposition of the mind, as they afterward add, and that we can
give no evidence, of this last sort, it remains then for them to prove that
their minds are well disposed, seeing they are the Opponents, and we the mere
Defendents, and that the evidences assigned by us, or such as are not manifest
even to the well disposed, and yet to go round, page 59. paragraph. 19. They
account this of the well disposed mina ridiculous, though it was the best
answer their Master could give the Jesuit in the like case, as above is shown,
but thou may perhaps judge Reader, that these that are so nice and scrupulous
in receiving evidences from others, would give some very solid ones for their
own rule; when pressed the same way to give us an evidence, that they have the
Scripture to be their rule from God, and that they have the true sense of it.
Take then notice of them here Reader, and see how satisfactory their answer is
Now (say the Students page 59.) The solution is easy, for they who make the
Scripture their principal rule are either our Churches, or they are Sects
dissenting from us. If the first, have not our divines frequently proved both
from the intrinsic characters of Divinity that appear in the Scriptures
themselves, and also from the outward motives of credibility, that we have
these Scripturall revelations from God? and have they not often assigned
sufficient objective evidences and proofs of the senses of the Scriptures
taught by our churches as to every point controverted by us, and all Sects
whatsoever, so that dissenters remain unconvinced for want of subjective
evidence and disposition of mind; and really ought to believe us teaching such
senses of Scripture, etc. Is not this rarely well solved? do the Students give
any better evidence for all this, then their own declaration, and is not this
(according to themselves) as good for other Heretics as for them? is it not
strange with what confidence they should print such stuff? Besides as to the
first part of it, it is manifestly false, for Calvin the chiefest of their
Divines, has in plain words asserted.

That all the objective evidences and motives of credibility are not sufficient
to establish the Conscience in the belief of the Scripturs certainly, and that
thereunto is necessary the secret and inward testimony of the Spirit, yea that
the same Spirit that was in the Prophets and Apostles enter into the heart etc.
So say all the public confessions of the Protestants abroad, and seeing of this
according to the Students there can be no objective evidences in the world
given, then neither can there of the Scripture, which they confess is their
rule. So the Reader may see that their work is like the vipers brood, that
destroys it self; and tends to overturne the certainty of all Christian
religion, landing in Scepticisme, which because they can not shun, they end
their section in vain boasting and railing, saying, page 77. they provoke all
the Papists and Qu. of the world to argue against them so, if they can. Here
are high words indeed, but seeing they are so busy in boasting we accept the
Challenge and offer us to prove before as public an auditory, as the last
Dispute was, that their arguments against the Q. are no better then the Jesuits
against their master. And here to conclude, they add, Let the Reader therefore
judge, whether railing Robin shows forth more of an asses then of a vipers
nature, where he brands our argument with the black mark of Popery. Well! we
leave to the Readers judgment, who also may judge, if this be not railing, and
if the Students, who talk at this rate, be to be trusted in their Preface,
saying that they have abstained from all personal criminations, and have not
rendered evil for evil, and what may be thought of men that are not ashamed
thus to belie themselves.

SECTION THIRD.
Wherein the Students arguments concerning the Supper, and against Perfection,
and Women's speaking are considered and answered, contained in their subsection
3. from page 66. of their book to page 78.

FIrst, They say, They might argue that the Q. have not revelations from the
Spirit, because of their mad and impious practices, and then they turn this
assertiou into a question, asking, have not the Q. committed such practices,
saying they were commanded by the Spirit? And for this they refer the Reader
to several books writ against the Q. by their declared adversaries: which
signify nothing unless they will prove that these men spoke Truth, which they
neither have, nor can do, and so are no more valued by us, then Cochleus lies
against Luther. But to confirm this, They place at large a citation out of H.
More, whom they say, the Q. have reported to be a Quaker. This is a false
calumny, which they are dared to prove. That H. More has in a letter to G. K.
owned some of the Q. principles, is true, as particularly that of immediate
objective Revelation, called by them the head of the Monster, and that the seed
is a substance, which they count one of the Q. grand errors. As for that
citation of H. More, he wrote it upon trust, and was not an eyewitness of these
things, and it recurrs upon him and them to prove the things true. The story
there mentioned of I. N. seeing it was at that very time disowned by the Q. and
since condemned by himself; militats nothing against us, no more then other
horrid things, yea that (which in the Students own esteem) is down right
treason, being done by some of the chief of their Ministry, as commanded by the
Scripture, does against them. In conclusion they give a proverb used by Will.
Dundas, in a book of his, as a further instance, which they call a bundle of
ridiculous and non-sensicall expressions. But will they deny but the
Presbyterian General assembly of which W. Dundas so writs, was a mingle mangle
of omni-gatherums, particularly that assembly that excommunicated and gave to
the devil B. Spotswood, and these other called reverend Prelates of the Church
the Students own, or let the Students tell us, whether in their esteem they
deserve a better designation. Now that to use proverbs in things written even
from the spirit of truth, is no inconsistency, let them read Tit. 1. 12. evil
beasts, slow bellyes, 2 Pet. 2. 22, the dog is returned, etc. and the sow to
the puddle. But to procced, they offer to prove, the spirit in the Q. not to be
the Spirit of God, because it teaches doctrines, contrary to the Scriptures.
Their first instance of this, is, the Q. denying the necessity of the
continuance of the use of Bread and Wine, as an Ordinance in the Church, which
they allege page 67. is commanded Matthew. 26. 26. Mark. 14. 21. Luke 22. 19.
But the Students may look over these places, and find if they can any thing in
the first two of Matthew. and Mark like a command, but only a mere narrative of
the matter of fact. in that of Luk, these words are added, do this in
remembrance of me. They procced to prove that this is not ceased, of its own
nature, carping at these words of R. B. (in his first answer to W. M. page 54,
55.) where he says, the very institution intimats the abolishing thereof at
Christ's coming, insinuating as if he had mistaken himself, for his words (say
they) allude to Paul's 1 Cor. 11. and not to Christ's, but while they take a
liberty to judge of his thoughts, they do but show their own forwardness to
mistake; for either these words of Christ's in Luke above mentioned, do import,
they should do that in remembrance of him until he came, or they do not, if
they do not, the Students give away their own cause. If they do, then he might
allude to that, as being there included, though not expressed.

They urge, the coming of Christ mentioned, must be his coming to judgment,
because these to whom Christ was come in Spirit do use it, but this proves not,
that they then practiced it by way of necessary duty, more then their
practicing other things, which our Adversaries themselves do acknowledge do not
continue, nor are not binding. But they proceed page 69. to prove it commanded
since, from the Apostles words 1 Cor. 11. And to prove that this was not a mere
narrative of a matter of fact (as we truly affirm) but a command, they affirm
first. That he often gives the title of the Lords Supper to it, even as
received by those Corinthians. For answer, the Students must needs be like
themselves, and as they often belyed us, so they use the Apostle the same way,
for not only in this Chapter or Epistle, but in all Paul's Epistles, these words
(the Lords Supper are only once mentioned, so not often. Secondly, verse 20.
where he uses their words, thus, When ye come together therefore into one
place, this is (...) to eat the Lords Supper, it is so far from making for
them, that it makes clearly against them, for the Apostle clearly here asserts
that the Corinthians in their useing of bread and wine did not eat the Lords
Supper, he says not they did not eat it, as they ought. Secondly they urge,
that the Apostle received of the Lord a command to take, eat, do this. This is
strongly alleged, And the Sy^iack copy has not in that 20. ver. nor
elsewhere, these words the Lords Supper at all, but in lieu of it, when then ye
meet together not as ye ought to do in the day of the Lord.
but we deny it, and let them prove it, for proof, they give none, unless we
may take an example for a proof in which they beg the question, for unless that
alleged minion of the King should tell these citizens he came to, that he had
received order to command them to obey the decree repeated by him, the example
says nothing; but that the Apostle has signified any such thing to us we deny,
and it remains for them to prove.

Thirdly, they allege, that since the Apostle reproves them for abuses in the
use of this, and to rectify those, brings them back, to the institution, the
duty of receiving it, may be much more concluded from the same institution.
Answer, this is their bare affirmation, the abuses committed in practicing a
ceremony may be regulated by telling the proper rise, use and end of it, and
yet the using it may not be an absolute duty, the Apostle says how those that
observe days, ought to do it to the Lord, it will not therefore follow, that
the observation of days, is a duty incumbent upon all, yea the Apostle in that
place expressly asserts the contrary. Their fourth reason is yet more
ridiculous, the Apostle insinuates that it is a duty, because of the first word
FOR that which I have, etc. Who but the Students would argue at this rate? such
kind of reasons serve to show their folly not to confirm their opinions, as do
these that follow with their old example of the Kings minion. In all which they
miserably beg the question, taking for granted that it is a standing statut,
which is the thing remains to them yet to prove. In the end of this page they
desire to join the word OFTEN, which say they, evidenceth it was a practice to
be continued in. And here they insult, because that R. B. in answer to W. M.
arguing thus from this word Often, did reply, that thence it would not follow,
that as often as a man sins he oftends God, did import, we should sin often;
here they say R. B. egregiously shows his folly and impiety, because they never
did argue from the word OFTEN precisely, but their brother W. M. to whom he
then answered, did precisely argue from it, whose express words in his
pretended sober answer are page 92. it may be observed that the Corinthians
were to be often in the use of it, because it is said, as often as ye eat,
etc. So since he argued from the word often, his answer was proper, nor have
they brought any thing to weaken it. And whereas they add, who will say, that
ever sin was institutedly God? R. B. never said so, but yet, that weakens not
his retortion, nor strengthens their argument, from the word often as may
appear in a thing truly instituted by God and yet lawful, else as often as a
man marries, he is bound to his wife might be said to import, that it were a
duty incumbent upon men to marry, often or unlawful to forbear. Their fifth
reason is, because the Apostle prescribes the right method of usieng it, for
they allege, if it had been indifferent, he would have rather forbidden it as
useless, etc. This is no argument, but their bare conjecture, in which they
would be wiser then the Apostle, and we have answered it before, showing the
Apostle gives rules to rectify the observation of days, which yet imports not
a duty to observe them. Their last and chiefest reason is, as they say, the
Aposils express command for it, let a man examine himself, and so let him eat,
the Students affirm, (and do but affirm) that to say, this is only a permission
is a desperate shift, let us hear how they prove it. Let a man examine himself,
this is without doubt a command, therefore let him eat must be a command also,
we deny this consequence, and it remains for them to prove it, and though this
were enough in strictness, yet we shall give a reason of our deny all: because
their proposition (whatever it may be do in some cases) holds not universally
true, as to instance from an example or two, let a man marry (...) the Lord,
and so let him mary. The first is a command here, but not the second, let a man
speak in religious things as the oracle of God, and so let him speak. The first
is a command, but not the second, many more might be named, which import only a
conditional command, not that there is a necessity upon all to marry, or upon
all to preach, but if a man marry let him do it in the Lord, and if a man
preach, let him do it as the Oracle of God. Also see a most plain example of
this Rev. 22. 11. he that is filthy let him be filthy still, and he that is
just, let him be just still, they are both in the imperative mood, yet the one
is a duty, the other but a permission not moral and positive, but physical
and negative; so if a man partake of the ceremony of bread and wine, let him
examine himself, seeing then their proposition holds not universally true, it
remains for them to prove that in this particular place it is so.

They bestow their 34. paragraph page 70, 71. to no purpose, in missing the
controversy, for whatever we understand by the substance, which whosoever enjoys
needs not the shadow. We do not deny but these that had the substance made use
of the shadow at times, for Paul purified himself according to the Law of
Moses, after he had been long an Apostle, but the question is, whether that
oblige us now. This the Students have forgott to prove, and will do well to
advert to it when they publish their next volumne, omitting needless homilies
not to the purpose. And thus we hope the Reader may see, that the things we
bring to prove this ceremony is ceased, are not shadows; but rather, that
what they bring to confirm it, is nothing but shadows.

Page 71. They go about to answer an argument used by R. B. against this
ceremony, drawn from the Apostls words 1 Cor. 16: 16. in his first answer to W.
M. p: 54. where he shows that since the bread is but one, which must needs be
the inward; the outward must be ceased, and to this they answer, saying, the
true and genuine sense of the place, is, to go (...) as they were dictating,
and not disputing without adding any probatiou. But secondly they proceed,
saying, that seeing the one bread is the saints, though the Apostles were truly
this one bread, yet Christ instituted his supper, without any contradiction, or
making them not one bread. For answer, were that practice of Christ, of the
nature they would have it, then should they say some thing, but while they
suppose it so, and argu^ from it, they do but beg the thing in controversy,
for the Apostles both then and after that time used many legal and typical
observations, and yet they would argue ill, that would infer from thence
because they did so, and that without contradiction to their being Christians
and under the Gospel dispensation, we ought to do so too, as for that bread
spoken by the Apostles in the 16 and 17 verses we acknowledge it to be the
Spiritual bread, to wit, the Spiritual body of Christ, of which the saints
feed, which makes them one, and is one with them as the Apostle himself
wordeth it. ver. 17. Now what signifies all this to prove that the outward
bread is the one bread? Hear how the Students evince it but Thirdly we say
That the one bread spoken of ver. 17. is both the outward and the inward bread,
yet but one Sacramentally, and is not this rarely well argued, we the Students
say so: as to the reason afterward insinuated as Christ says of the bread
that it is his body, they should have shown how it follows. Christ, as
Protestants well argue against Papists, calls himself a door, a Rock, etc. what
then? is Christ and a Rock one, Christ and a door one door? Let them show us,
if they can, in all the N. T. so much as one word of this sigment of a
Sacramental or symbolicall union. and whereas upon this occasion R. B. argued
in his Truth cleared of Calumnies Page 54. that if the outward bread were to be
called the one bread, as signifying it, The sacrifices of the Law might be
called one, with the one offering of Christ mentioned, Hebr. 10: 14 and so
continued, This they say signifies nothing because these are abrogated: then
until they prove this continues by virtue of a Gospel command, which they
have not as yet done, the same reason will hold against it.

To another Reason given of the discontinuance of this ceremony, from Gal. 2:
16. Let no man judge you in meats, or drinks, They say first, that then it had
not been lawful for the Apostle, to have reprehended the Corinthians for the
abuses in this matter; This is a poor shift indeed, though they should not have
been reprehended for laying it aside altogether, yet seeing they used it as a
religious duty, they might well be reprehended, if they did it not religiously.
Secondly, They say, that then gluttony etc. ought not to be reproved, and that
the Q. ere they miss to pull down Christ's ordinance will make way for gluttony
and drunkenness. Answer, Here is but a silly malicious reflection in stead of a
reason, The Apostle is speaking here, as the St. themselves afterward
acknowledge, of meats and drinks used in religious acts, and if the proposition
hold true in this respect, it will answer the end, and not of natural eating
etc. Thirdly, They say, It must only be understood of the Legal ceremonies,
because of the 14 verse, asking if the Lords supper was contrary unto us, or was
nailed to the Cross? what then? The Students are over hasty and should have
looked to the 21 and 22. verses, Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are
to perish with the useing; and do not bread and wine which perish in the
useing, and are therefore here included; as for the absurdity insinuated by
them, how could that be nailed to the cross, that was but instituted two days
before? will they say that abstaining from things strangled, and from blood was
nailed to the cross which was commanded long after Christ was crucified? And
yet some of their Divines (as they call them) use this Scripture for a repeal
of it.

Their second charge against the Q. and to prove they are not led by the
Spirit, is because they assert a possibility of not sinning upon earth which
they say, is expressly contrary to the Scripture, as first to Isaiah 64: 6 we
are all an unclean thing. All our righteousness are as filthy rags. But they
should have proven that the Prophet speaks here not only of the Legal
righteousness of the Jews, but even of the righteousness wrought by Christ
in the regenerate under the Gospel, which they have not so much as attempted
to do and therefore prove nothing, yea the chiefest of their Divines as Calvin,
Musculus, Corretus deny this place to be understood of the rightousnesse of the
Saints under the gospel, but only of the legal righteousness of the Jews,
whom we leave them to refute or reconile themselves to, and procced to their
second argument, from the words of the Prayer, Forgive us our sins, but men may
pray for forgiveness of sins past, though they sin not daily, and this is the
thing in question; likewise this argument drawn from these words, does militat
no less against perfect justification, then it does against perfect
sanctification, as G. K. has at more length in his Quakerism no Popery in
answer to their master J. M. Page 41. They argue from the words of the Apostle
Paul, Romans 7. 18. 20 etc. To will is present with me etc. but they should have
proven that the Apostle wrote of his own present condition, and not as
personating the condition of others, for the Apostle in the same 7 chap. ver.
14. says of himself, but I am carnal, sold under sin but who will say that
the Apostle as to his own present condition was then carnal? or if he was, was
there no spiritual men then? or was he none of them. But fourthly they urgee 1
Jo. 1: 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selve etc. and here they are
offended R. B. should say this is conditional, like the 6 verse, which they
confess is so, for, say they, at the same rate he might allege all the rest
of the verses of the epistle to be conditional, but if it refer, or allude
particularly to the 6. ver. the reason will hold as to it, though not of the
rest, that both they and the rest of the verses of this chapter do allude to
the fifth, the supposition if so often repeated, does show, they are angry that
R. B. should allege WE here does not include John more, then the Apostle James
3. 9. with the tongue curse we men, does include James. For first the Students
will have James here included, alleging it is spoken of excommunication, and
here they take occasion to upbraid R. B. with ignorance, in ecclesiastical
discipline, but surely they have been either dreaming or doting when they so
wrote, for hade they read the following verse they might have observed the
Apostle condemning this cursing, saying, these things ought not so to be, and
we suppose they judge not their Ecclesiastical discipline to be unlawful; but
being it seems ashamed of this shift, they give another interpretation which
destroys their own cause, alleging James might have understood it of
himself, before his conversion, while perhaps he was a curser. Very well, then
let them give us a reason, why the Apostle John might not also have understood
If we say etc. of himself also before his convesion; but are not these,
think thou Reader, learned Divines, who to evite the strength of a
Scripture, give it within the compass of one page two contradictory
expositions, affirming them both, and yet if the one be true, the other must be
false; and then can shake them both off, alleging, they may render the word by
way of interrogation, and do we therefore curse men? Are not these rare
interpreters, because the Apostle uses an interrogation elsewhere in this
chapter, therefore this may be so done also, but what then becomes of their
church discipline and other interpretation? These must be shutt out of doors.
Are not these like to be stable preachers, who give three different
interpretations to one text; if any one of which be true, the other two can not
be admitted? It seems these young men think to make a quick trade of the Bible,
cauponari verbum Dei, who can thus play fast and loose with it at pleasure. But
to proceed, they allege Ecclesiast. 7: 20. There is not a just man upon earth
that does good, and sins not; this argument is built upon an error of the
translation; it should be translated, who may not sin, qui non peccet, so
Iunius and Tremellius, Vatablus, the vulgar Latin, and almost all the
Interpreters have it, and our English translation Psalm. 119. ver. 11.
translateth. the same Hebrew word so, being in the same tense, which is the
second future: I have hid thy word in my heart, that I may not sin against
thee. A second place Ja. 3. 2. In many things we offend all, what then? it
follows not thence that we offend at all times, or we can never but offend,
which is the thing under debate; but to conclude, they confess, we have other
exceptions, which themselves, it seems, take no notice of, because, they are
solidly refuted by their Divines, and therefore (say the Stud.) the Q. herein
teach a doctrine contrary to the revelations of Gods Spirit in the Scriptures.
Answ. A quick way to dispatch controversies indeed, if it could hold, but at
present it may serve to show the St. folly, not to refute our principles, if
their Divines have already done the business so solidly, might not they have
spared their labor, which some of their own think had been their wisdom.

Their third instance against the Q. is page 74. their allowing of women to
preach, alleging it is directly contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. Let your women
keep silence, etc. and 1 Timothy 2. 12. Let the woman learn in silence, etc. Here
to begin like themselves, they say G. K. is too much addicted to women, but
they are dared if they can to produce any real ground for this malicious
insinuation G. K. besides the testimony of a good conscience has the testimony
of hundreds, who have known his manner of life and conversation from his
childhood to this day, that it has been honest and of good report, so that he
fears not, that the lying reports, which the malice of his adversaries may
raise, can hurt him, yet these are men that solemnly profess they have
abstained from personal Criminations, but seeing they have belyed the Apostle
Paul, as is above observed, G. K. may take it patiently to be treated at this
rate by men of such circumstances, but if they think to infer it, because G.
K. does plead for the liberty and privilege of women, they might as well
plead, that G. K. is too much addicted to a perfect holiness, because he does
plead for it, or that the Students are too much addicted to sin, since they
plead for the continuance of it for term of life. They are little less then
enraged, that G. K should have alleged the testimony of Augustine and Bernard
interpreting this place of the flesh, and therefore they labor like men in a
sweat, for a whole page against this to no purpose, the only reason of G. Ks.
citing them, being because some of their preachers cried out against this
allegory, as a horrid abusive thing in some Q. to show them it, is none of the
Q. coining, but already used by men by themselves applauded and commended, upon
this they ask, have not some of our Antagonists been observed to make a
Welshmans hose of the first chapter of Genesis, if they mean us, let them prove
we have so done, as we have already proved, they have used the Apostle James
with their three faced interpretatian, and again they ask, have not some Q.
been bold to aver, that there was never any such real tree as the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, if they have, let them instance and prove by whom
it was spoken, and writ and then they shall have an answer. As they proceed
they give an egregious specimen of their folly, alleging, that if it did hold,
(as G. K. affirms) that women are not allowed to speak by permission, then a
fortiori, it is unlawful for them to speak by commandment. Who but the
Students would talk at this rate, as if a commandment might not authorize a man
to do that, which a bare permission will not. G. Ks. arguments drawn from their
own allowing whores to speak, and women to sing, they call quibles, because
they can not answer, which they reply to only by questions, do they allow
whores authoritative preaching, affirming women may sing? Very well, whether it
be authoritative or not, whatsoever way they speak, they keep not silence, and
so the Apostls words are not taken strictly, and literally, which gains us the
cause, and shows our doctrine is no more directly against the Apostls words
then their own, besides from this it follows by the Students confession, that
women may as lawfully speak in the Church, as the licentiat Students, whom the
Presbytery permits to speak in the Church, before they are ordained, they pass
our chief objection very overly, drawn from 1 Cor. 11. 5. where the Apostle
gives direct rules how women should behave themselves in their public praying
and preaching, alleging there are rules given in Scripture concerning things,
that were never lawful, but only permitted, etc. as of polygamie under the
law, but they should have remembered that these are rules given by the Apostle,
to the Christian Church of Corinth, and seeing the Students suppose that the
Apostle gave directions to the Church of Corinth not only of things that belong
not to them now, but which are not lawful for them (a doctrine we question if
their Masters will approve of, or of the consequence of which themselves are
aware) it remains for them to prove that these two rules forbidding women's
speaking belongs to us, or is not of the number of these useless rules, more
then that other concerning the manner of their preaching. So we hope this
solution is impugned, and desire they may be sure not to forget to bring us
this reason, when they write next.

SECTION FOURTH.
Concerning the necessity of immediate Revelations to the building up of true
faith. containing an answer to the Students second Section from page 78. to
page 92.

IN their stating the controversy, they say, these inward revelations are not
subjective revelations, or divine illuminations. This is false, for as we have
above showed, one and the same illumination, that is effective or subjective is
also objective, and the objective is effective. Again they say, the question is
not, if immediate objective revelations be possible, or be sometimes made to
some de facto. This concession will overthrow much of all their own work, for
if they admit that any person in our time has immediate objective
revelations, admit Peter or John, their former argument will as much militate
against this real immediate objective revelation granted by them, as against
those, which they do not grant, seeing page 7. at the letter A, they say,
suppose that the spirit reveall the objects of faith immediately none will deny,
that he is a rule, (or rather ruler) to them who have him so. A good
concession, but which quite undoes their own cause, for now let us apply their
former argument against this real objective revelation granted by them, as
thus, we ought not to believe that as the rule of faith, of which there can be
no evidence given, but there can be no evidence in the world given of the
Spirit that is in Peter and John, therefore, etc. Again, if Peter and John say,
they can give an evidence of the Spirit of God in them, to wit, their own
declaration in life and power, as also the immediate testimony of the Spirit, or
the Scriptures testimony, let us apply in the last place their argument used
against us, and see if it will not be as good against Peter and John, whom they
grant de facto (according to their hypothesis) to have immediate objective
revelation. The argument is this, that which as really agrees to Enthusiast
Heretics, as to them, can be no evidence, but that evidence, to wit, their own
declaration, and saying, that both they and their adversaries have the immediate
testimony of the Spirit witnessing to the truth of it, would as really agree to
Enthusiast Heretics, therefore, etc. Yea not only might they thus argue
against any men's having immediate objective revelation in our days, but
against the Prophets and Apostles having it, seeing the argument might every way
be as strong, against their having it, as against our having it, especially at
such times, as they wrought no outward miracles in the sight of the people, to
whom they were sent, as often they did not. When the Lord sent Jonas to preach to
the Ninivites, he wrought no miracle in their sight. Now let us put the
Students in the Ninivites place, and we shall find they could argue as stoutly
and hardily against Jonas, as now they can do against any Quaker, they could
tell him, he could give no evidence of the Spirit of God in him, giving any
such message, as for his declaration, it would not suffice, because his saying
he had the Spirit would be as good a ground for any other Enthusiast Heretic.
But further these stout and hardy warriors could have used these same
arguments against the Prophets, when they wrought miracles, for they could have
alleged the miracles were not true miracles, but false, and such as may be
done by the power of the devil, and so if any could produce miracles now, (as
there have been) they would no more be believed, then the unbelieving Jews
believed the miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles. For they still looked
upon them to be deceivers. It is clear from Scripture that Antichrist shall be
permitted to work false miracles, but that they shall so counterfeit the true,
that it will be hard to discern, the one from the other, without Gods immediate
direction and teaching. And therefore the preaching of sound doctrine,
accompanied with a holy life, is a better evidence of a true Prophet, then all
outward miracles whatsoever, as Christ said, by their fruits ye shall know
them; he does not say, by their miracles, but by their fruits. Now we are most
willing to be tried by this rule, if both our doctrine, and life and manner of
conversation, be not answerable to that of the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, then let them say, we have not that spirit, which was in them. But if
they can not make out this, they but fight as men beating the air.

Page 80. They argue, that there is no substantial living principle in man,
that is the good seed, because then the evil seed or principle should also be
substantial. But this is absurd, therefore. That this is absurd, they argue,
for then it should be created, by God, and so God should be the author of evil
and sin, or it should be uncreated, and consequently God. To this we answer.
The same argument militats as much and rather more against their own principle,
for seeing they hold sin, to be somewhat, (whether a substance, or an accident,
is all one as to the argument) we argue by a retortion against themselves,
either it is created, or uncreated, and so the same inconvenience would follow.
But to answer directly, we say, sin considered in its formal reason, is rather
a privation, then any real being, as blindness or lameness in a man's body, or
corruption in wine, or any other liquor. But if they enquire about the subject
of this privation, whether it be a substance. We answer, it is, and it is clear
from the Scriptures testimony, that as Christ rules in the Saints, so the devil
rules in the wicked, and is in them, and as God has his seed and birth in the
Saints, so the devil has his seed and birth in the wicked, which is of the
devils nature. But if it be asked further, whether it is a substance, we answer
first, with inquiring at them another question, and retorting the argument upon
them, whether the devil is a substance, yea or nay? If yea, either he is
created, or uncreated, if created, then God is the author of the devil; if
uncreated, then he should be God, their own consequence, which is blasphemy.
But 2. the true answer to both is that he who, is, now the devil was created of
God a good Angel, but by his own voluntary fall, he has reduced himself to be
a devil not by any real creation, but by a degeneration, and as is the devil
himself so is his seed, a corrupted, degenerated principle from what it was
originally before sin was, but if we take the seed of the devil distinctly, as
distinct from himself, we do not say, it is any percipient principle, that
sees or knows, etc. for it is rather of the nature of a body, then of a
percipient, intelligent spirit, and the Scripture calls it a body, to wit,
the body of death. But whether the seed of sin be a substance, or not, the
Students argument is altogether impertinent to argue that because the good seed
is a substantial living principle, etc. then the evil principle or seed
should also be substantial, living, etc. for the same reasons. We deny this
Consequence, for there are greater reasons whereby to prove the one then the
other. If they think to argue from the rule of contraries, they think
foolishly, for it would as much follow, that because a man is a substance, who
sees and hears, etc. that therefore a man's blindness, and deafness, and
lameness are also substances, and that blindness sees, deafness hears,
lamenesse walks. Do they not know, the maxim in Logic that tells them,
substantia substantiae proprie non contrariatur. i. e. one substance properly
is not contrary to another. But last of all we may more justly retort this
blasphemous consequence upon many of their own church, who hold, that God
stirs up the devil and all wicked men unto all their wicked actions, by an
irresistible motion or quality which he infuseth into them, commonly called,
praedeterminatio physica. Is not this to make God the author of sin? As also
many of them teach that Original sin is a positive quality, infused into the
souls of men at their creation. Concerning which positive quality, we thus
argue, either it is created or uncreated, etc. and so the inconveniences of
their argument will fall much more upon their own heads, for they cannot
allege that this positive quality at its first creation was first good, and
afterward became changed into evil, because no quality can admit any such
transmutation, as for example, witness can never become blackness, nor
sweetness bitterness, nor straightness crookedness, although a substance
that is white, may loose its witness, and may become black, and that which is
sweet may become bitter, and that which is straight become crooked.

In the prosecution of their second argument, they bring their matter to this
issue, that G. K. holds the seed it self to be contradistinct from the
manifestation, because the manifestation is in the feed; but we deny the
consequence, do not they say, that the manifestation of Gods will is in the
Scripture, and also that the Scripture it self is the manifestation of Gods
will? That G. K. calls the seed both a substance, and a manifestation, is as
reasonable as to say, there are outward manifestations of Gods goodness,
power, and wisdom in the heavens, and earth; and yet the heavens and earth are
the very outward manifestations themselves. Are not our meat and drink and
clothing, natural and outward manifestations of the goodness of God to us,
and are not these things substances, and does not God manifest his goodness
also in them? What blind reasons are these, which those poor blind men bring
forth against the truth? Again they argue, that this manifestation (which we
say is a substance) depends not a solo Deo, cannot exist without a subject, nay
not without the understanding, to which it is made. All which they barely
assert, but do not offer to prove. Again they say, it is but a mere action, and
applicatio agentis ad passum. But how do they prove it? here they are as dumb
as stones. Perhaps they think to prove it, because manifestation, is a nomen
verbale, which commonly being derived from the active verb signifies an
action, but this is merely to play in words, and not to dispute, for they may
as well say, because the whole world is called the creation, (for Creation is
an active verbale) therefore the whole world is a mere action, or applicatio
agentis ad passum. We deny not, but the action, or motion, which proceeds from
the Spirit of God, may also be called a manifestation. But we say, the seed it
self, is also a manifestation; and those inward heavenly refreshments which God
ministers unto the souls of his Saints, are as real substantial spiritual
manifestations of his goodness, as the outward earthly refreshments, to wit
meat and drink, are real substantial natural manifestations. Lastly, they
query, if the manifestation be a substance, whether is it one manifestation, or
all the manifestations? To this we answer, they that please to call the action,
or motion, (which proceeds from the Spirit of God, an an efficient cause) a
manifestation, may easily distingnish manifestation, as it is a principle, or
quid permanens, or as it is an action, or quid transiens, now to apply, we say,
the substantial manifestations of God, inwardly to our souls are many, as they
are quid permanens, and per modum principii, for as God nourishes our outward
man, not with bread and drink once only, but often, and many are our outward
refreshments, all which are substances, agreeing in this that they are
manifestations and pledges of Gods bounty unto us, so does he nourish our
inward man, with spiritual bread and drink not once only, but often, giving us
daily the supersubstantiall bread, as the words in the prayer may be
translated, and have been by some learned men, and thus we have answered their
last argument, in their. 5. without recurring to any idea Platonica, a term
they vainly bring in to their argument, to move people to laugh at their folly.
And thus we hope it is apparent, that we have no need to retract our answers
given in the dispute, as they vainly imagine.

It would be more labor and expense of time and paper, then the thing is
worth, to answer them in all their pitiful ridiculous reasonings in these
matters, in every particular. Therefore not to weary the Reader, nor mispend
time, we shall set down some few clear distinct propositions, which shall
clearly answer any seeming difficulties alleged by them in this whole Section,
as in relation to Christ.

1. Proposition. The Word, or Son of God, has the whole entire nature of Man,
Spirit, Soul and Body united to him in the Heavens, and he is the same in
substance, what he was upon earth, both in Spirit, soul, and body.

2. Christ in us, or the seed, is not a third spiritual nature, distinct from
that which was in the man Christ Jesus, that was crucified according to the
flesh at Jerusalem, for the same that is in us, was and is in him, and as it is
in him, its the fullness or spring of the same in us, as the stream, nor is
there any difference, but such as is betwixt the spring and the stream, which
are one in their nature and substance.

3. We say that the same seed, and life, is in us, which was in him, and is in
him, in the fullness, as water is in the spring, and in us as the stream, and
this seed and spiritual nature which is both in him, and us does belong to
him, as he is the second Adam, or man Christ, therefore this seed being in us,
the Man Christ is in us; not according to his whole manhood, but according unto
that which is proper unto it, and yet without all division, as the natural
life is in all the members, but more principally in the head, and heart,
without any division, so this spiritual life and nature is both in Christ our
head, and in us, by which he dwells in us, as the spirit of man does in the
body; and we eat and partake of his flesh.

4. But if they argue that at least Christ has three natures in himself, we
say, Their own principle will conclude that as much as ours, for the Godhead is
one nature, the nature of the soul, is a second, and the nature of the body is
the third, and our adversaries themselves teach that as God is three persons in
one nature, so Christ is three natures in one person.

5. Although the word or (...) should assume into union with it self not only
two natures, but three, it should not make either two, or three Chists, but
one, for they grant that the Word has assumed two, to wit, the soul and body
of the man Christ, and yet he is not two Christ's, but one, even as the king is
but one king, although he possess three kingdoms, for ad multiplicationem
obliquorum non multiplicantur concreta, as your Logic teaches.

6. The seed and spiritual body of Christ both in him, and in us belonging to
Christ, as he is the second Adam, is as really and immediately united unto the
word, as his outward body was, for the wholl manhood of Christ was united to
the Logos, and the Logos to it, and in it, therefore the sufferings of this
seed and spiritual body of Christ in us, are as really his sufferings, as
these He accomplished at Jerusalem.

7. This seed is not our souls, but is a medium betwixt God and us, and our
union with God is but mediat through this, whereas the union of God with this
is immediate, Therefore none of us are either Christ, or God, but God and Christ
are in us.

8. Seeing this seed and spiriuall nature of Christ is one, and the same, both
in him, and in us, it is most unreasonable to argue, that there are as many
Christ's as men, as it is unreasonable to argue, that because the soul of man is
in all his members, that therefore, as many members as many souls. The element
of the air is but one only element, although it fill the wholl universe,
betwixt the stars and the earth. And the element of water, is but one, although
it fill many channells.

9. Christ outwardly died but once, but inwardly he dies in a spiritual and
mystical sense, as often as any crucify him to themselves by their
unfaithfulness, and disobedience, as the Scriptures declare.

10. As for the satisfaction of Christ without us, we own it against the
Socinians, and that it was full and complete in its kind, yet not so, as to
exclude the real worth of the work and sufferings of Christ in us, nor his
present intercession: for if Christ his intercession without us in heaven, does
not derogate from his satisfaction, but does fulfill it, no more does: his
intercession and sufferings in us.

11. The sufferings of Christ in men are voluntary, and yet without sin, as his
sufferings at Jerusalem were voluntary and without sin, for as he joined not
with them, who outwardly crucified him, in any Active way to coucurre with them
or countenance them, so nor does he inwardly join with men to countenance or
concur with them, when they crucify him, by their sins.

12. As there was no need that the Jews should have crucified Christ
outwardly, so as purposely to sin, that Christ might suffer for sin outwardly,
(although the prophecies of Christ's sufferings and Gods foreknowledge was
certain) so there is no need that men should now sin to crucify Christ
inwardly, for if there be any difficulty in the one, it recurres in the other
much more. Now, either men sin, or sin not, If they sin, Christ suffers by it;
If they sin not, he does not suffer, (nor is it needful that he suffer when
men sin not) but all men have sinned, and Christ has suffered for, and by the
sins of all, both without and within.

13. Christ's outward sufferings at Jerusalem were necessary unto men's
salvation, notwithstanding his inward sufferings, that he might be a complete
Savior in all respects; for it behoved Christ not only to suffer in the
members of his body, but also in the head, so that it is a most foolish and
unreasonable consequence to argue, that because Christ suffers in the members,
therefore he needed not to suffer in the head: whereas the sufferings of Christ
in the members are but a small part of what he suffered in the head, by being
offered up once for all, yet a part they are, as serving to make up the
integrall of his sufferings.

14. The doctrines of the incarnation, sufferings, death, and resurrection of
Christ etc: are necessary every where to be preached, and being preached, to be
believed and improved, as being of and belonging unto the integrall parts of
Christianity and Christian religion; even as the arms and legs are integrall
parts of a man, without which, though it is possible that a man may be and
live, yet he is not a complete man as to all his parts, even so, though one may
be a Christian, and partaker in part of Christianity, and in that state be
accepted of God, as is clear in the case of Cornelius, without the express
knowledge of the outward birth, sufferings: etc: of Christ, yet without the
same he is not a complete Christian, as wanting the knowledge of that which
serves to the perfection and accomplishment thereof.

Before we close this particular, we can not omit to take notice of two most
horrible perversions, committed by the Students sect. 2. The one is page 83.
where they allege out of G. K. his book of Immed. Revel. page 7. that G. K.
holds that when Christ suffers by man's sin, that he joines with man, which is a
most abominable lie and perversion. The second perversion of the Students.
which is no less abominable, is in page 79. of their book, where to cover
their other perversion, they cite most falsely and perfidiously a place in G.
K. book, where they bring him in, saying, [though it may be hurt and slain, by
joining with the contrary seed, before it come to its perfect formation] and
thus they would prove that according to G. K. Christ joines with man, when man
sins. Now we beseech the Reader to look to page 7. in G. K. his book of Im:
Revela, and he will find that the words of G. K. are thus, [Though till it come
to its perfect formation it can suffer hurt so far as to be slain through man
his joining unto the contrary seed and birth] Mark Reader G. K. says through
man his joining, but the Stuents, purposely to deceive the Reader, have left
out the word man, that the Reader may understand it of Christ his joining; a
thing never entered into G. K. his heart to think, far less to write. This
abominable perversion of the Students is enough to make all sober men abhor
them, as wilful and impudent liars, for such a manifest and visible thing
could not be done in ignorance. But are not these Students rare disputants, who
thus argue against the Q. page 83. l. 5, 6. Either he (to wit Christ) suffers
within willingly, and so he sins, it being by the sins of man that he suffers
and is crucified within. For by this argument it will follow not only that all
the Martyrs when they suffered willingly, did sin, but also that Christ himself
when he suffered willingly by the sins and wicked hands of the Jews that
crucified him outwardly, did sin, which is the highest blasphemy, and naturally
follows by the Students argument. But it seems these Students have no mind to
suffer willingly for righteousness sake, seeing they are men of such
principles, that think, when any does suffer willingly, he sins. We leave the
Reader to judge whether such stuff and work of the Students be Quakerism
canvassed, and a confutation of the Q. errors, or rather whether it be not a
manifest betraying of the Truth, and declaring themselves guilty of highest
blasphemy, lying and confusion; and whether these men who are guilty of such
confusion themselves, are fit to accuse others as not writing perspicuously
and clearly, as they do G. K. for his book of Imm: Revela. page last of their
preface. But G. K. doubts not but that his book will be acknowledged to be
clear and perspicuous, where it meets with men of a clear understaning, such as
the Students (to be sure) are not.

As for those stories about J. N. they have been long ago answered by our
friends, who judged both him, and them that joined with him in that particular,
as he also judged and condemned himself, and was by the mercy of God reduced
to a sober mind. As for that passage in Christopher Atkinsons book, we can say
nothing to it, unless we saw the book which is in G. M. his custody (which
shows that the Students have plowed with his heifer) who refused to let us
have the use of it, to see whether the place was perverted, and we did not
know where to have it any where else, but it is in cumbent on them to prove
whether C. A. or his book was owned really by the Q. for we can prove he was
denied by them, and if he denied that Christ is man, we deny him and his book
both; for we truly believe that Christ is both God and man.

In the prosecution of their second argument, Sect. 2. They take great pains
to prove that heathens have the Law and book of Nature, and from exerciseing
their reason and understanding naturally they may know many things, which we
do not deny, and so they might have spared that labor. But whereas they
allege that there is nothing needful to be known and believed by the
heathens, but what the book of nature and their natural understanding, and
reason as men, can teach them, according to the Q. principle, and consequently
the heathens need not these supernatural revelations. This they affirm
without any proof. We shall give manifest Instances to the contrary, For the
Q. say, All men need both to have and to know a supernatural influence and
work of the Spirit of God in order to their salvation. And this also our
adversaries grant. Now the Heathens need a divine revelation to make this
known to them. For the book of Nature or the mere natures of things being
considered can not teach men what is supernatural, and so it can not teach men
that in all their actings they are to have a supernatural end, nor can it
teach them, that they are to love, fear, serve and worship God, from a
supernatural principle of Gods grace, which are the greatest duties required
of man, and if it can not teach men, and convince them of their greatest
duties, it follows, that it can not convince them of the great sins, that are
contrary unto those duties. Also Nature can not teach men the mystery of
regeneration, (which yet is needful to be known) for men who are but too much
addicted to natural reason, and searchings into the book of nature (but
despise the divine and supernatural illumination of Christ in them) think
regeneration a fiction, or unnecessary thing. Other instances could be given,
but least they should call them the Q. errors, we shall forbear, contenting
our selves with such as our adversaries acknowledge to be true. But 2. if it
were granted that the book of Nature could in some sort discover all things
necessary to salvation (without supernatural light) which yet we deny, it does
not follow, that therefore divine, supernatural objective revelation, is not
necessary, because the discovery that the book of nature and natural reason
gives to men of divine things, as of the power, wisdom, justice, goodness,
love and mercy of God, is but dimm, weak, faint and barren, and is no more a
proportionat object to the spiritual sensations of the soul, then a report of
meat and drink and clothing are a suitable or proportionat object to the taste;
and feeling of the outward man; the souls of men need not only to be convinced
that there is a God, who is good, loving, merciful, powerful and just, but
they need also in order to their salvation to have a feeling of his divine
power, to see and taste that he is good, to handle that word of life, to know
Christ in themselves, to have the love of God shed abroad in them, by the holy
Spirit, which love is a sensible and perceptible object, and so is objective.
For if the Scriptures be nota sufficient objective revelation of God, and the
things of his kingdom, much less the book of nature, etc but the first is
true, therefore the second is true also. Now that the Scriptures are not a
sufficient objective revelation of God, etc. G K. has proved at large in his
book of Immed. Revela. and we need not produce any new arguments here, until
the Students, or their masters refute those already set down in that book,
only this we say in short, Nature and Scripture tell us that there is a God, but
they can neither give us a sense, sight, or tasting of him, or of his love, or
of his Spiritual judgments, as these things are inwardly experienced, where
God reveals them, Nature can not refresh, or comfort the soul, nor pour in wine
and oil into it, when it is wounded with sin, and although it could tell that
God can do this, what comfort could that be to the soul, unless God himself
do it, and make the soul sensibile of his hand reaching unto it, the
Spiritual things themselves that nature can not afford. Also nature cannot
discover the Spiritual judgments of God in the soul, whereby he cleanses it
from sin, as by water and fire. Now as to the second branch of their argument,
that the Scriptures are a sufficient objective revelation of all things
necessary to salvation, this we altogether deny, as is said, for although the
scripture is a full enough declaration of all doctrines and principles both
essential and integrall of Christian religion, yet the Scripture does propose
divine things and objects, but as a Card or Map does a land and the fruits of
it, to the outward eye. Now as this is not a sufficient objective proposal,
because we need to see the Land it self, and to taste, and eat and drink of the
fruit of it, so our souls need a more near and immediate discovery of God, then
the Scripture, which is but a report of him, that he may feed and nourish us by
his divine manifestations; and here in the prosecution of this argument, they
are at great pains to prove, that the Scriptures are given from God, which we
deny not, although some of their proofs be weak, but whatever reasons can be
brought to prove that the Scriptures are given from God, if the inward
testimony of the Spirit of God, be not believed, and received, these reasons
cannot beget any divine, saving faith, (whereof only we speak) but a mere
humane and natural faith or conviction.

As to that place of Scripture 2 Cor. 4: 3, 4 if our gospel etc: that is, say
they, the outward gospel, but does Paul say so? Nay; Look the Greek text, and
you will find the contrary, that the Gospel he spoke of, was hidd in them that
are lost, so the Greek. Therefore it was inward, and this Scripture they bring
to prove, that the Scriprures have objective evidence and perspicuity in
themselves, whereas Paul does not say of the Scripture, but of the Gospel,
which is the power of God. And whereas they query If a person may have immediate
objective revelations, who has not his mind well disposed, and if so, what
advantage would he have by them, which he might not have without them by the
Scriptures? We answer, much every way, because the Scripture is not able to
dispose his mind, as our adversaries grant, but these immediate objective
revelations are also really effective, and have sufficient power and ability in
them, to dispose his mind, if he do not resist them. Again, whereas they query,
May a person be well disposed who has not such revelations? We answer; No: yet
he may want some, and have other some, but if he may, yet there is need of such
revelations, even as if a man's eye, or taste, were never so well disposed, he
needs the objects themselves; and as painted bread, or a discourse of bread
can not satisfy the natural taste and appetite, no more can the Scripture
words satisfy the taste and appetite of the soul. They cite 2 Timothy 3: 15, 16,
17. to prove that the Scriptures of Old and New Testament are the principal,
complete; and infallible rule of faith and manners; but this place does not
say, that they are so, the Scripture we grant, but deny their consequence,
which is merly begged without a proof. They confess page 90. that the
Scriptures are not sufficient every way, so as to exclude the inward efficiency
of the Spirit, and the concurrence of other causes. Very well: Enough to
overthrow their whole argument for among other causes, divine inspiration is a
maine, for indeed the inward efficiency of the Spirit, is that objective
revelation which we plead for, only they deny it to be objective, whereas we
say, it is both effective and objective, as if a man should grant that the
light and heat of the fire does both enlighten us, and warm us but deny that
either that light or heat of the fire is objective, to our discerning, or
perceptible by themselves, which were ridiculous, and as ridiculous is their
conceit of an influence of the Spirit that is merely effective, and not
objective. That the books of the old and new testament are called the
Scripture, by way of eminency, we deny not, (although the name is given at
times to other writings) nor does this refute G. K. his translation of that
Scripture 2 Timothy 3: 16. which is confirmed by the Syriack, which has it thus,
In Scriptura enim quae per Spiritum scripta est, utilitas est ad doctrinam etc.
i. e. For in the Scripture which is written by the Spirit, there is profit.
But their reason from the Conjunction [and] is both foolish and blasphemous,
for if the words be rendered thus, All Scripture given by inspiration is and
profitable, is no more nonsense then diverse other places in the Scripture,
where the Conjuction and seems to be redundant, as in that place Joh. 8: 25.
where the Greek has it thus (...) i. e. The beginning (or from the beginning)
the same which and I speak unto you. Now if the Conjunction [and] render not
this place nonsense, no more does it render that in Timothy; but the Students
ignorance renders them rather blasphemers, and their arguments blasphemous
against the words of Christ. Moreover the conjunction (...) may signify a
strong affirmation, (as to say, even, truly, indeed,) as both our English
translation has it, Joh. 8: 25. and Schrevelius in his Greek-Lexicon does
render it: and thus the words have good sense, All-Scripture (or writing) given
by inspiration, is even (or indeed) profitable. And whereas, they say, none but
a Q. or Jesuit would so interpret the place, they declare their malice and
ignorance, for William Tindall that famous Protestant martyr in his translation
of the Bible, for which the Papists burnt him, did tranilate it, as G. K. does
whom we think the Students dare not accuse as a Jesuit, that he was a Q in so
far as he held diverse of our principles, condemned by the Students, we shall
not deny. As for us we bless the Lord our faith stands not on such a small
nicity, as the want of an [is] or the redundahcy of an [and] let them look to
that, whose faith knows no other foundation, but the letter. It does nothing
hurt our faith nor lessen the due esteem of the Scripture to us, if
peradventure an [is] has been lost, or an [and] has crept into the text since
the original coppies were lost. This we know and can prove that the Scripture
can not profit any man to salvation without the illumination or inspiration of
the Spirit, which is both effective and objective, and which our adversaries
grant at least to be effective. And if they make one exception why may not we
make another; or if they say, the Spirit is necessary one way, why may not we
say, it is necessare another way? But then the Scriptures, say they, would not
be profitable at all in any manner or kind, we deny the consequence, for it is
profitable, yea and necessary in genere objecti materialis, i. e. as the
material object in relation to all historical truths, and diverse other
dogmatical and doctrinall points, which perhaps we would not have known
without the Scripture, although we had had the Spirit in as large a measure as
men now have it. Again, the Scripture is profitable in genere objecti remoti
and secundarii. i. e. by way of a remote and secondary object and rule, even as
in relation to testimonies of life and experience, which may be known without
the Scripture, yet the Scripture is a secondary confirmation and help even in
that case as a card or map of a land is unto a traveller, that travells through
the land it self, and sees the high ways, who will not throw away his card,
because he sees the land it self, but will both delight and profit himself to
compare them both together. Other great and weighty uses we could give, but
these suffice to serve as instances against their weak and sorry argumentation.

Their last argument is from Joh. 12: 48. The word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day; But how prove they that this is the letter of
the Scripture, much of which was not then writ? And although this Word were not
Christ himself, yet it may be an inward testimony spoken by Christ in men's
hearts. Here they merely beg and prove not. But 2. suppose it were the
Scripture or written Law, as that cited by them Romans 2: 12. it will only
follow, that the Scripture is a secondary Law or rule, which we willingly
grant, and that by it men who have the Scriptures shall be judged, but not by
them only, for if the Gentiles who have not the written Law, shall be judged by
the Law in the conscience, so shall these also who have both inward and outward
be judged by both, and consequently their damnation shall be greater.

SECTION FIFTH.
Of worship being an Answer unto their third Section concerning inspirations to
duty.

IN their stating the controversy in this particular, they grossly prevaricate
in diverse things, as where they say, N. 2. the question is not only about duty
on the matter, videlicet the act of prayers etc. as separated from the right
manner, viz. sincerity and truth, whereas indeed the question betwixt them and
us, is about prayer, as separated from the right manner, viz. sincerity and
truth. For they say, God requires men to pray, without any inspiration, or
gracious influence of the spirit, so that such a prayer is an answering of the
obligation to the duty upon the matter, although it be separated from the right
manner, and accordingly they do both require and allow men to pray, when they
have no gracious influence, or motion thereunto, telling them, that even such
prayers are required, and that they do better to give such prayers, as want
sincerity unto God, then not to pray at all, seeing such lifelesse and
spiritlesse prayers have the matter of true prayer, although they want the
right manner. Whereas we on the contrary affirm that lifelesse prayers have
neither the right matter and substance, nor yet the right manner of prayer, and
therefore are not at all required in Scripture. Yet we deny not but many times,
when men want an influence of life to pray, they are still under the
obligation, and at such 'times it is their sin not to pray, because they ought
to have suitable influences to prayer, which would not be wanting if they were
faithful unto God, but when through unfaithfulness they want them, it does
not excuse them from being under the obligation, yet still when they want the
help of the Spirit, they ought to pray by the Spirit, because they ought to
have it. Even as when one man owes unto another man a just debt, in money, the
debtor ought to pay the money, although he have no money to pay it with, for
his want of the money does not excuse him from the obligation to pay it; yet he
ought to pay the debt only with money, or the equivalent of it, but if he
should offer to pay it, with any thing, that is not money, nor moneys worth; as
suppose with a few counters, this is no answering the obligation, either in the
right matter, or manner, and so it is in the case in hand. Again, N. 8. They
fall into the like prevarication, in alleging the question is not about a new
heart, and spiritual principle of obedience, for they own that as
indispensably necessary for acceptable performance. But do not they say, that
when men pray, without a new heart, they do in part answer the obligation? and
do not they encourage them to pray, even the most wicked? This is denied by the
people called Quakers, and is a great part of the question. We say indeed
wicked men ought to pray, but not remaining wicked, but that they ought to
forsake their wickedness, and have a new heart, and therewith to pray.
Moreover, whereas they say, the question is not about every performance, but
about acceptable performance: Herein they most palpably contradict themselves
N. 9. where they grant, that no act of worship can be acceptably performed
withot these influences, and they well know that the Qu: say the same, the
question then is not about acceptable performance seeing both they and we grant,
that no duty can be acceptably performed without the Spirit, so that if the
Students had understood their matter, they would have said, the question is not
about acceptable performance, but about simple performance, whether there be
any obligation to perform duty, that is not acceptable, which they affirm and
we deny: for indeed unacceptable performance is as good as no performance, but
rather worse, as if under the Law, the Jews had offered up a dogs neck in
place of a sacrifice, it had been a greater sin, then not to offer at all. As
it is a greater offense for a man to offer to pay his debt with counters or
pennies made of slait-stone, then not to pay at all. Another gross error they
committ, in alleging the question is about praeparatory motions, praevious in
time, this is a lie, we challenge them to show us any such thing in our books,
we do not require motions or influences of the Spirit, previous in time,
(although they are often given) it suffices that they are previous in order of
nature; as the cause is previous unto the effect, which is not always in time,
but in nature; but the question is indeed, about the necessity of motions, to,
and in the performance of duty so as the performance is to be in, by, through,
and with the Spirit, which may well be without a praeviousuesse in time, as to
inward duty, at least, and if the outward can be simultaneous with the inward,
it may also be as to the outward, but if it can not be so soon as the inward
in some cases, the reason is not for want of the motion, but because the bodily
organs can not so hastily answer the motion, as the mind it self can, and it
sufficiently answers the motion, that the mind answer it first, and then the
bodily organs as soon as their nature can permit. There is yet another great
error they committ in alleging, such a lively and spiritual disposition as
being necessary in our sense, whereas we do not lay it upon such a lively etc:
as if we required such a degree of life, for the least measure of life that is
but able to carry forth the soul in any living measure of performance, is
sufficient, where the soul keeps to the measure, and does not exceed, or go
beyond it.

In the prosecution of their arguments, they are no less unhappy in the
stating of the question; as will shortly appear. Page 95. 67. they bring in R
B. and A. Sk. denying their sequel, which they labor to prove, (but how
unsuccessfully, we shall see anon) because as angels and bruts agree in that
they are both substances, so spiritual duties, and other duties agree in that
they are both to be performed in the Spirit. But what then? Yet the difference
is still great betwixt those duties that as to their matter are natural and
civil, and those which as to their very matter are spiritual, as for example
to eat, to plough, to pay a debt, are not spiritual as to their matter, but
only as to their manner, and end, when acceptably performed, and therefore the
matter of those duties, and whole substance of them may be, without any
gracious motion of the Spirit, and in that case the performances themselves are
really profitable in the creation among men, and consequently do answer the
obligation in part, but prayer, and thanksgiving etc: are duties wholly
spiritual, both as to matter, or substance, and as to manner and end, so that
whosoever essayeth to do any of them without the gracious motions of the Spirit,
he leaves not only the right manner, but the very matter and substance of the
duty behind him, and brings the mere accidents along with him, which have no
profit nor use to men, nor are any wise in the least part an answer of the
obligation: and as to that Scripture cited by them, the plowing of the wicked
is sin, Prove. 21: 4. they do not prove, that it is meant of outward plowing,
the margin of our English has it, the light of the wicked, and Arius Montanus
renders it on the margin, cogitatio, the thought, that the plowing of the
wicked is sin in respect of the manner, and lastend, we grant, but that the
action materially considered is sin, we altogether deny, even in a wicked man,
for the outward mechanic and bodily act is good in its nature, and profitable,
as also in so far as it may be for the maintenance of his family, it is good,
so that in respect of the matter, and subordinate end, there is no difference
betwixt the plowing of a good man, and a wicked, whereas the prayer of a good
man by the Spirit, and the prayer of a wicked man, without the Spirit, differ
materially, in their very nature and substance, the good man's prayer by the
Spirit is true and real prayer, but the wicked man's prayer, is no true prayer
at all, but a dead image of it, nor is the wicked man a true worshipper, for he
only is a true worshipper according unto the express doctrine of Christ, who
worships the Father in Spirit and in truth, whereas a wicked man's plowing is as
real, and true, and good as to the matter, and nature of the outward action,
as that of the good. It does not therefore follow, that (according to the Q.
principle) because a man is not to pray without the Spirit, that therefore he
is not to plow without the Spirit, in respect of the matter, although in
respect of the defect in the manner, and last end, which should be the glory of
God, he sins when he plows, as when he prays, but yet not so much in the one,
as in the other, for in the one both matter and manner are wrong, in the other
not the matter, but manner, but if a man be faithful to God, he may as
certainly expect the divine assistance of the Spirit to help him to plow, as to
pray, although that assistance to pray is greater, and of another manner then
that to plow, as is obvious to any that has spiritual experience. And whereas
A. Sk. infers upon them, their going about the spiritual duties in a
carnal manner, etc. this they call an impudent calumny but in this, the
impudent calumny is their own, not his, for dare they deny but they are for
going about prayer, and praise (which are spiritual duties) without the motion
of the Spirit, which is as much as to say, in a carnal manner? for what is not
done by the Spirit, is done but in a carnal manner, and whereas they call, his
second answer, a clear confession etc. yet they tell us nothing of it page 96.
They are no less disingenuous, in alleging, that G. K. dissenteth from R. B.
and A. Sk (whom in their aerie and frothy minds they call his pretended
infallible brethren) for as G. K. requires inspirations to the acceptable
performance of other actions, so does A. Sk. and R. B. yet we all say, wicked
men may very lawfully go about natural and civil performances, as to plow,
to eat, to pay debts, as they are materially considered, without inspiration,
and in so doing (although they fall short of acceptable performance, for defect
of the right manner, and the last end) they sin less, then to omit those
actions, and indeed sin not at all, as to the nature and substance of them, as
they do, who pray without inspiration.

As for G. K. his distinction of Mandatory and permissory inspirations, it
holds good, notwithstanding all their idle, foolish and impertinent cavilling
at it; From the words of Paul that he essayed to go to Bithynia, but the
Spirit permitted him not; G. K. inferred by the rule of contraries, that the
Spirit sometimes permitted him, To evade this, they are sorely pinched, in
their Account of the dispute page 30. they grant his consequence, that Paul at
sometimes had a permission, but they deny it to be an inspiration. But here in
this new assault, they deny that any permission felloweth by the rule of
Contraries, from Paul's words, alleging that he permitted him, and he permitted
him not are not contraries. But G. K. did not allege these to be contraries,
for they are flatt contradictory, but these we say are contraries, the Spirit
permitted not Paul to go to Bithynia, therefore he permitted him to go
sometimes, to some places. This is a plain inference, from the rule of
contraries, by Contraries, we mean not contraries in the strict logical sense,
as when the contrariety is betwixt two universalls, but opposits, which in the
common way of speech are called contraries, and in the Logical sense may be
called, subcontraries, which do infer one another not to be true always
simul and sem^l, at one time, and place, but at diverse times and places, etc.
As for example, if there be a South, there must be a North, if a time to come,
there is a time to be past, if some things be hott, and not cold, other things
must be cold and not hott, and to use a more near example to the matter in
hand, if when a River is not permitted to runn, by reason of an excessive
freezing that binds it up, at one time, it follows that it is permitted to
run at another time, when there comes a thaw, or yet to come nearer, If the
wind do not permit a shipp to sail southward, at one time, it does permit
her at another time, to saill southward. We would not have insisted on such
rudiments, had not the great ignorance of the Students occasioned it,

Page 97. They close their 9.. most pitifully, after having failed to refute G.
Ks. distinction of permissory and mandatory inspirations, they say, they leave
it to be proved by G. K. that the simple permitting of him (meaning permission
not joined with a command) has been by inspiration. Here they shamefully
desert their undetaking, which was to refute permissive inspirations, but when
they faill to do this, they put G. K. to prove them, whereas they ought to
remember, that G. K. is not bound by the law of Dispute, to prove any thing,
being a mere defendant, yea when he offered ex abundanti to prove something in
the Dispute, they blamed him for so doing, being but a defendant, and now they
would have him leave Defendant, and become Opponent. This is a pitiful
confutation of the Qu: principles, that when they fall short in their proofs
against us, put us to prove our own principles, but seeing they are so beggarly,
as to beg from G. K. a proof of this, he shall give it uuto them, and it is
this. Admit then, that according to the Students supposition, Paul was
permitted to go unto a certain place, without any command of God, and that
Paul did this acceptably, or without sin, as to the thing it self, which they
must needs acknowledge he might; it follows then by their own argument that he
walked this journey in the Spirit, seeing they themselves plead that men ought
to walk in the Spirit, meaning outward walking, and seeing they grant, that
whatever act a man does acceptably, he must do it to the glory of God, and
that a man can do nothing to the glory of God, but as he does it from a good
principle, (yea the glory of God being a supernatural end, must have a
supernatural principle) which is the Spirit of God, it manifestly follows,
that Paul his journeying by a permission was by inspiration, for whatever is
done in the Spirit, is done by inspiration, inspiration both in the common
sense, and here particularly signifieing any gracious motion, influence and
assistance of the Spirit. In their answer to that other Scripture 1 Cor. 7: 6.
compared with ver. 40. they fall into their old way of asserting barely without
any proof, they tell us, that the permission falls upon the thing spoken, and
not upon the speaking it self. But how prove they it? Here they are quite
dumb, and say nothing for proof, and indeed it is as manifest as a thing can
be, that the permission does no less fall upon the speaking, then upon the
thing spoken, and they do most presumptuously contradict the Apostle, when
they say, Paul was commanded to speak this, whereas Paul said expressly, he
spoke by permission, and not of commandment.

In the prosecution of their second argument, they bring in G. K.
distinguishing betwixt privative and positive permission, where they give the
lie to their own Account, which says page 30. that G. K. distinguished
permission into Positive and Negative, as indeed he did. Now Privative and
Negative differ widely, for the want of sight in a stone, is not privative (as
in a man) but negative, and surely there is so little wit, or acumen in this
argument of the Students, and their prosecution of it, that it proves them to
be liker stones then men of reason and solidity,. And here they tell us, that
G. K. (whom in their vain minds they call this great inspired Rabbi) was very
unfortunat, in explaining this distinction, and assigning its ground, as may be
seen in their Account: but alas! for them poor men, they have egregiously
baffled themselves in that very matter in their Account, as is showed in our
answer thereunto. But behold what dull and heavy disputers these men are. If
Positive permission were inspiration, say they, then a man might inspire us,
for he might positively permit us. This consequence is as dull and heavy as a
stone, although the weight of it falls not upon us, but upon themselves to
prove them altogether impertinent; for their argument proceeds upon a wrong
supposition, that according to G. K. all positive permissions are inspirations,
a thing G. K. never dreamed of, but only that some positive permissions, to
wit, those of God, are inspirations, as he by his Spirit does permit men, or
allow them to do or use some things, as when God said to Adan in the garden,
of every tree in the garden thou may freely eat, save one; This was a
positive permission; and also (if God spoke this to him inwardly, as is most
probable, and as Augustine supposes) an inspiration; also when the Lord said
unto Ezekiel cap. 4: 15. Lo, I have given thee cows dung for man's dung, this
was a condescendece and positive permission, and also an inspiration. But the
Students proceed still more and more to baffle themselves (in stead of baffling
the Qu.) and show their ignorance and sottishness. For thus they argue, page
99. in prosecuting their third argument: every inspiration (say they) puts us
out necessarily to the doing of the thing inspired, and so commands us
virtually. And upon this bare alledgance the whole superstructure of this
argument stands, which yet is a manifest untruth, and suffers many undeniable
exceptions: for many times things inspired are not at all of the nature of
things to be done, but are simply things to be believed, as when God inspired
the Prophets with the knowledgs of things to come, which neither could nor
ought to be done by them, and as when Daniel was inspired to know things, which
he was so far from being commanded to write, that he was forbidden Dan. 12:
4. Again some inspirations are mere inward consolations, and spiritual
refreshments and renewings of strength only to enable us in general to serve
God, as meat and drink is unto the body, and that sometimes without words, and
sometimes with words by way of promise, as when he spoke to Noah Genesis cap. 9.
from ver. 8. to ver. 18. where there is not any command given to Noah, but only
promises, and yet Noah was inspired by the Lord, as all the true Prophets were.
And whereas they allege that inspiration includs in its notion an insuperable
putting and prompting out to the thing inspired, in all authors both sacred and
profane, is merely precarious, for sometimes indeed it signifies to command,
as where the inspiration is mandatory, but at other times it signifies to
comfort, refresh, quicken, influence and assist us, without any particular
command to any particular action, yet we acknowledge the nature of all divine
inspirations in the children of God is to incline, lead, move, draw and guide
them up more and more into unity with God, and so unto a further degree of
holiness, but not to determine them, unto all particular actions, and thus also
their fourth Instance is disproved, where they alledg that all inspirations of
God determine us to one extreme, which is false, if they mean an extreme in the
particular act; if they mean an extreme in the general, as to do all in
charity, and to the glory of God, we grant it, but this does not militate
against what we affirm. Their other two instances are but the former upon the
matter, repeated in a tautologicall way for want of new matter, and are
sufficiently answered above. And thus their silly and faint reasonings in this
argument are answered without any necessity of G. K. his returning to his bag
for new distinctions, as they scornfully but foolishly insinuat.

Page 99. 15. The Students tell us that G. K. finding himself beset with these
inextricable difficulties, as it seems, misplaces this distinction in their
Account, and gives in another distinction of Particular and General
inspirations, this is but their mere alleadgance, the distinction was right
enough placed, as any may see by the nature and coherence of the account, nor
did G. K. see any difficulty in their argument at all, as indeed there is none
in it. But let us see how they refute this distinction of General and
Particular inspirations or influences. First they say, he shall never be able
to produce a ground for this distinction, out of Scripture. A learned
refutation indeed! and like unto their old way, of putting us to prove what they
can not disprove. May it not as well suffice us to say, They shall never be able
to produce a ground out of Scripture against it, and the rather since we are
defendants. Secondly, That which is called a general inspiration could not put
us out to any particular thing, say they. Answer, If by putting us out they
mean, determine us insuperably or irresistibly thereunto, we grant, but this is
no absurdity. Thirdly, They would always leave us undetermined. Answer, nor is
this absurd, for in things that are permissive and left to our freedom in the
Lord to do them, or not to do them, we need not any thing to determine us, as
to the particular act, but may determine our selves, being free agents,
although as to the nature and kind of the act in general, that it be in true
love to God, and to his glory we are determined by the Lord.

Page 100. They are no less unsuccessfull in managing their other argument, in
comparing inward duties with outward, for, whereas they allege for a proof of
their minor, that if we were not to go about inward duties without a previous
sensible inspiration, there would be a progressus in infinitum. This has been
sufficiently answered above in the dispute, that as to that inward duty of
waiting, we can not suppose, that ever at any time an influence or inspiration
can be wanting, and this we say still, we mean to true Christians, who are
faithful unto God, and do faithfully improve his influences. As for others, if
they want influences either to inward or outward duties, the cause is their
unfaithfulness, and so the way to have them upon all occasions is to be
faithful to answer Gods call, who does often invite and call upon them, who are
unfaithful. But if they mean all inward duties, as meditation in many cases,
upon particular subjects, we deny that even true Christians have always
partiticular inspirations thereunto, nor is there any necessity to assert them.

Now let us take notice how they refute the distinction of general and
particular inspirations. First, say they, There are no general inspirations as
we have showed already, but that they have showed no such thing is already made
apparent. Secondly, supposing them, yet they being but general, would not be a
sufficient ground for the particular inward duties of waiting, desiring: but
how prove they this? No wise, but merely affirm it, only they confound
waiting, desireing and meditating together, whereas meditating is of a larger
extent, and sometimes yea often times requires a special inspiration. Thirdly,
say they, the Scriptures produced by the Qu. prove alike as to outward and
inward duties: To this we answer, That as to some outward duties, it is true,
as to others, false; as for example, to be clear in all outward conversation,
is a continual duty, and therefore we can never want an influence thereunto, if
we be faithful, but to preach and pray in the church or assembly, with audible
words, is not a continual duty, nor yet a general to all Christians, and
therefore it has not always an influence to assist thereunto. And here let the
Reader note, that by a general influence, or inspiration, we mean only such an
influence, as serves in general for all ordinary actions that are to be
generally performed in an acceptable manner, as the same spiritual influence
that suffices me to eat in faith, fear, and love, suffices me also to plow,
or do any other mechanical work, but the same does not suffice me to preach,
or expound Scripture, otherwise any ordinary Christian might do so at any
time, which our adversaries will not acknowledge. Now that preaching and
praying in particular, require a superadded spiritual influence and
inspiration, we prove thus: If men may have an influence or inspiration of the
Spirit, to wait, fear and love God, and yet want an influence or inspiration to
preach, and pray vocally, then the influence and inspiration to preach, and
pray vocally, is a distinct superadded influence etc: But the first is true,
therefore the second. The consequence of the first proposition is clear from
that maxim quorum unum potest esse absque alio etc. when of two things the one
can be without the other, the two are really distinguished. The second
proposition is proved, 1. because all true Christians have an influence and
inspiration to wait, fear and love God, but all true Christians have not an
influence and inspiration to preach and pray vocally in the church, this our
adversaries can not deny. 2. Even a true Gospel minister may at times want a
door of utterance, when in the time of this want he has an influence or
inspiration to wait, fear, and love God; therefore these two are distinct. The
antecedent is clear in the case of Ezekiel (chap. 3: 15, 16.) who sat seven
days with the elders, having nothing to speak unto them from the Lord, until
at the end of the seven days the word of the Lord came unto him. And Ezra sat
silent till the evening sacrifice and then he kneeled down and prayed Ezra 9:
5. Also Paul desired the Colossians to pray for him, that utterance might be
given him; which clearly imports, that he had it not at all times, although at
all times he had an influence or inspiration to wait, fear, and love God. And
David prayed that God would open his mouth, and his lips should show forth his
praise. Isaiah said, that God had given him the tongue of the learned etc.
Christ promised that he would give his Apostles a mouth and wisdom which all
their adversaries should not be able to resist: all this signifies an
influence of the Spirit to speak, which was not general to all, nor permanent
or perpetual with them who had it, as is clear in the case of David, who
declared, that he was silent, and held his tongue even from good, until the
fire kindled in him, and then he spoke with his tongue Psalm. 39: 3. Yea what
signifies the coal wherewith Isaiah his mouth was touched, but an inspiration
or influence of life, superadded unto that general influence which he had
before? Now if our adversaries say, this was given nnto those men in an
extraordinary way, as being Prophets and Apostles, but is now ceased, since the
Apostles days. To this we answer 1. This is a plain acknowledgment that
general influences common to all Christians are one thing, and particular
influences given to holy men to preach and pray vocally, are another. But 2,
that all influences and inspirations or motions of the Spirit to enable
ministers to preach and pray vocally are not ceased since the Apostles days,
is clear from Rev. 11: 3. And I will give unto my two witnesses, and they
shall prophecy, and it is said that if any man hurt them, fire proceeds out
of their mouth, which must needs signify a special influence of the Spirit
given them to prophecy or preach, which is not common to all Christians. Also
what are these gifts given unto ministers for the perfecting of the saints,
but such special influences to enable them to preach, which are not given to
all; yea do not the national preachers desire in their public prayers some
special assistance and help of the Spirit, to carry them forth in their
ministry, which they have not before, for if they had it before, why do they
seek it? From all which it is manifest, that as there are general influences
given to all, and at all times, so there are particular and special given only
to some, and but at some times. Moreover, that there is a greater influence of
life required to vocal prayer, when it is acceptable, then unto some mere
mental prayer (a thing expressly denied by the Students page 100. 16.) is
clear, because all true and acceptable vocal prayer, has mental prayer going
along with it, as its cause and spring, and so when any man prays vocally, (if
his prayer be true and acceptable) he prays also mentally, and so he does two
things together, whereas when he prays but mentally he does but one thing.
Now common reason teaches us that more strength is required to do two things
together, then to do but one of them. And seeing the vocal prayer has not any
life, or virtue in it, to reach unto Gods throne, or yet unto the hearts of his
people, to quicken and refresh them, but as it receives that life, from the
life that is in the mental prayer, it is clear, that a greater measure is
required to both, then simply to the one. Now although mental prayer (as to
the disposition and frame of the soul at lest) be always in and with good
Christians, and has always some measure of life in it, yet that measure is
sometimes so weak and low, that it can not go forth into the words, without
hurt or prejudice, and at other times although it be able and strong, yet it
will not answer the motion of man's will, so as to be drawn forth thereby, but
it only abides or goes forth into the vocal prayer, according to the will of
God, as he pleases to move it, therefore the free motion of the life it self,
as it pleases God to bring it forth, is to be attended in all outward
spiritual performances: But here let the Reader note, that we have said Uocall
prayer requires more life then some mental prayer, we do not say, then all;
for some mental prayer may be stronger then that which is a complex of mental
and vocal, as gathering the whole strength of the complex into that which is
solely and entirely mental, according unto that common saying, abundantly
confirmed by experience, vis unita fortior, united strength is the stronger, as
when the beams of the sun are united into a small point, they have more force,
then when they are diffused, and for this cause it is, that we are so much for
mental prayer, as knowing the great good of it in our experience. And from
what is above said, it is clear that we need another influence wherewith to
pray vocally, then to eat, plow, walk etc. because these natural actions may be
done sufficienty in a spiritual manner, by the help of that general
influence, which does always attend good men, to fear and love God, for the
principle of divine life, which is the living and powerful word of God in men's
hearts, is never idle, but is always operative, and at work, especially more
abundantly in them who join with it, being as a most rich and living spring,
that is continually flowing, and sending forth its streams, according to Joh.
4: 14. but to pray vocally requires an influence of life to flow forth into
the words, that it may in a liveing and powerful way reach the hearers, but
that plowing, eating, walking, etc. need no such emanating influence, is
certain, and will be acknowledged by our adversaries. But perhaps also they
will deny, that any life or virtue does flow forth into mental praying and
preaching, even when these duties are acceptably performed. But this is
contrary both to the certain experience of many thousands, and also to the
Scripturs testimony in many places.

I. It is contrary to the experience of many thousands, who can declare,
(whereof we are some) that the declarations, testimonies, and words of the
servants of God, in preaching and praying have a real life and living virtue
in them, whereby their souls are exceedingly refreshed, quickened, and
strengthened, which life and living virtue is a thing as distinct from the bare
outward words, which the natural ear can hear, as wine is distinct from the
vessel that carries it, therefore if another man, that has not this Spiritual
ability, should pronounce the same words, they have not any life or virtue at
all: and that God had given this Spiritual discerning to many before the
people called Q. were raised up, is manifest, from diverse in our own nation,
who cared not to hear men, who could speak never so good words, if they wanted
life, and in that day, they could and did distinguish betwixt dead and living
preachers, as also betwixt a living testimony and preaching, and a dry
discourse, see for this the book called, The fulfilling of the Scriptures. And
this was the express testimony of that Philosopher, who was converted by the
means of a few words spoke by a certain old man, who was a Christian, at the
Council of Nice, out of the mouth that old man, (said he) there went forth a
virtue, which I could not resist, these were his very words, as Lucas Osiander
relats them in his Epitome of the Church history. Cent. 4. lin. 2. cap. 5.

II. It is contrary to the Scriptures testimony in many places, The mouth of
the righteous is a well of life Prove. 10: 11. this must be understood in
respect of the influence of life, that comes out of his mouth, as water does
out of a well, and not barely in respect of the good words, which a wicked man
may speak: according to this Christ said to his disciples, The words that I
speak unto you are spirit and life, and as it was then, so it is now, for at
this day he speaks in his servants, and will to the end of the world, and it
is he only, who has the words of eternal life, which he speaks in his
servants, and as in the days of his flesh, he was said to speak with
authority, or power and not as the scribes, and the people wondered at the
gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, all which import a liveing
influence and virtue in the words of Christ, which the words of the Scribes and
Pharisees had not, so it is at this day, for Christ does as really speak by
his Spirit, in his servants, as he did in his body of flesh, so that Paul said,
he spak in him, and therefore his preaching was in demonstrtion of the Spirit
and power. And for this cause true Preachers and Prophets are called good
trees, of which men gather good fruit, whereas bad men or evil trees, having
no good fruit, although they have the Prophets and Apostles words, also they
are compared, to wit, the false Prophets, to clouds without rain and wells
without water, although they have good words, yet they have no rain nor water,
their whole ministry is dry, and empty of life and virtue, but the true
Prophets ministry is as a shower of rain, Deuteronomy. 32: 2. and sometimes it is
compared unto fire, as it is said in the Psalm, he makes his angels, or
messengers, spirits, and his ministers a flamme of fire, and fire was said to
go out of the mouths of the two witnesses. Also the influences of life that go
forth through the true prophets in their ministry are compared to golden oil,
and the men are compared unto golden pipes, Zech. 4: 12. And therefore the
Apostle Peter exhorted the ministers in his day to minister of the ability
which God gives, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, so they
ministered not only words, but grace; many other testimonies might be cited to
prove this truth.

Another instance brought by the Students, is, that an haeretick forbearing
prayer a year or two, or his whole life time, may justify himself by this
doctrine. To this it was answered, that though he may pretend, yet he has no
just ground from our principle, for we believe that all men are bound to pray
often unto God, yea daily, and that God does inwardly call and move all men
often unto prayer, during the day of their visitation, and when that is
expired, or when at any other time they want that inward call, or influence,
through unfaithfulness, they are still bound, and if they pray not, they sin,
because they ought to have an influence. But that our Account says, All have
not utterance to pray in words, is no excuse for heretics, for they must needs
acknowledge, as well as we, that all have not utterance, who may be good
Christians, seeing some that are naturally dumb may be good Christians, and yet
the^ must confess these have not utterance; also many good Christians, who
have no natural impediment, do want utterance in a spiritual way, to speak or
pray vocally in the hearing of others, at some times, although we believe it is
given at times to all that are faithful, who have no natural defect, that
they may pray vocally, or in the hearing of others: but how often, it is more
then we can determine, seeing it is not revealed, but if any fail of this
utterance, through unfaithfulnesie, their sin is nothing the less, if they
omit prayer. And thus their last two instances are also answered, for we do
affirm with great freedom, that all who are faithful to the Lord, never want
sufficient inspiration, or influence to wait upon God, fear him, love him,
desire his grace, and diverse other inward duties. We say not all, for some
inward duties, such as meditation on a particular subject or place of Scripture
are not always required, more then it is always required to speak; but if
they be unfaithful, we deny not, but they may and will want them, and in that
case, although they want inspirations and influences they are bound to pray,
yet not without them, but with them, as a man that wants both money and goods
to pay his debt, yet is bound to pay his debt, yet he must not, nor ought to
pay it, without money, or goods, the example is clear, and the application is
easy. As for that story they bring in concerning T. M. which, that their deceit
may be the more hide, they do not positively affirm, but only propose by way
of question, have not Q. declared to people etc. To which we answer, that we
know not that any Qu. ever declared any such thing and we believe diverse things
in the story are utterly false. If T. M. or any other of our profession, having
none in the family that can join with them in the true spirit of prayer, but
are professed opposers of the Q. way, be not so frequently heard pray by them,
is excusable by your oune way, who will not readily pray in our hearing when
they have none to join with them, and indeed the want of that true unity on
the part of those who are not of our faith, does often hinder our freedom, to
pray in their hearing, (unless we have some of our faith, present to join
with us) we may pray for them, as it pleases God to move us, in their hearing,
but we can not so properly pray with them as not being in unity with them,
where two or three (said Christ) agree together to seek any thing in my name,
but let our adversaries if they can, show us, where in the Scripture, it is
commanded, for any man, to pray, in the hearing of others where all present
have no agreement with him, yet we deny not, but that God upon some solemn
occasion may move to such a thing, especially when a public testimony is
required, as in the case of Stephen, who prayed audibly in the hearing of
others, all which were so far from having any agreement with him, that they
were at that time stoneing him to death; Acts 7. Moreover we could easily, upon
a more just ground retort the question upon your own Church members, how many
of your own church members were not only for a twelve month, but for many 12
months, never heard pray, and yet they pass among you for good Christians? It
is well knoune, that although ye hold family prayer, morning and evening to be a
duty, and the want of it a great sin, that yet many thousand families in the
nation, who belong to your church, want it, and many whole families are so
grossly ignorant, that none in the family can go about it, even in that
natural way, which ye plead for. As for us, it does suffice unto us, that God
hears us in secret, although men do not so frequently hear us; yet we oune
with all our hearts public expressive prayer, as it is performed in Spirit and
in truth, and all of us, have our share and testimony therein, as God moves
thereunto, even those who are outwardly silent, as the^^ who speak, when as
both agree together in one spirit, and with one heart and soul join together
in the same.

SECTION SIXTH. of BAPTISM.
Wherein their fourth Section concerning water Baptism, is answered.

IN their stating the question, they say, the question is not, whether Infants
ought to be baptized, or who have the power of administering baptism; whereas
indeed these two are a great part of the question betwixt our adversary and
us, for as touching infant baptism R. B. his Thesis does expressly say, it is a
mere human tradition; and it: well known that all the Quakers so called are of
the same mind, and do not the Students undertake to confute ehe Q. principles,
how is it then that they leave out so considerable a part of Quakerism, as they
call it? Is this Quakerism canvassed, to pick and chase at some, and pass by
others? Yea Infants-sprinkling with water on the forehead, is so considerable a
part of the question betwixt them and us, that if that be disproved, or if they
can not prove that to be a Gospel institution, they fall short exceedingly,
seeing that is the only baptism, in use among them of the national Church.
Again, it is so great a part of the question, who have the power of
administering baptism, that by this, the controversy stands or falls, for one
of our maine arguments against water-baptisme as remaining a duty, upon all
Christians, is, that none are to be found that have the power to administer it;
and the administration cannot be with a lawful administrator, the question
then really is, whether these who have no immediate call to administer water
baptism, (as John had) have power to administer it. Again, whether these, who
have no other mediat call to baptize, but what they have by the church of Rome
which is no true church, as the best Protestants affirm, have power to
administer baptism, and this question is the more proper in this place, seeing
I. M. the Students master confesses his and his brethrens call and ordination
to be by the church of Rome, and that they have no other, but what is conveyed
down to them from the Apostles times by that apostate church. But let us now
examine their arguments for water baptism in general: The first is, Baptism
with water is to continue in the church as long as Christ's presence is to
continue with his Apostles, and them who teach the doctrine that they taught:
But Christ's presence is to continue with his Apostles, and them who teach the
doctrine that they taught, to the end of the world, Therefore etc. Where it is
to be observed, that they think all is safe as to the minor, and therefore they
altogether pass it by Now although it is sufficient to invalidat the argument,
if the major be false, yet we have somewhat of great moment to say to the
minor, that is enough to overturne any baptism that they have; for we put them
to explain, who these are, that all along since the Apostles, have taught the
doctrine, which the Apostles taught, for the words are liable to diverse senses.
If they mean the church of Rome, and her bishops and teachers, we altogether
deny that they have taught the same doctrine, which the Apostles taught, and we
suppose the Students, if they follow their master I. M. will not affirm it.
And indeed for the same reason, the best primitive Protestants denied that the
church of Rome in their day had any lawfulll ordination at all, seeing she
continued not in the Apostles doctrine, and faith, as that famous Protestant
Sadeell does argue at great length, lib. de legit. voc. min. where he
affirms, that the succession of faith is as the soul, which gives life to the
succession of the bishops as unto a body, but that succession without this
faith, is a dead thing, and unprofitable carcass. Now the same reason does
militate as strongly against Water Baptism, and that also called the supper,
upon our present adversaries principle, that none have power to administer the
one or the other, but those who have a mediat outward call, conveyed down from
the Apostles, by a visible succession of ordained Bishops and Presbyters, for
we say, There has been no such visible succession, nor visibly ordained
Bishops and Presbyters, who all along have had the true faith, and taught the
true doctrine of the Apostles, therefore their ordination, and power to
administer the Sacraments, is void and null. And this is further confirmed by
the authority of Cyprian, who taught with great earnestness, that the baptism
of all heretics was void, and no baptism, but so it is, by our adversaries
confession, that the Church and bishops, and teachers of Rome have been
Heretics for many hundred years, before the reformation, Therefore etc. We say
then, the argument is fallacious, as to the Minor supposing what is not to be
supposed in their sense, videlicet, that either the teachers of the church of
Rome, or any other claiming a visible and mediat call, from the Apostles times
conveyed through a visible church unto them, have thaught the doctrine, which
the Apostles taught; a thing we altogether deny, and it lies on them to prove,
But that Christ has had some all along, who have both believed and taught the
doctrine of the Apostles, and that his presence has been with them, we
acknowledge, but we deny that these have been all along a visible church, and
teachers having a mediat call and ordination, and in this we agree with the
best Protestants, for indeed the true church has been hidd, even as a few
grains of corn among an exceeding great quantity of chaff, and stubble, and
she who has called her self the church, by reason of her outward succession,
was not the true church, though some of the true church lay hidden in her, as
corn is hid in a great quantity of chaff, and that the church is properly to
be placed in the alone grains of corn, and not in the chafe, Sadeell does
also show out of Augustine, Epi. 48. Another fault we find in the Students
argument, that supposeing Water Baptism had been commanded to the Apostles, by
Christ Matthew. 28. (which yet we altogether deny) it insinuates that it was as
long to continue as Christ's presence, with his church, for if teaching had
continued, though Baptism with water had discontinued (as our adversaries grant
that anointing with oil, and miraculous curing the sick, is discontinued) yet
the promise was ground enough to encourage them, and if all be still binding
that Christ commanded to his Apostles, why go they not forth, (we mean the
national teachers) into all the world, and teach the nations, who do not so
much as believe the Gospel historically: If they say, this was a command to
the Apostles, and not to them, why are they so partial as to take one part to
them, and reject another? But we shall now come to a more particular
examination of their Major, we have told them, that the Apostles baptized some
with water, out of a condescendency, as Paul circumcised Timothy, and not from
that command, Matthew. 28. which says nothing of Water Baptism; Their first
reason against this, is, they should have Baptized with water of their own
will and without any sufficient authority. But we deny this consequence, and
they themselves have furnished us with a sufficient answer, where they say Paul
circumcised Timothy but not without a command, for the Law of charity, and
other general precepts obliged Paul so to do, though it was a thing
indifferent of it self: the same we say, as to their baptising with water, the
Jews having so great an esteem of Water Baptism, and thinking it necessary,
the Apostles used it, although it was a thing indifferent of it self, after
Christ's ascension, and giving of the holy ghost, the Law of charity, and other
general precepts oblidging them, but this proves not, that the Apostles had
any command from Matthew. 28. or any such command any where else, that made
Water Baptism of it self, to be a necessary duty, to the end of the world. And
whereas they querie, will G. K. grant, that it was once lively. We answer, yes
under John, yet it follows not that it was to continue, because John had no
commission to the nations, but only to the Jews, and that the Apostles Baptized
whole families and thousands (if they so did) will not prove, that it was
necessary of it self, more then that Circumcision was, and yet even then, many
thousands of believing Jews, were Zealous for Circumcision, see Act. 21: 20,
21. yea many Bishops of Jerusalem were circumcised after this, as Eusebius
relats, the reason therefore was, that people were Zealous of Water Baptism,
because of John, and therefore the Apostles condescended to it, out of the law of
charity. Another question they make, where is water baptism buried? We answer,
where the other shadows are buried, for it was but a shadow, and carnal
ordinance, Heb. 9: 10. the Greek word is (...). Again the true water baptism
has been out of use all the time of the Apostasy, for the apostate church
has had no true baptism, and so in that respect it has been buried, and being
but a shadow, is not to be raised up again, And it is observable, that in the
revelation, where it is prophesied; of the return and restoration of the
church, there is not any thing mentioned of the restoring either Water Baptism,
or the use of bread and wine, as signs, etc. And so their second reason is
answered, that Water Baptism is no more to be used, out of condescendency to
the weak, then circumcision, because both are long ago buried, and what is
buried is deadly to be raised up again, as Augustine taught. Their third reason
is built on a mistake, that the God head of Christ, or names of Father, Son,
and holy ghost were a stumbling block to the believeing Jews, for of these
only we are to be understood, also that the Apostles used the words Father Son,
and holy ghost, when they baptized, can not be proved, far less used they,
the word Trinity; which was not invented long after the Apostles days: Their
second argument that the baptism commanded in Matthew. 28: 16. is with water,
resolves at last into this, that it is God only and not man, who baptises with
the holy ghost, because he is only the proper, immediate efficient cause of
baptism with the holy ghost, but we deny the consequence as weak and false,
for there is nothing more usual then to ascribe the effect unto the
isntrumental cause, as truly as unto the principal, Paul was sent to turn or
convert the Gentiles from darkness to light, and to open their eyes, and yet
God only was the proper and immediate efficient cause of this. Many more
examples could be given, yea the same reason of the Students would militate
against teaching, for even outward teaching, which is by the motion of the holy
ghost has a power, and virtue in it, whereof the men who teach, are but the
isntrumental conveyers, that is only from God, as the immediate efficient
cause. Another reason they give to make all sure, as they say is, that it is
only Christ, as he is God, and mightier, then John, who baptized with the holy
ghost, Matthew. 3: 11. where baptism with the holy ghost is peculiarly attributed
to Christ. But this makes their matter nothing more sure, for although that
baptism with the holy ghost be peculiarly attributed to Christ as the
principal cause, yet it hinders not that men are the isntrumental, even as
Christ said, it is not ye that speak, and yet they also spoke as instruments.
It is true, that John did not baptize with the holy ghost as the Apostles did,
or rather Christ through them, because John had not so powerful a ministry
given him, as the Apostles, of whom Christ said, that they should not only do
as great works, as he, but greater, to wit, by his power. Again, They argue,
that giveing and not granting, that baptism with the holy Ghost could be
administered by men, yet it is not commanded here for the words then would be
full of needless tautologies. To this we answer, that this does not follow,
for suppose that by teaching and baptizing were meant one thing; how usual is
it in Scripture to express one thing under diverse names, without any
tautologie? However we believe that by teaching and baptizing are meant two
several things, both which require the special operation of the holy Spirit,
for a man through teaching, by the concurrence of the holy ghost is first of
all convinced of the truth, and has a ground laid in him to believe, and then
he is baptized with the holy ghost, upon his believing and obeying in what he
is convinced of; nor is this to confound the command with the promise, for the
sense of it is this, go ye and baptize with the holy ghost instrumentally, and
I shall be with you, as the Principal cause to concur and assist you, and
thus there is no tautologie, the command and the promise being in diverso
genere, id est, in a different kind.

Their next argument to prove, that Water Baptism is to continue to the end of
the world, is, that God sent John to baptize with water, and Christ caused John
baptize him and commanded or caused his Apostles baptize with water, and these
commands were never formally repealed, nor ceased of their own nature,
Therefore. But to this the Answer is easy, for John's baptism, was no part of the
Gospel dispensation, as serving only to prepare the way to Christ, and he was
sent only to baptize the Jews, that Christ might be manifest to Israel, Joh.
1: 31. and it is called John's baptism in distinction from that of Christ, for
some were baptized with it, who had not received the holy ghost, and that
Christ was baptized with water, proves not its continuance, no more then that
he was circumcised, proves the continuance of Circumcision: that Christ
commanded his disciples to baptize with water, we find not, and though it were,
it is but as at that time being under John's dispensation, but unless they can
prove that Christ commanded to baptize all nations with water, and that to the
end of the world, they gain nothing, for what was commanded only as toward the
Jews, does not reach us gentiles, and so we need seek no repeal, there not
having been any such command.

In their answering our retortion, as touching washing the feet, anointing the
Sick with oil, and abstaining from blood, and things strangled, They say, 1.
This retortion has a damnable tendency, for enthusiasts may arise and plead
the same way against the most necessary truths, etc. We answer, They have no
ground from our retortion so to do, because, these things above mentioned are
but figures, and such as have no inward, or intrinsecall goodness, or
righteousness in them, as the other things have, which are most necessary. 2.
Whereas they say, If these things had been commanded, and never repealed, it
were better to admit and observe them, then to reject Baptism, etc. We answer,
if by repeal, they mean a formal repeal, we deny that it were better, for all
being but figurative things, and such as the inward Law of God writ in our
hearts, which is the new covenant dispensation, does not require of us, they
cease of their own nature, and carry a virtuall repeal in their bosom,
although it be not formally expressed in the Scripture, as to every particular,
for all the things of the ceremonial Law, are not one by one particularly
repealed in the new Testament; but together in one body, for the Law it self
being changed, the things required by it, if they have no other Law to require
them, do cease. 3. They say, That Christ in washing his disciples feet did 2
things. 1. To seal up to his disciples their part in him. 2. He intended to
leave them one example of humility, and it is only this second thing, which he
commanded, to his disciples, to wit, that they should perform acts of
humility, one to another. But we miss their proof there altogether, that he
only commanded this, and not the washing one another feet in particular, yea
this gloss expressly gives the lie to Christ his own words Joh. 13: 14. ye
also ought to wash one another feet, where not only an act of humility is
signified, but an act of love, and also by the outward washing of the outward
feet, is signified, how we ought to contribute to wash one another feet in a
spiritual sense that is to say, by seasonable reproofs and exhortations to
help on, one another, unto the sanctification of the most inferior affections,
that are as it were the feet: and that Christ points at such a mystery, is
clear, from ver. 10. He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet.
Again they alleege, that this act is put synecdochically, for all other acts of
humility; but admit, that it be so, this proves not, that this particular act
was not commanded, when Christ instituted the breaking of bread, at supper;
among other ends, it had this also, to signify the unity of Christians, and
how they ought to love one another; shall we therefore say, it is
synecdochically put for all acts of love, but is not particularly commanded?
And indeed as washing of feet was in use, in these hot countries, before that
Christ did wash his disciples feet and commanded it to them, so was that in
use, the chief in the family, to take bread and break it, and give to every
one, saying, take, eat; this was in use among the Jews, before Christ did so,
as diverse historians relate, particularly Paulus Ricius de coelesti
agricultura. Again, whereas they say, If he had commanded so, some would have
observed it. To this we answer, some yea many did observe it, as they grant
Ambrose and the church of Millain did, for if they used to do so, in the
eastern countries, where there was need for it, because the people ordinarily
did go barefoot, the Christians in that country would use it the rather that
Christ commanded it, yea it does appear, that it was a most ordinary thing in
the primitive times from Paul's words 1 Timothy 5: 10. where it is numbered among
other commanded duties, if she has washed the saints feet. If it be said,
that they used it, but not as a Sacrament, we answer, we read not of the word
Sacrament in the Scripture, it is enough that they used it, and were commanded
so to do by Christ, and it had a Spiritual signification, as well as these
things they call Sacraments. It is needless for us to insist more on this
particular, so as to refute arguments of their own making, which are none of
ours, wherein they fight with their own shadow, where we leave them, and
proceed to the other particulars. They tell us, that the command to anoint the
sick with oil, carries a repeal in its bosom, so we say, does John's Baptism
with water, as preparing the way to Christ, who is now come, and so we may
return them their axiom cessante fine legis, cessat and obligatio, but that
anointing with oil was only in order to miraculous cures, they say it, without
giving any proof, Ja. 5: 14. for although it were confessed, that it were in
order to outward healing or curing, yet it is clear from the text, that it was
not exclusive of all other things, for it is not only promised that he shall be
saved, but if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him, and this
saving seems rather to be spiritual, then the restoring the body to natural
health, otherwise it being absolutely promised, all sick persons in the church
should have been always restored to natural health, and so none should have
died, and we find anointing with oil joined with prayer, yea we are bidden pray
one for another, that we may be healed, nor is this ceased; but that by the
prayers of the godly, for one that is sick, and bodily diseased, it pleases
God at times, so to answer them, that they are restored to health by the Lord,
and we dare our adversaries, if they will deny this altogether, and this is in
a true sense miraculous, yea instances of this kind have been even among the
people called Q. and if it were altogether ceased, according to the Students
argument, prayer (at lest, so as to pray to God, to heal any sick person)
should cease also. It is better therefore to say, that anointing with oil is
ceased, as being but a figure. Their repeal of the command to abstain from
blood and things strangled, is not sufficiently proved from 1 Cor. 10: 25, for
let any read the whole chapter, and he shall find nothing said in it of blood,
or things strangled, that was not the subject, he was upon, but things offered
toidols, which we read not, that they used to strangle: the sense is plain,
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles (whether offered to idols, or not) that eat,
asking no question, if it be offered to an idol, or not. Beside it is not
usual to sell flesh of beasts strangled in the shambles, for they kill them
otherwise then by strangling, which is hurtful to the meat; and if selling of
strangled flesh had been usual, it would have been no transgressing the
Apostls rule, if they had any doubt, to have asked if it was strangled, for
many will not eat flesh that is strangled, because it is not so good
nourishment, although they have no scruple of conscience; yea the primitive
Christians even in Tertullian's time, as he shows in his Apology, abstained
from blood and things strangled, wherein there was a great providence of God to
clear them of that horrid falsehood, as if they did drink the blood of children.
By which it is clear, they did not understand Paul's words 1 Cor. 10: 25. to be
any repeal. It is therefore more safe to say that it being a part of the
ceremonial law, it is repealed with the other figures.

The words of John, He must increase, but I must decrease. Joh. 3: 30. they
will not have to be understood of John's baptism, wherein they are not only
contrary to many of their own church, as could be shown, but also to the
Scripture it self: for it is most clear, that John spoke this with a
particular relation to his baptism, when they came to him, and told him that
Christ baptized etc. on this he said, that Christ was to increase, meaning
Christ's baptism, not with water, but with the holy ghost (for Christ baptized
none with water himself) and he, that is, his baptism must decrease, not his
true honor and virtue; and the disciples he gathered, was unto Christ, but
that John's baptism was much practiced, proves it no more a standing command,
then other things of the Law.

In the last place they allege, that Peter commanded Cornelius and others with
him to be baptized, out of necessity ariseing from a divine precept, but their
proofs are weak. For (...) we ought to do all things in the name of the Lord,
when we eat, or drink, or journey, but yet all things are not commanded, but
some left to our fredome. 2. Peter in his sermon told Cornelius nothing of
water-baptisme, and when that after he spoke of it, he did not tell him, that
he ought to do it out of a necessity arising from a divine precept, let them
prove it if they can. 3. whereas they allege that Peter was accused by the
disciples, for administering water baptism to Cornelius, from Acts. 11. it is a
manifest untruth, for there is no such thing either in their accusation, or his
answer; as may be seen, if any will read the chapter; they accused him, for
going in to them, and eating with them, and this was all the accusation, and
though they had, the Students consequence does not follow, for if the law of
charity obliged him to baptize them, his refusal would have been a
withstanding of God.

SECTION SEVENTH, of the MINISTRY,
Being an Answer to their fifth Section Concerning the MINISTRY.

In the first part of their section, they plead that a man, who is a hypocrite,
and graceless, may be a true and lawful Pastor, yet they grant, that none
ought to be admitted into the ministry, but such as ex judicio charitatis, id
est, out of the judgment of charity, is to be esteemed truly pious, by which
acknowledgment, they destroy with their own hands any seeming strength, that
lies in their own arguments, as will appear, by a particular examination of
them. Their first reason is taken from many Jewish Priests and high Priests,
and many Scribes, and Pharisees in Christ's time, who were ministers of Gods
word, and yet who will say they were endued with sanct fiing grac? To which we
answer, that they were ministers of Gods word, or of the Gospel, is denved,
for they were but ministers of the Law, and legal performances, types, figures
and shadows; and as that Legal dispensation was but imperfect, in respect of
the Gospel, so the Priesthood and ministry of it, therefore both was to pass
away; so that to argue from the Law to the Gospel, is not equal, more then to
argue, that because the ministers of the Law were ministers of the figures and
types, that therefore the ministers of the Gospel, should be the same, yea we
may draw an argument from the outward and Legal qualifications of the Priests,
that none but truly holy should, or ought to be ministers under the Gospel;
for as under the Law, none were to be Priests, but these who came of Levi, a
figure of Christ; so under the Gospel, none are to be ministers, but who by a
spiritual birth and nativity, are of Christ. And as under the Law, none that
were lame and blind corporally, were to be Legal ministers, so under the
Gospel, none that are lame and blind spiritually, are to be Gospel ministers,
but all that want true holiness, are lame and blind spiritually, therefore.
Again, many of these Jewish Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, were openly and
manifestly impious, especially in the time of Christ his being in the flesh,
and could not be esteemed truly pious, in the judgment of charity, and so if
the argument hold, it proves that men be admitted, and owned to be ministers of
the Gospel, that are not pious in the judgment of charity. The like may be
said of Judas, whom they take in their second argument, to patronize a
graceless ministry, for if Judas was a devil from the beginning, certainly
Christ did know him to be so, and therefore could not in the judgment of
charity esteem him to be truly pious, how could he then admit him? But as
for Judas, they allege indeed that he was a devil from the beginning, but they
have not proved it; it is said expressly of him, that he fell from his ministry
by transgression, we read not that he was degraded his office, any other way,
but simply by his transgression, which was his betraying Christ. Again, it is
written of him, let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein,
and his Bishopric let another take. Psalm. 109. But they who plead for a
grace^esse Minister, would put another in Judas habitation, and so would hold
up a ministry of covetous men, as he was, who to satisfy their covetousness
will betray Christ: for suppose, that a man have all other qualifications
requisite, and yet be openly and notourly a wicked man, he may plead his right
to be admitted, and if admitted to be continued to be a minister, what ground
have his brethren, out of Scripture, to depose him, according to the Students
argument, (which is indeed the general argument of the clergy) [as they are
called] seeing he has all the essentialls of a Minister? if they say, Paul
requires that a Bishop, or Deacon be found blameless, not covetous, but
vigilant, sober etc: then it will follow, as much, that he that is not really
pious, ought not to be admitted, as he that is not seemingly pious, for the
Apostle does not say, he must be seemingly so, but simply that he must be so,
and indeed to expound all these qualifications of a seeming, and no real
holiness, is to mock the Scripture, for they might as well say, that seeming
holiness only, and not real, is required indispensably of us, in order to
salvation, for the Scripture as positively requires holiness, unto the
function of a Bishop, as it does require it unto salvation. There is yet
another thing, which they have to prove, concerning Judas, viz, that Christ
sent him to preach the Gospel. He sent him indeed to work miracles, heal the
sick, and to say, The kingdom of God is at hand, that is to say, the Gospel
dispensation is approaching; but that Judas was a minister of the Gospel,
which is the power of God unto salvation, we require them to prove: for it was
after his removal that Christ sent the Apostles to preach the Gospel. Their
third reason is, that the efficacy of the words depends not upon the
worthiness of the preachers 1 Cor. 3: 7. We grant the Antecedent, but deny the
Consequence, for although it depend not upon the worthiness of the Preacher,
yet it may and does require holiness, as a qualification indispensably
necessary in him, even as they grant themselves, that none are justified,
without faith, yet they deny that the efficacy of justification depends upon
the worthynesse of him that believes, and the efficacy of good wine depends
not upon the worthynesse of the vessel, that bears it, yet none will put good
wine in a leaky vessel, or unfit, and indeed as unfit as a leaky, unclean
vessel is to receive good wine, a graceless man is as unfit to receive the
dispensation of the Gospel, which is compared to new wine in the Scripture,
and said Christ, no man puts new wine into old bottles, for indeed the
ministration of the Gospel, is a ministration of life and grace, and none can
minister that which they have not. Their fourth argument depends upon a
proposition, which they lay down, and offer to prove, but fall short in, viz,
that they can not know who have true grace, this we deny, for if they would
believe in the Light, wherewith Christ has enlightened them, they should
receive the Anointing, and by it their eyes should be opened to know, who are
gracious, and who not. But let us see how they prove it. 1. Say they, we can
not know it immediately, that is granted. 2. Nor can we know it by their outward
works, unless it be out of the judgment of charity, which may deceive us, for
all the works which a godly man can do, may likewise be performed as to the
outward, by hypocrites. To this we answer, If by outward works, they mean such
as come under the outward observation of the mere outward and bodily senses we
grant; but there are works, which are the fruits of the Spirit, which, although
they remain in the souls of holy men, yet send forth a savor of that life and
Spirit, or spiritual principle, that is the root of them, through the outward
words and conversation, which can and do reach unto the spiritual senses of
others, where they are, and this savor and manifestation of life can no
hypocrite have, but it is an infallible evidence of sanctification in measure
where it is, and where the sanctification is greatest the savor or
manifestation of life is there greatest also, according unto this, Paul said,
we are a good savor, etc. and Paul said of the Corinthians, that they were the
epistle of Christ. John said of the Saints that the name of God, and of the
Lamb, shall be in their foreheads. Many other testimonies could be brought to
prove this, we shall only add that of Christ, he that believes in me, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water. So here is an evidence, that no
hypocrite can have Now what are these rivers, but the influences of the Spirit,
and seeing they are said to flow out, they may be discerned by others. It is
true the natural senses can not discern them, but the Spiritual senses can,
and seeing the students grant spiritual senses, if they grant them to be true
and real, they must grant also Spiritual sensible objects, which may be as
certainly apprehended, and discerned by our spiritual senses, although the
objects themselves be without us, as natural objects without us may be
apprehended by the natural senses. 3. Nor can we know it, say they, by
revelation, but how prove they it? They only suppose they have proved already,
that thereis no such thing, but how weak and impertinent their proofs are, is
above showed. But here note, that by revelation, is sufficiently understood the
revelation or discovery, which the fruits of the Spirit, or Spiritual life
give forth in holy men one to another, for as the savor of some sweet
oyntement is a sufficient revelation of it, to the sense of the natural smell,
so the Spiritual savor of the Spiritual ointment, is such to the Spiritual
smell. Lastly, whereas they say, the gift of discerning Spirits, was never
common to all. This we deny, nor does that Scripture cited by them prove it 1
Cor: 12, 10. Otherwise they might as well say, that faith was not common to all
true Christians, because it is said, to another, faith, but as by [faith] here
must be understood some extraordinary degree of faith, or the faith of
miracles, so the discerning must be some extraordinary degree, or as in
relation to miracles, seeing there were Spirits of Devils that wrought false
miracles, and such a discerning as to that, we do not plead for, as common to
all, but that a discerning of Spirits, so far as to discern betwixt them who
were godly and wicked, and who were ministers of the Spirit, and who not, was
common unto all, we prove, because it is promised as a general privilege, Mal
3: 18. Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
etc. Again, all are commanded to try the Spirits, 1 John 4: 1. Therefore all
have a measure of discerning whereby to try them, otherwise they were required
to do an impossible thing, which is absurd, If it be said He gives a rule,
whereby to try them, viz. every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is of God, ver. 2. To this we answer, the rule is one thing,
the discerning is another, and differ, as the object, and the eye; Now the eye
is as much required to see, as the object, Therefore all need a Spiritual eye,
to apply the rule in a suitable manner, so as to know, who do truly confess
Christ come in the flesh, for John can not mean a bare verbal confession,
because Antichrist himself may have that, therefore he means a true living
confession in life and power, which no hypocrite can have. Having thus answered
all their arguments we shall conclude this particular with one argument against
them, one part of which is their own confession. They who can be certainly
known and discerned, to be impious and unholy, ought not to be admitted into
the ministry. But impious and unholy men can be certainly known to be impious
and unholy, Therefore they ought not, etc. The first proposition is proved and
sufficiently confirmed from their own confession, that none ought to be
admitted, but who in the judgment of charity are to be esteemed truly pious,
therefore they who can not be so esteemed ought not to be admitted, but if they
be certainly known to be impious, they can not be so esteemed, therefore etc.
the assumption is proved above, partly by arguments, and partly by the
refutation of what they have said against it.

In the second part they dispute aginst an immediate enthusiastic call, (as
they call it) by way of inspiration, being necessary, and for the necessity of
a mediate and outward call; and because we plead for the blessed inspiration of
the Spirit of God, they call us Enthusiasticall impostors, and if the Apostles
themselves and primitive Christians were now living, they would give them the
same name: for we plead for no other inspiration, but that which was given unto
those holy men. But seeing they use the word Enthusiasme so much, in a way of
reproach, it is fit, that it be opened, let them tell us then, if they mean any
other thing by it, then true divine inspiration, if they mean another, it
concerns us not, for we plead for no other, but if they mean that, (as the word
properly signifies, being derived from a word, that signifies, God within, as
the best Greek dictionaries show) they should not reproach us with that, which
was the glory of the primitive Christians, and by which the Scriptures were
writ, to wit, divine inspiration. And here they tell us of an inward call,
which consists in the disposition of the soul, but they will not have it to be
an inspiration, but if by this disposition, they mean any spiritual or
supernatural gift, they must needs acknowledge that it is an inspiration, at
least in the general sense, for how can it be spiritual, unless it be
inspired, is not every good thing, that is spiritually good, from the Spirit?
Surely the national confession of faith, published in Knoxes time does
expressly say, that faith is the Inspiration of God: but if they say, they deny
not subjective but objective inspiration, we put them to prove this unnatural
division, and separation; as if there were any inspiration in men's souls, that
is not objective, which we altogether deny, but as to this inward call, we ask
them, if it has not in it the nature of a command, so that he who has it, is
bound to obey it: if they say, not, then a man may lawfully disobey it, and
resist it, although it be of God: if they say, it is a command, then it is
objective, for it is the nature of all real and true commands to be objective.
Again, if by disposition, they mean, the mere qualification that enables a man
to be a preacher, how can that be a call, seeing a man may be fit or able for an
office, that has not a call thereunto, being already in another office, that
he is fit for also. So that they bew ray gross ignorance, in confounding the
ability, and the call, which are distinct things. And here they require of us
to prove our immediate call by miracles, or any extraordinary thing, which can
only be from God, and so cannot agree to false teachers. And it having been
told them by R. B. that the Papists made the same objection against the first
reformers, they call this an impertinent prattling, but for all the disparity,
they show, the impertinent prattling falls upon themselves. They confess the
first reformers had an extraordinary call, in respect of their heroic gifts,
yet they also had a mediat call, They owned the holy Scriptures for their
principal rule, and preached no other Gospel, etc. To this we answer, that all
of them had a mediate call, is a mere alledgance without any proof, yea the
history of the reformation shows the contrary. Again, it is abundantly
evident out of their own writings, that the most eminent of them did lay no
weight upon that outward call, which some of them had, from the Popish church,
but did plead, that seeing the visible succession of the church, and ministry
was interrupted by the apostasy that they needed no outward call, but did
betake themselves to the extraordinary: see for this Sadeell de legit:
vocatione ministrorum, and when they used any argument of a mediate call, it
was but by way of arg. ad hominem, as now if any of us called Quakers hade ever
had the mediate call, from the national churches, as some in England indeed
had, namely S. F. who was a Parish priest, nor will it prove, that the first
reformers had an extraordinary call, because they owned the Scriptures as their
principal rule, and preached no other Gospel, otherwise all the national
preachers now would have an extraordinary call, because they pretend to own
the Scriptures as their principal rule, and to preach no other Gospel, yea we
own the Scriptures as much as the first reformers did, and we do acknowledge
them, that they are the principal external rule, and to be preferred to all
other outward writings and testimonies, but we can not prefer them, to the
inward testimony and word of God in our hearts, as neither did the most eminent
of these, called reformers, but indeed preferred the inward testimony and word
to the outward, as is proved in the book called Quakerisme no Popery. Now
whatever proof or evidence the first reformers could give of their
exrtaordinary call, the Quakers can give the same: that, which they mainly
insisted on, was the soundness of their doctrinee, accompanied with the
holiness of their life and good effect of their ministry, whereby souls were
converted unto God, as Sadeel in the treatise above mentioned de legit. voc.
Min. shows at length, and let our adversaries disprove this evidence, if they
can, which we say is as good an evidence to us, as it was to them, and though
false teachers may pretend unto the same, yet it can be proved, that it does
not justly belong unto them. As for Popery and Mahumetanism, it can be proved,
that they are contrary to Scripture, but our adversaries have not proved, nor
can, that our doctrine is so, and we are most willing to bring the matter to
this issue, we doubt not but to give better and stronger evidences from
Scripture and reason to convince gainsayers in a rational way, then our
adversaries can. But that we make the efficacy of our doctrine, taken precisely
by it self, and without being accompanied with the soundness of it etc: an
evidence of our Call, is a mere calumny of the Students.

Now let us see, what they have to say for Their outward and mediate call. They
cite diverse Scriptures to prove, that the Apostles ordained Elders but does
this prove, that their ordination, which they derive from the apostate church
of Rome, is a true ordination, and necessary? Yea it is clear, and confessed by
the most judicious Protestants, that true and lawful ordination, and
succession has not continued in the church, since the Apostles days, but has
suffered an interruption by the general apostasy, that as a flood overflowed
the earth, and that although God still preserved a church, yet she had not a
visible outward succession, because she was not visible all along here self,
and before our adversaries can make the half of their argument good, they must
prove, that not only a true church has continued ever since the Apostles
days, but that she has been visible, having a true visible succession of
visible teachers, who were good and faithful men, all along to convey it down
to this day. But to infer that ordination has continued, because of the
command (if the command had been universal) does not follow, seeing many things
commanded, may be unpractised, through unfaithfulness, to the command. Now it
is certain, that generally the visibly ordained bishops have not been faithful
men for many hundred years, and so kept not to the substance of that true
ordination, that was in the Apostles times, but lost it, through
unfaithfulness, and set up a shaddowe in its room, the like may be said of
other things. And the ordination being once lost, it can not be recovered
again, from a mere Scripture command, otherwise all may pretend to a power to
ordain, for the Scripture does not command one more then another, yea we find
no general command in Scripture for ordination, only that it was practiced,
which we deny not, and with it there was a spiritual gift of the holy Ghost
conveyed, which was the main and only thing that made the ordination and laying
on of hands effectual, and without which it is but a shadow, as may be seen
at this day in the National church, for who among them dare say, that they
either give or receive that spiritual gift of the holy Ghost, which was then
given and received therewith? 1 Timothy 4: 14. Their second argument is from Heb.
6. 1, 2. whereby they would infer, that laying on of hands is a part of the
foundation of Christianity, but that Scripture says no such thing, for the
doctrine of Baptismes, and laying on of hands relates to the 3 ver. as a thing
that the Apostle intended to open, and this (said he) will we do, if God
permit, whereas he had laid the foundation already, therefore the doctrine of
the laying on ofhands belongs not to the fouudation, but to the superstructure,
but however, it does not follow, that laying on of hands it self is a thing to
continue, for he speaks of it, but as of a doctrine, as that of Baptismes,
which we confess does continue, as the doctrine of the figures, types,
ceremonies and sacrifices does continue to this day: and the Apostle opened
them largely in that Epistle, yet the figures themselves were not to continue.
Besides, how do they prove that this laying on of hands is ordination, and not
that used in confirmation? Here they miserably stick, only they allege it is
ceased among many, and is not so necessary, but how prove they, that it is not
as necessary? Show us, where it is repealed, more then the other, seeing it was
as generally practiced, yea and more, for many received it, that were not
preachers nor elders.

In the last place, they plead, that Preachers should have a miantainance,
which we deny not, if they need it, but may not men be Preachers, who need no
supply from others? but many have wherewith to be hospitable unto others,
without taking, far less forceing others to give them: the maintenance then
that we are against, is 1. A superfluous and unnecessary mantainance. 2. A
forced maintenance. 3. Such a maintenance as Preachers agree with, and
contract for. 4. A taking it from them, who are not worthy. 5. A taking it from
them, who do not acknowledge them to be true Preachers. Now none of all the
Scriptures or reasons brought by them, prove any such maintenance, nor do we
read that ever the Apostles received it, or that they received any tithes,
which was the maintenance of the Law, and not of the Gospel. and that the
people ought to contract with preachers, will not follow, because they are bound
in charity to supply their wants, for we are bound in charity to supply the
wants of the poor, according to our ability, yet it does not follow, that we
are to contract with them, or that they can force it from us. As for the words
of Christ, freely give, as they import, that they were not to make sale of the
Gospel, so also that they were not to force, or compel men to give them,
anything as a recompense for preaching the same, for how can we give freely,
that which we force others to recompense us for? And here they cry out upon the
Q. as a sacrilegious crew, for denying such unlawful maintaintainance, as the
Priests generally have. it seems the young men are greatly concerned, they
love so well the wages of unrighteousness, for against no other thing do we
contend. Again, they allege, that we belie them, in saying, they think that
the preaching of the Gospel can be sold for any earthly wages; the reason they
give is weak, for although there is a vast disproportion and inequality in
worth betwixt the same, yet a thing may be sold for less then the worth of it,
yea when the worth is infinitely greater, for did not Judas sell Christ for
thirty pieces of silver, and do not they plead that greedy and covetous men
ought to be received, and paid, until divested, and are not such guilty of
simony, and selling of preaching, which they confess themselves? therefore the
Q. in this do not belie them. Yea do they not well know that it is a most
ordinary thing in young men (and it is well if some of these be not guilty of
the same) to go unto patrons, and offer them money for presentations unto
parish churches, then which we know no greater simony used in the church of
Rome? And as for the hospitality of Preachers, it is also required in Deacons,
and all good Christians, will it therefore follow, that all good Christians
must have set stipends, or if Christians are to work with their hands, that
they may have wherewith to be hospitable, why may not preachers also? They cite
Paul, telling that he had power to forbear working, but they know that Paul was
an Apostle, and claimed that power, not as an ordinary preacher, but as an
Apostle, like unto the other Apostles, mark these words, for as touching the
Apostles, they had that power, because of a more universal charge incumbent
upon them, then ordinary pastors, so that they could not so attend to work with
their hands, as others could, and yet even Paul wrought with his hands, which
is more, then any of the National teachers will do, to spare the receiving
from them who are not able. And it is to be observed, how the national
teachers plead stoutly, for their forbearing of working, from the power of the
Apostles, but when we tell them, that the Apostles traveled from one nation to
another, and took great pains to plant the Gospel in many places, and
hazarded their lives to preach it among the heathens; they answer, that is not
required of them: so they would take the Apostles to patronise them, in
forbearing working, and taking maintenance, but not in being at such pains
and jeopardies for the Gospells sake, as the Apostles, which is not equal.
Also when we tell them, the Apostles preached ly inspiration, and had an
immediate call from heaven, they tell us, that is ceased now: but why tell they
not that the power to forbear working is ceased also? Surely the continuing of
inspirations, and immediate calls to the Ministry seems a more needful thing,
then their stipends.

SECTION EIGHTH. of LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE,
Wherein the Students sixth Section concerning the Civil Magistrate his power
in punishing of heretics, And also what they say in their eighth Section
concerning the tendency of Quakerism to Anarchie and treason, and denying the
necessity of Christianity, is considered and answered.

After that the Students have labored what they can to overturne the Quakers,
they betake them to Persecution as their last refuge, thinking if they can but
prevaill here and get the Magistrates to cut off the Q. as blasphemers and
traitors (for such they have designed them in their title page) they will be
eased of the troublesome task of disputing any more with them. And here, not to
be unlike themselves, they begin with a lie, saying, they had a dispute
concerning this with the Q. the 1. of Iun 1675. whereas one of them, to wit I.
L. was not present, and the other two proposed not one argument in that matter,
but what was spoken, was by another, who being earnestly desired by them to
concur in the Account of it with them, utterly refused; as judging, neither
he, nor they could give a true account of it, and absolutely discharging to
meddle with that in their book, which yet they are not ashamed falsely to
ascribe to themselves, which that young man upon sight of their book from one
of us, declared to be a lie, asserting what is above written in this matter,
before several witnesses of their own profession, particularly P. D. one of
the Students attestators; and therefore since he judges himself, as he
declared, abused in this effaire by them, as well as we, we shall not take
notice of what passed at that time betwixt him and us, (it being also his
desire) but betake our selves to this Theme, as it is now proposed and urged by
the Students, wherein how miserably they are pained, the very stating of their
controversy shows, in which they have given away their cause. 1. They say,
they speak only of real heresies, and not what others call so. 2. they say,
they speak not of inward acts and mere exercises of the mind, because it belongs
neither to church, nor magistrate, to judge of hidden things. To which we
answer, that since the Students acknowledge that both their Church and
magistrate is liable to error, yea and that neither of them, are to be supposed
infallible, and therefore can not certainly and infallibly discern what is
heresy, neither ought they to take upon them to punish for heresy; and that
de facto Protestant churches have thus erred, their master, John Menzies and
many of his brethren, can bear witness, who have cried out against that for
error, antichristianity and heresy, causing men to be grievously persecuted
for it, which now they allow as Christian and Orthodox. But we shall improve
this more hereafter, and now proceed to their arguments. 1. They argue from
Deuteronomy. 13: 5. Exodus 22: 20. Lev. 22. but the question is, whether these commands
given particularly to the Jews, belong to us (for that of Lev. 22. is only
concerning the Priests and Levits, touching the holy things, with their
uncleanness upon them, and is wholly impertinent to this purpose) for if these
be obligatory upon us, so will also many other, as that a man may immediately
with his own hand kill him, that has killed his kinsman, unless he get to the
city of refuge, seeing there is no particular repeal of that, more then of the
former, yea and that of Deuteronomy. 5: 9. says expressly that the brother, husband
or father of him that consents to serve other Gods, shall kill him with his
own hand, which our adversaries will not deny to be murder, and let them show
us where the one part of this command is repealed more, then the other, or how
the one part is lawful for us, and the other unlawful, seeing both were
commanded and lawful to the Jews: for their mere assertions as to this page:
126. are not to be regarded. They are offended that Matthew. 5: 29. should be
given for a repeal of this, alleging that belongs only to private persons,
and not to magistrates, else it should be unlawful for Magistrates to punish
transgressors etc. Answ. The Consequence will not hold, for we are not
speaking of things civil, but of things religious, though it may be lawful for
them, to resist evil in the one, yet not in the other. But that Christian
magistrates are here included is easily proven. If this belong to all
Christians, then it belongs to all magistrates if they be Christians; for to
say, that a Christian by becomeing a magistrate, is dispensed, of these
obligations he is particularly tied to, as a Christian, is most absurd, yea if
Christian magistrates be bound to suffer for righteousness sake, then they are
not to resist evil in matters of religion, But the first is true, for how could
they enjoy the blessing of those that suffer for righteousness sake Matthew. 5:
10, 11. if they still resisted? At this rate none should suffer for Christ, who
could by any means shun it, by killing those that make them suffer, and who
would then be those that suffer willingly? and it seems according to the
Students, if a man be a magistrate, he ought not any more to suffer for Christ,
which is as much as to say, that so soon as a man becomes a magistrate, he
ceases to be a Christian.

The great noise they make of the two dispensations of the Gospel, mentioned
by G. K. does but manifest their own weakness and folly, for themselves will
not deny but that wherever faith in Jesus Christ is professed, and he owned as
the Savior, and Son of God, there is a dispensation of the Gospel, as in the
Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian, yea (and in their account) in the Romish church
also, yet will they not deny but that dipensation is more legal and obscure,,
then that themselves are under, as having many ceremonies and shadows not
necessary, and so here is a twofold dispensation acknowledged by themselves,
seeing they will not affirm that the use of all these ceremonies is absolutely
sinful in these churches, who are not as yet convinced of it, though it should
be unlawful for them to use them; and seeing the purest and most excellent
dispensation of the Gospel is to be like unto Christ, who resisted not evil,
though he was powerful to do it, and that we are bound to be like him, then
there is a dispensation of the Gospel, in which evil is not to be resisted.
But further, if there be such a dispensation of the Gospel, as men shall beat
their swords into plough-shears, and their spears into pruning hooks, and not
learn war any more, then there is a dispensation, in which evil hall not be
resisted, the consequence can not be denied; the antecedent is the express
words of the prophet Isaiah 2. 4. Besides, this twofold dispensation is proved
out of bishop Forbes of Aberdeen his exposition upon the Revelations, where he
affirms that the two last chapters of the Revelation, is understood of a
church upon earth, in which church it can not be supposed that evil should be
resisted by an outward sword.

Page 121. They argue from Romans 13. where the magistrate is not to bear the
sword in vain. Hence they conclude, they ought to resist evil, but this says
nothing as to matters of religion; they show as well their malice, as
disingenuity here, insinuating, we denied that place to belong to Magistrates
now, which we never did, nor do; only G. K. said, he would be glad to hear how
they could prove that it did belong to magistrates now, and indeed were we not
other ways persuaded of it, their arguments could not in reason convince us,
which is, that the Scripture is written for our cause, and these epistles are
to be received and obeyed by us, but they have overturned all these themselves
(as is above observed) where in their answer to the Apostls rules, about women's
praying and prophesying with their head covered; they suppose rules given by
the Apostle in his epistles, of things, that not only are not pertaining to us,
but even unlawful, and so unless they make us a clear distinction of these
rules, and that by some evident demonstration, to argue from our duty to obey
these commands, signifies nothing. But while they take up the paper to prove,
that which they can not say we ever denied, they most shamelessly omit our
chief answer to this, which could they have replied unto, they would not have
dropped thus. And therefore we shall return it upon them, that they may not
forget it, when they writ next. That of the 13 Romans can not be understood of
the magistrates punishing men for matters of Conscience, because, it being
written to the church of Rome, to show them, their duty toward their present
magistrate, which was Nero that cruel and persecuting Emperor, and then it
would follow, that Nero had had a lawful power, and authority, to punish even
Christians for errors in matters of religion, though himself was a professed
infidel, and seeing the magistrate is to exert his power, according to his
knowledge, it would follow that Nero exercised a lawful power in causing kill
the Apostles, and persecute the Christians, which will make that horrid crime
very slender, seeing it was no more according to the Stud. but the exerciseing
that lawful authority, he had received from God, according to his knowledge.

Page 122. They build an airy triumph upon their own mistak, alleging, that
since their magistrates are not under that pure dispensation, it is lawful for
them to resist evil, and so that of Matthew. is not a repeal to them. But they
have here either wilfully, or ignorantly forgotten the other branch of the
distinction, for granting their Magistrates may (as we deny not) and that
lawfully resist evil in Civil matters, yet not in matters of Conscience, and
this is that, which was incumbent upon them to have proven. But it may be worth
the Readers pains specially to notice their reasonings in this 122. p. in
answer to that objection given in by us, from the parable of the tares Matthew.
13. where the servants are expressly forbidden to pluck them up. Here they play
fast and loose to purpose, and to facilitate their own work, make no difficulty
to fasten contradictions upon Christ himself. 1. They say, It is clearly
repealed, because murderers, witches, traitors are tares, as well as heretics,
and if the one were to be eximed, so would the other. Is not this the way to
argue against Christ, and to charge contradictions upon him, not upon us?
wherein they fasten an absurdity upon him, who gave this command, or else they
must acknowledge, that by these tares are to be understood some sort of evil
doers, with whom the magistrates, are not to meddle. But since the Students say,
this is repealed, they must confess it sometimes stood in vigor, it being
once commanded, we would willingly be informed then of them, (and they may
remember it, when they write next) how long this command stood, and to whom it
belonged, since it had its rise from Christ, and was none of the old covenant
precepts, or if it be one of these useless Gospel commands they dream of,
which it is unlawful for us to obey. But to go on, they say, that ly the
tares is to be understood, bemasked hypocrites, who being scarce discernable
from the wheat, are therefore not to be meddled with. Very well then, where the
magistrate can not discern heresies, according to themselves, he is not to
punish: and then what comes of that authority was acknowledged Nero had, from
Romans 13 who was as incapable to discern heretics as hypocrites? And then seeing
as before is said, they are not to judge of hidden things, experience has
abundantly shown, how much the true discerning of heresy is both uncertain,
and difficult even to Protestant magistrates, who have called that wheat to day,
which they have called tares to morrow, and therefore ought according to this
rule, to forbear meddling in such matters.

Their second argument page 123. drawn from Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2: 14. which
is parallel with it, is before answered. Afterward they go about to play the
Politicians, showing both here, and in the following page how the public peace
is disturbed, by suffering of sundry Religions, and this they reckon so
certain, that they conclude it is known by all, that are but indifferently
versed in histories etc. Now if this conclusion hold true, it is impossible
either for France, Germany, Holland or Zwitserland to be in peace, without
either the Papists rise up, and cut the Protestants throats, or the
Protestants theirs, and who but such as the Students can be ignorant that after
much bloodshed and contention, who should oppress and destroy each other,
they have learned by sad experience, that it is safest, and most conducible to
the peace, and contributs most to the public benefit, not to meddle with each
others consciences, notwithstanding that these pitiful Statesmen can prattle
to the contrary, who have shown themselves in this to be very indifferently
versed in history.

But they proceed affirming, that since the Magistrate is keeper of both tables,
to whom is entrusted not only the care of men's bodies, but souls, he ought to
punish not only for evil, but also for religious offenses. If all this were
confessed, would it follow that he were to punish Religious, as Civil offenses
by a Civil censure? Surely nay, no more then he must punish Civil offenses, by
an Ecclesiastic censure. Now it remains for them to prove that offenses in
things purely conscientious should among Christians be punished by the
external sword, which they have not as yet done, and let it be here observed,
that not withstanding all their clamours for the Magistrates privilege, and
that the Q. detract from him, that all the power, dignity and honor they put
upon him, is to be the Clergies burrow, for as they allow him not authority to
judge who are Heretics, and who not, but he must only serve to be their
executioner, and persecut such as they find prejudicial to their interest, for
though they will have it to be lawful for Preachers, such as their Bishops, to
be Magistrates, as Chancellor, Counselor, Judge, etc. Yet no Magistrate, nay
the King himself must take upon him to be a Preacher, (though we could never
see any thing in all the New Testament, making this unlawful, yea and David
and Solomon in the Old, who were not of the tribe of Levi, were both Prophets
and Preachers, and penmen of the Scripture.) This trick even the Protestant
Clergy have learned from their father the Pope, who showed the Clergy long ago,
the way to make themselves Princes and Judges, but to be sure to shut out the
Magistrate from meddling with their function. So it may be easily seen here,
whether the Q. or the Students be greatest friends to the Magistrate. Lastly,
They conclude, that since those that broach heresy, do evil, and that the
Magistrate is the executer of God's wrath upon him that does, or acts
outwardly evil, without any restriction etc. it is not lawful for us to add a
restriction, where the Spirit of God has put none.

Who can but admire the impudency of these Students, which do that, which in
the following line they affirm is unlawful, by adding [outwardly] which is a
restriction? For the words in the text are not [outwardly evil] but evil, which
being taken without any restriction, comprehends inward as well as outward acts
of evil. Seeing then they put a restriction, (though to their own
selfe-condemnation, they confess it to be unlawful) which they are forced to
do, else hypocrites would be comprehended, whom they confess to be tares,
that are not to be meddled with. We that judge it no wise unlawful (because
without other clear texts be contradicted, there must be here a restriction)
may restrict it to things civil and moral, excluding matters of worship and
difference in opinion, for the reasons often before mentioned. Their 3.
argument wholly misses the matter, which is the practice of many princes, even
approved of God, in coercing Idolatries etc: for since all the examples, they
give, are of the kings of Judah and Israel under the, Law it nowise meets the
present controversy, which is concerning the power of Christian Magistrates
under the Gospel.

Lastly, They argue that the Prophets of the Old Testament, have prophesied
that it should be the office of Christian Magistrates to coerce false prophets,
for which they allege Deuteronomy. 18: 20. he that shall speak in the name of other
Gods shall die. Very well, he says not, shall be put to death in a judicial
way. It is said, The soul that sins shall die, it will not therefore follow,
that every soul that sins, shall be killed by the Magistrate. But though it
be understood of putting to death, it reaches not the case, we being under the
Gospel, not under the Law, where also it was not lawful so to do for
different opinions and interpretations of the Law, but only for rejecting the
true God, and his Law, and introducing new and strange Gods Their other proof
is from Zech. 13: 1, 2, etc: where it is said, that the fathers and the mothers
of the false Prophets shall say unto them, Thou shall not live, and thrust them
through, when they prophesy. This is so far from being taken literally, that
the Students dare not take it so themselves, else the father and and the mother
might do the business without troubling the magistrate, and afterward the
text speaks of those, who were not to live, of their having wounds in their
hands and being alive, which shows the understanding here is to be spiritual,
and seeing the Students do not understand it literally, of the persons to whom
the text ascribes this coercing, and that there is not the least word of a
magistrate in the place, for them, to affirm, that it is not to be understood
of the magistrate, is but miserably to beg the question. They begin their 8.
Sect. page 126. affirming that Quakerism tends to Anarchie and confusion and
treason, alleging, we would pull down the Magistrate, if we could, and set up
our own spiritual Magistrates, as John of Leyden etc. For this malicious
insinuation they give no reason, but such an one as destroys it, to wit, our
giving in [Resist not evil, pluck not up the tares] as repeals of some laws in
the Old Test. Now let men of reason, judge, whether treason be the tendency of
these men's principles, that affirm, evil is not to be resisted; or how these
can do violence to the Magistrate without contradicting their principles, and
then it can not be the tendency of them: and whereas they conclude, saying, That
Quakerism, as they conceive, beyond all doubt, tends to Anarchie, confusion of
state and treason. Their conceptions are very false, in this matter, and we may
upon far better grounds retort this upon the Students Confraternity, the
Clergy, who through their ambition and turbulency did from the pulpits blow the
trumpet of all the late confusion, and treason, in the civil wars, and show
themselves exact disciples of John. of Leyden, acting his pranks upon the stage
of Great Britain, a charge, they have not to lay to the Quakers.

Their next effort is to prove, we deny the necessity of Professing
Christianity, because we believe those not bound to believe the history of
Christ, from whom God has necessarily withheld the knowledge of it, for they
confess that we believe these obliged to believe them, to whom they are
revealed. But they must here also act like themselves, in making that a
horrible crime in us, which their own chief doctors affirm, who being
pressed by the Arminians with this argument [That which every man is bound to
believe is true. But every man is bound to believe that Christ died for them,
therefore it is true] They deny the Minor plainly affirming that those that have
not heard of Christ, are not bound to believe he died for them, so according to
the Students themselves, are guilty of denying the necessity of professing
Christianity as well as we. But further they say, we are guilty of this,
because we set up a new Christ in every man, that is borne, and grows up, unto
a perfect substantial birth, as their first charge in this matter hitts at
their own Doctors, so this second is common with us to the Apostle Paul (for
the Students dispute like blind men striking at random, that heed not, what
they hit) seeing the Apostle calls Christ within, of which we speak, the hope of
glory, which is neither a new Christ, nor yet another then he that died at
Jerusalem who did travel that he might be brought forth in the ^alatians, and
calls him, the new man, borne in, and put on by others. So if in this the
Apostle did not deny the outward sufferings of Christ, neither do we; unless
the Students can show, how our doctrine differs from his, or contradicts it,
which they have not yet attempted to do. As for that question of I. Penington.
How can outward blood cleanse? we refer them to his own book in defense of
that expression, as quarrelled by J. Hicks, called the flesh and blood of
Christ, of which there were diverse printed coppies at Aberdeen, before the
Students book was put to the press.

The CONCLUSION.
Wherein their observations upon R. B. his Offer, and their last Section of the
Q. Revileings, as they term them, are examined.

IN the end of the account of our dispute, I renewed an offer to the preachers
of Aberdeen, as being the persons, we were principally concerned withal,
giving the reasons therefore, and showing the good effects, that might proceed
therefrom, as in the same offer may be seen; at this the Stud. seem to have
gone mad, and fret and fume, like persons possessed, alleging, I betake my
self to railing as my last refuge; but whether there be any railing in that
Offer, is left to the judicious Reader to examine. The Students notwithstanding
their clamours, give not one instance of it, but whether they have any better
reason to answer it withal, then railing, let the Reader judge. For upon this
occasion, page 127. 128. they call me vain and arrogant, like a very Thraso,
ignorant and foolish, one whose weakness and ignorance is renowned, a bold
barkr, but a soft biter. These are the modest young men, that profess to be
against railing, that say in their Preface, they have abstained from personal
criminations, and have not rendered evil for evil, and with this their
unreasonable railling they mix in a company of lies, as that insinuation, as if
the Theses had been written by G. K. which is a false calumny, they are dared
to prove: Like unto which is what follows, that I provoked all Europe, sought
dispute indivers places from any who would without distinction, upon the
account of this printed provocation, boasted and gloried that I had got no
dispute; which contain as many lies almost as words, for which, they offer not
the least proof. Afterward as an instance of my cowardlynesse and vain
boasting; they say, I with G. K. sted, and deserted a dispute appointed betwixt
us and R. G. my uncle, at the Cross of Elgin, which is utterly false; neither
G. K. nor I ever spoke with R. G. about such a matter, nor made any appointment
with him: yea R. G. has under his hand declared, that being by a friend of his
desired, he refused to debate with us, in relation to these Theses, nor was
there any such appointment ever made known to us: So the Reader may see whether
these credible witnesses, that attested their Account, be any better here then
those credible informers, from whom they had this great untruth. As they
proceed, they give themselves the lie, for after many needless words, of which
it is hard to make sense, they conclude that this late engagement (meaning the
dispute with themselves) is a fulfilling of the offer in the end of the English
Theses, notwithstanding they subscribed the Articles, whereof the first
expressly bears, that it is abstract from it.

But first they say, The Ministers are not concerned to meet with the Qu.
because, the report of the victory is already gone upon their side, who are but
young men, and cannot do so well as their ministers who are more learned, and
grave; and yet a little after, that they may not omit here to give themselves
the lie, they say, that such a dispute would be a means to stumble the weak,
harden the fallen, and dishonor God, rather then the contrary. What confusion
is here! they are but young men, and their Masters more learned, grave and
able, their dispute (if they be to be believed) has done good, established many
inclining to Quakerism, and yet their Ministers disputing would be a mean to
stumble the weak etc. They conclude that we are not to be sought after, because
we are goats and wolves and not strayed sheep; we could produce enough under
their Masters hands to contradict this, if it were worth the pains. They fill
up the rest of the Sect with alleging that public disputs are against the
Law, upbraiding me as a rebel for offering one, alleging that it is not
lawful for Protestants neither in the Turkish nor Popish dominions to offer to
dispute against the public religion authorized by the Magistrate, though they
may privately call it in question, and dislwade from it: whereby they openly
condemn as rebels, the Apostles and primitive Christians, yea and the
primitive Protestants, as by many instances both at home, and abroad, could be
shown: and whereas they say, we profess to oppose their religion, and not
Papists, it is another falsehood, for some of us of late years, have lost their
lives, and others deeply suffered, for opposing Popery at Rome it self, a
task, the Students so long as they can sit at ease, and buy a benefice at home,
will as unwillingly undertake, as another dispute with the Qu.

They begin their last Sect. most impudently, alleging, that they have past
by, as much as they could, personal criminations: how great a lie this is, the
Reader by what is above said, will observe, They are angry we should allege,
that their Masters had put arguments into their mouths, though we can show
them, of the closest of them in manuscripts sent by them to us; and to disprove
this, they say, they faithfully declare it to be lies. But what men of faith
they are is above shown: let it be lest to the Reader to judge whether they be
more to be trusted; in saying, the arguments they brought; were their own,
then when they say, they had a dispute with the Q. the 1. of June 1675, though
one of them was altogether absent; and the other two were but mere hearers:
what reason is there, they should be believed in saying, the arguments they
used were their own, though perhaps they only repeated them, as when they
positively affirmed that they disputed with us, though they were mere
auditors? And to this they add another great lie, saying, that the Q. affirmed
in their Contra-remonstrance that this is G. Ms. work under their cover,
whereas the words are, It is strange, that they, (to wit, the Stud.) should
undertake so hastily, what he has been so long adviseing, unless this be his
work under their cover; but a supposition is not a positive assertion: It is
not said, this is his work, as the Stud. have perverted it, who are so
accustomed to lie, that such kind of perversions pass with them, but for small
escapes. They are offended W. M. should be called a Catechist, (though the
Bishop their Ordinary is not pleased he should have a higher designation, and
themselves can not deny it) and whereas they say, This is done exceeding
maliciously, for he officiated at the foresaid place for a short space, and
long before the publishing of their pamphlet: they would do well to show
wherein the malice of this lies, and to examine whether he did not exercise
that office longer then he has done any time; but it is their custom to speak
at random.

They cry out against our saying, we were informed, that their master had gone
to the B. to desire him to complain to the Council, etc. alleging that though
we say, we are informed, yet they insinuate it is a lie, of our making. Because
it is usual for us that are damnable Heretics, to spread a false report our
selves, and then say, we heard it. Let them instance any report, if they can,
raised up by us, for which we cannot give them Authors of their own Religion,
whereas the most part of their reports against us, have no authors but our
enemies. But for answer, let them know, that the same was told to R. B. by G.
M. and I. S. two chief Citizens of their own Profession, the last of which,
constrained him to stand upon the street until he should tell it him, And
whereas they add, that if they would follow our footsteps they could cast many
horrid things in our teeth, Answ. it is one thing to receive information
against a people, and report things as true, spoken or written by their
professed enemies, as the Students do in their citations out of Clerks
examples, Hicks and Faldo: and another to report things spoken by members of
their own Church, who if they have belyed them, let them reckon that among
themselves. Lastly, They accuse me, as having impudently aspersed their
Professor I. M. with seurrilous revileings, and malicious calumnies, of which,
they are so impudent, as not to give one instance, and are thereto dared, when
they write next, to name them, or instance one calumny or scurrilous revileing,
wherewith I asperse him, or else be accounted impudent liars, whereas they say
these calumnies we borrowed from the spiteful Jesuits, and like vipers,
spouted them out. Again, they declare their folly, The Jesuit accused him of
treason, as the Students, following his example, do us, but so not I, who only
minded him, that seeing he who says the Scripture is his Rule, has been
deceived, in pretending the Scripture said, that which now he confesses to be
an error. If the Spirit were to be rejected from being the rule, because men
pretending to it, have been deceived: so should the Scripture also, in which
instances, if he or they dare say, I have calumniated him, let them name
wherein. And I shall prove all I have asserted in that affair, and that without
recurring to the Jesuits testimony, having my information from better hands.
And to augment their lies, they say, It tends to his advantage; to be
calumniated by such as the Quakers: They have not proved that we have
calumniated him, and we may justly retort. That he may rather be troubled and
shamed to find himself so fawningly flattered and commended by such as the
Stud* like the Philosopher of old, that was troubled when spoken well of by a
profligat person.

Lastly, They go about to Apologize for the long time, their book has been a
comeing out because of their difficulties at the press, which difficulties were
not such as we meet with; to have their papers surprised and stopped, as they
sought to do ours. But because they could not persuade a Printer to be so
foolish, as to print them, without due payment, but it is like, the contriving
and patching it together, has been as great a cause of let, since when it was
out, and came from Edinburgh to Aberdeen, and after we had bought one entire
book at Edinburgh, They kept it up at Aberdeen several weeks, adviseing and
consulting about it, and upon notice of some gross contradictions in it, which
we had observed to some of their own way, They caused the Printer there to
patch two pages to it, to help them, by which; they have but rendered their
weakness more obvious. For whereas to solve that gross contradiction before
observed by us, of their making us speak in their Account, one after another,
and yet saying, the Auditors can testify, that we are liars, and never spoke
so, They say, their meaning is not, that we did not speak, one after another.
What means the word never then? This Apology amounts to no more, but that the
Students intended not to contradict themselves, and instead of bettering
themselves by this addition, they have given away their cause, for whereas they
before make a great clamor against G. K. for asserting permissive
inspirations, as if it had been some great absurdity, themselves here affirm
the same thing, saying, The Apostle by these words, it is good for a man not to
touch a woman, does not command but only permit, (he himself neverth elesse
being inspired by the Spirit of God so to do) is not this then a permissive
inspiration? So that these things will but make their folly manifest, as also
their further frivolous Apologies in that additionall advertisement, which to
the truly judicious does not cover but rather discover their weakness.

Seeing it may fall out that this tract may arrive at the hands of many who
perhaps may not see those sheets in which we have disproved the Students
calumnies and lies in matter of fact, as in Relation to the dispute we had
with them, we thought fit here also to insert the certificate of four Students
present at the dispute, and since come among us, three of which were at that
time actual Students of Philosophy in the University, and the other had been
in the class with one of the disputants.

R. B.
We under-subscribers late Students of Philosophy from the university of
Aberdeen being present at the Dispute do faithfully declare that the Students
have grossly belved the Qu. in their Account, making them speak that which
they spoke not and also sorging arguments and answers not mentioned upon the
place. And though we had no intention at that time to own the people called
Qu yet we dare not but declare that their Answers and behavior had no small
influence upon us, to make us in love with their way, and to search after it
more diligently: as also the Students arguments and lightness did not a little
tend to make us disgust them and their principles, and albeit that inward peace
and satisfaction of mind, which we enjoy in the Truth we now profess with
that despised and injured people, does make us bless the day, in which it
pleased God to bring us among them; yet we are not a little confirmed in the
belief of this reproached testimony and witnesses, that we find the strongest
arguments their Adversaries have against them, are lies and calumnies, And this
we testify for the Truth, whom the Truth has taught not to lie.

ROBERT SANDILANDS. JAMES ALEXANDER.


And I also declare, who (being a Student at that time, in the old town
College) was present at the Dispute, and heard the same with attention, that
the Students have grossly belyed the Q. in many things in their account, and
although that since, it has pleased God to join me unto that people, yet at
that time I had no mind to be of their way, However when I saw their account I
did approve it, as ingenuous, as now also I do, and disapprove the Students as
false in many things.

ALEXANDER SEATONE.


And I likewise (being a Student in the new town College) at that time, was
present at the Dispute and do declare, that the Students folly and lightness
had no small influence upon me, to search more narrowly into the way of that
people, which it pleased the Lord to bless unto me, so that the eyes of my
understanding came to be opened, and I came fully to be convinced of the truth
of their principles and way, to which now by the mercy and goodness of the
Lord, I am joined, and do find, by comparing the two Accounts together, that
the Students have wronged the people called Quakers in diverse things, as the
Students self contradictions do sufficiently show.

ALEXANDER PATERSO^^.





