AN APOLOGY For the True CHRISTIAN Divinity, As the same is held forth, and
preached by the People, Called, in Scorn, QUAKERS: Being a full Explanation and
Vindication of their Principles and Doctrines, by many Arguments, deduced from
Scripture and right Reason, and the Testimony of famous Authors, both ancient
and modern, with a full answer to the strongest objections usually made against
them, Presented to the KING.

Written and Published in Latin, for the information of Strangers, by ROBERT
BARCLAY.

And now put into our own Language, for the benefit of his Countrymen.

Acts 24.14. -- After the way, which they call heresy, so Worship I the God of
my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets.

Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. For the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men;

Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and wordly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godlily, in this present World.

Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, Zealous of good Works.

1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

Printed in the Year 1678.

UNTO CHARLES II. KING OF Great Britain And the Dominions thereunto belonging,
ROBERT BARCLAY, A Servant of JESUS CHRIST, called of God to the Dispensation of
the Gospel, now again revealed, and, after a long and dark night of Apostasy,
commanded to be Preached to all Nations; wishes Health and Salvation.
AS the condition of Kings and Princes, puts them in a station, more obvious to
the view and observation of the World, than that of other men, of whom, as
Cicero observes, neither any word, or action can be obscure; so are those Kings
(during whose appearance upon the stage of this World, it pleases the Great
KING of Kings singularly to make known unto men the wonderful steps of his
unsearchable Providence) more signally observed, and their lives and actions
more diligently remarked, and inquired into by posterity, especially if those
things be such, as not only relate to the outward transactions of this World,
but also are signalized by the manifestation or revelation of the knowledge of
God in matters Spiritual and Religious. These are the things that rendered the
lives of Cyrus, Augustus Caesar, and Constantine the Great, in former times,
and of CHARLES the Fifth, and some other modern Princes in these last Ages so
considerable.

But among all these transactions, which it has pleased God to permit, for the
Glory of His Power, and the manifestation of His Wisdom and Providence, no Age
furnishes us with things so strange and mavelous, whether with respect to
matters Civil or Religious, as these, that have fallen out within the compass of
thy time, who, though thou be not yet arrived at the Fiftieth year of thy age,
have yet been a witness of stranger things, than many Ages before produced; so
that, whether we respect those various troubles, wherein thou foundst thy self
engaged, while scarce got out of thy Infancy, the many different afflictions,
wherewith men of thy circumstances are often unacquainted, the strange and
unparalled fortune that befell thy Father, thy own narrow escape, and
banishment following thereupon, with the great improbability of thy ever
returning (at lest without very much pains and tedious combatings) or finally
the incapacity thou were under to accomplish such a design, considering the
strength of those that had possessed themselves of thy Throne, and the terror
they had inflicted upon Foreign States: and yet that, after all this, thou
should be restored without stroke of Sword, the help or assistance of Foreign
States, or the contrivance and work of human policy. All these do sufficiently
declare, that it is the Lord's doing, which, as it is mavelous in our eyes,
so it will justly be a matter of wonder and astonishment to generations to
come: and may sufficiently serve, if rightly observed, to confute and confound
that Atheism, wherewith this Age does so much abound.

As the vindication of the Liberty of Conscience (which thy Father, by giving
way to the important clamours of the Clergy, the answering and fulfilling of
whose unrighteous wills has often proved hurtful and pernicious to Princes,
sought, in some part, to restrain) was a great occasion of these troubles and
revolutions: so the pretense of Conscience was that which carried it on, and
brought it to that pitch it came to, and, though (no doubt) some, that were
engaged in that work, designed good things, at lest in the beginning, (albeit
always wrong in the manner they took to accomplish it, viz. by carnal weapons)
yet so soon as they had tasted of the sweet of the possessions of them, they
had turned out, they quickly began to do those things themselves, for which
they had accused others: for their hands were found full of oppression, and
they hated the reproofs of instruction, which is the way of life. And they
evilly entreated the Messengers of the Lord, and caused to beat and imprison
his Prophets, and persecuted his people, whom he had called and gathered out
from among them, whom he had made to beat their Swords into Plowshares, and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and not to learn carnal War any more: but he
raised them up, and armed them with Spiritual weapons; even with his own Spirit
and Power, whereby they testified in the Streets and Highways, and public
Markets and Synagogues, against the Pride, Vanity, Lusts, and Hypocrisy of
that generation, who were righteous in their own eyes, though often cruelly
entreated therefore, and they faithfully prophesied and foretold them of their
judgment and downfall, which came upon them, as by several warnings and Epistles
delivered to Oliver and Richard Cromwell, the Parliament, and other then
Powers, yet upon Record does appear.

And after it pleased God to restore thee, what oppressions, what banishments
and evil entreatings they have met with, by men pretending thy authority, and
cloaking their mischief with thy name, is known to most men in this Island,
especially in England, where there is scarce a Prison that has not been filled
with them, nor a Judge, before whom they have not been haled, though they could
never yet be found Guilty of any thing, that might deserve that usage,
therefore the sense of their innocence did no doubt greatly contribute to move
thee three years ago to cause some hundreds of them to be set at liberty; for
indeed their Sufferings are singular, and obviously distinguishable from all
the rest of such as live under thee, in these two respects.

First, In that among all the Plots, contrived by others against thee, since
thy return into Britain, there was never any owned of that people found or
known to be guilty (tho many of them have been taken and imprisoned upon such
kind of jealousies) but were always found innocent and harmless, (as became
the Followers of Christ) not coveting after, nor contending for the Kingdoms of
this World, but subject to every ordinance of man for Conscience sake.

Secondly, In that in the hottest times of persecution and the most violent
prosecution of those Laws, made against Meetings (being clothed with
Innocence) they have boldly stood to their testimony for God, without creeping
into holes or corners; or once hiding themselves, as all other Dissenters have
done, but daily met, according to their custom, in the public places appointed
for that end, so that none of thy Officers can say of them, that they have
surprised them in a corner, overtaken them in a private Conventicle, or catched
them lurking in their secret chambers: nor needed they to send out spies, to
get them whom they were sure daily to find in their open assemblys, testifying
for God and his Truth. By which those, that have an eye to see, may observe
their Christian patience and courage, constancy and suffering, joined in one
more than in any other People, that differ from them, or oppose them: And yet
in the midst of those troubles thou can bear witness, that, as on the one
part, they never sought to detract from thee, or to render thee and thy
Government odious to the people, by nameless and scandalous Pamphlets and
Libels; so on the other hand, they have not spared to admonish, exhort, and
reprove thee; and have faithfully discharged their Consciences toward thee,
without flattering words, as ever the true Prophets in ancient times used to
do, to those Kings and Princes, under whose Power, Violence, or Oppression was
acted.

And albeit it be evident by experience to be most agreeable both to Divine
Truth and Humane Policy, to allow every one to serve God, according to their
Consciences; nevertheless those other Sects, who, for the most part, durst not
peep out in the times of Persecution, while these innocent People stood bold
and faithful, do now combine in a joint Confederacy (notwithstanding all the
former Janglings and Contentions among themselves) to render us odious, seeking
unjustly to wrest our Doctrine and Words, as if they were inconsistent both
with Christianity and civil Society: so that to effectuat this their work of
Malice against us, they have not been ashamed to take the help, and commend the
Labors of some invidious Socinians against us. So do Herod and Pontius Pilate
agree to Crucify Christ.

But our practice, known to thee by good experience to be more consistent with
Christianity and civil Society, and the peace and welfare of this Island, than
that of those that thus accuse us, does sufficiently guard us against this
Calumny, that we may indeed appeal to the testimony of thy Conscience, as a
witness for us, in the face of the Nations.

These things moved me to present the world with a brief but true account of
this Peoples Principles, in some short Theological Propositions, which,
according to the will of God, proving successful, beyond my expectation, to the
satisfaction of several, and to the moving in many a desire of being farther
informed concerning us, as being every where evil spoken of; and likewise
meeting with public opposition by some, as such will always do, so long as
the Devil rules in the children of disobedience, I was thereby further engaged
in the liberty of the Lord, to present to the world, this Apology of the Truth
held by those People, which, because of thy interest in them, and theirs in
thee, as having first appeared and mostly increased in these Nations under thy
rule, I make bold to present unto thee.

Thou know and have experienced their faithfulness toward their God, their
patience in suffering, their peaceableness toward the King, their honesty,
plainness and integrity in their faithful warnings and testimonies to thee; and
if thou will allow thy self so much time as to read this, thou may find how
consonant their Principles are both to Scripture, Truth, and right Reason. The
simplicity of their behavior, the generality of their condition, as being poor
men and illiterate; the manner of their procedure being without the wisdom and
policy of this World, has made many conclude them fools and mad men, and
neglect them as not being capable of Reason. But tho it be to them as their
Crown thus to be esteemed of the wise and great and learned of this world; and
though they rejoice to be accounted fools for Christ's sake, yet of late some,
even such, who in the worlds account, are esteemed both wise and learned, begin
to judge otherwise of them, and find that they hold forth things very agreeable
both to Scripture, Reason, and true Learning.

As it is inconsistent with the Truth I bear, so it is far from me to use this
Epistle as an Engine to flatter thee, the usual design of such works; and
therefore I can neither dedicate it to thee, nor crave thy Patronage, as if
thereby I might have more confidenne to present it to the World, or be more
hopeful of its success. To God alone I owe what I have, and that more
immediately in matters Spiritual, and therefore to him alone, and to the
Service of his Truth, I dedicate whatever work he brings forth in me, to whom
only the praise and honor appertains, whose Truth needs not the Patronage of
worldly Princes, his Arm and Power being that alone, by which it is propagated,
established and confirmed. But I found it upon my Spirit, to take occasion to
present this Book unto thee, that, as thou have been often warned by several of
that People, who are inhabitants of England, so thou may not want a
seasonable Advertisement from a Memher of thy ancient Kingdom of Scotland; and
that thou may know (which I hope thou shall have no reason to be troubled
at) that God is raising up and increasing that People in that Nation. And the
Nations shall also hereby know, that the Truth we profess is not a work of
Darkness, nor propagated by stealth, and that we are not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, because we know it to be the Power of God unto Salvation; and that
we are no ways so inconsistent with Government, nor such disturbers of the
Peace, as our Enemies by traducing us, have sought to make the world believe we
are, for what to thee I dare appeal as a witness of our peaceableness and
Christian Patience.

Generations to come shall not more admire that singular step of Divine
Providence, in restoring thee to thy Throne, without outward Bloodshed, than
they shall admire the increase and progress of this Truth, without all outward
help, and against so great opposition, which shall be none of the least things
rendering thy Memory remarkable. God has done great things for thee, he has
sufficiently shown thee, that it is by him Princes rule, and that he can pull
down and set up at his pleasure. He has often faithfully warned thee by his
Servants, since he restored thee to thy Royal Dignity, that thy Heart might not
wax wanton against him, to forget his Mercies and Providence toward thee,
whereby he might permit thee to be soothed up and lulled asleep in thy sins, by
the flattering of Court-Parasits, who, by their fawning, are the ruin of many
Princes.

There is no King in the World, who can so experimentally testify of Gods
Providence and Goodness; neither is there any who rules so many free People, so
many true Christians, which thing renders thy Government more honorable, thy
self more considerable, than the accession of many Nations filled with slavish
and superstitious Souls.

Thou have tasted of prosperity and adversity; thou know what it is to be
banished thy Native Country, to be overruled, as well as to rule and sit upon
the Throne; and being oppressed, thou have reason to know how hateful the
Oppressor is, both to God and man. If after all these Warnings and
Advertisements, thou do not turn unto the Lord withal thy Heart, but forget
him, who remembered thee in thy distress, and give up thy self to follow Lust
and Vanity, surely great will be thy condemnation.

Against which snare, as well as the temptation of those, that may, or do feed
thee, and prompt thee to evil, the most excellent and prevalent remedy will be,
to apply thy self to that Light of Christ, which shines in thy Conscience,
which neither can nor will flatter thee, nor suffer thee to be at ease in thy
sins, but does and will deal plainly and faithfully with thee, as those that
are followers thereof have also done.

GOD Almighty, who has so signally hitherto visited thee with his love, so
touch and reach thy heart, ere the day of thy visitation be expired, that thou
may effectually turn to him, so as to improve thy place and station for his
Name. So wishes, so prays

Thy faithful Friend and Subject ROBERT BARCLAY.
From Ury, the place of my Pilgrimage, in my Native Country of Scotland, the 25
of the Month, called November, in the YEAR, 1675.
R. B. Unto the Friendly Reader wishes Salvation.
FOrasmuch as that, which above all things I propose to my self, is to declare
and defend the Truth; for the service whereof I have given up and devoted my
self, and all that is mine, therefore there is nothing, which for its sake (by
the help and assistance of God) I may not attempt. And in this confidence I did
sometime ago publish certain Propositions of Divinity, comprehending briefly
the chief Principles and Doctrines of Truth, which appearing not unprofitable
to some, and being, beyond my expectation, well received both by Foreigners,
though dissenting from us, (albeit also opposed by some envious ones) did so
far prevail, as, in some part, to remove that false and monstrous Opinion,
which lying fame, and the malice of our adversaries had implanted in the minds
of some, concerning us and our Doctrines. In this respect it seemed to me not
fit to spare my pains and labor.

Therefore being acted by the same measure of the Divine Spirit, and the like
design of propagating the Truth, by which I published the Propositions, I
judged it meet to explain them somewhat more largely at this time and defend
them by certain arguments.

Perhaps my method of writing may seem not only different, but even contrary to
that, which is commonly used by the men, called Divines, with which I am not
concerned, for that I confess my self to be not only no imitator and admirer of
the Schoolmen, but an opposer and despiser of them, as such, by whose labor I
judge the Christian Religion to be so far from being bettered, that it is rather
destroyed. Neither have I sought to accommodate this my work to itching Ears,
who desire rather to comprehend in their head the sublime notions of Truth,
than to embrace it in their heart. For what I have written comes more from my
heart, than from my head, what I have heard with the Ears of my Soul, and seen
with my inward Eyes, and my hands have handled of the Word of Life. And what
has been inwardly manifested to me of the things of God, that do I declare,
not so much minding the Eloquence and Excellency of Speech, as desiring to
demonstrate the efficacy and operation of Truth, and if I err sometime in the
former, it is not great matter; for I act not here the Grammarian or the
Orator, but the Christian; and therefore in this I have followed the certain
Rule of the Divine Light, and of the Holy Scriptures.

And to make an end, what I have written, is written not to feed the Wisdom and
Knowledge, or rather vain pride of this world, but to starve and oppose it, us
the little Preface prefixed to the Propositions does show, which with the title
of them is, as follows.

THESES THEOLOGICAE. To the Clergy of what sort soever, unto whose hands these
may come; but more particularly to the Doctors, Professors, and Students of
Divinity, in the Universities and Schools of Great Britain, whether
Prelatical, Presbyterian, or any other: ROBERT BARCLAY, a Servant of the Lord
God, and one of those (who in derision are called Quakers) wishes unfeigned
Repentance unto the acknowledgment of the Truth.
FRIENDS,
UNto You these following Propositions are offered, in which, they being read
and considered in the fear of the Lord, you may perceive that simple Naked
Truth, which Man by his Wisdom has rendered so obscure and mysterious, that the
World is even burdened with the great and voluminous Tractates which are made
about it, and by their vain jangling and Commentaries, by which it is rendered a
hundred fold more dark and intricate, than of it self it is; which great
Learning so accounted of (to wit) your School Divinity (which takes up almost
a man's whole Lifetime to learn) brings not a whit nearer to God, neither makes
any man less wicked, or more righteous than he was: Therefore has God laid
aside the Wise and Learned, and the Disputers of this World, and has chosen a
few despicable and unlearned Instruments (as to Letter-learning) as he did
Fishermen of old, to publish his pure and naked Truth, and to free it of these
Mists and Fogs, wherewith the Clergy has clouded it, that the People might
admire and maintain them: And among several others, whom God has chosen to
make known these things (seeing I also have received in measure Grace to be a
Dispencer of the same Gospel) it seemed good unto me, according to my duty, to
offer unto you these Propositions (tho short, yet) are weighty, comprehending
much, and declaring what the true ground of knowledge is, even of that
knowledge which leads to life Eternal, which is here witnessed of, and the
Testimony thereof left unto the Light of Christ in all your Consciences.

Farewell, R. B.

The First Proposition, Concerning the true Foundation of Knowledge. Seeing the
height of all happiness is placed in the true knowledge of God ( This is Life
Eternal to know the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent) the true
and right understanding of this foundation and ground of knowledge, is that,
John 17.3.
which is most necessary to be known and believed in the first place.

The Second Proposition. Concerning Immediate Revelation. Seeing no man knows
the Father, but the Son, and he, to whom the Son reveals him, Matthew. 11.27.
and seeing the Revelation of the Son is in and by the Spirit; therefore the
Testimony of the Spirit is that alone, by which the true knowledge of God has
been, is and can be only revealed, who, as by the moving of his own Spirit,
converted the Chaos of this World, into that wonderful order, wherein it was in
the beginning, and created Man, a living Soul to rule and govern it, so by the
Revelation of the same Spirit, he has manifested himself all along unto the
Sons of Men, both Patriarchs. Prophets and Apostles, which Revelations of God
by the Spirit, whether by outward voices and appearances, Dreams, or inward
objective manifestations in the heart, were of old the formal object of their
Faith, and remains yet so to be, since the object of the Saints Faith is the
same in all ages, though set forth under diverse Administrations. Moreover,
these divine inward Revelations, which we make absolutely necessary for the
building up of true Faith, neither do nor can ever contradict the outward
Testimony of the Scriptures, or right and found Reason; Yet from hence it will
not follow, that these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the
examination, either of the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or of the
natural reason of Man, as to a more noble or certain rule or touchstone; for
this Divine Revelation and inward Illumination is that, which is evident and
clear of it self, forceing by its own evidence and clearness the well disposed
understanding to assent, irresistibly moving the same thereunto, even as the
common Principles of natural Truths move and incline the mind to natural
assent. Such as are these, (that the whole is greater than the part; that two
contradictory sayings cannot be both true, or false,) which is also manifest
according to our adversaries Principle, who (supposing the possibility of
inward Divine Revelations) will nevertheless confess with us, that neither
Scripture nor found Reason will contradict it; and yet it will not follow,
according to them, that the Scripture, or found Reason, should be subjected to
the examination of the Divine Revelations in the Heart.

The Third Proposition, Concerning the Scriptures. From these Revelations of
the Spirit of God to the Saints, have proceeded the Scriptures of Truth, which
contain, 1. A faithful Historical Account of the Actings of God's People in
diverse Ages, with many singular and remarkable Providence attending them. 2. A
Prophetical Account of several things, whereof some are already past, and some
yet to come. 3. A full and ample account of all the chief Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, held forth in diverse precious declarations, exhortations
and sentences, which, by the moving of God's Spirit, were at several times, and
upon sundry occasions spoken and written unto some Churches and their Pastors;
Nevertheless, because they are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the
Fountain it self, therefore they are not to be esteemed the principal ground of
all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the adequate primary Rule of Faith and
Manners. Nevertheless, as that which gives a true and faithful Testimony of
the first Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a secondary Rule,
subordinate to the Spirit, from which they have all their excellency and
certainty; for as by the inward Testimony of the Spirit we do alone truly know
them, so they testify that the Spirit is that guide, by which the Saints are
led into all Truth: Joh. 16.13. Romans 8.14.
Therefore according to the Scriptures the Spirit is the first and principle
Leader: And seeing we do therefore receive and believe the Scriptures, because
they proceeded from the Spirit, therefore also the Spirit is more originally
and principally the Rule, according to that received maxim in the Schools,
Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. Englished thus:
That for which a thing is such, that thing it self is more such.

The Fourth Proposition. Concerning the Condition of Man in the fall. All
Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 5.12, 15.
as to the first Adam (or earthly man) is fallen, degenerated, and dead,
deprived of the sensation (or feeling) of this inward Testimony, or Seed of
God, and is subject unto the power, nature, and Seed of the Serpent; which he
sows in men's hearts, while they abide in this natural and corrupted State, from
whence it comes that not their words and deeds only, but all their imaginations
are evil perpetually in the sight of God, as proceeding from this depraved and
wicked Seed. Man therefore as he is in this state can know nothing aright; yea,
his thoughts and conceptions concerning God, and things Spiritual (until he be
disjoined from this evil Seed, and united to the Divine Light) are unprofitable
both to himself and others: Hence are rejected the Socinian and Pelagian
Errors, in exalting a Natural Light, as also the Papists and most of
Protestants, who affirm, that Man without the true Grace of God may be a true
Minister of the Gospel. Nevertheless, this Seed is not imputed to Infants, Ephesians.
2.1.
until by transgression they actually join themselves therewith; for they are
by Nature the children of Wrath, who walk according to the Power of the Prince
of the Air

The Fifth and Sixth Proposition. Concerning the Universal Redemption by
Christ, and also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every Man is
enlightened. The Fifth Proposition. God out of his Infinite love, who
delights not in the death of a sinner, but that all should live and be saved,
Ezekiel. 18.23. Esa. 49.6. John 3.16.1.19. Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 5.13. Heb. 2.9.
has so loved the world, that he has given his only Son a Light, that
whosoever believes in him should be saved, who enlighteneth every man, that
comes into the world, and makes manifest all things that are reproveable, and
teaches all temperance, righteousness, and godliness; and this Light
enlighteneth the hearts of all in a day in order to Salvation, if not resisted;
Nor is it less universal than the seed of sin, being the purchase of his death,
who tasted death for every Man; For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all
shall be made alive. 1 Cor. 15.22.


The Sixth Proposition. According to which principle (or Hypothesis) all the
Objections against the universality of Christ's death are easily solved;
neither is it needful to recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other
miraculous means, which, they say, God makes use of, to manifest the Doctrine
and History of Christ's passion unto such who (living in those places of the
world where the outward preaching of the Gospel is unknown) have well improved
the first and common Grace; For hence it well follows, that as some of the old
Philosophers might have been saved; so also may now some (who by Providence are
cast into those remote parts of the world, where the knowledge of the History is
wanting) be made partakers of the Divine Mystery, if they receive and resist
not that Grace, a manifestation whereof is given to every man to profit withal.
1 Cor. 12.7.
This certain Doctrine then being received, ( to wit) that there is an
Evangelical and saving Light and Grace in all, the universality of the Love and
Mercy of God toward mankind, (both in the death of his beloved Son the Lord
Jesus Christ, and in the manifestation of the Light in the heart) is
established and confirmed against all the Objections of such as deny it.
Therefore Christ has tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9.
not only for all kinds of men, as some vainly talk; but for every one, of all
kinds, the benefit of whose offering is not only extended to such, who have the
distinct outward knowledge of his death and suffering, as the same is declared
in the Scriptures; but even unto those, who are necessarily excluded from the
benefit of this knowledge by some inevitable accident; which knowledge we
willingly confess to be very profitable and comfortable, but not absolutely
needful unto such, from whom God himself has withheld it, yet they may be made
partakers of the mystery of his death (tho ignorant of the History) if they
suffer his Seed and Light (inlightning their hearts) to take (in which Light
communion with the Father and the Son is enjoined) so as of wicked men to
become holy, and lovers of that power, by whose inward and secret touches, they
feel themselves turned from the evil to the good, and learn to do to others, as
they would be done by, in which Christ himself affirms all to be included. As
they have then falsely and erreonously taught, who have denied Christ to have
died for all Men, so neither have they sufficiently taught the Truth, who
affirming him to have died for all, have added the absolute necessity of the
outward knowledge thereof in order to the obtaining its saving effects; Among
whom the Remonstrants of Holland have been chiefly wanting, and many other
Assertors of universal Redemption, in that they have not Placed the extent of
this salvation in that Divine and Evangelical Principle of Light and Life,
wherewith Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the world, which is
excellently and evidently held forth in these Scriptures, Genesis 6.3. Deuteronomy.
30.14. John 1.7, 8, 9. Romans 10.8. Tit. 2.11.


The Seventh Proposition. Concerning Justification. As many as resist not this
Light, but receive the same, in them is produced, a holy, pure, and spiritual
birth, bringing forth holiness, righteousness, purity, and all these other
blessed fruits, which are acceptable to God, by which holy birth ( to wit)
Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his works in us, as we are
sanctified, so are we justified in the sight of God, according to the Apostles
words, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Therefore it is not by
our works wrought in our will, nor yet by good works, considered as of
themselves, but Christ who is both the gift and the giver, and the cause
producing the effects in us, who as he has reconciled us while we were
enemies, does also in his wisdom save us, and justify us after this manner, as
says the same Apostle elsewhere, according to his mercy he has saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5.


The Eighth Proposition. Concerning Perfection. In whom this holy and pure
birth is fully brought forth, the body of death and sin comes to be crucified
and removed, Romans 6.14. Romans 8.13. Romans 6.2, 18 1 John 3.6.
and their hearts united and subjected unto the truth, so as not to obey any
suggestion or temptation of the evil one, but to be free from actual sinning,
and transgressing of the Law of God, and in that respect perfect; yet does this
perfection still admit of a growth, there remains ever in some part a
possibility of sinning, where the mind does not most diligently and watchfully
attend unto the Lord.

The Ninth Proposition. Concerning Perseverence, and the possibility of falling
from Grace. Although this Gift and inward Grace of God, be sufficient to work out
Salvation, yet in those in whom it is resisted, it both may and does become
their Condemnation; Moreover in whom it has wrought in part, 1 Timothy 1.6. Heb.
6.4, 5, 6.
to purify and sanctify them in order to their further Perfection; by
disobedience such may fall from it and turn it to wantoness making Shipwreck of
Faith, and after having tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and been made Partakers of
the Holy Ghost, again fall away, yet such an increase and stability in the
Truth may in this Life be attained, from which there can not be a total
Apostasy.

The Tenth Proposition. Concerning the Ministry. As by this Gift, or Light of
God, all true knowledge in things Spiritual is received and revealed; so by the
same as it is manifested and received in the heart by the strength and power
thereof, every true Minister of the Gospel is ordained, prepared, and supplied
in the work of the Ministry; and by the leading, moving, and drawing hereof,
ought every Evangelist and Christian Pastor to be led, and ordered in his
labor and work of the Gospel, both as to the place where, as to the Person to
whom, and as to the times when he is to Minister: Moreover, who have this
Authority may and ought to Preach the Gospel, tho without human Commission or
Literature; as on the other hand, who want the Authority of this Divine Gift,
however Learned or Authorized by the Commissions of Men and Churches, are to be
esteemed but as deceivers, and not true Ministers of the Gospel; also who have
received this holy and unspotted Gift, as they have freely received, Mat. 10.
so are they freely to give, without hire or bargaining, far less to use it as
a Trade to get Money by it; yet if God has called any from their Employments
or Trades, by which they acquire their livelihood, it may be lawful for such
(according to the liberty which they feel given them in the Lord) to receive
such Temporals (to wit) what may be needful to them for Meat and Clothing, as
are freely given them by those, to whom they have Communicated spirituals.

The Eleventh Proposition. Concerning Worship. All true and acceptable worship
to God is offered in the inward and immediate moving and drawing of his own
Spirit, which is neither limited to places, times, or Persons; for tho we be to
worship him always, in that we are to fear before him; yet as to the outward
signification thereof in Prayers, Praises, or Preachings, we ought not to do it
where and when we will, but where and when we are moved thereunto by the secret
Inspirations of his Spirit in our hearts, which God hears and accepts of,
and is never wanting to move us thereunto, when need is, of which he himself is
the alone proper Judge: all other worship then, both Praises, Prayers, and
Preachings, which man sets about in his own will, and at his own appointment,
Ezekiel. 13. Matt. 10.20. Acts 2.4.18.5. John 3.6. and 4.21. Judges 19. Acts 17.23.
which he can both begin and end at his pleasure, do or leave undone as himself
sees meet, whether they be a prescribed Form, as a Liturgy or Prayers conceived
extemporally, by the natural strength and faculty of the mind, they are all but
Superstitions, Will Worship, and abominable Idolatry in the sight of God, which
are to be denied, rejected, and separated from in this day of his Spiritual
arising, however it might have pleased him who winked at the times of
Ignorance, with a respect to the simplicity and integrity of some, and of his
own innocent Seed, which lay as it were, buried in the hearts of Men, under the
mass of Superstition, to blow upon the dead and dry bones, and to raise some
breathings and answer them, and that until the day should more clearly dawn and
break forth.

The Twelfth Proposition. Concerning Baptism. Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet 3.21. Romans 6.4.
Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. Joh. 3.30. 1 Cor. 1.17
As there is one Lord, and one Faith, so there is one Baptism, which is not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience before
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and this Baptism is a Pure and
Spiritual thing, to wit, the Baptism of the Spirit and fire, by which we are
buried with him, that being washed and purged from our sins, we may walk in
newness of Life, of which the Baptism of John was a figure, which was commanded
for a time, and not to continue for ever; as to the Baptism of Infants it is a
mere humane Tradition, for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in
all the Scripture.

The Thirteenth Proposition. Concerning the Communion or participation of the
body and blood of Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Joh. 6.32, 33, 55. 1 Cor. 5.8.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is inward and Spiritual, which is
the participation of his flesh and blood, by which the inward m^n is daily
nourished in the hearts of those in whom Christ dwells, of which things the
breaking of bread by Christ with his Disciples was a figure, which they even
used in the Church for a time, who had received the substance, for the cause of
the weak: even as abstaining from things strangled, and from blood, the washing
one another feet, and the anointing of the sick with Oil, Acts 15, 20 Joh. 13,
14. Ja. 5.14.
all which are commanded with no less authority and solemnity than the former;
yet seeing they are but the shaddows of better things, they cease in such as
have obtained the Substance.

The Fourteenth Proposition. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in
matter purely religious and pertaining to the Conscience. Since God has
assumed to himself the power and Dominion of the Conscience, who alone can
rightly instruct and govern it, therefore it is not lawful for any whatsoever,
Luc. 9.55, 56. Matt. 7.12, 29. Tit. 3.10.
by virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the Government of this
World, to force the Consciences of others; and therefore all Killing,
Banishing, Fining, Imprisoning, and other such things, which men are afflicted
with for the alone exercise of their Conscience or difference in Worship, or
Opinion, proceeds from the Spirit of Cain, the murderer, and is contrary to
the Truth, providing always that no Man under the pretense of Conscience,
prejudice his Neighbor in his Life or Estate; or do any thing destructive to,
or inconsistent with human Society, in which case the Law is for the
transgressor, and Justice is to be administered upon all without respect of
Persons.

The Fifteenth Proposition. Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc. Seeing
the chief end of all Religion is to redeem Man from the Spirit and vain
Conversation of this World, and to lead into inward communion with God, before
whom if we fear always, we are accounted happy, Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Pet 1.14 Joh.
5.44. Jer. 10.3. Acts 10.26 Matt. 15.13. Col. 2.8.
therefore all the vain customs and habits thereof both in word and deed are to
be rejected and forsaken by those who come to this fear; such as the taking off
the Hat to a Man, the bowings and cringings of the Body, and such other
Salutations of that kind, with all the foolish and superstitious formalities
attending them, all which Man has invented in his degenerate state to feed his
pride in the vain pomp and glory of this World, as also the unprofitable Plays,
frivolous Recreations, Sportings and Gamings which are invented to pass away
the precious time, and divert the mind from the witness of God in the heart,
and from the living sense of his fear, and from that Evangelical Spirit
wherewith Christians ought to be leavened, and which leads into sobriety,
gravity and Godly fear, in which, as we abide, the blessing of the Lord is felt
to attend us in these actions which we are necessarily engaged in order to the
taking care for the sustenance of the outward man.


AN APOLOGY For the true CHRISTIAN DIVINITY.
The first Proposition.
Seeing the height of all happiness is placed in the true knowledge of God,
(this is Life eternal, to know the true God and Jesus Christ, John 17.3*
whom thou have sent) the true and right understanding of this foundation and
ground of knowledge is that which is most necessary to be kn^wn and believed in
the first place.

HE that desires to acquire any art or science, seeks first those means, by
which that art or science is obtained. If we ought to do so in things Natural
and Earthly, how much more then in Spiritual? In this affair then should our
inquiry be the more diligent, because he that errs in the entrance, is not so
easily reduced again into the right way; he that misseth his road from the
beginning of his Journey, and is deceived in his first Marks, at his first
seting forth, the greater his Mistake is, the more difficult will be his
Entrance into the right way.

Thus when a Man first proposes to himself the knowledge of God, from a sense
of his own unworthiness, and from the great weariness of his mind, occasioned
by the secret checks of his Conscience, and the tender yet real glances of Gods
Light upon his Heart; the earnest desires he has to be redeemed from his
present trouble, and the fervent breathings he has to be eased of his
disordered Passions and Lusts; and to find quietness and peace in the certain
knowledge of God, and in the assurance of his love and good will toward him,
makes his heart tender, and ready to receive any Impression; and so (not having
then a distinct discerning) through forwardness embraces any thing, that
brings present ease. If either through the reverence he bears to certain
persons, or from the secret inclination to what does comply with his natural
Disposition, he fall upon any Principles or Means, by which he apprehends he
may come to know God, and so does center himself, it will be hard to remove him
thence again, how wrong soever they may be. For the first anguish being over,
he becomes more hardy; and the Enemy being near, creates a false peace, and a
certain confidence, which is strengthened by the minds unwillingness, to enter
again into new doubtfulness, or the former anxiety of a search.

This sufficiently verified in the example of the Pharisees and Jewish Doctors,
who most of all resisted Christ, disdaining to be esteemed ignorant for this
vain Opinion; they had of their knowledge hindered them, from the true knowledge,
and the mean people who were not so much preoccupyed with former principles,
nor conceited of their own knowledge did easily believe. Wherefore the Pharisees
upbraid them, saying, Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed in him? John
7.48, 49.
But this people which know not the Law are accursed. This is also abundantly
proved by the experience of all such, as being secretly touched with the call
of God's Grace unto them, do apply themselves unto false Teachers, where the
remedy proves worse than the disease; because, instead of knowing God, or the
things relating to their Salvation aright, they drink in wrong Opinions of him,
from which it is harder to be dis-intangled, than while the Soul remains a
blank, or tabala rasa. For they, that conceit themselves wise, are worse to
deal with, then they, that are sensible of their ignorance. Nor has it been
less the device of the Devil, the great Enemy of Mankind, to persuade Men into
wrong notions of God, than to keep them altogether from acknowledging him, the
latter taking with few, because odious, but the other having been the constant
ruin of the World; for there has scarce been a Nation found, but has had some
notions or other of Religion: so that not from their denying any Deity, but
from their mistakes and misapprehensions of it, has proceeded all the Idolatry
and superstition of the world, yea hence even Atheism it self has proceeded,
for these many and various opinions of God and Religion, being so much mixed
with the guessings and uncertain judgments of men, have begotten in many the
opinion that there is no God at all. This and much more, that might be said,
may show how dangerous it is to miss in the first step. All that come not in by
the door, are accounted as Thieves and Robbers.

Again, how needful and desirable that knowledge is, which brings Life
Eternal, Epictetus shows, saying excellently well, cap. 38. (...) Know that
the main foundation of piety, is this to have (...) right opinions and
apprehensions of God.

This therefore I judged necessary as a first Principle, in the first place, to
affirm, and I suppose will not need much further explanation nor defense, as
being generally acknowledged by all (and in these things, that are without
controversy, I love to be brief) as that, which will easily commend it self to
every Man's reason and Conscience, and therefore I shall proceed to the next
Proposition, which tho it be nothing less certain, yet by the malice of Satan
and ignorance of many, comes far more under debate.

The Second Proposition. Of Immediate Revelation.
Seeing no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him, Matt. 11.27. And seeing the revelation of the Son is in, and by
the Spirit, therefore the Testimony of the Spirit, is that alone, by which the
true knowledge of God has been, is and can be, only revealed: who as by the
moving of his own Spirit, he disposed the chaos of this World, into that
wonderful order, wherein it was in the beginning, and created man a living Soul
to rule and govern it; so by the revelation of the same Spirit, he has
manifested himself all along unto the sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles; which revelations of God, by the Spirit, whether by outward
voices and appearances, dreams or inward objective manifestations in the heart,
were of old the former object of their faith, and remain yet so to be: since
the object of the Saints faith is the same in all ages, tho held forth under
diverse administrations: Moreover these divine inward revelations, which we make
absolutely necessary for the building up of true faith, neither do, nor can
ever, contradict the outward testimony of the Scriptures, or right and sound
Reason; yet from hence it will not follow that the Divine revelations are to be
subjected to the Test, either of the outward testimony of the Scriptures, or of
the natural reason of Man, as to a more noble, and certain rule and touchstone;
for this Divine revelation and inward illumination, is that, which is evident,
and clear of it self; forcing by its own evidence and clearness, the well
disposed understanding to assent, irresistibly moving the same thereunto, even
as the common principles of natural truths do move and incline the mind to a
natural assent. As that the whole is greater than its part. That two
contradictorys can neither be both true, nor both false.

I. IT is very probable, that many carnal and natural Christians will oppose
this Proposition, who being wholly unacquainted with the movings and actings of
God's Spirit upon their hearts, judge the same nothing necessary, and some are
apt to flout at it as ridiculous. Yea to that highth are the generality of all
Christians apostatized and degenerated, that tho there be not any thing more
plainly asserted, more seriously recommended, nor more certainly artested to,
in all the writings of the Holy Scriptures, yet nothing is less minded, and
more rejected by all sorts of Christians, than Immediate and Divine Revelation,
in so much, that once to lay claim to it is matter of reproach. Whereas of old,
none were ever judged Christians, but such as had the Spirit of Christ, Romans
8.9. But now many do boldly call themselves Christians, who make no difficulty
of confessing they are without it, and laugh at such as say they have it. Of
old they were accounted the Sons of God, who were led by the Spirit of God,
ibid. verse 14. But now many averr themselves Sons of God who know nothing of
this leader, and he that affirms himself so led, is, by the pretended Orthodox
of this Age, presently proclaimed a Heretic: the reason hereof is very
manifest, viz, because many in these days, under the name of Christians do
experimentally find that they are not acted, nor led by Gods Spirit, yea many
great Doctors, Divines, Teachers, and Bishops of Christianity (commonly so
called) have wholly shut their ears from hearing, and their eyes from seeing
this inward Guide, and so are become strangers unto it; whence they are, by
their own experience, brought to this strait, either to confess that they are
as yet ignorant of God, and have only the shadow of knowledge, and not the true
knowledge of him, or that this knowledge is acquired without immediate revelation.

For the better understanding then of this proposition, we do distinguish
betwixt the certain knowledge of God, and the uncertain, betwixt the spiritual
knowledge and the literal, the saving heart-knowledg and soaring, airy
head-knowledg. The last we confess may be, diverse obtained, but the first by no
other way, then the inward immediate manifestation and revelation of Gods
Spirit, shining in and upon the heart, inlightning and opening the
understanding.

. II. Having then proposed to my self, in these propositions, to affirm those
things which relate to the true and effectual knowledge which brings life
eternal with it, therefore I have affirmed, and that truly, that this knowledge
is no otherways attained, and that none have any true ground to believe they
have attained it, who have it not by this revelation of Gods Spirit.

The certainty of which truth is such, that it has been acknowledged by some
of the most refined and famous of all sorts of Professors of Christianity in
all ages; who being truly upright-hearted and earnest seekers of the Lord
(however stated under the disadvantages and epidemical errors of their several
sects, or ages) the true seed in them has been answered by Gods love, who has
had regard to the Good, and has had of his elect ones among all, who finding a
distaste and disgust in all other outward means, even in the very principles and
precepts more particullary relative to their own forms and societies, have at
last concluded, with one voice, that there was no true knowledge of God, but
that which is revealed inwardly by his own Spirit; whereof take these following
testimonies of the Ancients.

1. It is the inward Master ( says Augustine) that teaches, it is Christ that
teaches, it is inspiration that teaches: Aug. ex. Tract. Epist. Joh. 3.
where this inspiration and unction is wanting, it is in vain that words from
without are beaten in. And therefore, for he that created us and redeemed us,
and called us by faith, and dwells in us by his Spirit, unless he speaks
unto you inwardly, it is needless for us to cry out.

2. There is a difference faith (Clemens Alexandrinus) betwixt that, Lib. 1.
Storm.
which any one says of the Truth, and that which the Truth it self
interpreting it self, says. A conjecture of Truth differs from the Truth it
self, a similitude of a thing differs from the thing it self; it is one thing
that is acquired by exercise and discipline, and another thing, which by power
and faith. Lastly, the same Clemens says, Paedag.
Truth is neither hard to be arrived at, nor is it impossible to apprehend it,
for it is most nigh unto us, even in our houses, as the most wise Moses has
insinuated.

3. How is it, ( says Tertullian) that since the Devil always works, and
stirs up the mind to iniquity, Lib. de veland. virginibus cap. 1.
that the work of God should either cease or desist to act? Since for this end
the Lord did send the Comforter, that because human weakness could not at once
bear all things, knowledge might be by little and little directed, formed and
brought to perfection by the holy Spirit that Vicar of the Lord. I have many
things yet (says he) to speak unto you, but ye can not as vet bear them, but
when that Spirit of Truth shall come, he shall lead you into all Truth, and
shall teach you these things, that are to come. But of his works we have spoken
above. What is then the administration of the Comforter, but that discipline be
derived, and the Scriptures revealed? etc.

Hpist. Paulin. 103.
4. The Law ( says Hierom) is spiritual, and there is need of a revelation to
understand it. And in his epistle 150 to Hedibia, question 11. he says, the
whole epistle to the Romans needs an interpretation, it being involved in so
great obscuritys, that for the understanding thereof, we need the help of the
Holy Spirit, who through the Apostle, dictated it.

5. So great things ( says Athanasius) does our Savior daily: he draws unto
piety, De incarnatione verbi Dei.
persuades unto virtue, teaches immortality, excites to the desire of heavenly
things, reveals knowledge from the Father, inspires power against death, and
shows himself unto every one.

6. Gregory the Great, upon these words [he shall teach you all things] says,
Hom. 30. upon the Gospel.
that unless the same Spirit sit upon the heart of the hearer, in vain is the
discourse of the doctor, let no man then ascribe unto the man, that teaches
what he understands from the mouth of him that speaks, for unless he that
teaches, be within the tongue of the Doctor, that is without, labors in
vain.

7. Cyrillas Alexandrinus plainly affirms, that men know that Jesus is the
Lord by the Holy Ghost, In thesau. 10. lib. 13. cap. 3.
no otherwise than they who taste honey, know that it is sweet even by its
proper quality.

8. Therefore ( says Bernard) we daily exhort you, Brethren, by speech that ye
walk the ways of the heart, In Psalm. 84.
and that your Souls be always in your hands; that he may hear what the Lord
says in you. And again, upon these words of the Apostle, [Let him that
glories, glory in the Lord] with which threefold vice (says he) all sorts of
religious men are less or more dangerously affected, because they do not so
diligently attend with the ears of the heart, to what the Spirit of Truth
(which flatters none) inwardly speaks.

This was the very basis and main foundation, upon which the primitive
Reformers walked.

Luther in his book to the Nobility of Germany says. This is certain, that no
man can make himself a Doctor of the holy Scripture, but the holy Spirit alone.
And upon the Magnificat he says, No man can rightly understand God, or the
Word of God, unless he immediately receive it from the Holy Spirit, neither can
any one receive it from the Holy Spirit, except he find it by experience in
himself, and in this experience the Holy Ghost teaches, as in his proper
school, out of which school nothing is taught but mere talk.

Philip Melanchton in his Annotations upon the 6. of John, Who hear only an
outward and bodily voice, hear the creature; but God is a Spirit, and is
neither discerned nor known, nor heard, but by the Spirit; and therefore to
hear the voice of God, to see God, is to know and hear the Spirit: by the
Spirit alone God is known and perceived.

Which also the more serious to this day do acknowledge, even all such, who
satisfy themselves not with the superfice of Religion, and use it not as a
cover or art. Yea all these, who apply themselves effectually to Christianity,
and are not satisfied until they have found its effectual work upon their
hearts, redeeming them from Sin, do feel that no knowledge effectually prevails
to the producing of this, but that which proceeds from the warm influence of
God's Spirit upon the heart, and from the comfortable shinings of his Light
upon their understanding: and therefore to this purpose a late modern Author
says well, videlicer, Doctor Smith of Cambridge in his select discourses: To
seek our Divinity merely in Books and Writings, is to seek the living among the
dead, we do but in vain many times seek God in these, where his Truth is too
often, not so much enshrined as entombed. Intra te quaere Deum, seek God within
thine own Soul, he is best discerned (...) as Plotinus phraseth it, by an
intellectual touch of him. We must see with our eyes, and hear with our ears,
and our hands must handle the Word of Life ( to express it in St. John 's
words) (...), etc. The Soul it self has its sense as well as the Body. And
therefore David, when he would teach us to know what the Divine Goodness is,
calls not for speculation but sensation. Taste and see how good the Lord is.
That is not the best and truest knowledge of God, which is wrought out by the
labor and sweat of the Brain, but that which is kindled within us by an
heavenly warmth in our Hearts. And again: there is a knowledge of the Truth, as
it is in Jesus, as it is in a Christ-like nature, as it is in that sweet, mild,
humble and loving Spirits of Jesus, which spreads it self like a Morning Star,
upon the spirits of good men full of Light and Life. It profits little to know
Christ himself after the flesh, but he gives his Spirit to good men, that
searches the deep things of God. And again: it is but thin airy knowledge, that
is got by mere speculation, which is ushered in by Syllogisms and
demonstrations, but that, which springs forth from true goodness is (...) as
Origin speaks, it brings such: a Divine Light to the Soul as is more clear
and convincing, than any demonstration.

III. That this certain and undoubted method of the true knowledge of God has
been brought out of use, has been none of the least devices of the Devil, to
secure mankind to his kingdom. For after the light and glory of the Christian
Religion had prevailed, over a good part of the World, and dispelled the thick
mists of the heathenish Doctrine, of the plurality of Gods, he that knew there
was no probability of deluding the World any longer that way, did then puff man
up with a false knowledge of the true God, setting him on work to seek God the
wrong way, and persuading him to be content with such a knowledge as was of his
own acquiring, and not of God's teaching. And this device has proved the more
successful, because accommodated to the natural and corrupt spirit and temper
of man, who, above all things, affects to exalt himself; in which exaltation,
as God is most greatly dishonored, so therein the Devil has his end; who is
not anxious how much God be acknowledged in words, provided himself be but
always served, he matters not how great and high speculations the natural man
entertains of God, so long as he serves his lusts and passions, and is obedient
to his evil suggestions and temptations. Thus Christianity is become an art,
acquired by humane science and industry, as any other art and science is, and
men have not only assumed unto themselves the name of Christians; but even have
procured to be esteemed as masters of Christianity, by certain artificial
tricks, though altogether strangers to the Spirit and Life of Jesus. But if we
shall make a right definition of a Christian, according to the Scripture,
videlicer, that he is one, that has the Spirit and is led by it. How many
Christians, yea, and of these great Masters and Doctors of Christianity, so
accounted, shall we justly divest of that noble title?

If then such as have all the other means of knowledge, and are sufficiently
learned therein, whether it be the letter of the Scripture, the traditions of
Churches, the works of Creation and Providence, whence they are able to deduce
strong and undeniable arguments (which may be true in themselves) are not yet
to be esteemed Christians, according to the certain and infallible definition
abovementioned: And if the inward and immediate Revelation of Gods Spirit in
the Heart, in such as have been altogether ignorant of some, and but very
little skilled in others, of these means of attaining knowledge, has brought
them to Salvation: Then it will necessarily and evidently follow, that inward
and immediate Revelation, is the only sure and certain way to attain the true
and saving knowledge of God.

But the first is true:

Therefore the last.

Now as this Argument does very strongly conclude* for this way of knowledge,
and against such as deny it, so herein it is the more considerable, because the
Propositions from which it is deduced are so clear, that our very Adversaries
cannot deny them. For, as to the first, it is acknowledged that many learned
men may be, and have been damned. And as to the second, who will deny but many
illeterate men may be, and are saved? Nor dare any affirm that none come to the
knowledge of God and Salvation, by the inward Revelation of the Spirit, without
these outward means, unless they be also so bold, as to exclude Abel, Seth,
Noah, Abraham, Job, and all the Holy Patriarchs, from true Knowledge and
Salvation.

. IV. I would however not be understood, as if hereby I excluded those other
means of Knowledge, from any use or service to Man, it is far from me to judge,
as in the next Proposition concerning the Scriptures shall more plainly appear.
The question is not, what may be profitable or helpful, but what is absolutely
necessary. Many things may contribute to further a work, which yet are not that
main thing that makes the work go on.

The sum then of what is said, amounts to this, that where the true inward
Knowledge of God is, through the Revelation of his Spirit, there is all,
neither is there any absolute necessity of any other. But where the best,
highest, and most profound Knowledge is, without this there is nothing, as to
the obtaining the great End of Salvation. This Truth is very effectually
confirmed, by the first part of the Proposition it self, which in few words,
comprehends diverse unquestionable Arguments, which I shall in brief subsume.

First, That there is no knowledge of the Father but by the Son.

Secondly, That there is no knowledge of the Son but by the Spirit.

Thirdly, That by the Spirit God has always revealed himself to his Chilldren.

Fourthly, That these Revelations were the formal Object of the Saints Faith.

And Lastly, That the same continues to be the Object of the Saints Faith to
this day.

Of each of these I shall speak a little particularly, and then proceed to the
latter part.

. V. As to the first, viz. That there is no Knowledge of the Father but by the
Son, it will not need much probation, being founded upon the plain words of
Scripture, and is therefore a fit medium to draw the rest of our Assertions
from.

For the infinite and most wise God, who is the Foundation, Root and Spring of
all Operation, has wrought all things by his Eternal Word and Son. This is
that WORD, that was in the beginning with God, John 1.1, 2, 3.
and was God, by whom all things were made, and without whom was not any thing
made that was made. This is that Jesus Christ, by whom God created all things,
Ephesians. 3.9.
by whom and for whom, all were created, that are in Heaven and in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions or Principalities,
or Powers, Col. 1.16. Who therefore is called the first born of every Creature,
Col. 1.15. As then, that infinite and incomprehensible Fountain of Life and
Motion, operateth in the Creatures, by his own Eternal Word and Power, so no
Creature has access again unto him, but in and by the Son, according to his own
express words, No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him, Matthew. 11.27. Luke 10.22. And again, he himself says, I am
the Way, the Truth and the Life: no man comes unto the Father but by me, Joh.
14.6.

Hence he is fitly called the Mediator betwixt God and Man: For having been
with God from all Eternity, being himself God, and also in time partaking of
the nature of man, through him, is the goodness and love of God conveyed to
mankind, and by him again man receives and partaketh of these mercies.

Hence is easily deduced the probation of this first Assertion, thus:

If no man know the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him,
then there is no knowledge of the Father but by the Son.

But no man knows the Father but the Son.

Therefore there is no knowledge of the Father but by the Son.

The first part of the antecedent are the plain words of Scripture. The
consequence thereof is undeniable, except one would say, that he has the
knowledge of the Father, while yet he knows him not, which were an absurd
repugnance.

Again, If the Son be the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and that no man comes
unto the Father but by him, then there is no knowledge of the Father but by the
Son.

But the first is true.

Therefore the last.

The antecedent are the very Scripture words. The consequence is very evident.
For how can any know a thing who uses not the way, without which it is not
knowable? But it is already proved that there is no other way, but by the Son;
so that who so uses not that way cannot know him, neither come unto him.

. VI. Having then laid down this first Principle, I come to the second, viz.
That there is no Knowledge of the Son but by the Spirit, or that the Revelation
of the Son of God, is by the Spirit.

Where it is to be noted, that I always speak of the saving, certain, and
necessary Knowledge of God, which that it cannot be acquired otherwise than by
the Spirit, does also appear from many clear Scriptures. For Jesus Christ, in
and by whom the Father is revealed, does also reveal himself to his Disciples
and Friends, in and by his Spirit, as his manifestation was sometimes outward,
when he testified and witnessed for the Truth in this World, and approved
himself faithful throughout. So being now withdrawn, as to the outward man, he
does teach and instruct mankind inwardly, by his own Spirit, he stands at the
door and knocks, and who so hears his Voice and opens, he comes in to
such, Rev. 3.20. Of this Revelation of Christ in him, Paul speaks, Gal. 1.6.
in which he places the excellency of his Ministry, and the certainty of his
Calling. And the Promise of Christ to his Disciples, Lo, I am with you to the
end of the World, confirms this same thing, for this is an inward Presence
and Spiritual, as all acknowledge. But what relates hereto will again occur. I
shall deduce the proof of this Proposition, from two manifest places of
Scripture. The first is, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. What man knows the things of a man,
save the Spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no
man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World,
but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are freely
given us of God. The Apostle in the verses before, speaking of the wonderful
things which are prepared for the Saints, after he has declared that the
natural man cannot reach them, adds, that they are revealed by the Spirit of
God, ver. 9, 10. giving this reason, for the Spirit searches all things, even
the deep things of God. And then he brings in the comparison, in the verses
above mentioned, very apt, and answerable to our purpose and Doctrine, that as
the things of a man are only known by the Spirit of man, so the things of God
are only known by the Spirit of God: that is, that as nothing below the Spirit
of man (as the Spirit of Brutes, or any other Creatures) can properly reach
unto, nor comprehend the things of a man, as being of a more noble and higher
Nature, so neither can the Spirit of man, or the natural man, as the Apostle,
in the 14 verse, subsumes, receive, nor discern the things of God, or the
things that are Spiritual, as being also of a higher Nature, which the Apostle
himself gives for the reason, saying, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. So that, the Apostles words being reduced to an
argument do very well prove the matter under debate, thus:

If that, which appertains properly to man, cannot be discerned by any lower
or baser Principle, than the Spirit of man; then cannot these things, that
properly relate unto God and Christ, be known or discerned by any lower or
baser thing, than the Spirit of God and Christ.

But the First is true:

Therefore also the Second.

The whole strength of the argument is contained in the Apostles words before
mentioned, which therefore being granted, I shall proceed to deduce a second
argument, thus:

That which is Spiritual, can only be known and discerned by the Spirit of God.

But the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the true and saving knowledge of him is
Spiritual:

Therefore the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the true and saving knowledge of
him, can only be known and discerned by the Spirit of God.

The other Scripture is also a saying of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.3. No man
can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The Scripture, which is
full of Truth, and answers full well to the enlightened understanding of the
Spiritual and real Christian, may perhaps prove very strange to the carnal and
pretended follower of Christ, by whom perhaps it has not been so diligently
remarked. Here the Apostle does so much require the Holy Spirit in the things
that relate to a Christian, that he positively averrs, we cannot so much as
affirm Jesus to be the Lord without it, which insinuates no less, than that the
Spiritual Truths of the Gospel are as lies in the Mouths of carnal and
unspiritual men, for though, in themselves they be true, yet are they not true,
as to them, because not known, nor uttered forth, in and by that Principle and
Spirit, that ought to direct the mind, and actuat it, in such things, they are
no better than the counterfeit representations of things in a comedy, neither
can it be more truly and properly called a real and true knowledge of God and
Christ, than the actings of Alexander the great, and Julius Caesar, etc. if now
transacted upon a Stage, might be called truly and really their doings, or the
persons representing them might be said truly and really to have conquered
As^^, and overcome Pompey, etc.

This knowledge then of Christ, which is not by the Revelation of his own Spirit
in the heart, is no more properly the knowledge of Christ, than the prattling of
a Parret which has been taught a few words, may be said to be the voice of a
man: for as that, or some other Bird, may be taught to sound or utter forth a
rational sentence, as it has learned it by the outward ear, and not from any
living principle of reason actuating it. So just such is that knowledge of the
things of God, which the natural and carnal man has gathered from the words or
writings of Spiritual men, which are not true to him, because conceived in the
natural Spirit, and so brought forth by the wrong Organ, and not proceeding
from the Spiritual Principle, no more than the words of a man, acquired by art
and brought forth by the mouth of a Bird, not proceeding from a rational
Principle, are true, with respect to the Bird that utters them. Wherefore from
this Scripture I shall further add this Argument.

If no man can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, then no man can
know Jesus to be the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

But the First is true:

Therefore the Second.

From this argument there may be another deduced, concluding in the very terms
of this assertion: thus,

If no man can know Jesus to be the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, then can there
be no certain knowledge or Revelation of him, but by the Spirit.

But the First is true:

Therefore the Second.

VII. The third thing affirmed is, That, by the Spirit, God always revealed
himself to his Children.

For making appear of the truth of this assertion, it will be but needful to
consider God's manifesting himself toward, and in relation to his Creatures
from the beginning, which resolves it self always herein. The First step of all
is ascribed hereunto by Moses, Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters. I think it will not be denied that God's converse with man,
all along from Adam to Moses, was by the immediate manifestation of his Spirit.
And afterward through the whole tract of the Law, he spoke to his Children no
otherways: which, as it naturally follows from the Principles above proved,
so it cannot be denied, by such as acknowledge the Scriptures of Truth to have
been written by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. For these writings, from
Moses to Malachy* do declare that during all that time, God revealed himself to
his Children, by his Spirit.

But if any will object, that after th dispensation of the Law, God's method of
speaking was altered.

I answer first, that God spoke always immediately to the Jews, in that he
spoke always immediately to the High Priest, from betwixt the Cherubins; who,
when he entered into the Holy of Holys, returning, did relate to the whole
People the voice and will of God* there immediately revealed. So that his
immediate speaking never ceased in any age.

Secondly, from this immediate fellowship were none shut out, who earnestly
sought after and waited for it: in that many, besides the High Priest, who were
not so much as of the kindred of Levi, nor of the Prophets, did receive it and
speak from it, as it is written Numb. 11.25. Where the Spirit is said to have
rested upon the seventy Elders, which Spirit also reached unto two, that were
not in the Tabernacle, but in the Camp, whom when some would have forbidden,
Moses would not, but rejoiced, wishing all the Lord's people were Prophets, and
that he would put his Spirit upon them, verse 29.

This is also confirmed Neh. 9. Where the Elders of the People, after their
return from captivity, when they began to sanctify themselves by fasting and
prayer, in which, numbering up the many mercies of God toward their Fathers,
they say, ver. 20. Thou gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them, and ver.
30. Yet many years did thou forbear and testify against them by thy Spirit
in thy Prophets. Many are the sayings of Spiritual David, to this purpose, as
Psalm. 51.13. Take not thy Holy Spirit from me, uphold me with thy free Spirit,
Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Hereunto does the Prophet
Isaiah ascribe the credit of his Testimony, saying, chap. 48. v. 16. And now
the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me. And that God revealed himself to his
children under the New Testament, to wit, to the Apostles, Evangelists, and
primitive Disciples, is confessed by all. How far now this yet continues, and
is to be expected comes hereafter to be spoken to.

VIII. The fourth thing affirmed, is, that these Revelations were the object of
the Saints faith of old.

This will easily appear by the definition of Faith, and considering what its
object is. For which we shall not dive into the curious and various notions of
the Schoolmen, but stay in the plain and positive words of the Apostle Paul,
who, Hebr. 11. describes it two ways. Faith (says he) is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen: which as the Apostle
illustrateth it, in the same chapter, by many examples, is no other but a firm
and certain belief of the mind, whereby it rests, and in a sense possesses
the substance of some things hoped for, through its confidence in the promise
of God. And thus the Soul has a most firm evidence by its faith, of things not
yet seen nor come to pass. The object of this faith is the promse, word, or
testimony of God speaking to the mind. Hence it has been generally affirmed,
that the object of Faith is Deus loquens, etc. That is, God speaking, etc.
Which is also manifest from all these Examples, deduced by the Apostle
throughout that whole Chapter, whose Faith was founded neither by that outward
testimony, nor upon the voice and writing of man, but upon the revelation of
Gods Will manifest unto them, and in them; as in the Example of Noah, ver. 7.
thus, By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen, as yet moved with
fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his House, by the which he condemned the
World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. What was here
the object of Noah's Faith but God speaking unto him? He had not the Writings
nor Prophesyings of any going before, nor yet the concurrence of any Church or
People to strengthen him; and yet his Faith in the Word, by which he
contradicted the whole World, saved him and his House. Of which also Abraham is
set forth as a singular Example, being therefore called the Father of the
Faithful, who is said against hope to have believed in hope: In that he only
willingly forsook his Fathers Country, not knowing whether he went: In that he
believed concerning the coming of Isaac, though contrary to natural
probability: But above all, In that he refused not to offer him up, not
doubting but God was able to raise him from the dead; of whom it is said, that
in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. And last of all, In that he rested in the
Promise, that his Seed should possess the Land, wherein himself was but a
Pilgrim, and which to them was not to be fulfilled, while diverse Ages after.
The object of Abraham's Faith, in all this, was no other but inward and
immediate Revelation, or God signifying his will unto him inwardly, and
immediately by his Spirit.

But because, in this part of the Proposition, we made also mention of external
Voices, Appearances, and Dreams in the alternative, I think also fit to speak
hereof, what in that respect, may be objected, to wit,

Obj. That those, who found their Faith now upon immediate and objective
Revelation, ought to have also outward Voices or Visions, Dreams or appearances
for it.

It is not denied but God made use of the Ministry of Angels, who in the
appearance of men, spoke outwardly to the Saints of old, and that he did also
reveal some things to them in Dreams and Visions, none of which we will affirm
to be ceased, so as to limit the power and liberty of God, in manifesting
himself toward his Children. But while we are considering the object of Faith,
we must not stick to that, which is but circumstantially and accidently so, but
to that, which is universally and substantially so.

Next again, we must distinguish betwixt that, which in it self is subject to
doubt and delusion, and therefore is received for and because of another; and
that which is not subject to any doubt, but is received simply for, and because
of it self, as being prima veritas the very first and original Truth. Let us
then consider how, or how far these outward voices, appearances, and dreams,
were the object of the Saints faith? was it because they were simply voices,
appearances, or dreams? nay certainly we know, and they were not ignorant, that
the Devil can form a sound of words, and convey it to the outward ear. That he
can easily deceive the outward senses, by making things to appear that are not.
Yea, do we not see by daily experience, that the Juglers and Mountebancks can
do as much as all that, by their Legerdemain? God forbid then, that the Saints
faith should be founded upon so fallacious a foundation, as man's outward and
fallible senses. What made them then give credit to these visions? eertainly
nothing else, but the secret testimony of Gods Spirit in their hearts, assuring
them, that the voices, dreams, and Visions were of and from God. Abraham
believed the Angels, but who told him that these men were Angels? we must not
think his faith then was built upon his outward senses, but proceeded from the
secret persuasion of Gods Spirit in his heart. This then must needs be
acknowledged to be originally and principally the object of the Saints faith,
without which there is no true and certain faith, and by which many times faith
is begotten and strenthenged, without any of these outward or visible helps. As
we may observe in many passages of the Holy Scripture, where it is only
mentioned, and God said, etc. And the word of the Lord came unto such and such,
saying, etc.

But if any one should pertinaciously affirm, that this did import an outward
audible voice to the carnal ear.

I would gladly know, what other argument such a one could bring, for this his
affirmation, saving his own simple conjecture. It is said indeed the Spirit
witnesses with our Spirit; but not to our outward ears, Romans 8.16. and seeing
the Spirit of God is within us, and not without us, it speaks to our Spiritual,
and not to our bodyly ear. Therefore I see no reason where it is so often said
in Scripture; the Spirit said, moved, hindered, called such or such a one, to
do, or forbear such or such a thing, that any have to conclude, that this was
not an inward voice, to the ear of the Soul, rather than an outward voice to
the bodyly ear. If any be otherwise minded, let them if they can, produce their
arguments, and we may further consider of them. From all then which is above
declared, I shall deduce an argument, to conclude the probation of this
assertion, thus,

That which any one firmly believes, as the ground and foundation of his hope
in God and life Eternal; is the formal object of his faith.

But the inward and immediate revelation of God's Spirit, speaking in and unto
the Saints, was by them believed, as the ground and foundation of their hope in
God, and life eternal.

Therefore these inward and immediate revelations were the formal object of
their faith.

. IX. That which now comes under debate, is, what we have asserted in the last
place, to wit, That the same continues to be the object of the Saints faith
unto this day. Many will agree to what we said before, who differ from us
herein.

There is nevertheless a very firm argument confirming the truth of this
assertion, included in the Proposition it self, to wit, That the object of the
Saints faith, is the same in all ages, though held forth under diverse
administrations. Which I shall reduce to an argument, and prove thus,

First, Where the Faith is one, the object of the Faith is one.

But the Faith is one:

Therefore, etc.

That the Faith is one, is the express words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.5. who
places the one Faith with the one God, importing no less than that to affirm
two faiths is as absurd, as to affirm two Gods.

Moreover if the Faith of the Ancients were one and the same with ours, i. e.
agreeing in substance therewith, and receiving the same definition, it had been
impertinent for the Apostle, Heb. 11. to have illustrated the definition of our
faith, by the examples of that of the Ancients, or to go about to move us by
the example of Abraham, if Abraham's faith were different in nature from ours.
Nor does hence any difference arise, because they believe in Christ, with
respect to his appearace outwardly as future, and we as already appeared; For
nor did they then so believe in him to come, as not to feel him present with
them, and witness him near, seeing the Apostle says they all drank of that
spiritual Rock, which followed them, which Rock was Christ: Nor do we so
believe concerning his appearance past, as not also to feel and know him
present with us, and to feed upon him; except Christ (says the Apostle) be in
you, ye are reprobates, so that both our faith is one, terminating in one and
the same thing. And as to the other part or consequence of the antecedent, to
wit, that the object is one, where the faith is one, the Apostle also proves
it, in the forecited Chapter, where he makes all the Worthys of old, examples
to us. Now wherein are they imitable, but because they believed in God? and
what was the object of their Faith, but inward and immediate revelation, as we
have before proved? Their example can be no ways applicable to us, except we
believe in God, as they did, that is, by the same object. The Apostle clears
this yet further by his own example, Gal. 1.16. where he says, so soon as
Christ was revealed in him, he consulted not with flesh and blood, but
forthwith believed and obeyed. The same Apostle, Heb. 13.7, 8. where he
exhorts the Hebrews to follow the faith of the Elders, adds this reason,
considering the end of their conversation, Jesus Christ the same to day,
yesterday and for ever: hereby notably insinuating that in the object there is
no alteration.

If any now object the diversity of Administration.

I answer, that alters not at all the object, for the same Apostle mentioned
this diversity three times, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. centreth always in the same
Object, the same Spirit, the same Lord, the same God.

But further, if the object of Faith were not one and the same, both to us and
to them, then it would follow, that we were to know God some other way, than by
the Spirit.

But this were absurd:

Therefore, etc.

Lastly, this is most firmly proved from a common and received maxim of the
Schoolmen; to wit, Omnis actus specificatur ab objecto, every act is specified
from its object, from which, (if it be true) as they acknowledge (tho for the
sake of many, I shall not recur to this argument, as being too nice and
Scholastic. Neither lay I much stress upon those kind of things, as being
that, which commends not the simplicity of the Gospel.) If the object were
different, then the faith would be different also.

Such as deny this Proposition now adays, use here a distinction, granting that
God is to be known by his Spirit, but again denying, that it is immediate or
inward, but in and by the Scriptures, in which the mind of the Spirit (as they
say) being fully and amply expressed, we are thereby to know God, and be led in
all things.

As to the negative of this assertion, that the Scriptures are not sufficient,
neither were ever appointed to be the adequate and only rule, nor yet can guide
or direct a Christian in all those things, that are needful for him to know, we
shall leave that to the next Proposition to be examined. What is proper in this
place to be proved, is, that Christians now are to be led inwardly and
immediately by the Spirit of God, even in the same manner, though it befall not
to many to be led in the same measure as the Saints were of old.

. X. I shall prove this by diverse Arguments, and first from the Promise of
Christ in these words, Joh. 14.16. And I will pray the Father, and he will give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: 17. Even the Spirit
of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither
knows him, but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.
Again, ver. 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to
your remembrance. and 16.13. But when that Spirit of Truth shall come, he shall
lead you into all Truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he
shall hear he shall speak, and shall declare unto you things to come. We have
here first, who this is, and that is diverse ways expressed: to wit, The
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, and sent of the Father in the
Name of Christ. And hereby is sufficiently proved the fottishness of those
Socinians, and other carnal Christians, who neither know nor acknowledge any
internal Spirit or Power, but that which is merely Natural, by which they
sufficiently declare themselves to be of the World, who cannot receive the
Spirit, because they neither see him nor know him. Secondly, Where this Spirit
is to be, He dwells with you, and shall be in you. And Thirdly, What his Work
is, He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
and guide you into all Truth, (...).

As to the First, Most do acknowledge that there is nothing else understood
than what the plain words signify; which is also evident by many other places
of Scripture, that will hereafter occur: Neither do I see how such as affirm
otherwise can avoid Blasphemy. For, If the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, and
Spirit of Truth be all one with the Scriptures, then it will follow that the
Scriptures is God, seeing it is true that the Holy Ghost is God. If these Men's
reasoning might take place, where ever the Spirit is mentioned in relation to
the Saints, thereby might be truly and properly understood the Scriptures.
Which what a non-sensical Monster it would make of the Christian Religion, will
easily appear to all Men. As where it is said, A Manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal; it might be rendered thus, A manifestation
of the Scriptures is given to every man to profit withal. What notable sense
this would make, and what a curious interpretation, let us consider by the
sequel of the same chapter, 1 Cor. 12.9, 10, 11. To another the gifts of
Healing by the same Spirit, to another the working of Miracles, etc. But all
these works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will. What would now these great masters of Reason, the
Socinians judge, if we should place the Scriptures here instead of the Spirit?
Would it answer their Reason, which is the great guide of their Faith? Would it
be good and sound Reason in their Logical Schools, to affirm that the
Scriptures divides severally, as it will, and gives to some the gift of
Healing, to others the working of Miracles? If then this Spirit, a
manifestation whereof is given to every man to profit withal, be no other than
that Spirit of Truth, beforementioned, which guides into all Truth; this
Spirit of Truth cannot be the Scriptures. I could infer an hundred more
absurdities of this kind, upon this sottish Opinion, but what is said may
suffice. For even some of themselves, being at times forgetful, or ashamed of
their own Doctrine, do acknowledge that the Spirit of God is another thing, and
distinct from the Scriptures, to guide and influence the Saints.

Secondly, That this Spirit is inward, in my opinion, needs no interpretation
nor commentary, He dwells with you and shall be in you. This indwelling of
the Spirit in the Saints, as it is a thing most needful to be known and
believed, so is it as positively asserted in the Scripture, as any thing else
can be. If so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, says the Apostle to the
Romans, 8.9. and again, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you, 1 Cor. 6.19. Without this the
Apostle reckons no man a Christian. If any man (says he) have not the Spirit
of Christ he is none of his. These words immediately follow those
abovementioned out of the Epistle to the Romans, but ye are not in the Flesh,
if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you. The context of which shows that the
Apostle reckons it the main token of a Christian, both positively and
negatively. For in the former verses, he shows how the carnal mind is enmity
against God, and that such as are in the Flesh cannot please him. Where
subsuming, he adds concerning the Romans, that they are not in the Flesh, if
the Spirit of God dwell in them. What is this, but to affirm that they, in whom
the Spirit dwells, are no longer in the Flesh, nor of those who please not God,
but are become Christians indeed? Again, In the next verse he concludes
negatively, that if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his,
that is, he is no Christian. He then that acknowledges himself ignorant, and a
stranger to the inward in being of the Spirit of Christ in his Heart, does
thereby acknowledge himself to be yet in the carnal mind, which is enmity to
God, to be yet in the Flesh, where God cannot be pleased: and in short
(whatever he may otherwise know or believe of Christ, or however much skilled,
or acquainted with the Letter of the Holy Scripture, not yet to be)
notwithstanding all that attained to the least desire of a Christian, yea, not
once to have embraced the Christian Religion. For take but away the Spirit, and
Christianity remains no more Christianity, than the dead Carcass of a Man, when
the Soul and Spirit is departed, remains a man, which the living can no more
abide, but to bury out of their sight, as a noisome and useless thing, however
acceptable it has been, when actuated and moved by the Soul. Lastly,
Whatsoever is Excellent, whatsoever is Noble, whatsoever is Worthy, whatsoever
is Desirable in the Christian Faith, is ascribed to this Spirit, without which
it could no more subsist, than the outward World without the Sun. Hereunto have
all true Christians in all Ages, attributed their Strength and Life. It is by
this Spirit that they avouch themselves to have been converted to God, to have
been redeemed from the World, to have been strengthened in their Weakness,
comforted in their Afflictions, confirmed in their Temptations, imboldened in
their Suffering, and triumphed in the midst of all their Persecutions. Yea, The
Writings of all true Christians, are full of the great and notable things,
which they all affirm themselves to have done, by the Power and Virtue, and
Efficacy of the Spirit of God working in them. It is the Spirit that
quickens, Joh. 6.63. It was the Spirit that gave them utterance, Act. c. 2.4.
It was the Spirit by which Stephen spoke, That the Jews were not able to
resist, Acts 6.10. It is such as walk after the Spirit that receive no
condemnation, Romans 8.1. It is the Law of the Spirit that makes free, ver. 2. It
is by the Spirit of God dwelling in us, that we are redeemed from the Flesh and
from the carnal mind, v. 9. It is the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, that
quickneth our mortal Bodies, v. 11. It is through this Spirit that the deeds of
the Body are mortified, and Life obtained, ver. 13. It is by this Spirit that
we are adopted, and cry ABBA Father, v. 15. It is this Spirit that bears
witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, v. 16. It is this
Spirit that helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for us, with
gr^anings which cannot be uttered, 26. It is by this Spirit that the glorious
things which God has laid up for us, which neither outward Ear has heard, nor
outward Eye has seen, nor the Heart of Man conceived, by all his Reasonings,
are revealed unto us, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. It is by this Spirit that both Wisdom and
Knowledge, and Faith and Miracles, and Tongues and Prophesies are obtained, 1
Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. It is by this Spirit that we are all baptized into one Body,
v. 13. In short, what things relating to the Salvation of the Soul, and to the
Life of a Christian, is rightly performed, or effectually obtained without it?
And what shall I more say? For the time would fail me, to tell of all those
things, which the Holy Men of Old have declared; and the Saints of this day, do
witness themselves to enjoy, by the virtue and power of this Spiritual dwelling
in them. Truly, my Paper could not contain those many Testimonies, whereby
this Truth is confirmed; wherefore besides what is above mentioned out of the
Fathers, whom all pretend to reverence, and these of Luther and Melancthon, I
shall deduce yet one observable Testimony out of Calvin, because not a few of
the followers of his Doctrine do refuse and deride (and that as it is to be
feared, because of their own Non-experience thereof) this way of the Spirit's
in-dwelling, as uncertain and dangerous, that so, if neither the Testimony of
the Scripture, nor the sayings of others, nor right reason can move them, they
may at least be reproved by the words of their own Master, who says in the
third book of his Institutions, cap. 2. on this wise.

But they alledg, it is a bold presumption for any one to pretend to an
undoubted knowledge of God's will; which (says he) I should grant unto them, if
we should ascribe so much to our selves, as to subject the incomprehensible
counsel of God to the rashness of our understandings. But while we simply say,
with Paul, that we have received not the Spirit of this World, but the Spirit
which is of God, by whose teaching we know those things that are given us of
God. What can they prate against it, without reproaching the Spirit of God? For
if it be a horrible Sacriledg, to accuse any Revelation, coming from him,
either of a lie, of uncertainty or ambiguity; in asserting its certainty,
wherein we do offend? But they cry out, that it is not without great temerity,
that we dare so boast of the Spirit of Christ. Who would believe that the
sottishness of these men were so great, who would be esteemed the masters of
the world, that they should so fail in the first Principles of Religion? Verily
I could not believe it, if their own writings did not testify so much. Paul
accounts those the Sons of God, who are acted by the Spirit of God; but these
will have the Children of God acted by their own Spirits, without the Spirit of
God. He will have us call God Father, the Spirit dictating that term unto us,
which only can witness to our Spirits, that we are the Sons of God. These tho
they cease not to call upon God, do nevertheless demit the Spirit, by whose
guiding he is rightly to be called upon. He denies them to be the Sons of God,
or the Servants of Christ: who are not led by his Spirit, but these feign a
Christianity, that needs not the Spirit of Christ. He makes no hope of the
blessed Resurrection, unless we feel the Spirit residing in us, but these feign
a hope without any such a feeling; But perhaps they will answer that they deny
not but that it is necessary to have it, only of modesty and humility we ought
to deny and not acknowledge it. What means he then, when he commands the
Corinthians to try themselves if they be in the Faith, to examine themselves,
whether they have Christ, whom whosoever acknowledges not dwelling in him, is a
reprobate. By the Spirit which he has given us, says John, we know that he
abides in us. And what do we then else, but call in question Christ his
promise, while we would be esteemed the Servants of God without his Spirit,
which he declared he would pour out upon all his? Seeing these things are the
first grounds of Piety, it is miserable blindness to accuse Christians of
Pride, because they dare glory of the presence of the Spirit, without which
glorying, Christianity it self could not be. But by their example they declare
how truly Christ spoke, saying, that his Spirit was unknown to the world, and
that those only acknowledge it, with whom it remains. Thus far Calvin.

If therefore it be so, why should any be so foolish as to deny, or so unwise
as not to seek after this Spirit, which Christ has promised shall dwell in his
Children? They then that do suppose the in-dwelling and leading of his Spirit
to be ceased, must also suppose Christianity to be ceased, which cannot subsist
without it.

Thirdly, What the work of this Spirit is, is partly before shown, Joh. 16.13*
and 14, 26.
which Christ compriseth in two or three things, He will guide you into all
Truth, he will teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance.
Since Christ has provided for us so good an instructor, what need we then lean
so much to those traditions and commandments of Men, wherewith so many
Christians have Burdened themselves? What need we set up our own Carnal and
corrupt reason for a guide to us in matters Spiritual, as some will needs do?
May it not be complained of all such, as the Lord did of old, concerning
Israel, by the Prophets, Jer. 2.13. For my People have committed two Evils, they
have forsaken me, the Fountain of Living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns,
broken Cisterns, that hold no water. Have not many forsaken, do not many deride
and reject, this inward and Immediate Guide, this Spirit, that leads into all
Truth, and cast up to themselves other ways, broken waves indeed, which have
not all this while brought them out of the flesh, nor out of the world, nor
from under the dominion of their own lusts, and sinful affections, whereby
truth which is only rightly learned by this Spirit, is so much a stranger in
the Earth?

From all them that have been mentioned concerning this promise and these words
of Christ, it will follow that Christians are always to be led inwardly and
immediately by the Spirit of God dwelling in them; and that the same is a
standing and perpetual Ordinance, as well to the Church in general in all ages,
as to every individual member in particular, as appears from this argument.

The promise of Christ to his Children are Yea and Amen, and cannot fail, but
must of necessity be fulfilled.

But Christ has promised that the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
Truth shall abide with his Children for ever, shall dwell with them, shall be
in them, shall lead them into all Truth, shall teach them all things, shall
bring all things to their remembrance.

Therefore, etc.

Again, No man is redeemed from the carnal mind, which is at enmity with God,
which is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be; No man is yet in the
Spirit, but in the flesh, and cannot please God, except he in whom the Spirit
of God dwells.

But every true Christian, is in measure redeemed from the carnal mind, is
gathered out of the Enmity; and can be subject to the Law of God, is out of the
flesh, and in the Spirit, the Spirit of God dwelling in him.

Therefore every true Christian has the Spirit of God dwelling in him.

Again, Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, that is, no
Child, no Friend, no Disciple of Christ.

But every true Christian is a Child, a Friend, a Disciple of Christ.

Therefore every true Christian has the Spirit of Christ.

Moreover, Whosoever is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, in him the Spirit of God
dwells and abides.

But every true Christian is the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

Therefore in every true Christian, the Spirit of God dwells and abides.

But to conclude, He in whom the Spirit of God dwells, it is not in him a
lazy, dumb, useless thing; but it moves, actuateth, governs, instructs,
and teaches him all things whatsoever is needful for him to know, yea
brings all things to his remembrance.

But the Spirit of God dwells in every true Christian:

Therefore it leads, instructs, and teaches every true Christian
whatsoever is needful for him to know.

XI. But there are some, that will confess, that the Spirit does now lead and
influence the Saints, but that he does it only Subjectively, or in ablind
manner, by inlighting their understandings, to understand and believe the Truth
delivered in the Scriptures. But not at all by presenting these Truths to the
mind by way of object, and this they call medium incognitum assentiendi, as
that of whose working a man is not sensible.

This opinion, tho somewhat more tolerable than the former, is nevertheless not
altogether according to Truth, neither does it reach the fullness of it.

1. Because there be many Truths, which as they are applicable to particulars,
and individuals, and most needful to be known by them, are no wise to be found
in the Scripture, as in the following Proposition, shall be shown.

Besides, the arguments already deduced do prove, that the Spirit does not only
subjectively help us to discern Truths, elsewhere delivered, but also
objectively present those Truths to our minds. For that which teaches me all
things, and is given me for that end, without doubt presents those things to my
mind which it teaches me. It is not said it shall teach you how to understand
those things that are written, but it shall teach you all things. Again, that
which brings all things to my remembrance, must needs present them by way of
object, else it were improper to say, it brought them to my remembrance, but
only, that it helps to remember the objects brought from elsewhere.

My second argument shall be drawn from the Nature of the New Covenant, by
which, and those that follow, I shall prove that we are led by the Spirit, both
immediately and objectively: the nature of the New Covenant is expressed in
diverse places, and

First, Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord,
My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed's seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. By
the latter part of this, is sufficiently expressed the perpetuity and
continuance of this Promise, It shall not depart says the Lord from henceforth
and for ever. In the former part is the promise it self, which is the Spirit of
God being upon them, and the words of God being put into their mouths.

First, this was immediate, for there is no mention made of any medium, he
says not, I shall by the means of such and such writings, or books, convey
such and such words into your mouths, but my words, I, even I, says the Lord,
shall put into your mouths.

Secondly, this must be objectively, for [the words put into your mouth] are
the object presented by him. He says, not the words which ye shall see
written, my Spirit shall only enlighten your understandings, to assent unto,
but positively, my words, which I have put into thy mouth, etc.

From whence I argue thus,

Upon whomsoever the Spirit remains always, and puts words into his
mouth, him does the Spirit teach immediately, objectively, and continually.

But the Spirit is always upon the Seed of the Righteous, and puts words
into their mouths, neither departs from them.

Therefore the Spirit teaches the Righteous immediately, obejectively and
continually

Secondly, the nature of the New Covenant is yet more amply expressed, Jer.
31.33. which is again repeated and reasserted by the Apostle, Heb. 8.10. in
these words, For this is the Covenant, that I will make with the House of
Israel in those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and
write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a People. And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man
his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least
to the greatest.

The object here, is God's Law placed in the heart, and written in the mind;
from whence they become God's People, and are brought truly to know him.

In this then is the Law distinguished from the Gospel: The Law before was
outward, written in Tables of stone; but now it is inward, written in the
heart. Of old the People depended upon their Priests for the knowledge of God;
but now they have all a certain and sensible knowledge of him: concerning which,
Augustine speaks well, in his book De Litera and Spiritu; from whom Aquinas
first of all seems to have taken occasion to move this question, Whether the
New Law be a written Law, or an implanted Law? Lex scripta, vel Lex indita?
which he thus resolves, affirming that the New Law, or the Gospel, is not
properly a Law written, as the Old was; but Lex indita, an implanted Law; and
that the Old Law was written without, but the New Law is written within on the
Table of the Heart.

How much then are they deceived, who, instead of making the Gospel preferable
to the Law, have made the condition of such as are under the Gospel far worse?
for no doubt it is a far better, and more desirable thing to converse with God
immediately, than only mediately, as being a higher and more glorious
Dispensation: And yet these men acknowledge, that many under the Law, had
immediate converse with God, whereas they now cry it is ceased.

Again, Under the Law, there was the Holy of Holys, into which the High Priest
did enter, and received the word of the Lord immediately from betwixt the
Cherubins, so that the People could then certainly know the mind of the Lord;
but now, according to these men's judgment, we are in a far worse condition,
having nothing but the outward letter of the Scripture, to guess and divine
from, concerning one verse of which, scarce two can be found to agree. But
Jesus Christ has promised us better things, though many are so unwise not to
believe him, even to guide us, by his own unerring Spirit, and has rent and
removed the vail, whereby not only one, and that once a year, may enter, but
all of us at all times have access unto him, as often as we draw near unto him
with pure hearts. He reveals his will to us by his Spirit, and writes his Laws
in our Hearts. These things then being thus premised; I argue,

Where the Law of God is put into the mind, and written in the heart, there the
object of Faith, and revelation of the knowledge of God is inward, immediate,
and objective.

But the Law of God is put into the mind, and written in the heart of every
True Christian, under the new Covenant.

Therefore the object of Faith, and Revelation of the knowledge of God to every
True Christian, is inward, immediate and objective.

The assumption is the express words of Scripture. The Proposition then must
needs be true, except that, which is put into the mind, and written in the
heart, were either not inward, not immediate, or not objective, which is most
absurd.

XII. The third Argument is from these words of John, 1 John 2. ver. 27. But
the Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need not
that any man teach you, but the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and
is Truth, and no Lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him.

First, This could not be any special, peculiar, or extraordinary privilege,
but that which is common to all the Saints, it being a general Epistle,
directed to all them of that Age.

Secondly, the Apostle proposes this Anointing in them, as a more certain
Touchstone for them to discern and try Seducers by, even then his own
writings; for having in the former verse said, that he had written some things
to them, concerning such as seduced them, he begins the next verse, but the
Anointing, etc. and ye need not that any man teach you, etc. which infers, that
having said to them what can be said, he refers them for all to the inward
Anointing, which teaches all things as the most firm, constant, and certain
Bull-wark, against all Seducers.

And Lastly, that it is a lasting and continuing thing, the Anointing which
abides; if it had not been to abide in them, it could not have taught them all
things, neither guided them against all hazard. From which I argue thus,

He that has Anointing abiding in him, which teaches him all things, so that
he needs no man to teach him, has an inward and immediate Teacher, and has
some things inwardly and immediately revealed unto him.

But the Saints have such an Anointing:

Therefore, etc.

I could prove this Doctrine from many more places of Scripture, which for
brevitys sake I omit, and now come to the second part of the Proposition, where
the objections usually formed against it are answered.

XIII. The most usual, is that these Revelations are uncertain.

But this bespeaketh much ignorance in the opposers; for we distinguish betwixt
the thesis and the hypothesis, that is, betwixt the proposition and
supposition. For it is one thing to affirm that the true and undoubted
Revelation of God's Spirit, is certain and infallible; and another thing to
affirm that this or that particular person, or people, is led infallibly by
this Revelation, in what they speak or write, because they affirm themselves to
be so led, by the inward and immediate Revelation of the Spirit. The first is
only by us asserted, the latter may be called in question. The question is not,
who are, or are not so led? but whether all ought not, or may not be so led?

Seeing then we have already proved, that Christ has promised his Spirit to
lead his Children, and that every one of them both ought, and may be led by it.
If any depart from this certain Guide, in deeds, and yet in words pretend to be
led by it into things that are not good, it will not from thence follow that
the true guidance of the Spirit is uncertain, or ought not to be followed, no
more than it will follow that the Sun shows not light, because a blind man,
or one who wilfully shuts his Eyes, falls into a ditch at Noon day for want of
Light: or that no words are spoken because a deaf man hears them not: or that a
Garden full of fragrant Flowers has no sweet smell, because he that has lost
his smelling, does not savor it; the fault then is in the Organ, and not in
the Object.

All these mistakes therefore are to be ascribed to the weakness or wickedness
of men, and not to that Holy Spirit. Such as bend themselves most against this
certain and infallible Testimony of the Spirit, use commonly to allege the
example of the old Gnostics, and the late monstrous and mischievous actings
of the Anabaptists of Munster, all which touches us nothing at all, neither
weakens a whit our most true Doctrine. Wherefore as a most sure Bullwark
against such kind of assaults, was subjoyned that other part of our
Proposition, thus, Moreover these Divine and inward Revelations which we
establish, as absolutely necessary for the founding of the true Faith, as they
do not, so neither can they at any time contradict the Scriptures Testimony, or
found Reason.

Besides the intrinsic and undoubted Truth of this assertion, we can boldly
affirm it, from our certain and blessed Experience. For this Spirit never
deceived us, never acted nor moved us to any thing that was amiss, but is clear
and manifest in its Revelations, which are evidently discerned of us, as we
wait in that pure and undefiled Light of God (that proper and fit Organ) in
which they are received. Therefore if any reason after this manner,

( That because some wicked, ungodly, devilish men have committed wicked
actions, and have yet more wickedly asserted, that they were led into these
things by the Spirit of God.

Therefore, no man ought to lean to the Spirit of God, or seek to be led by it.)

I utterly deny the consequence of this Proposition, which, were it to be
received as true, then would all faith in God, and hope of Salvation become
uncertain, and the Christian Religion be turned into mere Skepticism. For after
the same manner I might reason thus,

Because Eve was deceived by the lying of the Serpent:

Therefore she ought not to have trusted to the promise of God.

Because the old World was deluded by evil Spirits:

Therefore ought neither Noah, nor Abraham, nor Moses, to have trusted the
Spirit of the Lord.

Because a lying Spirit spoke through the four hundred Prophets, that persuaded
Achab to go up and fight at Ramoth Gilead:

Therefore the Testimony of the true Spirit of Micajah was uncertain and
dangerous to be followed.

Because there were seducing Spirits crept into the Church of old:

Therefore it was not good, or uncertain, to follow the Anointing, which taught
all things, and is Truth, and no Lie.

Who dare say that this is a necessary consequence? Moreover, not only the
Faith of the Saints, and Church of God of old, is hereby rendered uncertain,
but also the Faith of all sorts of Christians now, is liable to the like
hazard; even of those, who seek a foundation for their Faith elsewhere, than
from the Spirit. For I shall prove by an inevitable argument ab incommodo, i.
e. from the inconveniency of it, that if the Spirit be not to be followed upon
that account, and that men may not depend upon it as their Guide, because some,
while pretending thereunto commit great evils; that then nor Tradition, nor the
Scriptures, nor Reason, which the Papists, Protestants, and Socinians, do
respectively make the rule of their Faith, are any whit more certain. The
Romanists reckon it an error to celebrate Easter any other ways than that
Church does. This can only be decided by Tradition. And yet the Greek Church,
which equally lays claim to Tradition with her self, does it otherwise. Yea
so little effectual is Tradition to decide the case, that Polycarpus the
Disciple of John, and Anicetus the Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesi. lib.
5. cap. 26.
who immediately succeeded them (according to whose example both sides
concluded the question ought to be decided) could not agree. Here of necessity
one behoved to err, and that following Tradition. Would the Papists now judge we
dealt fairly by them, if we should thence aver, that Tradition is not to be
regarded* Besides, in a matter of far greater importance, the same difficulty
will occur, to wit, in the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, for many do affirm,
and that by Tradition, that in the First Six Hundred Years the Roman Prelates
never assumed the Title of Universal Shepherd, nor were acknowledged as such.
And, as that which altogether overturneth this presidency, there are that
alledg, and that from Tradition also, that Peter never saw Rome; and that
therefore the Bishop of Rome cannot be his Successor. Conc. Flor. Sess. 5.
decreto quodam Concl. Ephesians. Act. 6. Sess. 11. and 12. Council. Flor. Sess.
18.20. Conc. Flor. Sess. 21. p. 480. and seqq.
Would ye Romanists think this sound reasoning, to say, as ye do.

Many have been deceived, and erred grievously, in trusting to Tradition.

Therefore we ought to reject all Traditions, yea even those by which we affirm
the contrary, and as we think prove the Truth.

Lastly, in the Council of Florence, the chief Doctors of the Romish and Greek
Churches, did debate whole Sessions long, concerning the Interpretation of one
Sentence of the Council of Ephesus, and of Epiphanius, and Basilius, neither
could they ever agree about it.

Secondly as to the Scripture, the same difficulty occurreth: the Lutherans
affirm they believe Consubstantiation, by the Scripture, which they Calvinists
deny, as that which they say according to the same Scripture, is a gross error.
The Calvinists again affirm absolute reprobation, which the Arminians deny,
affirming the contrary, wherein both affirm themselves to be ruled by the
Scripture, and Reason, in the matter; should I argue thus then to the
Calvinists?

Here the Lutherans and Arminians grossly err, by following the Scripture.

Therefore the Scripture is not a good nor certain Rule, and e contra.

Would either of them accept of this Reasoning as good and sound? What shall I
say of the Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independants, and Anabaptists of Great
Britain, who are continually buffeting one another with the Scripture? To whom
the same Argument might be alleged, though they do all unanimously acknowledge
it to be the Rule.

And Thirdly, As to Reason, I shall not need to say much, from whence comes all
the Controversies, Contentions and Debates in the World, but because every man
thinks he follows right Reason? Hence of old came the Jangles betwixt the
Stoics, Platonists, Peripateticks, Pythagorians, and Cynicks, as of late
betwixt the Aristotelians, Cartesians, and other Naturalists: Can it be thence
inferred, or will the Socinians, those great Reasoners, allow us to conclude,
because many, and that very wise men, have erred, by following (as they
supposed) their Reason, and that with what diligence, care and industry they
could, to find out the Truth, that therefore no man ought to make use of it at
all, nor be positive in what he knows certainly to be rational. And thus far as
to Opinion, the same uncertainty is no less incident unto those other
Principles.

. XIV. But if we come to Practices, though I confess, I do with my whole heart
abhor and detest those wild Practices, which are written, concerning the
Anabaptists of Munster; I am bold to say as bad if not worse things, have been
committed by those that lean to Tradition, Scripture and Reason, wherein also
they have averred themselves to have been authorized by these Rules. I need but
mention all the Tumults, Seditions, and horrible Bloodshed, wherewith Europe
has been afflicted these diverse Ages; in which Papists against Papists,
Calvanists against Calvanists, Lutherans against Lutherans, and Papists
assiisted by Protestants, against other Protestants assisted by Papists, have
miserably shed one another Blood, hireing and forcing men to kill one another,
who were ignorant of the Quarrel, and strangers to one another: All, mean
while, pretending Reason for so doing, and pleading the lawfulness of it from
Scripture.

For what have the Papists pretended for their many Massacres, acted as well in
France as elsewhere, but Tradition, Scripture and Reason? Did they not say,
that Reason persuaded them, Tradition allowed them, and Scripture commanded
them to persecute, destroy, and burn Heretics, such as denied this plain
Scripture, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body? And are not the Protestants
assenting to this bloodshed? who assert the same thing, and encourage them, by
burning and banishing, while their brethren are so treated for the same cause.
Are not the Islands of great Britain and Ireland (yea and all the Christian
world) a lively example hereof, which were diverse years together as a Theater
of Blood; where many lost their lives, and numbers of Families were utterly
destroyed, and ruined? For all which, no other cause was principally given,
than the precepts of the Scripture. If we then compare these actings, with
those of Munster, we shall not find great difference; for both affirmed and
pretended they were called, and that it was lawful to Kill, Burn, and Destroy
the Wicked. We must Kill all the Wicked, said those Anabaptists, that we that
are the Saints, may possess the Earth. We must burn obstinate Heretics, say
the Papists, that the holy Church of Rome may be purged of rotten Members, and
may live in peace. We must cut off seducing Separatists, say the Prelatick
Protestants, who trouble the peace of the Church, and refuse the Divine
Hierarchy and religious Ceremonies thereof; we must kill, say the Calvinistick
Presbyterians, the profane malignants, who accuse the Holy Consistorical and
Presbyterian Government, and seek to defend the Popish and Prelatick Hierarchy;
as also those other Sectarys, that trouble the peace of our Church. What
difference I pray thee, impartial Reader, see thou betwixt these?

If it be said, The Anabaptists went without, and against the authority of the
Magistrate, so did not the other.

I might easily refute, by alleging the mutual Testimonies of these Sects
against one another. The behavior of the Papists toward Henry the third and
fourth of France; Their designs upon James the sixth, in the Gunpowder
Treason; as also their Principle of the Popes powder to depose Kings, for the
cause of Heresy, and to absolve their subjects from their Oath, and give them
to others: proves it against them.

And as to the Protestants, how much their actions differ from those other
above mentioned, may be seen by the many Conspiracies and Tumults, which they
have been active in, both in Scotland and England, and which they have acted
within these hundred years in diverse Towns and Provinces of the Netherlands.
Have they not often times sought, not only from the Popish Magistrates, but
even from those that had begun to reform, or that had given them some liberty
of exercising their Religion, that they might only be permitted, without
trouble or hinderance, to exercise their Religion, promising they would not
hinder or molest the Papists, in the exercise of theirs? and yet did they not
on the Contrary, so soon as they had power, trouble and abuse these
Fellow-Citizens, and turn them out of the City, and which is worse, even such
who together with them, had forsaken the Popish religion? Did they not these
things in many places, against the mind of the Magistrates? Have they not
publicly with contumelious Speeches, assaulted their Magistrates, from whom
they had but just before sought and obtained the free exercise of their
Religion? Representing them so soon as they opposed themselves to their
Hierarchy, as if they regarded neither God nor Religion? Have they not by
violent hands possessed themselves of the Popish Churches; so called, or by
force against the Magistrates mind taken them away? Have they not turned out of
their Office and Authority whole Councils of Magistrates, under pretense that
they were addicted to Popery? Which Popish Magistrates nevertheless they did
but a little before acknowledge to be ordained by God, affirming themselves
obliged to yield them obedience and subjection, not only for fear, but for
Conscience sake, to whom moreover the very Preachers and Overseers of the
reformed Church, had willingly sworn fidelity: and yet afterward have they not
said, that the people is bound to force a wicked Prince to the observation of
God's Word? There are many other instances of this kind to be found in their
Histories, not to mention many worse things, which we know to have been acted
in our time, and which for brevity's sake I pass by.

I might say much of the Lutherans, whose tumultuous actions against their
Magistrates, not professing the Lutheran profession, are testified of by
several Historians worthy of credit. Among others I shall propose only one
example to the Readers consideration, which fell out at Berline, in the year
1615. Where the seditious multitude of the Lutheran Citizens being stirred up,
by the daily clamours of their Preachers, did not only violently take up the
Houses of the reformed Teachers, overturn their libraries, and spoil their
furniture; but also with reproachful words, yea and with stones, assaulted the
Marquess of Brandeburgh the Elector's brother, while he sought by smooth words
to quiet the fury of the multitude: they killed ten of his Guard, scarcely
sparing himself, who at last by flight, escaped out of their hands.

All which sufficiently declares, that the concurrence of the Magistrate does
not alter their Principles, but only their method of procedure. So that for my
own part, I see no difference betwixt the actings of those of Munster, and
these others, whereof the one pretended to be led by the Spirit, the other by
Tradition, Scripture, and Reason, save this that the former were rash, heady,
and foolish, in their proceedings, and therefore were the sooner brought to
nothing, and so into contempt and derision? But the other being more Politic
and wise in their Generation, held it out longer, and so have authorized their
wickedness more, with seeming Authority of Law and Reason. But both their
actings being equally evil, the difference appears to me to be only like that;
which is betwixt a simple silly Thief, that is easily catched, and hanged
without any more ado, and a Company of resolute bold Robbers, who being better
guarded, tho their offense be nothing less, yet by violence, do, to evite the
danger, force their Masters to give them good terms.

From all which then it evidently follows, that they argue very ill, that
despise and reject any Principle, because Men, pretending to be led by it, do
evil, in case it be not the natural and consequential tendency of that
principle, to lead unto those things that are evil.

Again, It does follow from what is above asserted, that if the Spirit be to be
rejected upon this account, all these other principles ought on the same
account to be rejected. And for my part, as I have never a whit the lower
esteem of the blessed Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, nor do the less respect
any solid Tradition, that is answerable and according to Truth, neither at all
despise Reason, that noble and excellent faculty of the mind; because wicked
men have abused the name of them, to cover their wickedness, and deceive the
simple; So would I not have any reject or diffide the certainty of that
unerring Spirit, which God has given his Children, as that which can alone
guide them into all Truth, because some have falsely pretended to it.

XV. And because the Spirit of God is the Fountain of all Truth and sound
Reason, therefore we have well said, that it cannot contradict neither the
Testimony of the Scripture, nor right Reason: yet (as the Proposition it self
concludes, to whose last part I now come) it will not from hence follow, that
these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the examination either of the
outward Testimony of Scripture, or of the humane or natural reason of Man, as
to a more noble and certain rule and touchstone; for the Divine Revelation and
inward Illumination is that, which is evident by it self, forcing the
wel-distosed understanding, and irresistibly moving it to assent, by its own
evidence and clearness, even as the common Principles of Natural Truths do bow
the mind to a natural assent.

He that denies this part of the Proposition, must needs affirm, that the
Spirit of God, neither can nor ever has manifested it self to Man, without the
Scripture or a distinct discursion of Reason: or that the Efficacy of this
Supernatural Principle working upon the Souls of Men, is less evident, then
natural principles in their common Operations both which are false.

For First, through all the Scriptures we may observe, that the manifestation
and revelation of God by his Spirit, to the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
was immediate and objective, as is above proved, which they did not examine by
any other principle but their own evidence and clearness.

Secondly, to say that the Spirit of God has less evidence upon the mind of
Man, then natural principles have, is to have too mean and low thoughts of it.
How comes David to invite us, to taste and see that God is good, if this cannot
be felt and tasted? This were enough to overturn the faith and assurance of all
the Saints, both now and of old. How came Paul to be persuaded, that nothing
could separate him from the love of God, but by evidence and clearness, which
the Spirit of God gave him? The Apostle John who knew well, wherein the
certainty of Faith consisted, judged it no ways absurd, without further
argument; to ascribe his knowledge and assurance, and that of all the Saints,
hereunto in these words, Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. and again, 5, 6. it is the
Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth.

Observe the reason brought by him, because the Spirit is Truth. Of whose
certainty and infallibility I have heretofore spoken; We then trust to and
confide in this Spirit, because we know, and certainly believe, that it can
only lead us a right, and never mis-lead us, and from this certain confidence,
it is that we affirm, that no revelation coming from it, can ever contradict
the Scriptures Testimony nor right Reason: not as making this a more certain
rule to our selves, but as condescending to such, who not discerning the
revelations of the Spirit, as they proceed purely from God, will try them by
these mediums. Yet those that have the Spiritual senses, and can savor the
things of the Spirit as it were in prima instantia, i. e. at the first blush,
can discern them without, or before they apply them either to Scripture, or
Reason. Just as a good Astronomer can calculate an eclipse infallibly, by which
he can conclude, if the order of Nature continue; and some strange and
unnatural revolution interveen not, there will be an eclipse of the Sun, or
Moon, such a day, and such an hour: yet can he not persuade an ignorant rustic
of this, until he visibly see it. So also a Mathematician can infallibly know
by the Rules of Art, that the three sides of a right triangle are equal to two
right angles, yea can know them more certainly, than any man by measure. And
some geometrical demonstrations are by all acknowledged to be infallible, which
can be scarcely discerned or proved by the Senses; yet if a Geometer be at the
pains, to certify some ignorant man concerning the certainty of his Art, by
condescending to measure it, and make it obvious to his senses, it will not
hence follow, that that measuring is so certain, as the demonstration it self;
or that the demonstration would be uncertain without.

XVI. But to make an end, I shall add one argument to prove, that this inward
Immediate objective Revelation, which we have pleaded for all along, is the
only, sure, certain, and unmovable foundation of all Christian faith; which
argument when well weighed, I hope will have weight with all sorts of
Christians, and it is this.

That which all Professors of Christianity, of whatsoever kind are forced
ultimately to recur unto, when pressed to the last. That for and because of
which all other foundations are recommended and accounted worthy to be
believed; and without which they are granted to be of no weight at all, must
needs be the only most true, certain, and unmovable foundation of all Christian
Faith:

But inward immediate objective revelation by the Spirit, is that which all
Professors of Christianity of whatsoever kind are forced ultimately to recur
unto, etc.

Therefore, etc.

The Proposition is so evident, that it will not be denied. The assumption
shall be proved by parts.

And first, as to Papists, they place their foundation in the judgment of the
Church and Tradition. If we press them to say, why they believe as the Church
does? Their answer is, because the Church is always led by the infallible
Spirit. So here the leading of the Spirit is the utmost foundation. Again, If
we ask them why we ought to trust Tradition? They answer, Because these
Traditions were delivered us by the Doctors and Fathers of the Church, which
Doctors and Fathers by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost commended the Church to
observe them. Here again all ends in the Revelation of the Spirit.

And for the Protestants and Socinians, both which acknowledge the Scriptures to
be the foundation and rule of their Faith; the one is subjectively influenced
by the Spirit of God, to use them; the other, as manageing them with and by
their own Reason. Ask both, or either of them, why they trust in the
Scriptures, and take them to be their Rule? Their answer is, Because we have in
them, the mind of God delivered unto us, by those, to whom these things were
inwardly, immediately, and objectively revealed by the Spirit of God. And not
because this or that man wrote them, but because the Spirit of God dictated
them.

It is strange then that men should render that so uncertain and dangerous to
follow, upon which alone the certain ground and foundation of their own faith
is Built. Or that they should shut themselves out from that Holy Fellowship
with God, which only is enjoyed in the Spirit, in which we are commanded, both
to walk and live.

If any reading these things, find themselves moved by the strength of these
Scripture arguments to assent, and believe such Revelations necessary, and yet
find themselves strangers to them, which as I observed in the beginning is the
cause, that this is so much gainsaid and contradicted. Let them know that it
is not, because it is ceased to become the privilege of every Christian, that
they do not feel it, but rather because they are not so much Christians by
Nature as by Name: and let such know that the secret Light which shines in the
heart, and reproves unrighteousness, is the small beginnings of the Revelation
of God's Spirit, which was first sent into the world to reprove it of Sin, John
16.8. And as by forsaking Iniquity, thou come to be acquainted with that
Heavenly voice in thy heart, thou shall feel, as the Old man, the Natural man,
that savoureth not the things of God's Kingdom, is put off, with his evil and
corrupt affections and Lusts, I say thou shall feel the New Man, the Spiritual
birth, and Babe raised, which has its Spiritual Senses, and can see, feel,
taste, handle, and smell the things of the Spirit: but till then, the knowledge
of things Spiritual is but as an historical Faith, but as the description of
the Light of the Sun, or of curious Colors to a blind man; who, though of the
largest capacity, cannot so well understand it, by the most acute and lively
description, as a child can by seeing them. So neither can the natural man of
the large capacity, by the best words, even Scripture words so well understand
the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, as the least and weakest child who tastes
them, by having them revealed inward and objectively, by the Spirit.

Wait then for this, in the small Revelation of that pure Light, which first
reveals things more known, and as thou becom'st fitted for it, thou shall
receive more and more, and by a living experience easily refute their
Ignorance, who ask, how do thou know that thou art acted by the Spirit of
God? which will appear to thee a question no less ridiculous, then to ask one,
whose eyes are open, how he knows the Sun shines at Noonday; and though this
be the surest and certainest way, to answer all objections, yet by what is
above written, it may appear, that the mouths of all such opposers as deny this
Doctrine, may be shut by unquestionable and unanswerable reasons.

The Third Proposition, Concerning the Scriptures.
From these Revelations of the Spirit of God to the Saints have proceeded the
Scriptures of Truth, which contain,

I. A faithful historical account of the actings of Gods People in diverse ages,
with many singular and remarkable Providence attending them.

II. A Prophetical account of several things, whereof some are already past,
and some yet to come.

III. A full and ample account of all the chief Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, held forth in diverse precious Declarations, Exhortotions, and
Sentences, which, by the moving of God's Spirit, were at several times, and
upon sundry occasions, spoken and written unto some Churches, and their Pastors.

Nevertheless, because they are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the
Fountain it self, therefore they are not to be esteemed the principal ground of
all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the adequate, primary Rule of Faith and
manners. Yet, because they give a true and faithful Testimony of the first
Foundation, they are and may be esteemed, a secondary rule, subordinate to the
Spirit, from which they have all their excellency and certainty: for, as by the
inward Testimony of the Spirit we do alone truly know them, so they testify,
that the Spirit is that Guide by which the Saints are led into all Truth;
therefore, according to the Scriptures, John 16. verse 13. Romans 8. verse 14,
the Spirit is the First and Principal Leader. Seeing then that we do therefore
receive and believe the Scriptures, because they proceeded from the Spirit, for
the very same reason, is the Spirit more Originally and Principally the Rule,
according to that received Maxim in the Schools, Propter quod unumquodque est
tale, iliud ipsum est magis tale; That for which a thing is such, the thing it
self is more such.

. I. THe former part of this Proposition, though it needs no Apology for it,
yet it is a good Apology for us, and will help to sweep away that, among many
other Calumnys, wherewith we are often loaded, as if we were vilifiers and
deniers of the Scriptures, for in that which we affirm of them, it does appear
at what high rate we value them, accounting them without all deceit or
equivocation, the most excellent Writings in the World, to which not only no
other Writings are to be preferred, but even in diverse respects not comparable
thereunto. For, as we freely acknowledge, that their Authority does not depend
upon the approbation or Canons of any Church or Assembly, so neither can we
subject them to the fallen, corrupt, and defiled reason of man; and therein as we
do freely agree with the Protestants, against the error of the Romanists; so on
the other hand, we cannot go the length of such Protestants, as make their
Authority to depend upon any virtue, or power, that is in the Writings
themselves; but we desire to ascribe all to that Spirit, from which they
proceeded.

We confess indeed, there wants not a Majesty in the Style, a coherence in the
parts, a good scope in the whole, but seeing these things are not discerned by
the Natural, but only by the Spiritual man, it is the Spirit of God that must
give us that belief of the Scriptures, which may satisfy our Consciences.
Therefore the chiefest among Protestants, both in their particular Writings,
and public Confessions, are forced to acknowledge this.

Hence Calvin, though he says he is able to prove that if there be a God in
Heaven, these writings have proceeded from him, yet he concludes another
knowledge to be necessary: Insti. lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect. 4.

But, if (says he) we respect the Consciences, that they be not daily molested
with doubts, and they stick not at every Scruple, it is requisite that this
persuasion which we speak of, be taken higher than humane Reason, Judgment, or
conjectures, to wit, from the secret Testimony of the Holy Spirit. And again,
To those that ask that we prove unto them, by Reason, that Moses and the
Prophets were Inspired of God to speak, I answer, that the Testimony of the
Holy Spirit is more excellent than all reason. And again, let this remain a
firm Truth, that he only whom the Holy Ghost has persuaded, can repose himself
on the Scripture with a true certainty. And lastly, this then is a judgment,
which cannot be begotten, but by a Heavenly Revelation, etc.

The same is also affirmed in the first public Confession of the French
Churches, published in the Year 1559. Art. 4. We know these books to be
Canonick, and the most certain Rule of our Faith, not so much by the common
accord and consent of the Church, as by the Testimony and inward persuasion of
the Holy Spirit.

Thus also in the 5 Article of the Confession of faith of the Churches of
Holland, confirmed by the Synod of Dort. We receive these books only, for holy
and canonick, not so much because the Church receives and approves them, as
because the Spirit of God renders witness in our hearts, that they are of God.

And lastly, The Divines, so called, at Westminster, who began to be afraid of,
and guard against the Testimony of the Spirit, because they perceived a
dispensation beyond that, which they were under, beginning to dawn, and to
eclipse them, yet could they not get by this, tho they have laid it down
neither so clearly, distinctly, nor honestly, as they that went before. It is
in these words, chap. 1. sect. 5. Nevertheless, our full persuasion and
assurance of the infallible Truth thereof, is from the inward work of the Holy
Spirit, bearing witness by and with the Word in our heart.

By all which it appears, how necessary it is, to seek the certainty of the
Scriptures, from the Spirit; and no where else. The infinite janglings and
endless contests of those, that seek their authority elsewhere, do witness to
the Truth hereof.

Council. Laod. can. 59. in cod. Ecc. 163. Council. Laod. held in the Year 364.
excluded from the canon Eccl. the Wisdom of Solomon Judith, Tobias, the
Maccabees, which the Council of Carthage held in the Year 399 received.
For the Ancients themselves even of the first Centuries, were not as one among
themselves, concerning them; while some of them rejected Books, which we
approve, and others of them approved those which some of us reject. It is not
unknown to such as are in the least acquainted with Antiquity, what great
contests are, concerning the second Epistle of Peter, that of James, the second
and third of John, and the Revelations, which many even very Ancient, deny to
have been written by the beloved Disciple and Brother of James, but by another
of that name. What should then become of Christians, if they had not received
that Spirit, and those Spiritual senses, by which they know how to discern the
true from the false. It Is the privilege of Christ's Sheep indeed, that they
hear his voice, and refuse that of a stranger, which privilege being taken
away, we are left a prey to all manner of wolves.

II. Tho then we do acknowledge the Scriptures to be a very heavenly and Divine
writing, the use of them to be a very comfortable and necessary to the Church
of Christ, and that we also admire, and give praise to the Lord, for his
wonderful Providence, in preserving these writings, so pure and uncorrupted, as
we have them through so long a night of Apostasy, to be a testimony of his
Truth, against the wickedness and abominations even of these, whom he made
instrumental in preserving them; so that they have kept them to be a witness
against themselves, yet we may not call them the principal fountain of all
Truth and knowledge, nor yet the first adequate rule of Faith, and manners,
because the principal fountain of Truth must be the Truth it self, i. e. that
whose certainty and authority depends not upon another. When we doubt of the
streams of any river or flood, we recur to the fountain it self, and having
found it, there we sist, we can go no further, because there it springs out of
the bowels of the Earth, which are inscrutable. Even so the writing and sayings
of all men we must bring to the Word of God, I mean the Eternal Word, and if
they agree hereunto, we stand there for this Word always proceeds, and does
eternally proceed from God, in and by which, the unsearchable wisdom of God,
and unsearchable counsel, and will conceived in the heart of God, is revealed
unto us; that then the Scripture is not the principal ground of faith and
knowledge, as it appears by what is above spoken, so it is provided in the
latter part of the Proposition, which being reduced to an argument runs thus.

That the certainty and authority whereof depends upon another, and which is
received as Truth, because of its proceeding from another, is not to he
accounted the principal ground and origin of all Truth and knowledge.

But the Scriptures authority and certainty depends upon the Spirit, by which
they were dictated, and the reason why they were received, as Truth, is,
because they proceeded from the Spirit:

Therefore they are not the principal ground of Truth.

To confirm this argument, I added the School Maxim Propter quod unumquodque
est tales, illud ipsum est magis tale. Which Maxim, tho I confess it does not
hold universally, in all things, yet in this it both does and will very well
hold, as by applying it, as we have above intimated, will appear.

The same argument will hold, as to the other branch of the position, That it
is not the primary adequade rule of faith and manners, thus,

That, which is not the rule of my faith in believing the Scriptures
themselves, is not the primary adequate rule of faith and manners:

But the Scripture is not, nor can it be the rule of that faith, by which I
believe them, etc.

Therefore, etc.

But as to this part, we shall produce diverse arguments hereafter, as to what
is affirmed, That the Spirit, and not the Scriptures, is the rule, it is
largely handled in the former proposition, the sum whereof I shall subsume in
one argument, thus,

If by the Spirit we can only come to the true knowledge of God; If by the
Spirit we be to be led into all truth, and so be taught of all things, Then the
Spirit, and not the Scriptures, is the foundation and ground of all Truth, and
knowledge, and the primary rule of faith and manners:

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

Next, the very nature of the Gospel it self declares, that the Scriptures
cannot be the only and chief rule of Christians, else there should be no
difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel. As from the nature of the New
Covenant, by diverse Scriptures described in the former Proposition is proved.

But besides those, which are before mentioned, herein does the Law and the
Gospel differ, in that the Law being outwardly written, brings under
condemnation, but has not life in it to save, whereas the Gospel as it
declares and makes manifest the evil, so it being an inward powerful thing also
gives power to obey, and deliver from the evil. Hence it is called (...), which
is glad tidings, the Law or Letter, which is without us, kills: but the Gospel,
which is the inward Spiritual Law, gives life for it consists not so much in
words, as in virtue. Wherefore such as comes to know it, and be acquainted with
it, come to feel greater power over their iniquities, than all outward Laws or
Rules can give them. Hence the Apostle concludes. Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you. For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. This Grace
then, that is inward, and not an outward Law, is to be the Rule of Christians:
hereunto the Apostle commends the Elders of the Church, saying, Acts 20.32. And
now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all those that are
sanctified. He does not commend them here to outward laws, or writings; but to
the Word of Grace, which is inward, even the Spiritual Law, which makes free,
as he elsewhere affirms, Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death. This Spiritual Law is
that which the Apostle declares he preached and directed people unto, which was
not outward, as Romans 10.8. is manifest, where distinguishing it from the Law,
he says, The Word is nigh thee, in thy heart and in thy mouth, and this is the
Word of Faith which we preach. From what is above said, I argue thus,

The principal Rule of Christians under the Gospel, is not an outward letter,
nor law outwardly written and delivered, but an inward Spiritual Law, engraven
in the heart, the Law of the Spirit of Life, the Word, that is nigh in the
heart and in the mouth.

But the letter of the Scripture is outward, of it self a dead things, a mere
declaration of good things, but not the things themselves.

Therefore it is not, nor can be the chief or principle rule of Christians.

. III. Thirdly, That which is given to Christians for a Rule and Guide, must
needs be so full, as it may clearly and distinctly guide and order them in all
things and occurences that may fall out.

But in that there are many hundred of things, with a regard to their
circumstances, particular Christians may be concerned in, for which there can
be no particular Rule had in the Scriptures:

Therefore the Scriptures cannot be a Rule to them.

I shall give an instance in two or three particulars, for to prove this
Proposition. It is not to be doubted but some men are particularly called to
some particular Services, there being not found in which, though the act be no
general positive duty, yet in so far as it may be required of them, is a great
sin to omit, for as much God is zealous of his Glory, and every act of
Disobedience to his will manifested, is enough not only to hinder one greatly
from that Comfort and inward Grace, which otherwise they might have, but also
brings Condemnation.

As for instance, Some are called to the Ministry of the Word, Paul says,
there was a necessity upon him to preach the Gospel, woe unto me if I preach not.

If it be necessary that there be now Ministers of the Church, as well as then,
then there is the same necessity upon some more than upon others, to occupy
this place, which necessity, as it may be incumbent upon particular persons,
the Scripture neither does nor can declare.

If it be said, that the qualifications of a Minister are found in the
Scripture, and by applying these qualifications to my self, I may know whether
I be fit for such a place or no.

I answer, The qualifications of a Bishop or Minister, as they are mentioned,
both in the Epistle to Tim. and Tit. are such as may be found in a private
Christian, yea which ought in some measure to be in every true Christian? so
that that gives a man no certainty, every pacity to an office gives me not a
sufficient call to it.

Next again, By what Rule shall I judge if I be so qualified? how do I know that
I am sober, meek, holy, harmless? Is not the Testimony of the Spirit in my
Conscience, that, which must assure me hereof? And, suppose that I was
quallified, and called, yet what Scripture Rule shall inform me, whether it be
my duty to preach in this or that place, in France or England, Holland or
Germany? whether I shall take up my Time in Confirming the Faithful, reclaiming
Heretics, or Converting Infidels, as also in Writing Epistles to this or that
Church?

The general Rules of the Scripture, viz. to be diligent in my duty, to do all
to the Glory of God, and for the good of his Church, can give me no light in
this thing. Seeing two different things may both have a respect to that way,
yet may I commit a great error and offense, in doing the one, when I am called
to the other. If Paul, when his Face was turned by the Lord toward Jerusalem,
had gone back to Achaia, or Macedonia, he might have supposed he could have
done God more acceptable service, in Preaching and Confirming the Churches,
than in being shut up in Prison in Judea; but would God have been pleased
herewith? Nay certainly. Obedience is better than Sacrifice, and it is not our
doing that which is good simply that pleases God, but that good which he will
thus to do. Every Member has its particular place in the Body, as the Apostle
shows, 1 Cor. 12. If then, I being the foot should offer to exercise the
office of the hand, or being the hand, that of the tongue, my service would be
troublesome and not acceptable; and instead of helping the Body I should make a
Schism in it. So that, that which is good for another to do, may be sinful to
me: for, as Masters will have their Servants to obey them according to their
good pleasure, not only in blindly doing that which may seem to them to tend to
their Masters profit; whereby it may chance (the Master having business both in
the field and in the house) that the Servant that knows not his Masters will,
may go to the field, when it is the mind of the Master he should stay and do
the business of the house. Would not this Servant then deserve a reproof for
not answering his Master's mind? And what Master is so sottish and careless, as
having many Servants, leaves them in such disorder, as not to assign each his
particular station, and not only the general term of doing that which is
profitable, which would leave them in various doubts, and no doubt end in
confusion?

Shall we then dare to ascribe unto Christ, in the ordering of his Church and
Servants, that which in man might justly be accounted disorder and confusion;
The Apostle shows this distinction well, Romans c. 12. v. 6, 8. Having then
Gifts differing according to the Grace, that is given us, whether Prophecy, let
us Prophecy according to the proportion of Faith, or Ministry, let us wait on
our Ministrings, or he, that teaches, on teaching, or he that exhorts, on
exhortation. Now what Scripture Rule shows me, that I ought to exhort rather
than prophecy? or to minister rather than teach? Surely none at all. Many more
difficulties of this kind occur in the Life of a Christian.

Moreover, that which of all things is most needful for him to know, to wit,
whether he really be in the Faith, and an heir of Salvation, or no, the
Scripture can give him no certainty in, neither can it be a Rule to him. That
this knowledge is exceeding desirable and comfortable, all do unanimously
acknowledge, besides that it is especially commanded, 2 Cor. 13. v. 5. Examine
your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your selves. Know ye not your own
selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates? and 2 Pet.
1.10. Wherefore the rather Brethren, give all diligence to make your calling
and election sure. Now I say, what Scripture Rule can assure me, that I have
true Faith? that my calling and election is sure?

If it be said, by comparing the Scripture marks of true faith with mine?

I demand, wherewith shall I make this observation? what shall ascertain me
that I am not mistaken? It cannot be the Scripture: That Is the matter under
debate.

If it be said, My own Heart;

How unfit a judge is it in its own case? and how like to be partial, especially
if it be yet unrenewed? Does not the Scripture say, that it is deceitful above
all things? I find the promises, I find the threatenings in the Scripture, but
who tells me that the one belongs to me, more than the other? The Scripture
gives me a mere declaration of these things, but makes no application; so that
the assumption must be of my own making: thus, as for example, I find this
Proposition in the Scripture;

He that believes, shall be saved: thence I draw this assumption.

But I, Robert believe:

Therefore I shall be saved.

The minor is of mine own making, not expressed in the Scripture, and so a
humane conclusion, not a Divine position, so that by my Faith and assurance
here, is not built upon a Scripture position, but upon a humane Principle;
which unless I be sure of elsewhere, the Scripture gives me no certainty in the
matter.

Again, if I should pursue the argument further, and seek a new medium out of
the Scripture, the same difficulty would occur thus:

He, that has the true and certain marks of true Faith, has true Faith:

But I have those marks:

Therefore I have true Faith.

For the assumption is still here of my own making, and is not found in the
Scriptures, and by consequence the conclusion can be no better, since it still
follows the weaker proposition. This is indeed so pungent, that the best of
Protestants, who plead for this assurance, ascribe it to the inward Testimony
of the Spirit (as Calvin in that large citation, cited in the former
Proposition) so that, not to seek further into the Writings of the primitive
Protestants, which are full of such expressions, even the Westminster
confession of Faith affirms, chap. 18. sect. 12. This certainty is not bear
conjecture and probable persuasion grounded upon fallible hope, but an
infallible assurance of Faith, founded upon the Divine Truth of the promise of
Salvation, the inward evidences of these Graces, unto which these promises are
made, the Testimony of the Spirit of Adoption, witnessing to our Spirits, that
we are the Children of God, which Spirit is the earnest of our Inheritance,
whereby we are sealed to the day of Redemption.

Moreover, the Scripture it self, wherein we are so earnestly pressed to seek
after this Assurance, does not at all affirm it self a rule sufficient to give
it, but wholly ascribes it to the Spirit, as Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, 1 John 4.13.
Hereby do we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit; and 5.6. And it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the
Spirit is truth.

. IV. Lastly, That cannot be the only principle nor chief rule, which does not
universally reach every individual, that needs it to produce the necessary
effect, and from the use of which (either by some innocent and sinless defect,
or natural, yet harmless and blameless imperfection) many who are within the
compass of the visible Church, and may without absurdity, yea with great
probability be accounted often he Elect) are necessarily excluded, and that
either wholly, or at least from the immediate use thereof. But it so falls out
frequently concerning the Scriptures, in the case of deaf People, Children and
Idiots, who can by no means have the benefit of the Scriptures. Shall we then
affirm that they are without any rule to Godward, or that they are all damned?
As such an Opinion is in it self very absurd, and inconsistent both with the
Justice and Mercy of God, so I know no sound reason can be alleged for it. Now
if we may suppose any such to be under the New Covenant Dispensation, as I know
none will deny, but that we may suppose it without any absurdity, we cannot
suppose them without some rule and means of knowledge, seeing it is expressly
affirmed, They shall all be taught of God, Joh. 6.45. And they shall know me
from the least to the greatest, Heb. 8.11. But secondly, Though we were rid of
this difficulty, how many illeterate and yet good men, are there in the Church
of God, who cannot read a Letter in their own Mothers Tongue? Which
imperfection, though it be inconvenient, I cannot tell whether we may safely
affirm it to be sinful; these can have no immediate Knowledge of the rule of
their Faith; So their Faith must needs depend upon the credit of other men's
Reading, or relating it unto them, where either the altering, adding or
omitting of a little word may be a foundation in the poor hearer, of a very
dangerous mistake; whereby he may either continue in an iniquity ignorantly, or
believe a lie confidently. As for Example, the Papists in all their Catechisms
and public Exercises of Examination, toward the People, have boldly cut away
the second Command, because it seems so expressly to hit against their Adoration
and use of Images. Whereas many of these People, in whom by this omission, this
false Opinion is fostered, are under a simple impossibility, or at least a very
great difficulty, to be outwardly informed of this abuse. But further, suppose
all could read the Scriptures in their own Language, where is there one of a
thousand that has that through knowledge of the original Languages, in which
they are written, so as in that respect immediately to receive the benefit of
them? Must not all these here depend upon the honesty and faithfulness of the
Interpreters? Which how uncertain it is for a man to build his Faith upon, the
many Corrections, Amendments, and various Essays, which even among Protestants
have been used, whereof the latter has constantly blamed and corrected the
former, as guilty of Defects and Errors, does sufficiently declare. And that
even the last Translations in the vulgar Languages needs to be corrected (as I
could prove at large, were it proper in this place) learned men do confess. But
last of all there is no less difficulty even occurs to these skilled in the
Original Languages, who cannot so immediately receive the mind of the Authors
in these Writings, as that their Faith does at least obliquely depend upon the
honesty and credit of the Transcribers, since the Original Copies are granted
by all not to be now extant. Hieron. epist. 28* ad Lucin page 247. Epiphan. in
Anchor. Tom. 2. oper.


Of which Transcribers Jerome in his time complained, saying, that they wrote
not what they found, but what they understood. And Epiphanius says, that in
the good and correct Copies of Luke it was written; that Christ wept, and that
Irenaeus does cite it, but that the Catholics blotted it out, fearing least
Heretics should have abused it. Other Fathers also declare, that whole verses
were taken out of Mark; because of the Manichees.

But further, the various lections of the Hebrew Character by reason of the
Points, which some plead for as coaevous with the first writings, which others,
with no less probability, alledg to be a later invention, the disagreement of
diverse citations of Christ and the Apostles, with those passages in the Old
Testament, they appeal to the great controversy among the Fathers, whereof
some highly approve the Greek Septuagint, decrying and rendering very doubtful
the Hebrew Copy, as in many vitiated, and altered by the Jews, other some and
particularly Jerome, exalting the certainty, of the Hebrew, and rejecting, yea
even deriding the History of the Septuagint, which the primitive Church chiefly
made use of, and some Fathers that lived centuries before them, affirmed to be
a most certain thing. Add the many various lections in diverse copys of the
Greek, and the great alterations among the Fathers of the first three
Centuries, (who had greater opportunity to be better informed, than we can now
lay claim to) concerning the books to be admitted or rejected, as is above
observed. I say, all these and much more which might be alleged, puts the
minds, even of the Learned, into infinite doubts, scruples, and inextricable
difficulties. Whence we may very safely conclude, that Jesus Christ, who
promised to be always with his Children, to lead them into all Truth, to guard
them against the devices of the Enemy, and to establish their Faith upon an
unmovable Rock, left them not to be principally ruled by that, which was
subject in it self, to many uncertainties, and therefore he gave them his
Spirit, as their Principal Guide, which neither moths nor time can wear out,
nor transcribers nor translators corrupt, which none are so young, none so
illiterate, none in so remote a place, but they may come to be reached, and
rightly informed by it.

Through and by the clearness, which that Spirit gives us, it is that we are
only best rid of those difficulties, that occur to us, concerning the
Scriptures. The real and undoubted experience whereof I my self have been a
witness of, with great admiration of the love of God to his children in these
latter days. For I have known some of my Friends, who profess the same faith
with me, faithful servants of the most High God, and full of the Divine
knowledge of his Truth, as it was immediately and inwardly revealed to them, by
the Spirit from a true and living experience. Who not only were ignorant of the
Greek and Hebrew, but even some of them could not read their own vulgar
Language, who being pressed by the adversaries with some citations out of the
English Translation, and finding them to disagree with the manifestation of
Truth in their hearts, have boldly affirmed the Spirit of God never said so,
and that it was certainly wrong, for they did not believe that any of the Holy
Prophets, or Apostles, had ever written so, which when I on this account
seriously examined, I really found to be errors and corruptions of the
Translators. Who as in most translations, do not so much give us the genuine
significations of the words, as strain them to express that which comes nearest
with that opinion and notion they have of Truth. And this seemed to me to suit
very well with that saying of Augustine, Epist. 19. ad Hen. Tom. 2. fol. 14.
after he has said that he gives only that honor to those books, which are
called Canonical, as to believe that the Authors thereof did in writing, not
err. He adds, and if I shall meet with any thing in these writings, that
seems repugnant to Truth, I shall not doubt to say that either the volume is
faulty, or erroneous: that the expounder has not reached what was said, or
that I have in no wise understood it. So that he supposes, that in the
transcription and translation there may be errors.

V. If it be then asked me, whether I think hereby to render the Scripture
altogether uncertain, or useless?

I answer, not at all. The proposition it self declares what esteem I have for
them; and provided that to the Spirit, from which they came, be but granted,
that place the Scriptures themselves give it, I do freely concede to the
Scripture the second place, even whatsoever they say of themselves. Which the
Apostle Paul chiefly mentions in two places, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. The Holy
Scriptures are able to make wise unto Salvation, through Faith, which is in
Christ Jesus. All Scripture given by inspiration from God, is profitable for
correction, for instruction, in righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work.

For tho God do principally and chiefly lead us by his Spirit, yet he sometimes
conveys his comfort and consolation to us, through his Children, whom he raises
up and inspires, to speak or write a word in season; whereby the Saints are
made instruments in the hand of the Lord, to strengthen and encourage one
another: which do also tend to perfect, and make them wise unto Salvation, and
such as are led by the Spirit, cannot neglect but do natural love, and are
wonderfully cherished by that, which proceeds from the same Spirit in
another; because such mutual emanations of the heavenly Life, tend to quicken
the mind, when at any time it is overtaken with heaviness. Peter himself
declares this to have been the end of his writing, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Wherefore I
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of those things, tho ye
know them and be established in the present Truth. Yea, I think it meet, as
long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance.

God is Teacher of his People himself, and there is nothing more express than
that such as are under the New Covenant, they need no man to teach them: yet it
was a fruit of Christ's Ascension, to send Teachers and Pastors, for perfecting
of the Saints. So that the same work is ascribed to the Scriptures, as to
Teachers; the one to make the man of God perfect, the other for the perfection
of the Saints.

As then Teachers are not to go before the teaching of God himself, under the
New Covenant, but to follow after it, neither are they to rob us of that great
privilege, which Christ has purchased unto us, by his Blood, so neither is the
Scripture to go before the teaching of the Spirit, or to rob us of it.

Secondly, God has seen meet, that herein we should, as in a looking glass,
see the conditions and experiences of the Saints of old, that finding our
experience answer to theirs, we might thereby be the more confirmed and
comforted, and our hope strengthened of obtaining the same end; that observing
the Providence attending them, seeing the snares they were liable to, and
beholding their deliverances, we may thereby be made wise unto Salvation, and
seasonably reproved, and instructed in righteousness.

This is the great work of the Scriptures and their service to us, that we may
witness them fulfilled in us, and so discern the stamp of God's Spirit and ways
upon them, by the inward acquaintance we have with the same Spirit and work in
our hearts. The prophecys of the Scripture are also very comfortable, and
profitable unto us, as the same Spirit inlightens us, to observe them fulfilled
and to be fulfilled. For in all this, it is to be observed, that it is only the
Spiritual Man, that can make a right use of them, they are able to make the man
of God perfect (so it is not the natural Man) and whatsoever was written
aforetime, was written for our comfort, [our] that are the believers, [ our]
that are the Saints, concerning such the Apostle speaks; for as for the other,
the Apostle Peter plainly declares, that the unstable and unlearned wrest them
to their own destruction: these were they that were unlearned in the Divine and
heavenly learning of the Spirit, not in humane and School Literature, of which
we may safely presume that Peter himself, being a Fisherman, had no great
skill: for it may with great probability, yea certainly, be affirmed, that he
had no knowledge of Aristotle's Logic, which both Papists and Protestants, now
degenerating from the simplicity of Truth, make handmaid of Divinity (as they
call it) and a necessary introduction to their carnal, natural and humane
Ministry. By the infinite obscure labors of which kind of men, mixing in their
heathenish stuff, the Scripture is rendered at this day of so little service to
the simple People, whereof if Jerome complained in his time, now twelve hundred
years ago, Hieron Ep. 134. ad Cypr. tom. 3. saying, It is wont to befall the
most part of learned Men, that it is harder to understand their expositions,
than the things, which they go about to expound; what may We say then,
considering those great heaps of commentarys since, in ages yet far more
corrupted?

VI. In this respect above mentioned then, we have shown what service and use
the Holy Scriptures, as managed in and by the Spirit are of, to the Church of
God; wherefore we do account them a secondary rule. Moreover, because they are
commonly acknowledged by all, to have been written by the dictates of the Holy
Spirit, and that the errors which may be supposed by the injury of times to
have slipped in, are not such, but that there is a sufficient clear Testimony
left to all the essentials of the Christian faith; we do look upon them as the
only fit outward judge of Controversies among Christians, and that whatsoever
doctrine is contrary unto their Testimony, may therefore justly be rejected as
false. And for our parts, we are very willing, that all our Doctrines and
Practices be tried by them; which we never refused, nor ever shall in all
controversies with our adversaries, as the Judge and Test. We shall also be very
willing to admit it, as a positive certain Maxim, That whatsoever any do,
pretending to the Spirit, which is contrary to the Scriptures, be accounted and
reckoned a delusion of the Devil. For as we never lay claim to the Spirit's
leadings, that we may cover our selves in any thing that is evil, so we know,
that as every evil contradicts the Scriptures, so it does also the Spirit; in
the first place, from which the Scriptures came, and whose motions can never
contradict one another, though they may appear sometimes, to be contradictory
to the blind Eye of natural Man, as Paul and James seem to contradict one
another.

Thus far we have shown both what we believe, and what we believe not,
concerning the Holy Scriptures, hoping we have given them their due place. But
since they that will needs have them to be the only, certain, and principal
Rule, want not some show of arguments, even from the Scripture it self (though
it no where call it self so) by which they labor to prove their Doctrine, I
shall briefly lay them down by way of Objections, and answer them before I make
an end of this matter.

VII. Their first Objection is usually drawn from Isaiah 8.20. To the Law and
to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there
is no Light in them. Now this Law, Testimony, and Word, they plead to be the
Scriptures.

To which I answer that, That is to beg the thing in question, and remains yet
unproved. Nor do I know for what reason we may not safely affirm this Law and
Word to be inward. But suppose it was outward, it proves not the case at all
for them, neither makes it against us; for it may be confessed, without any
prejudice to our cause, that the outward Law was more particularly to the Jews
a Rule, and more principally than to us: seeing their Law was outward and
literal, but ours, under the New Covenant, (as has been already said) is
expressly affirmed to be inward and Spiritual. So that this Scripture is so far
from making against us, that it makes for us: for if the Jews were directed to
try all things by their Law, which was without them, written in tables of
stone, then if we will have this advice of the Prophet to reach us, we must
make it hold parallel to that dispensation of the Gospel, which we are under.
So that we are to try all things (in the first place) by that Word of Faith,
which is preached unto us, which the Apostle says is in the heart, and by that
Law, which God has given us, which the Apostle says also expressly, is written
and placed in the mind.

Lastly, If we look to this place, according to the Greek interpretation of the
Septuagint, our adversaries shall have nothing from thence to carp, yea it will
favor as much; for there it is said, that the Law is given us for a help,
which very well agrees with what is above asserted.

Their second objection is from Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc.

Here, say they, we are commanded, by Christ himself, to search the Scriptures.

I answer First, That the Scriptures ought to be searched, we do not at all
deny, but are very willing to be tried by them, as has been above declared.
But the question is, Whether they be the only and principal Rule? which this is
so far from proving, that it proves the contrary; for Christ checks them here,
for too high an esteem of the Scriptures, and neglecting of him, that was to be
preferred before them, and to whom they bore witness, as the following words
declare. For in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they, which
testify of me, and ye will not come unto me, that ye may have life. This
shows, that while they thought they had eternal life in the Scriptures, they
neglected to come unto Christ to have Life, of which the Scriptures bore
witness. This answers well to our purpose, since our adversaries now do also
exalt the Scriptures, and think to have life in them, which is no more, than to
look upon them as the only principal rule, and way to Life, and yet refuse to
come unto the Spirit, of which they testify, even the inward Spiritual Law,
which could give them Life. So that the cause of this Peoples ignorance and
unbelief was not their want of respect to the Scriptures, which though they
knew, and had a high esteem of, yet Christ testifies in the former verses, that
they had neither seen the Eather, nor heard his voice at any time, neither had
his word abiding in them, which had they then had, then they had believed in
the Son. Moreover, that place may be taken in the Indicative mood, Ye search
the Scriptures, which interpretation the Greek word will bear, and so Pasor
translateth it, which by the reproof following, seems also to be the more
genuine interpretation, as Cyrillus long ago has observed.

VIII. Their third objection is from these words, Acts 17.11. These were more
noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were
so.

Here say they, the Beroeans are commended, for searching the Scriptures, and
making them the Rule.

I answer, That the Scriptures either are the principal or only Rule, will not
at all from this follow, neither will their searching the Scriptures, or being
commended for it, infer any such thing, for we recommended and approve the use
of them, in that respect as much as any; yet will it not follow, that we affirm
them to be the principal and only Rule.

Secondly, It is to be observed, that these were the Jews of Beroea to whom
these Scriptures, which were the Law and the Prophets, were more particularly a
Rule, and the thing under examination was, whether the Birth, Life, Works, and
sufferings of Christ did answer to the Prophecies that went before of him; so
that it was most proper for them being Jews, to examine the Apostles Doctrine,
by the Scriptures, seeing he pleaded it to be a fulfilling of them. It is said
nevertheless in the first place, that they received the Word with cheerfulness:
and in the second place, they searched the Scriptures; not that they searched
the Scriptures, and then received the Word; for then could not they have
prevailed to convert them, had they not first minded the Word abiding in them,
which opened their understandings no more, than the Scribes and Pharisees, who
(as in the former objection we observed) searched the Scriptures, and exalted
them, and yet remained in their unbelief, because they had not the Word abiding
in them.

But lastly, If this commendation of the Jewish Beroeans might infer, that the
Scriptures were the only and prsncipal Rule to try the Apostles Doctrine by,
what should have become of the Gentiles? How should they ever have come to
received the Faith of Christ, who neither knew the Scriptures nor believed
them? We see in the end of the same Chapter, how the Apostle preaching to the
Athenians, took another method, and directed them to somewhat of God within
themselves, that they might feel after him. He did not first go about to
Prosolite them to the Jewish Religion, and to the belief of the Law and the
Prophets. and from thence to prove the coming of Christ. Nay, he took a nearer
way. Now certainly, the principal and only Rule is not different; one to the
Jews, and another to the Gentiles, but is universal, reaching both: though
secondary and subordinate Rules and means may be various, and diversely suited,
according as the people they are used to, are stated and circumstantiated. Even
so we see that the Apostle to the Athenians used a Testimony of one of their
own Poets, which he judged would have credit with them: and no doubt such
Testimonys whose Authors they esteemed, had more weight with them, than all the
sayings of Moses and the Prophets, whom they neither knew, nor would have cared
for. Now because the Apostle used the Testimony of a Poet to the Athenians,
will it therefore follow he made that the Principal, or only rule to try his
Doctrine by? So neither will it follow, that, though he made use of the
Scriptures to the Jews, as being a principle already believed by them, to try
his Doctrine, that from thence the Scriptures may be accounted the principal or
only rule.

IX. The last, and which at first view seems to be the greatest objection, is
this,

Obj.
If the Scripture be not the adequate, principal, and only Rule, then it would
follow that the Scripture is not complete, nor the Canon filled, that if men be
now immediately led and ruled by the Spirit, they may add new Scriptures of
equal authority with the old, whereas every one that adds it cursed: yea what
assurance have we, but at this rate every one may bring in a new Gospel,
according to his fancy?

The dangerous consequences, insinuated in this objection, were fully answered
in the latter part of the last Proposition, in what was said a little before,
offering freely to disclaim all pretended Revelations contrary to the
Scriptures.

But if it be urged, that it is enough to deny these consequences, Obj.
if they naturally follow from your Doctrine of immediate Revelation, and
denying the Scripture to be the only rule.

I answer, We have proved both these Doctrines to be true and necessary,
according to the Scriptures themselves, and therefore to fasten evil
consequences upon them, which we make appear do not follow, is not to accuse
us, but Christ and his Apostles, who preached them.

But Secondly, we have shut the door upon all such Doctrine, in this very
position, affirming that the Scriptures give a full and ample Testimony to all
the principal Doctrines of the Christian Faith. For we do firmly believe, that
there is no other Gospel or Doctrine to be preached, but that which was
delivered by the Apostles, and do freely subscribe to that saying, Let him that
preaches any other Gospel, Gal. 1.8.9.
than that which has been already preached by the Apostles, and according to
the Scriptures be accursed.

So we distinguish betwixt a revelation of a new Gospel and new doctrines and a
new Revelation of the good old Gospel and Doctrines; the last we plead for, but
the first we utterly deny. For we firmly believe, that no other foundation can
any man lay, than that which is laid already. But that this revelation is
necessary, we have already proved, and this distinction does sufficiently guard
us against the hazard insinuated in the objection.

As to the Scriptures being a filled Canon, I see no necessity of believing it.
And, if these men that believe the Scripture to be the only Rule, will be
consistent to their own Doctrine, they must needs be of my judgment: Seeing it
is simply impossible to prove the Canon by the Scriptures. For it cannot be
found in any book of the Scripture, that these Books, and just these, and no
other are Canonical, as all are forced to acknowledge, how can they then evite
this argument?

That, which cannot be proved by Scripture is no necessary article of Faith.

But the Canon of the Scripture, to wit, that there are so many Books
precisely, neither more or less, cannot be proved by Scripture.

Therefore, it is no necessary article of Faith.

If they should alledg, Obj.
that the admitting of any other books to be now written by the same Spirit
might infer the admission of new doctrines.

I deny that consequence, for the Principal of fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Religion are contained in the tenth part of the Scripture; but it
will not follow thence, that the rest are impertinent, or useless. If it should
please God to bring to us any of these Books, which by the injury of time are
lost, which are mentioned in the Scripture, as The Prophecy of Enoch, the Book
of Nathan, etc. or the third epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, I see no
reason why we might not receive them, and place them with the rest. That which
displeases me is, that men should first affirm that the Scripture is the only
and principal rule, and yet make a great article of Faith of that which the
Scripture can give us no light in.

As for instance, how shall a Protestant prove by Scripture, to such as deny
the Epistle of James to be authentic, that it ought to be received?

First, if he should say, because it contradicts not the rest, (besides that
there is no mention made of it in any of the rest) perhaps these men think it
does contradict Paul, in relation to Faith and Works. But, if that should be
granted, it would as well follow, that every Writer that contradicts not the
Scripture should be put into the Canon. And by this means, these men fall into
a greater absurdity, than they fix upon us; for thus they would equal every one
the writings of their own Sect with the Scriptures, for I suppose they judge
their own confession of Faith does not contradict the Scriptures. Will it
therefore follow, that it should be bound up with the Bible? And yet it seems
impossible, according to their Principles, to bring any better argument to
prove the Epistle of James to be authentic. There is then this unavoidable
necessity, to say, We know it by the same Spirit, from which it was written, or
otherwise to step back to Rome and say; we know by Tradition that the Church
has declared it to be Canonical; and the Church is infallible: let them find
amidst if they can, so that out of this objection we shall draw an unanswerable
Argument ad hominem, to our purpose.

That, which cannot assure me concerning an article of Faith, necessary to be
believed, is not the primary, adequate, only rule of Faith:

But the Scripture cannot thus assure me:

Therefore, etc.

I prove the assumption thus,

That which cannot assure me concerning the canon of the Scripture to wit, that
such Books are only to be admitted, and the Apochrypha to be excluded, cannot
assure me of this.

Therefore, etc.

And lastly, As to these words, Rev. 22.18. that if any man shall add unto
these things, Obj.
God shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this Book. I desire
they will show me how it relates to anything else, than to that particular
Prophecy. It says not, now the Canon of the Scripture is filled up, no man is
to write more from that Spirit. Yea do not all confess that there have been
Prophecies, and true Prophets since? The Papists deny it not. And do not the
Protestants affirm that John Hus prophesied of the Reformation? was he
therefore cursed, or did he therein evil? I could give many other examples
confessed by themselves; but moreover the same was in effect commanded long
before, Prove. 30.6. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee and thou
be found a Liar. Yet how many books of the Prophets were written after? and the
same was said by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not. add unto the word, which I
command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it. So that, though we should
extend that of the Revelation beyond the particular Prophecy of that book, it
cannot be understood, but of a new Gospel, or new Doctrines, or of restraining
man's Spirit, that he mix not his humane words with the Divine, and not of a
new revelation of the old, as we have said before.

The Fourth Proposition, Concerning the Condition of Man in the fall.
All Adam's posterity (or mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, as to the first Adam
(or earthly man) is fallen, degenerated, and dead, deprived of the sensation (or
feeling) of this inward Testimony, or Seed of God; and is subject unto the
Power, Nature, and Seed of the Serpent, which he sows in men's hearts, while
they abide in this natural and corrupted estate: from whence it comes, that not
only their words and deeds, but all their imaginations, are evil perpetually in
the sight of God, as proceeding from this depraved and wicked Seed. Man
therefore, as he is in this state, can know nothing aright, yea his Thoughts
and Coneptions concerning God, and things Spiritual (until he be disjoined from
this evil Seed, and united to the Divine Light) are unprofitable both to
himself and others. Hence are rejected the Socinian, and Pelagian errors in
exalting a Natural Light; as also the Papists and most of Protestants, who
affirm, that man without the true Grace of God, may be a true Minister of the
Gospel. Nevertheless, this Seed is not imputed to Infants, until by
Transgression they actually join themselves therewith, for they are by Nature
the Children of Wrath. Who walk according to the Power of the Prince of the
Air, and the Spirit that now works, in the Children of disobedience, having
their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the
flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.

. I. HItherto we have discoursed how the True knowledge of God is attained, and
preserved, also of what use and service the Holy Scripture is to the Saints.

We come now to examine the state and condition of Man, as he stands in the
fall; what his capacity and power is, and how far he is able, as of himself, to
advance, in relation to the things of God. Of this we touched a little in the
beginning of the second Proposition; but the full, right, and through
understanding of it, is of great use and service: because from the ignorance
and altercations, that have been about it, there have arisen great and
dangerous errors, both on the one hand and the other. While some do so far
exalt the light of Nature, or the faculty of the natural man, as capable of
himself by virtue of the inward will, faculty, light and power, that pertains
to his Nature, to follow that which is good, and make real progress toward
Heaven. And of these are the Pelagians, and Semi-Pelagians of old, and of late
the Socinians, and diverse others among the Papists. Others again will needs run
into another extreme, to whom Augustine, among the Ancients first made way in
his declining age, through the heat of his Zeal against Pelagius) not only
confessing men incapable of themselves to do good, and prone to evil; but that
in his very Mothers-womb, and before he commits any actual Transgression, he is
contaminate with a real guilt, whereby he deserves eternal Death: in which
respect they are not afraid to affirm, that many poor Infants are eternally
damned, and for ever endure the Torments of Hell. Therefore the God of Truth,
having now again revealed his Truth, that good and even Way, by his own Spirit,
has taught us to avoid both these extremes.

That then, which our proposition leads us to treat of, is,

First, What the condition of man is in the Fall, and how far incapable to
meddle in the things of God.

And Secondly, that God does not impute this evil to Infants, until they
actually join with it, that so by establishing the Truth, we may overturn the
errors on both parts.

And as for that Third thing included in the proposition it self, concerning
these Teachers, which want the Grace of God, we shall refer that to the Tenth
Proposition, where that matter is more particularly handled.

II. As to the First, not to dive into the many curious Notions which many
have, concerning the Condition of Adam before the fall; all agree in this, that
thereby he came to a very great loss, not only in the things which related to
the outward man, but in regard of that true Fellowship and Communion he had
with God. This loss was signified to him in the Command, For in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17. This death could not be an
outward death, or the dissolution of the outward man, for as to that, he did
not dye yet many Hundred Years after; so that it must needs respect his
Spiritual Life and Communion with God. The consequence of this fall, besides
that which relates to the fruits of the Earth, is also expressed, Genesis 3.24. So
he drove out the man, and he placed at the East of the Garden of Eden,
Cherubims, and a Flaming Sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the
Tree of Life. Now whatsoever literal signification this may have, we may safely
ascribe to this Paradise, a mystical signification, and truly account it that
Spiritual Communion and Fellowship, which the Saints obtain with God, by Jesus
Christ, to whom only these Cherubims give way, and unto as many as enter by
him, who calls himself the door. So that, though we do not ascribe any whit of
Adam's guilt to men, until they make it theirs by the like acts of
Disobedience, yet we cannot suppose that men, who are come of Adam naturally,
can have any good thing in their Nature, as belonging to it, which he from whom
they derive their Nature, had not himself to communicate unto them.

If then we may affirm, that Adam did not retain in his Nature, as belonging
thereunto, any will or light capable to give him knowledge in Spiritual things,
then neither can his posterity. For whatsoever real good any man does, it
proceeds not from his nature as he is a man, or the Son of Adam: but from the
Seed of God in him, as a new visitation of Life, in order to bring him out of
this natural condition. So that, though it be in him, yet it is not of him, and
this the Lord himself witnessed, Genesis 6.5. where it is said, he saw, that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually: which words
as they are very positive, so are they very comprehensive. Observe the emphasis
of them, First, there is every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, so
that this admits of no exception of any Imagination of the thoughts of his
heart. Secondly, is only evil continually: it is neither in some part evil
continually, nor yet only evil at sometimes; but both only evil, and always and
continally evil: which certainly excludes any good, as a proper effect of man's
heart, naturally. For that, which is only evil, and that always, cannot of its
own Nature, produce any good thing. The Lord expresses this again a little
after, chap. 8. v. 21. The Imagination of man's heart, is evil from his youth.
Thus inferring how natural and proper it is unto him; From which I thus argue.

If the thoughts of man's heart be not only evil, but always evil, then are
they, as they simply proceed from his heart, neither good in part, nor at any
time:

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

Again,

If man's thoughts be always and only evil, then are they altogether useless and
ineffectual to him, in the things of God.

But the First is true:

Therefore also the Last.

Secondly, this appears clearly from that saying of the Prophet Jeremiah, 17.9.
The Heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. For who can
with any color of reason, imagine that that which is so, has any power of it
self, or is any wise fit to lead a man to righteousness, whereunto it is of its
own Nature directly opposite? This is as contrary to reason, as it is
impossible in Nature, that a stone of its own nature and proper motion, should
flee upwards. For, as a stone of its own nature, inclines and is prone to move
down-wards toward the Center; so the Heart of man is naturally prone and
inclined to evil, some to one, and some to another. From this then I also thus
argue:

That which is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, is not fit,
neither can it lead a man aright, in things that are good and honest.

But the heart of man is such:

Therefore, etc.

Romans 3.10. Ps. 14.3. and 53.2.
But the Apostle Paul, describes the condition of men in the Fall, at large,
taking it out of the Psalmist. There is none righteous, no not one: There is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. They are all
gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their
Tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their Lips: whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed blood.
Destruction and Misery are in their ways: and the way of peace have they not
known: There is no fear of God before their Eyes. What more positive can be
spoken? He seems to be particularly careful to avoid, that any good should be
ascribed to the natural man, he shows how he is polluted in all his ways, he
shows how he is void of Righteousness, of Understanding, of the Knowledge of
God, how he is out of the way, and in short, unprofitable: than which nothing
can be more fully said, to confirm our judgment. For if this be the condition
of the natural man, or of man as he stands in the fall, he is unfit to make one
right step to Heaven.

If it be said, That is not spoken of the condition of man in general, Obj.
but only of some particulars, or at the least that it comprehends not all.

The Text shows the clean contrary, in the foregoing verses, Answ.
where the Apostle takes in himself, as he stood in his natural condition, What
then are we better than they? No, in no wise, for we have before proved both
Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin, as it is written. And so he
goes on, by which it is manifest, that he speaks of Mankind in general.

If they object that, which the same Apostle says, Obj.
in the foregoing chapter, verse 14. to wit, that the Gentiles do by nature the
things contained in the Law, and so consequently do by Nature, that which is
good and acceptable in the sight of God.

I answer, This nature must not, Answ.
neither can be understood of man's own nature, which is corrupt and fallen, but
of the Spiritual Nature, which proceeds from the Seed of God in man, as it
receives a new visitation of God's love, and is quickened by it, which clearly
appears by the following words, where he says, These not having a Law (id est)
outwardly, are a Law unto themselves, which shows the work of the Law, written
in their Hearts. These acts of theirs then, are an effect of the Law written in
their hearts, but the Scripture declares that the writing of the Law in the
heart is a part, yea and a great part too of the New Covenant dispensation, and
so no consequence nor part of man's nature.

Secondly, if this nature here spoken of, could be understood of man's own
nature, which he has as he is a man, then would the Apostle unavoidably
contradict himself, since he elsewhere positively declares, That the Natural
man discerns not the things of God, nor can. Now I hope the Law of God is
among the things of God, especially as its written in the heart. The Apostle,
in the 7 chap. of the same Epistle, says, verse 12. that the Law is Holy,
just, and good; and verse 14. that the Law is Spiritual, but he is carnal. Now
in what respect is he carnal, but as he stands in the Fall, unregenerate? Now
what inconsistency would here be to say, that he is carnal, and yet not so, of
his own Nature? seeing it is from his Nature, that he is so denominated. We see
the Apostle contra-distinguisheth the Law, as Spiritual, from man's Nature, as
carnal and sinful. Wherefore, as Christ says, there can no Grapes be expected
from Thistles, Mat. 7.16.
nor Figgs of Thorns, so neither can the fulfilling of the Law, which is
Spiritual, Holy and Just, be expected from that Nature which is Corrupt, Fallen
and Unregenerate. Whence we conclude with good reason, that the Nature here
spoken of, by which the Gentiles are said to have done the things contained in
the Law, is not the common Nature of men, but the Spiritual Nature, that
arises from the works of the Righteous and Spiritual Law that is written in the
heart. I confess they of the other extreme when they are pressed with this
Testimony by the Socinians and Pelagians, as well as by us, when we use this
Scripture to show them, how some of the Heathens, by the Light of Christ in
their heart, come to be saved, are very far to seek, giving this answer, that
there were some relics of the Heavenly Image left in Adam, by which the
Heathens could do some good things. Which, as it is in it self without proof,
so it contradicts their own assertions elsewhere, and gives away their cause.
For if these relics were of force to enable them to fulfill the Righteous Law
of God, it takes away the necessity of Christ's coming, or at least leaves them
away to be saved without him: unless they will say, which is worst of all; that
though they really fulfilled the righteous Law of God, yet God damned them,
because of the want of that particular knowledge, while he himself withheld all
means of their coming to him, from them; but of this hereafter.

III. I might also here use another argument, from these words of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 2. where he so positively excludes the Natural man from an understanding
in the things of God; but because I have spoken of that Scripture in the
beginning of the Second Proposition, I will here avoid to repeat what is there
mentioned, referring thereunto. Yet because the Socinians and others, who exalt
the Light of the Natural man, or a natural Light in man, do object against this
Scripture, I shall remove it ere I make an end.

Obj.
They say, The Greek word (...) ought to be translated animal, and not natural,
else, say they, it would have been (...) from which they seek to infer, that it
is only the animal Man, and not the rational, that is excluded here, from the
discerning the things of God. Which shift, without disputing the word, is
easily refuted, neither is it any wife consistent with the scope of the place,
for

Frist, The animal life is no other, than that, which Man has common with
other living Creatures, for as he is a mere Man, he differs no otherwise from
Beasts, than by the rational Property. Now the Apostle deduceth his argument in
the foregoing Verses, from this simile, that as the things of a Man cannot be
known but by the Spirit of a Man, so the things of God no Man knows but by
the Spirit of God. But I hope, these Men will confess unto me, that the things
of a Man are not known by the animal Spirit only, i. e. by that, which he has
common with the Beasts; but by the rational: So that it must be the rational,
that is here understood. Again, the subsumption shows clearly, that the Apostle
had no such intent, as these Men's gloss would make him to have; viz. So the
things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God, according to their
Judgment he should have said, the things of God knows no Man by his animal
Spirit, but by his rational Spirit: for to say, the Spirit of God here spoken
of, is no other than the rational Spirit of Man, would border upon Blasphemy,
since they are so often contra-distinguished. Again, going on, he says not
that they are rationally, but spiritually discerned.

Secondly, The Apostle throughout this Chapter shows how the wisdom of Man is
unfit to Judge the things of God; and ignorant of them. Now ask these Men,
whether a Man be called a wise Man from his animal Property, or from his
rational? If from his rational, then it is not only the animal, but even the
rational, as he is yet in the natural State, which the Apostle excludes here;
and whom he contradistinguisheth from the Spiritual, v. 15. But the Spiritual
man judges all things* this cannot be said of any Man merely because rational,
or as he is a Man; seeing the Men of greatest reason, if we may so esteem Men,
whom the Scripture calls wise, as were the Greeks of Old, not only may be, but
often are Enemies to the Kingdom of God, while both the preaching of Christ is
said to be foolishness with the wise Men of this World, and the wisdom of this
World, is said to be foolishness with God. Now whether it be any ways propable,
that either these wise Men, that are said to account the Gospel foolishness,
are only so called with respect to their animal Property, and not their
rational; or that that wisdom, that is foolishness with God, is not meant of
the rational, but only the animal property, any rational Man, laying aside
interests, may easily Judge.

. IV. I come now to the other part, to wit, that this evil and corrupt seed is
not imputed to Infants, until they actually join with it. For this there is a
reason given in the end of the Proposition it self, drawn from Ephesians. 2. for
these are by nature Children of Wrath, who walk according to the prince of the
power of the Air, the Spirit, that now works in the children of disobedience.
Here the Apostle gives their evil walking, and not any thing, that is not
reduced to act, as a reason of their being Children of wrath: and this is
suitable to the whole strain of the Gospel, where no man is ever threatened or
judged for what iniquity he has not actually wrought. Such indeed as continue
in iniquity, and so do Homologat the sins of their Fathers, God will visit the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children.

Is it not strange then, that men should entertain an opinion so absurd in it
self, and so cruel and contrary to the nature, as well of God's mercy, as
justice, concerning the which the Scripture is altogether silent? But it is
manifest, that Man has invented this opinion out of self-love and from that
bitter Root, from which all errors springs; for the most of Protestants that
hold this, having as they fancy, the absolute decree of Elections to secure
them and their Children; so as they cannot miss of Salvation, they make no
great difficulty to send all others, both Old and Young, to hell. For whereas
self-love (which always is apt to believe that, which it desires) possesses
them with a hope that their part is secure, they are not solicitous how they
leave their Neighbors, which are the far greater part of Mankind, in these
inextricable difficultys. The Papists again use this Opinion, as an art to
augment the esteem of their Church, and reverence of its Sacraments, seeing
they pretend it is washed away by Baptism, only in this they appear to be a
little more Merciful, in that they send not these unbaptized infant to Hell,
but to a certain Limbus; concerning which the Scriptures are as silent as of
the other. This then is not only not authorized in the Scriptures, but contrary
to the express tenor of it. The Apostle says plainly, Romans 4.15. Where no Law
is, there is no transgression. And again, 5.13. But sin is not imputed, where
there is no Law. Than which Testimonies there is nothing more positive, since
to infants there is no Law, seeing as such they are utterly incapable of it,
the Law cannot reach but such as have in some measure, less or more, the
exercise of their understanding, which infants have not. So that from thence I
thus agree,

Sin is imputed to none, where there is no Law.

But to infants there is no Law:

Therefore sin is not imputed to them.

The Proposition is the Apostle's own Words, the Assumption is thus proved.

Those, who are under a physical impossibility of either hearing, knowing, or
understanding any Law, where the impossibility is not brought upon them by any
act of their own, but is according to the very order of nature appointed by
God, to such there is no Law:

But infants are under this physical impossibility.

Therefore, etc.

Secondly, What can be more positive than that of Ezekiel. 18.20. The Soul that
sins, it shall die: the Son shall not bear the Fathers Iniquity? For the
Prophet here first shows what is the cause of man's Eternal Death, which he
says, is in his sinning; and then, as if he purposed expressly to shut out such
an opinion, he assures us the Son shall not bear the Fathers Iniquity. From
which I thus argue,

If the Son bear not the Iniquity of his Father, or of his immediate Parents,
far less shall he bear the iniquity of Adam:

But the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father:

Therefore, etc.

. V. Having thus far shown how absurd this Opinion is, I shall briefly examine
the reasons its Authors bring for it.

First, They say Adam was a public Person, Obj.
and therefore all men sinned in him, as being in his loins. And for this they
alledg that of Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin; and so Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,
etc. These last words, say they, may be translated, in whom all have sinned.

To this I answer, That Adam is a public person is not denied, and that
through him there is a seed of sin propagated to all men, Answ.
which in its own nature is sinsiul, and inclines men to iniquity; yet will it
not follow from thence, that Infants, who join not with this Seed, are guilty.
As for these words in the Romans, the reason of the guilt there alleged is,
for that all have sinned. Now no man is said to sin* unless he actually sin in
his own person, for the Greek words (...) may very well relate to (...), which
is the nearest antecedent; so that they hold forth how that Adam by his sin,
gave an entrance to sin in the world, and so death entered by sin, (...) i. e.
upon which [viz. occasion] or, in which [viz. death] all others have sinned,
that is, actually in their own person, to wit, all that were capable of
sinning, of which number that infants could not be, the Apostle clearly shows
by the following verse, Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law: and since,
as is above proved, there is no Law to Infants, they cannot be here included.

Their second Objection is from Psalm. 51.5. Obj.
Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Hence,
they say it appears, that Infants from their Conception are guilty.

How they infer this consequence, for my part, I see not. The iniquity and sin
here, Answ.
appears to be far more ascribable to the Parents than to the Child. It is said
indeed, In sin did my mother conceive me, not my mother did conceive me a
sinner. Besides, that so interpreted, contradicts expressly the Scripture before
mentioned, in making Children guilty of the sins of their immediate Parents
(for of Adam there is not here any mention) contrary to the plain words, the
Son shall not bear the Fathers iniquity.

Obj.
Thirdly, They object that the wages of sin is death, and that seeing Children
are subject to Diseases and Death, therefore they must be guilty of sin.

Answ.
I answer, That these things are a consequence of the fall, and of Adams sin, is
confessed, but that infers necessarily a guilt in all others that are subject
to them, is denied. For though the whole outward Creation suffered a decay by
Adam's fall, which groans under vanity according to which it is said in Job,
that the Heavens are not clean in the sight of God; yet will it not from thence
follow, that the Herbs, Earth, and Trees are sinners.

Next, Death, though a consequent of the fall, incident to man's earthly Nature,
is not the wages of sin, in the Saints, but rather sleep, by which they pass
from death to life, which is so far from being troublesome and painful to them,
as all real punishments for sin are, that the Apostle counts it gain: To me,
says he, to die is gain, Psalm. 1.21.

Obj.
Some are so foolish, as to make an objection farther, saying, That if Adam 's
sin be not imputed to those, who actually have not sinned, then it would
follow, that all Infants are saved.

But we are willing, that this supposed absurdity should be the consequence of
our Doctrine, rather than that, which it seems, our adversaries reckon not
absurd, though the undoubted and unavoidable consequence of theirs, viz. that
Many Infants eternally perish, not for any sin of their own, but only for Adams
iniquity; where we are willing to let the controversy sist, commending both to
the illuminated understanding of the Christian Reader.

This error of our adversaries is both denied and refuted by Zwinglius, that
eminent Founder of the Protestant Churches of Zwitzerland, in his Book De
Baptismo, for which he is anathematized by the Council of Trent, in the fifth
Session. We shall only add this information, that we confess then, that a seed
of sin is transmitted to all men from Adam (although imputed to none, until by
sinning they actually join with it) in which seed he gave occasion to all to
sin* and it is the orignal of all evil actions and thoughts in men's hearts,
(...) to wit, (...), as it is in the 5. of the Romans, i. e. in which death all
have sinned. For this seed of sin is frequently called Death in the Scripture,
and the body of death, seeing indeed it is a death to the Life of Righteousness
and Holiness. Therefore its seed and its product is called the old man, the old
Adam, in which all sin is; for which cause we use this name to express this
sin, and not that of original sin, of which phrase the Scripture makes no
mention, and under which invented and unscriptural Barbarism, this notion of
imputed sin to Infants, took place among Christians.

The Fifth and Sixth Propositions, Concerning the Universal Redemption by
Christ, and also the saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every man is
enlightened.
The Fifth Proposition.
GOD, out of his Infinite love, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11.
who delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but that all should live and be
saved, has so loved the World, that he has given his only Son a LIGHT, that
whosoever believes in him shall be saved, John, 3.16. Who inlighteneth every
man that comes into the World, John 1.9. And makes manifest all things, that
are reprovable, Ephesians. 5.12. And teaches all Temperance, Righteousness, and
Godliness. And this light lighteneth the hearts of all in a day, in order to
Salvation, and this is it, which reproves the Sin of all Individuals, and would
work out the Salvation of all, if not resisted: nor is it less Universal, than
the Seed of Sin, being the purchase of his death, who tasted death for every
man, For, as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ all shall be made alive, 1 Cor.
15.22.

The Sixth Proposition.
According to which Principle (or hypothesis) all the objections against the
Universality of Christ's Death, are easily solved, neither is it needful to
recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other miraculous means, which they
say, God uses, to manifest the Doctrine and History of Christ's Passion, unto
such (who living in the places of the World, where the outward preaching of the
Gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and common Grace. For as hence
it well follows that some of the old Philosophers might have been saved, so
also may some (who by Providence are cast into those remote parts of the World,
where the knowledge of the History is wanting) be made partakers of the Divine
Mystery, if they receive, and resist not that Grace, a manifestation whereof is
given to every man to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12.7
This most certain Doctrine being then received, that there is an Evangelical
and Saving Light and Grace in all, the universality of the Love and Mercy of
God toward Mankind (both in the Death of his Beloved Son the Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the manifestation of the Light in the heart) is established and
confirmed, against all the Objections of such as deny it. Therefore Christ has
tasted death for every man, not only for all kind of men, as some vainly talk,
but for every man of all kinds; the benefit of whose Offering is not only
extended to such, who have the destinct outward knowledge of his death and
sufferings, as the same is declared in the Scriptures; but even unto those who
are necessarily excluded from the benefit of this knowledge* by some inevitable
accident: Which knowledge we willingly confess to be very profitable and
comfortable, but not absolutely needful unto such, from whom God himself has
withheld it, yet they may be made partakers of the mystery, of his death
(though ignorant of the history) if they suffer his Seed and Light
(inlightening their hearts) to take place (in which Light communion with the
Father and the Son is enjoyed) so as of wicked men to become holy, and lovers
of that Power, by whose inward and secret touches, they feel themselves turned
from the Evil to the Good, and learn to do to others, as they would be done by,
in which Christ himself affirms all to be included. As They have then falsely
and erroneously taught, who have denied Christ to have dyed for all men, so
neither have They sufficiently taught the Truth, who affirming him to have died
for all, have added the absolute necessity of the outward knowledge thereof, in
order to obtain its saving effect. Among whom the Remonstrants of Holland have
been chiefly wanting, and many other assertors of Universal Redemption, in that
they have not placed the extent of his Salvation in that Divine and Evangelical
Principle of Light and Life, wherewith Christ has enlightened every man that
comes into the World, which is excellently and evidently held forth in these
Scriptures, Genesis 6.3. Deuteronomy. 30.14. Joh. 1.7, 8, 9, 16. Romans 10.8. Tit. 2.11.

HItherto we have considered man's fallen, lost, corrupted and degenerated
condition.

Now it is fit to inquire, how and by what means he may come to be freed out of
this miserable and depraved condition; which in these two Propositions, is
declared and demonstrated, which I thought meet to place together, because of
their affinity, The one being as it were, an explanation of the other.

As for that Doctrine which these Propositions chiefly strike at, to wit,
absolute reprobation; according to which some are not afraid to assert; That
God by an eternal and immutable decree, has predestined to Eternal
Damnation, the far greater part of Mankind, not considered as made, much less
as fallen, without any respect to their Disobedience or Sin, but only for the
demonstrating of the Glory of his Justice: and that for the bringing this
about, he has appointed these miserable Souls necessarily to walk in their
wicked ways, that so his justice may lay hold on them: And that God does
therefore not only suffer them to be liable to this misery in many parts of the
world, by withholding from them the preaching of the Gospel, and knowledge of
Christ; but even in those places where the Gospel is preached, and Salvation by
Christ is offered: whom though he publicly invite them, yet he justly condemns
for disobedience, albeit he has with held from them all Grace, by which they
could have laid hold on the Gospel, viz. because he has by a secret will
unknown to all men, ordained and decreed (without any respect had to their
disobedience or sin) that they shall not obey, and that the offer of the Gospel
shall never prove effectual, for their Salvation; but only serve to aggravate
and occasion their greater condemnation.

I say, as to this horrible and Blasphemous Doctrine, or cause, is common with
many others, who have both wisely, and learnedly, according to Scripture,
Reason, and Antiquity refuted it. Seeing then that so much, and so well, is
said already against this Doctrine, that little can be superadded, except what
has been said already, I shall be short in this respect. Yet, because it lies
so in opposition to my way, I cannot let it altogether pass.

I. First, We may safely call this Doctrine a novelty, seeing the first Four
Hundred Years after Christ there is no mention made of it: for as it is
contrary to the Scriptures Testimony, and to the Tenor of the Gospel, so all
the Ancient Writers, Teachers, and Doctors of the Church pass it over with a
profound Silence. The first Foundations of it were laid in the later writings
of Augustine, who in his heat against Pelagius, let fall some expressions, which
some have unhappily gleaned up, to the establishing of this error; thereby
contradicting the Truth, and sufficiently gainsaying many others, and many
more and frequent expressions of the same Augustine. Afterward was this
Doctrine fomented by Dominicus a Friar, and the Monks of his Order; and at last
unhappily taken up by John Calvin (otherwise a man in diverse respects to be
commended) to the great staining of his reputation, and defamation both of the
Protestant and Christian Religion: which though it received the Degrees of the
Synod of Dort for its confirmation, has since lost ground, and begins to be
exploded by most men of Learning and Piety in all Protestant Churches. However
we should not quarrel for the silence of the Ancients, paucity of its
assertors, or for the learnedness of its Opposers, if we did observe it to have
any real bottom in the writings, or sayings of Christ and the Apostles, and
that it were not highly injurious to God himself, to Jesus Christ our Mediator
and Redeemer, and to the Power, Virtue, Nobility, and Excellency of his Blessed
Gospel, and lastly unto all mankind.

. II. First, It is highly injurious to God, because it makes him the author of
Sin; which of all things is most contrary to his nature. I confess the
assertors of this Principle deny this Consequence, but that is but a pure
illusion, seeing it so naturally follows from their Doctrine, and is equally
ridiculous, as if a man should pertinaciously deny that one and two makes
three. For if God has decreed that the reprobated ones shall perish, without
all respect to their evil deeds, but only of his own pleasure: and if he has
also decreed long before they were in being, or in any capacity to do good or
evil, that they should walk in those wicked ways, by which as by a secondary
means, they are led to that end, who I pray, is the first author and cause
thereof; but God who so willed and decreed? This is as natural a consequence,
as any can be. And therefore, although many of the Preachers of this doctrine
have sought out various, strange, strained and intricate distinctions, to
defend their opinion, and evite this horrid consequence; yet some, and that of
the most eminent of them, have been so plain in the matter, as they have put it
beyond all doubt. Of which I shall instance a few among many passages. Calv. in
cap. 3. Genesis Id. 1. Inst. c. 18. S. 1. Id. lib. de Praed. Idem lib. de provid.
Id Inst. cap. 23. S. 1
I say, that by the ordination and will of God, Adam fell. God would have man
to fall. Man is blinded by the will and commandment of God. We refer the causes
of hardening us to God. The highest or remote cause of hardening is the will of
God. It follows that the hidden counsel of God is the cause of hardening.
These are Calvin's expressions. Beza lib. de. praed.
God (says Beza) has predestined not only unto damnation but also unto the
causes of it, whomsoever he saw meet. Id de praed. adart. 1.
The degree of God cannot be excluded from the causes of corruption. Zanch de
excaecat. q. 5. Idem lib. 5 de not Dei cap. 2. de praed.
It is certain, (says Zanchius) that God is the First cause of obduration.
Reprobates are held so fast under Gods Almighty decree, that they cannot but
sin and perish. Paraeus lib. 3. de amiss. gratiae. c. 2. ibid. c. 1.
It is the opinion (says Paraeus) of our Doctors, that God did inevitably
decree the temptation and fall of Man. The creature sins indeed necessarily
by the most just Judgment of God. Our men do most rightly affirm, that the fall
of man was necessary and inevitable by accident, because of Gods decree.
Martyr. in Romans
God (says Martyr) does incline and force the wills of wicked men into great
sins. Zuing. lib. de prove. c. 5.
God (says Zwinglius) moves the robber to kill. He kills, God forcing him
thereunto. But thou will say, he is forced to sin, I permit truly, that he is
forced. Resp. ad Vorst. part. 1. p. 120.
Reprobate Persons (says Piscator) are absolutely ordained to this twofold end,
to undergo everlasting punishment, and necessarily to sin, and therefore to
sin, that they may be justly punished.

If these sayings do not plainly and evidently import, that God is the Author
of Sin, we must not then seek these Men's opinions from their words, but some
way else: it seems as if they had assumed to themselves that monstrous and
twofold will they feign of God; one by which they declare their minds openly,
and another more secret and hidden, which is quite contrary to the other. Nor
does it at all help them, to say, that man sins willingly, since that
willingness, proclivity and propensity to evil is, according to their judgment,
so necessarily imposed upon him, that he cannot but be willing, because God
has willed and decreed him so. Which shift is just as if I should take a Child
incapable to resist me, and throw it down from a great precipice, the weight of
the Child's body indeed makes it go readily down, and the violence of the fall
upon some rock or stone, beats out its Brains, and kills it. Now then, I pray,
though the body of the Child goes willingly down, (for I suppose it as to its
mind, is incapable of any will) and the weight of its body, and not any
immediate stroke of my hand, who perhaps am at a great distance, makes it die,
whether is the Child or I the proper cause of its death? Let any man of reason
judge, if Gods's part be (with them) as great, yea more immediate, in the sins
of men, (as, by the testimonies above brought, does appear) whether does not
this make him not only the Author of sins but more unjust, than the unjustest
of men?

III. Secondly, This Doctrine is injurious to God, because it makes him delight
in the death of sinners, yea and to will many to die in their sins, contrary to
these Scriptures, Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.3. 2 Pet. 3.9. For, if he has created
men only for this very end, that he might show forth his Justice and Power in
them, as these men affirm, and for effecting thereof, has not only withheld
from them the means of doing good, but also predestined the evil, that they
might fall into it; and that he inclines and forces them into great sins,
certainly he must necessarily delight in their death, and will them to die,
seeing against his own will he neither does nor can do any thing.

IV. Thirdly, It is highly injurious to Christ our Mediator, and to the
efficacy and excellency of his Gospel; for it renders his mediation
ineffectual, as if he had not by his sufferings thoroughly broken down the
middle wall, nor yet removed the wrath of God* or purchased the love of God
toward all mankind, if it was afore-decreed that it should be of no service to
the far greater part of mankind. It is to no purpose to alledg that the death
of Christ was of efficacy enough to have saved all mankind, if in effect its
virtue be not so far exended, as to put all mankind into a capacity of
Salvation.

Fourthly, It makes the preaching of the Gospel a mere mock and illusion, if
many of theseto whom it is preached, be by an irrevocable decree excluded from
being benefited by it, it wholly makes useless the preaching of Faith and
Repentance, and the whole tenor of the Gospel promises and threatenings, as
being all relative to a former decree, and means before appointed to such,
which because they cannot fail, man needs do nothing but wait for that
irresistible snatch, which will come, though it be but at the last hour of his
Life, if he be in the decree of Election. And be his diligence and waiting what
it can, he shall never attain it, if he belong to the decree of Reprobation.

Fifthly, It makes the coming of Christ and his propitiatory Sacrifice, which
the Scripture affirms to have been the fruit of Gods love to the world, and
transacted for the sins and Salvation of all men, to have been rather a
testimony of Gods wrath to the world, and one of the greatest judgments and
severest acts of Gods indignation toward mankind, it being only ordained to
save a very few, and for the hardening, obduring, and augmenting the
condemnation of the far greater number of men, because they believe not truly
in it; the cause of which unbelief again (as the Divines [so called] above
assert) is the hidden counsel of God: certainly the coming of Christ was never
to them a testimony of Gods love, but rather of his implacable wrath. And if
the World may be taken for the far greater number of such as live in it, God
never loved the world, according to this Doctrine, but rather hated it greatly,
in sending his Son to be crucified in it.

. V. Sixthly, This Doctrine is highly injurious to mankind, for it renders them
in a far worse condition than the devils in hell. For these were sometimes in a
capacity to have stood, and do suffer only for their guilt; whereas many
millions of men are for ever tormented, according to them, for Adams sin, which
they neither knew of, nor ever were accessory to. It renders them worse than
the Beasts of the Field, of whom the Master requires not more than they are
able to perform, and if they be killed, death to them is the end of sorrow;
whereas man is for ever tormented, for not doing that which he never was able
to do. It puts him into a far worse condition than Pharaoh put the Israelites:
for though he withheld Straw from them, yet by much labor and pains they
could have gotten it. But from men they make God to with hold all means of
Salvation, so that they can by no means attain it. Yea they place mankind in
that condition, which the Poets feign of Tantalus, who oppressed with thirst,
stands in water up to the chin, yet can by no means reach it with his tongue;
and being tormented with hunger, has Fruit hanging at his very Lips, yet so as
he can never lay hold on them with his Teeth; and these things are so near him
not to nourish him but to torment him. So do these men, they make the outward
Creation of the work of Providence, the smitings of the Conscience, sufficient
to convince the Heathens of sin, and to condemn and judge them, but not at all
to help them to Salvation. They make the preaching of the Gospel the offer of
Salvation by Christ, the use of the Sacraments, of Prayer and good works,
sufficient to condemn those they account reprobates within the Church, serving
only to inform them to beget a seeming faith and vain hope, yet because of a
secret impotency, which they had from their Infancy, all these are wholly
ineffectual to bring them the least step toward Salvation, and do only
contribute to render their condemnation the greater, and their torments the
more violent and intolerable.

Having thus briefly removed this false Doctrine, which stood in my way, because
they that are desirous may see it both Learnedly and Piously refuted by many
others, I come to the matter of our Proposition, which is, that God out of his
infinite love, who delights not in the death of a sinner, but that all should
live and be saved, has sent his only begotten Son into the World, that
whosoever believes in him might be saved; which also is again affirmed in the
sixth Proposition, in these words, Christ then tasted Death for every Man of
all kinds. Such is the evidence of this Truth, delivered almost wholly in the
express words of Scripture, that it will not need much probation. Also, because
our assertion herein is common with many others, who have both earnestly and
soundly according to the Scripture, pleaded for this Universal Redemption; I
shall be the more brief in it, that I may come to that, which may seem more
singularly and peculiarly ours.

VI. This Doctrine of Universal Redemption, or Christ's dying for all Men, is of
it self so evident from the Scripture Testimony, that there is scarce found any
other Article of the Christian Faith, so frequently, so plainly, and so
positively asserted. It is that, which makes the preaching of Christ to be
truly termed the Gospel, or an annunciation of glad tidings to all. Thus the
Angel declared the birth and coming of Christ to the Shepherds to be Luke 2.10.
Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People. He
says not to a few People. Now if this coming of Christ, had not brought a
possibility of Salvation to all, it should rather have been accounted bad
tidings of great sorrow, to most People, neither should the Angel have had
reason to have sung Peace on Earth, and good will toward men, if the greatest
part of mankind had been necessarily shut out from receiving any benefit by it.
How should Christ have sent out his to preach the Gospel to every Creature,
Mark. 16.15? a very comprehensive Commission! that is to every Son and Daughter
of mankind. Without all exception, he commands them to Preach Salvation to all,
repentance and remission of sins to all, warning every one, and exhorting every
one, as Paul did, Col. 1.28. Now how could they have preached the Gospel to
every Man, as became the Ministers of Jesus Christ, in much assurance; if
Salvation by that Gospel, had not been possible for all, what if some of those
had asked them, or should now ask any of these Doctors who deny the
Universallity of Christ's death, and yet preached it to all promiscuously, has
Christ dyed for me? How can they with confidence give a certain answer to this
question? If they give a conditional answer, as their principal obliges them
to do, and say, If thou repent, Christ has dyed for thee, does not the same
question still recur? Has Christ dyed for me, so as to make repentance
possible for me? To this they can answer nothing, unless they run in a Circle:
whereas the feet of those, that bring the glad tidings of the Gospel of Peace,
are said to be beautiful, for that they preach the common Salvation, repentance
unto all, offering a door of mercy and hope to all through Jesus Christ, who
gave himself a ransom for all. The Gospel invites all: and certainly by the
Gospel Christ intended not to deceive and delude the greater part of Mankind,
when he invites and cries, saying, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. If all then ought to seek after him, and
to look for Salvation by him, he must needs have made Salvation Possible to
all: for who is bound to seek after that, which is impossible? Certainly it
were a mock of men, to bid them do so. And such as deny, that by the death of
Christ, Salvation is made possible to all men, do most blasphemously make God
mock the World, in giving his servants a commission to preach the Gospel of
Salvation unto all, while he has before decreed, that it shall not be possible
for them to receive it. Would not this make the Lord to send forth his servants
with a lie in their Mouth, which were Blasphemous to think, commanding them to
bid all and every one believe, that Christ died for them, and had purchased
life and Salvation? Whereas it is no such thing, according to the forementioned
Doctrine. But seeing Christ after he arose, and perfected the work of our
Redemption, gave a commission to preach Repentance, remission of Sins, and
Salvation to all; it is manifest, that he dyed for all. For he, that has
Commissionated his servants thus to Preach, is a God of Truth, and no Mocker of
poor Mankind, neither does he require any of Man, that, which is simply
impossible for him to do; for that no Man is bound to do that, which is
impossible, is a principle of Truth engraven in every man's mind. And seeing he
is both a most Righteous and Merciful, God, it cannot at all stand neither with
his justice nor mercy, to bid such men repent or believe, to whom it is
impossible.

VII. Moreover, if we regard the Testimony of the Scripture in this matter,
where there is not one Scripture which I know of, that affirms Christ not to
dye for all, there are diverse, that positively and expressly assert he did, as 1 Timothy 2.1, 3, 4, 6. I exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, etc. for this
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men
to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the Truth, who gave himself a
ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Except we will have the Apostle
here to assert quite another thing then he intended, there can be nothing more
plain to confirm what we have asserted. And this Scripture does well answer to
that manner of arguing, which we have hitherto used: For first the Apostle here
recommends them to pray for all men. And to obviate such an objection, as if
they had said, with our Adversaries, Christ prayed not for the World, neither
wills he us to pray for all, because he wills not that all should be saved,
but has ordained many to be damned, that he might show forth his Justice in
them. He obviates I say, such an Objection, telling them that it is good and
acceptable in the sight of God, who will have all men to be saved. I desire to
know what can be more expressly affirmed, or can any two Propositions be stated
in terms more contradictory than these two, God wills not some to be saved,
and God wills all men to be saved, or God will have no man Perish. If we
believe the last, as the Apostle has affirmed, the first must be destroyed;
seeing of contradictory Propositions, the one being placed, the other is
destroyed. Whence, to conclude, he gives us a reason of his willingness that
all men should be saved, in these words, who gave himself a ransom for all, as
if he would have said, since Christ died for all, since he gave himself a
ransom for all, therefore he will have all men to be saved. This Christ himself
gives as the reason of God's love to the World, in these words, John 3.16. God
so loved the World, that he gave his Only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. Compared with 1
John 4.9. This [ whosoever] is an indefinit term, from which no man is
excluded. From all which then I thus argue,

Arg.
For whomsoever it is Lawful to pray, to them Salvation is possible:

But it is lawful to pray, for every individual man in the whole World.

Thereforc Salvation is possible unto them.

I prove the major proposition thus,

No man is bound to pray for that which is impossible to be attained.

But every man is bound and commanded to pray for all men.

Therefore it is not impossible to be obtained. I prove also this Proposition
further, thus:

No man is bound to pray, but in Faith.

But he that prays for that, which he judges simply impossible to be
obtained, cannot pray in Faith.

Therefore, etc. Again,

That which God wills, is not impossible:

But God wills all men to be saved:

Therefore it is not impossible. And Lastly,

These for whom our Savior gave himself a ransom, to such Salvation is
possible.

But our Savior gave himself a ransom for all:

Therefore Salvation is possible unto them.

VIII. This is very positively affirmed, Heb. 2.9. in these words, But we see
Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death
crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God might taste Death
for every man. He that will but open his eyes, may see this Truth here
asserted; if he tasted Death for every man, than certainly there is no man for
whom he did not taste death, then there is no man who may be made a sharer of
the benifit of it; for he came not to condemn the World, but that the World
through him might be saved, John 3.17. He came not to judge the World but to
save the World, John 12.47. Whereas according to the Doctrine of our
Adversaries, he behoved to come to condemn the World, and judge it, and not that
it might be saved by him, or to save it: for if he never came to bring
Salvation to a greater part of mankind, but that his coming, though it could
never do them good, yet shall augment their condemnation, from thence it
necessarily follows, that he came not of intention to save, but to judge and
condemn the greater part of the World, contrary to his own express Testimony,
and as the Apostle Paul, in the words above cited,, does assert affirmatively,
that God wills the Salvation of all, so does the Apostle Peter assert
negatively, that he wills not the perishing of any, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is
not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness, but is long
suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance. And this is Correspondent to that of the Prophet Ezekiel,
33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. If it be safe to
believe God, and trust in him, we must not think that he intends to cheat us,
by all these expressions through his Servants; but that he was in good earnest,
and that this will and desire of his has not taken effect, the blame is on our
parts, as shall be after spoken of, which could not be, if so be we never were
in any capacity of Salvation, or that Christ had never died for us, but left us
under an impossibility of Salvation, what means all those earnest invitations?
all those serious expostulations? all those regreting contemplations? wherewith
the Holy Scriptures are full, as, Why will ye dye, O House of Israel! Why will
ye not come unto me, that ye might have Life? I have waited to be gracious unto
you: I have sought to gather you: I have knocked at the door of your Hearts: Is
not your destructions of your selves? I have called all the day long. If men,
who are so invited, be under no capacity of being saved, if Salvation be
impossible unto them, shall we suppose God in this, to be no other, but like
the Author of a Romance, or the Master of a Comedy, who amuses and raises the
various Affections and Passions of his Spectators, by diverse and strange
Accidents, sometimes leading them into Hope, and sometimes into Despair, all
those actions in effect being but a pure Illusion, while he has appointed what
the conclusion of all shall be?

Thirdly, this Doctrine is abundantly confirmed by that of the Apostle, 1 John
2.1, 2. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ
the Righteous. And he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole World. The way which our Adversaries take to
evite this Testimony, is most foolish and ridiculous. The [World] here say
they, is the World of Believers. For this Commentary we have nothing, but their
own assertion, and so while it manifestly destroys the Text, may be justly
rejected. For first, let them show me if they can, in all the Scripture, where
the [ whole world] is taken for Believers only; I shall show them where it is
many times taken for the quite contrary, as the world knows me not, the world
receives me not. I am not of this world. Besides all these Scriptures, Psalm.
17.14. Isa. 13.11. Matthew. 18.1. John 7.7, 8.26.12.19.14.17.15.18,
19.17.14.18.20. 1 Cor. 1.21.2 12.6.2. Gal. 6.14. Jam. 1.27. 2 Pet. 2.20. 1 John
2.15.3.1. and 4.4, 5. and many more. Secondly, the Apostle, in this very place;
contradistinguisheth the World from the Saints, thus, And not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world. What means the Apostle by [ ours] here? Is
not that the sins of Believers? Was not he one of those Believers? And was not
this an universal Epistle written to all the Saints, that then were? So that,
according to these men's comment, there should be a very unnecessary and foolish
redundancy in the Apostles words; as if he had said, he is a Propitiation not
only for the sins of all Believers, but for the sins of all Believers. Is not
this to make the Apostles words void of good sense? Let them show us, where
ever there is such a manner of speaking in all the Scripture; where any of the
Penmen first name the Believers in concreto with themselves, and then
contradistinguish them from some other whole world of Believers. That [ whole
World] if it be of Believers, must not be the world we live in. But we need no
better interpreter for the Apostle than himself, who uses the very same
expression and phrase, in the same Epistle, c. 5.19. saying; We know that we
are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness: there cannot be found in
all the Scripture two places, which run more parallel, seeing in both, the same
Apostle, in the same Epistle, to the same persons, contradistinguisheth
himself, and the Saints, to whom he writes, from the whole world, which
according to these men's commentary, ought to be understood of Believers, as if
John had said, We know particular Believers are of God, but the whole World of
Believers lies in wickedness. What absurd wresting of Scripture were this? And
yet it may be as well pleaded for as the other, for they differ not at all,
seeing then that the Apostle John tells us plainly, that Christ not only died
for him, and for the Saints and Members of the Church of God, to whom he wrote,
but for the whole world. Let us then hold it for a certain and undoubted Truth,
notwithstanding the cavils of such as oppose.

This might also be proved from many more Scripture testimonies, if it were at
this season needful. All the Fathers, so called, and Doctors of the Church, for
the first four centuries preached this Doctrine, according to which they boldly
held forth the Gospel of Christ, and efficacy of Death, inviting and entreating
the Heathens to come and be partakers of the benefits of it, showing them, how
there was a door open for them all to be saved, through Jesus Christ; not
telling them that God had predestined any of them to Damnation, or had made
Salvation impossible to them, by withholding Power and Grace, necessary to
believe from them. But of many of their sayings, which might be alleged, I
shall only instance a few.

Austin, on the 95 Psalm, says, The Blood of Christ is of no less value than
the whole World.

Prosper ad Gall. c. 9. The redeemer of the World gave his blood for the World,
and the World would not be redeemed, because the darkness did not receive the
Light. He that says, the Savior was not crucified for the redemption of the
whole World, looks not to the virtue of the Sacrament, but to the part of
Infidels, since the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is the price of the whole
World, from which redemption they are strangers, who either delighting in their
captivity would not be redeemed, or after they were redeemed, returned to the
same servitude.

The same Prosper, in his answer to Vencentius's first objection. Seeing
therefore because of one common nature, and cause in Truth; undertaken by our
Lord, all are rightly said to be redeemed, and nevertheless all are not brought
out of Captivity; the property of Redemption, without doubt, belongs to those
from whom the Prince of this World is shut out, and now are not vessels of the
devil, but Members of Christ, whose Death was so bestowed upon mankind, that it
belonged to the Redemption of such, who are not to be regenerated. But so, that
which was done by the Example of one for all, might by a singular mystery, be
celebrated in every one. For the Cup of Immortality, which is made up of our
Infirmity and the Divine Power, has indeed that in it, which may profit all,
but if it be not drunk, it does not heal.

The Author de vocat. Gentium, lib. 11. cap. 6. There is no cause to doubt, but
that our Lord Jesus Christ died for Sinners and wicked Men, and if there can be
any found, who may be said not to be of this number, Christ has not died for
all, he made himself a Redeemer for the whole World.

Chrysistom, on the 1. chap. of John. If he inlightens every man coming into
the World, how comes it, that so many men remain without Light? For all do not
so much as acknowledge Christ, how then does he inlighten every Man? he
illuminates indeed so far as in him is, but if any of their own accord, closing
the eyes of their mind, will not direct their eyes unto the beams of this
Light, the cause that they remain in darkness is not from the nature of the
Light, but through their own malignity, who willingly have rendered themselves
unworthy of so great a gift. But why be lieved they not? Because they would
not. Christ did his part.

The Arelatensian Synod, held about the year 490, Pronounced him accursed, who
should say that Christ has not dyed for all, or that he would not have all men
to be saved.

Ambr. on Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8. The mystical Sun of Righteousness is arisen to
all, he came to all, he suffered for all, and rose again for all. And therefore
he suffered, that he might take away the Sin of the World: But if any one
believed not in Christ, he bros himself of this general Benefit, even as if one
by closing the Windows, should hold out the Sunbeams; the Sun is not therefore
not arisen to all, because such a one has so robbed himself of its heat: But
the Sun keeps its Prerogative, it is such a ones imprudence, that he shuts
himself out from the common benefit of the Light.

The same Man in his 11 Book of Cain and Abel, cap. 13. says; Therefore he
brought unto all, the means of Health, that whosoever should Perish, may
ascribe to himself the causes of his Death, who would not be cured, when he had
the remedy, by which he might have escaped.

IX. Seeing then that this Doctrine of the Universality of Christ's death is so
certain and agreeable to the Scripture Testimony, and to the sense of the
purest Antiquity, it may be wondered how so many, some whereof have been
esteemed not only learned, but also pious, have been capable to fall into so
gross and strange an error. But the cause of this does evidently appear, in
that the way and method, by which the virtue and efficacy of this death is
communicated to all men, has not been rightly understood; or indeed has been
erroneously affirmed. The Pelagians, ascribing to all man's will and nature,
denied man to have any seed of sin conveyed to him from Adam. And the
Semi-Pelagians making Grace as a Gift following upon Man's merit or right
improving of his nature, according to their known Principle, Facienti quod in
se est, Deus non denegat gratiam.

This gave Augustine, Prosper, and some others occasion, laboring, in
opposition to these Opinions, to magnify the Grace of God, and paint out the
corruption of Man's Nature, (as the Proverb is, of those that seek to make
straight a crooked stick) to incline to the other extreme. So also the
Reformers, Luther, and others, finding among other errors, the strange
Expressions, used by some of the Popish Scholasticks, concerning Free Will, and
how much the tendency of their Principles is to exalt Man's Nature, and lessen
Gods Grace, having all those sayings of Augustine and others, for a pattern;
through the like mistake run upon the same extreme. Tho afterward the
Lutherans seeing how far Calvin and his followers drove this matter, (who as a
Man of subtle and profound judgment, foreseeing where it would land, resolved
above-board to assert, that God had decreed the means as well as the end (and
therefore had ordained men to sin, and excites them thereto, which he labors
earnestly to defend) and that there was no avoiding the making God the Author
of sin, thereby received occasion to discern the falsity of this Doctrine, and
disclaimed it; as appears by the latter writings of Melancthon, and the
Monpelgartension Conference, where Lucas Osiander, one of the Collocutors,
terms it impious, calls it a making God the Author of Sin, and a horrid and
horrible Blasphemy. Yet, because none of those who have asserted this Universal
Redemption, since the Reformation, have given a clear distinct and satisfactory
testimony, how it is communicated to all, and so have fallen short of fully
declaring the perfection of the Gospel Dispensation; others have been thereby
the more strengthened in their errors. Which I shall illustrate by one singular
example.

The Arminians and other assertors of universal Grace, use this as a chief
Argument.

That which every man is bound to believe is true:

But every man is bound to believe that Christ died for them.

Therefore, etc.

Of this Argument the other party deny the Assumption, saying, that they who
never heard of Christ, are not obliged to believe in him, and seeing the
Remonstrants (as they are commonly called) do generally themselves acknowledge,
that without the outward knowledge of Christ there is no Salvation; that gives
the other yet party a stronger Argument for their precise decree of
Reprobation. For, say they, seeing we all see really and in effect, that God
has withheld from many Generations, and yet from many Nations, that Knowledge
which is absolutely needful to Salvation, and so has rendered it simply
impossible unto them, why may he not as well withhold the Grace necessary to
make a saving application of that Knowledge where it is preached? For these is
no ground to say, that this were injustice in God, or impartiality, more than
his leaving those others in utter ignorance; the one being but a withholding
Grace to apprehend the object of Faith, the other a with drawing the object it
self. For answer to this, they are forced to draw a conclusion from their
former Hypothesis of Christ? dying for all, and God's mercy and justice,
saying, that if these Heathens, who live in these remote places, where the
outward knowledge of Christ is not, did improve that common knowledge they have,
to whom the outward Creation is for an object of Faith, by which they may
gather that there is a God, then the Lord would, by some Providence, either
send an Angel to tell them of Christ, or conveigh the Scripture to them, or
bring them some way to an opportunity to meet with such as might inform them.
Which, as it gives always too much to the power and strength of man's will and
nature, and savours a little of Socinianism and Pelagianism, or at least of
Semi-pelagianism, so, since it is only built upon probable conjectures, neither
has it evidence enough to convince any, strongly tainted with the other
Doctrine, nor yet does it make the equity and wonderful Harmony of Gods Mercy
and Justice toward all, so manifest to the understanding. So that I have often
observed, that these assertors of Universal Grace, did far more pithily and
strongly overturn the false Doctrine of their Adversaries, then they did
establish and confirm the truth and certainty of their own. And though they
have proof sufficient from the Holy Scriptures to confirm the Universality of
Christ's Death, and that none are precisely, by any irrevocable decree,
excluded from Salvation, yet I find when they are expressed, in the respects
above mentioned, to show how God has so far equally extended the capacity to
partake of the benefit of Christ's Death unto all, as to communicate unto them
a sufficient way of so doing, they are somewhat in a strait, and are put more
to give us their conjectures, from the certainty of the former presupposed
Truth, to wit, (that because Christ has certainly dyed for all, and God has
not rendered Salvation impossible to any, therefore there must be some way or
other, by which they may be saved, which must be by improving some common
Grace, or by gathering from the works of Creation and Providence) then by
really demonstrating, by convincing, and Spiritual Arguments, what that way is.

. X. It falls out then, that as Darkness, and the great Apostasy, came not
upon the Christian World all at once, but by several degrees, one thing making
way for another, until that thick and gross vail came to be overspread,
wherewith the Nations were so blindly covered, from the seventh and eighth,
until the sixteenth Centuries, even as the Darkness of the Night, comes not
upon the outward Creation at once, but by degrees, according as the Sun
declines in each Horizon; so neither did that full and clear Light and Knowledge
of the glorious Dispensation, of the Gospel of Christ, appear all at once, the
work of the first Witnesses being more to restifie against, and discover the
abuses of the Apostasy, than to establish the Truth in purity. He that comes
to build a new City, must first remove the old Rubbish, before he can see to
lay a new Foundation; and he that comes to a House greatly polluted and full of
Dirt, will first sweep away and remove the Filth, before he put up his own good
and new Furniture. The dawning of the day dispells the Darkness, and makes us
see the things, that are most conspicuous; but the distinct discovering and
discerning of things, o as to make a certain and perfect observation, is
reserved for the arising of the Sun, and its shining in full brightness. And we
can, from a certain Experience, boldly affirm, that the not waiting for this,
but building among, yea, and with the old popish rubbish, and setting up,
before a full purgation has been to most Protestants the foundation of many a
mistake, and an occasion of unspeakable hurt. Therefore the Lord God, who, as
he sees meet, does communicate and make known to man, the more full evident
and perfect knowledge of his everlasting Truth, has been pleased to reserve the
more full discovery of this glorious and Evangelical Dispensation to this our
Age (albeit diverse testimonies have thereunto been born by some noted men in
several Ages, as shall hereafter appear) and for the greater augmentation of
the Glory of his Grace, that no man might have whereof to boast, has raised up
a few despicable and illiterate men, and for the most part Mechanics, to be
the Dispensators of it, by which Gospel, all the scruples, doubts, hesitations
and objections above mentioned, are easily and evidently answered, and the
justice as well as mercy of God, according to their Divine and Heavenly
Harmony, are exhibited, established and confirmed, according to which certain
Light and Gospel, as the knowledge thereof has been manifested to us, by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ in us, fortified by our own sensible experience, and
sealed by the testimony of the Spirit in our Hearts; we can confidently affirm,
and clearly evince, according to the testimony of the Holy Scriptures, the
following points:

. XI. First, That God, who out of his infinite love, sent his Son the Lord
Jesus Christ into the World, who tasted Death for every man, has given to
every man, whether Jew or Gentile, Turk or Scythian, Indian, or Barbarian, of
whatsoever Nation, Country, or Place, a certain day or time of visitation,
during which day or time, it is possible for them to be saved, and to partake
of the Fruit of Christ's Death.

Secondly, That for this end God has communicated and given unto every man, a
measure of the Light of his own Son, a measure of Grace, or a measure of the
Spirit; which the Scripture expresses by several names, as sometimes of the
Seed of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.18.19. The Light that makes all things manifest,
Ephesians. 5.13. The Word of God, Romans 10.18. or Manifestation of the Spirit given to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. a Talent, Mat. 25.15. a little Leaven, The Gospel
preached in every Creature, Col. 1.23.

Thirdly, That God, in and by this Light and Seed, invites, calls, exhorts, and
strives with every man, in order to save them; which, as it is received and not
resisted, works the Salvation of all, even of those who are ignorant of the
Death and Sufferings of Christ, and of Adam's Fall, both by bringing them to a
sense of their own misery, and to be sharers in the Sufferings of Christ
inwardly, and by making them partakers of his Resurrection, in becoming Holy,
Pure, and Righteous, and recovered of their sins; by which also are saved they
that have the knowledge of Christ outwardly, in that it opens their
understanding, rightly to use and apply the things delivered in the Scriptures,
and to receive the saving use of them. But that this may be resisted and
rejected in both, in which then God is said to be resisted and pressed down,
and Christ to be again crucified, and put to open shame, in and among men, and
to to those as thus resist and refuse him, he becomes their condemnation.

First then, according to this Doctrine, the Mercy of God is excellently well
exhibited, in that none are necessarily shut out from Salvation, and his
Justice is demonstrated, in that he condemns none, but such to whom he really
made offer of Salvation, affording them the means sufficient thereunto.

Secondly, This Doctrine, if well weighed, will be found to be the Foundation of
Christianity, Salvation, and Assurance.

Thirdly, It agrees and answers with the whole tenor of the Gospel Promises and
Threats, and with the Nature of the Ministry of Christ, according to which the
Gospel, Salvation, Repentance is commanded to be preached to every Creature,
without respect of Nations, Kindreds, Families or Tongues.

Fourthly, It magnifies and commends the merits and death of Christ, in that it
not only accounts them sufficient to save all, but declares them to be brought
so nigh unto all as thereby to be put into the nearest capacity of Salvation.

Fifthly, It exalts above all, the Grace of God, to which it attributes all
good, even the least and smallest actions, that are so, ascribing thereunto not
only the first beginnings and motions of good, but also the whole conversion
and salvation of the Soul.

Sixthly, It contradicts, overturns and enervates the false Doctrine of the
Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians, Socinians and others, who exalt the Light of Nature,
the liberty of man's will, in that it wholly excludes the natural man from
having any place or portion in his own Salvation, by any acting, moving, or
working of his own, until he be first quickened, raised up and acted by God's
Spirit.

Seventhly, As it makes the whole Salvation of Man solely and alone to depend
upon God, so it makes his condemnation wholly, and in every respect, to be
himself, in that he refused, and resisted somewhat, that from God wrestled and
strove in his heart; and forces him to acknowledge God's just Judgment, in
rejecting him, and forsaking of him.

Eighthly, It takes away all ground of Despair, in that it gives every one
ground of hope and certain assurance, that they may be saved; neither does feed
any in security, in that none are certain how soon their day may expire, and
therefore it is a constant incitement and provocation, and lively encouragement
to every man, to forsake evil, and close with that which is good.

Ninthly, It wonderfully commends as well the certainty of the Christian
Religion, among Infidels, as it manifests its own verity to all, in that its
confirmed and established by the experiences of all men, seeing there was never
yet a man found in any place of the Earth, however barbarous and wild, but has
acknowledged that at some time or other, less or more, he has found somewhat
in his heart, reproving him for some things evil, which he has done,
threatening a certain horror, if he continued in them, as also promising and
communicating a certain peace and sweetness, as he has given way to it, and
not resisted it.

Tenthly, It wonderfully shows the excellent Wisdom of God, by which he has
made the means of Salvation so universal and comprehensive, that it is not
needful to recur to those miraculous and strange ways: seeing according to this
most true Doctrine, the Gospel reaches all, of whatsoever condition, age, or
nation.

Eleventhly, It is really, and effectively, though not in so many words, yet by
deeds; established and confirmed by all the Preachers, Promulgators and Doctors
of the Christian Religion, that ever were, or now are, even by those, that
otherways in their judgment, oppose this Doctrine; in that they all, wherever
they have been, or are, or whatsoever people, place, or Country they come to,
do preach to the people, and to every individual among them, that they may be
saved, entreating and desiring them to believe in Christ, who has died for
them? so that what they deny in the general, they acknowledge of every
particular: there being no man to whom they do not preach, in order to
Salvation, telling him, Jesus Christ calls and wills him to believe and be
Saved, and that if he refuse, he shall therefore be condemned, and that his
condemnation is of himself; such is the Evidence and Virtue of Truth, that it
constrains its Adversaries, even against their wills, to plead for it.

Lastly, According to this Doctrine, the former argument used by the Armenians,
and evited by the Calvinists, concerning every man's being bound to believe,
that Christ died for him, is, by altering the assumption, rendered invincible:
thus,

That, which every man is bound to believe is true:

But every man is bound to believe, that God is merciful unto him:

Therefore, etc.

This assumption no man can deny, seeing his mercys are said to be over all his
works. And herein, the Scripture every way declares the mercy of God to be, in
that he invites and calls Sinners to Repenance, and has opened a way of
Salvation for them; so that, though those men be not bound to believe the
History of Christ's Death and Passion, who never came to know of it, yet they
are bound to believe, that God will be merciful to them, if they follow his
ways, and that he is merciful unto them, in that he reproves them for evil, and
incourages them to good. Neither ought any man to believe, that God is
unmerciful to him, or that he has from the beginning ordained him to come into
the World, that he might be left to his own evil inclinations, and so do
wickedly as a means appointed by God, to bring him to eternal Damnation; which
were it true, as our Adversaries affirm it to be of many thousands, I see no
reason why a man might not believe, for certainly a man may believe the Truth.

As it manifestly appears, from the thing itself, that these good and excellent
consequences follow, from the belief of this Doctrine, so from the probation of
them it will yet more evidently appear. To which before I come, it is requisite
to speak somewhat, concerning the state of the controversy, which will bring
great Light to the matter. For, from the not right understanding of a matter,
under debate, sometimes both arguments on the one hand, and objections on the
other, are brought, which do no way hit the case; and hereby also our sense and
judgment therein will be more fully understood and opened.

XII. First then, by this day and time of Visitation, which we say God gives
unto all, during which they may be saved, we do not understand the whole time
of every man's Life, though to some it may be extended even to the very Hour of
Death; as we see in the example of the Thief converted upon the Cross: but,
such a season at lest as sufficiently exonereth God of every man's condemnation,
which to some may be sooner, and to others latter, according as the Lord in his
Wisdom sees meet. So that, many men may outlive this day, after which there
may be no possibility of Salvation to them, and God justly suffers them to be
hardened, as a just punishment of their unbelief, and even raises them up, as
Instruments of Wrath, and makes them a Scourge one against another. Whence, to
men in this condition, may be fitly applied those Scriptures, which are abused,
to prove that God incites men necessarily to sin: this is notably expressed by
the Apostle, Romans 1. from ver. 17. to the end, but especially ver. 28. And even
as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient. That many may out
live this day of Gods gracious visitation unto them, is shown by the Example of
Esau, Heb. 12.16.17. who sold his Birth right, so he had it once, and was
capable to have kept it; but afterward when he would have inherited the
Blessing he was rejected. This appears also by Christ's weeping over Jerusalem,
Luke 19.42. saying, If thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong
unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes. Which plainly imports a
time, when they might have known them, which now was removed from them, though
they were yet alive; but of this more shall be said hereafter.

XIII. Secondly, By this Seed, Grace and Word of God, and Light, wherewith we
say, every man is enlightened, and has a measure of it, which strives with
them, in order to save them; and which may, by the stubbornness and wickedness
of man's will, be quenched, bruised, wounded, pressed down, slain and crucified:
We understand not the proper Essence and Nature of God, precisely taken, which
is not devisible into parts and measures, as being a most pure, simple Being,
void of all composition or division, and therefore can neither be resisted,
hurt, wounded, crucified, or slain, by all the efforts and strength of men: But
we understand a Spiritual, Heavenly, and invisible Principle, in which God, as
Father, Son, and Spirit, dwells; a measure of which Divine and Glorious Life,
is in all men, as a Seed, which of its own nature, draws, invites, and inclines
to God; and this we call Vehiculum Dei, or the Spiritual Body of Christ, the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, which came down from Heaven, of which all the Saints
do feed, and are thereby nourished unto Eternal Life. And, as every unrighteous
Action is witnessed against, and reproved by this Light and Seed, so by such
actions it is hurt, wounded, and slain, and resiles or flees from them, even as
the Flesh of Men flees from that which is of a contrary nature to it. Now,
because it is never separated from God nor Christ, but where ever it is, God
and Christ are as wrapped up therein. Therefore, and in that respect, as it is
resisted, God is said to be resisted; and where it is born down, God is said to
be pressed, as a Cart under sheaves, and Christ is said to be slain and
crucified. And, on the contrary, as this Seed is received in the heart, and
suffered to bring forth its natural and proper effect, Christ comes to be
formed and raised, of which the Scripture makes so much mention, calling it the
New Man, Christ within, the hope of Glory. This is that Christ within, which we
are heard so much to speak and declare of, every where preaching him up, and
exhorting People to believe in the Light, and obey it, that they may come to
know Christ in them, to deliver them from all sin.

But by this we do not at all intend either to equal our selves to that Holy
Man the Lord Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, in whom all the
fullness of the Godhead dwell bodily, nor to destroy the reality of his present
Existence, so neither do we, as some have falsely caluminated us. For, though we
affirm that Christ dwells in us, yet not immediately, but mediately, as he is
in that Seed, which is in us, whereas he, to wit, the Eternal Word, which was
with God, and was God, dwelt immediately in that Holy Man. He then is as the
Head, and we as the Members; he the Vine, and we the Branches. Now, as the Soul
of Man dwells otherwise, and in a far more immediate manner, in the Head, and
in the Heart, than in the Hands, or Legs. And as the Sap, Virtue and Life of
the Vine lodges far otherwise in the Stock and Root, than in the Branches; so
God dwells otherwise in the Man Jesus, than in us. We also freely reject the
Heresy of Appollonarius, who denied him to have any Soul, but said, the Body
was only acted by the Godhead. As also the error of Eutyches, who made the
Manhood to be wholly swallowed up of the Godhead; wherefore, as we believe he
was a true and real man, so we also believe, that he continues so to be
glorified in the Heavens, in Soul and Body, by whom God shall judge the World,
in the great and general day of Judgment.

. XIV. Thirdly, We understand not this Seed, Light or Grace, to be an accident,
as most men ignorantly do, but a real Spiritual Substance, which the Soul of
man is capable to feel and apprehend, from which that real, Spiritual, inward
Birth in Believers arises, called the New Creature, the new Man in the Heart.
This seems strange to carnal minded men, because they are not acquainted with
it; but we know it, and are sensible of it, by a true and certain experience,
though it be hard for man in his natural wisdom to comprehend it, until he come
to feel it in himself, and if he should, holding it in the mear notion, it
would avail him little. Yet we are able to make it appear to be true, and that
our Faith, concerning it, is not without a solid ground: for it is in, and by
this inward and substantial Seed in our Hearts, as it comes to receive
nourishment, and to have a birth or geniture in us, that we come to have those
Spiritual Senses raised, by which we are made capable of tasting, smelling,
seeing and handling the things of God. For a man cannot reach unto those things
by his natural Spirit and Senses, as is above declared.

Next, we know it to be a Substance, because it subsists in the hearts of
wicked men, even while they are in their wickedness, as shall be hereafter
proved at large. Now no accident can be in a subject, without it give the
subject its own denomination, as where whiteness is in a subject, there the
subject is called white. So we distinguish betwixt Holiness, as it is an
accident, which denominates man so, as the Seed receives a place in him, and
betwixt this Holy substantial Seed, which many times lies in man's heart, as a
naked grain in a stony ground. So also, as we may distinguish betwixt Health
and Medicine; Health cannot be in the Body, without the Body be called
Healthful, because Health is an accident, but Medicine may be in a Body that is
most unhealthful, for that it is a substance. And, as when a Medicine begins to
work, the Body may in some respect be called healthful, and in some respect
unhealthful; so we acknowledge, as this Divine Medicine receives place in Man's
Heart, it may denominate him in some part holy and good, though there remain
yet a corrupted unmortified part, or some part of the evil humors unpurged
out; for where two contrary accidents are in one subject, as Health and
Sickness in a Body, the subject receives its denomination from the accident,
which prevails most; so many Men are called Saints, good and Holy Men, and that
truly when this Holy Seed has wrought in them in a good measure, and has
somewhat leavened them into its Nature, though they may be yet liable to many
infirmities and weaknesses, yea, and to some iniquities. For, as the seed of
sin, and ground of corruption, yea, and the capacity of yielding thereunto, and
sometimes actual falling, does not denominate a good and holy man, impious; so
neither does the Seed of Righteousness in evil men, and the possibili^y of
their becoming one with it, denominate them good or holy.

XV. Fourthly, We do not hereby intend any ways to lessen or derogate from the
Atonement and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ: But on the contrary, do magnify and
exalt it. For, as we believe all those things to have been certainly
transacted, which are recorded in the Holy Scriptures, concerning the Birth,
Life, Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ; so we do also
believe, that it is the duty of every one to believe it, to whom it pleases God
to reveal the same, and to bring them the knowledge of it; yea, we believe it
were damnable unbelief not to believe, when so declared, but to resist that
Holy Seed, which, as minded, would lead and incline every one to believe it, as
it is offered unto them; though it reveals not in every one the outwardly and
explicit knowledge of it, nevertheless it always assenteth to it, ubi
declaratur, where it is declared. Nevertheless, as we firmly believe it was
necessary, that Christ should come, that by his Death and Sufferings he might
offer up himself a Sacrifice to God for our sins, who his own self bore our
sins in his own Body on the Tree; so we believe that the remission of sins,
which any partake of, is only in, and by virtue of that most satisfactory
Sacrifice, and no otherwise. For it is by the obedience of that One that the
Free-gift is come upon all to justification; for we affirm, that as all men
partake of the Fruit of Adam's Fall, in that by reason of that evil Seed, which
through him is communicated unto them, they are prone and inclined unto evil,
though thousands of thousands be ignorant of Adam's Fall, neither ever knew of
the eating of the forbidden Fruit; so also many may come to feel the influence
of this Holy and Divine Seed and Light, and be turned from evil to good by it,
though they knew nothing of Christ's coming in the Flesh, through whose
Obedience and Sufferings it is purchased unto them. And, as we affirm it is
absolutely needful, that those do believe the History of Christ's outward
Appearance, whom it pleased God to bring to the knowledge of it; so we do freely
confess, that even that outward knowledge is very comfortable to such as are
subject to, and led by the inward Seed and Light. For, not only does the sense
of Christ's Love and Sufferings tend to humble them, but they are thereby also
strenthened in their Faith, and encouraged to follow that excellent pattern
which he has left us, who suffered for us, as says the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet
2.21. Leaving us an example that we should follow his steps: And many times we
are greatly edified and refreshed with the gracious sayings, which proceed out
of his mouth. The History then is profitable and comfortable, with the Mystery,
and never without it; but the Mystery is and may be profitable, without the
explicit and outward knowledge of the History.

But Fifthly, This brings us to another question, to wit, Whether Christ be in
all men or no: Which sometimes has been asked us, and Arguments brought
against it, because indeed it is to be found in some of our Writings, that
Christ is in all men, and we often are heard in our public Meetings and
Declarations, to desire every man to know and be acquainted with, Christ in
them, telling them that Christ is in them. It is fit therefore, for removing of
all mistakes, to say something in this place concerning this matter. We have
said before, how that a Divine Spiritual, and Supernatural Light is in all Men;
how that that Divine Supernatural Light or Seed, is Vehiculum Dei: how that God
and Christ dwells in it, and is never separated from it; also how that ( as
it is received and closed with, in the heart) Christ comes to be formed and
brought forth. But we are far from ever having said, that Christ is thus formed
in all men, or in the wicked. For that is a great attainment, which the Apostle
traveled, that it might be brought forth, in the Galatians. Neither is Christ
in all men by way of union, or indeed, to speak strictly, by way of
inhabitation, because this inhabitation, as it is generally taken, imports
union, or the manner of Christ's being in the Saints. As it is written, I will
dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. But in regard Christ is in all
men, as in a Seed, yea, and that he never is, nor can be, separate from that
Holy, pure Seed and Light, which is in all men; therefore may it be said, in a
larger sense, that he is in all, even as we observed before. The Scripture
says, Amos 2.13. God is pressed down, as a Cart under Sheaves, and Christ
Crucified in the ungodly, though to speak properly and strictly, neither can
God be pressed down, nor Christ as God, be Crucified. In this respect then, as
he is in the Seed, which is in all men, we have said Christ is in all men, and
have preached and directed all men to Christ in them; who lies crucified in
them, by their Sins and Iniquities, that they may look upon him whom they have
pierced, and repent: whereby he that now lies, as it were, slain and buried in
them, may come to be raised, and have dominion in their hearts over all. And
thus also the Apostle Paul preached to the Corinthians and Galatians, 1 Cor.
2.2. Christ Crucified in them, (...) as the Greek has it. This Jesus Christ
was that, which the Apostle desired to know in them, and make known unto them,
that they might come to be sensible, how they had thus been Crucifying Christ,
that so they might repent and be saved. And, for as much as Christ is called
that Light, that enlightens every man; The Light of the World: Therefore the
Light is taken for Christ, who truly is the Fountain of Light, and has his
Habitation in it for ever. Thus the Light of Christ is sometimes called Christ,
i. e. that, in which Christ is, and from which he is never separated.

XVI. Sixthly, It will manifestly appear, by what is above said, that we
understand not this Divines Principle to be any part of man's nature, nor yet
to be any relics of any good, which Adam lost by his fall: in that we make it
a distinct separate thing from man's Soul, and all the faculties of it. Yet
such is the malice of our Adversaries, that they cease not sometimes to
Calumniate us, as if we preached up a natural light or the Light of Man's
natural Conscience. Next there are that lean to the doctrine of Socinus and
Pelagius, who persuade themselves, through mistake, and out of no ill design to
injure us, as if this, which we preach up, were some natural power and faculty
of the Soul, and that we only differ in the wording of it, and not in the thing
it self. Whereas there can be no greater difference, than is betwixt us in that
matter: For we certainly know, that this Light, of which we speak, is not only
distinct, but of a different nature from the Soul of Man and its Faculties.
Indeed that Man as he is a rational Creature, has reason as a natural faculty
of his Soul, by which he can discern things that are rational. We deny not, for
this is a property natural and essential to him, by which he can know and learn
many Arts and Sciences, beyond what any other Animal can do; by the mere Animal
Principle. Neither do we deny, but by this rational Principle, Man may
apprehend in his Brain, and in the notion, a knowledge of God, and Spiritual
things: Yet, that not being the right Organ, as in the second Proposition, has
more at length been signified, it cannot profit him toward Salvation; but
rather hinders, and indeed the great cause of the Apostasy has been, that
man has sought to fathom the things of God, in and by this natural and
rational Principle, and to build up a Religion in it, neglecting and
overlooking this Principle and Seed of God in the heart, so that herein, in the
most Universal and Catholic sense, has Antichrist in every Man set up
himself, and sits in the Temple of God, as God and above every thing, that
is called God. For men being the Temple of the Holy Ghost, as says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.16. when the rational Principle sets it self up there above
the Seed of God, to reign and rule, as a Prince in Spiritual things, while the
Holy Seed is wounded and bruised, there is Antichrist in every Man, or
somewhat exalted above and against Christ. Nevertheless we do not hereby
affirm, as if man had received his Reason to no purpose, or to be of no service
unto him, in no wise: We look upon Reason as fit to order and rule man in
things Natural: For as God gave two great Lights to rule the outward World, the
Sun and Moon, the greater Light to rule the Day* and the lesser Light to rule
the Night; So has he given Man the Light of his Son a Spiritual Divine Light,
to rule him in the things Spiritual; and the light of Reason, to rule him in
things Natural. And even as the Moon borrows her Light from the Sun, so ought
Men, if they would be rightly and comfortably ordered in natural things, to
have their Reason enlightened by this Divine and pure Light. Which enlightened
Reason in those that obey, and follow this true Light, we confess may be useful
to man, even in Spiritual things, as it is still subservient, and subject to
the other: even as the animal life in man, regulated and ordered by his Reason,
helps him in going about things, that are rational. We do further rightly
distinguish this from man's natural Conscience; for Conscience, being that in
man, which arises from the natural faculties of man's Soul, may be defiled and
corrupted, it is said expressly of the Impure, Tit. 1.15. That even their mind
and conscience is defiled. But this Light can never be corrupted nor defiled,
neither did it ever consent to evil or wickedness in any, for it is said
expressly, that it makes all things manifest, that are proveable, Ephesians. 5.13. and
so is a faithful witness for God against every unrighteousness in Man. Now
Conscience, to define it truly, comes from [ conscire] and is that knowledge
which arises in man's heart, from what agrees, contradicts, or is contrary
to any thing believed by him, whereby he becomes conscious to himself, that he
transgresses by doing that which he is persuaded he ought not to do. So that
the mind being once blinded, or defiled with a wrong belief, there arises a
conscience from that belief, which troubles him, when he goes against it. As
for Example, a Turk who has possessed himself with a false belief, that it is
unlawful for him to drink Wine, if he do it, his conscience smites him for it:
But though he keep many Concubines, his conscience troubles him not, because
that his judgment is already defiled with a false Opinion that is lawful for
him to do the one, and unlawful to do the other. Whereas if the Light of Christ
in him were minded, it would reprove him, not only for committing Fornication,
but also as he became obedient thereunto, inform him that Mahomet is an
Impostor; as well as Socrates was informed by it, in his day of the falsity of
the Heathens Gods.

So if a Papist eat Flesh in Lent, or be not dilligent enough in adoration of
Saints and Images, or if he should contemn Images, his Conscience would smite
him for it; because his judgment is already blinded with a false belief
concerning these things; whereas the Light of Christ never consented to any of
those Abominations. Thus then man's Natural Conscience is sufficiently
distinguished from it; for Conscience follows the judgment, does not inform
it. But this Light as it is received, removes the blindness of the judgment,
opens the understanding, and rectifies both the Judgment and Conscience. So we
confess also that Conscience is an excellent thing, where it is rightly
informed and enlightened. Whereof some of us have fitly compared it to a
Lanthorn, and the Light of Christ to the Candle. A Lanthorn is useful, when a
clear Candle burns and shines in it: but otherwise of no use. To the Light of
Christ then in the Conscience, and not to man's Natural Conscience, it is that
we continually commend men, this, not that, is it which we preach up, and
direct people to, as to a most certain Guide unto Life Eternal.

Lastly, this Light, Seed, etc. appears to be no power or natural faculty of
man's mind; because a man that is in his health, can, when he pleases, stir up,
move and exercise the Faculties of his Soul: he is absolute master of them, and
except there be some Natural cause or impediment in the way, he can use them at
his pleasure: But this Light and Seed of God in man he cannot move and stir up,
when he pleases, but it moves, blows, and strives with man, as the Lord sees
meet. For, though there be a possibility of Salvation to every man, during the
day of his Visitation, yet cannot a man at any time when he pleases, or has
some sense of his misery, stir up that Light and Grace, so as to procure to
himself tenderness of heart, but he must wait for it: which comes upon all, at
certain times and seasons, wherein it works powerfully upon the Soul, mightily
tenders it, and breaks it, at which time if man resist it not, but close with
it, he comes to know Salvation by it. Even as the Lake of Bethsaida did not
cure all those that washed in it, but such only as washed first, after the
Angel had moved upon the Waters; so God moves in love to mankind, in this Seed
in his heart, at some singular times, setting his Sins in order before him, and
seriously inviting him to repentance, offering to him remission of Sins and
Salvation; which if man accept of, he may be Saved. Now, there is no man alive,
and I am confident there shall be none to whom this Paper shall come, who if
they will deal faithfully and honestly with their own hearts, will not be
forced to acknowledge, but they have been sensible of this in some measure, less
or more, which is a thing that man cannot bring upon himself, with all his
pains and industry. This then, O Man and Woman! is the day of God's gracious
Visitation to thy Soul, which thou shall be happy for ever if thou resist not.
This is the day of the Lord, which as Christ says, is like the Lightening
which shines from the East unto the West. And the Wind or Spirit, which blows
upon the heart, and no man knows whither it goes, nor whence it comes.

XVII. And lastly, this leads me to speak concerning the manner of this Seed,
or Lights operation in the Hearts of all men, which will show yet more
manifestly how we differ vastly from all those, that exalt a natural power or
light in man; and how our Principle leads, above all others, to attribute our
whole Salvation to the mere Power, Spirit, and Grace of God.

To them then that ask us, after this manner; How do ye differ from the
Pelagians and Armenians? For if two men have equal sufficient Light and Grace,
and the one be saved by it, and the other not, is it not, because the one
improves it, the other not? is not then the will of man the cause of the one's
Salvation, beyond the other? I say to such we thus answer, that as the Grace
and Light, in all, is sufficient to save all, and of its own Nature, would save
all, so it strives and wrestles with all, for to save them; he that resists its
striving, is the cause of his own condemnation; he that resists it not, it
becomes his Salvation; so that in him that is saved, the working is of the
Grace, and not of the man, and its a passiveness, rather than an act: though
afterward, as man is wrought upon, there is a will raised in him, by which he
comes to be a co-worker with the Grace: For according to that of Augustine, he
that made us without us, will not save us without us. So that the first step is
not by man's working, but by his not contrary working. And we believe, that at
these singular seasons of every man's visitation, abovementioned, as man is
wholly unable of himself, to work with the Grace, neither can he move one step
out of the natural condition, until the Grace lay hold upon him; so it is
possible to him to be passive, and not to resist it, as it is possible for him
to resist it. So we say the Grace of God works in and upon man's nature, which
though of it self, wholly corrupted and defiled, and prone to evil, yet, is
capable to be wrought upon by the Grace of God, even as Iron, though a hard and
cold Metal of it self, may be warmed and softened by the heat of the Fire, and
wax melted by the Sun. And as Iron or Wax, when removed from the Fire or Sun,
returns to its former condition of coldness, and hardness: so man's heart as
it resists, or retires from the Grace of God, returns to its former condition
again. I have often had the manner of God's working, in order to Salvation
toward all men, illustrated to my mind by one or two clear examples, which I
shall here add, for the information of others.

The First is, of a man heavily diseased; to whom I compare man in his fallen and
natural condition. I suppose God, who is the great Physician, not only to give
this man Physic, after he has used all the Industry he can for his own
health, by any skill or knowledge of his own. As those that say, If a man
reprove his reason, or natural faculties, God will super add Grace. Or, as
others say, that he comes and makes offer of a remedy to this man outwardly,
leaving it to the Liberty of man's will, either to receive it, or reject it.
But he, even the Lord, this great Physician, comes and pours the remedy into
his mouth, and as it were, lays him in his Bed, so that if the Sick-man he
but passive, it will necessarily work the effect: but if he be stubborn and
untoward, and will needs rise up and go forth into the cold, or eat such fruits
as are hurtful to him, while the Medicine should operate; then, though of its
nature it tends to cure him, yet it will prove destructive to him, because of
those obstructions, which it meets with. Now, as the man that should thus
undo himself, would certainly be the cause of his own death; so who will say,
that if cured, he owes not his health wholly to the Physician, and not to any
deed of his own? seeing his part was not any action, but a passiveness.

The Second example is, of diverse men lying in a dark pit together, where all
their Senses are so stupefied, that they are scarce sensible of their own
misery. To this I compare man, in his natural, corrupt, falln condition, I
suppose not, that any of these men wrestling to deliver themselves, do thereby
stir up or engage one able to deliver them, to give them his help. Saying with
himself, I see one of these men willing to be delivered, and doing what in him
lies, therefore he deserves to be assisted: As say the Socinians, Pelagians and
Semi-Pelagians. Neither do I suppose, that this deliverer comes to the top of
the Pit, and puts down a Ladder, desiring them that will, to come up, and so
put them upon using their own strength and will to come up; As do the Jesuits
and Armenians: yet as they say, such are not delivered without the Grace,
seeing the Grace is that Ladder, by which they were delivered. But I suppose
that the deliverer comes at certain times, and fully discovers and informs them
of the great misery and hazard they are in, if they continue in that noysom and
pestiferous place, yea forces them to a certain sense of their misery (for the
wickedest men at times are made sensible of their misery by Gods visitation)
and not only so, but lays hold upon them, and gives them a pull, in order to
lift them out of their misery, which if they resist not, will save them, only
they may resist it. This being applied as the former, does the same way
Illustrate the matter. Neither is the Grace of God frustrated, though the
effect of it be diverse, according to its object: being the ministration of
mercy and love, in those that reject it not, but receive it, John 1.12. but the
ministration of Wrath and Condemnation, in those, that do reject, John 3.19.
Even as the Sun, by one act or operation melts and softeneth the Wax, and
hardens the Clay. The nature of the Sun is to cherish the Creation, and
therefore the Living are refreshed by it, and the Flowers send sorth a good
favor, as it shines upon them, and the Fruits of the Trees are ripened; yet
cast forth a dead Carcass, a thing without Life, and the same reflection of the
Sun will cause it to stink, and putrefie it, yet is not the Sun said thereby
frustrate of its proper effect. So every man, during the day of his visitation,
is shined upon by the Sun of Righteousness, and capable of being influenced by
it, so as to send forth good Fruit and a good Savor, and to be melted by it:
but when he has sinned out his day, then the same Sun hardens him, as it does
the clay, and makes his wickedness more to appear and putrefie, and send forth
an Evil Savor.

XVIII. Lastly, As we truly affirm that God wills no man to perish, and
therefore, has given to all; Grace sufficient for Salvation, so we do not
deny, but that in a special manner, he works in some, in whom Grace so
prevails, that they necessarily obtain Salvation, neither does God suffer
them to resist. For, it were absurd to say, that God had not far otherwise
extended himself toward the Virgin Mary, and the Apostle Paul, than toward
many others. Neither can we affirm, that God equally loved the beloved Disciple
John and Judas the Traitor. In so far nevertheless, as none wanted such a
measure of Grace, by which they might have been saved, all are justly
inexcusable. And also, God working in those, to whom this prevalency of Grace
is given, does so hide himself, to shut out all security and presumption, that
such may be humbled, and the free Grace of God magnified, and all reputed to be
of the Free Gift, and nothing from the strength of it self. Those also who
perish, when they remember those times of God's Visitation toward them,
wherein he wrestled with them, by his Light and Spirit, are forced to confess
that there was a time, wherein the door of Mercy was open unto them, and that
they are justly condemned, because they rejected their own Salvation.

Thus both the Mercy and Justice of God is established, and the will and
strength of man is brought down, and rejected, his condemnation is made to be
of himself, and his Salvation only to depend upon God: Also by these positions,
two great objections, which often are brought against this Doctrine, are well
solved.

The first is deduced from those places of Scripture, wherein God seems
precisely to have decreed and predestined some to Salvation: and for that end
to have ordained certain means, which fall not out to others, as in the calling
of Abraham, David, and others, and in the Conversion of Paul, for these being
numbered among such, to whom this prevalency is given, the objection is easily
loosed.

The second is drawn from those places, wherein God seems to have ordained some
wicked persons to destruction, and therefore to have obdur'd their hearts, to
force them unto great sins, and to have raised them up, that he might show in
them his Power: who if they be numbered amongst those Men, whose day of
Visitation is past over, that objection is also solved, as will more evidently
appear to any one, that will make a particular application of those things,
which I at this time, for brevities sake, thought meet to pass over.

XIX. Having thus clearly and evidently stated the question, and opened our
mind and judgment in this matter, as diverse objections are hereby prevented, so
will it make our probation both the easier and the shorter.

The first thing to be proved, is, that God has given to every man a day or
time of Visitation, wherein it is possible for him to be saved. If we can prove
that there is a day and time given, in which those might have been saved that
actually perish, the matter is done. For none deny but those that are saved,
have a day of Visitation. This then appears by the regrets and complaints,
which the Spirit of God throughout the whole Scriptures makes, even to those
that did perish; challenging them for that they did not except of, nor close
with God's Visitation and offer of mercy to them. Thus the Lord expresses
himself then first of all to Cain, Genesis 4.6, 7. And the Lord said unto Cain,
why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? If thou do not well, sin lies at the door. This was
said to Cain, before he slew his Brother Abel, when the evil seed began to
tempt him, and work in his heart, we see how God gave warning to Cain in
season, and in the day of his visitation toward him acceptance and remission,
if he did well: For this interrogation, shall thou not be accepted? imports an
affirmative, thou shall be accepted, if thou do well. So that if we may trust
God Almighty, the Fountain of all Truth and Equity, it was possible in a day,
even for Cain to be accepted. Neither could God have proposed the doing of
good, as a condition if he had not given Cain sufficient strength, whereby he
was capable to do good. This the Lord himself also shows, even that he gave a
day of Visitation to the old World, Genesis 6.3. And the Lord said, My Spirit
shall not always strive in Man; for so it ought to be translated. This
manifestly implies, that his Spirit did strive with man, and does strive with
them for a Season; which season expiring, God cease to strive with them, in
order to save them; for the Spirit of God cannot be said to strive with Man,
after the day of his Visitation is expired, seeing it naturally, and without
any resistance, works its effect then, to wit, continually to judge and condemn
them. From this day of Visitation, that God has given to every one, is it,
that he is said to wait to be gracious, Isa. 30.18. and to be long-suffering,
Exodus 34.6. Number. 14.18. Psalm. 86.15. Jer. 15.15. Here the Prophet Jeremy, in
his Prayer, lays hold upon the long-suffering of God, and in his expostulating
with God, he shuts out the objection of our Adversaries, in the 18 verse, Why
is my pain Perpetual? and my wound Incurable? which refuses to be healed, will thou altogether be unto me as a Liar, and as Waters that fail? Whereas
according to our Adversaries Opinion, the Pain of the most part of men is
perpetual, and their wound altogether incurable. Yea the offer of the Gospel
and of Salvation unto them, is, as a lie, and as waters, that fail, being never
intended to be of any effect unto them. The Apostle Peter says expressly, that
this long-suffering of God waited, in the days of Noah, for those of the old
World, 1 Pet. 3.20. which being compared with that of Genesis 6.3. before
mentioned, does sufficiently hold forth our Proposition. And that none may
object that this long-suffering or striving of the Lord was not in order to
save them, the same Apostle says expressly, 2 Pet. 3.15. that the
long-suffering of God is to be accounted Salvation, and with this
long-suffering a little before, in the 9 verse, he couples that God is not
willing any should perish. Where taking himself to be his own interpreter, as
he is most fit, he holds forth that those to whom the Lord is long-suffering
(which he declares he was to the wicked of the old World, and is now to all,
not willing that any should perish) they are to account this long-suffering of
God to them, Salvation. Now how, or in what respect, can they account it
Salvation, if there be not so much as a possibility of Salvation conveyed to
them therein? For it were not Salvation to them, if they could not be saved by
it. In this matter Peter further refers to the writings of Paul, holding forth
this to have been the Universal Doctrine. Where it is observable, what he adds
upon this occasion, how there are some things in Paul 's Epistles, hard to be
understood, which the unstable and unlearned wrest to their own destruction,
insinuating plainly this of those expressions in Paul's Epistles, as the 9 to
the Romans, etc. which some unlearned in Spiritual things, did make to
contradict the Truth of God's long-suffering toward all, in which he wills
not any of them should perish, and in which they all may be saved. Would to God
many had taken more heed, than they had done, to this Advertisement! That place
of the Apostle Paul, which Peter seems here most particularly to hint at, does
much contribute also to clear the matter, Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches
of his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? Paul speaks here to the
unregenerate, and to the wicked, who in the following verse, he says, Treasure
up wrath unto the day of wrath: And to such he commends the riches of the
forbearance and long-suffering of God; showing that the tendency of God's
goodness leads to repentance. How could it necessarily tend, to lead them to
repentance? How could it be called riches or goodness to them, if there were
not a time, wherein they might repent by it, and come to be sharers of the
riches exhibited in it? From all which I thus argue.

If God plead with the wicked, from the possibility of their being accepted; if
God's Spirit strive in them for a season, in order to save them who afterward
perish; if he wait to be gracious unto them; if he be long-suffering toward
them; And if this long-suffering be Salvation to them while it endures, during
which time God wills them not to Perish, but exhibiteth to them the riches of
his goodness and forbearance, to lead them to repentance; then there is a day
of Visitation, wherein such might have been; or some such now may be saved, who
have perished and may if they repent, not perish.

But the first is true.

Therefore also the Last.

XX. Secondly, this appears from the Prophet Isa. 5.4. What could I have done
more to my Vineyard? for in the 2 verse he says, he has fenced it, and
gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest Vine, and yet
says he, when I looked it should have brought forth grapes, it brought forth
Wild grapes. Wherefore he calls the inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of
Judea, to judge betwixt him and his vineyard, saying, what could I have done
more to my vineyard, than I have done in it? and yet as is said, it brought
forth wild grapes. Which was applied to many in Israel, who refused God's
Mercy. The same example is used by Christ, Matthew. 21.33. Mar. 12.1. Luke 20.9.
where Jesus shows how to some a Vineyard was planted, and all things given
necessary for them to get them fruit to pay or restore to their Master; and how
the Master many times waited to be merciful to them, in sending servants after
servants, and passing by many offenses, before he determined to destroy and
cast them out. First then, this cannot be understood of the Saints, or of such
as repent and are saved, for, it is said expressly, he will destroy them.
Neither would the parable any ways have answered the end, for which it is
alleged, if these men had not been in a Capacity to have done good, yea, such
was their capacity, that Christ says in the Prophet, What could I have done
more? So that it is more than manifest, that by this parable repeated in three
sundry Evangelists, Christ holds forth his long-suffering toward men, and
their wickedness, to whom means of Salvation being afforded, do nevertheless
resist, to their own condemnation. To these also are parallel these Scriptures,
Prove. ^1.24, 25, 26. Jer. 18.9, 10. Matthew. 18.32, 33, 34. Acts 13.46.

Lastly, that there is a day of Visitation given to the wicked, wherein they
might have been saved, and, which being expired, they are shut out from
Salvation, appears evidently by Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem, expressed
in three sundry places, Matthew. 23.37. Luke 13.34.19. v. 41, 42. And when he was
come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known,
even thou, at least, in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but
now they are hid from thine Eyes: Than which, nothing can be said more evident,
to prove our Doctrine. For first, he insinuates, that there was a day, wherein
the inhabitants of Jerusalem might have known those things that belonged to
their Peace. Secondly, that during that day, he was willing to have gathered
them, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens. A familiar Example, yet very
significative in this case, which shows, that the offer of Salvation made unto
them, was not in vain on his part, but as really, and with as great
cheerfulness and willingness, as a Hen gathers her Chickens. Such as is the
love and care of the Hen toward her Brood, such is the care of Christ to
gather lost Men and Women, to redeem them out of their corrupt and degenerate
state. Thirdly, That because they refused, the things belonging to their Peace
were hid from their Eyes. Why were they hid? because ye would not suffer me to
gather you; ye would not see those things that are good for you, in the season
of God's Love toward you; and therefore now, that day being expired, ye cannot
see them: and, for a farther judgment, God suffers you to be hardened in
unbelief.

So it is after real offer of Mercy and Salvation rejected, that God hardens
Men's Hearts, and not before. Thus, that saying is verified, To him that has,
shall be given, and from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that
which he has. This may seem a riddle, yet is, according to this Doctrine,
easily solved. He has not, because he has lost the season of using it, and so
to him it is, now, as nothing; for Christ uses this expression, Matthew. 25.26.
upon the occasion of taking the one Talent from the sloathful Servant, and
giving it to him that was diligent, which Talent was no ways insufficient of
it self, but of the same nature with those given to the others; and therefore
the Lord had reason to exact the profit of it, proportionably, as well as from
the rest. So, I say, it is after the rejecting of the day of Visitation, that
the Judgment of Obduration is inflicted upon Men and Women, as Christ
pronounces it upon the Jews, out of Isa. 6.9. which all the four Evangelists
make mention of; Mat. 13.14. Mat. 4.12. Luke 8.10. Joh. 12.40. And last of all,
the Apostle Paul, after he had made offer of the Gospel of Salvation to the
Jews at Rome, pronounces the same, Acts 28.26. after that some believed not;
Well spoke the Holy Ghost, by Isaiah the Prophet, unto our Fathers, saying, Go
unto this People, and say, hearing* ye shall hear and shall not understand, and
seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For the heart of this People is
waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes have they
closed, least they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.
So it appears, that God would have them to see, but they closed their Eyes; and
therefore they are justly hardened. Of this matter Cyrillus* Alexandrinus upon
John, lib. 6. cap. 21. speaks well, answering to this objection. But some may
say, if Christ be come into the World, that those that see may be blinded,
their Blindness is not imputed unto them, but it rather seems that Christ is
the cause of their Blindness, who says, he is come into the world, that those
that see may be blinded. But (says he) they speak not rationally, who object
these things unto God, and are not afraid to call him the Author of evil. For,
as the sensible Sun is carried upon our Horizon, that it may communicate the
gift of its clearness unto all, and make its light shine upon all; but if any
one close his Eyelids, or willingly turn himself from the Sun, refusing the
benefit of its light, he wants its illumination and remains in darkness, not
through defect of the Sun, but through his own fault. So that the true Sun, who
came to enlighten those that sat in darkness, and in the region of the shadow
of death, visited the Earth, for this cause, that he might communicate unto
all, the gift of Knowledge and Grace, and illuminate the inward Eyes of all by a
peculiar splendour: but many reject the Gift of this Heavenly Light, freely
given to them, and have closed the eyes of their minds, least so excellent an
illumination or irradiation of the Eternal Light should shine unto them. It is
not then through defect of the true Son, but only through their own iniquity
and hardness, for, as the wise man says (Wisdom 2.) their wickedness has
blinded them. From all which I thus argue.

If there was a day, wherein the obstinate Jews might have known the things
that belong to their peace, which, because they reject it, was hid from their
Eyes: If there was a time, wherein Christ would have gathered them, who,
because they refused, could not be gathered; then such as might have been saved
do actually perish, that slighted the day of God's Visitation toward them,
wherein they might have been converted and saved:

But the First is true:

Therefore also the Last.

XXI. Secondly, That which comes in the second place to be proved is, that
whereby God offers to work this Salvation, during the day of every man's
visitation, and that is that he has given to every man a measure of saving,
sufficient, and supernatural Light and Grace. This I shall do, by Gods
Assistance, by some plain and clear testimonies of the Scripture.

First, from that of John 1.9. That was the true Light, which inlightneth every
man that comes into the world. This place does so clearly favor us, that, by
some, it is called the Quakers Text, for it does evidently demonstrate our
Assertion, so that it scarce needs either consequence or deduction, seeing it
self is a consequence of two Propositions, asserted in the former verses, from
which it follows, as a conclusion, in the very terms of our Faith. The first
of these Propositions is, the Life that is in him, is the Light of Men; the
second the Light shines in the Darkness, and from these two he infers, and he
is the true Light, that lights every man that comes into the world.

From whence, I do in short observe, that this Divine Apostle calls Christ the
Light of Men, and gives us this as one of the chief Properties, at least
considerably and especially, to be observed by us, seeing hereby, as he is the
Light, and, as we walk with him in that Light, which he communicates to us, we
come to have fellowship and communion with him, as the same Apostle says
elsewhere, 1 John 1.7. Secondly, That this Light shines in Darkness, though
the Darkness comprehend it not. Thirdly, that this true Light inlighteneth
every man, that comes into the World. Where the Apostle, being directed by
God's Spirit, has carefully avoided their captiousness, that would have
restricted this to any certain number. Where every one is, there is none
excluded. Next, Should they be so obstinate, as sometimes they are, as to say,
that this [ every man] is only every one of the Elect: these words following,
every man that comes into the world, would obviate that objection. So that it
is plain, there comes no Man into the World, whom Christ has not enlightened,
in some measure, and in whose dark Heart this Light does not shine, though the
Darkness comprehend it not, yet it shines there, and the nature thereof is to
dispel the Darkness, where Men shut not their Eyes upon it. Now, for what end
this Light is given, is expressed ver. 7. where John is said to come for a
witness, to bear witness to the Light, that all men through it might believe;
to wit, through the Light, (...), which does very well agree with (...), as
being the nearest antecedent; though most translators have (to make it suit
with their own Doctrine) made it relate to John, as if all men were to believe
through John. For which, as there is nothing directly in the Text, so it is
contrary to the very strain of the Context. For, seeing Christ has lighted
every Man with this Light, is it not that they may come to believe through it?
All could not believe through John, because all men could not know of John's
Testimony, whereas every man being lighted by this, may come there through to
believe. John shined not in the Darkness, but this Light shines in the
Darkness, that, having dispelled the Darkness, it may produce and beget Faith.
And lastly, We must believe through that, and become believers through that, by
walking in which, fellowship with God is known and enjoyed, but, as has been
above observed, it is by walking in this Light, that we have this communion and
fellowship, not by walking in John, which were nonsense. So that this relative
(...) must needs be referred to the Light, whereof John bears witness, that,
through that Light, wherewith Christ has lighted every man, all men might come
to believe. Seeing then this Light is the Light of Jesus Christ, and the Light,
through which men come to believe, I think it needs not be doubted but that it
is a supernatural, saving, and sufficient Light. If it were not supernatural,
it could not be properly called the Light of Jesus, for, though all things be
his, and of him, and from him, yet those things, which are common and peculiar
to our Nature, as being a part of them, we are not said in so special a manner
to have from Christ. Moreover, the Evangelist is holding out to us here the
office of Christ, as Mediator, and the benefits, which, from him, as such, do
redound unto us.

Secondly, It cannot be any of the Natural Gifts or Faculties of our Soul,
whereby we are said here to be enlightened, because this Light is said to shine
in the Darkness, and cannot be comprehended by it. Now, this Darkness is no
other, but man's natural condition and state, in which natural state he can
easily comprehend, and does comprehend, those things that are peculiar and
common to him, as such. That Man in his Natural Condition is called Darkness,
see Ephesians. 5.8. For ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord.
And in other places, as Acts 26.18. Col. 1.3. 1 These. 5.5. where the condition
of man in his natural state, is termed Darkness: Therefore, I say, this Light
cannot be any Natural Property or Faculty of Man's Soul, but a supernatural
Gift and Grace of Christ.

Thirdly, It is Sufficient and Saving.

That which is given, that all men through it may believe, must needs be Saving
and Sufficient: That, by walking in which fellowship with the Saints, and the
Blood of Christ, which cleanses from all sin, is possessed, must be Sufficient:

But such is the LIGHT, 1 John 1.7.

Therefore, etc.

Moreover,

That, which we are commanded to believe in, that we may become the Children of
the Light, must be a Supernatural, Sufficient, and Saving Principle:

But we are commanded to believe in this Light:

Therefore, etc.

The Proposition cannot be denied. The Assumption is Christ's own words, John
12.36. While ye have Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children
of the Light.

To this they object, that by [ Light] here is understood Christ's outward
Person, in whom he would have them believe.

That they ought to have believed in Christ, that is, that he was the MESSIAH,
that was to come, is not denied; but, how they evince, that Christ intended
that here, I see not: nay, the place it self shows the contrary, by those
words, While ye have Light, and by the verse going before, Walk while ye have
the Light, least Darkness come upon you. Which words import, that, when that
Light, in which they were to believe, was removed, then they should lose the
capacity, or season of believing. Now, this could not be understood of Christ's
Person, the Jews might have believed in him, and many did savingly believe in
him, as all Christians do at this day, when the Person, to wit, his bodily
presence or outward man, is far removed from them. So that, this Light, in
which they were commanded to believe, must be that inward, Spiritual Light,
that shines in their Hearts, for a season, even during the day of Man's
Visitation; which, while it continues to call, invite, and exhort, Men are
said to have it, and may believe in it: but, when refuse to believe in it, and
reject it, then it cease to be light, to show them the way, but leaves the
sense of their unfaithfulness, as a sting in their Conscience; which is a
terror and darkness unto them, and upon them, in which they cannot know where
to go, neither work any ways profitably, in order to their Salvation: and
therefore to such rebellious ones, the day of the Lord is said to be darkness,
and not light, Amos 5.18.

From whence it appears, that, tho many receive not the Light, (as the darkness
comprehends it not) nevertheless this Saving Light shines in all, that it may
save them. Concerning which also, Cyrillus Alexandrinus says well, and defends
our Principle. With great diligence and watchfulness (says he) does the
Apostle John endeavor to anticipate and prevent the vain thoughts of men, Upon
Job lib. 1. cap. 11.
for there is here a wonderful method of sublime things, and overturning of
Objections, he has just now called the Son the true Light; by whom he
affirmed, that every man coming into the world was enlightened, yea, that he was
in the World, and the world was made by him. One may then object, if the Word
of God be the Light, and if this Light inlighten the hearts of men, and suggest
unto men piety, and the understanding of things; if he was always in the
world, and was the Creator or Builder of the world; why was he so long unknown
unto the world? It seems rather to follow, because he was unknown to the world,
therefore the world was not enlightened by him, nor he totally Light. Let any
should so object, he divinely infers [and the world knew him not] Let not the
world (says he) accuse the Word of God and his Eternal Light, but its own
weakness: For the Son inlightens, but the creature rejects the Grace, that is
given unto it, and abuses the sharpness of understanding granted it, by which
it might have naturally known God, and as a prodigal has turned its sight to
the Creatures, neglected to go forward, and through lazyness and negligence,
buried the illumination and despised this Grace. Which that the disciple of
Paul might not do, he was commanded to watch, therefore it is to be imputed to
their wickedness, who are illuminated and not unto the Light; for as albeit the
sun rises upon all, yet he, that is blind, receives no benefit thereby; none
thence can justly accuse the brightness of the Sun, but will ascribe the cause
of not seeing to the blindness: So I judge, it is only to be understood of the
Only Begotten Son of God, for he is the true Light, and sends forth his
brightness upon all, but the God of this world, as Paul says, has blinded the
minds of those, that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4. That the Light of the Gospel
shine not unto them. We say then, that darkness is come upon men, not because
they are altogether deprived of Light; for Nature retains still the strength
of understanding divinely given it, but because man is dulled by an evil habit,
and become worse, and has made the measure of Grace, in some respect to
languish. When therefore the like befalls to man, the Psalmist justly Prays,
crying, Open mine Eyes, that I may behold the wonderful things of thy Law. For
the Law was given, that this Light might be kindled in us, the blearedness of
the eyes of our minds being wiped away, and the blindness being removed, which
detained us, in our former ignorance. By these words then, the world is accused
as ungrateful and unsensible, not knowing its Author, nor bringing forth the
good fruit of the illumination that it may now seem to be said truly of all,
which was of old said, by the Prophet, of the Jews, I expected that it should
have brought forth grapes, but it brought forth wild grapes. For the good fruit
of the illumination was the knowledge of the Only Begotten, as a cluster hanging
from a fruitful branch, etc.

From which it appears, Cyrillus believed, that a saving illumination was given
unto all. For as to what he speaks of Nature, he understands it not of the
common nature of man by it self, but of that nature which has the strength of
understanding Divinely given it: for he understands this Universal Illumination
to be of the same kind with that Grace, of which Paul makes mention to Timothy,
saying, Neglect not the Grace that is in thee. Now it is not to be believed,
that Cyrillus was so ignorant, as to judge that Grace to have been some natural
gift.

XXII. That this Saving Light and Seed, or a measure of it is given to all,
Christ tells expressly, in the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. from v. 18.
Mark. 4. and Luke 8.11. he says, that this seed sown in those several sorts of
grounds is the Word of the Kingdom, which the Apostle calls the Word of Faith,
Romans 10.8. Ja. 1.21. (...) the implanted ingrafted Word, which is able to save
the Soul; the words themselves declare that it is that, which is Saving, in the
nature of it, for in the good ground, it fructified abundantly.

Let us then observe, that this Seed of the Kingdom, this Saving Supernatural
and Sufficient Word was really sown in the stony, thorny ground, and by the
way-side, where it did not profit, but became useless, as to these grounds. It
was, I say, the same Seed, that was sown in the good ground. It is then the
fear of Persecution, and deceitfulness of riches (as Christ himself
interprets the parable) which hinders this Seed to grow in the hearts of
many. Not but that in its own nature it is sufficient, being the same with that
which grows up and prospers in the hearts of those, who receive it. So
that, though all are not saved by it, yet there is a Seed of Salvation planted
and sown in the hearts of all, by God, which would grow up and redeem the Soul,
if it were not choked and hindered. Concerning this parable Victor Antiochenus
(on the 4 chap. of Mark, as he is cited by Vossius in his Pelagian History,
Book 7.) says, that Our Lord Christ has liberally sown the Divine Seed of the
Word, and proposed it to all, without respect of persons; and, as he, that
sows, distinguishes not betwixt ground and ground, but simply casts in the
seed, without distinction, so our Savior has offered the food of the Divine
Word, so far as was his part, although he was not ignorant what would become of
many. Lastly, he so behaved himself, as he might justly say, what should I have
done, than I have not done? And to this answers the parable of the Talents,
Mat. 25. he, that had two Talents, was accepted, as well as he, that had five,
because he used them to his Master's profit. And he, that had one, might have
done so: his Talent was of the same nature with the rest, it was capable to
have proportionably brought forth its interest, as the rest. And so, tho there
be not a like proportion of Grace given to all, to some five Talents, to some
two Talents, and to some but one Talent; yet there is given to all that, which
is sufficient, and no more is required than according to that which is given.
For, unto whomsoever much is given, from him shall much be required, Luke
12.48. he that had the two Talents, was accepted for giving four, nothing less
than he that gave the ten, so should he also that gave the one, if he had given
two, and no doubt one was capable to have produced two, as well as five to have
produced ten, or two four.

XXIII. Thirdly, this Saving Spiritual Light is the Gospel, which the Apostle
says expressly is preached in every creature under Heaven, even that very
Gospel, whereof Paul was a Minister, Col. 1.23. For the Gospel is not a mere
declaration of good things, being the power of God unto Salvation, to all
those, that believe, Romans 1.16. tho the outward declaration of the Gospel be
taken sometimes for the Gospel, yet it is but figuratively, and by a Metonymie.
For, to speak properly, the Gospel is this inward Power and Life, which
preaches glad tidings in the hearts of all men, offering Salvation unto them,
and seeking to redeem them from their iniquities, and therefore it is said to
be preached in every creature under Heaven: whereas there are many thousands of
men and women, to whom the outward Gospel was never preached. Therefore the
Apostle Paul, Romans 1. where he says the Gospel is the Power of God unto
Salvation, adds, that therein is revealed the Righteousness of God from faith
to faith, and also the wrath of God against such as hold the Truth of God in
unrighteousness: For this reason (says he) because that, which may be known of
God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. Now that which may
be known of God, is known by the Gospel, which was manifest in them. For those
of whom the Apostle speaks, had no outward Gospel preached unto them, so that
it was by the inward manifestation of the knowledge of God in them, which is
indeed the Gospel preached in man, that the righteousness of God is revealed
from faith to faith, that is, it reveals to the So^l that, which is just, good
and righteous, and that, as the Soul receives it, and believes righteousness,
comes more and more to be revealed, from one degree of Faith to another. For
tho, as the following verse says, the outward Creation declares the Power of
God, yet that which may be known of him, is manifest within: By which inward
manifestation, we are made capable to see and discern the Eternal Power and
Godhead in the outward Creation; so were it not for this inward Principle, we
could no more understand the invisible things of God by the outward visible
Creation, than a blind man can see and discern the variety of shapes and
colors, or judge of the beauty of the outward Creation. Therefore he says,
First, That which may be known of God is manifest in them, and in and by that,
they may read and understand the Power and Godhead in those things, that are
outward and visible. And tho any might pretend that the outward Creation does,
of it self, without any supernatural, or Saving Principle, in the heart, even
declare to the natural man, that there is a God: Yet, what would such a
knowledge avail, if it did not also communicate to me what the will of God is,
and how I shall do that, which is acceptable to him? For the outward Creation,
tho it may beget a persuasion that there is some Eternal Power or Virtue, by
which the World has had its beginning, yet it does not tell me, nor does it
inform me of that which is just, holy, and righteous, how I shall be delivered
from my temptations and evil affections, and come unto righteousness: That must
be from some inward manifestation in my heart. Whereas those Gentiles, of whom
the Apostle speaks, knew by that inward Law and manifestation of the knowledge
of God in them, to distinguish betwixt good and evil, as in the next chapter
appears, of which we shall speak hereafter. The Prophet Micah speaking of man
indefinitely, or in general, declares this Mic. 6.8. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good. And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? He does not say, God
requires, till he has first assured, that he has showed unto them. Now
because this is showed unto all men, and manifest in them, therefore, says the
Apostle, is the wrath of God revealed against them, for that they hold the
Truth in unrighteousness, that is, the measure of Truth, the Light, the Seed,
the Grace in them; for that they hide the Talent in the Earth, that is, in the
earthly and unrighteous parts in their hearts, and suffer it not to bring forth
fruit, but to be choked with the sensual cares of this life, the fear of
reproach, and the deceitfulness of riches, as by the parables above mentioned,
does appear. But the Apostle Paul opens and illustrates this matter yet more,
Romans 10. where he declares, that the Word, which he preached (now the Word,
which he preached, and the Gospel, which he preached and whereof he was a
Minister, is one and the same) is not far off, but nigh, in the heart and in
the Mouth; which done, he frames as it were, the objection of our adversaries,
in the 12 and 15 verses, How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? How shall they hear without a Preacher? This he answers in the 18 verse,
saying But (I say) have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went forth into
all the Earth, and their words unto the end of the World; insinuating, that
this Divine Preacher has sounded in the ears and hearts of all men; for of the
outward Apostles that saying was not true, neither then, nor many hundred years
after, yea for ought we know, there may be yet great and spacious Nations and
Kingdoms, who never have heard of Christ, nor his Apostles, as outwardly. This
inward and Powerful Word of God is yet more fully described in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, c. 4. v. 12, 13. For the Word of God is quick, and sharper than a
two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. The virtues of this Spiritual Word are here enumerated, it is quick,
because, it searches and tries the hearts of all: no man's heart is exempt from
it, for the Apostle gives this reason of its being so, in the following verse;
but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to
do: And there is not any creature, that is not manifest in his sight. Tho this
ultimately and mediately be referred to God, yet nearly and immediately it
relates to the Word, or Light, which as has been before proved, is in the
hearts of all, else it had been improper to have brought it in here. The
Apostle shows how every intent and thought of the heart is discerned by the
Word of God, because all things are naked before God, which imports nothing
else, but it is in and by this Word, whereby God sees and discerns man's
thoughts; and so must needs be in all men, because the Apostle says, there is
no creature that is not manifest in his sight. This then is that faithful
Witness and Messenger of God, that bears witness for God, and for his
righteousness in the hearts of all men: For he has not left man without a
witness, Act. 14.17. and he is said to be given for a Witness to the people,
Isa. 55.4. And as this Word bears witness for God, so it is not placed in
men, only to condemn them, for as he is given for a Witness, so says the
Prophet, He is given for a Leader and a Commander. The Light is given, that all
through it may believe, Joh. 1.7. For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
this word of God, which is placed in man's heart, both to be a Witness for God,
and to be a means to bring man to God, through faith and repentance. It is
therefore powerful, that it may divide betwixt the Soul and the Spirit. It is
like a two-edged Sword, that it may cut off iniquity from him, and separate
betwixt the precious and the vile; and, because man's heart is cold and hard,
like Iron naturally, therefore has God placed this Word in him, which is said
to be like a Fire, and like a Hammer, Jer. 23.29. that, like as by the heat of
the Fire, the iron of its own nature cold, is warmed, and by the strength of
the Hammer is softened and framed, according to the mind of the worker; so the
cold and hard Heart of Man is, by the virtue and powerfulness of this Word of
God near, and in the Heart, as it resists not, warmed and softened, and received
a Heavenly and Celestial Impression and Image. The most part of the Fathers
have spoken at large, touching this Word, Seed, and Light, and saving Voice,
calling all unto Salvation, and able to save.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, lib. 2. Stromat. The Divine Word has oried,
calling all, knowing well those that will not obey. And yet, because it is in
our power, either to obey or not to obey, that none may have a pre^^xt of
ignorance, it has made a righteous call, and requires but that, which is
according to the ability and strength of every one. The self same, in his
warning to the Gentiles, For, as (says he) that Heavenly Ambassador of the
Lord, the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all, etc. This
is the new Song, coming, and manifestation of the Word, which now shows it self
in us, which was in the beginning, and was first of all. And again, Hear
therefore ye that are a far off, hear ye who are near, the word is hid from
none, the Light is common to all, and shines to all. There is no darkness in
the World, let us hasten to Salvation, to the New birth, that we, being many,
may be gathered into the One alone love. Ibid. he says, that there is infused
unto all, but principally into those that are trained up in Doctrine, a certain
Divine Influence, (...)* And again, he speaks concerning the innate Witness,
worthy of belief, which of it self, does plainly choose that which is most
honest. And again he says, that it is not impossible to come unto the Truth,
and lay hold of it, seeing it is most near to us, in our own houses, as the
most wise Moses declares, living in three parts of us, viz. in our hands, in
our mouth, and in our heart, this says he, is a most true badg of the Truth,
which is also fulfilled in three things, namely, in Council, in Action, in
Speaking. And again he says also unto the unbelieving Nations: Receive Christ,
receive Light, receive Sight, to the and thou may rightly know both God and
man. The Word that has enlightened us, is more pleasant than Gold, and the
stone of great value. And again he says, let us receive the Light, that we may
receive God, let us receive the Light, that we may be the Scholars of the
Lord. And again, he says to those Infidel Nations, The Heavenly Spirit helps
thee, resist and flee Pleasure. Again, lib. Strom. 5. (he says) God forbid
that man be not a partaker of Divine Aquaintance, (...), who in Genesis is said
to be a partaker of Inspiration. And Paed. lib. 1 cap. 3. there is (says he)
some lovely and some desirable thing in man, which is called the in breathing
of God, (...). The same man, lib. 10. Strom. directs men unto the Light and
Water in themselves, who have the Eye of the Soul darkened or dimmed through
evil up bringing and learning: let them enter in unto their own domestic
light, or unto the Light, which is in their own House, (...), unto the Truth,
which manifests accurately and clearly these things that have been written.

Justin Martyr, in his first Apology says, that the Word, which was, and is,
is in all, even that very same Word, which through the Prophets, foretold
things to come.

The writer of the calling of the Gentiles, says, lib. 1. cap. 2 We believe
according to the same (viz. Scripture) and most religiously confess, that God
was never wanting in care to the generality of men: who, although he did lead
by particular lessons, a People gathered to himself unto Godliness, yet he
withdrew from no Nation of Men, the Gifts of his own Goodness, that they might
be convinced that they had received the words of the Prophets, and legal
commands, in services and testimonies of the first Principles. Cap. 7. he
says, that he believes that the help of Grace, has been wholly withdrawn from
no man. Lib. cap. 1. Because, albeit Salvation is far from sinners, yet there
is nothing void of the Presence and Virtue of his Salvation. Cap. 2. But,
seeing none of that People, over whom was set both the Doctrins, were
justified, but through Grace by the Spirit of Faith, who can question, but that
they, who, of whatsoever Nation, in whatsoever times, could please God, were
ordered by the Spirit of the Grace of God: which, albeit in fore-time, it was
more sparing and hid, yet denied it self to no Ages, being in virtue one, in
quantity different, in counsel unchangeable, in operation multifarious.

XXIV. The third Propositions which ought to be proved, is, that it is by this
Light, Seed, or Grace, that God works the Salvation of all men, and many come
to partake of the benefit of Christ's Death and Salvation, purchased by him. By
the inward and effectual operations of which, as many Heathens have come to be
partakers of the Promises, who were not of the Seed of Abraham after the Flesh,
so may some now, to whom God has rendered the knowledge of the History
impossible, come to be saved by Christ. Having already proved, that Christ has
died for all, that there is a day of Visitation given to all, during which,
Salvation is possible to them, and that God has actually given a measure of
Saving Grace and Light unto all, preached the Gospel to and in them and placed
the Word of Faith in their Hearts, the matter of this Proposition may seem to
be proved. Yet shall I little, for the farther satisfaction of all, who desire
to know the Truth, and hold it, as it is in Jesus, prove this, from two or
three olear Scripture Testimonies, and remove the most common, as well as the
more strong, objections, usually brought against it.

Out Theme then has two parts; First, That those that have the Gospel, and
Christ outwardly preached unto them, are not saved, but by the working of the
Grace and Light in their Hearts.

Secondly, That by the working and operations of this, many have been, and some
may be saved, to whom the Gospel has never been outwardly Preached, and who
are utterly ignorant of the outward History of Christ.

As to the first, though it be granted by most, yet, because it is more in words
than deeds (the more full discussing of which will fall in in the next
Proposition, concerning Justification) I shall prove it in few words. And first
from the words of Christ to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Now this
Birth comes not by the outward preaching of the Gospel, or knowledge of Christ,
or historical Faith in him, seeing many have that, and firmly believe it, who
are never thus renewed. The Apostle Paul also goes so far, while he commends
the necessity and excellency of this New Creation, as, in a certain respect, to
lay aside the outward knowledge of Christ, or the knowledge of him after the
Flesh; in these words, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. Wherefore henceforth know we no man
after the Flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a New
Creature, old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. Whence
it manifestly appears, that he makes the knowledge of Christ after the Flesh,
but as it were the Rudiments, which young Children learn, which, after they are
become better Scholars, are of less use to them, because they have, and
possess the very substance of those first Precepts, in their minds. As all
comparisons halt in some part, so shall I not affirm this to hold in every
respect: yet so far will this hold, that as those things, that go no farther
than the Rudiments, are never to be accounted learned, and as they grow beyond
these things, so they have less use of them; even so such as go no farther than
the outward knowledge of Christ, shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. But
such as come to know this New Birth, to be in Christ indeed, to be a New
Creature, to have old things past away, and all things become new, may safely
say with the Apostle, Though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more. Now this New Creature proceeds from the work of
this Light and Grace in the Heart* It is that Word, which we spoke of, that is
sharp and piercing, that implanted Word, able to save the Soul, by which this
Birth is begotten: and therefore Christ has purchased unto us this Holy Seed;
that thereby this Birth might be brought forth in us, which is therefore also
called, the manifestation of the Spirit, given to every one to profit withal;
for it is written, that by One Spirit we are all Baptized into One Body. And
the Apostle Peter also ascribes this Birth to the Seed and Word of God, which
we have so much declared of, saying, 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again not of
corruptible Seed, but of uncorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever. Though then this Seed be small in its appearance, so that
Christ compares it to a grain of Mustard Seed, which is the least of all Seeds,
Matt. 13.31, 32. and that it be hid in the Earthly part of man's heart, yet
therein is Life and Salvation toward the Sons of men wrapped up, which comes to
be revealed as they give way to it. And in this Seed, in the hearts of all men,
is the Kingdom of God, as in capacity to be produced or rather exhibited,
according as it receives depth, is nourished and not choked. Hence Christ
says, that the Kingdom of God was in the very Pharisees, Luke 17.20, 21. who
did oppose and resist him, and were justly accounted as Serpents, and a
Generation of Vipers. Now the Kingdom of God could be no other ways in them,
than in a Seed, even as the Thirty-fold, and the Hundredfold is wrapped up in a
small Seed, lying in a barren ground, which springs not forth because it wants
nourishment: and as the whole Body of a great Tree is wrapped up potentially in
the Seed of the Tree, and so is brought forth in due season; and as the
capacity of a Man or Woman is not only in a Child, but even in the very embryo,
even so the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, yea Jesus Christ himself, Christ within,
who is the hope of Glory, and becomes Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption, in every man and woman's heart, in that little incorruptible
Seed, ready to be brought forth, as it is cherished and received in the love of
it. For there can be no men worse than those rebellious and unbelieving
Pharisees were, and yet this Kingdom was thus within them, and they were
directed to look for it there: so it is neither lo here, nor lo there, in this
or the other observation that this is known, but as this Seed of God in the
Heart is minded and entertained. And certainly hence it is, (even because this
Light, Seed and Grace, that appears in the heart of man is so little regarded,
and so much overlooked) that so few know Christ brought forth in them. The one
sort to wit, the Calvinists, they look upon Grace as an irresistible Power, and
therefore neglect and despise this Eternal Seed of the Kingdom in their Hearts,
as a low, insufficient, useless thing as to their Salvation. On the other hand
the Papists, Armenians and Socinians, they go about to set up their Natural
Power and will, with one consent denying that this little Seed, this small
appearance of the Light, is that supernatural saving Grace of God given to
every man, to save him. And so upon them is verified that saying of the Lord
Jesus Christ, This is the condemnation of the World, that Light is come into
the World, but men love darkness rather than Light; the reason is added,
because their deeds are evil. All confess they feel this, but they will not
have it to be of that Virtue. Some will have it to be Reason; some a Natural
Conscience; some certain Relics of God's Image, that remained in Adam. So
Christ, as he met with opposition from all kinds of Professors in his outward
appearance, so does he now in his inward. It was the meaness of his outward man
that made many despise him, saying, Is not this the Son of the Carpenter? are
not his Brethren and Sisters among us? is not this a Galilean? and came there
ever a Prophet out of Galilea? and such like reasonings. For they expected an
outward deliverer, who as a Prince, should deliver them with great ease from
their outward Enemies; and not such a MESSIAH as should be crucified
shamefully, and as it were led them into many sorrows, troubles, and
afflictions. So the meaness of this appearance make the crafty Jesuits, the
pretended rational Socinians, and the learned Arminians, overlook it, desiring
rather something, that they might exercise their subtilty, reason and learning
about, and use the liberty of their own wills. And the secure Calvinists, they
would have a Christ to save them without any trouble, to destroy all their
Enemies for them, without them, and nothing or little within, while the mean
while, be at ease to live in their Sins secure. Whence when all is well
examined, the cause is plain, it is because their deeds are evil, that with one
consent they reject this Light: for it checks the wisest of them all, and the
learned of them all, in secret it reproves them, neither can all their Logic
silence it, nor can the securest among them stop its voice from crying, and
reproving them within, for all their confidence in the outward knowledge of
Christ, or of what he has suffered outwardly for them. For, as has been often
said, in a day it strives with all, wrestles with all, and it is the unmortified
Nature, the first Nature, the old Adam, yet alive in the wisest, in the
learnedest, in the most Zealous for the outward knowledge of Christ, that denies
this, that despises it, that shuts it out, to their own Condemnation. They come
all under this description, every one that does evil, hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, least his deeds should be reproved, John 3.20. So that it
may be said now, and we can say from a true and certain experience, as it was
of old, Psalm. 118.22. Mat. 21.42. Mark 12.10. Luke 20 17. Acts 4.11. The Stone
which the Builders, of all kinds, have rejected, the same is become unto us the
Head of the Corner. Glory to God for ever! who has chosen us a first fruits to
himself in this day, wherein he is arisen to plead with the Nations, and
therefore has sent us forth to preach this everlasting Gospel unto all, Christ
nigh to all, the Light in all, the Seed sown in the Hearts of all, that men may
come and apply their minds to it. And we rejoice that we have been made to lay
down our Wisdom and Learning (such of us as have had some of it) and our carnal
reasoning, to learn of Jesus, and sit down at the Feet of Jesus in our Hearts,
and hear him, who there makes all things manifest, and reproves all things by
his Light, Ephesians. 5.13. For many are wise and learned in the Notion, in the
Letter of the Scripture, as the Pharisees were, and can speak much of Christ,
and plead strongly against Infidels, Turks and Jews, and it may be also against
some Heresies, who in the mean time are Crucifying Christ in the small
appearance of his Seed in their Hearts. O! better were it to be stripped naked of
all, to account it as dross and dung, and become a Fool for Christ's sake, thus
knowing him to teach thee in thy Heart, so as thou may witness him raised
there, feel the virtue of his Cross there, and say with the Apostle, I glory in
nothing, save in the Cross of Christ, whereby I am crucified to the World, and
the World unto me. This is better than to write Thousands of Commentaries, and
to preach many Sermons. And it is thus to preach Christ, and direct People to
his pure Light in the Heart, that God has raised us up, and for which the wise
men of this World account us Fools; because by the operation of this Cross of
Christ in our Hearts, we have denied our own Wisdom and Wills in many things,
and have forsaken the vain Worships, Fashions and Customs of this world. For
these diverse Centuries the world has been full of a dry, fruitless and barren
knowledge of Christ, feeding upon the husk and neglecting the kernel, following
after the shadow, but strangers to the substance. Hence the Devil matters not
how much of that knowledge abounds, provided he can but possess the Heart, and
rule in the will* crucify the appearance of Christ there, and so keep the Seed
of the Kingdom from taking root. For he has led them abroad, lo here, and lo
there, and has made them wrestle in a false zeal, so much one against another,
contending for this outward observation, and for the other outward observation,
seeking Christ in this and the other external thing, as in Bread and Wine;
contending one with another how he is there, while some will have him to be
present therein this way, and some the other way; and some in Scriptures, in
Books, in Societies, and Pilgrimages, and Merits. But some confiding in an
external barren Faith, think all is well, if they do but firmly believe that he
died for their Sins past, present, and to come, while in the mean time, Christ
lies crucified and slain, and is daily resisted and gainsaid in his appearance
in their Hearts. Thus from a Sense of this blindness and ignorance, that is
come over Christendom, it is, that we are led and moved of the Lord, so
constantly and frequently to call all, invite all, request all to turn to the
Light in them, to mind the Light in them, to believe in Christ, as he is in
them. And that in the Name, Power and Authority of the Lord, not in School
arguments and distinctions, (for which many of the wise men of this World
account us Fools and mad men) we do charge and command them to lay aside their
Wisdom, to come down out of that proud, airy, brain knowledge, and to stop that
mouth, how eloquent soever to the worldly ear it may appear; and to be silent
and sit down as in the dust, and to mind the Light of Christ in their own
Consciences. Which if it minded, they would find as a sharp two edged sword in
their hearts, and as a fire and a hammer, that would knock against and burn up
all that carnal, gathered, natural stuff, and make the stoutest of them all
tremble and become Quakers indeed. Which those, that come not to feel now, and
kiss not the Son, while the day lasts, but harden their hearts, will feel to
be a certain truth, when it is too late. To conclude, as says the Apostle, All
ought to examine themselves whether they be in the Faith indeed; and try their
own selves, for except Jesus be in them, they are certainly reprobates. 2 Cor.
13.5.

XXV. Secondly, that which remains now to be proved is, that by the operation
of this Light and Seed, some have been, and may yet be saved, to whom the
Gospel is not outwardly preached, nor the History of Christ outwardly known. To
make this the easier, we have already shown how that Christ has died for all
men, and consequently these are enlightened by Christ, and have a measure of
Saving Light and Grace; yea that the Gospel, though not in any outward
dispensation, is Preached to them, and in them: So, that thereby they are
stated in a possibility of Salvation. From which, I may thus argue:

Arg.
To whom the Gospel, the Power of God unto Salvation is manifest, they may be
saved, whatever outward knowledge they want.

But this Gospel is preached in every Creature, in which is certainly
comprehended many, that have not the outward knowledge:

Therefore of those, many may be saved.

But to those arguments, by which it has been proved that all men have a
measure of Saving Grace, I shall add one, and that very observable, not yet
mentioned, viz. that excellent saying of the Apostle Paul to Titus, c. 2. v.
11. The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godlily in this present World. Than which there can be nothing
more clear, it comprehending both the parts of the controversy. First, it
testifies that it is no Natural Principle or Light, but says plainly, it
brings Salvation. Secondly, it says not that it has appeared to a few, but
unto all men. The Fruit of it declares also how efficacious it is, seeing it
comprehends the whole Duty of Man. It both teaches us first, to forsake Evil,
to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; and then it teaches us our whole Duty.
First, to live Soberly, that comprehends Temperance, Chastity, Meekness, and
those things that relate unto a man's self. Secondly, Righteously, that
comprehends Equity, Justice and Honesty, and those things which relate to our
Neighbors. And Lastly, Godlyly, which comprehends Piety, Faithfulness and
Devotion, which are the Dutys relating to God. So then there is nothing
required of man, or is needful to man, which this Grace teaches not. Yet I
have heard a public Preacher, one of those that are accounted Zealous men, to
evite the strength of this text deny this Grace to be saving, and say, it was
only intended of common Favors and Graces, such as is in the heat of the Fire,
and outward light of the Sun. Such is the darkness and ignorance of those that
oppose the Truth, whereas the Text says expressly, that it is Saving. Others,
that cannot deny but it is saving, alledg this [ all] comprehends not every
individual, but only all kinds. But, is a bare negation, sufficient to overturn
the strength of a positive assertion? If the Scriptures may be so abused, what
so absurd as may not be pleaded for from them? or what so manifest as may not
be denied? But, we have not reason to be staggered by their denying, so long as
our Faith is found in express terms of the Scripture, they may as well seek to
persuade us that we do not intend that which we affirm; though we know the
contrary, as make us believe that, when the Apostle speaks forth our Doctrine
in plain words, yet he intends theirs; which is the quite contrary, and indeed
can there be any thing more absurd than to say, where the word is plainly [all]
few is only intended. For they will not have [ all] taken here, for the greater
number. Indeed, as the case may be sometimes by a Figure, [ all] may be taken
of two numbers, for the greater number, but let them show us if they can,
either in Scripture, or Profane, or Ecclesiastical Writings, that any man that
wrote sense, did ever use the word [ all] to express of two numbers, the
lesser. Whereas they affirm, that the far less number have received Saving
Grace, and yet will they have the Apostle by [ all] to have signified so.
Though this might suffice, yet to put it further beyond all question, I shall
Instance another saying of the same Apostle, that we may use him as his own
Commentator, Romans 5.18. Therefore as by the Offense of One, judgment came upon
all to condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of One, the free Gift came
upon all men to Justification of Life. Here no man of reason, except he will be
obstinately ignorant, will deny but this similitive particle [ as] makes the [
all] which goes before, and comes after, to be of one and the same extent. Or
else let them show us one example, either in Scripture, or elsewhere among men,
that speak proper language, where it is otherwise. We must then either affirm
that this loss, which leads to condemnation, has not come upon all, or say
that this Free Gift is come upon all by Christ. Whence I thus argue: First:

If all men have received a loss from Adam, Arg.
which leads to condemnation, then all men have received a Gift from Christ;
which leads to Justification.

But the first is true,

Therefore also the last.

From all which it naturally follows, that all men, even the Heathens may be
saved: for Christ was given as a Light to inlighten the Gentiles, Isa. 49.6.
Now, to say that though they might have been saved, yet none were, is to judge
too uncharitably. I see not what reason can be alleged for it, yea, though it
were granted, which never can be that none of the Heathens were saved; it will
not from thence follow, that they could not have been saved: or that none now
in their condition can be saved. For, a non esse ad non posse non datur
sequela, i. e. that consequence is false, that concludes a thing cannot be,
because it is not.

But if it be Objected; which is the great Objection, Obj.
That there is no Name under Heaven, by which Salvation is known, but by the
Name JESUS.

Therefore they (not knowing this) cannot be saved.

Answ.
I answer, though they know it not outwardly, yet if they know it inwardly, by
feeling the Virtues and Power of it, the Name JESUS indeed (which signifies a
Savior) to free them from Sin and Iniquity in their hearts, they are saved by
it. I confess there is no other name to be saved by; but Salvation lies not in
the literal, but in the experimental knowledge, albeit those that have the
literal knowledge, are not saved by it, without this real experimental knowledge.
Yet those that have the real knowledge, may be saved without the external, as by
the arguments hereafter brought, will more appear. For, if the outward distinct
knowledge of him, by whose means I receive benefit, were necessary for me,
before I could reap any Fruit of it, then by the rule of Contrarys it would
follow, that I could receive no hurt without I had also the distinct knowledge
of him that had occasioned it; whereas experience proves the contrary. How many
are injured by Adam's fall, that know nothing of ever there being such a man in
the world? or of his eating the forbidden Fruit? why may they not then be saved
by the Gift and Grace of Christ in them, making them Righteous and Holy, though
they know not distinctly how that was purchased unto them by the death and
sufferings of Jesus, that was Crucified at Jerusalem; especially seeing God
has made that knowledge simply impossible to them? As many men are killed by
Poison infused into their meat, though they neither know what the Poison was,
nor who infused it: so also on the other hand, how many are cured of their
diseases by good remedies, who know not how the Medicine is prepared, what the
ingredients are, not often times who made it? The like may also hold in
Spiritual things, as we shall hereafter prove.

XXVI. First, If there were such an absolute necessity for this outward
knowledge, that it were even of the essentials of Salvation, then none could be
saved without it; whereas our adversaries deny not, but readily confess, that
many Infants and deaf Persons are saved without it. So that here they break
that general rule, and make Salvation possible without it. Neither can they
alledg, that it is because such are free from Sin, seeing they also affirm,
that all Infants, because of Adam's sin, deserve eternal condemnation, as being
really guilty in the sight of God; and of deaf People it is not to be doubted,
and experience shows us, that they are subject to many common Iniquitys, as
well as other men.

Obj.
If it be said, that these Children are the Children of believing Parents.

Answ.
What then? They will not say, that they transmit Grace to their Children. Do
they not affirm, that the Children of believing Parents are guilty of Original
Sin, and deserve death, as well as others? How prove they, that that makes up
the loss of all explicit knowledge?

If they say, Obj.
Deaf People may be made sensible of the Gospel by Signs:

All the signs cannot give them any explicit knowledge of the History of the
Death, Sufferings, and Resurrection of Christ. Answ.
For what signs can inform a deaf man, that the Son of God took on him man's
nature? was born of a Virgin, and suffered under Pontius Pilate.

And, if they should further alledg, Obj.
that they are within the bosom of the visible Church, and partakers of the
Sacraments.

All that gives no certainty of Salvation, Answ.
for (as the Protestants confess) they confer not Grace ex opere operato. And
will not they acknowledge, that many are in the bosom of the Church, who are
visibly no members of it? But if this Charity be extended toward such who are
where the Gospel is preached, so that they may be judged capable of Salvation,
because they are under a simple impossibility of distinctly knowing the means
of Salvation; what reason can be alleged, why the like Charity may not be had
to such, as though they can hear, yet are under a simple impossibility of
hearing, because it is not spoken unto them. Is not a man in China or in India
as much to be excused for not knowing a thing which he never heard of, as a
deaf man here, who cannot hear? For, as the deaf man is not to be blamed,
because God has been pleased to suffer him to lie under this Infirmity, so is
the Chinees or the Indian as excusable, because God has withheld from him the
opportunity of Hearing. He, that cannot hear a thing, as being necessarily
absent, and he, that cannot hear it, as being Naturally deaf, are to be placed
in the same category.

Secondly, this manifestly appears by that saying of Peter, Acts 10.34. Of a
Truth I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he
that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. Peter was
before liable to that mistake, that the rest of the Jews were in, judging that
all were unclean except themselves, and that no man could be saved except they
were proselyted to their Religion, and Circumcised. But God showed Peter
otherways in a Vision, and taught him to call nothing common or unclean; and
therefore seeing that God regarded the Prayers of Cornelius, who was a stranger
to the Law, and to Jesus Christ, as to the outward? yet Peter saw that God had
accepted him. And he is said to fear God, before he had this outward knowledge,
therefore Peter concludes that every one, that in every Nation, without respect
of Persons, fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. So he
makes the fear of God and the working of Righteousness, and not an outward
historical knowledge, the qualification; they then, that have this, wherever
they be they are saved. Now we have already proved, that to every man that
Grace is given, whereby he may live godlily and righteously, and we see that by
this Grace Cornelius did so, and was accepted, and his Prayers came up for a
memorial before God, before he had this outward knowledge. Also was not Job a
perfect and upright man, that feared God and eschewed Evil? Who taught Job
this? how knew Job Adam's fall? And from what Scripture learned he that
excellent knowledge he had, and that Faith, by which he knew his Redeemer lived?
For many make him as old as Moses, was not this by an inward Grace in the
heart? was it not that inward Grace that taught Job to eschew evil, and to fear
God? and was it not by the workings thereof that he became a just and upright
man? how does he reprove the wickedness of men, chap. 2.4? and after he has
numbered up their wickedness, does he not condemn them verse 13. for rebelling
against this Light, for not knowing the way thereof, nor abiding in the paths
thereof? It appears then Job believed that men had a Light, and that because
they rebelled against it, therefore they knew not its ways, and abode not in
its paths, even as the Pharisees, who had the Scriptures, are said to err, not
knowing the Scriptures. And also Job's Friends, though in some things wrong,
yet who taught them all those excellent sayings, and knowledge which they had?
Did not God give it them in order to save them, or was it merely to condemn
them? Who taught Elihu that the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding, that the Spirit of God made him, and the Breath of the Almighty
gave him Life? And did not the Lord accept a Sacrifice for them? And who dare
say that they are damned? But further, the Apostle puts this controversy out
of doubt, for if we may believe his plain assertions, he tells us, Romans 2. that
the Heathens did the things contained in the Law. From whence I thus argue.

In every nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousnss, is accepted:
Arg.


But many of the Heathens feared God, and wrought Righteousness:

Therefore they were accepted.

The minor is proved from the example of Cornelius. But I shall further prove
it thus:

He that does the things contained in the Law, fears God, and works
Righteousness.

But the Heathens did the things contained in the Law.

Therefore they feared God, and wrought Righteousness.

Can there be any thing more clear? For, if to do the things contained in the
Law, be not to fear God and work Righteousness, then what can be said to do so,
seeing the Apostle calls the Law Spiritual, Holy, Just and Good? But this
appears manifestly by another medium taken out of the same Chapter, verse 13.
So that nothing can be more clear. The words are, The doers of the Law shall be
Justified. From which I thus argue, without adding any word of my own.

The doers of the Law shall be justified.

But the Gentiles do the things contained in the Law.

All that know but a conclusion, do easily see what follows from these express
words of the Apostle. And indeed, he through that whole chapter, labors as if
he were contending now with our Adversaries, to confirm this Doctrine, verse 9,
10, 11. Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of man that does evil, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile. For there is no respect of Persons with
God. Where the Apostle clearly homologats the sentence of Peter before
mentioned, and shows that Jew and Gentile, or, as he himself explains in the
following verses, both they that have an outward Law, and they that have none,
when they do good shall be justified. And to put us out of all doubt, in the
very following verses, he tells, that the doers of the Law are justified, and
that the Gentiles did the Law. So that, except we think he spoke not what he
intended, we may safely conclude that such Gentiles were justified, and did
partake of that Honor, Glory and Peace, which comes upon every one that does
good: Even the Gentiles that are without the Law, when they work good, seeing
with God there is no respect of Persons; so as we see that it is not the having
the outward knowledge that does save, without the inward; so neither does the
want of it, to such to whom God has made it impossible, who have the inward,
bring condemnation. And many that have wanted the outward, have had a knowledge
of this inwardly, by virtue of that inward Grace and Light given to every man,
working in them, by which they forsook iniquity, and became Just and Holy, as
is above proved, who though they knew not the History of Adam's fall; yet were
sensible in themselves of the loss that came by it, feeling their inc^inations
to sin, and the body of sin in them: and though they knew not the coming of
Christ, yet were sensible of that inward Power and Salvation which came by him,
even before, as well as since, his appearance in the flesh. For I question
whether these men can prove that all the Patriarchs and Fathers before Moses
had a distinct knowledge either of the one or the other, or that they knew the
History of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and of Adam's eating the
forbidden Fruit: far less that Christ should be born of a Virgin, should be
Crucified, and treated in the manner he was. For it is justly to be believed
that what Moses wrote of Adam, and of the first times, was not by Tradition,
but by Revelation: yea we see that not only after the writing of Moses, but
even of David and all the Prophets who Prophesied so much of Christ, how little
the Jews, that were expecting and wishing for the Messiah, could thereby
discern him when he came, that they Crucified him as a Blasphemer, not as a
Messiah, by mistaking the Prophecies concerning him; for Peter says expressly,
Acts 3.17. to the Jews, that both they and their Rulers did it through
Ignorance. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.8. That had they known it, they would not
have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Yea Mary her self, to whom the Angel had
spoken, and who had laid up all the miraculous things accompanying his Birth in
her Heart, she did not understand how, when he disputed with the Doctors in the
Temple, that he was about his Fathers business. And the Apostles that had
believed him, conversed daily with him* and saw his Miracles, could not
understand, neither believe those things which related to his Death,
Sufferings, and Resurrection, but were in a certain respect stumbled at them.

. XXVII. So we see how that it is the inward work, and not the outward History
and Scripture, that gives the true knowledge, and by this inward Light, many of
the Heathen Philosophers where sensible of the loss received by Adam, though
they knew not the outward History: Hence Plato asserted, that man's Soul was
fallen into a dark cave, where it only conversed with shadows. Pythagoras says,
Man wandereth in this world as a stranger, banished from the presence of God.
And Plotinus compares Man's Soul, fallen from God, to a Cinder, or dead Coal,
out of which the Fire is extinguished. Some of them said, that the wings of the
Soul were clipped or fallen off, so that they could not flee unto God. All which,
and many more such expressions, that might be gathered out of their writings,
show they were not without a sense of this loss. Also, they had a knowledge and
discovery of Jesus Christ inwardly, as a remedy in them, to deliver them from
that evil seed, and the evil inclinations of their own hearts, though not under
that particular denomination.

Some called him a Holy Spirit, as Seneca, Epist. 41. who said, There is a Holy
Spirit in us, that treats us, as we treat him. Cicero calls an inuate
Light, in his Book de Rublica, cited by Lactantius, 6. Instit. where he calls
this, Right Reason, given unto all, constant and eternal, calling unto duty by
commanding, and deterring from deceit, by forbidding. Adding, that it cannot be
abrogated, neither can any be freed from it, neither by Senate nor People; that
it is one Eternal, and the same always to all Nations, so that there is not
one at Rome, and another at Athens: who so obey it not, must flee from himself,
and in this is greatly tormented, although he should escape all other
punishment. Plotinus also calls him Light, saying, that as the Sun cannot be
known but by its own Light, so God cannot be known but with his own Light: and
as the Eye cannot see the Sun, but by receiving its Image, so Man cannot know
God but by receiving his Image, and that it behoved Man to come to purity of
Heart before he could know God; calling him also Wisdom, a name frequently
given him in Scripture. See Prove. 1.20. to the end, and Prove. 8, 9.34. Where
Wisdom is said to cry, entreat, and invite all, to come unto her, and learn of
her. And what is this Wisdom but Christ? Hence such as came among the Heathen,
to forsake Evil, and cleave to Righteousness, were called Philosophers, that is
lovers of Wisdom. They knew this Wisdom was nigh unto them, and that the best
knowledge of God and Divine Mysteries, was by the Inspiration of the Wisdom of
God. Phocylides affirmed, that the Word of the Wisdom of God was best. His
words in the Greek are, (...).

And much more of this kind might be instanced, by which it appears they knew
Christ, and by his working in them, were brought from unrighteousness to
righteousness, and to love that Power by which they felt themselves redeemed;
so that, as says the Apostle, they show the work of the Law written in their
Hearts, and did the things contained in the Law, and therefore, as all doers of
the Law are, were no doubt justified, and saved thus by the Power of Christ in
them. And as this was the Judgment of the Apostle, so was it of the primitive
Christians. Hence Justyn Martyr stuck not to call Socrates a Christian, saying,
that all such as lived according to the Divine Word in them, which was in all
men, were Christians, such as Socrates and Heraclitus, and others among the
Greeks, etc. That such as live with the Word, are Christians without fear or
anxiety.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Apol. 2. Strom. lib. 1. That this Wisdom or
Philosophy was necessary to the Gentiles, and was their Schoolmaster to lead
them unto Christ, by which of old the Greeks were justified.

Nor do I think, says Augustine, in his Book of the City of God, lib. 18. cap.
47 that the Jews dare affirm that none belonged unto God but the Israelites.
Upon which place Lodovicus Vives says, that thus the Gentiles not having a
Law, were a Law unto themselves, and the Light of so living in the Gift of God,
and proceeds from the Son; of whom it is written, that he inlighteneth every
man that comes into the World.

Augustine also testifies in his Confessions, lib. 7. cap. 9. That he had read
in the writings of the Platonists, though not in the very same words, yet that,
which by many and multiplied reasons did persuade, that in the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God; this was in the beginning with God, by
which all things were made, and without which nothing was made, that was made:
In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; and the Light shined in the
Darkness, and the Darkness did not comprehend it. And, albeit the Soul gives
testimony concerning the Light, yet it is not the Light, but the Word of God,
for GOD is the true LIGHT, which inlighteneth every man, that comes into the
World; and so repeats to the 14 verse of the 1 chapter of John, adding, these
things have I there read.

Yea, there is a Book translated out of the Arabic, which gives an account of
one Hai Ebn Yokdan, who, without converse of man, living in an Island alone,
attained to such a profound knowledge of God, as to have immediate converse with
him, and to affirm, that the best and most certain knowledge of God is not that,
which is attained by premises premised, and conclusions deduced, but that,
which is enjoyed by conjunction of the mind of man, with the Supreme Intellect,
after the mind is purified from its corruptions, and is separated from all
bodily Images, and is gathered into a profound stilness.

. XXVIII. Seeing then it is by this inward Gift, Grace and Light, that both
these, that have the Gospel preached unto them, come to have Jesus brought
forth in them, and to have the saving and sanctified use of all outward helps
and advantages: and also by this same Light, that all may come to be saved, and
that God calls, invites, and strives with all, in a day, and saves many, to
whom he has not seen meet to conveigh this outward knowledge; therefore we
having the experience of the inward and powerful work of this Light in our
Hearts, even Jesus revealed in us, cannot cease to proclaim the day of the
Lord, that it is arisen in it, crying out the woman of Samaria, Come and see
One that has told me all, that ever I have done, Is not this the Christ? That
others may come and feel the same in themselves, and may know that that little
small thing, that reproves them in their Hearts, however they have despised it,
and neglected it, is nothing less than the Gospel preached in them, Christ the
Wisdom and Power of God, being in and by that Seed, seeking to save their Souls.

Of this Light therefore Austin speaks, in his Confessions, lib. 11. cap. 9. In
this beginning, O God! thou made the Heaven and the Earth, in thy Word, in
thy Son, in thy Virtue, in thy Wisdom, wonderfully saying, and wonderfully
doing, who shall comprehend it? who shall declare it? What is that, which
skineth in unto me, and smites my Heart without hurt, at which I both tremble
and am inflamed; I tremble in so far as I am unlike unto it, and I am inflamed
in so far as I am like unto it? It is Wisdom, which shines in unto me, and
dispelleth my cloud, which had again covered me, after I was departed from that
Darkness and rampire of my punishments. And again he says, lib. 10. cap. 27.
It is too late that I have loved thee, O thou Beautifulness, so ancient, and so
new; late have I loved thee, and behold thou wast within and I was without, and
there was seeking thee, thou did call, thou did cry, thou did break my
Deafness, thou glancedst, thou did shine, thou chasedst away my darkness.

Of this also our Country man, George Buchanan speaks thus, in his Book de
Jure Regni apud Scotos: Truly I understand no other thing at present than that
Light, which is divinely infused into our Souls, for, when God formed Man, he
not only gave him Eyes to his Body, by which he might shun those things that
are hurtful to him, and follow those things that are profitable. But also has
set before his mind, as it were, a certain Light, by which he may discern
things that are vile, from things that are honest: Some call this Power,
Nature, others the Law of Nature, I truly judge it to be Divine, and am
persuaded that Nature and Wisdom never say different things. Moreover God has
given us a compend of the Law, which in few words comprehend the whole, to wit,
that we should love him from our hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves. And
of this Law all the Books of the Holy Scriptures, which pertain to the forming
of manners, contain no other but an explication.

This is that Universal, Evangelical Principle, in, and by which this Salvation
of Christ is exhibited to all men, both Jew and Gentile, Scythian and
Barbarian, of whatsoever Country or Kindred he be. And therefore God has
raised up unto himself, in this our Age, faithful Witnesses and Evangelists, to
preach again his Everlasting Gospel, and to direct all, as well the high
Professors, who boast of the Law and the Scripture, and the outward knowledge of
Christ, as the Infidels and Heathens, that know not him that way, that they may
all come to mind the Light in them, and know Christ in them, the Just One,
(...), whom they have so long killed, and made merry over, and he has not
resisted, Jam. 5.6. And give up their Sins, Iniquities, false Faith,
Professions, and outside Righteousness, to be crucified by the Power of his
Cross in them, so as they may know within, to be the Hope of Glory, and may
come to walk in his Light, and be saved, who is that True Light, that
enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World.

The Seventh Proposition Concerning Justification,
As many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, it becomes in them a
Holy, Pure and Spiritual Birth, bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity,
and all other Blessed Fruits those which are acceptable to God, by which Holy
Birth, to wit, Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his Works in us, as
we are Sanctified, so are we Justified in the sight of God, according to the
Apostles Words: But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Therefore, it is not by our Works wrought in our will, nor yet by good Works,
considered as of themselves, but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the Giver,
and the Cause producing the effects in us, who as he has reconciled us while
we were Enemies, does also in his Wisdom Save us, and Justify us after this
manner, as says the same Apostle elsewhere. According to his Mercy he has
Saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Tit. 3.5.

I. THE Doctrine of Justification comes well in order after the discussing of
the extent of Christ's death, and of the Grace thereby communicated; some of
the sharpest contests concerning this having from thence their rise. Many are
the disputes among those called Christians, concerning this point; and indeed
if all were truly minding that, which justifies, there would be less noise
about the Notions of Justification. I shall briefly review this controversy as
it stands among others, and as I have often seriously observed it; then in
short state the controversy, as to us, and open our Sense and Judgment of it:
and lastly, prove it (if the Lord will) by some Scripture Testimonies, and the
certain experience of all, ever were truly Justified.

II. That this Doctrine of Justification has been, and is greatly vitiated in
the Church of Rome, is not by us questioned, though our Adversaries, who for
want of better arguments do often make Lies their refuge, have not spared in
this respect to stigmatize us with Popery, but how untruly will hereafter
appear. For to speak little of their meritum ex condigno, which was no doubt a
very common Doctrine of the Romish Church, especially before Luther, though
most of their modern Writers, especially in their controversies with
Protestants, do partly deny it, partly qualify it, and seem to state the
matter only, as if they were propagaters and pleaders for good works, by the
others denied. Yet if we look to the effects of this Doctrine among them, as
they appear in the generality of their Church Members, not in things
disapproved, but highly approved and commended by their Father the Pope, and
all his Clients, as the most beneficial casuality of all his revenue, we shall
find that Luther did not without great ground oppose himself to them in this
matter, and, if he had not himself run into another extreme (of which
hereafter) his work would have stood the better. For in this, as in most other
things, he is more to be commended for what he pulled down of Babylon, than for
what he built of his own. Whatever then the Papists may pretend, or even some
good men among them may have thought, experience shows, and it is more than
manifest by the universal and approved practice of their People, that they
place not their Justification so much in works that are truly and morally good,
and in the being truly renewed and sanctified in the mind, as in such things as
are either not good nor evil, or may truly be called evil, and can no
otherways be reckoned good than because the Pope pleases to call them so. So
that if the matter be well sifted, it will be found that the greatest part of
their Justification depends upon the authority of his Bulls, and not upon the
Power, Virtue, and Grace of Christ revealed in the heart, and renewing of it:
as will appear, First, from their Principle concerning their Sacraments, which
they say, confer Grace, ex opere, operato. So that if a man partake but of
them, he thereby obtains remission of sin, though he remain as he was; the
virtue of the Sacraments making up the want that is in the man. So that this
act of Submission and Faith to the Laws of the Church, and not any real inward
change, is that which justifies him. As for example, if a man make use of the
Sacrament (as they call it) of Penance, so as to tell over his sins to a
Priest, though he have not true contrition; which the Lord has made absolutely
necessary for Penitent Sinners, but only attrition, a figment of their own,
that is, if he be sorry he has sinned not out of any love to God, or his Law
which he has transgressed, but for fear of Punishment, yet does the virtue of
the Sacrament (as they affirm) procure to him remission of Sins; so that being
absolved by the Priest, he stands accepted and justified in the sight of God.
This man's Justification then proceeds not from his being truly penitent, and
in any measure inwardly changed and renewed by the working of God's Grace in
his heart, but merely from the authority of the Priest, and virtue of the
Sacrament, who has pronounced him absolved, so that his Justification is from
somewhat without him, and not within him.

Secondly, this will yet more appear in the matter of Indulgences, where
remission of all Sins, not only past, but for years to come, is annexed to the
visiting such and such Churches and Relics, saying such and such Prayers: so
that the person that so does, is presently cleared from the guilt of his sin,
and justified and accepted in the sight of God. As for example, he that in the
great Jubilee, will go to Rome, and present himself before the Gate of Peter
and Paul, and there receive the Popes blessing, or he that will go a Pilgrimage
to James's Sepulcher in Spain, or to Mary of Loretta, is upon the performance
of those things, promised forgiveness of Sins. Now if we ask them the reason,
how such things are not morally good in themselves, come to have virtue, they
have no other answer but because of the Church and Popes Authority; who being
the great Treasurer of the magazine of Christ's merits, lets them out upon such
and such conditions. Thus also the invention of saying Mass is made a chief
instrument of Justification; for in it they pretend to offer Christ daily to
the Father, a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the living and dead: So
that a man for Money, can procure Christ thus to be offered for him when he
pleases, by which offering he is said to obtain remission of sins, and to stand
justified in the sight of God. From all which, and much more of this nature
which might be mentioned, it does appear, that the Papists place their
Justification, not so much in any work of Holiness, really brought forth in
them, and real forsaking of iniquity, as in the mere performance of some
ceremonies, and a blind belief which their Teachers have begotten in them, that
the Church and the Pope having the absolute Dispensation of the Merits of
Christ, have power to make these merits effectual for the remission of sins,
and Justification of such as will perform those Ceremonies. This is the true
and real method of Justification taken by the generality of the Church of Rome,
and highly commended by their public Preachers, especially the Monks in their
Sermons to the People, of which I my Self have been an Ear and and Eyewitness.
However some of their modern Writers have labored to qualify it in their
controversies. This Doctrine Luther and the Protestants then had good reason to
deny and oppose, though many of them ran into another extreme, so as to deny
good works to be necessary to Justification, and to preach up not only
remission of Sins, but Justification by Faith alone, without all works however
good. So that men do not obtain their Justification according as they are
inwardly sanctified and renewed, but are justified merely by believing that
Christ died for them, and so some may perfectly be Justified, though they be
lying in gross Wickedness, as appears by the example of David, whom they say
was fully and perfectly Justified, while he was lying in the gross sins of
Murder and Adultery. As then the Protestants have sufficient ground to quarrel
and confute the Papists concerning those many abuses in the matter of
Justification, showing how the Doctrine of Christ is thereby vitiated and
overturned, and the Word of God made void by many and useless Traditions; the
Law of God neglected, while foolish and needless ceremonies are prized and
followed, through a false opinion of being justified by the performance of
them; and the merits and sufferings of Christ (which is the Only Sacrifice
appointed of God for remission of sins) derogated from, by the setting up of a
daily Sacrifice, never appointed by God, and chiefly devised out of
Covetousness to get money by: so the Protestants on the other hand, by not
rightly establishing and holding forth the Doctrine of Justification, according
as it is delivered in the Holy Scriptures, have opened a door for the Papists
to accuse them, as if they were neglecters of good works, Enemiies to
Mortification and Holiness, such as esteem themselves Justified, while lying in
great sins, by which kind of accusations (for which too great ground has been
given out of the writings of some rigid Protestants) the Reformation has been
greatly defamed and hindered, and the Souls of many ensnared. Whereas who will
narrowly look into the matter, may observe these debates to be more in specie,
than in genere, seeing both do upon the matter land in one, and like two men in
a circle, who though they go sundry ways, yet meet at last in the same center.

For the Papists they say, they obtain remission of sins, and are Justified by
the Merits of Christ, as the same are applied unto them, in the use of the
Sacraments of the Church: and are dispensed in the performance of such and such
Ceremonies, Pilgrimages, Prayers and Performances, tho there be not an inward
renewing of the mind, nor knowing of Christ inwardly formed, yet they are
remitted, and righteous, ex opere operato, because of the Power and Authority
accompanying the Sacraments, and the dispensators of them.

So says the Westminster Confession of Faith. Chap. 11. Sect. 1.
The Protestants say, that they obtain remission of Sins, and stand Justified in
the sight of God, by virtue of the merits and sufferings of Christ, not by
infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by
accounting and accepting their persons as righteous: they resting on him and
his Righteousness by Faith, which Faith the act of believing, is not imputed
unto them for Righteousness.

So the Justification of neither here is placed, in any inward renewing of the
mind, or by virtue of any Spiritual Birth or Formation of Christ in them: but
only by a bare application of the death and sufferings of Christ, outwardly
performed for them: whereof the one lays hold on a Faith resting upon them, and
hoping to be Justified by them alone; the other by the saying of some outward
Prayers and Ceremonies, which they judge makes the death of Christ effectual
unto them. I except here (being unwilling to wrong any) what things have been
said as to the necessity of inward Holiness, either by some modern Papists, or
some modern Protestants, who, in so far as they have labored after a midst
betwixt these two extremes, have come near to the Truth, as by some citations
out of them, hereafter to be mentioned, will appear, though this Doctrine has
not since the Apostasy, so far as ever I could observe, been so distinctly and
evidently held forth according to the Scriptures Testimony, as it has pleased
God to reveal it, and preach it forth, in this day by the witnesses of his
Truth, whom he has raised to that end. Which Doctrine though it be briefly
held forth and comprehended in the Thesis it self, yet I shall a little more
fully explain the state of the Controversy, as it stands betwixt us and those
that now oppose us.

III. First then, as by the explanation of the former Thesis appears, we
renounce all natural power and ability in our selves, in order to bring us out
of our lost and fallen condition, and first Nature; and confess, that of our
selves we are able to do nothing that is good; so neither can we procure
remission of sins, or justification, by any act of our own, so as to merit it,
or draw it as a debt from God, due unto us, but we acknowledge all to be of and
from his Love, which is the original and fundamental cause of our acceptance.

Secondly, God manifested this love toward us, in the sending of his Beloved
Son the Lord Jesus Christ into the world, who gave himself for us an Offering
and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor: and having made peace
through the blood of his Cross that he might reconcile us unto himself, and by
the Eternal Spirit offered himself, without spot unto God, and suffered for our
sins, the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God.

Thirdly then, forasmuch as all men who have come to man's estate, (the Man
Jesus only excepted) have sinned, therefore all have need of this Savior, to
remove the Wrath of God from them, due to their offenses, in this respect he is
truly said, to have born the Iniquities of us all, in his Body on the Tree; and
therefore is the Only Mediator, having qualified the Wrath of God toward us,
so that our former sins stand not in our way, being by virtue of his most
satisfactory Sacrifice, removed and pardoned Neither do we think that remission
of sins is to be expected, sought, or obtained any other way, or by any works
or Sacrifice whatsomever: (though as has been said formerly, they may come to
partake of this remission, that are ignorant of the History.) So then Christ by
his death and sufferings, has reconciled us to God even while we are Enemies,
that is, he offers reconciliation unto us, we are put into a capacity of being
reconciled, God is willing to forgive us our iniquities, and to accept us, as
is well expressed by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling
the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has put
in us the Word of Reconciliation. And therefore the Apostle in the next verses,
treats them in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, intimating that the Wrath
of God being removed by the obedience of Christ Jesus, he is willing to be
reconciled unto them, and ready to remit the sins that are past, if they repent.

We consider then our Redemption in a two fold respect or state, both which in
their own Nature are perfect, though in their application to us, the one is
not, nor cannot be without respect to the other.

The first is the Redemption performed and accomplished by Christ for us, in
his Crucified Body, without us. The other is the Redemption wrought by Christ
in us, which no less properly is called and accounted a Redemption than the
former. The first then is that whereby man as he stands in the fall, is put
into a capacity of Salvation, and has conveyed unto him a measure of that
Power, Virtue, Spirit, Life and Grace, that was in Christ Jesus: which as the
free Gift of God, is able to counter-ballance, overcome and root out the Evil
Seed, wherewith we are naturally, as in the fall, leavened.

The second, is that whereby we witness, and know this pure and perfect
Redemption in our selves, purifying, cleansing and redeeming us from the power
of Corruption, and bringing us into unity, Favor and Friendship with God. By
the first of these two, we that are lost in Adam, plunged in the bitter and
corrupt Seed, unable of our selves to do any good thing, but naturally joined
and united to evil, forward and propense to all iniquity, servants and slaves
to the Power and Spirit of Darkness, are notwithstanding all this, so far
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, while Enemies, that we are put into
a capacity of Salvation; having the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace offered
unto us: and God is reconciled unto us in Christ, calls and invites us to
himself, in which respect we understand these Scriptures. Ephesians. 2. verse 15. 1 John 4. verse 10. Ezech. 16. verse 6. 1 Pet. 2. v. 22.24. and 3.18.
He stew the enmity in himself. He loved us first, seeing us in our blood, he
said unto us live, he who did not sin his own self, bare our sins in his own
Body on the Tree, and he died for our sins, the just for the unjust.

By the second we witness this capacity brought into act, whereby receiving,
and not resisting, the purchase of his death, to wit, the Light, Spirit, and
Grace of Christ revealed to us, we witness and possess a real true and inward
Redemption from the power and prevalency of sin, and so come to be truly and
really redeemed, justified, and made righteous, and to a sensible union and
friendship with God. Thus he died for us, Tit. 2.14. Phil. 3. verse 10.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and thus we know him and the Power
of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made
conformable to us. This last follows the first in order, and is a consequence
of it, proceeding from it as an effect from its cause. So as none could have
enjoyed the last, without the first had been, (such being the will of God) so
also can none now partake of the first, but as he witnesses the last.
Wherefore, as to us, they are both causes of our Justification. The first the
procuring efficient, the other the formal cause.

Fourthly, we understand not by this Justification by Christ, barely the good
works, even as wrought by the Spirit of Christ, for they as Protestants truly
affirm, are rather an effect of Justification, than the cause of it. But we
understand the formation of Christ in us, Christ born and brought forth in us,
from which good works as naturally proceed, as Fruit from a Fruitful Tree. It
is this inward Birth in us bringing forth Righteousness and Holiness in us,
that does Just^fie us, which having removed and done away the contrary Nature
and Spirit, that did bear rule, and bring condemnation, now is in dominion over
all, in our hearts. Those then that come to know Christ thus formed in them, do
enjoy him wholly and undivided, who is The LORD our RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23.6.
This is to be clothed with Christ, and to have put him on, whom God therefore
truly accounts Righteous and Just. This is so far from being the Doctrine of
Papists, that as the generality of them do not understand it, so the learned
among them oppose it, and dispute against it, and particularly Bellarmin. Thus
then as I may say, the formal cause of Justification is not the works, to speak
properly, they being but an effect of it; but this inward Birth, this Jesus
brought forth in the heart: who is the Well-beloved, whom the Father cannot but
accept, and all those, who thus are sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus, and
washed with it. By this also comes that communication of the goods of Christ
unto us, by which we come to be made partakers of the Divine Nature, as says
Peter, ep. 2. c. 1. v. 4. are made one with him, as the Branches with the Vine,
and have a title and right to what he has done and suffered for us. So that
his Obedience becomes ours, his Righteousness ours, his Death and Sufferings
ours. And by this nearness we come to have a sense of his Sufferings, and to
suffer with his Seed, that yet lies pressed and crucified in the hearts of the
ungodly, and so travel with it, and for its Redemption, and for the repentance
of those Souls that in it are crucifying as yet the Lord of Glory. Even as the
Apostle Paul, who by his sufferings is said to fill up that which is behind of
the afflictions of Christ for his Body, which is the Church. Though this be a
Mystery sealed up from all the wise men, that are yet ignorant of this Seed in
themselves, and oppose it, nevertheless some Protestants speak of this
Justification by Christ inwardly put-on, as shall hereafter be recited in its
place.

Lastly, though we place remission of sins in the Righteousness and Obedience
of Christ performed by him, in the flesh, as to what pertains to the remote
procuring cause, and that we hold our selves formally justified by Christ Jesus
formed and brought forth in us; yet can we not (as some Protestants have
unwarily done) exclude works from Justification: for, though properly we be not
justified for them, yet are we justified in them, and they are necessary, even
as causa sine qua non, i. e. the cause, without which none are Justified. For
the denying of this, as it is contrary to the Scriptures Testimony, so it has
brought a great scandal to the Protestant Religion, opened the mouths of
Papists, and made many too secure, while they have believed to be Justified
without good works. Moreover, though it be not so safe to say they are
meritorious, yet seeing they are rewarded, many of those called the Fathers,
have not spared to use the word [ merit] which some of us have perhaps also
done, in a qualified sense, but no ways to infer the Popish abuses above
mentioned. And lastly, if we had that notion of good works, which most
Protestants have, we could freely agree to make them, not only not necessary,
but reject them as hurtful: viz. that the best works, even of the Saints, are
defiled and polluted. For though we judge so of the best works performed by man,
endeavoring a conformity to the outward Law, by his own strength, and in his
own will; yet we believe, that such works as naturally proceed from this
Spiritual Birth, and formation of Christ in us, are pure and Holy, even as the
Root from which they come, and therefore God accepts them, Justifies us in
them, and rewards us for them of his own Free Grace. The state of the
controversy being thus stated, these following Positions do hence from arise,
in the next place to be proved.

IV. First, that the obedience, sufferings and death of Christ is that, by
which the Soul obtains remission of sins, and is the procuring cause of that
Grace, by whose inward workings Christ comes to be formed inwardly, and the
Soul to be made conformable unto him, and so just and justified. And that
therefore, in respect of this capacity and offer of Grace, God is said to be
reconciled, not as if he were actually reconciled, or did actually justify, or
account any just, so long as they remain in their sins, really impure and
unjust.

Secondly, that it is by this inward Birth of Christ in man, that man is made
just, and therefore so accounted by God, wherefore to be plain, we are thereby,
and not till that be brought forth in us, formally (if we must use that word)
justified in the sight of God: because Justification is, both more properly and
frequently in Scripture, taken in its proper signification, for making one
just, and not reputing one merely such, and is all one with Sanctification.

Thirdly, that since good works as naturally follow from this birth, as heat
from fire, therefore are they of absolute necessity to Justification, as causa
sine qua non, i. e. though not as the cause for which, yet as that in which we
are, and without which we cannot be Justified. And though they be not
meritorious, and draw no debt upon God, yet he cannot but accept and reward
them, for it is contrary to his Nature to deny his own: Since they may be
perfect in their kind, as proceeding from a Pure, Holy Birth and Root.
Wherefore their judgment is false, and against the Truth that say, that the
holiest works of the Saints are defiled and sinful in the sight of God: For
these good works are not the works of the Law, excluded by the Apostle, from
Justification.

V. As to the first I prove it from Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
remission of sins, that are past through the forbearance of God. Here the
Apostle holds forth the extent and efficacy of Christ's death, showing that
thereby, and by Faith therein, remission of sins that are past, is obtained; as
being that wherein the forbearance of God is exercised toward mankind. So
that, though men for the sins they daily commit, deserve Eternal Death, and
that the Wrath of God should lay hold upon them; yet by virtue of that most
satisfactory Sacrifice of Christ Jesus, the Grace and Seed of God moves in love
toward them, during the day of their visitation; yet not so, as not to strike
against the evil, for that must be burned up and destroyed, but to redeem man
out of the evil.

Secondly, if God were perfectly reconciled with men, and did esteem them just,
while they are actually unjust, and do continue in their sins. Then should God
have no Controversy with them: I do not only speak concerning men before
conversion, who afterward are converted, whom yet some of our Antagonists
called Antinomians, do averr were Justified from the beginning, but also
touching those, who according to the common Opinion of Protestants have been
converted; whom, albeit they confess they persist always in some misdeeds, and
sometimes in hanious sins, as is manifest in David's Adultery and Murder, yet
they assert to be perfectly and wholly Justified.
How comes he then so often to complain, to expostulate so much, throughout the
whole Scripture, with such as our Adversaries confess to be Justified, telling
them, that their sins separate betwixt him and them? Isa. 59.2. For, where
there is a perfect and full reconciliation, there there is no separation. Yea
from this Doctrine it necessarily follows, either that such for whom Christ
died, and whom he has thus reconciled, never sin, or that when they so do,
they are still reconciled, and their sins make not the least separation from
God, yea that they are justified in their sins. From whence also would follow
this abominable consequence, that the good works and greatest sins of such are
all alike in the sight of God, seeing neither the one serves to justify them,
nor the other to break their reconciliation, which occasions great security,
and opens a door to every lewd practice.

Thirdly, this would make void the whole practical Doctrine of the Gospel, and
make Faith it self needless; for if Faith and Repentance, and the other
conditions, called for throughout the Gospel, be a qualification upon our part
necessary to be performed, then before this be performed by us, we are either
fully reconciled to God, or but in a capacity of being reconciled to God, he
being ready to reconcile and justify us, as these conditions are performed:
which later if granted, is according to the Truth we profess; and if we are
already perfectly reconciled and justified, before these conditions are
performed, (which conditions are of that Nature, that they cannot be performed
at one time, but are to be done all ones Lifetime) then can they not be said
to be absolutely needful; which is contrary to the very express Testimony of
Scripture, which is acknowledged by all Christians. Heb. 11.6. Joh. 3.18. Luke
13.3. Apoc. 2.5. Romans 8.13.
For without Faith it is impossible to please God. They that believe not are
condemned already, because they believe not in the Only begotten Son of God.
Except ye Repent ye cannot be Saved. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall
dye. And those that were converted: I will remove your Candle-stick from you,
and unless you repent. Should I mention all the Scriptures that positively and
evidently prove this, I might transcribe much of all the Doctrinal part of the
Bible. For, since Christ said, It is finished, and did finish his work Sixteen
Hundred Years ago, and upwards; if so he fully perfected Redemption then, and
did then actually reconcile every one that is to be saved, not simply opening a
door of mercy for them, offering the Sacrifice of his Body, by which they may
obtain remission of their sins, when they repent, and communicating unto them a
measure of his Grace, by which they may see their sins, and be able to repent:
but really make them to be reputed as just, either before they believe, (as say
the Antinomians) or after they have assented to the Truth of the History of
Christ, or are sprinkled with the Baptism of Water, while nevertheless they are
actually unjust, so that no part of their Redemption is to be wrought by him
now, as to their reconciliation and justification, then the whole Doctrinal
part of the Bible is useless and of no profit; in vain were the Apostles sent
forth to preach Repentance and Remission of sins, and in vain do all the
Preachers bestow their labor, spend their Lungs, and give forth Writings, yea
much more in vain do the People spend their money, which they give them for
preaching, seeing it is all but actum agere, but a vain and uneffectual essay
to do that, which is already perfectly done, without them.

But lastly, to pretermit their humane labors, as not worth the disputing,
whether they be needful or not, since (as we shall hereafter show) themselves
confess the best of them is sinful; this also makes void the present
intercession of Christ for men. What shall become of that great Article of
Faith, by which we affirm that he sits at the Right Hand of God, daily making
intercession for us, and for which end the Spirit it self makes intercession
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered? For Christ makes not
intercession for those that are not in a possibility of Salvation; that is
absurd. Our Adversaries will not admit that he prayed for the World at all. And
to pray for those that are already reconciled, and perfectly justified, is to
no purpose: to pray for remission of sins is yet more needless, if all be
remitted past, present, and to come. Indeed there is not any solid solving of
this, but by acknowledging, according to the Truth, that Christ by his death
removed the Wrath of God, so far as to obtain remission of sins for as many as
receive that Grace and Light, that he communicates unto them, and has
purchased for them by his Blood: which as they believe in, they come to know
remission of sins past, and power to save them from sin, and to wipe it away so
often as they may fall into it by unwatchfulness or weakness, if applying
themselves to this Grace, they truly repent: for to as many as receive him, he
gives power to become the Sons of God. So none are Sons, none are Justified,
none Reconciled until they thus receive him in that little Seed in their
hearts. And Life Eternal is offered to those, who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek Glory, Honor and Immortality. For if the Righteous man depart
from his Righteousness, his Righteousness shall be remembered no more: And
therefore, on the other part, none are longer Sons of God, and Justified, than
they patiently continue in righteousness and well doing. And therefore Christ
lives always making intercession, during the day of every man's visitation,
that they may be converted: and when men are in some measure converted, he
makes intercession that they may continue and go on, and not faint nor go back
again. Much more might be said to confirm this Truth, but I go on to take
notice of the common objections against it, which are the Arguments made use of
to propogate the Errors contrary to it.

VI. The first and chief is drawn from that saying of the Apostle, before
mentioned, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ:
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them.

From hence they seek to infer that Christ fully perfected the work of
reconciliation, while he was on Earth. Obj.


I answer: Answ.
If by [ Reconciliation] be understood the removing of wrath, and the purchase
of that Grace, by which we may come to be reconciled, we agree to it; but that
that place speaks no more, appears from the place it self; for when the Apostle
speaks in the perfect time, saying, He has reconciled us, he speaks of himself
and the Saints, who having received the Grace of God purchased by Christ, were
through Faith in him, actually reconciled: But as to the World he says [
Reconciling] not [ Reconciled] which reconciling, though it denotes a time
somewhat past, yet it is by the imperfect time, denoting that the thing begun
was not perfected. For this work Christ began toward all in the days of his
Flesh, yea and long before: for he was the Mediator from the beginning, and the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. But in his Flesh, after he had
perfectly fulfilled the Law, and the Righteousness thereof, and rent the vail,
and made way for the more clear and universal Revelation of the Gospel to all,
both Jew and Gentile, he gave up himself a most satisfactory Sacrifice for sin,
which becomes effectual to as many as receive him in his inward appearance in
his Light in the heart. Again, this very place shows that no other
reconciliation is intended, but the opening of a door of mercy, upon Gods part,
and a removing of Wrath for sins that are past, so as men notwithstanding their
sins, are stated in a capacity of Salvation. For the Apostle in the following
verse, says, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

For if their reconciliation had already been perfectly accomplished, what need
any entreating then to be reconciled? Ambassadors are not sent after a peace
already perfected, and reconciliation made, to entreat for a Reconciliation,
for that implies a manifest contradiction.

Secondly, they object verse 21. of the same chapter, For he has made hiw to
be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him.

Obj.
From whence they argue; that, as our sin is imputed to Christ, who had no sin,
so Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, without our being Righteous.

But this interpretation is easily rejected, for though Christ bare our sins,
Answ.
and suffered for us* and was among men, accounted a sinner, and numbered among
transgressors; yet that God reputed him a sinner is no where proved. For it is
said, he was found before him Holy, Harmless, and Undefiled, Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet.
2.22.
neither was there found any guile in his mouth. That we deserved these things,
and much more for our sins, which he endured in obedience to the Father, and
according to his counsel is true, but that ever God reputed him a sinner is
denied. Neither did he ever dye that we should be reputed Righteous, though no
more really such than he was a sinner (as hereafter appears.) For indeed if
this argument hold, it might be stretched that length, as to become very
pleasing to wicked men that love to abide in their sins: For if we be made
Righteous, as Christ was made a sinner, merely by imputation, then as there was
no sin, not in the least in Christ, so it would follow that there needed no
more Righteousness, no more Holiness, no more inward Sanctification in us, than
there was sin in him. So then by his [ being made sin for us] must be
understood his suffering for our sins, that we might be made partakers of the
Grace purchased by him, by the workings whereof we are made the Righteousness
of God in him. For that the Apostle understood here a being made really
righteous, and not merely a being reputed such appears by what follows, seeing
in the 14, 15, and 16 verses of the following chapter he argues largely against
any supposed agreement of Light and Darkness, Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, which must needs be admitted, if men be to be reckoned
ingrafted in Christ, and real members of him merely by an impurative
Righteousness wholly without them, while they themselves are actually
unrighteous. And indeed it may be thought strange how some men have made this
so fundamental an article of their Faith, which is so contrary to the whole
strain of the Gospel. A thing Christ in none of all his Sermons and Gracious
Speeches ever willed any to rely upon, always recommending to us works as
instrumental to our Justification; and the more it is to be admired at, because
that that Sentence or term (so frequent in their mouths, and so often pressed
by them as the very basis of their hope and confidence) to wit, the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, is not to be found in all the Bible, at lest as to my
observation. Thus have I past through the first part, and that the more
briefly, because many who assert this Justification by bare imputation do
nevertheless confess, that even the Elect are not Justified, until they be
Converted, that is, not until this imputative Justification be applied to them
by the Spirit.

VII. I come then to the second thing proposed by me, which is, That it is by
this inward Birth, or Christ formed within, that we are so to speak, formally
Justified in the sight of God. I suppose I have said enough already to
demonstrate how much we ascribe to the Death and Sufferings of Christ, as that
whereby satisfaction is made to the Justice of God, remission of Sins obtained,
and this Grace and Seed purchased, by and from which this Birth proceeds. The
thing now to be proved is, That by Christ Jesus formed in us, we are Justified
or made Just. Let it be marked I use Justification in this sense upon this
occasion.

First then I prove this by that of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such
were some of you, but ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are
Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. First
this [ Justified] here understood, must needs be a being really made Just, and
not a being merely imputed such* else [ Sanctified] and [ washed] might be
reputed a being esteemed so, and not a being really so; and then it overturns
the whole intent of the context. For the Apostle showing them in the preceding
verses, how the unrighteous cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and descending
to the several species of Wickedness, subsumes, that they were sometimes such
but now are not any more such. Wherefore, as they are now Washed and
Sanctified, so are they justified; for if this Justification were not real,
than it might be alleged that the Corinthians had not forsaken these evils,
but were, though still they continued in them, notwithstanding Justified. Which
as in it self it is most absurd, so it luculently overturneth the very import
and intent of the place, as if the Corinthians turning Christians had not
wrought any real change in them, but had only been a belief of some barren
Notions, which had wrought no alteration in their affections, will, or manner
of Life. For my own part, I neither see any thing, nor could ever yet hear or
read any thing, that with any color of reason did evince [ Justified] in this
place to be understood any other ways, than in its own proper and genuine
interpretation of being made just. And for the more clear understanding hereof
let it be considered, that this word [ justifie] is derived either from the
Substantive justice, or the Adjective just. Both which words import the
Substantive, that true and real Virtue in the Soul, as it is in it self, to
wit, it signifies really, and not suppositively, that excellent quality
expressed and understood among men by the word [ justice,] and the Adjective [
just] as applied signifies a man or woman, who is just, that is in whom this
quality of Justice is stated; for it would not be only great in propriety, but
also manifest falsity, to call a man just merely by supposition, especially if
he were really unjust. Now this word [ justifie] formed or from justice, or
just, does beyond all question signify a making just, it being nothing else
but a composition of the Verb facio, and the Adjective justus, which is nothing
else than thus justifico, i. e. justum facio, to make just; and [ justified] of
justus and fio, as justus fio, I become just, and justificatus i. e. justus
factus I am made just. Thus also is it with Verbs of this kind, as sanctifico,
from sanctus holy, and facio; honorifico from honos and facio; sacrifico from
sacer and facio: all which are still understood of the Subject really and truly
endued with that virtue and quality, from which the verb is derived. Therefore
as none are said to be Sanctified, that are really unholy, while they are such;
so neither can any be truly said to be Justified, while they actually remain
unjust. Only this Verb Justify has in a Metaphorical and Figurative sense,
been otherways taken, to wit, in a Law sense; as when a man really guilty of a
crime is freed from the punishment of his sin, he is said to be justified, that
is, put in the place, as if he were just. For this use of the word has
proceeded from that true supposition, that none ought to be acquitted but the
innocent. Hence also that manner of speaking, I will Justify such a man, or I
will justify this or that, is used from the supposition, that the Person and
thing is really justifiable. And where there is an error and abuse in the
matter, so far there is also in the expression.

This is so manifest and apparent, that Paraeus a chief Protestant, and a
Calvinist also in his opinion, acknowledges this, De Just. con. Bell. lib. 2.
cap. 7. page 469.
We never at any time said (says he) nor thought that the Righteousness of
Christ was imputed to us, that by him we should be named formally just, and be
so, as we have diverse times already showed; for that would no less soundly
sight with right reason, than if a guilty man absolved in Judgment, should say
that he himself were formally just by the clemency of the Judge granting him his
Life. Now is it not strange, that men should be so facile in a matter of so
great concernment, as to build the stress of their acceptance with God upon a
mere borrowed and metaphorical signification, to the excluding, or at least
esteeming that not necessary; without which the Scripture says expressly, no
man shall ever see God? For, if Holiness be requisite and necessary, of which
this is said, then must good works also, unless our Adversaries can show us a
Holy man without good works. But moreover [ Justified] in this Figurative sense
is used for approved, and indeed for the most part, if not always in Scripture,
when the word [ justifie] is used, it is taken in the worst part, that is, that
as the use of the word that way is an usurpation, so it is spoken of such as
usurp the thing to themselves, while it properly does not belong unto them, as
will appear to those that will be at the pains to examine these places, Exodus
23.7. Job 9.20, 27, 5. Prove. 17.15. Isa. 5.23. Jer. 3.11. Ezech. 16.51, 52.
Luke, 10.29, 16, 15. which are all spoken of men justifying the wicked, or of
wicked men justifying themselves, that is approving themselves in their
wickedness. If it be at any time in this signification taken in good part, it
is very seldom comparatively, and that so obvious and plain by the context, as
leaves no scruple. But the question is not so much the use of the word, where
it is passingly or occasionally used, as where the very Doctrine of
Justification is handled. Where indeed to mistake it, viz. in its proper place,
so as to content our selves with an imaginary Justification, while God requires
a real, is of most dangerous consequence, for the disquisition of which let it
be considered, that in all these places to the Romans, Corinthians, Gallatians,
and elsewhere, where the Apostle handles this Theme, the word may be taken in
its own proper signification without any absurdity: as where it is often
asserted in the above mentioned Epistles to the Romans and Gallatians, that a
man cannot be justified by the Law of Moses, nor by the works of the Law. There
is no absurdity nor danger in understanding it, according to its own proper
signification, to wit, that a man cannot be made just by the Law of Moses,
seeing this so well agrees with that saying of the same Apostle, that the Law
makes nothing perfect. And also where it is said, We are Justified by Faith, it
may very well be understood of being made just, seeing it is also said, that
Faith purifies the heart, and no doubt the pure in heart are just, and the Just
live by Faith. Again where it is said, We are justified by Grace, We are
justified by Christ, We are justified by the Spirit, it is no ways absurd to
understand it of being made just, seeing by his Spirit and Grace he does make
men just. But to understand it universally the other way, merely for acceptance
and imputation, would infer great absurdities, as may be proved at large, but
because I judged it would be acknowledged, I forbear at present for brevities
sake. But further, in the most weighty places, where this word justify is used
in Scripture with an immediate relation to the Doctrine of Justification, our
Adversaries must needs acknowledge it to be understood of making just, and not
barely in the legal acceptance, as first in that of the 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye
are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified, as I before have
proved; which also many Protestants are forced to acknowledge. Neither decide
we, says Thysius, because of the most great and strict connection, Disp. de
Just. These. 3.
that Justification does sometimes seem also to comprehend Sanctification as a
consequence, as in Romans 8.30. Tit. 3.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such sometimes were
ye, but ye are washed, etc. Zanchus having spoken concerning this sense of
Justification, adds, saying, ver. 4: loc. de Just. ad Ephesians. In cap. 2.
There is another signification of the word, viz. for a man from unjust to be
made just, even as Sanctified signifies from unholy to be made holy. In which
signification the Apostle said (in the place above cited) and such were some of
you, etc. that is, of unclean ye are made holy, and of unjust, ye are made just
by the Holy Spirit for Christ's sake, in whom ye have believed. Of this
signification is that, Rev. 22.11. Let him that is just, be just still, that
is, really from just become more just, even as from unjust he became just. And
according to this signification the Fathers, and especially Augustine have
interpreted this word. Thus far he, H. Bullinger on the same place, 1 Cor. 6.
speaks thus, By diverse words (says he) the Apostle signifies the same thing,
when he says ye are Washed, ye are Sanctified, ye are Justified.

Secondly, In that excellent saying of the Apostle so much observed, Romans 8.30.
Whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified them he also
glorified. This is commonly called the golden chain, as being acknowledged to
comprehend the method and order of Salvation. And therefore, if [ justified]
were not understood here in its proper signification, of being made just,
sanctification would be excluded out of this chain. And truly it is very worthy
of observation, that the Apostle, in this succinct and compendious account,
makes the word [ justified] to comprehend all betwixt calling and glorifying;
thereby clearly insinuating that the being really righteous is that only
medium, by which from our calling we pass to glorification. All for the most
part do acknowledge the word to be so taken in this place, and not only so, but
most of those who oppose, are forced to acknowledge, that, as this is the most
proper, so the most common signification of it, thus diverse famous Protestants
do acknowledge. We are not, says D. Chamierus, such impertinent esteemers of
words, as to be ignorant, nor yet such importunat Sophists, Tom. 3. de Sanct.
lib. 10. cap. 1.
as to deny that the words of Justification and Sanctification do infer one
another, ye we know that the Saints are chiefly for this reason so called,
because that in Christ they have received remission of sins: and we read in the
Revelation, Let him that is just be just still, which cannot be understood
except of the fruit of inherent righteousness. Nor do we deny but perhaps in
other places they may be promiscuously taken, especially by the Fathers, I
take, says Beza, the name of Justification largely, In cap. 3. ad Tit. ver. 7.
so as it comprehends whatsoever we acquire from Christ, as well by imputation,
as by the efficacy of the Spirit in sanctifying us. So likewise is the word of
Justification taken, Romans 8.30. Melancthon says, that to be justified by
Faith, In Apol. Confess. Aug. In Genesis cap. 15. ad verb. Credidit Abraham Deo.
page 161.
signifies in Scripture not only to be pronounced just, but also of unrighteous
to be made righteous. Also some chief Protestants, though not so clearly, yet
in part, hinted at our Doctrine, whereby we ascribe unto the Death of Christ
remission of Sins, and the work of Justification unto the Grace of the Spirit
acquired by his Death. Martinus Boraeus, explaining that place of the Apostle,
Romans 4.25. Who was given for our sins, and rose again for our justification,
says, There are two things beheld in Christ, which are necessary to our
justification, the one is his death, the other is his arising from the dead. By
his death, the sins of this world behoved to be expiated. By his rising from
the dead, it pleased the same goodness of God, to give the Holy Spirit, whereby
both the Gospel is believed, and the Righteousness lost by the fault of the
first Adam is restored. And afterward he says, The Apostle expresses both
parts in these words, Who was given for our sins, etc. In his Death is beheld
the satisfaction for sin, in his Resurrection the gift of the Holy Spirit, by
which our Justification is perfected. And again the same man says elsewhere,
Lib. 3. Reg. cap. 9. ver. 4. page 681.
Both these kinds of Righteousness are therefore contained in Justification,
neither can the one be separate from the other. So that in the definition of
Justification, the merit of the blood of Christ is included, both with the
remission of sins and with the gift of the Holy Spirit of Justification and
Regeneration. In Romans 4. ad ver. 16.
Martinus Bucerus says, Seeing by one sin of Adam the world was lost, the
Grace of Christ has not only abolished that one sin, and death, which came by
it, but has together taken away those infinite sins, and also led into full
justification as many as are of Christ, so that God now not only remits unto
them Adam 's sin and their own, but also gives them therewith the Spirit of a
solid and perfect Righteousness, which renders us conform unto the Image of the
First begotten. And upon these words [ by Jesus Christ] he says, We always
judge that the whole benefit of Christ tends to this, that we might be strong
through the gift of Righteousness, being rightly and orderly ordained with all
virtue, that is, restored to the Image of God. And lastly, William Forbes, our
Country man, Bishop of Edinburgh, says, In considerat. modest. de Just. lib.
2. Sect. 8.
Whenever the Scripture makes mention of the Justification before God, as
speaks Paul, and from him, besides others, Augustine, it appears that the word
[justify] necessarily signifies not only to pronounce just, in a Law sense, but
also really and inherently to make just, because that God does other ways
justify a wicked man than earthly Judges. For he, when he justifies a wicked
or unjust man, does indeed pronounce him as these also do, but by pronouncing
him just, because his judgment is according to Truth, he also makes him really,
of unjust to become just. And again, the same man upon the same occasion
answering the more rigid Protestants, who say that God first justifies, and
then makes just; he adds, But let them have a care, least by too great and
empty subtilty, unknown both to the Scripture and the Fathers, they lessen and
diminish the weight and dignity of so great and divine a benefit, so much
celebrated in the Scripture, to wit, justification of the wicked. For, if to
the formal reason of justification of the ungodly, does not at all belong his
justification (so to speak) i. e. his being made righteous, then in the
Justification of a sinner, although he be Justified, yet the stain of sin is
not taken away, but remains the same in his Soul as before Justification. And
so dotwithstanding the benefit of Justification, he remains as before unjust
and a sinner, and nothing is taken away, but the guilt and obligation to pain,
and the offense and enmity of God through non imputation. But both the
Scriptures and Fathers do affirm, that in the Justification of a sinner, their
sins are not only remitted, forgiven, covered, not imputed, but also taken
away, blotted out, cleansed, washed, purged, and very far removed from us, as
appears from many places of the Holy Scriptures. The same Forbes shows us at
length, in the following chapter, that this was the confessed judgment of the
Fathers, out of the writings of those, who hold the contrary opinion, some
whereof out of him I shall note, as first, Calvin says, that the judgment of
Austin, Inst. lib. 3. cap. 11. Sect. 15. In Exam. Council. Trid de Inst. page
129. In cap. 2. ad Ephesians. ver. 4. loc. de lust. These. 15.
or at least his manner of speaking, is not throughout to be received, who,
although he took from man all praise of righteousness, and ascribed all to the
Grace of God, yet he refers Grace to Sanctification, by which we are regenerate
through the Spirit unto newness of life. Chemnitius says, that they do not
deny but that the Fathers take the word [justifie] for renewing, by which works
of righteousness are wrought in us by the Spirit. And page 130. I am not
ignorant that the Fathers indeed often use the word [justifie] in this
signification, to wit, of making just. Zanchius says, that the Fathers, and
chiefly Austin, interpret the word [justifie] according to this signification,
to wit, of making just, so that, according to them, to he justified was no
other, than of unjust to be made just, through the Grace of God for Christ. He
mentions more, but this may suffice to our purpose.

VIII. Having thus sufficiently proved that by justification is to be
understood a really being made righteous; I do boldly affirm, and that not only
from a notional knowledge, but from a real inward experimental feeling of the
thing, that the immediate, nearest, or formal cause (if we must, in
condescendence to some, use this word) of a man's justification, in the sight
of God, is the revelation of Jesus Christ in the Soul, changing, altering and
renewing the mind, by whom (even the Author of this inward work) thus formed
and revealed, we are truly justified and accepted in the sight of God. For it
is as we are thus covered and clothed with him, in whom the Father is always
well pleased, that we may draw near to God, and stand with confidence before
his throne, being purged by the blood of Jesus inwardly poured into our Souls,
and clothed with his Life and Righteousness therein revealed. And this is that
order and method of Salvation held forth by the Apostle in that Divine saying,
Romans 5.10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. For the
Apostle first holding forth the reconciliation wrought by the death of Christ,
wherein God is near to receive and redeem man, holds forth his Salvation and
Justification to be by the Life of Jesus. Now that this Life is an inward
Spiritual thing revealed in the Soul, whereby it is renewed and brought forth
out of death, where it naturally has been by the fall, and so quickened and made
alive unto God. The same Apostle shows, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in
sins and trespasses, he has quickened us together in Christ (by whose Grace ye
are saved) and has raised us up together. Now, this none will deny to be the
inward work of renovation, and therefore the Apostle gives that reason of their
being saved by Grace, which is the inward Virtue and Power of Christ in the
Soul: but of this place more hereafter. Of the Revelation of this inward Life
the Apostle also speaks, 2 Cor. 4.10. That the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our Bodies; and ver. 11. That the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our mortal Flesh. Now this inward Life of Jesus is that,
whereby as is before observed, he says, We are saved.

Secondly, That it is by this revelation of Jesus Christ, and the new Creation
in us, that we are justified, does evidently appear from that excellent saying
of the Apostle included in the Proposition it self, Tit. 3.5. according to his
mercy he has saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, etc. Now that, whereby we are saved, that we are also no doubt justified
by, which words are, in this respect, synonimous. Here the Apostle clearly
ascribes the immediate cause of Justification to this inward work of
Regeneration, which is Jesus Christ revealed in the Soul, as being that, which
formerly states us in a capacity of being reconciled with God, the washing or
regeneration being that inward Power and Virtue, whereby the Soul is cleansed
and clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, so as to be made fit to appear
before God.

Thirdly, This Doctrine is manifest from 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your own selves
whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? First, it appears
here how earnest the Apostle was, that they should know Christ in them, so that
he presses this exhortation upon them, and inculcates it three times. Secondly,
he makes the cause of reprobation or not-justification the want of Christ thus
revealed and known in the Soul: whereby it necessarily follows by the rule of
contraries, where the parity is alike (as in this case it is evident) that,
where Christ is inwardly known, there the persons subjected to him are approved
and justified. For there can be nothing more plain than this, that if we must
know Christ in us, except we be reprobates ortunjustified persons, that, if we
know him in us, we are not reprobates, and consequently justified ones. Like
unto this is that other saying of the same Apostle, Gal. 4.19. My little
Children, of whom I travel in Birth again until Christ be formed in you, and
therefore the Apostle terms this Christ within the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.28.
Now that which is the hope of Glory can be no other, than that which we
immediately and most nearly rely upon for our Justification, and that whereby
we are really and truly made Just. And as we do not hereby deny, but the
Original and Fundamental cause of our Justification is the Love of God
manifested in the appearance of Jesus Christ in the flesh; who by his Life,
Death, Sufferings and Obedience, made a way for our Reconciliation, and became
a Sacrifice for the remission of sins, that are past, and purchased unto us
this Seed and Grace, from which this birth arises, and in which Jesus Christ is
inwardly received, formed and brought forth in us, in his own pure and Holy
Image of Righteousness; by which our Souls live unto God, and are clothed with
him, and have put him on even as the Scripture speaks, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Gal.
3.27. We stand justified and saved in and by him, and by his Spirit and Grace.
Romans 3.24. 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.7. So again, reciprocally we are hereby made
partakers of the fullness of his merits, and his cleansing blood is near, to
wash away every sin and infirmity, and to heal all our backslidings, as often
as we turn toward him by unfeigned Repentance, and become renewed by his
Spirit. Those then, that find him thus raised and ruling in them, have a true
ground of hope to believe that they are Justified by his Blood. But let not any
deceive themselves, so as to foster themselves in a vain hope and confidence,
that by the Death and Sufferings of Christ they are Justified, so long as sin
lies at their door, Genesis 4. v. 7. Iniquity prevails, and they remain yet
unrenewed and unregenerate, lest it be said unto them, I know you not. Let that
saying of Christ be remembered, not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall
enter, but he that does the will of my Father, Matthew. 7.21. To which let these
excellent sayings of the beloved Disciple be added: Little Children let no man
deceive you, he that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous.
He that commits sin is of the Devil, because if our heart condemn us, God is
greater than our heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.7. and 20.

Many Famous Protestants bear witness to this inward Justification by Christ
inwardly revealed and formed in man, as 1. M. Borrhaeus. In Genesis page 162.
In the Imputation (says he) wherein Christ is ascribed and imputed to
Believers for Righteousness, the merit of his Blood, and the Holy Ghost given
unto us, by Virtue of his merits, are equally included. And so it shall be
confessed that Christ is our Righteousness, as well from his Merit,
Satisfaction, and Remission of sins obtained by him, as from the gifts of the
Spirit of Righteousness. And if we do this, we shall consider whole Christ,
proposed to us for our Salvation, and not any single part of him. The same man,
page 169. In our Justification then Christ is considered, who breaths and lives
in us, to wit by his Spirit put on by us, concerning which putting on the
Apostle says, Ye have put on Christ. And again, page 171. We endeavor to
treat in Justification, not of part of Christ, but him wholly, in so far as he
is our Righteousness every way. And a little after, as then blessed Paul in our
Justification, when he says, whom he Justified, them he Glorified, comprehends
all things, which pertains to our being reconciled to God the Father, and our
renewing, which fits us for attaining unto glory, such as Faith, Righteousness,
Christ, and the Gift of Righteousness exhibited by him, whereby we are
regenerated to the fulfilling of the Justification which the Law requires; so
we also will have all things comprehended in this cause, which are contained in
the recovery of Righteousness and Innocence. And page 181. The form (says he)
of our Justification is the Divine Righteousness it self, by which we are
formed just, and good. This is Jesus Christ, who is esteemed our Righteousness,
partly from the forgiveness of sins, and partly from the renewing and the
restoring of that integrity, which was lost by the fault of the first Adam: so
that his New and Heavenly Adam, being put on by us, of which the Apostle says,
Ye have put on Christ, ye have put him on I say, as the form, so the
Righteousness, Wisdom, and Life of God.

So also affirms Claudius Alberius Inuncanus, see his Orat. Apodeict.
Lausaniae excus. 1587. orat. 2. page 86, 87. Zuinglius also in his Epistle to
the Princes of Germany, as cited by Himelius, c. 7. p. 60. says, That the
Sanctification of the Spirit is true Justification, which alone suffices to
Justify. Essius upon 1 Cor. 6.11. says, Lest Christian Righteousness should
be thought to consist in the washing alone, that is, in the remission of sins,
he adds the other degree or part [but ye are sanctified] that is, ye have
attained to purity, so that ye are now truly Holy before God. Lastly,
expressing the sum of the benefit received in one word, which includes both the
parts, But ye are Justified the Apostle adds in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that is, by his merits, and in the Spirit of our God, that is the Holy
Spirit proceeding from God, and communicated to us by Christ. And lastly*
Richard Baxter, a Famous English Preacher, who yet lives, in his Book called
Aphorisms of Justification, page 80. says, that some ignorant wretches gnash
their Teeths at this Doctrine, as if it were flat Popery, not understanding the
Nature of the Righteousness of the New Covenant, which is all out of Christ in
our selves, though wrought by the Power of the Spirit of Christ in us.

IX. The third thing proposed to be considered is, concerning good Works their
necessity to Justification. I suppose there is enough said before to clear us
from any imputation of being Popish in this matter.

But if it be queried, Whether we have not said, or will not affirm, that a man
is justified by Works? Quest.


I answer, I hope none need, neither ought to take offense, if in this matter
we use the plain Language of the Holy Scripture; Answ.
which says expressly in answer hereunto, Jam. 2.24. Ye see then how that by
works a man is Justified, and not by Faith only. I shall not offer to prove the
Truth of this saying, since what is said in this Chapter by the Apostle is
sufficient to convince any man, that will read and believe it, I shall only
from this derive this one argument.

If no man can be Justified without Faith, and no Faith be living, Arg*
nor yet available to Justification without works, then works are necessary to
Justification.

But the First is true:

Therefore also the Last.

For this Truth is so apparent and evident in the Scriptures, that for the
proof of it, we might transcribe most of the precepts of the Gospel. I shall
instance a few, which of themselves, do so clearly assert the thing in
question, that they need no commentary, nor further demonstration. And then I
shall answer the objections made against this, which indeed are the arguments
used for the contrary opinion. Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no man shall see
God. Matthew. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven. Joh. 13.7. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. 1 Cor.
7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping
of the Commandments of God. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and through the
Gates may enter into the City: and many more, that might be instanced; from all
which I thus argue:

If those only can enter into the Kingdom, that do the will of the Father; If
those be accounted only the wise builders and happy, Arg.
that do the sayings of Christ; if no observation avail, but only the keeping
of the Commandments; and if they be blessed that do the Commandments, and
thereby have right to the Tree of Life, and entrance through the gate into the
City, then works are absolutely necessary to Salvation, and Justification.

But the First is true:

And therefore also the Last.

The consequence of the antecedent is so clear and evident, that I think no man
of sound reason will call for a proof of it.

Obj.
X. But they object that works are not necessary to Justification, First,
because of that saying of Christ, Luke 17.10. When ye shall have done all these
things that are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants, etc.

Answ.
Answer, as to God, we are indeed unprofitable, for he needs nothing, neither
can we add any thing unto him; but as to our selves, we are not unprofitable,
else it might be said that it is not profitable for a man to keep God's
Commandments, which is most absurd, and would contradict Christ's Doctrine
throughout. Does not Christ, Matthew. 5. through all those beatitudes pronounce
men blessed for their Purity, for their Meekness, for their Peaceableness? etc.
And is it not then, that for which Christ pronounces men blessed, profitable
unto them? Moreover, Matthew. 25.21, 23. does not Christ pronounce the men good
and faithful Servants, that improved their Talents? Was not their doing of that
then profitable unto them? and verse 30. It is said of him that hid his Talent,
and did not improve it, Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness.
If then their not improving of the Talent made the man unprofitable, and he was
therefore cast into utter darkness, it will follow by the Rule of Contraries,
so far at least, that the improving made the other profitable; seeing, if our
Adversaries will allow us to believe Christ's Words, this is made a reason, and
so at left a cause instrumental of their acceptance, Well done good and
faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Obj.
Secondly, they object those sayings of the Apostle, where he excludes the deeds
of the Law from Justification, as first, Romans 3.20. because by the deeds of the
Law there shall be no flesh justified in his sight. And ver. 28. Therefore we
conclude that a man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law.

Answ.
Answ. We have shown already what place we give to works, even to the best of
works, in justification, and how we ascribe its immediate and formal cause to
the worker brought forth in us, but not to the works. But in answer to this
objection, I say, there is a great difference betwixt the works of the Law, and
those of Grace or of the Gospel. The first are excluded, the second not, but
are necessary. The first are those which are performed in man's own will, and
by his strength, in a conformity to the outward Law and Letter, and therefore
are men's own imperfect works, or works of the Law which makes nothing perfect.
And to this belong all the Ceremonies, Purifications, Washings, and Traditions
of the Jews. The second are the works of the Spirit of Grace wrought in the
Heart, wrought in conformity to the Inward and Spiritual Law: which works are
not wrought in man's will, nor by his power and ability, but in and by the
Power and Spirit of Christ in us, and therefore are pure and perfect in their
kind; as shall hereafter be proved: and may be called Christ's works, for that
he is the immediate author and worker of them. Such works we affirm absolutely
necessary to justification, so that a man cannot be justified without them, and
all faith without them is dead and useless, as the Apostle James says. Now
that such a distinction is to be admitted, and that the works excluded by the
Apostle, in the matter of Justification, are of the first kind, will appear, if
we consider the occasion of the Apostle mentioning this, as well here, as
throughout in his Epistle to the Galatians, where he speaks of this matter, and
to this purpose at large: which was this, That, whereas many of the Gentiles,
that were not of the Race nor Seed of Abraham, as concerning the Flesh, were
come to be converted to the Christian Faith, and believe in him, some of those
that were of the Jewish Proselites thought to subject the faithful and
believing Gentiles, to the legal Ceremonies and Observations, as necessary to
their Justification. This gave the Apostle Paul occasion at length, in his
Epistle to the Romans, Galatians, and elsewhere, to show the use and tendency
of the Law, and of its works, and to contradistinguish them from the Faith of
Christ and Righteousness thereof; showing how the former was ceased, and become
ineffectual, the other remaining, and yet necessary. And that the works
excluded by the Apostle are of this kind of works of the Law, appears by the
whole strain of his Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 1* 2, 3 and 4. for after,
in the 4* chapter, he upbraideth them for their returning unto the observation
of days and times, and that in the beginning of the 5 chapter, he shows them
their folly, and the evil consequence of adhering to the Ceremonies of
Circumcision; then he adds, v. 6. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision avails, but Faith, which works by love; and thus he
concludes again, chap. 6. v. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision
avails, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. From which places appears
that distinction of works aforementioned, whereof the one is excluded, the
other necessary to Justification. For the Apostle shows here that
Circumcision, which word is often used to comprehend the whole Ceremonies and
legal Performances of the Jews, is not necessary, nor does avail. Here are then
the works, which are excluded, by which no man is justified: but Faith, which
works by love, but the new Creature, this is that, which avails, which is
absolutely necessary; for Faith, that works by love, cannot be without works,
for, as is said in the same 5 chapter, v. 22. Love is a work of the Spirit.
Also the New Creature, if it avail and be necessary, cannot be without works,
seeing it is natural for it to bring forth works of Righteousness. Again, that
the Apostle no ways intends to exclude such good works, appears, in that in
the same Epistle he exhorts the Galatians to them, and holds forth the
usefulness and necessity of them, and that very plainly, c. 6. v. 7, 8, 9. Be
not deceived, says he, God is not mocked, for what soever man sows, that
shall he also reap: for he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption; but he that sows in the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
everlasting. And let us not be weary of well doing, for in due season we shall
reap if we faint not. Does it not hereby appear, how necessary the Apostle
would have the Galatians know that he esteemed good works to be? to wit, not
the outward testimony and tradition of the Law, but the fruits of the Spirit,
mentioned a little before, by which Spirit he would have them to be led, and
walk in those good works. As also how much he ascribed to these good works, by
which he affirms Life Everlasting is reaped. Now, that cannot be useless to
man's Justification, which capaciates him to reap so rich a harvest.

But lastly, for a full answer to this objection, and for the establishing of
this Doctrine of good works, I shall instance another saying of the same Apostle
Paul, which our adversaries also in the blindness of their minds make use of
against us, to wit, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of Righteousness, which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost. It is generally granted by all, that [ saved]
is here all one as if it had been said [ justified.] Now, there are two kinds
of works here mentioned, one, by which we are not saved, that is, not
justified; and another by which we are saved, or justified. The first, the
works of Righteousness, which we have wrought, that is, which we in our first
fallen nature, by our own strength, have wrought our own legal performances; and
therefore may truly and properly be called ours, whatever specious appearances
they may seem to have. And that it must needs, and ought so to be understood,
does appear from the other part, By the washing of Regeneration and renewing of
the Holy Ghost; seeing Regeneration is a work, comprehensive of many good
works, even of all those, which are called the Fruits of the Spirit.

Now, in case it should be objected, that these may also be called ours,
because wrought in us, and also by us, many times as instruments.

I answer, It is far otherwise than the former; for in the first we are yet
alive in our own natural state, unrenewed, working of our selves, seeking to
save our selves by imitating and endeavoring a conformity to the outward
Letter of the Law, and so wrestling and striving in the carnal mind, that is
enmity to God, and in the cursed will not yet subdued. But in this second we
are Crucified with Christ* we are become dead with him, have partaken of the
Fellowship of his sufferings, are made conformable to his death, and our first
man, our old man with all his deeds, as well the openly wicked as the seeming
righteous, our legal endeavors and foolish wrestlings, are all buried and
nailed to the Cross of Christ, and so it is no more we, but Christ alive in us,
the Worker in us. So that, though it be we in a sense, yet it is according to
that of the Apostle to the same, Gal. c. 2. v. 20. I am Crucified, yet
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, not I, but the Grace
of Christ in me. These works are especially to be ascribed to the Spirit of
Christ, and the Grace of God in us, as being immediately thereby acted and led
in them, and enabled to perform them. And this manner of speech is not
strained, but familiar to the Apostles, as appears, Gal. 2.8. For he that
wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same
was mighty in me, etc. Phil. 2.13. For it is God which works in you, both to
will and to do, etc. So that it appears by this place, that since the washing
of Regeneration is necessary to Justification, and that Regeneration
comprehends works, works are necessary; and that these works of the Law, that
are excluded, are different from these, that are necessary and admitted.

XI. Thirdly, they object that no works, yea not the works of Christ in us can
have place in Justification, Obj.
because nothing that is impure can be useful in it; and all the works wrought
in us are impure. For this they alledg that saying of the Prophet Isaiah, c.
64. v. 6. All our Righteousness are as filthy rags, adding this reason, that
seeing we are impure, so must our works be, which though good in themselves,
yet as performed by us, they receive a tincture of impurity, even as a clean
water passing through an unclean pipe is defiled.

That no impure works are useful to Justification is confessed, Answ.
but that all the works wrought in the Saints are such is denied. And for
answer to this the former distinction will serve, We confess that the first
sort of works above mentioned are impure; but not the Second: because the first
are wrought in the unrenewed state, but not the other. And as for that of
Isaiah, it must relate to the first kind, for though he says all our
Righteousness are as filthy rags, yet that will not comprehend the
Righteousness of Christ in us, but only that which we work of and by our
selves. For should we so conclude, then it would follow that we should throw
away all Holiness and Righteousness, since that which is filthy rags, and as a
menstruous Garment, ought to be thrown away; yea it would follow that all the
Fruits of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 4. were as filthy rags: whereas on the
contrary, some of the works of the Saints are said to have a sweet savor in
the nostrils of the Lord, are said to be an Ornament of great price in the
sight of God, are said to prevail with him, and to be acceptable to him, which
filthy rags and a menstruous garment cannot be. Yea many Famous Protestants
have acknowledged that this place is not, therefore so to be understood. Calvin
upon this place says, That it is used to be cited by some, that they may prove
there is so little merit in our works, that they are before God filthy and
defiled; but this seems to me to be different from the Prophets mind (says he)
seeing he speaks not here of all mankind. Musculus upon this place says, that
it was usual for this People to presume much of their legal Righteousness, as
if thereby they were made clean; nevertheless they had no more cleanness than
the unclean Garment of a man. Others expone this place concerning all the
Righteousness of our Flesh, that opinion indeed is true. Yet I think that the
Prophet did rather accommodate these sayings to the impurity of that People in
legal terms. The Author (commonly supposed Bertius) speaking concerning the
true sense of the 7 Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, Epistolae praefixiae
dissert. ann.
has a digression touching this of Isaiah, saying, This place is commonly
corrupted by a pernicious wresting: for it is still alleged, as if the meaning
thereof inferred the most excellent works of the best Christians, etc. James
Coret, a French Minister in the Church of Basil, in his Apology concerning
Justification, Impress. Paris ann. 1597 page 78.
against Alescales, says, Nevertheless, according to the counsel of certain
good men, I must admonish the Reader that it never come into our minds to abuse
that saying of Isa. 64.6. against good works, in which it is said, that all our
Righteousness are as filthy rags, as if we would have that which is good in our
good works, and proceeds from the Holy Spirit, to be esteemed as a filthy and
unclean thing.

XII. As to the other part, that seeing the best of men are still impure and
imperfect, therefore their works must be so. It is to beg the question, and
depends upon a Proposition denied, and which is to be discussed at further
length in the next Proposition. But tho we should suppose a man not thoroughly
perfect in all respects, yet will not that hinder but good and perfect works in
their kind may be brought forth in them by the Spirit of Christ; neither does
the Example of Water going through an unclean Pipe hit the matter: because,
though Water may be capable to be tinctured with uncleanness, yet the Spirit of
God cannot, whom we assert to be the immediate Author of those works that avail
in Justification; and therefore Jesus Christ his works in his Children are pure
and perfect, and he works in and through that pure thing of his own forming
and creating in them. Moreover, if this did hold, according to our Adversaries
Supposition, that no man ever was or can be perfect, it would follow that the
very Miracles and works of the Apostles, which Christ wrought in them, and they
wrought in and by the Power, Spirit, and Grace of Christ, were also impure and
imperfect, such as their Converting of the Nations to the Christian Faith,
their gathering of the Churches, their Writing of the Holy Scriptures, yea and
their Offering up and Sacrificing of their Lives for the Testimony of Jesus.
What may our Adversaries think of this Argument, whereby it will follow that
the Holy Scriptures, whose perfection and excellency they seem so much to
magnify, are proved to be impure and imperfect, because they came through
impure and imperfect Vessels? It appears by the confessions of Protestants,
that the Fathers did frequently attribute unto works of this kind, that
Instrumental work which we have spoken of in Justification, (albeit some
ignorant persons cry out it is Popery) and also diverse, and that Famous
Protestants do of themselves confess it. Amandus Polanus in his Symphonia
Catholica, cap. 27. de remissione peccatorum, page 651. places this These as
the common opinion of Protestants, most agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Fathers. We obtain the remission of sins by Repentance, Confession, Prayers and
Tears proceeding from Faith, but do not merit to speak properly, and therefore
we obtain remission of sins, not by the merit of our Repentance and Prayers,
but by the mercy and goodness of God. Innocentius Gentiletus, a Lawyer of great
same among Protestants, in his examine of the Council of Trent, page 66, 67. of
Justification, Impress. Genevae 1586.
having before spoken of Faith and Works, adds these words: But seeing the one
cannot be without the other, we call them both conjunctly instrumental causes.
Zanchius in his 5 book De Natura Dei, says; We do not simply deny that good
works are the cause of Salvation, to wit, the instrumental rather than the
efficient cause, which they call [sine qua non.] And afterward, Good Works are
the instrumental cause of the possession of Life Eternal, for by these as by a
means and a lawful way, God leads unto the possession of Life Eternal. G.
Amesius says, that our obedience, albeit it be not the principal and
meritorius cause of Life Eternal, In medulla S. Theologiae lib. 2. cap. 1.
Thesi 30.
is nevertheless a cause in some respect, administering, helping and advancing
toward the possession of the life. Also Richard Baxter in the book above
cited, page 155. says, that we are justified by works in the same kind of
causality, as by Faith, to wit, as being both causes sine qua non, or
conditions of the New Covenant on our part requisite to Justification. And page
195. he says; It is needless to teach any Scholar who has read the Writings
of Papists, how this Doctrine differs from them.

But lastly, because it is fit here to say something of the merit and reward of
works, I shall add something in this place of our sense and belief concerning
that matter, we are far from thinking or believing that man merits any thing by
his works, from God, all being of Free Grace, and therefore do we, and always
have denied that Popish notion of meritum excondigno, nevertheless we cannot
deny but that God out of his infinite goodness, wherewith he has loved
mankind, after he communicates to him his Holy Grace and Spirit, does according
to his own will recompense and reward the good works of his Children: and
therefore this merit of congruity or reward, in so far as the Scripture is
plain and positive for it, we may not deny; neither wholly reject the word, in
so far as the Scripture makes use of it. For the same Greek (...), which
signifies [ merit,] is also in those places where the Translators express it
worth, or worthy, as Matthew. 3.8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 8. concerning
which Richard Baxter says, in the above cited book, page 8. But in a larger
sense as promise is an Obligation, and the thing promised is said to be debt,
so the performers of the conditions are called worthy, and that which they
perform, Merit, although properly all be of Grace, and not of Debt. Also those
who are called the Fathers of the Church, frequently used this word of merit,
whose sayings concerning this matter I think not needful to insert, because it
is not doubted, but evident that many Protestants are not averse from this
word, in the sense that we use it. The Apology for the Augustine Confession,
Art. 20. has these words, We agree that works are truly meritorius, not of
remission of sins, or Justification, but they are meritorious of other rewards
Corporal and Spiritual, which are indeed as well in this Life, as after this
Life. And further, Seeing works are a certain fulfilling of the Law, they are
rightly said to be meritorious, it is rightly said that a reward is due to them.

In the acts of the conference of Oldenburgh, the Electoral Divines, page 110
and 265. say, In this sense our Churches also are not averse from the word
[merit] used by the Fathers, neither therefore do they defend the Popish
Doctrine of merit.

G. Vossius, in his Theological These concerning the merits of good works
says, We have not adventured to condemn the word [merit] wholly, as being
that, which both many of the Ancients use, and also the reformed Churches have
used in their confessions. Now that God judges and accepts men according to
their works, is beyond doubt to those that seriously will read and consider
these Scriptures, Matthew. 17.26. Romans 2.6, 7, 10. 2 Cor. 5.10. Ja. 1.25. Heb.
10.35. 1 Pet. 1.17. Rev. 22.12.

XIII. And to conclude this Theme, let none be so bold as to mock God,
supposing themselves justified and accepted in the sight of God, by virtue of
Christ's Death and Sufferings, while they remain unsanctified and unjustified
in their own Hearts, and polluted in their Sins, lest their hope prove that of
the Hypocrite, which perishes. Job 8.13.
Neither let any foolishly imagine that they can by their own works, or by the
performance of any Ceremonies or Traditions, or by the giving of Gold or Money,
or by afflicting their bodies in Will Worship and voluntary humility, or
foolishly striving to conform their way to the outward Letter of the Law,
flatter themselves that they merit before God, or draw a debt upon him, or that
any man, or men have Power to make such kind of things effectual to their
Justification, lest they be found foolish boasters, and strangers to Christ and
his Righteousness indeed. But blessed for ever are they, that having truly had
a sense of their own unworthyness and sinfulness, and having seen all their own
endeavors and performances fruitless and vain* and beheld their own emptyness,
and the vanity of their vain Hopes, Faith and Confidence, while they remained
inwardly pricked; pursued and condemned by God's Holy Witness in their Hearts,
and so having applied themselves thereto, and suffered his Grace to work in
them; are become changed and renewed in the Spirit of their minds, past from
death to Life, and know Jesus arisen in them, working both the will and the
deed: and so having put on the Lord Jesus Christ, in effect are clothed with
him, and partake of his Righteousness and Nature, such can draw near to the
Lord with boldness, and know their acceptance in and by him, in whom and in as
many as are found in him, the Father is well-pleased.

The Eighth Proposition, Concerning Perfection.
In whom this Pure and Holy Birth is fully brought forth, the Body of Death and
Sin comes to be Crucified, and removed, and their hearts united and subjected
to the Truth; so as not to obey any Suggestions or Temptations of the Evil One,
to be free from actual sinning and transgressing of the Law of God, and in that
respect perfect: yet does this perfection still admit of a growth, and there
remains always, in some part a possibility of sinning, where the mind does
not most diligently and watchfully attend unto the Lord.

I. SInce we have placed Justification in the Revelation of Jesus Christ formed
and brought forth in the Heart, there working his works of Righteousness, and
bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit. The question is, how far he may
prevail in us while we are in this Life? or we over our Souls Enemies, in and
by his strength? Those that plead for Justification wholly without them, merely
by imputative Righteousness, denying the necessity of being clothed with real
and inward Righteousness, do consequently affirm, that it is impossible for a
man, even the best of men to be free of sin in this life, which they say no man
ever was, These are the words of the Westminst. larger Catechism.
but on the contrary, that none can, neither of himself nor by any Grace
received in this life. (O! wicked saying against the power of God's Grace!)
Keep the Commandments of God perfectly, but that every man does break the
Commandments in Thought, Word and Deed. Whence they also affirm, as was a
little before observed, That the very best actions of the Saints, their
Prayers, their Worships, are impure and polluted. We on the contrary, though we
freely acknowledge this of the Natural Fallen man, in his first state, whatever
his profession or pretense may be, so long as he is unconverted and
unregenerate: yet we do believe that those, in whom Christ comes to be formed,
and the new man brought forth, and born of the incorruptible Seed, as that
birth, and man in union therewith naturally does the will of God; so it is
possible so far to keep to it, as (...) to be found daily Transgressors of the
Law of God. And for (...) stating of the controversy, let it be considered.

(...), that we place not this possibility in man's own will and (...) is a
man, the Son of fallen Adam, or as he is in his natural state, however wise or
knowing, or however much endued with a notional and literal knowledge of Christ,
thereby endeavoring a conformity to the letter of the Law, as it is outward.

Secondly, that we attribute it wholly to man as he is born again, renewed in
his mind, raised by Christ, knowing Christ alive, reigning and ruling in him,
and guiding and leading him by his Spirit, and revealing in him the Law of the
Spirit of Life, which not only manifests and reproves sin, but also gives power
to come out of it.

Thirdly, that by this we understand not such a perfection as may not daily
admit of a growth, and consequently mean not, as if we were to be as Pure,
Holy, and Perfect, as God in his Divine Attributes of Wisdom, Knowledge, and
Purity; but only a perfection proportionable and answerable to man's measure,
whereby we are kept from transgressing the Law of God, and enabled to answer
what he requires of us, even as he that improved his Two Talents, so as to make
Four of them, perfected his work, and was so accepted of his Lord; as to be
caled a good and faithful Servant, nothing less than he that made his Five Ten.
Even as a little Gold is perfect gold in its kind, as well as a great mass, and
a Child has a perfect body as well as a man, though it daily grow more and
more. Thus Christ is said, Luke 2.52. to have increased in Wisdom and Stature,
and in favor with God and man, though before that time he had never sinned,
and was (no doubt) perfect, in a true and proper sense.

Fourthly, though a man may witness this for a season, and therefore all ought
to press after it, yet we do not affirm but those that have attained it in a
measure, may by the wiles and temptations of the Enemy, fall into iniquity, and
lose it sometimes if he be not watchful, and diligently attend not to that of
God in the heart. And we doubt not but many good and holy men, who has not
arrived to everlasting life, have had diverse ebbings and flowings of this kind,
for though every sin weaken a man in his Spiritual condition, yet it does not
so as to destroy him altogether, or render him incapable of rising again.

Lastly, though I affirm, that after a man has arrived to such a condition in
which a man may not sin, he yet may sin; I will nevertheless not deny but there
may be a state attainable in this life, in which to do Righteousness may become
so natural to the Regenerate Soul, that in the stability of this condition they
cannot sin. Others may perhaps speak more certainly of this state, as having
arrived to it. For me I shall speak modestly, as ackno^ledging my self not to
have arrived at it, yet I dare not deny it, for that it seems so positively to
be asserted by the Apostle, in these words, 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God,
sins not, neither can he, because the Seed of God remains in him.

The Controversy being thus stated, which will serve to obviate objections, I
shall proceed first to show the absurdity of that Doctrine, that pleads for
sin, for term of life, even in the Saints.

Secondly, prove this Doctrine of perfection from many pregnant Testimonies of
the Holy Scripture.

And lastly, answer the arguments and objections of our opposers.

. III. First then, this Doctrine, viz. that the Saints nor can, nor ever will be
free of sinning in this life, is inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, and with
his glorious Power and Majesty, Who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity,
who having purposed in himself together to him, that should worship him, and be
witnesses for him, on earth, a chosen people, does also no doubt sanctify and
purify them. For God has no delight in iniquity, but abhors, transgression,
and, though he regard man in transgression, so far as to pity him, and afford
him means to come out of it, yet he loves him not, neither delights in him, as
he is joined thereunto. Wherefore, if man must always be joined to sin, then
God should always be at a distance with them, as it is written, Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid
his Face from you; whereas, on the contrary, the Saints are said to partake,
even while here, of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and to be one spirit with
the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. now no unclean thing can be so. It is expressly written,
that there is no communion betwixt Light and Darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. But God is
Light, and every sin is darkness in a measure. What greater stain then can
there be than this, upon God's Wisdom? as if he had been wanting to prepare a
means, whereby his Children might perfectly serve and worship him; or had not
provided a way, whereby they might serve him in any thing, but that they must
withal still serve the devil, no less, yea more than himself. For he that
sins is the servant of sin, Romans 6.16. and every sin is an act of service
and obedience to the devil. So then, if the Saints sin daily, in thought, word
and deed, yea, if the very service they offer to God, be sin, surely they serve
the devil more than they do God. For, besides that they give the devil many
entire services without mixture of the least grain to God, they give God not
the least service, in which the devil has not a large share; and, if their
prayers, and all their spiritual performances be sinful, the devil is as much
served by them, in these, as God, and in most of them much more: Since they
confess that many of them are performed, without the leadings and influence of
God's Spirit. Now, who would not account him a foolish master, among men, who,
being able to do it, and also desirous that it might be so, yet would not
provide away, whereby his Children and Servants might serve him more entirely
than his avowed enemy, or would not guard against their serving of him; but be
so imprudent and unadvised in his contrivance, that, whatever way his Servants
and Children served him, they should no less, yea, often much more serve his
enemy? What may we then think of that Doctrine, that would infer this folly upon
the Omnipotent and only Wise GOD.

. IV. Secondly, It is inconsistent with the Justice of God? For, since he
requires purity from his Children, and commands them to abstain from every
iniquity, so frequently and precisely, as shall hereafter appear; and, since
his wrath is revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, it
must needs follow, that he has capacitated man to answer his will, or else
that he requires more than he has given power to perform: which is to declare
him openly unjust, and with the sloathful Servant, to be a hard Master. We have
elsewhere spoken of the injustice these men ascribe to God, in making him to
damn the wicked, to whom they alledg he never offered any means of being good.
But this is yet an aggravation more irrational and inconsistent, to say, that
God will not afford to those whom he has chosen to be his own (whom they
confess he loves) the means to please him. What can follow then from so
strange a Doctrine? This imperfection in the Saints, either proceeds from God,
or from themselves. If it proceeds from them, it must be, because they are
short in improving or making use of the power given them, whereby they are
capable to obey; and so it is a thing possible to them (as indeed it is by the
help of that power) but this our adversaries deny, they are then not to be
blamed for their imperfection and continuing in sin, since it is not possible
to them to do otherwise. If it be not of themselves it must be of God, who has
not seen meet to allow them Grace in that degree to produce that effect. And
what is this but to attribute to God the height of injustice, to make him
require his Children to forsake sin, and yet not to afford them sufficient
means for so doing; Surely this makes God more unrighteous than wicked men, who
if as Christ says, their Children require Bread of them, will not give them a
Stone, or instead of Fish a Serpent. But these men confess, we ought to seek of
God power to redeem us from sin, and yet believe they are never to receive such
a power: such Prayers then cannot be in Faith, but are all vain. Is not this to
make God as unjust to his Children, as Pharaoh was to the Israelites, in
requiring Brick and not giving them straw? But blessed be God, he deals not so
with those that truly trust in him, and wait upon him, as these men vainly
imagine: for such faithful ones find of a truth that his Grace is sufficient
for them, and know how by his Power and Spirit to overcome the Evil one.

V. Thirdly, this evil Doctrine is highly injurious to Jesus Christ, and
greatly denegates from the Power and Virtue of his Sacrifice, and renders his
coming and ministry, as to the great end of it ineffectual. For Christ (as for
other ends) so principally he appeared for the removing of sin, for gathering a
righteous Generation that might serve the Lord in purity of mind, and walk
before him in fear, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and that Evangelick
perfection which the Law could not do. Hence he is said, Tit. 2.14. To have
given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works. This is certainly spoken
of the Saints while upon Earth. But contrary thereunto, these men affirm that
we are never redeemed from all Iniquity, and so make Christ's giving of himself
for us void and ineffectual, and give the Apostle Paul the Lie plainly by
denying that Christ purifieth to himself a peculiar People zealous of good
works. How are they zealous of good works, who are ever committing evil ones?
how are they a purified People that are still in impurity, as are they that
daily sin, unless sin be accounted no impurity? Moreover it is said expressly, 1 John 3.5, 8. that For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, and ye know that he was manifested to take away
our sins. But these men make this purpose of none effect, for they will not
have the Son of God to destroy the works of the Devil in his Children in this
world. Neither will they at all believe that he was manifest to take away our
sins, seeing they plead a necessity of always living in them. And lest any
should wrest this place of the Apostle, as if it were spoken only of taking
away the guilt of sin, as if it related not to this life, the Apostle as of
purpose to obviate such an objection, adds in the two following verses,
whosoever abides in him sins not, etc. I hope then they sin not daily in
Thought, Word and Deed. Let no man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous, he that commits sin is of the Devil. But
he that sins daily, in Thought, Word and Deed, commits sin. How comes
such a one then to be the Child of God? And if Christ was manifest to take away
sin, how strangely do they overturn the Doctrine of Christ, that deny that it
is ever taken away here? And how injurious are they to the Efficacy and Power
of Christ's appearance? Came not Christ to gather a People out of sin into
Righteousness, out from the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of the Dear Son
of God? And are not they that are thus gathered by him, his Servants, his
Children, his Brethren, his Friends? Who as he was, so are they to be in this
World, Holy, Pure, and Undefiled. And does not Christ still watch over them,
stand by them, pray for them, preserve them by his Power and Spirit, walk in
them, and dwell among them; even as the Devil on the other hand, does among the
reprobate ones? How comes it then that the Servants of Christ are less his
Servants, than the Devils are his? or is Christ unwilling to have his Servants
thoroughly pure? which were gross Blasphemy to assert, contrary to many
Scriptures. Or is he not able by his Power to preserve, and enable his Children
to serve him? which were no less Blasphemous to affirm of him, concerning whom
the Scriptures declare that he has overcome Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave, and
triumphed over them openly, and that all power in Heaven and Earth is given to
him. But certainly if the Saints sin daily in Thought, Word and Deed, as these
men assert, they serve the Devil daily, and are subject to his Power, and so he
prevails more than Christ does, and holds the Servants of Christ in bondage,
whether Christ will or not. But how greatly then does it contradict the end of
Christ's coming? as it is expressed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Even as
Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it: That he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word, That he might present it
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing;
but that it should be holy and without blemish. Now if Christ has really thus
answered the thing he came for, then the members of this Church are not always
sinning in Thought, Word and Deed. Or there is no difference betwixt being
sanctified and unsanctified, clean and unclean, holy and unholy, being daily
blemished with sin and being without blemish.

VI. Fourthly, this Doctrine renders the work of the ministry, the preaching of
the Word, the Writing of the Scripture, and the Prayers of the Holy men,
altogether useless and ineffectual. As to the first, Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors and
Teachers are said to be given for the perfection of the Saints, etc. till we
all come in the unity of the Faith and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto
a perfect man, unto a measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Now if
there be a necessity of sinning daily, and in all things, then there can be no
perfection. For such as do so, cannot be esteemed perfect. And if for
effectuating this perfection in the Saints, the ministry be appointed and
disposed of God, do not such as deny the possibility hereof, render the
ministry useless, and of no profit? seeing there can be no other true use
assigned but to lead People out of sin into Righteousness. If so be these
ministers assure us, that we need never expect to be delivered from it do not
they render their own work needless? what needs preaching against sin, for the
reproving of which all preaching is, if it can never be forsaken? Our
Adversaries are exalters of the Scriptures in words, much crying up their
usefulness and perfection. Now the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 3.17. that the
Scriptures are for making the man of God perfect. And if this be denied to be
attainable in this Life, then the Scriptures are of no profit, for in the other
life we shall not have use for them. It renders the Prayers of the Saints
altogether useless, seeing themselves do confess they ought to pray daily that
God would deliver them from evil, and free them from sin, by the help of his
Spirit and Grace, while in this world. But though we might suppose this
absurdity to follow, that their Prayers are without Faith, yet were not that so
much, if it did not infer the like upon the Holy Apostles, who prayed earnestly
for this end, and therefore (no doubt) believed it attainable, Col. 4.12.
laboring fervently for you in Prayers, that ye may stand perfect, etc. 1 These.
3.13. and 5.23, etc.

VII. But Fifthly, this Doctrine is contrary to common reason and sense. For
the two opposite Principles, whereof the one rules in the Children of Darkness,
the other in the Children of Light, are Sin and Righteousness. And as they are
respectively leavened and acted by them, so they are accounted either as
Reprobated or Justified: seeing it is abomination in the sight of God either to
Justify the Wicked, or Condemn the Just. Now to say that men cannot be so
leavened with the one, as to be delivered from the other, is in plain words to
affirm, that Sin and Righteousness are consistent, and that a man may be truly
termed Righteous, though he be daily sinning in every thing he does. And then,
what difference betwixt good and evil? Is not this to fall into that great
abomination of putting Light for Darkness, and calling good evil, and evil good?
since they say, the very best actions of God's Children are defiled and
polluted, and that those that sin daily, in Thought, Word and Deed, are good
men and woman, the Saints and Holy Servants of the Holy Pure God. Can there be
any thing more repugnant, than this to common reason? Since the subject is
still denominated from that accident, that does most influence it, as a Wall is
called white, when there is much whiteness, and Black, when there is much
blackness, and such like. But when there is more Unrighteousness in a man, than
Righteousness, that man ought rather to be denominated Unrighteous than
Righteous. Then surely, if every man sin daily, in Thought, Word and Deed, and
that in his sins there is no Righteousness at all, and that all his Righteous
actions are polluted and mixed with sin, then there is in every man more
Unrighteousness than Righteousness, and so no man ought to be called righteous,
no man can be said to be sanctified or washed. Where are then the Children of
God? where are the purified ones? where are they who were sometimes unholy, but
now holy? that sometimes were darkness, but now are Light in the Lord? There
can none such be found then at this rate, except that unrighteousness be
esteemed so. And is not this to fall into that abomination above mentioned of
justifying the ungodly? This certainly lands in that horrid Blasphemy of the
Ranters, that affirm there is no difference betwixt good and evil, and that all
is one in the sight of God. I could show many more gross absurdities, evil
consequences, and manifest contradictions plied in this sinful Doctrine, but
this may suffice at present, by which also in a good measure, the probation of
the Truth we affirm is advanced. Yet nevertheless, for the further evidencing
of it, I shall proceed to the second thing proposed by me, to wit, to prove
this from several Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures.

VIII. And first, I prove it from the peremptory positive command of Christ and
his Apostles, seeing this is a maxim engraven in every man's heart naturally,
that no man is bound to that which is impossible: since then Christ and his
Apostles have commanded us to keep all the Commandments, and to be perfect in
this respect, it is possible for us so to do. Now that this is thus commanded
without any commentary or consequence, is evidently apparent from these plain
Testimonies, Matthew. c. 5. v. 48.7.21. Joh. 13.17. 1 Cor. 7.19. 2 Cor. 13.11. 1
John, c. 2. v. 3, 4, 5, 6. and c. 3. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. These
Scriptures intimate a positive command for it, they declare the absolute
necessity of it, and therefore as if they had purposely been written to answer
the objections of our Opposers, they show the folly of those that will esteem
themselves Children or Friends of God, while they do otherwise.

Secondly, it is possible because we receive the Gospel and Law thereof for
that effect, and it is expressly promised to us as we are under Grace, as appears
by these Scriptures, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye
are not under the Law, but under Grace; and Romans 8.3. For what the Law could
not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.
That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc. For if this
were not a condition both requisite, necessary and attainable, under the
Gospel, there were no difference betwixt the bringing-in of a better hope and
the Law which made nothing perfect, neither betwixt those, which are under the
Gospel, or who, under the Law, enjoyed and walked in the Life of the Gospel,
and mere Legalists. Whereas the Apostle throughout that whole sixth to the
Romans, argues not only the possibility, but necessity of being free from sin,
from their being under the Gospel, and under Grace, and not under the Law, and
therefore states himself and those to whom he wrote, in that condition, in
these verses, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and therefore, in the 11, 12, 13.16, 17, 18
verses, he argues both the possibility and necessity of this freedom from sin,
almost in the same manner we did a little before: and the 22 he declares them
in measure to have attained this condition, in these words, But now being made
free from sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness,
and the end everlasting Life. And, as this perfection or freedom from sin is
attained and made possible, where the Gospel and inward Law of the Spirit is
received and known, so the ignorance hereof has been, and is, an occasion of
opposing this Truth. For man not minding the Light and Law within his heart,
which not only discovers sin, but leads out of it, and so being a stranger to
the new Life and Birth, that is born of God, which naturally does his will, and
cannot, of its own nature, transgress the Commandments of God, does, I say, in
his natural state, look at the Commandments, as they are without him, in the
letter, and, finding himself reproved and convicted, is by the letter killed,
but not made alive. So man, finding himself wounded, and not applying himself
inwardly to that, which can heal, labors in his own will after conformity to
the Law, as it is without him, which he can never obtain, but finds, the more
he wrestles, the more he falls short. So this is the Jew still, in effect,
with his carnal Commandment, with the Law without, in the first covenant state,
which makes not the comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience,
Heb. 9.9. though they may have here a notion of Christianity, and an external
Faith in Christ. This has made them strain and wrest the Scriptures for an
imputative Righteousness, wholly without them, to cover their impurities, and
this has made them imagine an acceptance with God possible, though they
suppose it impossible ever to obey Christ's Commands. But alas! O deceived
Souls! that will not avail in the day, wherein God will judge every man
according to his works, whether good or bad. It will not save thee to say it
was necessary for thee to sin daily, in thought, word and deed; for such as do
so* have certainly obeyed unrighteousness. And what is provided for such, but
tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath, even as glory, honor, and
peace, immortality and Eternal Life to such as have done good, and patiently
continued in well doing. So then, if thou desire to know this perfection and
freedom from sin possible for thee, turn thy mind to the Light and Spiritual
Law of Christ in the heart, and suffer the reproofs thereof, bear the judgment
and indignation of God upon the unrighteous part in thee, as therein it is
revealed; which Christ has made tolerable for thee; and so suffer judgment in
thee to be brought forth in victory, and thus come to partake of the fellowship
of Christ's sufferings, and be made conformable unto his death, that thou may
feel thy self crucified with him to the world, by the power of his Cross in
thee, so that that life, that sometimes was alive in thee to this world, and
the love and lusts thereof may die, and a new Life be raised, by which thou
may live hence forward to God, and not to or for thy self, and with the
Apostle thou may say, Gal. 2.20. It is no more I, but Christ alive in me; and
then thou will be a Christian indeed, and not in name only, as too many are.
Then thou will know what it is to have put off the old man with his deeds, who
indeed sins daily, in thought, word and deed; and to have put on the New Man,
that is renewed in Holiness after the Image of him, that has created him, Ephesians.
4.24. and thou will witness thy self to be Gods workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, and so not to sin always. And to this New Man Christ's
yoke is easy, and his burden is light, though it be heavy to the old Adam,
yea the Commandments of God are not unto this grievous, For it is his meat and
drink to be found fulfilling the will of God.

Lastly, this perfection or freedom from sin is possible, because many have
attained it, according to the express Testimony of the Scripture. Some before
the Law, and some under the Law, through witnessing and partaking of the
benefit and effect of the Gospel, and much more many under the Gospel. As first
it is written of Enoch, Genesis 5.22, 24* that he walked with God, which no man
while sinning can, nor does the Scripture record any feeling of his. It is said
of Noah, Genesis 6.9. and of Job, 1.8. and of Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.
that they were perfect. But under the Gospel, besides that of the Romans above
mentioned, see what the Apostle says of many Saints in general. Ephesians. 2.4, 5,
6. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he has loved us,
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by Grace
ye are saved.) And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, etc. I judge while they were sitting in these
heavenly places they could not be daily sinning, in Thought, Word and Deed,
neither were all their works which they did there, as filthy rags, or as a
menstruous Garment. See what is further said to the Hebrews, 12.22, 23. Spirits
of just men made perfect. And to conclude, let that of the Revelation, 14. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. be considered. Where, though their being found without fault be
spoken in the present time, yet is it not without respect to their innocence
while upon earth; and their being redeemed from among men, and no guile found
in their mouth is expressly mentioned in the time past. But I shall proceed now
in the third place, to answer the objections, which indeed are the arguments of
our opposers.

IX. I shall begin with their chief and great argument, which is the words of
the Apostle, Obj.
1. Joh. 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we decieve our selves, and the
Truth is not in us. This they think invincible.

Answ.
But is it not strange to see men so blinded with partiality? How many
Scriptures tenfold more plain do they reject, and yet stick so tenaciously to
this, that can receive so many answers? As first, [ If we say we have no sin,
etc.] will not import the Apostle himself to be included. Sometimes the
Scripture uses this manner of expression, when the person speaking cannot be
included, which manner of speech the Grammarians call Metaschematismos. Thus
Ja. 3.9, 10. speaking of the Tongue says, therewith bless we God, and
therewith curse we men, adding, these things ought not so to be: who from this
will conclude that the Apostle was one of those cursers? But secondly, this
objection hitteth not the matter, he says not we sin daily in Thought, Word
and Deed, far less that the very good works, which God works in us by his
Spirit, are sin: yea the next verse clearly shows, that upon confession and
repentance we are not only forgiven, but also cleansed, He is faithful to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Here is both a
forgiveness and removing of the guilt, and a cleansing or removing of the
filth; for to make forgiveness and cleansing to belong both to the removing of
the guilt, as there is no reason for it from the text, so it were a most
violent forcing of the words, and would imply a needless tautology. The Apostle
having shown how that not the guilt only, but even the filth also of sin is
removed, subsumes his words in the time past, in the 10 verse, If we say we
have not sinned, we make him a liar. Thirdly, as Augustine well observed in his
exposition upon the Epistle to the Galatians, It is one thing not to sin,
another thing not to have sin. The Apostles words are not, If we say we sin
not, o^ commit not sin daily, but if we say we have no sin. And betwixt these
two there is a manifest difference, for in respect all have sinned, as we
freely acknowledge, all may be said in a sense to have sin. Again, sin may be
taken for the seed of sin, which may be in those, that are redeemed from actual
sinning: but as to the temptations, and provocations proceeding from it, being
resisted by the servants of God, and not yielded to, they are the Devils sin,
that tempts, not the man's, that is preserved. Fourthly, this being
considered, as also how positive and how plain, once again, the same Apostle
is, in the very same Epistle, as in diverse places above cited, is it equal, or
rational to strain this one place presently after so qualified, and subsumed in
the times past, to contradict, not only other positive expressions of his, but
the whole tendency of his Epistle, and of the rest of the holy commands and
precepts of the Scripture.

Secondly, Their second Objection is from two places of Scripture much of one
signification. The one is, 1 Kings 8.46. Obj.
For there is no man, that sins not. The other is Eccles. 7.20. for there is
not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not.

I answer, first; These affirm nothing of a daily and continual sinning, Answ.
so as never to be redeemed from it, but only that all have sinned, or that
there is none, that does not sin, though not always, so as never to cease to
sin: and in this lies the question. Yea, in that place of the Kings, he speaks,
within two verses, of the returning of such with all their Souls and Hearts,
which implies a possibility of leaving off sin. Secondly there is a respect to
be had to the seasons and dispensations; for, if it should be granted that in
Solomon's time there was none, that sinned not, it will not follow that there
are none such now, or that it is a thing is not now attainable by the Grace of
God under the Gospel, for a non esse ad non posse non valet sequela. And
lastly, this whole objection hangs upon a false interpretation, for the Hebrew
word (...) may be read in the potential mood, Thus, There is no man, who may
not sin, as well as in the Indicative: so both the old Latin, Junius and
Tremellius and Vatablus have it, and the same word is so used, Psalm. 119.11. I
have hid thy Word in my Heart, (...) that is to say, that I may not sin against
thee, in the potential mood, and not in the indicative, as it is in the
English; which being more answerable to the universal scope of the Scriptures,
the testimony of the Truth, and the sense almost of all Interpreters, doubtless
ought to be so understood, and the other interpretation rejected as spurious.

Thirdly, they object some expressions of the Apostle Paul, Obj.
Romans 7.19. for the good, that I would, I do not; but the evil, which I would
not, that I do. And ver. 24. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?

I answer, This place infers nothing, unless it were apparent that the Apostle
here were speaking of his own condition, Answ.
and not rather in the person of others, or what he himself had sometimes born,
which is frequent in Scripture, as in the case of cursing in James, before
mentioned. But there is nothing in the text, that does clearly signify the
Apostle to be speaking of himself, or of a condition he was then under, or was
always to be under; yea, on the contrary, in the former Chapter, as before is at
large shown, he declares they were dead to sin, demanding how such should yet
live any longer therein? Secondly, it appears that the Apostle only personated
one not yet come to a Spiritual condition, in that he says, verse 14. but I am
carnal, sold under sin. Now, is it to be imagined that the Apostle Paul, as to
his own proper condition, when he wrote that Epistle, was a carnal man, who in
the 1 chapter testifies of himself, that he was separated to be an Apostle,
capable to impart to the Romans Spiritual gifts? and chapter 8. ver. 2. that
the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus had made him free from the law of
sin and death, so then he was not carnal. And seeing there are Spiritual men in
this life, as our adversaries will not deny, and is intimated through this
whole 8 chapter to the Romans, it will not be denied but the Apostle was one of
them. So then, as his calling himself carnal, in the 7 chap. can not be
understood of his own proper state, neither can the rest of what he speaks
there of that kind be so understood; yea after ver. 24. where he makes that
exclamation, he adds in the next verse, I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, signifying that by him he witnessed deliverance, and so goes on, showing
how he had obtained it in the next Chapter, viz. 8. v. 35. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? And verse 37. But in all these things we are more
than conquerors. And in the last verse, nothing shall be able to separate us,
etc. But wherever there is a continuing in sin, there there is a separation in
some degree, seeing every sin is contrary to God, and (...) i. e. a
transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. and whoever commits the least sin is
overcome of it, and so, in that respect, is not a conqueror, but conquered.
This condition then which the Apostle plainly testified, he with some others
had obtained, could not consist with continual remaining and abiding in sin.

Obj.
Fourthly, they object the faults and sins of several eminent Saints, as Noah,
David, etc.

Answ.
I answer, that does not at all prove the case, for the question is not whether
good men may not fall into sin, which is not denied, but whether it be not
possible for them not to sin? It will not follow, because these men sinned that
therefore they were never free of sin, but always sinned. For, at this rate of
arguing it might be urged according to this rule, contrariorum par ratio, i. e.
the reason of contraries is alike, that, if, because a good man has sinned,
once, or twice, he can never be free from sin, but must always be daily and
continually a sinner, all his life long, then by the rule of Contraries, if a
wicked man have done good once or twice, he can never be free from
righteousness, but must always be a righteous man all his life time, which as
it is most absurd in it self, so it is contrary to the plain testimony of the
Scripture, Ezech. 33.12. to the 18.

Lastly they object, that, Object.
if perfection or freedom from sin be attainable, this will render
mortification of sin useless, and make the blood of Christ of no service to us,
neither need we any more pray for forgiveness of sins.

I answer, I had almost omitted this objection, Answ.
because of the manifest absurdity of it; for can mortification of sin be
useless where the end of it is obtained? seeing there is no attaining of this
perfection but by mortification, does the hope and belief of overcoming render
the fight unnecessary? Let rational men judge which has most sense in it, to
say as our adversaries do, It is necessary that we fight and wrestle, but we
must never think of overcoming. We must resolve still to be overcome. Or to
say, Let us fight, because we may overcome. Whether do such as believe they may
be cleansed by it, or those, that believe they can never be cleansed by it
render the Blood of Christ most effectual? If two men were both grievously
diseased, and applied themselves to a Physician for remedy, which of those do
most commend the Physician and his cure, he that believes he may be cured by
him, and as he feels himself cured, confesses that he is so, and so can say,
This is a skilful Physician, this is good Medicine, behold I am made whole by
it? or he that never is cured, nor ever believes that he can so long as he
lives? As for praying for forgiveness, we deny it not, for that all have
sinned, and therefore all need to pray that their sins past may be blotted out,
and that they may be daily preserved from sinning. And if hoping or believing
to be made free from sin, hinders praying for forgiveness of sin, it would
follow by the same inference, that men ought not to forsake murder, adultery,
or any of these gross evils, seeing the more men are sinful, the more plentiful
occasion there would be of asking forgiveness of sin, and the more work for
mortification. But the Apostle has sufficiently refuted such sin-pleasing
cavils in these words, Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we continue in sin, that Grace may
abound? God forbid.

But lastly, it may be easily answered, by a retorsion to those that press
this, from the words of the Lords prayer, forgiven us our debts, that this
militates no less against perfect justification, than against perfect
sanctification. For, if all the Saints, the least as well as the greatest, be
perfectly justified in that very hour wherein they are converted, as our
adversaries will have it, then they have remission of sins long before they
dye. May it not then be said to them, What need have ye to pray for remission
of sin, who are already justified, whose sins are long ago forgiven, both past
and to come?

X. But this may suffice; concerning this possibility Jerome speaks clearly
enough, lib. 3. adver. Pelagium. This we also say that a man may not sin, if he
will, for a time and place, according to his bodily weakness, so long as his
mind is intent, so long as the cords of the cythar relax not by any vice, and
again in the same book, which is that, that I said, that it is put in our
power, (to wit, being helped by the grace of God) either to sin, or not to sin.
For this was the error of Pelagius, which we indeed reject and abhor, and which
the Fathers deservedly withstood, that man by his natural strength, without the
help of Gods grace, could attain to that state, so as not to sin. And Augustine
himself, a great opposer of the Pelagian heresy, did not deny this
possibility, as attainable by the help of God's grace, as in his book de
Spiritu and litera, cap. 2. and his book de natura and gratia against Pelagius,
cap. 42.50, 60, and 63 de gestis concilii Palaestini, cap. 7. and 2. and de
peccato originali, lib. 2. cap. 2. Gelasius also, in his disputation against
Pelagius, says, But if any affirm that this may be given to some Saints in his
life, not by the Power of man's strength, but by the grace of God, he does well
to think so confidently, and hope it faithfully: for by the gift of God all
things are possible. That this was the common opinion of the Fathers, appears
from the words of the Aszansik Council, Canon last, We believe also this,
according to the Catholic Faith, that all that are baptized through Grace by
baptism received, and Christ helping them, and co-working, may and ought to do
whatsoever belongs to Salvation, if they will faithfully labor.

XI. Blessed then are they, that believe in him, who is both able and willing
to deliver as many as come to him through true repentance, from all sin, and do
not resolve, as these men do, to be the devil's servants all their life time,
but daily go on forsaking unrighteousness, and forgetting those things, Phil.
3. ver. 14.
that are behind, press forwards toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high
calling of God, in Christ Jesus: such shall not find their faith and confidence
to be in vain, but in due time shall be made conquerors, through him, in whom
they have believed, and so, overcoming, shall be established as pillars in the
house of God, so as they shall go no more out, Rev. 3. ver. 12.

The Ninth Proposition, Concerning Perseverance, and the possibility of falling
from Grace.
Although this Gift, and inward Grace of God be sufficient to work out
Salvation, yet in those, in whom it is resisted, it both may, and does, become
their condemnation. Moreover, they, in whose hearts it has wrought in part to
purify and sanctify them, in order to their further perfection, may by
disobedience fall from it, turn it to wantonness, 1 Timothy 1.9. make shipwreck of
faith, and after having tasted the heavenly Gift, and been made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, again fall away, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. yet such an increase and
stability in the Truth may, in this life, be attained, from which there can not
be a total Apostasy.

I. THE first sentence of this Proposition has already been treated of, in the
5 and 6 Propositions, where it has been shown that that Light, which is given
for Life, and Salvation, becomes the condemnation of those that refuse it, and
therefore is already proved in those places, where did demonstrate the
possibility of man's resisting the Grace and Spirit of God; and indeed it is so
apparent in the Scriptures, that it cannot be denied, by such as will but
seriously consider these testimonies, Prove. 1.24, 25, and 26. Joh. 3.18, 19. 2
These. 2.11, 12. Acts 7.51. and 13.46. Romans 1. v. 18. As for the other part of
it, that, they, in whom this Grace may have wrought in a good measure, in order
to purify and sanctify them, tending to their further perfection, may
afterward through disobedience fall away, etc. The testimonies of the
Scripture included in the Proposition it self are sufficient to prove it, to
men of unbyassed judgments. But, Because, as to this part, our cause is common
with many other Protestants, I shall be the more brief in it. For it is not my
design to do that, which is done already, neither do I covet to appear knowing,
by writing much, but simply purpose to present to the world a faithful account
of our principles, and briefly to let them understand what we have to say for
our selves.

II. From these Scriptures then included in the Proposition (not to mention any
more, which might be urged) I argue thus.

If men may turn the Grace of God into wantonness, then they must once

But the first is true:

Therefore also the Second.

If men may make shipwreck of faith, they must once have had it, neither could
they ever have had true faith without the Grace of God:

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last:

If men may have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and been made partakers of the
holy Spirit, and afterward fall away, they must needs have known in measure
the operation of Gods Saving Grace and Spirit, without which no man could taste
the heavenly Gift, nor yet partake of the Holy Spirit:

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

Secondly, Seeing the contrary doctrine is built upon this false hypothesis,
that Grace is not given for salvation to any, but to a certain elect number,
which cannot lose it and that all the rest of mankind, by an absolute decree,
are debarred from grace and salvation, that being destroyed, this falls to the
ground. Now as that doctrine of theirs is wholly inconsistent with the daily
practice of those that preach it, in that they exhort people to believe and be
saved; while in the mean time, if they belong to the decree of reprobation, it
is simply impossible for them so to do and, if to the decree of election, it is
needless; seeing it is as impossible to them to miss of it, as has been before
demonstrated: so also in this matter of perseverance, their practice and
principle are no less inconsistent and contradictory, for while they daily
exhort people to be faithful to the end, showing them, if they continue not,
they shall be cut off, and fall short of the reward: which is very true, but no
less inconsistent with that doctrine, that affirms there is no hazard, because
no possibility of departing from the least measure of true Grace. Which, if
true, it is to no purpose to beseech them to stand, to whom God has made it
impossible to fall. I shall not longer insist upon the probation of this,
seeing what is said may suffice to answer my design, and that the thing is also
abundantly proved by many of the same judgment. That this was the doctrine of
the primitive Protestants, thence appears, that the Augustan confession
condemns it as an error of the Anabaptists, to say, that who once are
justified, they cannot lose the Holy Spirit. Many such like sayings are to be
found in the common places of Philip Melancthon. Vossius, in his Pelagian
History, lib. 6. testifies that this was the common opinion of the Fathers, in
the confirmation of the 12 These, page 587. he has these words, that this,
which we have said, was the common sentiment of antiquity, those at present can
only deny, who otherways perhaps are men not unlearned, but nevertheless in
antiquity altogether strangers, etc. These things thus observed, I come to the
objections of our opposers.

Obj.
III. First they allege, that those places mentioned of making shipwreck of
faith is only understood of seeming faith, and not of a real true faith.

This objection is very weak, and apparently contrary to the Text, Answ.
1 Timothy 1.19. where the Apostle adds to faith a good Conscience, by way of
complaint; whereas, if their faith had been only seeming and hypocritical, the
men had been better without it than with it, neither had they been worthy of
blame, for losing that, which in it self was evil. But the Apostle expressly
adds [ and of a good Conscience], which shows it was real, neither can it be
supposed that men could truly attain a good Conscience, without the operation
of Gods Saving Grace: far less that a good Conscience does consist with a
seeming, false, and hypocritical faith. Again, these places of the Apostle
being spoken by way of regret, clearly import that these seize, they had
fallen from, were good and real, not false and deceitful, else he would not have
regreted their falling from them. And so he says positively, they tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. not that
they seemed to be so, which shows this objection is very frivolous.

Secondly, they allege, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, Obj.
that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it, until the day of
Jesus Christ, etc. and 1. Pet. 1.5. who are kept by the Power of God through
faith unto Salvation.

These Scriptures, Answ.
as they do not affirm any thing positively contrary to us, so they cannot be
understood otherwise than as the condition is performed upon our part, seeing
Salvation is no other ways proposed there, but upon certain necessary
conditions to be performed by us, as has been above proved, and as our
adversaries also acknowledge, as Romans 8. v 13. For, if ye live after the flesh,
ye shall dye, but, if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live. And Heb. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold
the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end. For, if these places of
the Scripture, upon which they build their objection, were to be admitted
without these conditions, it would manifestly overturn the whole tenor of their
exhortations throughout all their writings. Some other objections there are of
the same nature, which are solved by the same answers, which also, because
largely treated of by others, I omit, to come to that testimony of the Truth,
which is more especially ours in this matter, and is contained in the latter
part of the Proposition, in these words, yet such an increase and stability in
the Truth may in this life be attained from which there cannot be a total
apostasy.

IV. As in the explanation of the fifth and sixth Propositions, I observed that
some that had denied the errors of others concerning reprobation, and affirmed
the universality of Christ's death, did notwithstanding fall short in
sufficiently holding forth the truth, and so gave the contrary party an
occasion, by their defects, to be strengthened in their errors: so may it be
said in this case. As, upon the one hand, they err, that affirm that the least
degree of true and saving grace cannot be fallen from, so do they err, upon the
other hand, that deny any such stability to be attained, from which there
cannot be a total and final apostasy. And betwixt these two extremes lies the
Truth, apparent in the Scriptures, which God has revealed unto us by the
testimony of his Spirit, and which also we are made sensible of, by our own
sensible experience. And, even as in that former controversy was observed, so
also in this the defense of Truth will readily appear, to such as seriously
weigh the matter: for the arguments upon both hands, rightly applied, will, as
to this, hold good, and the objections, which are strong, as they are
respectively urged against the two opposite false opinions, are here easily
solved by the establishing of this Truth. For all the arguments, which these
allege, that affirm there can be no falling away, may well be received upon
the one part, as of these, who have attained to this stability and
establishment, and their objections solved by this concession: so, upon the
other hand, the arguments alleged, from Scripture testimonies, by those, that
affirm the possibility of falling away, may well be received of such as are not
come to this establishment, though having attained a measure of true grace.
Thus then the contrary batterings of our adversaries, who miss the Truth, do
concur the more strongly to establish it, while they are destroying each other.
But, lest this may not seem to suffice to satisfy such as judge it always
possible for the best of men, before they dye, to fall away, I shall add, for
the proof of it, some brief considerations, from some few testimonies of the
Scripture.

V. And first, I freely acknowledge, that it is good for all to be humble, and
in this respect, not over confident, so as to lean to this to foster themselves
in iniquity, or lie down in security, as if they had attained this condition,
seeing watchfulness and diligence is of indispensible necessity to all mortal
men, so long as they breath in this world: for God will have this to be the
constant practice of a Christian, that thereby he may be the more fit to serve
him, and the better armed against all the daily temptations of the Enemy. For,
since the wages of sin is death, there is no man, while he sins, and is
subject thereunto, but may lawfully suppose himself capable of perishing. Hence
the Apostle Paul himself says, 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a castaway. Here the Apostle supposes it possible
for him to be a castaway, and yet it may be judged he was far more advanced in
the inward work of regeneration, when he wrote that Epistle, than many who now
adays too presumptuously suppose they cannot fall away, because they feel
themselves to have attained some small degree of true Grace. But the Apostle
makes use of this supposition, or possibility of his being a cast away (as I
before observed) as an inducement to him to be watchful, I keep under my body,
lest, etc. Nevertheless the same Apostle at another time, in the sense and
feeling of God's holy Power, and in the dominion thereof, finding himself a
conqueror therethrough over sin and his Souls enemies, makes no difficulty to
affirm, Romans 8.38. For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, etc. which
clearly shows that he had attained a condition, from which he knew he could
not fall away.

But secondly, it appears such a condition is attainable, because we are
exhorted to it, and, as has been proved before, the Scripture never proposes
to us things impossible. Such an exhortation we have from the Apostle, 2 Pet.
1.10. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure. And though there be a condition here proposed, yet since we have
already proved that it is possible to fulfill this condition, then also the
promise, annexed thereunto, may be attained. And since where assurance is
wanting, there is still a place left for doubtings and despairs, if we would
affirm it never attainable, then should there never be a place known by the
Saints in this world, wherein they might be free of doubting and despair: Which
as it is most absurd in it self, so it is contrary to the manifest experience
of thousands.

Thirdly, God has given to many of his Saints and children, and is ready to
give unto all, a full and certain assurance, that they are his, and that no
power shall be able to pluck them out of hand. But this assurance would be no
assurance, if those who are so assured were not established and confirmed
beyond all doubt and hesitation. If so, then surely there is no possibility for
such to miss of that, which God has assured them of. And that there is such
assurance, attainable in this life, the Scripture abundantly declares, both in
general, and as to particular persons. As first, Rev. 3. v. 12. him that
overcomes will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out, etc. which contains a general promise unto all. Hence the Apostle
speaks of some that are sealed, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given
the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts: Wherefore the Spirit so sealing is
called the earnest or pledge of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye were
sealed by the holy Spirit of Promise. And therefore the Apostle Paul, not only
in that of the Romans above nored, declares himself to have attained that
condition, but 2 Timothy 4.7. he affirms in these words, I have fought a good
fight, etc. which also many good men have, and do witness. And therefore, as
there can be nothing more manifest, than that which the manifest experience of
this time shows, and therein is found agreeable to the experience of former
times, so we see there have been, both of old and of late that have turned the
Grace of God into wantonness, that have fallen from their faith and integrity,
thence we may safely conclude such a falling away possible. We also see that
some of old and of late have attained a certain assurance, sometime before they
departed, that they should inherit eternal life, and have accordingly dyed in
that good hope* Of and concerning whom the Spirit of God testified, That they
are saved. Wherefore we also see that such a state is attainable in this life,
from which there is not a falling away. For seeing the Spirit of God did so
testify, it was not possible that they should perish, concerning whom, he who
cannot lie, thus bare witness.

The Tenth Proposition, Concerning the Ministry.
As by this Light or Gift of God all true knowledge in things Spiritual is
received and revealed, so by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
heart, by the strength and power thereof, every true Minister of the Gospel is
ordained, prepared, and supplied in the work of the Ministry: and by the
leading, moving and drawing hereof, ought every Evangelist and Christian Pastor
to be led and ordered in his labor and work of the Gospel, both as to the
place where, as to the persons to whom, and as to the time wherein he is to
minister. Moreover, who have this authority, may and ought to preach the
Gospel, though without hamane Commission or Literature, as on the other hand,
who want the Authority of this Divine Gift, however learned or authorized by
the Commission of Men and Churches, are to be esteemed but as deceivers, and
not true Ministers of the Gospel. Also who have received this holy and
unspotted Gift, Matthew. 10. ver. 8.
as they have freely received it, so are they freely to give it without hire or
bargaining, far less to use it as a Trade to get Money by; yet if God has
called any one from their Employments or Trades by which they acquire their
Livelihood,, it may be lawful for such, according to the liberty which they
feel given them in the Lord, to receive such temporals (to wit, what may be
needful for them for meat and clothing) as are given them freely and cordially
by those to whom they have communicated Spirituals.

I. HItherto I have treated of those things which relate to the Christian Faith
and Christians, as they stand each in his private and particular condition, and
how and what way every man may be a Christian indeed, and so abide. Now I come
in order to speak of those things that relate to Christians as they are stated
in a joint fellowship and Communion, and come under a visible and outward
society, which society is called the Church of God, and in Scripture compared
to a body, and therefore named the Body of Christ. As then in the natural body
there be diverse members, all concurring to the common end of preserving and
confirming the whole body; so in this Spiritual and mystical Body there are
also diverse, according to the different measures of Grace, and of the Spirit
diversely administered unto each member; and from this diversity arises that
distinction of persons in the visible Society of Christians, as of Apostles,
Pastors, Evangelists, Ministers, etc. That which in this Proposition is
proposed, is, What makes or constitutes any a Minister of the Church, what his
qualifications ought to be, and how he ought to behave himself? But because it
may seem somewhat preposterous, to speak of the distinct Offices of the Church,
until something be said concerning the Church in general, though nothing
positively be said of it in the Proposition, yet as here implied, I shall
briefly premise something thereof, and then proceed to the particular members
of it.

II. It is not in the least my design to meddle with those tedious and many
controversies, wherewith the Papists and Protestants do tear one another
concerning this thing, but only according to the Truth manifested to me, and
revealed in me by the testimony of the Spirit, according to that proportion of
wisdom given me, briefly to hold forth, as a necessary introduction both to
this matter of the Ministry, and of Worship which follows those things which
I, together with my Brethren, do believe concerning the Church.

The [ Church] then, according to the grammatical signification of the word, as
it is used in the Holy Scripture, signifies an assembly or gathering of many
into one place, for the Substantive (...) comes from the word (...) I call out
of, and originally from (...) I call, and indeed as this is the grammatical
sense of the word, so also it is the real and proper signification of the
thing, the Church being no other thing, but the society, gathering, or company
of such as God has called out of the World, and worldly Spirit, to walk in his
LIGHT and LIFE. The Church then so designed is to be considered, as it
comprehends all that are thus called and gathered truly by God, both such as
are yet in this inferior World, and such as having already laid down the
earthy Tabernacle, are passed into their heavenly Mansions, which together do
make up the one Catholic Church, (concerning which there is so much
controversy) out of which Church we freely acknowledge there can be no
Salvation, because under this Church and its denomination are comprehended all,
and as many, of whatsoever Nation, Kindred, Tongue or People they be (though
outwardly strangers and remote from those who profess Christ and Christianity
in words, and have the benefit of the Scriptures) as become obedient to the
holy Light and Testimony of God in their hearts, so as to become sanctified by
it, and cleansed from the evils of their ways. For this is the Universal or
Catholic Spirit, by which many are called from all the four corners of the
earth, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. By this the secret
Life and Virtue of Jesus is conveyed into many that are afar off, even as by
the blood that runs into the Veins and Arteries of the Natural Body, the Life
is conveyed from the Head and Heart unto the extremest parts. There may be
members therefore of this Catholic Church both among Heathens, Turks, Jews,
and all the several sorts of Christians, Men and Women of integrity and
simplicity of Heart, who though blinded in something in their understanding,
and perhaps burdened with the Superstitions and formality of the several Sects
in which they are engrossed, yet being upright in their Hearts before the Lord,
chiefly aiming and laboring to be delivered from iniquity, and loving to
follow righteousness, are by the secret touches of this Holy Light in their
Souls, inlivened and quickened, thereby secretly united to God, and there
through become true members of this Catholic Church. Now the Church, in this
respect has been in being in all generations, for God never wanted some such
witnesses for him, though many times slighted, and not much observed by this
World. And therefore this Church, though still in being, has been oftentimes
as it were Invisible, in that it has not come under the observation of the men
of this World, being as says the Scripture, Jer. 3.14. One of a City, and two
of a Family. And yet, though the Church thus considered, may be, as it were hid
from wicked men, as not then gathered into a visible fellowship, yea and not
observed even by some that are members of it, yet may there notwithstanding
many belong to it, as when Elias complained he was left alone, 1 Kings 19.18.
God answered unto him, I have reserved to my self seven thousand men, who have
not bowed their knees to the Image of Baal, whence the Apostle argues, Romans 11.
the being of a remnant in his day.

III. Secondly, the Church is to be considered, as it signifies a certain
number of persons gathered by Gods Spirit, and by the testimony of some of his
servants raised up for that end, unto the belief of the true Principles and
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, who through their hearts being united by the
same love, and their understanding informed in the same Truths, gather, meet,
and assemble together to wait upon God, to worship him, and to bear a joint
testimony for the Truth against Error, suffering for the same, and so becoming,
through this fellowship as one family and household in certain respects, do each
of them watch over, teach, instruct, and care for one another, according to
their several measures and seize. Such were the Churches of the Primitive
time, gathered by the Apostles, whereof we have diverse mentioned in the Holy
Scriptures. And as to the visibility of the Church, in this respect, there has
been a great interruption since the Apostles days, by reason of the apostasy,
as shall hereafter appear.

IV. To be a member then of the Catholic Church, there is need of the inward
calling of God, by his Light in their Heart, and a being leavened into the
nature and Spirit of it, so as to forsake unrighteousness, and be turned to
righteousness, and in the inwardness of the mind to be cut out of the
wild-Olive-tree of our own first fallen nature, and ingrafted into Christ by his
Word and Spirit in the heart. And this may be done in those, who are strangers
to the History (God not having pleased to make them partakers thereof) as in
the V. and VI. Propositions has already been proved.

To be a member of a particular Church of Christ, as this inward work is
indispensibly necessary, so is also the outward profession of, and belief in
Jesus Christ, and those holy Truths delivered by his Spirit in the Scriptures,
seeing the testimony of the Spirit recorded in the Scriptures does answer the
testimony of the same Spirit in the heart, even as face answers face in a
glass. Hence it follows that the inward work of Holiness and forsaking
iniquity, is necessary in every respect to the being a member in the Church of
Christ; and that the outward profession is necessary to be a member of a
particular gathered Church, but not to the being a member of the Catholic
Church, yet it is absolutely necessary where God affords the opportunity of
knowing it: the outward testimony is to be believed where it is presented and
revealed, the sum whereof has upon other occasions been already proved.

V. But contrary hereunto, the Devil that works, and has wrought, in the
mystery of iniquity, has taught his followers to affirm, That no man however
holy, is a member of the Church of Christ, without the outward profession, and
that he be initiated thereunto by some outward Ceremonies. And again, That men
who have this outward Profession, though inwardly unholy, may be members of the
true Church of Christ, yea and ought to be so esteemed. This is plainly to put
Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, as if God had a greater regard to
words than actions, and were more pleased with vain professions than with real
holiness: But these things I have sufficiently refuted heretofore. Only from
hence let it be observed, that upon this false and rotten foundation Antichrist
has builded his Babylonish Structure, and the Antichristian Church in the
apostasy has hereby reared her self up to that height and grandeur she has
attained, so as to exalt herself above all, that is called God, and sit in the
Temple of God, as God.

For the particular Churches of Christ gathered in the Apostles days, soon
after beginning to decay as to the inward Life, came to be overgrown with
several Errors, and the hearts of the professors of Christianity to be leavened
with the old Spirit and conversation of the World. Yet it pleased God for some
Centuries to preserve that life in many, whom he emboldened with zeal to stand
and suffer for his Name through the ten Persecutions. But these being over, the
meekness, gentleness, love, long-suffering, goodness and temperance of
Christianity came to be lost. For after that the Princes of the earth came to
take upon them that Profession, and that it ceased to be a reproach to be a
Christian, but rather became a means to preferment, men became such by birth
and education, and not by conversion, and renovation of Spirit: then there was
none so vile, none so wicked, none so profane, who became not a member of the
Church. And the Teachers and Pastors thereof becoming the Companions of
Princes, and so being enriched by their benevolence, and getting vast treasures
and Estates, became puffed up, and as it were drunken with the vain pomp and
glory of this World, and so marshalled themselves in manifold orders and
degrees, not without innumerable contests and alterations who should have the
As was betwixt the Bishop of Rome and the Bishop of Constantinople.
Precedence. So the virtue, life, substance, and kernel of the Christian
Religion came to be lost, and nothing remained but a shadow and image, which
dead image or carcass of Christianity (to make it take the better with the
superstitious multitude of Heathens, that became engrossed in it, not by any
inward conversion of their hearts, or by becoming less wicked or superstitious,
but by a little change in the object of their superstition) not having the
inward ornament and life of the Spirit, became decked with many outward and
visible orders, and beautified with the gold, silver, precious stones, and the
other splendid ornaments of this perishing world; so that this was no more to
be accounted the Christian Religion and Christian Church, notwithstanding the
outward profession, than the dead body of man is to be accounted a living man,
which, however cunningly embalmed, and adorned with ever so much gold, or
silver, or most precious stones, or sweet ointments, is but a dead body still,
without sense, life or motion. For that Apostat Church of Rome has introduced
no less ceremonies and superstitions into the Christian profession, than was
either among Jews or Heathens; and that there is, and has been, as much, yea,
and more pride, covetousness, unclean lust, luxury, fornication, profanity and
atheism among her teachers and chief Bishops, as ever was among any sort of
people, none need doubt that have read their own authors, to wit, Platina, and
others.

Now though Protestants have reformed from her in some of the most gross
points, and absurd doctrines, relating to the Church and Ministry, yet (which
is to be regretted) they have but lopt the branches, but retain and plead
earnestly for the same root, from which these abuses have sprung, so that even
among them, though all that mass of superstition, ceremonies and orders be not
again established, yet the same pride, covetousness and sensuality is found to
have overspread and leavened their Churches and Ministry; and the life, power,
and virtue of true religion is lost among them, and the very same death,
barrenness, dryness, and emptyness is found in their ministry, so that in
effect they differ from Papists but in form and some ceremonies, being with
them apostatized from the life and power the true primitive Church and her
Pastors were in, so that of both it may be said truly (without breach of
charity) that having only a form of godliness (and many of them not so much as
that) they are deniers of, yea enemies to the power of it. And this proceeds,
not simply from their not walking answerable to their own principles, and so
degenerating that way, (which also is true) but, which is worse, their setting
down to themselves and adhering to certain principles, which naturally, as a
cursed fruit, bring forth these bitter fruits: these therefore shall afterward
be examined and refuted, as the contrary positions of truth, in the Proposition
are explained and proved.

For, as to the nature and constitution of a Church (abstract from their
disputes concerning its constant visibility, infallibility, and the primacy of
the Church of Rome) the Protestants, as in practice, so in principles differ
not from Papists, for they ingross within the compass of their Church whole
Nations, making their infants members of it, by sprinkling a little water upon
them, so that there is none so wicked or profane, who is not a fellow-member,
no evidence of holiness being required to constitute a member of the Church;
and look through the Protestant Nations, and there shall no difference appear
in the lives of the generality of the one, more than of the other, but he, who
rules in the children of disobedience, reigning in both, so that the
reformation, through this defect, is but in holding some less gross errors, in
the notion, but not in having the heart reformed and renewed, in which mainly
the life of Christianity consists.

VI. But the Popish errors concerning the ministry, which they have retained,
are most of all to be regretted, by which chiefly the life and power of
Christianity is barred out among them, and they kept in death, barrenness and
dryness: there being nothing more hurtful than an error in this respect, for
where a false and corrupt ministry enters, all other manner of evils follows
upon it, according to that Scripture adage, Hos. 4.9.
like people, like priest. For by their influence, instead of ministering life
and righteousness, they minister death and iniquity. The whole backslidings of
the Jewish congregations of old is hereto ascribed. The leaders of my people
have caused them to err. The whole writings of the Prophets are full of such
complaints; and for this cause, under the New Testament, we are so often warned
and guarded to beware of false Prophets and false Teachers, etc. What may be
thought then, where all, as to this, is out of order, where both the
foundation, call, qualifications, maintenance, and whole discipline is
different from, and opposite, to the ministry of the primitive Church, yea and
necessarily tends to the shutting out a Spiritual ministry, and the in-bringing
and establishing a carnal? This shall appear by parts.

VII. That then, which comes first to be questioned in this matter, is
concerning the Call of a Minister, to wit, what makes, or how comes a man to
be a Minister, Quest.
Pastor, or Teacher in the Church of Christ.

We answer, by the inward power and virtue of the Spirit of God. For, as says
our proposition, Answ.
having received the true knowledge of things Spiritual by the Spirit of God,
(without which they cannot be known) and being by the same in measure purified
and sanctified, he comes thereby to be called and moved to minister to others,
being able to speak from a living experience, of what he himself is a witness,
and therefore knowing the terror of the Lord, he is fit to persuade men, etc. 2
Cor. 5.11. and his words and ministry, proceeding from the inward power and
virtue, reaches to the heart of his hearers, and makes them approve of him, and
be subject unto him. Our adversaries are forced to confess that this were
indeed desirable, and best, but this they will not have to be absolutely
necessary. I shall first prove the necessity of it; and then show how much they
err in that, which they make more necessary than this Divine and Heavenly call.

First, That which is necessary to make a man a Christian, Arg.
so as without it he cannot be truly one, must be much more necessary to make a
man a Minister of Christianity, seeing the one is a degree above the other, and
has it included in it, nothing less than he, that supposes a master, supposes
him first to have attained the knowledge and capacity of a Scholar. They that
are not Christians, cannot be Teachers or Ministers among Christians:

But this inward call, power and virtue of the Spirit of God, is necessary to
make a man a Christian, as we have abundantly proved before in the second
proposition, according to these Scriptures, He that has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of his. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons
of God.

Therefore this call, moving, and drawing of the Spirit must be much more
necessary to make a minister.

Secondly, all ministers of the New Testament ought to be ministers of the
Spirit, and not of the letter, according to that 2 Cor. 3.6. and as the old
Latin has it, not by the letter, but by the Spirit. But how can a man be a
minister of the Spirit, who is not inwardly called by it, and who looks not
upon the operation and testimony of the Spirit as essential to his call? As he
could not be a minister of the letter, who had thence no ground for his call,
yea that were altogether a stranger to, and unacquainted with it, so neither
can he be a minister of the Spirit, who is a stranger to it, and unacquainted
with the motions thereof, and knows it not to draw, act, and move him, and go
before him in the work of the Ministry. I would willingly know, how those that
take upon them to be ministers (as they suppose) of the Gospel, merely from an
outward vocation, without so much as being any ways sensible of the work of the
Spirit, or any inward call therefrom, can either satisfy themselves or others,
that they are Ministers of the Spirit, or wherein they differ from the
ministers of the Letter. For

Thirdly, if this inward call or testimony of the Spirit were not essential and
necessary to a minister, then the ministry of the New Testament should not
only be no ways preferable to, but in diverse respects far worse than that of
the Law: for, under the Law, there was certain tribe allotted for the
ministry, and of that tribe certain families set apart for the priesthood and
other offices, by the immediate command of God to Moses, so that the people
needed not be in any doubt, who should be Priests and Ministers of the holy
things: yea, and besides this, God called forth, by the immediate testimony of
his Spirit, several, at diverse times, to teach, instruct, and reprove his
people, as Samuel, Nathan, Elias, Elisa, Jeremiah, Amos, and many more of the
Prophets: But now under the New Covenant, where the ministry ought to be more
spiritual, the way more certain, and the access more easy unto the Lord, our
adversaries, by denying the necessity of this inward and Spiritual vocation,
make it quite otherways; for there being now no certain family or tribe, to
which the ministry is limited, we are left in uncertainty, to choose and have
pastors at a venture, without all certain assent of the will of God, having
neither an outward rule nor certainty, in this affair to walk by; for that the
Scripture cannot give any certain rule in this matter, has, in the third
Proposition concerning it, been already shown.

Fourthly, Christ proclaims them all Thieves and Robbers, that enter not by him
the door into the Sheepfold, but climb up some other way, whom the Sheep ought
not to hear, Joh. 10.1.
but such as come in without the Call, movings, and leadings of the Spirit of
Christ, wherewith he leads his Children into all truth, come in certainly not
by Christ, who is the Door, but some other way, and therefore are not true
Shepherds.

Obj.
VIII. To all this, they object the succession of the Church, alleging, that
since Christ gave a call to his Apostles and Disciples, they have conveyed that
call to their Successors, having power to ordain Pastors and Teachers, by which
power the authority of ordaining and making Ministers and Pastors is
successively conveyed to us, so that such, who are ordained and called by the
Pastors of the Church, are therefore true and lawful Ministers, and others who
are not so called, are to be accounted but intruders. Hereunto also some
Protestants add a necessity, though they make it not as a thing essential,
that, besides this calling of the Church, every one being called, ought to have
the inward call of the Spirit, inclining him, so chosen, to his work, but this
they say is subjective, and not objective, of which before.

Answ.
As to what is subjoined of the inward call of the Spirit, in that they make it
not essential to a true call, but a supererogation as it were, it shows how
little they set by it, since those, they admit to the ministry, are not so
much as questioned in their trials, whether they have this or not. Yet, in that
it has been often mentioned, especially by the Primitive Protestants in their
treatises of this subject, it shows how much they were secretly convinced in
their minds, that this inward call of the Spirit was most excellent, and
preferable to any other; and therefore in the most noble and heroic acts of
the reformation, they laid claim unto it, so that many of the primitive
Protestants did not scruple both to despise and disown this outward Succession.
call, when urged by the Papists against them. But now Protestants having gone
from the testimony of the Spirit, plead for the same succession, and being
pressed by those, whom God now raises up by his Spirit, to reform these many
abuses that are among them, with the example of their Forefathers practice
against Rome, they are not at all ashamed utterly to deny that their fathers
were called to their work by the inward and immediate vocation of the Spirit,
clothing themselves with that call, which they say their Forefathers had, as
Pastors of the Roman Church. For thus (not to go further) affirms Who gives
himself out Doctor and Professor of the Sacred Theology at Franequer.
Nicolaus Arnoldus, in a pamphlet written against the same Propositions, called
a Theologick Exercitation, sect. 40. averring, that they pretended not to an
immediate act of the Holy Spirit, but reformed by the virtue of the ordinary
vocation, which they had in the Church, as it then was, to wit, that of Rome,
etc.

IX. Many absurdities do Protestants fall into, by deriving their ministry thus
through the Church of Rome. As first they must acknowledge her to be a true
Church of Christ, though only erroneous in some things, which contradicts their
forefathers so frequently, and yet truly, calling her Antichrist. Secondly,
they must needs acknowledge that the Priests and Bishops of the Romish Church,
are true Ministers and Pastors of the Church of Christ, as to the essential
part, else they could not have been fit subjects, for that power and authority
to have resided in, neither could they have been vessels capable to receive
that power, and again transmit it to their successors. Thirdly, it would follow
from this, that the Priests and Bishops of the Romish Church are yet really
true Pastors and Teachers; for if Protestant Ministers have no authority, but
what they received from them, and since the Church of Rome is the same, she was
at that time of the reformation, in doctrine and manners, and she has the same
power now, she had then, and if the power lie in the Succession, then these
Priests of the Romish Church now, which derive their ordination from those
Bishops that ordained the first reformers, have the same authority, which the
successors of the reformed have, and consequently are no less Ministers of the
Church than they are. But how shall this agree with that opinion, which the
primitive Protestants had of the Romish Priests and Clergy, to whom Luther did
not only deny any power or authority, but contrariwise affirmed, that it was
wickedly done of them, to assume to themselves only this authority to teach,
and be Priests and Ministers, etc. For he himself affirmed, that every good
Christian (not only men, but even women also) is a Preacher.

X. But against this vain succession, as asserted either by the Papists or
Protestants, as a necessary thing to the call of a minister, I answer, that
such as plead for it, as a sufficient or necessary thing to the call of a
minister, do thereby sufficiently declare their ignorance of the nature of
Christianity, and how much they are strangers to the Life and Power of a
Christian ministry, which is not entailed to succession, as an outward
inheritance: and herein, as has been often before observed, they not only make
the Gospel not better than the Law, but even far short of it; for Jesus Christ,
as he regards not any distinct particular family, or nation, in the gathering
of his Children, but only such as are joined to, and leavened with his own pure
and righteous Seed, so neither regards he a bare outward succession, where his
pure, immaculate, and righteous Life is wanting; for that were all one. He took
not in the Nations within the New Covenant, that he might suffer them to fall
into the old errors of the Jews, or to approve them in these errors; but that
he might gather unto himself a pure people out of the earth. Now, this was the
great error of the Jews, to think they were the Church and People of God,
because they could derive their outward succession from Abraham, whereby they
reckoned themselves the Children of God, as being the offspring of Abraham,
who was the Father of the faithful. But how severely does the Scripture rebuke
this vain and frivolous pretense? Telling them, that God is able of the stones
to raise children unto Abraham, and that not the outward seed, but those, that
were found in the faith of Abraham, are the true Children of faithful Abraham.
Far less then can this pretense hold among Christians, seeing Christ rejects
all outward affinity of that kind; Matthew. 12. v. 48. etc. Mark. 3. ver. 33. etc
These, says he, are my mother, brethren, and sisters, who do the will of my
Father which is in heaven. And again: He looked round about him, and said, who
shall do the will of God, these (said he) are my brethren. So then such as do
not the commands of Christ, as are not found clothed with his righteousness,
are not his disciples; and that, which a man has not, he cannot give to
another; and it is clear, that no man, nor Church, though truly called of God,
and, as such, having the authority of a Church and Minister, can any longer
retain that authority, than they retain the power, life, and righteousness of
Christianity; for the form is entailed to the power and substance, and not the
substance to the form. So that when a man cease inwardly in his heart to be a
Christian (where his Christianity must lie) by turning to Satan, and becoming a
reprobate, he is no more a Christian, though he retain the name and form, than
a dead man is a man, though he have the image and representation of one, or
than the Picture or Statue of a man is a man; and though a dead man may serve
to a Painter to retain some imperfect representation of the man, that sometimes
was alive, and so one Picture may serve to make another by, yet none of those
can serve to make a true living man again, neither can they conveigh the life
and spirit of the man, it must be God, that made the man at first that alone
can revive him. As death then makes such interruption of an outward natural
succession, that no art nor outward form can uphold; and as a dead man, after
he is dead, can have no issue, neither can dead images of men make living men,
so that it is the living that are only capable to succeed one another, and such
as dye, so soon as they dye, cease to succeed, or to transmit Succession. So it
is in Spiritual things, it is the life of Christianity, taking place in the
Heart that makes a Christian, and so it is a number of such being alive, joined
together in the life of Christianity that make a Church of Christ, and it is
all those that are thus alive and quickened, considered together that make the
Catholic Church of Christ: Therefore where this life cease in one, then that
one cease to be a Christian, and all power, virtue, and authority, which he
had as a Christian, cease with it; so that if he has been a Minister or
Teacher, he cease to be so any more; and though he retain the form, and hold
to the authority in words, yet that signifies no more, nor is it of any more
real virtue or authority than the mere image of a dead man: And as this is most
agreeable to Reason, so is it to the Scriptures Testimony, for it is said of
Judas, Acts 1.25. That Judas fell from his Ministry and Apostleship by
transgression. So his transgression caused him to cease to be an Apostle any
more; whereas had the Apostleship been entailed to his person, so that
transgression could not cause him to lose it until he had been formally
degraded by the Church, (which Judas never was so long as he lived) Judas had
been as really an Apostle after he betrayed Christ, as before: And as it is of
one, so of many, yea of a whole Church; for seeing nothing makes a man truly a
Christian, but the life of Christianity inwardly ruling in his Heart, so
nothing makes a Church, but the gathering of several true Christians into one
Body. Now where all these members lose in this life, there the Church cease
to be, though they still uphold the form and retain the name; for when that
which made them a Church, and for which they were a Church, cease, then they
cease also to be a Church: and therefore the Spirit speaking to the Church of
Laodicea, because of her luke-warmness, Rev. 3.16. threateneth to spue her out
of his mouth. Now suppose the Church of Laodicea had continued in that
luke-warmness, and had come under that condemnation and judgment, though she
had retained the name and form of a Church, and had had her Pastors and
Ministers, as no doubt she had at that time, yet surely she had been no true
Church of Christ, nor had the authority of her Pastors and Teachers been to be
regarded because of any outward succession, though perhaps some of them had it
immediately from the Apostles. From all which I infer, That since the authority
of the Christian Church and her Pastors is always united, and never separated
from the inward power, virtue, and righteous life of Christianity, where this
cease, that cease also. But our adversaries acknowledge, That many, if not
most of those, by and through whom they derive this authority, were altogether
destitute of this life and virtue of Christianity. Therefore they could neither
receive, have, nor transmit any Christian authority.

Obj.
But if it be objected, That though the generality of the Bishops and Priests of
the Church of Rome during the apostasy were such wicked men, yet Protestants
affirm and thou thy self seem to acknowledge, that there were some good men
among them whom the Lord regarded, and who were true members of the Catholic
Church of Christ: might not they then have transmitted this authority?

Answ.
I answer: This says nothing, in respect Protestants do not at all lay claim to
their Ministry as transmitted to them by a direct line of such good men, which
they can never show, nor yet pretend to, but generally place this succession as
inherent in the whole Pastors of the Apostate Church, neither do they plead
their call to be good and valid, because they can derive it through a line of
good men, separate and observable distinguishable from the rest of the Bishops
and Clergy of the Romish Church, but they derive it, as an Authority residing
in the whole; for they think it heresy to judge that the quality or condition
of the Administrator any ways invalidates or prejudiceth his work.

This vain then and pretended Succession not only militates against, and fights
with the very manifest purpose and intent of Christ, in the gathering and
calling of his Church, but makes him (so to speak) more blind and less prudent
than natural men are in conveying and establishing their outward Inheritances:
for where an Estate is entailed to a certain Name and Family, when that Family
wears out, and there is no lawful Successor found of it that can make a just
title appear, as being really of blood and affinity to the Family, it is not
lawful for any one of another race or blood, because he assumes the name or
arms of that Family, to possess the estate, and claim the superiorities and
privileges of the family, but by the law of Nations the inheritance devolves
into the Prince, as being ultimus haeres, and so he gives it again immediately
to whom he sees meet, and makes them bear the name and arms of the family, who
then are entitled to the privileges and revenues thereof. So in like manner
the true name and title of a Christian, by which he has right to the heavenly
inheritance, and is a member of Jesus Christ, is inward Righteousness and
Holiness, and the mind redeemed from the vanities, lusts and iniquities of this
world. And a gathering or company made up of such members, makes a Church;
where this is lost, the title is lost, and so the true Seed, to which the
promise is, and to which the inheritance is due, becomes extinguished in them,
and they become dead as to it, and so it retires, and devolves it self again
into Christ, who is the righteous heir of Life, and he gives the title and true
right again immediately, to whom it pleases him, even to as many as being
turned to his Pure Light in their Consciences, come again to walk in his
righteous and innocent life, and so become true members of his body, which is
the Church. So the authority, power and heirship is not annexed to persons, as
they bear the bare names or retain a form, holding the mere shell or shadow of
Christianity: But the promise is to Christ, and to the Seed, in whom the
authority is inherent, and in as many as are one with him, and united unto him
by purity and holiness, and by the inward renovation and regeneration of their
minds.

Moreover, this pretended succession is contrary to Scripture definitions and
nature of the Church of Christ, and of the true members. For first, The Church
is the house of God, the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. But according
to this Doctrine, the house of God is a polluted nest of all sort of wickedness
and abominations, made up of the most ugly, defiled and perverse stones that
are in the earth, where the devil rules in all manner of unrighteousness. For
so our adversaries confess, and History informs, the Church of Rome to have
been, as some of their Historians acknowledge; and if that be truly the house
of God, what may we call the house of Satan? or may we call it therefore the
house of God, notwithstanding all this impiety, because they had a bare form,
and that vitiated many ways also, and because they pretended to the name of
Christianity, though they were antichristian, devilish, and atheistical in
their whole practice and spirit, and also in many of their principles? Would
not this infer yet a greater absurdity, as if they had been something to be
accounted of because of their hypocrisy and deceit, and false pretenses?
Whereas the Scripture looks upon that as an aggravation of guilt, and calls it
Blasphemy, Rev. 2.9. Of two wicked men, he is most to be abhorred who covers
his wickedness with a vain pretense of God and righteousness; even so these
abominable beasts, and fearful monsters, who look upon themselves to be Bishops
in the apostate Church, were never a whit the better, that they falsely
pretended to be the Successors of the Holy Apostles, unless to lie be
commendable, and that hypocrisy be the way to Heaven. Yea were not this to
fall into that evil condemned among the Jews? Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in lying
words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord are these, thoroughly amend your ways, etc. as if such outward names
and things were the thing the Lord regarded, and not inward holiness? or can
that then be the pillar and ground of Truth, which is the very sink and pit of
wickedness, from which so much error, superstition, idolatry, and all
abomination springs? Can there be any thing more contrary both to Scripture and
Reason?

Secondly, The Church is defined to be the Kingdom of the dear Son of God, into
which the Saints are translated, being delivered from the power of darkness. It
is called the Body of Christ, which from him by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together increases with the increase of God,
Col. 2.19. But can such members, such a gathering as we have demonstrated that
Church and Members to be, among whom they allege their pretended authority to
have been preserved, and through which they derive their call, can such, I say,
be the body of Christ, or members thereof? or is Christ the head of such a
corrupt, dead, dark, abominable stinking carcass? If so, then might we not as
well affirm against the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14. That righteousness has
fellowship with unrighteousness, that Light has communion with Darkness, that
Christ has concord with Belial, that a Believer has part with an Infidel, and
that the Temple of God has agreement with Idols? Moreover, no man is called
the Temple of God, nor of the Holy Ghost, but as his vessel is purified, and so
he fitted and prepared for God to dwell in, and many, thus fitted by Christ,
become his body, in and among whom he dwells and walks, according as it is
written, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God and
they shall be my people. It is therefore that we may become the Temple of
Christ and people of God, that the Apostle in the following verse exhorts,
saying out of the Prophet, Wherefore come out from among them, 2. Cor. 6. v.
17, 18.
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you; and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. But to what purpose all this exhortation,
and why should we separate from the unclean, if a mere outward profession, and
name be enough to make the true Church, and if the unclean and polluted were
both the Church and lawful successors of the Apostles, inheriting their
authority, and transmitting it to others? Yea how can the Church be the Kingdom
of the Son of God, as contrary distinguished from the Kingdom and Power of
darkness? and what need, yea what possibility of being translated out of the
one into the other, if those, that make up the Kingdom and Power of darkness,
be real members of the true Church of Christ, and not simple members only, but
the very Pastors and Teachers of it? But how do they increase in the increase
of God, and receive Spiritual nourishment from Christ the Head, that are
enemies of him in their hearts, by wicked works, and openly go into perdition?
Verily as no metaphysical and nice distinctions, (that, though they were
practically, as to their own private states, enemies to God and Christ, and so
servants of Satan, yet they were, by virtue of their office, members and
ministers of the Church, and so able to transmit the succession) I say, as such
invented and frivolous distinctions will not please the Lord God, neither will
he be deluded by such, nor make up the glorious body of his Church with such
mere outside hypocritical shows, nor be beholden to such painted sepulchers
for to be members of his body, which is sound, pure, and undefiled; and
therefore he needs not such false and corrupt members to make up the defects of
it; so neither will such distinctions satisfy truly tender and Christian
Consciences, especially considering the Apostle is so far from desiring us to
regard that, as that we are expressly commanded to turn away from such as have a
form of godliness, but deny the power of it. For we may well object against
these, as the poor man did against the proud Prelate, that went about to cover
his vain and unchristian-like sumptuousness, by distinguishing that it was not
as Bishop, but as Prince, he had all that splendour. To which the poor rustic
wisely is said to have answered, When the Prince goes to Hell, what shall
become of the Prelate? And indeed this were to suppose the body of Christ to be
defective, and, that to fill up these defective places, he puts counterfeit and
dead stuff, instead of real living members; like such as lose their eyes, arms,
or legs, make counterfeit ones of timber or glass, instead of them. But we
cannot think so of Christ, neither can we believe, for the reasons above
adduced, that either we are to account, or that Christ does account, any man,
or men, a whit the more members of his body, because, though they be really
wicked, they hypocritically and deceitfully cloth themselves with his Name
pretended to it, for this is contrary to his own doctrine, where he says
expressly, Joh. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. that he is the Vine, and his Disciples
are the Branches, that except they abide in him, they cannot bear fruit, and,
if they be unfruitful, they shall be cast forth, as a branch, and wither. Now I
suppose these cut and withered branches are no more true branches, nor members
of the Vine, they can draw no more sap nor nourishment from it, after that they
are cut off, and so have no more virtue, sap, nor life. What have they then to
boast or glory of any authority, seeing they want that life, virtue and
nourishment, from which all authority comes? So such members of Christ, as are
become dead to him through unrighteousness, and so derive no more virtue nor
life from him, are cut off by their sins, and wither, and have no more any true
or real authority, and their boasting of any is but an aggravation of their
iniquity by hypocrisy and deceit. But further, would not this make Christ's
body a mere shadow and phantam? Yea would it not make him the head of a
lifeless, rotten, stinking carcass, having only some little outward false show,
while inwardly full of rottenness and dirt? and what a monster would these men
make of Christ's body, by assigning it, real, pure, living, quick Head, full of
virtue and life, and yet tied to such a dead, lifeless body, as we have already
described these members to be, which they allege to have been the Church of
Christ. Again, the members of the Church of Christ are specified by this
definition, to wit, as being the sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 1.2. But
this notion of succession supposes not only some unsanctified members to be of
the Church of Christ, but even the whole to consist of unsanctified members,
yea that such as were professed Necromancers, and open servants of Satan, were
the true successors of the Apostles, and in whom the Apostolic authority
resided, these being the vessels, through whom this Succession is transmitted,
though many of them, as all Protestants, and also some Papists, confess,
attained these offices in the (so called) Church, not only by such means as
Simon Magus sought it, but by much worse, even by witchcraft, murder,
traditions, money, and treachery, which Platina himself confesses In the life
of Benedict. 4. Of Joh. 16 of Sylvester 3. of Boniface 8. of Steph. 6 of Jean
8. Also Onuphrius annotations upon this Papass toward the end.
of diverse Bishops of Rome.

XI. But such as object not this succession of the Church, (which yet most
Protestants begin now to do) distinguish in this matter, affirming, that, in a
great apostasy, such as was that of the Church of Rome, God may raise up some
singularly, by his Spirit, who from the testimony of the Scriptures, perceiving
the errors, into which such as bear the name of Christians are fallen, may
instruct and teach them, and then become authorized by the people's joining
with, and accepting of their ministry only. Most of them also will affirm, that
the Spirit herein is subjective, and not objective.

But they say, that, where a Church is reformed, Obj.
such as they pretend the Ptotestants Churches are, there an ordinary orderly
call is necessary; and that of the Spirit, as extraordinary, is not to be
sought after, alleging that res aliter se habet in ecclesia constituenda, quam
in ecclesia constituta, that is, there is a difference in the constituting of a
Church, and after it is constitute.

I answer, this objection as to us says nothing, seeing we accuse, Answ.
and are ready from the Scriptures to prove the Protestants guilty of gross
errors, and needing reformation, as well as they did, and do the Papists; and
therefore we may justly lay claim, if we would, to the same extraordinary call,
having the same reason for it, and as good evidence, to prove ours, as they had
for theirs. As for that Maxim, viz. that the case is different in a
constituting Church, and a Church constituted, I do not deny it, and therefore
there may be a greater measure of power required to the one, than to the other,
and God in his Wisdom distributes the same, as he sees meet, but that the same
immediate assistance of the Spirit is not necessary for ministers in a gathered
Church, as well as in gathering one, I see no solid reason alleged for it. For
sure Christ's promise was to be with his children to the end of the world; and
they need him no less to preserve and guide his Church and Children, than to
gather and beget them. Nature taught the Gentiles this Maxim, Non minor est
virtus, quam quaerere parta tueri.

Englished thus; For to defend what you attain,
Requires no less strength than to gain.
For it is by this inward and immediate operation of the Spirit (which Christ
has promised to lead his Children with into all Truth, and to teach them all
things) that Christians are to be led in all steps (as well last as first)
which relates to Gods Glory and their own Salvation, as we have heretofore
sufficiently proved, and therefore need not now repeat it. And truly this
device of Satan, whereby he has got people to put the immediate guidings and
leadings of Gods Spirit, as an extraordinary thing, a far off, which their
Forefathers had, but which they now are neither to wait for, nor expect, is a
great cause of the growing Apostasy upon the many gathered Churches, and is one
great reason why a dry, dead, barren, lifeless, spiritless ministry, which
leavens the people into the same death, does so much abound, and is so much
overspreading even the Protestant nations, that their preachings and worships,
as well as whole conversation, is not to be discerned from Popish by any fresh
living zeal, or lively Power of the Spirit accompanying it, but merely by the
difference of some notions and opinions.

Obj.
XII. Some unwise and unwary Protestants do sometimes object to us, that, if we
have such an immediate call, as we lay claim to, we ought to confirm it by
miracles.

Answ.
But this being an objection once and again objected to the primitive
Protestants by the Papists, we need but short return the answer to it, that
they did to the Papists, to wit, that we need not miracles, because we preach
no new Gospel, but that, which is already confirmed by all the miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, and that we offer nothing, but that, which we are
ready and able to confirm by the testimony of the Scriptures, which both
already acknowledge to be true. And that John the Baptist, and diverse of the
Prophets did none, that we hear of, and yet were both immediately and
extraordinarily sent. This is the common Protestant answer, therefore may
suffice in this place, though, if need were, I could say more to this purpose,
but that I study brevity.

XIII. There is also another sort of Protestants, to wit, the English
Independents, who, differing from the Calvinistical Presbyterians, and denying
the necessity of this succession, or the authority of any National Church, take
another way, affirming, that such as have the benefit of the Scriptures, any
company of people, agreeing in the principles of Truth, as they find them there
declared, may constitute among themselves a Church, without the authority of
any other, and may choose to themselves a Pastor, who by the Church thus
constitute and consenting, is authorized, requiring only the assistance and
concurrence of the Pastors of the neighboring Churches, (if any be) not so
much as absolutely necessary to authorize, as decent for orders sake. Also they
go so far as to affirm, that, in a Church so constitute, any gifted Brother, as
they call them, if he find himself qualified thereto, may instruct, exhort, and
preach in the Church, though, as not having the Pastoral office, he cannot
administer that they call their Sacraments.

To this I answer, that this was a good step out of the Babylonish darkness,
and, no doubt, did proceed from a real discovery of the Truth, and from the
sense of a great abuse of the promiscuous National gatherings. Also this
preaching of the Gifted Brethren (as they called them) did proceed at first
from certain lively touches and movings of the Spirit of God upon many. But
(alas!) because they went not forward, that is much decayed among them, and the
motions of Gods Spirit begin to be denied and rejected among them now, as much
as by others.

But as to their pretended Call from the Scripture, I answer: The Scripture
gives a mere declaration of true things, but no call to particular persons, so
that though I believe the things there written to be true, and deny the errors,
which I find there testified against, yet as to these things which may be my
particular duty, I am still to seek, and therefore I can never be resolved in
the Scripture, whether I, such a one by name, ought to be a Minister. And for
the resolving this doubt, I must needs recur to the inward and immediate
testimony of the Spirit, as in the Proposition concerning the Scriptures more
at large is shown.

XIV. From all this then we do firmly conclude, that not only in a general
apostasy it is needful men be extraordinarily called, and raised up by the
Spirit of God, but that even when several assemblies or Churches are gathered
by the Power of God, not only into the belief of the Principles of Truth, so as
to deny Errors and Heresies, but also into the Life, Spirit and Power of
Christianity, so as to be the Body and House of Christ indeed, and a fit Spouse
for him, that he who gathers them, does also, for the preserving them in a
lively, fresh, and powerful condition, raise up, and move among them by the
inward immediate operation of his own Spirit, Ministers and Teachers to
instruct and teach, and watch over them who being thus called, are manifest in
the hearts of their Brethren, and their call is thus verified in them, who by
the feeling of that life and power that passes through them, being inwardly
builded up by them daily in the most holy Faith become the Seals of their
Apostleship, and this is answerable to another saying of the same Apostle Paul,
2 Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ's speaking in me, which to
you-wards is not weak, but is mighty in you. So this is that which gives a true
substantial Call and title to a Minister, whereby he is a real successor of the
virtue, life and power, that was in the Apostles, and not of the bare name; and
to such Ministers we think the outward Ceremony of Ordination, or laying on of
Hands not necessary, neither can we see the use of it, seeing our adversaries
who use it, acknowledge that the virtue and power of communicating the Holy
Ghost by it is ceased among them. And is it not then foolish and ridiculous for
them, by an apish imitation to keep up the shadow where the substance is
wanting? And may not they by the same rule, where they see blind and lame men,
in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, bid them see and walk? yea is it not
in them a mocking of God and men, to put on their hands, and bid men receive
the Holy Ghost, while they believe the thing impossible, and confess that that
Ceremony has no real effect? Having thus far spoken of the Call, I shall
proceed next to treat of the qualifications and work of a true Minister.

XV. As I have placed the true call of a Minister in the motion of this Holy
Spirit, so is the power, Life, and virtue thereof, and the pure Grace of God
that comes therefrom, the chief and most necessary qualification, without which
he can no ways perform his duty, neither acceptably to God, nor beneficially to
men. Our adversaries in this case affirm that three things go to the making up
of a Minister, viz. 1. Natural parts, that he be not a fool: 2. Acquired Parts,
that he be learned in the Languages, in Philosophy and School Divinity. 3. The
Grace of God.

The two first they reckon necessary to the being of a Minister, so as a man
cannot be one without them: The third they say goes to the well-being of one,
but not to the being; so that a man may truly be a lawful Minister without it,
and ought to be heard and received as such. But we (supposing a natural
capacity, that one be not an idiot) judge the grace of God indispensably
necessary to the very being of a Minister, as that without which any can
neither be a true, nor lawful, nor good Minister. As for letter-learning, we
judge it not so much necessary to the well-being of one, though accidentally
sometimes in certain respects it may concur, but more frequently it is hurtful
than helpful, as appeared in the example of Taulerus, who being a learned man,
and who could make an eloquent preaching, needed nevertheless to be instructed
in the way of the Lord by a poor Laick. I shall first speak of the necessity of
Grace, and then proceed to say something of that Literature which they judge so
needful.

First then, as we said in the Call, so may we much more here. If the Grace of
God be a necessary qualification to make one a true Christian, it must be a
qualification much more necessary to constitute a true Minister of
Christianity. That Grace is necessary to make up a true Christian, I think will
not be questioned, since it is by Grace we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. it is the Grace
of God that teaches us to deny ungodliness, and the lusts of this world, and
to live godlily and righteously, Tit. 2.11. yea Christ says expressly, That
without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. and the way whereby Christ helps,
assisteth, and works with us, is by his Grace. Hence says to Paul, My Grace
is sufficient for thee. A Christian without Grace is indeed no Christian, but
an hypocrite and a false pretender. Then I say, If Grace be necessary to a
private Christian, far more to a teacher among Christians, who must be as a
Father and Instructor of others, seeing this dignity is bestowed upon such as
have attained a greater measure than their Brethren. Even Nature it self may
teach us that there is more required in a Teacher than in those that are
taught, and that the Master must be above and before the Scholar in that Art or
Science which he teaches others. Since then Christianity cannot be truly
enjoyed, neither any man denominated a Christian without the true Grace of God,
therefore neither can any man be a true nor lawful teacher of Christianity
without it.

Secondly, No man can be a Minister of the Church of Christ, Arg.
which is his Body, unless he be a member of the Body, and receive of the
virtue and life of the Head;

But he that has not true Grace can neither be a member of the Body, neither
receive of that life and nourishment which comes from the Head:

Therefore far less can he be a Minister to edify the Body.

That he cannot be a Minister who is not a Member, is evident, because who is
not a member is shut out and cut off, and has no place in the Body, whereas
the Ministers are counted among the most eminent Members of the Body; But no
man can be a member, unless he receive of the virtue, life, and nourishment of
the Head: For the members that receive not this life and nourishment, decay and
wither, and then are cut off. And that every true member does thus receive
nourishment and life from the Head, the Apostle expressly affirms, Ephesians. 4.16.
From whom the whole body being fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in
love. Now this that thus is communicated, and which thus uniteth the whole, is
no other than the Grace of God, and therefore the Apostle in the same chapter,
ver. 7. But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ, and v. 11. he shows how that by this Grace and Gift both
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers are given for the work of
the Ministry and edifying of the Body of Christ. And certainly then no man,
destitute of Grace, is fit for this work, seeing that all that Christ gives,
are so qualified; and these that are not so qualified, are not given nor sent
of Christ, are not to be heard, nor received, nor acknowledged as Ministers of
the Gospel, because his sheep neither ought nor will hear the voice of a
stranger. This is also clear from 1 Cor. 12. throughout, for the Apostle in
that Chapter, treating of the diversity of Gifts and Members of the Body,
shows how by the working of the same Spirit in different manifestations or
measures in the several Members of the whole Body is edified, saying, v. 13.
That we are all baptized by the One Spirit into one Body, and then v. 28. he
numbers out the several dispensations thereof, which by God are set in the
Church through the various working of his Spirit, for the edification of the
whole. Then, if there be no true member of the body, which is not thus baptized
by this Spirit, neither any thing, that works to the edifying of it, but
according to a measure of Grace received from the Spirit, surely without Grace
none ought to be admitted to work or labor in the body, because their labor
and work, without this Grace and Spirit, would not be ineffectual.

XVI. Thirdly, that this Grace and Gift is a necessary qualification to a
Minister, is clear from that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Peter 4.10, 11. As every
man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God
gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom
be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. From which it appears, That
these that minister, must minister according to the Gift and Grace received,
but they that have not such a Gift, cannot minister according thereunto.
Secondly, As good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God: But how can a man be a
good Steward of that which he has not? Can ungodly men, that are not gracious
themselves, be good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God? and therefore in the
following Verses he makes an exclusive limitation of such as are not thus
furnished, saying, If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; and
if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability that God gives; which is
as much as if he had said, They that cannot thus speak and thus minister, ought
not to do it: For this [ If] denotes a necessary condition. Now what this
ability is, is manifest by the former words, to wit, the Gift received, and the
Grace, whereof they are Stewards, as by the immediate context and dependency of
the words does appear: neither can it be understood of a mere natural ability,
because man in this condition is said not to know the things of God, and so he
cannot minister them to others. And the following words show this also, in that
he immediately subjoyneth, That God in all things may be glorified: but surely
God is not glorified but greatly dishonored, when natural men from their mere
natural ability meddle in Spiritual things, which they neither know nor
understand.

Fourthly, that Grace is a most necessary qualification for a Minister, appears
by these qualifications, which the Apostle expressly requires, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit.
1. etc. where he says, A Bishop must be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good
behavior, apt to teach, patient, a lover of good men, just, holy, temperate,
as the Steward of God, holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught*
Upon the other hand, He must neither be given to Wine, nor a Striker, nor
covetous, nor proud, nor self-willed, nor soon angry. Now I ask, If it be not
impossible that a man can have all these abovenamed Virtues, and be free of
all these Evils, without the Grace of God? if then these Virtues (for the
producing of which in a man Grace is absolutely necessary) be necessary, to
make a true Minister of the Church of Christ, according to the Apostles
judgment, surely Grace must be necessary also.

Concerning this thing a learned man, and well skilled in Antiquity, about the
time of the Reformation, writes thus, Whatsoever is done in the Church, either
for Ornament or Edification of Religion, whether in choosing Magistrates, or
instituting Ministers of the Church, except it be done by the ministry of Gods
Spirit, which is as it were, the Soul of the Church, it is vain and wicked. For
whoever has not been called by the Spirit of God to the great office of God,
and dignity of Apostleship, as Aaron was, and has not entered in by the door
which is Christ, but has otherways risen in the Church by the window, by the
favors of men, etc. truly such a one is not the Vicar of Christ and the
Apostles, but a thief and a Robber, and the Vicar of Judas Iscariot, and Simon
the Samaritan. Hence it was so strictly appointed concerning the election of
Prelates (which holy Dionisius calls Sacrament of Nomination) that the Bishops
and Apostles, who should oversee the Service of the Church, should be men of
most entire manners and life, powerful in sound Doctrine to give a reason for
all things. So also Franciscus Lambertus Avenionensis, In his book concerning
Prophecy, learning, tongues, and the Spirit of Prophecy. Argentorat. Excus.
anno 1516. de prove. cap. 24.
another about the same time writes thus, Therefore it can never be, that by
the Tongues or Learning any can give a sound judgment concerning the Holy
Scriptures, and the Truth of God. Lastly (says he) the Sheep of Christ seeks
nothing but the Voice of Christ, which he knows by the Holy Spirit, wherewith
he is filled: he regards not learning, Tongues, or any outward thing, so as
therefore to believe this or that to be the voice of Christ his true Shepherd,
he knows that there is need of no other thing but the testimony of the Spirit
of God.

XVII. Against this absolute necessity of grace they object, That if all
Ministers had the saving Grace of God, Obj.
then all ministers should be saved, seeing none can fall away from, or lose
Saving Grace.

But this Objection is built upon a false Hypothesis, Answ.
purely denied by us, and we have in the former Proposition concerning
Perseverance already refuted it.

Obj.
Secondly, it may be objected to us, That since we affirm that every Man has a
measure of true and Saving Grace, there needs no singular qualifications
neither to a Christian, nor Minister, for seeing every man has this Grace,
then no man needs forbear to be a Minister for want of Grace..

Answ.
I answer, We have above shown, that there is necessary to the making a
Minister, a special and particular call from the Spirit of God, which is
something besides the universal dispensation of Grace to all, according to that
of the Apostle, No man takes this honor unto himself but he that is called of
God, Heb. 5.4.
as was Aaron. Moreover we understand by Grace, as a qualification to a
Minister, not the mere measure of Light, as it is given to reprove, and call
him to righteousness: but we understand Grace, as it has converted the Soul,
and operateth powerfully in it, as hereafter concerning the work of Ministers,
will further appear. So we understand not men simply, as having Grace in them,
as a Seed, (which we indeed affirm all have in a measure) but we understand men
that are gracious, leavened by it into the nature thereof, so as thereby to
bring forth these good Fruits of a blameless conversation, and of justice,
holiness, patience and temperance, which the Apostle requires as necessary in a
true Christian Bishop and Minister.

Thirdly, they So Nic. Arnoldus, Sect. 32. upon the 4 These.
object the example of the false Prophets, of the Pharisees, and of Judas.

But first, as to the false Prophets; there can nothing be more foolish and
ridiculous, as if because there were false Prophets, truly false without the
Grace of God, therefore Grace is not necessary to a true Christian Minister.
Indeed if they had proven that true Prophets wanted this Grace, they had said
something. But what have false Prophets common with true Ministers? but that
they pretend falsely that which they have not. And because false Prophets want
true Grace, will it therefore follow, that true Prophets ought not to have it,
or need it not? yea does it not much rather follow, that they ought to have it,
that they may be true and not false? The example of the Pharisees and Priests
under the Law will not answer to the Gospel times, because God set apart a
particular Tribe for that Service, and particular Families to whom it belonged
by a lineal Succession; and also their service and work was not purely
Spiritual, but only the performance of some outward and carnal observations and
ceremonies, which were but a shadow of the Substance, that was to come, and
therefore their work made not the comers thereunto perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience, seeing they were appointed only according to the Law of a carnal
commandment, and not according to the power of an endless life. Notwithstanding
as in the figure they behoved to be without blemish, as to their outward man,
and in the performance of their work, they behoved to be washed and purified
from their outward pollutions; so now under the Gospel times the Ministers in
the antitype must be inwardly without blemish in their Souls and spirits,
being as the Apostle requires, blameless, and in their work and service must be
pure and undefiled, from their inward pollutions, and so clean and holy, that
they may offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 2.5. As to Judas, the season of his ministry was not wholly Evangelical,
as being before the work was finished, and while Christ himself and his
Disciples were yet subject to the Jewish Observances and Constitutions, and
therefore his Commission, as well as that which the rest received with him at
that time, was only to the House of Israel, Matthew. 10.5, 6. which made that by
virtue of that Commission the rest of the Apostles were not empowered to go
forth and preach after the Resurrection, until they had waited at Jerusalem for
the pouring forth of the Spirit. So that it appears Judas's ministry was more
Legal than Evangelical. Secondly, Judas's Case, as all will acknowledge, was
singular and extraordinary, he being immediately called by Christ himself, and
accordingly furnished and empowered by him to preach, and do miracles, which
immediate Commission our Adversaries do not so much as pretend to, and so fall
short of Judas, who trusted in Christ's Words, and therefore went forth and
preached, without Gold or Silver, or Scrip for his Journey, giving freely as he
had freely received, which our Adversaries will not do, as hereafter shall be
observed; Also that Judas at that time had not the least measure of Gods Grace,
I have not as yet heard proved. But is it not sad that even Protestants should
lay aside the eleven good and faithful Apostles, and all the rest of the holy
Disciples and Ministers of Christ, and betake them to that one, of whom it was
testified that he was a devil, for a pattern, and example to their Ministry?
Alas! it is to be regretted that too many of them resemble this pattern over
much. Obj.


Another Objection is usually made against the necessity of Grace, Ibid. Nic.
Arnoldus.
that, in case it were necessary, then such as wanted it could not truly
administer the Sacraments, and consequently the people would be left in doubts
and infinite scruples, as not knowing certainly whether they had truly received
them, because not knowing infallibly whether the administrators were truly
gracious men.

But this objection hitteth not us at all, because the nature of that Spiritual
and Christian Worship, Answ.
which we, according to the truth plead for, is such as is not necessarily
attended with these carnal and outward institutions, from the administering of
which the objection arises, and so has not any such absurdity following upon
it, as will afterward more clearly appear.

XVIII. Though then we make not humane Learning necessary, yet we are far from
excluding true learning, to wit, that learning, which proceeds from the
inward teachings and instructions of the Spirit, whereby the Soul learneth the
secret ways of the Lord, becomes acquainted with many inward travels and
exercises of the mind, and learneth by a living experience how to overcome evil
and the temptations of it, by following the Lord, and walking in his Light, and
waiting daily for wisdom and knowledge immediately from the revelation thereof,
and so lays up these heavenly and Divine Lessons in the good treasure of the
heart, as honest Mary did the sayings which she heard, and things which she
observed; and also out of this Treasure of the Soul, as the good Scribe, brings
forth things new and old, according as the same Spirit moves, and gives a true
liberty, and as need is for the Lords glory, whose the Soul is, and for whom,
and with an eye to whose glory, she which is the Temple of God, learneth to do
all things. This is that good learning which we think necessary to a true
Minister, by and through which learning a man can well instruct, teach, and
admonish in due season, and testify for God from a certain experience, as
David did, Solomon, and the holy Prophets of old, and the blessed Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Who testified of what they had seen, heard, felt, and
handled of the Word of Life, 1 John 1.1. ministering the Gift according as they
had received the same, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, and
preached not the uncertain rumors of others, by hearsay, which they had
gathered merely in the comprehension, while they were strangers to the thing in
their own experience in themselves: as to teach people how to believe, while
themselves were unbelieving, or how to overcome sin, while themselves are
slaves to it, as all ungracious men are, or to believe and hope for an eternal
reward, which themselves have not as yet arrived at, etc^

XIX. But let us examine this Literature, which they make so necessary to the
being of a Minister; as in the first place, the knowledge of the Tongues, at
least of the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. The reason for this is, that they may
read the Scriptures, which is their only Rule, in the original languages, and
thereby be the more capable to comment upon it, and interpret it, etc. That
also, which made this knowledge be the more prized by the Primitive
Protestants, was indeed that dark Barbarity, that was over the world, in the
centuries immediately preceding the reformation; the knowledge of the tongues
being about that time, until it was even then restored by Erasmus and some
others, almost lost and extinct. And this barbarity was so much the more
abominable, that the whole worship and prayers of the people was in the Latin
tongue, and among that vast number of Priests, Monks and Friars, scarce one of
a thousand understood his breviary, or that mass, that he daily read and
repeated. The Scriptures being not only to the people, but to the greater part
of the Clergy, even as to the literal knowledge of it, as a sealed book. I
shall not at all discommend the zeal, that the first Reformers had, against
this Babylonish darkness, nor their pious endeavors to translate the Holy
Scriptures, but I do truly believe, according to their knowledge, that they did
it heartily: and therefore, to answer the just desires of those that desire to
read them, and for other very good reasons, as maintaining a commerce and
understanding among diverse nations by these common languages and other of that
kind, we judge it necessary and commendable, there be public Schools, for the
teaching and instructing youth, as are inclinable thereunto, in the languages.
And although that Papal ignorance deserved justly to be abhorred and
abominated, we see nevertheless that the true reformation consists not in that
knowledge, because, although, since that time, the Papists, stirred up through
emulation of the Protestants, have more applied themselves unto literature, and
it now more flourishes in their Universities, and Cloisters, than before,
especially in the Ignatian or Jesuitick Sect, they are as far now, as ever,
from a true reformation, and more obdured in their pernicious doctrines. But
all this will not make this a necessary qualification to a minister, far less a
more necessary qualification, than the Grace of God and his Spirit, because the
Spirit and Grace of God can make up this want in the most rustic and ignorant.
But this knowledge can no ways make up the want of the Spirit in the most
learned and eloquent. For all that, which man by his own industry, learning,
and knowledge in the languagues, can interpret of the Scriptures, or find out,
is nothing without the Spirit, he cannot be certain of it, and may still miss
of the sense of it; but a poor man, that knows not a letter, when he hears
the Scriptures read, by the same Spirit, he can say this is true, and by the
same Spirit he can understand, open, and interpret it, if need be: yea, he,
finding his condition to answer the condition and experience of the Saints of
old, knows and possesses the Truths there delivered, because they are sealed
and witnessed in his own heart by the same Spirit. And this we have plentiful
experience of, in many of those illiterate men, whom God has raised up to be
ministers in his Church in this day, so that some such by his Spirit have
corrected some of the errors of the Translators, as in the third Proposition
concerning the Scriptures, I before observed. Yea I know my self a poor
shoemaker, that cannot read a word, who, being assaulted with a false citation
of Scripture, from a public Professor of Divinity, before the Magistrate of a
City, when he had been taken preaching to some few, that came to hear him, I
say, I know such a one, and he yet lives, who, though the Professor (who also
is esteemed a learned man) constantly asserted his saying to be a Scripture
sentence, yet affirmed, not through any certain letter knowledge he had of it,
but from the most certain evidence of the Spirit in himself, that the Professor
lied, and that the Spirit of God never said any such thing as the other
affirmed, and the Bible being brought, it was found as the poor shoemaker had
said.

XX. The second part of their Literature is Logic and Philosophy, an art so
little needful to a true minister, that, if one, that comes to be a true
minister, has had it, it is safest for him to forget and lose it; for it is
the root and ground of all contention and debate, and the way to make a thing a
great deal darker, than clearer. For under the pretense of regulating man's
Reason into a certain order and rules, that he may find out, as they pretend,
the Truth, it leads into such a labyrinth of contention, as is far more fit to
make a Sceptick than a Christian, far less a minister of Christ; yea it often
hinders man from a clear understanding of things, that his own Reason would
give him: and therefore, through its manifold rules and diverse inventions, it
often gives occasion for a man, that has little reason, foolishly to speak
much to no purpose. Seeing a man, that is not very wise, may notwithstanding be
a perfect Logician, and then, if ye would make a man a fool to purpose, that is
not very wise, do but teach him Logic and Philosophy, and, whereas before he
might have been fit for something, he shall then be good for nothing, but to
speak nonsense, for these notions will so swim in his head, that they will
make him extremely busy about nothing. The use, that wise men and solid make of
it, is, to see the emptiness thereof; therefore says one, It is an art of
contention and darkness, by which all other sciences are rendered more obscure,
and harder to be understood.

If it be urged, that thereby the Truth may be maintained and confirmed, Inst.
and Heretics confuted.

I answer, the Truth, in men truly rational, Answ.
needs not the help thereof, and such as are obstinate, this will not
convince, for by this they may learn twenty tricks and distinctions, how to
shut out the Truth; and the Truth proceeding from an honest heart, and spoken
forth from the Virtue and Spirit of God will have more influence, and take
sooner and more effectually, than by a thousand demonstrations of Logic, as
that Lucae Osiandri epit. hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5. cent. 4.
Heathen Philosopher acknowledged, who, disputing with the Christian Bishops in
the Council of Nice, was so subtle, that he could not be overcome by them, but
yet by a few words, spoken by a simple old rustic, was presently convin^ed by
him, and converted to the Christian Faith, and being inquired how he came to
yield to that ignorant Old Man, and not to the Bishops, he said, that they
contended with him in his own way, and he could still give words for words, but
there came from the Old Man that virtue, which he was not able to resist. This
secret virtue and power ought to be the Logic and Philosophy, wherewith a true
Christian minister ought to be furnished, and for which they need not be
beholden to Aristotle. As to natural Logic, by which rational men, without
that art and rules, or sophistical learning, deduce a certain conclusion out of
true Propositions, which scarce any man of Reason wants, we deny not the use of
it, and I have sometimes used it in this Treatise, which also may serve without
that Dialectical art. As for the other part of Philosophy, which is called
Moral, or Ethics, it is not so necessary to Christians, who have the rules of
the Holy Seriptures, and the Gift of the Holy Spirit, by which they can be much
better instructed. The Physical and Metaphysical part may be reduced to the
arts of Medicine and the Mathematics, which have nothing to do with the
essence of a Christian Minister. And therefore the Apostle Paul, who well
understood what was good for Christian Ministers, and what hurtful, thus
exhorted the Colossians, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit. And to his beloved Disciple Timothy he writes also
thus, 1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust,
avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science, falsely so
called.

. XXI. The third and main part of their literature is School Divinity, a
monster made up betwixt some Scriptural notions of Truth, and the Heathenish
terms and maxims, being, as it were, the Heathenish Philosophy Christianized,
or rather the literal external knowledge of Christ Heathenized; it is man in
his first fallen natural state, with his devilish wisdom, pleasing himself with
some notions of Truth, and adorning them with his own serpentine and worldly
wisdom, because he thinks the simplicity of the Truth too low and mean a thing
for him, and so despises that simplicity, wheresoever it is found, that he may
set up and exalt himself, puffed up with this his monstrous birth; it is the
devil, darkening, obscuring, and veiling the knowledge of God with his sensual
and carnal wisdom, that so he may the more securely deceive the hearts of the
simple, and make the Truth as it is in it self, despicable and hard to be known
and understood, by multiplying a thousand hard and needless questions, and
endless contentions and debates, all which whosoever perfectly knows, he is not a
whit less the servant of sin, than he was, but ten times more, in that he is
exalted and proud of iniquity, and so much the further from receiving,
understanding, or learning the Truth, as it is in its own naked simplicity,
because he is full, learned, rich, and wise in his own conceit; and so those,
that are most skilled in it, wear out their day, and spend their precious time
about the infinite and innumerable questions they have feigned and invented
concerning it. A certain learned man called it a twofold discipline, as of the
race of the centaurs, partly proceeding from Divine sayings, partly from
Philosophical reasons. A thousand of their questions they confess themselves to
be no ways necessary to Salvation, and yet many more of them they could never
agree upon, but are and still will be in endless janglings about them. The
Volumes that have been written about it, a man in his whole age, though he
lived very old, could scarce read, and when he has read them all, he has but
wrought himself a great deal more vexation and trouble of Spirit than he had
before. These certainly are the words multiplied without knowledge, by which
counsel has been darkened, Job c. 38. v. 2. They make the Scripture the text
of all this Mass, and it is concerning the sense of it that their voluminous
debates arise. But a man of a good upright heart may learn more in half an
hour, and be more certain of it by waiting upon God and his Spirit in the
heart, than by reading a thousand of their Volumes, which by filling his head
with many needless imaginations may well stagger his faith, but never confirm
it; and indeed those that give themselves most to it, are most capable to fall
into error, as appears by the example of Origin, who, by his learning, was
one of the first, that, falling into this way of interpreting the Scriptures,
wrote so many Volumes, and in them so many errors, as very much troubled the
Church. Also Arius led by this curiosity and humane scrutiny, despising the
simplicity of the Gospel, fell into his error, which was the cause of that
horrible Heresy, which so much troubled the Church; methinks the simplicity,
plainness, and brevity of the Scriptures themselves, should be a sufficient
reproof for such a science; and the Apostles being honest, plain, illeterate
men, my be better understood by such kind of men now, than with all that mass
of scholastic stuff, which neither Peter, nor Paul, nor John, ever thought of.

XXII. But this invention of Satan, wherewith he began the Apostasy, has been
of dangerous consequence, for thereby he at first spoiled the simplicity of
Truth, by keeping up the Heathenish learning, which occasioned such uncertainty
even among those called Fathers, and such debate, that there are few of them to
be found, who, by reason of this mixture, do not only frequently contradict one
another, but themselves also. And therefore, when the Apostasy grew greater,
he, as it were, buried the Truth with this vail of darkness, wholly shuting out
people from true knowledge, and making the learned, so accounted, busy
themselves with idle and needless questions, while the weighty Truths of God
were neglected, and, as it were, went into desuetude. Now, though the grossest
of these abuses be swept away by Protestants, yet the evil root still remains,
and is nourished and upheld, and upon the growing hand, that this science is
kept up, and deemed necessary for a Minister; for, while the pure learning of
the Spirit of Truth is despised and neglected, and made ineffectual, man's
fallen,. earthly wisdom is upheld, and so in that he labors and works with the
Scriptures, being out of the Life and Spirit, those that wrote them were in, by
which they are rightly understood, and made use of. And so he that is to be a
Minister, must learn this art or trade of merchandising with the Scriptures,
and be that, which the Apostle would not be, to wit, a trader with them, 2 Cor.
2.17. That he may acquire a trick from a verse of Scripture, See also 2 Pet. 2.
ver. 3.
by adding his own barren notions and conceptions to it, and his uncertain
conjectures, and what he has stolen out of Books (for which end he must have of
necessity a good many by him) and may each Sabbath day (as they call, it) or
oftener, make a Discourse for an hour long, and this is called the preaching of
the word, whereas the Gift, Grace, and Spirit of God to teach, open, and
instruct, and to preach a word in season, is neglected; and so man's arts and
parts, and knowledge and wisdom, which is from below, set up and established in
the Temple of God, yea, and above the little Seed, which in effect is
Antichrist working in the Ministry, and so the Devil may be as good and able a
Minister as the best of them, for he has better skill of Languages, and more
Logic, Philosophy, and School Divinity, than any of them and knows the Truth
in the notion, better than they all, and talk more Eloquently than all those
Preachers. But what avails all this? Is it not all but as Death, as a painted
Sepulcher, and dead Carcass, without the Power, Life, and Spirit of
Christianity, which is the marrow and substance of a Christian Ministry, and
he, that has this, and can speak from it, though he be a poor Shepherd, or a
Fisherman, and ignorant of all that Learning, and of all those questions and
notions, yet speaking from the Spirit, his Ministry will have more influence
toward the converting of a sinner unto God, than all of them, learned after
the flesh, as in that Example of the old man at the Council of Nice did appear.

* XXIII. And if in any Age, since the Apostles days, God has purposed to
show his power by weak instruments, for the battering down of that carnal and
heathenish wisdom, and restoring again the ancient simplicity of Truth, this is
it; for in our day God has raised up witnesses for himself, as he did
Fishermen of old, many, yea, most of whom are laboring and mechanic men, who
altogether, without that learning, have by the Power and Spirit of God, struck
at the very root and ground of Babylon, and in the strength and might of this
Power, have gathered thousands, by teaching their Consciences into the same
Power and Life; who, as to the outward part, have been far more knowing than
they, yet not able to resist the virtue that proceeded from them. Of which I my
self am a true witness, and can declare from a certain experience, because my
heart has been often greatly broken and tendered by that virtuous Life, that
proceeded from the powerful Ministry of those illeterate men; so that by their
very countenance, as well as words, I have felt the evil in me often chained
down, and the good reached to and raised. What shall I then say to you, who are
lovers of learning, and admirers of knowledge? Was not I also a lover and
admirer of it, who also sought after it, according to my age and capacity? But
it pleased God in his unutterable love, early to withstand my vain endeavors,
while I was yet but eighteen years of age, made and me seriously to consider
(which I wish also may befall others) that without holiness and regeneration no
man can see God, and that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and
to depart from iniquity a good understanding. And how much knowledge puffs up,
and leads away from that inward quietness, stilness, and humility of mind,
where the Lord appears, and his heavenly wisdom is revealed. If ye consider
these things, then will ye say with me that all this learning, wisdom, and
knowledge, gathered in this fallen nature, is but as dross and dung, in comparison
of the cross of Christ, especially being destitute of that Power, Life, and
Virtue, which I perceived these excellent, though despised, because illeterate,
Witnesses of God, to be filled with; and therefore, seeing that, in and among
them, I with many others, have found the heavenly food, that gives contentment,
let my Soul seek after this learning, and wait for it for ever.

. XXIV. Having thus spoken of the call and qualifications of a Gospel Minister,
that, which comes next to be considered, is, What his proper work is, how, and
by what rule, he is to be ordered. Our adversaries do all along go upon
outward, and therefore have certain prescribed rules and methods contrived,
according to their humane and earthly wisdom. We, on the contrary, walk still
upon the same foundation, and lean always upon the immediate assistance and
influence of that Holy Spirit, which God has given his Children to teach them
all things, and lead them in all things; which Spirit, being the Spirit of
order and not of confusion, leads us, and as many as follow it, into such a
comely and decent order, as becomes the Church of God. But our adversaries,
having shut themselves out from this immediate council and influence of the
Spirit, have run themselves into many confusions and disorders, seeking to
establish an order in this matter. For some will have first a chief Bishop or
Pope to rule and be Prince over all, and under him by degrees Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons; and besides these,
Acoluthi, consotari, ostiarii, etc. And in their Theology, as they call it,
Professors, Batchelors, Doctors, etc. And others are to have every Nation
independent of another, having its own Metropolitan or Patriarch, and the rest
in order subject to him, as before. Others again are against all precedence
among Pastors, and constitute their subordination not of persons, but of power,
as first the Consistory or Session, then the Class or Presbytery, then the
Provincial, and then the National Synod or Assembly. Thus do they tear one
another, and contend among themselves concerning the ordering, distinguishing,
and making their several orders and offices concerning which there has been no
less contest, not only by way of verbal di^pute, but even by fighting, tumults,
wars, vastations, and bloodshed, than about the conquering, overturning, and
establishing of Kingdoms. And the Histories of late times are as full of the
various Tragedies, acted upon the account of this Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Monarchy and Common Wealth; as the Histories of old times, that gave account of
the wras and contests that fell out both in Assyrian, Persian, Greek, and Roman
Empires. These last upon this account, though among those that are called
Christians, have been no less bloody and monstrous, than the former among
Heathens, concerning their outward Empires and Governments. Now all this, both
among Papists and Protestants, proceeds, in that they seek in imitation to
uphold a form and shadow of things, though they want the Power, Virtue, and
Substance, though for many of their orders and forms they have not so much as
the name in the Scripture. But, in opposition to all this mass of formality and
heap of Orders, Rules and Governments, we say, the Substance is chiefly to be
sought after, and the Power, Virtue, and Spirit is to be known and waited for,
which is one in all the different names and offices the Scripture makes use of,
as appears by 1 Cor. 12. often before mentioned, There are diversities of
Gifts, but the same Spirit. And after the Apostle throughout the whole chapter,
verse. 4.
has shown how one and the self same Spirit works in, and quickens each
member: then in the 28 verse he shows how thereby God has set in the Church,
first Apostles, secondly Prophets, Teachers, etc. And likewise to the same
purpose, Ephesians. 4. he shows how by these Gifts he has given some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, etc. Now it was
never Christ's purpose nor the Apostles, verse. 11.
that Christians should without this Spirit and Heavenly Gift, set up a shadow
and form of these orders, and so make several ranks and degrees, to establish a
carnal Ministry of men's making, without the Life, Power, and Spirit of Christ:
this is that work of Antichrist and Mystery of Iniquity, that has got up in
the dark night of Apostasy; but in a true Church of Christ, gathered together
by God, not only unto the belief of the principles of Truth, but also into the
Power, Life, and Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of God is the Orderer, Ruler, and
Governor, as in each particular, so in the general: and when they assemble
together, to wait upon God and worship and adore him, then such as the Spirit
sets apart to the Ministry by its Divine Power and Influence, opening their
Mouths, and giving them to exhort, reprove, and instruct with Virtue and Power,
these are thus of God ordained and admitted into the Ministry, and their
brethren cannot but hear them, receive them, and also honor them for their
works sake, and so this is not monopolized to a certain kind of men, as the
Clergy (who are to that purpose educated and brought up, as other carnal
Artists) and the rest to be despised as Laics: but it is left to the free Gift
of God, to choose any, whom he sees meet thereunto, whether rich, or poor,
servant or master, young or old, yea male or female. And such as have this
call, verify the Gospel, by preaching not in Speech only, but also in Power,
and the Holy Ghost, and in much fullness, 1 These. 1.5. and cannot but be
received and heard by the Sheep of Christ.

. XXV. But if it be objected here, Obj.
that I seem hereby to make no distinction at all betwixt Ministers and others,
which is contrary to the Apostle, saying, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Apostles? Are
all Prophets? Are all Teachers? etc. From thence they insinuate, that I also
contradict his comparison, in that chapter, of the Church of Christ with a
humane body, as where he says, verse 17. If the whole body were an Eye, where
were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling, etc. Also
the Apostle not only thus distinguishes the Ministers of the Church in
general, from the rest of the Members, but also from themselves, as naming
them, distinctly and separately; Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, etc.

As to the last part of this objection, to which I shall first answer, Answ.
it is apparent, that this diversity of Names, is not for to distinguish
separate Offices, but to denote the different and various Operations of the
Spirit, a manner of Speech frequent with the Apostle Paul, wherein he sometimes
expatiates to the Illustrating of the Glory and Praise of God's Grace, as in
particular, Romans 12.6. Having then Gifts, differing according to the Grace that
is given us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the proportion of
Faith; Or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that Teaches, on
Teaching, or he that Exhorts, on Exhortation. Now none will say from all this
that these are distinct Offices, or do not or may not co-incide in one person,
as may all these other things mentioned by him in the subsequent verses, viz.
Of Loving, being kindly affectioned, Fervency of Spirit, Hospitality,
Diligence, Blessing, Rejoicing, etc. Which yet he numbers forth as different
gifts of the Spirit. And, according to this objection, might be placed as
distinct and separate Offices, which were most absurd.

Secondly, in these very places mentioned, it is clear, that it is no real
distinction of separate Offices, because all acknowledge that Pastors and
Teachers, which the Apostle there no less separateth and distinguishes, than
Pastors and Prophets or Apostles, are one and the same, and co-incide in the
same Office and Person, and therefore so may be said of the rest. For [
Prophecy,] as it signifies the foretelling of things to come, is indeed a
distinct Gift, but no distinct Office, and therefore our Adversaries do not
place it among their several orders, neither will they deny but that both may
be and have been given of God to some, that not only have been Pastors and
Teachers, and that there it has co incided in one Person with these other
Offices, but also to some of the Laics, and so it has been found according to
their own concession, without the limits of their Clergy. Prophecy in the other
sense, to wit, as it signifies a speaking from the Spirit of Truth, is not
only peculiar to Pastors and Teachers, who ought so to Prophecy, but even a
common privilege to the Saints: for though to Instruct, Teach and Exhort, be
proper to such as are more particularly called to the work of the Ministry, yet
it is not so proper to them, as not to be when the Saints are met together, as
any of them are moved by the Spirit, common to others: For some acts belong to
all in such a relation, but not only to those within that relation; competunt
omni, sed non Soli: thus to see and hear, are proper acts of a man: seeing it
may be properly predicated of him, that he hears and sees, yet are they
common to other Creatures also. So to Prophecy in this sense, is indeed proper
to Ministers and Teachers, yet not so, but that it is common and lawful to
other Saints when moved thereunto, though it be not proper to them by way of
relation, because notwithstanding that motion, they are not particularly called
to the work of the Ministry, as appears by 1 Cor. 14. where the Apostle at
large declaring the order and ordinary method of the Church, says, ver. 30,
31. But if, any thing be revealed to another, that sits by, let the first
hold his peace. For ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all
be comforted: Which shows that none is here excluded. But yet that there is a
subordination according to the various measures of the Gift received; the next
verse shows,; And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.
For God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace. Now that Prophesying in
this sense, may be common to all Saints, appears by the 39 verse of the same
Chapter, where speaking to [ all] in general, he says, Therefore Brethren
covet to Prophecy: and verse 1. he exhorts them, saying, Covet Spiritual Gifts,
but the rather that ye may Prophecy.

Secondly, as to Evangelists the same may be said; for whoever preaches the
Gospel is really an Evangelist, and so consequently every true Minister of the
Gospel is one, else what proper office can they assign to it, unless they
should be so foolish as to affirm, that none were Evangelists, but Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, who wrote the Account of Christ's Life and Sufferings? And
then it were neither a particular office, seeing John and Matthew were
Apostles, Mark and Luke, Pastors and Teachers, so that there they co-incided in
one, and indeed it is absurd to think, that upon that particular account the
Apostle used the word [ Evangelist] Calvin acknowledges, that such as preach
the Gospel in purity after some time of Apostasy, may be truly called
Evangelists; and therefore says, that there were Apostles in his time; and
hence the Protestants, at their first coming forth, termed themselves
Evangeleci, or Evangeliks.

Lastly, an Apostle, if we look to the Etymology of the word, signifies one
that is sent; and in respect every true Minister is sent of God, in so far he
is an Apostle, though these Twelve, because of their being specially sent of
Christ, were therefore called Apostles, (...), or per eminentiam, i. e. by way
of excellency. And yet there was no limitation to such a number, as some
foolishly imagine it appears, because after that number was filled up, the
Apostle Paul was afterward so called; therefore we judge that these are no
distinct separate Offices, but only Names used upon occasions, to express the
more eminent arising and shining forth of God's Grace, as if any Minister of
Christ should now Prosolyte or turn a whole Nation to the Christian Faith,
though he had no distinct Office; yet I doubt not but both Papists and
Protestants would judge it tolerable, to call such an one an Apostle, or an
Evangelist. For some of the Jesuits call of their Sect Apostles, of India, and
of Japon, upon this alleged account. And Calvin testifies that there were
Apostles and Evangelists in his time, upon the account of the Reformation, upon
which account we have known John Knox often called the Apostle of Scotland, so
that we conclude that Ministers, Pastors or Teachers, does comprehend all, and
that the Office is but one, and therefore in that respect we judge there ought
to be no precedence among them; to prove which I shall not insist, seeing it is
shown largely, and treated of by such as have denied the Diocesian Episcopacy,
as they call it.

XXVI. As to the first part of the objection, viz. that I seem to make no
distinction betwixt the Minister and People, I answer, If it be understood of a
liberty to Speak or Prophecy by the Spirit, I say all may do that, when moved
thereunto, as above is shown; but we do believe and affirm that some are more
particularly called to the work of the Ministry, and therefore are fitted of
the Lord for that purpose, whose work is more constantly and particularly to
instruct, exhort, admonish, oversee, and watch over their Brethren; and that as
there is something more incumbent upon them in that respect, than upon every
common Believer, so also, as in that relation, there is due to them from the
Flock such obedience and subjection, as is mentioned in these Testimonys of the
Scripture, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Pet. 5.5. Also besides
these, who are thus particularly called to the Ministry, and constant labor in
the Word and Doctrine, there are also the Elders, who though they be not moved
to a frequent Testimony by way of Declaration in Words, yet as such as are
grown up in the experience of the blessed work of Truth in their Hearts, watch
over, and privately admonish the Young, care for the Widows, the Poor and
Fatherless, and care and look that nothing be wanting, but that Peace, Love,
Unity, Concord and Soundness be preserved in the Church of Christ, and this
answers to the Deacons mentioned, Acts 6.

That which we oppose, is the distinction of Laity and Clergy (which in the
Scripture is not to be found) whereby none are admitted unto the work of the
Ministry, but such as are educated at Schools on purpose, and instructed in
Logic and Philosophy, etc. And so are at their Apprenticeship to learn the Art
and Trade of Preaching, even as a man learns any other Art, whereby all other
honest mechanic men, who have not got this Heathenish Art, are excluded from
having this privilege; and so he that is a Scholar, thus bred up, must not
have any honest trade whereby to get him a Livelihood, if he once intend for
the Ministry, but he must see to get him a place, and then he has his set
hire, for a Livelihood to him, he must also be distinguished from the rest, by
the Color of his Clothes, for he must only wear Black, and must be a Master of
Arts: but more of this hereafter.

XXVII. As this manner of separating men for the Ministry is nothing like the
Church in the Apostles days, so great Evils have and do follow upon it; for
first, Parents seeing both the Honor and Profit that attends the Clergy, do
allot their Children sometimes from their Infancy to it, and so breed them up
on purpose: and others come to age, upon the same account betake them to the
same Trade, and having these natural and acquired parts, that are judged the
necessary qualifications of a Minister, are thereby admitted, and so are bred
up in Idleness and Pleasure, thinking it a disgrace for them to work with their
hands, only if they study a little out of their Books, to make a discourse once
or twice in a Week, during the running of an Hourglass. Whereas the Gift,
Grace and Spirit of God to call, gift and qualify for the Ministry, is
neglected and overlooked. And many Covetous, Corrupt, Earthly, Carnal men,
having a mere show and form, but strangers to and utterly ignorant of the
inward work of Grace upon their hearts, are brought in, and intrude themselves,
and so through them, Death, Barrenness and Darkness, and by consequence
Superstition, Error and Idolatry has entered, and leavened the Church; and they
that will narrowly observe, shall find that it was thus the Apostasy came to
take place; of the Truth of which I could give many examples, which for
brevities sake I omit. For so the Office, Reverence, and respect due to it, was
annexed to the mere name, so that, when once a man was ordained a Bishop or a
Priest, he was heard and believed, though he had nothing of the Spirit, Power
and Life, that the true Apostles and Ministers were in, that in a short time
the succession came to be of the Name and Title, and the Office was thereto
annexed, and not of the Nature, Virtue and Life. Which in effect made them to
cease to be the Ministry and Ministers of Christ, but only a shadow and vain
image of it, which also decaying was in some ages so metamorphosed, that not
only the substance was lost, but the very form wholly vitiated, alterated and
marred, that it may be far better said of the pretended Christian Church, as
was disputed of Theseus's Boat, (which by the piecing of many new pieces of
Timber, was wholly altered) whether indeed it were the same or another. But in
case that the first had been of Oak, and the last pieces put in but of rotten
Fir, and that also the form had been so far changed, as to be nothing like the
first, I think it would have suffered no dispute, but might have easily been
concluded to be quite another, retaining nothing but the name, and that also
unjustly. Secondly, from this distinction of Laity and Clergy this abuse also
follows, that good honest mechanic men, and others, who have not learned the
art and trade of Preaching, and so are not licentiated according to these rules
they prescribe unto themselves, such I say, being possessed with a false
opinion, that it is not lawful for them to meddle with the Ministry, nor that
they are any ways fit for it, because of the defect of that Literature, do
thereby neglect the Gift in themselves, and quench many times the pure
breathings of the Spirit of God in their hearts; which if given way to, might
have proved much more for the edification of the Church, than many of the
conned Sermons of the learned. And so by this means the Apostles command, and
advice is slighted, who exhorts, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20. Not to quench the Spirit,
nor despise Prophesying: And all this is done by men pretending to be
Christians, who glory that the first Preachers and Propagators of their
Religion, were such kind of plain mechanic men, and illiterate. And even
Protestants do no less than Papists exclude such kind of men from being
Ministers among them, and thus limit the Spirit and Gift of God, though their
Fathers in opposition to Papists, asserted the contrary; and also their own
Histories declare, how that kind of illiterate men did, without learning, by
the Spirit of God, greatly contribute in diverse places to the Reformation.

By this it may appear, that, as in calling and qualifying, so in preaching and
praying, and the other particular steps of the Ministry, every true Minister is
to know the Spirit of God, by its virtue and life, to accompany and assist him.
But, because this relates to worship, I shall speak of it more largely in the
next Proposition, which is concerning Worship. The last thing to be considered
and inquired into is, concerning the maintenance of a Gospel Minister. But
before I proceed, I judge it fit to speak something in short concerning the
preaching of Women, and so declare what we hold in that matter.

Seeing Male and Female are one in Christ Jesus, and that he has given his
Spirit no less to one than to the other, when God moves by his Spirit in a
Woman, we judge it no ways unlawful for her to preach in the Assemblies of Gods
People. Neither think we that of Paul, 1 Cor. 14.34. to reprove the
inconsiderate and talkative Women among the Corinthians, who ttoubled the
Church of Christ with their unprofitable questions, or that 1 Timothy 2.11. that
all Women ought to learn in silence, not usurping authority over the man, any
ways repugnant to this Doctrine, because it is clear, that women have prophesied
and preached in the Church, else had the saying of Joel been badly applied by
Peter, Acts 2.17. And, seeing Paul himself, in the same Epistle to the
Corinthians, gives rules how women should behave themselves in their public
preaching and praying, it would be a manifest contradiction, if that place were
otherways taken in a larger sense; and the same Paul speaks of a Woman that
labored with him in the work of the Gospel: Acts 21.9.
And it is written that Phillip had four Daughters that prophesied; and lastly
it has been observed, that God has effectually in this day converted many
Souls by the ministry of Women, and by them also frequently comforted the Souls
of his Children, which manifest experience puts the thing beyond all
controversy: but now I shall proceed to speak of the maintenance of Ministers.

* XXVIII. We freely acknowledge, as the Proposition holds forth, that there is
an obligation upon such, to whom God sends, or among whom he raises up a
Minister, that, if need be, they minister to his necessities. Secondly, that it
is lawful for him to receive what is necessary and convenient. To prove this, I
need not insist, for our adversaries will readily grant it to us, for the thing
we affirm is, that this is all that these Scripture testimonies relating to
this thing do grant, Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5.16. That,
which we then oppose in this matter, is first, that it should be constrained
and limited. Secondly, that it should be superfluous, chargeable and sumptuous.
And thirdly, the manifest abuse hereof, of which I shall also briefly treat.

As to the first, our adversaries are forced to recur to the Example of the
Law, a refuge they use in defending most of their errors and superstitions,
which are contrary to the nature and purity of the Gospel.

They say, God appointed the Levites the tithes, Obj.
therefore they belong also to such as minister in holy things under the Gospel.

I answer, all that can be gathered from this, is, that, as the Priests had a
maintenance allowed them under the Law, Answ.
so also the ministers and preachers under the Gospel, which is not denied; but
the comparison will not hold, that they should have the very same, since,
first, there is no express Gospel command for it, neither by Christ nor his
Apostles. Secondly, the parity does no ways hold betwixt the Levites under the
Law, and the preachers under the Gospel, because the Levites were one of the
tribes of Israel, and so had a right to a part of the inheritance of the land,
as well as the rest of their brethren, and having none, had this alloted to
them in lieu of it. Next, the tenth of the tithes was only allowed to the
Priests that served at the Altar, the rest being for the Levites, and also to
be put up in Storehouses for entertaining of Widows and Strangers. But these
Preachers, notwithstanding they inherit what they have by their Parents, as
well as other men, yet claim the whole tithes, allowing nothing either to widow
or stranger. But as to the tithes I shall not insist, because diverse have
clearly and learnedly treated of it apart, and also diverse Protestants do
confess them not to be jure Divino, and the parity, as to the quota, does not
hold, but only in general as to the obligation of a maintenance. Which
maintenance, though the hearers be obliged to give, and fail of their duty, if
they do not, yet that it ought neito be received nor yet forced, I prove,
because Christ, when he sent forth his Apostles, said, Freely ye have received,
freely give, Mat. 10.8. and they had liberty to receive Meat and Drink from
such as offered them to supply their need. Which shows that they were not to
seek or require any thing by force, or to stint, or make a bargain before hand,
as the Preachers as well among Papists as Protestants, do in these days, who
will not preach to any, until they be sure first of so much a year; but, on the
contrary, these were to do their duty, and freely to communicate (as the Lord
should order them) what they had received, without seeking or expecting a
reward.

The answer of this, given by Nicolaus Arnoldus, Exercit. Theolog. Sect. 42.43.
is not to be forgotten, but indeed to be kept upon record for a perpepetual
remembrance of him and his brethren, for he frankly answers after this manner,
We have not freely received, and therefore are not bound to give it freely. The
answer I confess is ingenious and good. For, if those that receive freely, are
to give freely, it would seem to follow by the rule of contraries, that those
who receive not freely, ought not to give freely, and I shall grant it. Only
they must grant me, that they preach not by and according to the Gift and Grace
of God received, nor can they be good Stewards of the manifest Grace of God, as
every true Minister ought to be, or then they have gotten this Gift or Grace by
money, as Simon Magus would have been compassing it, since they think
themselves not bound to give it without money again. But, to be plain, I
believe he intended not that it was from the Gift or Grace of God they were to
preach, but from their acquired arts and studies, which has cost them much
labor and also some money at the University; and therefore, as he that puts
his stock in the public bank, expects interest again, so these Scholars having
spent some money, learning the art of preaching think they may boldly say, they
have it not freely, for it has cost them both money and pains, and therefore
they expect both money and ease again. And therefore as Arnoldus gets money for
teaching his young Students the art of preaching, so he intends they should be
repayed, before they give it again to others. It was of old said, Omnia venalia
Romae, i. e. All things are set to sale at Rome, but now the same proverb may
be applied to Franequer. And therefore Arnoldus's Students, when they go about
to preach, may safely seek and require hereby, telling their hearers their
masters maxim, Nos gratis non accepimus, ergo neque gratis dare tenemur. But
then they answer again, that they find them, and their Master to be none of his
Ministers, who, when he sent forth his Disciples, gave them this command,
Freely ye have received, freely give, and therefore we will have none of your
teaching, because we perceive you to be of the number of those, that look for
their gain from their quarter.

Isa. 56.11.
XXIX. Secondly, the Scripture testimonies, that urge this, are in the same
nature of these, that press charity and liberality toward the poor, and
command hospitality, etc. But these are not, nor can be stinted to a certain
quantity, because they are deeds merely voluntary, where the obedience to the
command lies in the good will of the giver, and not in the matter of the thing
given, as Christ show in the Example of the widows mite. So that, though there
be an obligation upon Christians to minister of outward things to their
ministers, yet there can be no definition of the quantity, but by the givers
own consents, and a little from one may more truly fulfill the obligation, than
a great deal from another. And therefore as acts of charity and hospitality can
neither be limited nor forced, so neither can this.

If it be objected, that Ministers may and ought to exhort, persuade, yea and
earnestly press Christians (if they find them defective therein) to acts of
charity and hospitality, and so may they do also to the giving of maintenance.

I answer, All this says nothing for a stinted and forced maintenance (for
which there cannot so much as the show of one solid argument be brought from
Scripture) I confess, Ministers may use exhortations in this, as much as in any
other case, even as the Apostle did to the Corinthians, showing them their
duty: but it were fit for Ministers, that do so, that their testimony might
have the more weight, and be the freer of all suspicion of covetousness and
self-interest, that they might be able to say truly, in the sight of God, that,
which the same Apostle subjoyns upon the same occasion, 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 17,
18. But I have used none of these things. Neither have I written these things,
that it should be so done unto me; For it were better for me to die, than that
any man should make my Glory void. For, though I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel. For, if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward; but,
if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. What is
my reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of
Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel.

Thirdly, As there is neither precept nor example for this forced and stinted
maintenance in the Scripture, so the Apostle, in his solemn farwell to the
Pastors and Elders of the Church of Ephesus, guards them against it, Acts
20.33, 34, 35. But, if the thing had been either lawful or practiced, he would
rather have exhorted them to be content with their stinted hire, and not to
covet more; whereas he shows them first by his own Example, that they were
not to covet or expect any man's Silver or Gold. Secondly, that they ought to
work with their hands for an honest livelihood, as he had done. And lastly, he
exhorts them so to do from the words of Christ, because it is a more blessed
thing to give than to receive; showing that it is so far from a thing that a
true minister ought to aim at, or expect, that it is rather a burden to a true
Minister, and cross to him, to be brought upon necessity, so to lack.

. XXX. Fourthly, If a forced and stinted maintenance were to be supposed, it
would make the Ministers of Christ just one with these hirelings whom the
Prophet cried out against. For certainly if a man make a bargain to preach to
People for so much a year so as to refuse to preach, unless he have, and seek
to force the People to give it by violence, it cannot be denied, that such a
one preaches for hire, and so looks for his gain from his quarter, yea and
prepares War against such as put not into his mouth: but this is the particular
special mark of a false Prophet, and a hireling, and therefore can no ways
compet to a true Minister of Christ.

Next, that a superfluous maintainace, that is, more than in reason is needful,
ought not to be received by Christian Ministers, will not need much proof,
seeing the more moderate and sober, both among Papists and Protestants readily
confess it, who with one voice exclaim against the excessive revenues of the
Clergy: and that it may not want a proof from Scripture, what can be more plain
than that of the Apostle to Timothy? 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9, 10. where he both shows
wherewith we ought to be content, and also the hazard of such as look after
more; and indeed, since that very obligation of giving maintenance to a
Minister is founded upon their need, and such as have opportunity to work, are
commended rather in not receiving than in receiving, it can no ways be supposed
lawful for them to receive more then is sufficient, and indeed were they truly
pious and right, tho necessitate, they would rather incline to take too little,
than be gaping after too much.

. XXXI. Now that there is great excess and abuse hereof among Christians, the
vast Revenues which the Bishops and Priests have, both Papist and Protestant do
declare, since I judge it may be said without any Hyperbole, that some
particular persons have more paid them yearly, than Christ and his Apostles
made use of their whole life time, who yet wanted not what was needful as to
the outward man, and no doubt deserved it far better, than those that enjoy
that fullness. But it is manifest these Bishops and Priests love their fat
benefices, and the Pleasure and Honor, that attend them, so well, that they
purpose neither to follow Christ nor his Apostles Example, nor advice in this
matter.

But it is usually objected; that Christians are become so hard-hearted, and
generally so little heed Spiritual things, Obj.
that if Ministers had not a settled and stinted maintenance secured them by
Law, they and their Families might starve for want of bread.

Answ.
I answer, This objection might have some weight as to a carnal Ministry, made
up of natural men, who have no Life, Power, nor Virtue with them, and so may
insinuate some need of such a maintenance for such a Ministry: but it says
nothing as to such as are called and sent of God, who sends no man away faring
upon his own charges, and so go forth in the Authority and Power of God, to
turn People from Darkness to Light, for such can trust to him, that sends
them, and do believe that he will provide for them, knowing that he requires
nothing of any, but what he gives power to perform, and so when they return,
if he inquire, can say they wanted nothing. And such also when they stay in a
place, (being immediately furnished by God, and not needing to borrow and steal
what they preach from Books, and take up their time that way) fall a working of
their lawful Employments, and labor with their hands, as Paul did when he
gathered the Church of Corinth. And indeed, if this objection had any weight,
the Apostles and primitive Pastors should never had gone forth to convert the
nations, for fear of want. Does not the Doctrine of Christ teach us to venture
all, and part with all, to serve God? Can they then be accounted Ministers of
Christ, who are afraid to preach him* lest they get not money for it, or will
not do it, until they be sure of their payment? What for serves the Ministry,
but to perfect the Saints, and so to Convert them from that hard-heartedness?

But thou will say, I have labored and preached to them, Obj.
and they are hard-hearted still, and will not give me any thing.

Then surely thou have either not been sent to them of God, Answ.
and so thy Ministry and Preaching has not been among them in the Power,
Virtue, and Life of Christ, and so thou deserve nothing, or else they have
rejected thy Testimony, and so are not worthy, and from such thou ought not
to expect, yea nor yet to receive any thing, if they would give thee, Matthew.
10.4.
but thou ought to shake off the dust from thy Feet, and leave them. And how
frivolous this objection is, appears, in that in the darkest and most
superstitious times, the Priests Revenues increased most, and they were most
richly rewarded, though they deserved least. So that he that is truly sent of
God, as he needs not, so neither will he be afraid of want, so long as he
serves so good a Master, neither will he ever forbear to do his work for that
cause. And indeed such as make this objection, show truly that they serve not
the Lord Christ, but their own belly, and that makes them so anxious for want
of food to it.

. XXXII. But lastly, as to the abuses of this kind of maintenance, indeed he
that would go through them all, though he did it passingly, might make of it
alone an huge Volumn, they are so great and numerous. For this abuse, as others
crept in with the Apostasy, there being nothing of this in the primitive times;
then the Ministers claimed no Tithes, neither sought they a stinted or forced
maintenance, but such as wanted, had their necessity supplied by the Church,
and others wrought with their hands. But the Persecutions being over, and the
Emperors and Princes coming under the Name of Christians, the Zeal of those
great men was quickly abused by Covetousness of the Clergy, who soon learned to
change their Cottages with the Palaces of Princes, and rested not, until by
degrees some of them came to be Princes themselves, nothing inferior to them
in Splendour, Luxury and Magnificence; a method of living, that honest Peter and
John, the Fishermen, and Paul the Tent-maker, never coveted. And perhaps as
little imagined, that men pretending to be their Successors, should have
arrived to these things; and so soon as the Bishops were thus seated and
constitute, forgetting the Life and Work of a Christian, they went usually by
the Ears together about the precedence and revenues, each coveting the chiefest
and fattest Benefice. It is also to be regreted to think how soon this mischief
crept in among Protestants, who had scarce well appeared, when the Clergy among
them began to speak at the old rate and show, that though they had forsaken the
Bishop of Rome, they were not resolved to part with their old Benefices, and
therefore so soon as any Princes or States shook off the Popes Authority, and
so demollished the Abbeys, Nunneries, and other Monuments of Superstition, the
reformed Clergy began presently to cry out to the Magistrates, to beware of
meddling with the Churches Patrimony, severely exclaiming against making a
lawful use of those vast revenues, that had been superstitiously bestowed upon
the Church (so called) to the good and benefit of the Commonwealth, as no less
than Sacrilege.

But by keeping up of this kind of maintenance for the Ministry and
Clergymen, so called, there is first a bait laid for Coveteousness, which is
Idolatry, and of all things most hurtful: so that for Coveteousness sake, many
being led by the desire of filthy Lucre, do apply themselves to be Ministers,
that they may get a Livelihood by it; if a man have several Children, he will
allot one of them to be a Minister, which if he can get it to be, he reckons it
as good as a Patrimony, so that a fat Benefice has always a good many
expectants, and then what Bribing, what Courting, what Industry, and shameful
actions are used to acquire these things, is too openly known, and needs not to
be proved.

The scandal that herethrough is raised among Christians, is so manifest, that
it is become a Proverb that the KIRK is always GREEDY. Whereby the Gift and
Grace of God being neglected, they have for for the most part no other motive
or rule, in applying themselves to one Church more than another, but the
greater Benefice. For tho they hypocritically pretend, at their accepting of
and entering unto their Church, that they have nothing before them but the Glory
of God, and the Salvation of Souls, yet if a richer Benefice offer it self,
they presently find it more for God's Glory, to remove from the first, and go
thither. And thus they make no difficulty often to change, while
notwithstanding they accuse us, that we allow Ministers to go from place to
place, and not to be tied to one place; but we allow this not for the gaining
of money, but as moved of God; for, if a Minister be called to Minister in a
particular place, he ought not to leave it, except God call him from it, and
then he ought to obey, for we make the will of God inwardly revealed, and not
the love of money, and more gain, the ground of removing.

Secondly, From this abuse has proceeded that Luxury and Idleness, that most
of the Clergy live in, even among Protestants as well as Papists, to the great
scandal of Christianity. For not having lawful Trades, to work with their
hands, and being so superfluously and sumptuosly provided for, they live in
Idleness and Luxury: and there does more Pride, Vanity, and Worldly Glory
appear in their Wives and Children, than in most others, which is open and
evident to all.

Thirdly, They become hereby so glewed to the love of money, that there is none
like them in malice, rage, and cruelty, if they deny their hire, they rage like
drunken men, fret, fume, and as it were go mad. A man may sooner satisfy the
severest Creditor, than them, the general voice of the poor does confirm this,
for indeed they are far more exact in taking up the Tithes of Sheep, Geese,
Swine and Eggs, etc. and look more narrowly to it, than to the members of the
Flock; they will not miss the least mite, and the poorest Widow cannot escape
their avaritious hands: twenty Lies they will hear unreproved, and as many
Oaths a man may swear in their hearing without offending them, and greater
evils than all this they can overlook. But, if thou owe them ought, and
refuse to pay it, then nothing but war will they thunder against thee, and they
will stigmatize thee with the horrible Title of Sacriledg, and send thee to
Hell without mercy, as if thou had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost.
Of all People we can best bear witness to this: for God having shown us this
corrupt and Antichristian Ministry, and called us out from it, and gathered us
unto his own Power and Life, to be a separate People, so that we dare not join
with, nor hear these Antichristian hirelings, neither yet put into their
mouths, or feed them. O! what malice, envy, and fury has this raised in their
Hearts against us? that tho we get none of their wares, neither will buy them,
as knowing them to be naught, yet will they force us to give them money, and
because we cannot for conscience sake do it, our sufferings have upon that
account been unutterable. Yea, to give account of their cruelty, and several
sorts of inhumanity used against us, would make no small History. These
avaritious Hirelings have come to that degree of malice and rage, that several
poor laboring men have been carried hundreds of miles from their own
dwellings, and shut up in prison, some two, some three, yea, some seven years
together, for the value of one pound sterling, and less. I know my self a poor
Widow, that for the tithes of her Geese, which amounted not to five shillings,
was about four years kept in prison, thirty miles from her house. Yea, they by
violence for this cause have plundered of men's goods, the hundred fold, and
prejudiced much more, yea, hundreds have hereby spilt their innocent blood, by
dying in the filthy noisome holes and prisons, and some of the Priests have been
so enraged, that Goods thus ravished could not satisfy them, but they must
also satisfy their fury by beating, knocking, and wounding with their hands
innocent men and women, for refusing (for Conscience sake) to put into their
mouths.

The only way then soundly to reform and remove all these abuses, and take away
the ground and occasion of them, is to take away all stinted and forced
maintenance and stipend: and, seeing those things were anciently given by the
people, that they return again into the public treasure, and thereby the
people may be greatly benefited by them, for that they may supply for these
public taxations and impositions, that are put upon them, and may ease
themselves of them. And whoever call or appoint teachers to themselves, let
them accordingly entertain them. And for such as are called and moved to the
Ministry by the Spirit of God, those that receive them, and taste of the good
of their Ministry, will no doubt provide things needful for them, and there
will be no need of a Law to force a hire for them; for he that sends them, will
take care for them, and they also having food and raiment, will therewith be
content.

. XXXIII. The sum then of what is said, Is, that The Ministry that we have
pleaded for, and which also the Lord has raised up among us, is in all its
parts like the true Ministry of the Apostles and primitive Church. Whereas the
Ministry our adversaries seek to uphold and plead for, as it does in all its
parts differ from them, so, on the other hand, it is very like the false
Prophets and Teachers, testified against and condemned in the Scripture, as may
be thus briefly illustrated.

1. The Mintstry and Minister we plead for, are such as are immediately called
and sent forth by Christ and his Spirit unto the work of the Ministry, so were
the holy Apostles and Prophets, as appears by these places, Matthew. 10. verse
1.5. Ephesians. 4.11. Heb. 5.4.

1. But the Ministry and Ministers, our opposers plead for, are such as have no
immediate call from Christ, to whom the leading and motion of the Spirit is not
reckoned necessary: but who are called, sent forth, and ordained by wicked and
ungodly men, such were of old the false Prophets and Teachers, as appears by
these places, Jer. 14.14, 15. item chap. 23.21. and 27.15.

2. The Ministers we plead for, are such, as are acted and led by God's Spirit,
and by the power and operation of his Grace in their hearts, are in some
measure converted and regenerate, and so are good, holy, and gracious men, such
were the Holy Prophets and Apostles, as appears from 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.

2. But the Ministers, our adversaries plead for, are such, to whom the Grace
of God is no needful qualification, and so may be true Ministers according to
them, though they be ungodly, unholy, and proflagate men, such were the false
Propets and Apostles, as appears from Mic. 3.5.11. 1 Timothy 6.5, 6, 7, 8. etc. 2 Timothy 3.2. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.

3. The Ministers, we plead for, are such as act, move and labor in the work
of the Ministry, not from their own mere natural strength and ability, but as
they are acted, moved, under-proped, assisted, and influenced by the Spirit of
Christ, and Minister according to the Gift received, as good stewards of the
manif^ld Grace of God, such were the holy Prophets and Apostles, 1 Pet. 4.10,
11. 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.3, 4, 5, 13. Acts. 2.4. Matthew. 10.20. Mark 13.11.
Luke 12.12. 1 Cor. 13.2.

3. But the Ministers our adversaries plead for, are such as wait not for, nor
expect, nor need the Spirit of God, to act and move them in the work of the
Ministry, but what they do, they do from their own mere natural strength and
ability, and what they have gathered and stolen from the letter of the
Scripture, and other Books, and so speak it forth in the strength of their own
wisdom and eloquence, and not in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit
and power: Such were the false Prophets and Apostles, as appears, Jer. 23.30,
31, 32, 34. etc. 1 Cor. 4.18. Jude 16.

4. The Ministers we plead for, are such as being holy and humble, conend not
for precedence and priority, but rather strive to perfer one anoher, and serve
one another in love, neither desire to be distinguished from the rest by their
Garments and large Phylacteries, nor seek the greetings in the Market places,
nor uppermost Rooms at Feasts, nor the chief seats in the Synagogues, nor yet
to be called of men Master, etc. Such were the holy Prophets and Apostles, as
appears from Matthew. 23.8, 9, 10. and 20.25, 26, 27.

4. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such as strive and contend
for Superiority, and claim precedence over one another, affecting and
ambitiously seeking after the forementioned things, such were the false
Prophets and Apostles in time past, Matthew. 23.5, 6, 7.

5. The Ministers we plead for, are such as having freely received, freely
give, who covet no man's Silver, Gold or Garments, who seek no man's Goods, but
seek them, and the Salvation of their Souls, whose hands supply their own
necessities, working honestly for Bread to themselves and their Families: and
if at any time they be called of God, so as the work of the Lord hinder them
from the use of their Trades, take what is freely given them by such, to whom
they have communicated Spirituals, and having food and raiment, are therewith
content; such were the Holy Prophets and Apostles, as appears from Matthew. 10.8.
Act. 20.33, 34, 35. 1 Timothy 6.8.

5. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such as not having freely
received, will not freely give, but are covetous, doing that which they ought
not, for filthy lucres sake, as to preach for hire, and divine for money, and
look for their gain from their quarter, and prepare War against such as put not
into their mouths, etc. Greedy Dogs, which can never have enough. Shepherds who
feed themselves, and not the Flock, eating the fat, and clothing themselves
with the wool, making Merchandise of Souls, and following the way of Balaam,
that loved the wages of Unrighteousness. Such were the false Prophets and
Apostles, Isa. 56.11. Ezech. 34.2, 3, 8. Mic. 3.5, 11. Tit. 1.10, 11. 2 Pet. 2.
verses 1, 2, 3, 14.15.

And in a word, We are for a Holy, Spiritual, pure and living Ministry, where
the Ministers are both called, qualified, and ordered, acted and influenced in
all the steps of their Ministry, by the Spirit of God, which being wanting, we
judge cease to be the Ministers of Christ.

But they judging this Life, Grace and Spirit no essential part of their
Ministry, are therefore for the upholding of an humane, carnal, dry, barren,
fruitless and dead Ministry, of which (alas!) we have seen the Fruits in the
most part of their Churches, of whom that saying of the Lord is certainly
verified, Jer. 23.32. -- I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they
shall not profit this People at all, says the LORD.

The Eleventh Proposition, Concerning Worship.
All true and acceptable Worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate
moving and drawing of his own Spirit, which is neither limited to places,
times, nor persons: for, though we be to Worship him always, and that we are
continually to fear before him, yet as to the outward signification thereof in
Prayers, Praises or Preachings, we ought not to do it in our own will, where
and when we will; but where and when we are moved thereunto by the stirring and
secret Inspiration of the Spirit of God in our hearts; which God hears and
accepts of, and is never wanting to move us thereunto, when need is, of which
he himself is the alone proper Judge. All other Worship then, both Praises,
Prayers or Preachings, which man sets about in his own will and at his own
appointment, which he can both begin and end at his pleasure, do or leave
undone, as himself sees meet, whether they be a prescribed form, as a Liturgy,
etc. Or Prayers conceived extempore by the Natural strength and Faculty of the
mind, they are all but Superstitions, Will Worship, and abominable Idolatry in
the sight of God, which are now to be denied and rejected, and separated from,
in this day of his Spiritual arising, however it might have pleased him (
winked at the times of Ignorance, with a respect to the simplicity and
integrity of some, and of his own Innocent Seed, which lay as it were, buried
in the hearts of men under that mass of Superstition) to blow upon the dead and
dry bones, and to raise some breathings of his own and answer them; and that
until the day should more clearly dawn and break forth.

. I. THE Duty of man toward God lies chiefly in these two generals. 1. In an
Holy conformity to the pure Law and Light of God, so as both to forsake the
evil, and be found in the practice of these perpetual and moral precepts of
Righteousness and Equity. And 2. In rendering that Reverence, Honor and
Adoration to God, that he requires, and demands of us, which is comprehended
under Worship. Of the former we have already spoken, as also of the different
relations of Christians, as they are distinguished by the several measures of
Grace, received and given to every one, and in that respect have their several
offices in the Body of Christ, which is the Church. Now I come to speak of
Worship, or of those acts, whether private or public, general, or particular,
whereby man renders to God that part of his duty, which relates immediately to
him; and as Obedience is better than Sacrifice, so neither is any Sacrifice
acceptable, but that which is done according to the will of him to whom it is
offered. But men finding it easier to Sacrifice in their own wills, than obey
God's will, have heaped up Sacrifices without obedience, and thinking to
deceive God, as they do one another, give him a show of Reverence, Honor and
Worship, while they are both inwardly estranged and alienated from his Holy and
Righteous Life, and wholly strangers to the pure breathings of his Spirit, in
which the acceptable Sacrifice and Worship is only offered up. Hence it is,
that there is not any thing relating to man's duty toward God, which among all
sorts of People has been more vitiated, and in which the Devil has more
prevailed, than in abusing man's mind concerning this thing: and as among many
others, so among those called Christians, nothing has been more out of order,
and more corrupted, as some Papists and all Protestants do acknowledge. As I
freely approve whatsoever the Protestants have reformed from Papists in this
respect, so I meddle not at this time with their controversies about it; only
it suffices me with them to deny, as no part of the true Worship of God, that
abominable Superstition and Idolatry the Popish Mass, the Adoration of Saints
and Angels, the Veneration of Relics, the Visitation of Sepulchers, and all
these other Superstitious Ceremonies, Confraternities, and endless Pilgrimages
of the Romish Synagogue. Which all may suffice to evince to Protestants, that
Antichrist has wrought more in this, than in any other part of the Christian
Religion, and so it concerns them narrowly to consider whether herein they have
made a clear and perfect Reformation, as to which stands the controversy
betwixt them and us. For we find many of the Branches lopped off by them, but
the Root yet remaining, to wit, a Worship acted in and from man's will and
spirit, and not by and from the Spirit of God; for the true Christian and
Spiritual Worship of God has been so early lost, and man's wisdom and will
has so quickly and thoroughly mixed it self herein, that both the Apostasy in
this respect has been greatest, and the Reformation herefrom, as to the evil
root, most difficult. Therefore let not the Reader suddenly stumble at the
account of our Proposition in this matter, but here us patiently in this
respect explain our selves, and I hope (by the assistance of God) to make it
appear, that though our manner of (...) and Doctrine seem most singular and
different from all (...) of Christians, yet it is most according to the purest
Christian Religion, and indeed most needful to be observed and followed; and
that there be no ground of mistake (for that I was necessitate to speak in few
words, and therefore more obscurely and dubiously in the Proposition it self)
it is fit in the first place to explain and hold forth out sense, and clear the
state of the controversy.

. II. And first, let it be considered, that what is here affirmed is spoken of
the worship of God in Gospel times, and not of the worship, that was under or
before the Law: For the particular commands of God to men then, are not
sufficient to authorize us now to do the same things; else we might be supposed
at present acceptable to offer Sacrifice, as they did, which all acknowledge to
be ceased. So that what might have been both commendable and acceptable under
the Law, may justly now be charged with superstition, yea, and Idolatry. So
that impertinently in this respect, does Arnoldus rage, against this
Proposition [ Exercit. Theolog. sect. 44.) saying, that I deny all public
worship, and that, according to me, such as in Enoch 's time publicly began to
call upon the Name of the Lord, and such as at the command of God went twice up
to Jerusalem to worship, and that Anna, Simeon, Mary, etc. Were Idolaters,
because they used the public worship of these times. Such a consequence is
most impertinent, and no less foolish and absurd, than if I should infer from
Paul's expostulating with the Galatians for their returning to the Jewish
Ceremonies, that he therefore condemned Moses and all the Prophets as foolish
and ignorant, because they used those things: the forward man not heeding the
different dispensation of times, ran into this impertinency. Though a Spiritual
Worship might have been, and no doubt was practiced by many under the Law in
great simplicity, yet will it not follow that it were no superstition to use
all those Ceremonies that they used, which were by God dispensed to the Jews,
not as being essential to true worship, or necessary as of themselves, for
transmitting and entertaining an holy fellowship, betwixt him and his people,
but in condescension to them, who were inclinable to Idolatty: albeit then in
this, as in most other things, the substance was enjoyed under the Law by such
as were Spiritual indeed, yet was it veiled and surrounded with many Rites and
Ceremonies, which is no ways lawful for us to use now under the Gospel.

. III. Secondly, albeit I say, that this worship is neither limited to times,
places, nor persons, yet I would not be understood, as if I intended the
putting away of all set times and places to worship. God forbid I should think
of such an opinion. Nay, we are none of those, that forsake the assembly of our
selves together, but have even certain times and places, in which we carefully
meet together (nor can we be driven thereform by the threats and persecutions
of men) to wait upon God, and worship him. To meet together we think necessary
for the people of God, because, so long as we are clothed with this outward
tabernacle, there is a necessity to the entertaining of a joint and visible
fellowship, and bearing of an outward testimony for God, and seeing of the
Faces of one another, that we concur with our Persons, as well as Spirits. To
be accompanied with that inward love and unity of Spirit, does greatly tend to
encourage and refresh the Saints.

But the limitation, we condemn, is, that, whereas the Spirit of God should be
the immediate actor, moreover, perswader and influencer of man in the
particular acts of worship, when the Saints are met together, this Spirit is
limited in its operations, by setting up a particular man, or men to preach and
pray in man's will, and all the rest are excluded from so much as believing
that they are to wait for God's Spirit, to move them in such things, and so
they neglecting that, which should quicken them in themselves, and not waiting
to feel the pure breathings of God's Spirit, so as to obey them, are led merely
to depend upon the preacher, and hear what he will say.

Secondly, in that these peculiar men come not hither to meet with the Lord,
and to wait for the inward motions and operations of his Spirit, and so pray,
as they feel the Spirit to breath through them, and in them, and to preach, as
they find themselves acted and moved by God's Spirit, and as he gives
utterance, so as to speak a word in season, to refresh weary Souls, and as the
present condition and state of the peoples hearts requires, suffering God by
his Spirit both to prepare peoples hearts, and also give the preacher what may
be fit and seasonable for them. But he has hammered together in his closet,
according to his own will, by his humane wisdom and illeterature, and by
stealing the words of Truth from the letter of the Scriptures, and patching
together other men's. Writings and Observations, so much as will hold him
speaking an hour, while the Glass runs, and without waiting or feelling the
inward influence of the Spirit of God, he declaims that by hap-hazard, whether
it be fit or seasonable for the peoples condition or no; and when he has ended
his Sermon, he says his Prayer also in his own will, and so there is an end of
the business. Which customary worship, as it is no ways acceptable to God, so
how unfruitful it is and unprofitable to those, that are found in it, the
present condition of the Nations does sufficiently declare. It appears then
that we are not against set times for worship, as Arnoldus against this
Proposition, Sect. 45. No less impertinently alleges, offering needlessly to
prove that, which is not denied: only these times being appointed for outward
convenience, we may not therefore think with the Papists that these days are
holy, and lead people into a superstitious observation of them, being persuaded
that all days are alike holy in the sight of God. And albeit it be not my
present purpose to make a long digression concerning the debates among
Protestants, concerning the first day of the week, commonly called the Lords
day, yet, for as much as it comes fitly in here, I shall briefly signify our
sense thereof.

. IV. We, not seeing any ground in Scripture for it, cannot be so
superstitious, as to believe that either the Jewish Sabbath now continues, or
that the first day of the week is the anti-tipe thereof, or the true Christian
Sabbath, which with Calvin we believe to have a more Spiritual sense, and
therefore we know no moral obligation, by the fourth command or elsewhere, to
keep the first day of the week more as any other, or any holiness inherent in
it. But first, for as much as it is most necessary, that there be some time set
apart for the Saints to meet together to wait upon God. And that, secondly, it
is fit at some times they be freed from their other outward affairs.

And that thirdly, Reason and Equity does allow that Servants and Beasts have
some time allowed them, to be eased from their continual labor. And that
fourthly, it appears that the Apostles and primitive Christians, did use the
first day of the week for these purposes. We find our selves sufficiently moved
for these to do so also, without superstitiously straining the Scriptures for
another reason, which that it is not to be there found, many Protestants, yea,
Calvin himself, upon the fourth command has abundantly evinced. And though we
therefore meet, and abstain from working upon this day, yet does not that
hinder us from having meetings also for worship at other times.

. V. Thirdly, though according to the knowledge of God, revealed unto us by the
Spirit, through that more full dispensation of Light, which we believe the Lord
has brought about in this day, we judge it our duty to hold forth that Pure and
Spiritual Worship, which is acceptable to God, and answerable to the testimony
of Christ and his Apostles, and likewise to testify against, and deny not only
manifest Superstition and Idolatry, but also all formal Will Worship, which
stands not in the power of God, yet, I say, we do not deny the whole Worship of
all those, that have born the name of Christians even in the Apostasy, as if
God had never heard their prayers, nor accepted any of them. God forbid we
should be so void of Charity. The latter part of the Proposition shows the
contrary; and, as we would not be so absurd on the one hand to conclude,
because of the errors and darkness, that many were covered and surrounded with,
in Babylon, that none of their prayers were heard, or accepted of God, so will
we not be so unwary on the other, as to conclude, that because God heard and
pitied them so, we ought to continue in these errors and darkness, and not come
out of Babylon, when it is by God discovered unto us. The Popish Mass, and
Vespers, I do believe to be, as to the matter of them, abominable Idolatry and
Superstition, and so also believe the Protestants; yet will either I, or they,
affirm, that in the darkness of Popery no upright-hearted men, tho zealous in
these abominations, have been heard of God, or accepted of him? Who can deny,
but that both Bernard and Bonaventur, Thaulerus, Thomas a Kempis, and diverse
others have both known and tasted of the love of God, and felt the Power and
Virtue of God's Spirit working with them for their Salvation? And yet ought we
not to forsake and deny those Superstitions, which they were found in? the
Calvinistical Presbyterians do much upbraid) and I say, not without reason) the
formality and deadness of the Episcopalian and Lutheran Liturgies, and yet, as
they will not deny but there have been some good men among them, so neither
dare they refuse, but that, when that good step was brought in by them of
turning the public Prayers into the vulgar Tongues, tho continued in a
Liturgy, it was acceptable to God, and sometimes accompanied with his Power and
Presence: yet will not the Presbyterians have it from thence concluded, that
the Common Prayers should still continue; so likewise, tho we should confess,
that, through the mercy and wonderful condescension of God, there have been
upright in heart both among Papists and Protestants, yet can we not therefore
approve of their way in the general, or not go on to the upholding of that
Spiritual Worship, which the Lord is calling all to, and so to the testifying
against whatsoever stands in the way of it.

. VI. Fourthly, to come then to the state of the Controversy, as to the
public Worship, we judge it the duty of all, to be diligent in the assembling
of themselves together, (and what we have been, and are, in this matter, our
enemies in Great Britain, who have used all means to hinder our assembling
together to Worship God, may bear witness) and when assembled, the great work
of one and all ought to be to wait upon God; and, returning out of their own
thoughts and imaginations, to feel the Lord's presence, and know a gathering
into his Name indeed, where he is in the midst according to his promise. And as
every one is thus gathered, and so met together inwardly in their Spirits, as
well as outwardly in their Persons, there the secret Power and Virtue of Life
is known to refresh the Soul, and the pure motions and breathings of God's
Spirit are felt to arise, from which as words of Declaration, Prayers or
Praises arise, the acceptable Worship is known, which edifies the Church, and
is well-pleasing to God, and no man here limits the Spirit of God, nor brings
forth his own conned and gathered stuff, but every one puts that forth which
the Lord puts into their hearts, and it is uttered forth not in man's will and
wisdom, but in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Yea,
though there be not a word spoken, yet is the true Spiritual Worship performed,
and the body of Christ edified; yea it may and has often fallen out among us,
that diverse meetings have past without one word, and yet our Souls have been
greatly edified and refreshed, and our hearts wonderfully overcome with the
secret sense of God's Power and Spirit, which without words has been ministered
from one Vessel to another. This is indeed strange and incredible to the mere
natural and carnally-minded man, who will be apt to judge all time lost, where
there is not something spoken, that is obvious to the outward senses; and
therefore I shall insist a little upon this subject, as one that can speak from
a certain experience, and not by mere hearsay, of this Wonderful and Glorious
Dispensation, which has so much the more of the Wisdom and Glory of God in it,
as it is contrary to the Nature of man's Spirit, Will and Wisdom.

VII. As there can be nothing more opposite to the Natural will and wisdom of
man, than this silent waiting upon God; so neither can it be obtained not
rightly comprehended by man, but as he lays down his own wisdom and will, so
as to be content to be thoroughly subject to God. And therefore it was not
preached, nor can be so practiced, but by such as find no outward ceremony, no
observations, no words, yea not the best and purest words, even the words of
Scripture, able to satisfy their weary and afflicted Souls, because where all
these may be, the life, power, and virtue, which make such things effectual,
may be wanting. Such I say, were necessitate to cease from all outward, and to
be silent before the Lord, and being directed to that inward principle of Life
and Light in themselves, as the most excellent Teacher, which can never be
removed into a corner, Isa. 30. verse 20.
came thereby to be learned to wait upon God in the measure of Life and Grace
received from him, and to cease from their own forward words and actings in the
natural willing and comprehension, and feel after this inward Seed of Life,
that as it moves, they may move with it, and be acted by its power, and
influenced whether to pray, preach or sing. And so from this principle of man's
being silent, and not acting in the things of God, of himself, until thus acted
by God's Light and Grace in the heart, did naturally spring that manner of
sitting silent together, and waiting together upon the Lord. For many thus
principled, meeting together in the pure fear of the Lord, did not apply
themselves presently to speak, pray or sing, etc. being afraid to be found
acting forwardly in their own wills, but each made it their work to retire
inwardly to the measure of Grace in themselves, not being only silent as to
words, but even abstaining from all their own Thoughts, Imaginations and
Desire, so watching in a holy dependence upon the Lord, and meeting together
not only outwardly in one place, but thus inwardly in One Spirit, and in One
Name of Jesus, which is his Power and Virtue. They come thereby to enjoy and
feel the arisings of this Life, which as it prevails in each particular,
becomes as a stood of refreshment, and overspreads the whole meeting, for man
and man's part and wisdom being denied and chained down in every individual,
and God exalted, and his Grace in dominion in the heart, thus his Name comes to
be One in all, and his Glory breaks forth, and covers all, and there is such a
holy aw and reverence upon every Soul, that if the natural part should arise in
any, or the wise part, or what is not one with the Life, it would presently be
chained down and judged out. And when any are through the breaking forth of
this power constrained to utter a sentence of exhortation or praise, or to
breath to the Lord in Prayer, Prove. 27. verse 19.
then all are sensible of it, for the same Life in them answers to it, as in
water face answers to face. This is that Divine and Spiritual Worship, which
the World neither knows, nor understands, which the Vultures Eye sees not
into. Yet many and great are the advantages which my Soul with many others has
tasted of hereby, and which would be found of all such as would seriously apply
themselves hereunto. For, when People are gathered thus together, not merely to
hear men, nor depend upon them, but all are inwardly taught to stay their minds
upon the Lord, Isa. 10.20. and 26.3.
and wait for his appearance in their hearts; thereby the forward working of
the Spirit of man is stayed and hindered from mixing it self with the Worship of
God; and the form of this Worship is so naked and void of all outward and
worldly splendour, that all occasion for man's wisdom to be exercised in that
superstition and idolatry has no lodging here; and so there being also an
inward quietness and retiredness of mind, the Witness of God arises in the
heart, and the Light of Christ shines, whereby the Soul comes to see its own
condition. And there being many joined together in this same work, there is an
inward travel and wrestling, and also, as the measure of Grace is abode in, an
overcoming of the power and spirit of darkness; and thus we are often greatly
strengthened and renewed in (...) of our minds without a word, Ephesians. 4.23.
and we enjoy and possess the (...) and Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, by which our inward than is nourished and fed. Which makes us not to
dote upon outward Water and Bread and Wine, in our Spiritual things. Now as
many thus gathered together, grow up in the strength, power and virtue of
Truth, and as Truth comes thus to have victory and dominion in their Souls,
then they receive an utterance, and speak steadily to the edification of their
Brethren, and the pure Life has a free passage through them, and what is thus
spoken edifieth the body indeed. Such is the evident certainty of that Divine
strength, that is communicated by thus meeting together, and waiting in silence
upon God, that sometimes when one has come in, that has been unwatchful and
wandering in his mind, or suddenly out of the hurry of outward business, and so
not inwardly gathered with the rest, so soon as he retires himself inwardly,
this Power being in a good measure raised in the whole meeting, will suddenly
lay hold upon his Spirit, and wonderfully help to raise up the good in him, and
beget him into the sense of the same Power, to the melting and warming of his
heart, even as the warmth would take hold upon a man that is cold, coming into
a stove, or as a flame will lay hold upon some little combustible matter lying
near unto it; yea if it fall out, that several met together, be straying in
their minds, though outwardly silent, and so wandering from the measure of Grace
in themselves, (which through the working of the enemy, and negligence of some
may fall out) it either one come in, or may be in, who is watchful, and in whom
the Life is raised in a great measure, as that one keeps his place, he will
feel a secret Travel for the rest, in a sympathy with the Seed, which is
oppressed in the other, and kept from arising by their thoughts and wanderings;
and as such a faithful one waits in the Light, and keeps in this Divine work,
God oftentimes answers the secret travel and breathings of his own Seed
through such a one, so that the rest will find themselves secretly smitten
without words, and that one will be as a Midwife, through the secret travel of
his Soul, to bring forth the life in them, just as a little water thrown into a
Pump brings up the rest, whereby life will come to be raised in all, and the
vain imaginations brought down, and such a one is felt by the rest to minister
life into them without words; yea sometimes, when there is not a word in the
meeting, but all are silently waiting, if one come in, that is rude and wicked,
and in whom the power of darkness prevails much, perhaps with an intention to
mock, or do mischief, if the whole meeting be gathered into the Life, and it be
raised in a good measure, it will strike terror into such an one, and he will
feel himself unable to resist, but by the secret strength and virtue thereof
the power of darkness in him will be chained down, and if the day of his
Visitation be not expired, it will reach to the measure of Grace in him, and
raise it up to the redeeming of his Soul, and this we often bear witness of, so
as we had hereby frequent occasion in this respect, since God has gathered us
to be a People, to renew this old saying of many, Is Saul also among the
Prophets? For not a few have come to be convinced of the Truth, after this
manner, 1 Samuel 10.12.
of which I my self in a part am a true witness, who not by strength of
arguments, or by a particular disquisition of each Doctrine, and convincement
of my understanding thereby, came to receive and bear witness of the Truth, but
by being secretly reached by this Life: For when I came into the silent
Assemblies of God's People, I felt a secret power among them, which touched my
heart, and as I gave way unto it, I found the evil weakening in me, and the good
raised up, and so I became thus knit and united unto them, hungering more and
more after the increase of this Power and Life, whereby I might feel my self
perfectly redeemed: and indeed this is the surest way to become a Christian; to
whom afterward the knowledge and understanding of Principles will not be
wanting, but will grow up, so much as is needful, as the natural Fruit of this
good root, and such a knowledge will not be barren nor unfruitful after this
manner. We desire therefore all that come among us, to be prosolyted, knowing,
that though Thousands should be convinced in their understandings of all the
Truths we maintain, yet if they were not sensible of this inward Life, and
their Souls not changed from unrighteousness to righteousness, they could add
nothing to us; for this is that cement whereby we are joined as to the Lord, 1
Cor. 6.17.
so to one another, and without this none can Worship with us. Yea if such
should come among us, and from that understanding and convincement they have of
the Truth, speak ever so true things, and utter them forth with ever so much
excellency of speech, if this Life were wanting, it would not edify us at all:
but be as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. 1 Cor. 13.1.

. VIII. Our work then and worship is, when we meet together, for every one to
watch and wait upon God in themselves, and to be gathered from all visibles
thereinto. And as every one is thus stated, they come to find the good arise
over the evil, and the pure over the impure, in which God reveals himself, and
draws near to every individual, and so he in the midst in the general.
Whereby each not only partakes of the particular refreshment and strength,
which comes from the good in himself, but is a sharer of the whole body, as
being a living member of the body, having a joint fellowship and communion with
all; and as this Worship is steadfastly preached, and kept to it becomes easy,
though it be very hard at first to the natural man, whose roving imaginations,
and running worldly desires are not so easily brought to silence; and therefore
the Lord oftentimes, when any turns toward him, and have true desires thus to
wait upon him, and find great difficulty through the unstayedness of their
minds, does in condescension and compassion cause his Power to break forth in a
more strong and powerful manner; and when the mind sinks down, and waits for
the appearance of Life, and that the power of darkness in the Soul wrestles and
works against it, then the good Seed as it arises, will be found to work as
Physic in the Soul, especially if such a weak one be in the Assembly of diverse
others, in whom the Life is arisen in greater dominion, and through the
contrary workings of the power of darkness, there will be found an inward
striving in the Soul, as really in the mystery, as ever Esau and Jacob strove
in Rebeckahs Womb. And from this inward travel, while the darkness seeks to
obsure the Light, and the Light break through the darkness, (which always it
will do, if the Soul give not its strength to the darkness) there will be such
a painful travel found in the Soul, that will even work upon the outward man;
so that oftentimes through the working thereof the body will be greatly
shaken, and many groans and sighs and tears, even as the pangs of a Woman in
travel, will lay hold upon it, yea and tais not only as to one, but when the
Enemy (who when the Children of God assemble together, is not wanting to be
present, to see if he can let their comfort) has prevailed in any measure in a
whole meeting, and strongly works against it, by spreading and propagating
his dark power, and by drawing out the minds of such as are met from the Life
in them, as they come to be sensible of this power of his that works against
them, and to wrestle with it, by the Armor of Light, sometimes the power of
God will break forth into a whole meeting, and there will be such an inward
travel, while each is seeking to overcome the evil in themselves, that by the
strong contrary workings of these opposite powers, like the going of two
contrary tides, every individual will be strongly exercised as in a day of
battle; and thereby trembling, and a motion of body will be upon most, if not
upon all, wbich, as the power of Truth prevails, will from pangs and groans end
with a sweet sound of thanksgiving and praise, and from this the name of
Quakers, i. e. Tremblers, was first reproachfully cast upon us, which, though
it be none of our choosing, yet in this respect we are not ashamed of it, but
have rather reason to rejoice therefore, even that we are sensible of this
power, that has often times laid hold upon our adversaries, and made them
yield unto us, and join with us, and confess to the Truth, before they had any
distinct or discursive knowledge of our Doctrins, so that sometimes many at one
Meeting have heen thus convinced, and this Power would sometimes also teach to,
and wonderfully work even in little Children, to the admiration and
astonishment of many

. IX. Many are the blessed experiences, which I could relate of this silence
and manner of Worship, yet do I not so much commend and speak of silence, as if
we had a Law in it to shut out Praying or Preaching, or tied our selves
thereunto; not at all, for as our Worship consists not in the Words, so
neither in silence; as silence, but in an holy dependence of the mind upon God,
from which dependence silence necessarily follows in the first place, until
words can be brought forth, which are from God's Spirit; and God is not wanting
to move in his Children to bring forth words of Exhortation or Prayer, when it
is needful, so that of the many gatherings and meetings of such as are
convinced of the Truth, there is scarce any, in whom God raises not up some or
other to minister to his Brethren, that there are few meetings that are
altogether silent. For, when many are met together in this one Life and Name,
it does most naturally and frequently excite them to pray to, and praise God,
and stir up one another by mutual exhortation and instructions; yet we judge it
needful there be in the first place some times of silence, during which, every
one may be gathered inward to the Word and Gift of Grace, from which he that
ministers, may receive strength to bring forth what he ministers, and that
they that hear, may have a sense to discern betwixt the precious and the vile,
and not to hurry into the exercise of these things, so soon as the Bell rings,
as other Christians do; yea and we doubt not, but assuredly know that the
meeting may be good and refreshful, though from the sitting down to the rising
up thereof, there has not been a word as outwardly spoken; and yet Life may
have been known to abound in each particular, and an inward growing up therein,
and thereby, yea so as words might have been spoken acceptably, and from the
life: yet there being no absolute necessity laid upon any so to do, all might
have chosen rather quietly and silently to possess and enjoy the Lord in
themselves, which is very sweet and comfortable to the Soul, that has thus
learned to be gathered out of all its own thoughts and workings, to feel the
Lord to bring forth both the will and the deed, which many can declare by a
blessed experience, though indeed it cannot but be hard for the natural man to
receive or believe this Doctrine; and therefore it must be rather by a sensible
experience, and by coming to make proof of it, than by arguments that such can
be convinced of this thing, seeing it is not enough to believe it, if they come
not also to enjoy and possess it; yet in condescension to, and for the sake of
such as may be the more willing to apply themselves to the practice and
experience hereof, that they found their understandings convinced of it, and
that it is founded upon Scripture and Reason, I find a freedom of mind to add
some few considerations of this kind, for the confirmation hereof, besides what
is before mentioned of our experience.

. X. That to wait upon God, and to watch before him, is a duty incumbent upon
all, I suppose none will deny; and that this also is a part of Worship, will
not be called in question, since there is scarce any other so frequently
commanded in the Holy Scriptures, as may appear from Psalm. 27.14.37. v. 7.34.
Prove. 20.22. Isa. 30.18. Hosea 12.7, Zach. 3.8. Matthew. 24.42, 25.13.26.41.
Marc. 13.33, 35. Luc. 21.36. Act. 1.4.20.31. 1 Cor. 16.13. Col. 4.2. 1 These.
5.6. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7. Also this duty is often recommended with very
great and precious promises, as Psalm. 25.3.37.9.69.7. Isa. 40.31. Lam. 3.25.26.
They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, etc. Now, how is this
waiting upon God or watching before him, but by this silence, of which we have
spoken? Which, as it is in it self a great and principle duty, so it
necessarily in order both of nature and time proceeds all other. But, that it
may be the better and more perfectly understood, as it is not only an outward
silence of the body, but an inward silence of the mind, from all its own
imaginations and self-cogitations, let it be considered according to Truth, and
to the Principles and Doctrines heretofore affirmed and proved, that man is to
be considered in a two fold respect, to wit, in his natural, unregenerate, and
fallen state: and in his Spiritual and renewed condition, from whence arises
that distinction of the natural and spiritual man, so much used by the Apostle,
and heretofore spoken of, also these two births of the mind proceed from the
two Seeds in man respectively, to wit, the good Seed and the evil. And from the
evil Seed does not only proceed all manner of gross and abominable wickedness
and profanity, but also hypocrisy, and these wickednesses, which the Scripture
calls spiritual, because it is the Serpent working in and by the natural man in
things that are spiritual, which having a show and appearance of good, are so
much the more hurtful and dangerous, as it is Satan transformed and
transforming himself into an Angel of Light; and therefore does the Scripture
so pressingly and frequently (as we have heretofore had occasion to observe)
shut out and exclude the natural man from meddling with the things of God,
denying his endeavors therein, though acted and performed by the most eminent
of his parts, as of wisdom and utterance.

Also this spiritual wickedness is of two sorts, though both one in kind, as
proceeding from one root, yet different in their degrees, and in the subjects
also sometimes. The one is, when as the natural man is meddling in, and working
in the things of Religion, does from his own conceptions and divinations,
affirm or propose wrong and erroneous notions and opinions of God and things
spiritual, and invent superstitions, ceremonies, observations and rites in
worship, from whence have sprung all the Heresies and Superstitions, that are
among Christians. The other is, when as the natural man, from a mere conviction
of his understanding, does in the forwardness of his own will, and by his own
natural strength, without the influence and leading of God's Spirit, go about
either in his understanding to imagine, conceive, or think of the things of
God, or actually to perform them by preaching or praying. The first is a
missing both in matter and form. The second is a retaining of the form without
the Life and Substance of Christianity, because Christian Religion consists
not in a mere belief of true Doctrins, or a mere performance of Acts good in
themselves, or else the bare letter of the Scripture, though spoken by a
Drunkard or a Devil, might be said to be Spirit and Life, which I judge none
will be so absurd as to affirm: and also it would follow, that where the form
of godliness is, there the power is also, which is contrary to the express
words of the Apostle. For the form of godliness cannot be said to be, where
either the notions and opinions believed are erroneous and ungodly, or the acts
performed evil and wicked, for then it would be the form of ungodliness, and
not of godliness. But of this further hereafter, when we shall speak
particularly of preaching and praying. Now, though this last be not so bad as
the former, yet it has made way for it; for men having first departed from the
Life and Substance of true Religion and Worship, to wit, from the inward Power
and Virtue of the Spirit, so as therein to act, and thereby to have all their
actions enlivened, have only retained the form and show, to wit, the true words
and appearance, and so acting in their own natural and unrenewed wills in this
form; the form could not but quickly decay and be vitiated, for the working and
active spirit of man could not contain it self within the simplicity and
plainness of Truth, but giving way to his own numerous inventions and
imaginations, began to vary in the form, and adapt it to his own inventions,
until by degrees, the form of godliness, for the most part, came to be lost, as
well as the power. For this kind of Idolatry, whereby man loves, idolizeth and
huggeth his own conceptions, inventions, and product of his own brain, is so
incident unto him, and seated in his fallen nature, that, so long as his natural
Spirit is the first author and actor of him, and is that, by which he only is
guided and moved in his worship toward God, so as not first to wait for
another Guide to direct him, he can never perform the pure Spiritual Worship,
nor bring forth any thing but the Fruit of the first, fallen, natural, and
corrupt root. Wherefore the time appointed of God being come, wherein by Jesus
Christ he has been pleased to restore the true Spiritual Worship, and the
outward form of Worship, which was appointed by God to the Jews, and whereof
the manner and time of its performance was particularly determined by God
himself, being come to an end, we find that Jesus Christ, the Author of the
Christian Religion, prescribes no set form of Worship to his Children, under
the more pure administration of the New Covenant; If any object here, that the
Lord's Prayer is a prescribed form of Prayer, Obj.
and therefore of Worship, given by Christ to his Children.

I answer, first, This cannot be objected by any sort of Christians that I
know, Answ.
because there are none who use not other Prayers, or that limits their Worship
to this. Secondly, this was commanded to the Disciples while yet weak, before
they had received the dispensation of the Gospel, not that they should only use
it in praying, but that he might show them by one example, how that their
Prayers ought to be short, and not like the long Prayers of the Pharisees; and
that this was the use of it, appears by all the Prayers, which diverse Saints
afterward made use of, whereof the Scripture makes mention, for none made use
of this, neither repeated it, but used other words, according as the thing
required, and as the Spirit gave utterance. Thirdly, that this ought so to be
understood, appears from Romans 8.26. of which afterward mention shall be made
at greater length, where the Apostle says, We know not what we should pray for
as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, etc. But if
this Prayer had been such a prescribed form of Prayer to the Church, that had
not been true, neither had they been ignorant what to pray, nor should they
have needed the help of the Spirit to teach them.


save that he only tells them, that the Worship now to be performed is
Spiritual, and in the Spirit; and it is especially to be observed, that in the
whole New Testament there is no order, nor command given in this thing, but to
follow the Revelation of the Spirit, save only that general, of meeting
together; a thing dearly owned and diligently practiced by us, as shall
hereafter more appear. True it is, mention is made of the duties of Praying,
Preaching, and Singing, but what order or method should be kept in so doing, or
that presently they should be set about so soon as the Saints are gathered,
there is not one word to be found, yea these duties (as shall afterward be
made appear) are always annexed to the assistance, leadings, and motions of
God's Spirit. Since then, man in his natural state is thus excluded from acting
or moving in things Spiritual, how or what way shall he exercise this first and
previous duty of waiting upon God, but by silence, and by bringing that natural
part to silence? Which is no otherways, but by abstaining from his own
Thoughts and Imaginations, and from all the self-workings and motions of his
own mind, as well in things materially good, as evil, that he being silent, God
may speak in him, and the Good Seed may arise. This, though hard to the natural
man, is so answerable to Reason and even natural experience in other things,
that it cannot be denied. He, that comes to learn of a master, if he expect to
hear his master, and be instructed by him, must not continually be speaking of
the matter to be taught, and never be quiet, otherwise how shall his master
have time to instruct him? yea though the scholar were never so earnest to
learn the science, yet would the master have reason to reprove him, as untoward
and indocile, if he would always be meddling of himself, and still speaking,
and not wait in silence patiently to hear his master instructing and teaching
him, who ought not to open a mouth, until by his master he were commanded and
allowed so to do. So also, if one were about to attend a great Prince, he would
be thought an impertinent and imprudent servant, who, while he ought patiently
and readily to wait, that he might answer the King when he speaks, and have his
Eye upon him to observe the least motions and inclinations of his will, and to
do accordingly, would be still deafening him with discourse, though it were in
praises of him, and running to and fro, without any particular and immediate
order to do things, that perhaps might be good in themselves, or might have
been commanded at other times to others. Would the Kings of the Earth accept of
such servants, or service? Since then, we are commanded to wait upon God
diligently, and in so doing it is promised, that our strength shall be renewed,
this waiting cannot be performed but by silence, or cessation of the natural
part on our side, since God manifests himself not to the outward man or senses
so much as to the inward, to wit, to the Soul and Spirit, if the Soul be still
thinking and working in her own will, and busily exercised in her own
imaginations, though the matters, as in themselves, may be good concerning God,
yet thereby she incapacitates her self from discerning the still and small
voice of the Spirit, and so hurts her self greatly, in that she neglects her
chief business of waiting upon the Lord; nothing less than if I should busy my
self crying out and speaking of a business, while in the mean time I neglect to
hear one, who is quietly whispering into my ear, and informing me in these
things, which are most needful for me to hear and know concerning that
business. And since it is the chief work of a Christian to know the natural
will, in its own proper motions, crucified, that God may both move in the act
and in the will, the Lord chiefly regards this profound Subjection and
Self-denial. For some men please themselves as much, and gratify their own
sinful wills and humors in high and curious speculations of Religion, affecting
a name and reputation that way, or because those things by Custom, or
otherways, are become pleasant and habitual to them, though not a whit more
regenerated, or inwardly Sanctified in their Spirits, as others gratify their
Lusts in actions of Sensuality; and therefore both are alike hurtful to men,
and sinful in the sight of God, it being nothing but the mere fruit and effect
of man's natural and unrenewed will and spirit. Yea should one (as many no
doubt do) from a sense of sin, and fear of punishment, seek to terrify
themselves from sin, by multiplying Thoughts of Death, Hell and Judgment, and
by presenting to their Imaginations the Happyness and Joys of Heaven, and also,
by multiplying Prayer and other Religious Performances, as these things could
never deliver him from one Iniquity without the secret and inward Power of
God's Spirit and Grace, so would they signify no more, than the Fig Leaves,
wherewith Adam thought to cover his nakedness; and seeing it is only the
product of man's own natural will, proceeding from a self-love, and seeking to
save himself, and not arising purely from that Divine Seed of Righteousness,
which is given of God to all for Grace and Salvation, it is rejected of God,
and no ways acceptable unto him, since the natural man, as natural, while he
stands in that state, is with all his arts, parts, and actings reprobated by
him. This great duty then of waiting upon God must needs be exercised in man's
denying self* both inwardly and outwardly in a still and mere dependence upon
God, in abstracting from all the Workings, Imaginations, and Speculations of
his own mind, that being emptyed as it were of himself, and so thoroughly
crucified to the natural products thereof, he may be fit to receive the Lord,
who will have no Co-partner nor Co-rival of his Glory and Power. And man being
thus stated, the little Seed of Righteousness, which God has planted in his
Soul, and Christ has purchased for him, even the measure of Grace and Life,
(which is burdened and crucified by man's natural Thoughts and Imaginations)
receives a place to arise, and becomes a holy Birth, and geniture in man, and
is that Divine Air, in and by which man's Soul and Spirit comes to be leavened.
And by waiting therein he comes to be accepted in the sight of God, to stand in
his presence, hear his voice, and observe the motions of his Holy Spirit. And
so man's place is to wait in this; and as hereby there are any objects
presented to his mind concerning God or things relating to Religion, his Soul
may be exercised in them without hurt, and to the great profit both of himself
and others, because those things have their rise not from his own will, but
from God's Spirit. And therefore, as in the arisings and movings of this, his
mind is still to be exercised in thinking and meditating, so also in the more
obvious acts of Preaching and Praying. And so it may hence appear, we are not
against Meditation, as some have sought falsely to infer from our Doctrine; but
we are against the Thoughts and Imaginations of the natural man in his own
will, from which all Errors and Heresies concerning the Christian Religion, in
the whole World, have proceeded. But if it please God at any time, when one or
more are waiting upon him, not to present such objects, as gives them occasion
to exercise their minds in Thoughts and Imaginations, but purely to keep them
in this Holy dependence, and as they persist therein, to cause his secret
refreshment and the pure incomes of his Holy Life, to flow in upon them, then
they have good reason to be content, because by this (as we know by good and
blessed experience) the Soul is more strengthened, renewed, and confirmed in
the Love of God, and armed against the power of sin, than any way else: this
being a fore-tast of that real and sensible enjoyment of God, which the Saints
in Heaven daily possess, which God frequently affords to his Children here, for
their comfort and encouragement, especially when they are assembled together to
wait upon him.

XI. For there are two contrary Powers or Spirits, to wit, the Power and Spirit
of this World, in which the Prince of Darkness bears rule, and over as many as
are acted by it and work from it, and the Power or Spirit of God, in which God
works and bears rule, and over as many as act in and from it. So whatever
be the things, that a man thinks of, or acts in, however Spiritual or
Religious, as to the Notion or form of them, so long as he acts and moves in
the natural and corrupt Spirit, and Will, and not from, in, and by the Power of
God, he sins in all, and is not accepted of God. For hence both the
ploughing, and praying of the Wicked is sin: as also, whatever a man acts in
and from the Spirit and Power of God, having his understanding and will
influenced and moved by it, whether it be Actions Religious, Civil, or even
Natural, he is accepted in so doing in the sight of God, and is blessed in
them. From what is said it does appear, how frivolous and impertinent their
objection is, that say, they wait upon God in praying and preaching, since
waiting does of it self imply a passive dependence rather, than an acting; and
since it is and shall yet be more shown, that Preaching and Praying without the
Spirit is an offending of God, not a waiting upon him, and that Praying and
Preaching by the Spirit presupposes necessarily a silent waiting, for to feel
the motions and influence of the Spirit to lead thereunto. And lastly, that in
several of these places, where praying is commanded, as Matthew. 26.41. Mark
13.33. Luke 21.36. 1 Pet. 4.7. watching is specially prefixed, as a previous
preparation thereunto. So that we do well and certainly conclude, that, since
waiting and watching is so particularly commanded and recommended, and this
cannot be truly performed, but in this inward silence of the mind from men's
own Thoughts and Imaginations, this silence is, and must necessarily be, a
special and principal part of God's Worship.

XII. But Secondly, The excellency of this silent waiting upon God does appear,
in that it is impossible for the Enemy, viz. the Devil, to counterfeit it, so
as for any Soul to be deceived or deluded by him in the exercise thereof. Now,
in all other matters he may mix himself in with the natural mind of man, and
so, by transforming himself, he may deceive the Soul, by busying it about
things perhaps innocent in themselves, while yet he keeps them from beholding
the Pure Light of Christ, and so from knowing distinctly his duty, and doing of
it. For that envious Spirit of man's Eternal Happyness knows well, how to
accomodate himself, and fit his snares for all the several dispositions and
inclinations of men; if he find one not fit to be engaged with gross Sins or
Worldly Lusts, but rather averse from them, and Religiously inclined, he can
fit himself to beguile such an one, by suffering his Thoughts and Imaginations
to run upon Spiritual matters, and so hurry them to work, act, and meditate in
their own wills: for he well knows, that so long as self bears rule, and the
Spirit of God is not the principal and chief Actor, man is not put out of his
reach, so therefore he can accompany the Priest to the Altar, the Preacher to
the Pulpit, the Zealot to his Prayers, yea the Doctor and Professor of Divinity
to his Study, and there he can cheerfully suffer him to labor and work among
his Books, yea and help him to find out and invent subtle distinctions and
quiddities, by which both his mind, and others through him, may be kept from
heeding God's Light in the Conscience, and waiting upon him. There is not any
exercise whatsoever, wherein he cannot enter and have a chief place, so as the
Soul many times cannot discern it, except in this alone; for he can only work
in and by the natural man, and his Faculties, by secretly acting upon his
Imaginations and desires, etc. And therefore, when he, to wit, the natural man
is silent, there he must also stand. And therefore, when the Soul comes to this
silence, and as it were, is brought to nothingness, as to her own workings,
then the Devil is shut out, for the Pure Presence of God, and shining of his
Light he cannot abide, because so long as a man is thinking and meditating as
of himself, he cannot be sure, but the devil is influencing him therein, but
when he comes wholly to be silent, as the Pure Light of God shines in upon him,
then he is sure that the Devil is shut out, for beyond the imaginations he
cannot go, which we often find by sensible experience. For he that of old is
said to have come to the gathering together of the Children of God, is not
wanting to come to our Assemblies, and indeed he can well enter and work in a
meeting that is silent only as to words, either by keeping the minds in various
thoughts and imaginations, or by stupifying them, so as to overwhelm them with
a spirit of heavynses and sloathfulness; but, when we retire out of all and are
returned in, both by being diligent and watchful upon the one hand, and also
silent and retired out of all our thoughts upon the other, as we abide in this
sure place, we feel our selves out of his reach: yea oftentimes the Power and
Glory of God will break forth and appear, just as the bright Sun through many
Clouds and Mists, to the dispelling of that Power of Darkness, which will also
be sensibly felt seeking to cloud and darken the mind, and wholly to keep it
from purely waiting upon God.

. XIII. Thirdly, The excellency of this Worship does appear, in that it can
neither be stopped, nor interrupted by the malice of Men or Devils, as all
other can. Now interruptions and stoppings of Worship may be understood in a
twofold respect, either as we are hindered from meeting, as being outwardly by
violence separated one from another; or, when permitted to meet together, as we
are interrupted by the Tumult, Noise and Confusion, which such as are malicious
may use, to molest or distract us. Now in both these respects this Worship does
greatly overpass all others; for how far soever People be separate or hindered
from coming together, yet as every one is inwardly gathered to the measure of
Life in himself, there is a secret, unity and fellowship enjoyed, which the
Devil and all his Instruments can never break or hinder. But Secondly, it does
as well appear, as to these molestations which occur, when we are met together,
what advantage this True and Spiritual Worship gives us beyond all others,
seeing in despite of a thousand interruptions and abuses, one of which were
sufficient to have stopped all other sorts of Christians, we have been able
through the Nature of this Worship, to keep it uninterrupted as to God, and
also at the same time to show forth an example of our Christian Patience
toward all, even oftentimes to the reaching and convincing of our opposers;
for there is no sort of Worship used by others, which can subsist, (though they
be permitted to meet) unless they be either authorized and protected by the
Magistrate, or defend themselves with the Arm of Flesh; but we at the same time
exercise Worship toward God, and also patiently bear the reproaches and
ignominies, which Christ Prophesied should be so incident and frequent to
Christians; for how can the Papists say their Mass, if there be any there to
disturb and interrupt them? Do but take away the Mass Book, the Calice, the
Host, or the Priest's Garments; yea do but spill the Water, or the Wine, or
blow out the Candles (a thing quickly done) and the whole business is marred,
and no Sacrifice can be offered. Take from the Lutherans or Episcopalians their
Liturgy, or Common Prayer Book, and no service can be said. Remove from the
Calvinists, Arminians, Socinians, Independants or Anabaptists, the Pulpit, the
Bible, and the Hourglass, or make but such a noise as the Voice of the
Preacher cannot be heard, or disturb him but so before he come, or strip him of
his Bible and his Books, and he must be dumb: for they all think it an Heresy
to wait to speak as the Spirit of God gives utterance; and thus easily their
whole Worship may be marred. But when People meet together, and their Worship
consists not in such outward acts, and they depend not upon any ones
speaking, but merely sit down to wait upon God, and to be gathered out of all
visibles, and to feel the Lord in Spirit, none of these things can hinder them;
of which we may say of a truth, we are sensible witnesses; for when the
Magistrates, stirred up by the malice and envy of our opposers, have used all
means possible, and yet in vain, to deter us from meeting together, and that
openly and publicly in our own hired Houses for that purpose; both Death,
Banishments, Imprisonments, Finings, Beatings, Whippings, and other such
Devilish Inventions have proved ineffectual to terrify us from our Holy
A^^^blies, I say, and we having thus oftentimes purchased our Liberty to meet
by deep sufferings, our opposers have then taken another way, by turning in
upon us the worst and wickedest People, yea the very off scourings of men, who
by all manner of inhumane, beastly, and brutish behavior have sought to
provoke us, weary us, and molest us* but in vain. It would be almost incredible
to declare, and indeed a shame, that among many men pretending to be
Christians, it should be mentioned, what things of this kind men's eyes have
seen, and I my self, with others, have shared of in suffering, there they have
often beaten us, and cast water and dirt upon us; there they have danced,
leaped, sung, and spoken all manner of profane and ungodly words, offered
violence, and shameful behavior to grave Woman and Virgins; jeared, mocked,
and scoffed, asking us, If the Spirit was not yet come, and much more, which
were tedious here to relate; and all this, while we have been seriously and
silently sitting together, and waiting upon the Lord, so that by these things
our inward and spiritual Fellowship with God and one another, in the pure life
of Righteousness has not been hindered. But on the contrary, the Lord knowing
our sufferings and reproaches for his Testimonies sake, has caused his Power
and Glory more to abound among us, and has mightily refreshed us by the sense
of his love, which has filled our Souls, and so much the rather as we found
our selves gathered into the Name of the Lord, Prove. 18.10.
which is the strong Tower of the Righteous, whereby we felt our selves
sheltered from receiving any inward hurt through their malice; and also that he
had delivered us from that vain name and profession of Christianity, under
which our opposers were not ashamed to bring forth these bitter and cursed
Fruits; yea sometimes in the midst of this tumult and opposition God would
powerfully move some or other of us by his Spirit, both to testify of that
joy, which notwithstanding their malice we enjoyed, and powerfully so declare
in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit against their folly and
wickedness, so as the power of Truth has brought them to some measure of
quietness and stillness, and stopped the impetuous streams of their fury and
madness: that as ever of old Moses by his Rod divided the Waves of the Red Sea,
that the Israelites might pass, so God has thus by his Spirit made a way for
us in the midst of this raging wickedness, peaceably to enjoy and possess him,
and accomplish our Worship to him. So that sometimes upon such occasions
several of our opposers and interrupters, have hereby been convinced (...)
Truth, and gathered from being Persecutors to be Sufferers with (...) let it
not be forgotten, but let it be inscribed and abide for a constant remembrance
of the thing, that in these beastly and brutish pranks, used to molest us in
our Spiritual meetings, none have been more busy, than the Young Students of
the Universities, who were learning Philosophy and Divinity so called, and many
of them preparing themselves for the Ministry. Should we commit to writing all
the abominations committed in this respect by the young fry of the Clergy, it
would make no small Volumn, as the Churches of Christ, gathered into his Pure
Worship in Oxford and Cambridge in England, and Edinburgh, and Aberdeen in
Scotland, where the Universities are, can well bear witness.

. XIV. Moreover, in this we know, that we are partakers of the New Covenant's
Dispensation, and Disciples of Christ indeed, sharing with him of that
Spiritual Worship, which is performed in the Spirit and in Truth, because as he
was, so are we in this world. For the Old Covenant Worship had an outward
Glory, Temple, and Ceremonies, and was full of outward Splendour and Majesty,
having an outward Tabernacle and Altar, beautified with Gold, Silver and
Precious Stones, and their Sacrifices were tied to an outward particular place,
even the outward Mount Zion, and those that prayed, behoved to pray with their
Faces toward that outward Temple, and therefore all this behoved to be
protected by an outward arm, nor could the Jews peaceably have enjoyed it, but
when they were secured from the violence of their outward Enemies, and
therefore when at any time their Enemies prevailed over them, their Glory was
darkened, and their Sacrifices stopped, and the Face of their Worship marred;
hence they complain, lament, and bewail the destroying of the Temple, as a loss
irreparable. But Jesus Christ the Author and Institutor of the New Covenant
Worship, testifies, that God is neither to be worshipped in this nor that
place, but in the Spirit and in Truth; and forasmuch as his Kingdom is not of
this World, John 18.36.
neither does his Worship consist in it, or need either the Wisdom, Glory,
Riches or Splendour of this world, to beautify or adorn it, nor yet the outward
power or arm of flesh to maintain, uphold or protect it; but it is and may be
performed by those that are spiritually minded, notwithstanding all opposition,
violence, and malice of men; because it being purely Spiritual, it is out of
the reach of natural men to interrupt or molest it; even as Jesus Christ the
Author thereof, did enjoy and possess his Spiritual Kingdom, while oppressed,
persecuted, and rejected of men, and as, in despite of the malice and rage of
the devil, he spoiled principalities and powers, triumphing over them, and,
through death, destroyed him, that had the power of death, that is, the devil;
Col. 2.15.
so also all his followers both can and do worship him, not only without the
arm of Flesh to protect them, but even when oppressed. For their worship, being
spiritual, is by the power of the Spirit defended and maintained: but such
worships as are carnal and consist in carnal and outward ceremonies and
observations, need a carnal and outward arm to protect them, and defend them,
else they cannot stand and subsist. And therefore it appears, that the several
worships of our opposers, both Papists and Protestants are of this kind, and
not the true Spiritual and New Covenant worship of Christ, because, as has
been observed, they cannot stand without the protection or countenance of the
outward Magistrate, neither can be performed, if there be the least opposition:
for they are not in the patience of Jesus, to serve and worship him with
sufferings, ignomies, calumnies, and reproaches: And from hence have sprung all
those wars, fightings, and bloodshed among Christians, while each by the arm of
Flesh endeavored to defend and protect their own way and worship; and from
this also sprung up that monstrous opinion of persecution, of which we shall
speak more at length hereafter.

. XV. But Fourthly, The nature of this Worship, which is performed by the
Operation of the Spirit, the natural man being silent, does appear from these
words of Christ, John 4.23, 24. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true
Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: For the Father
seeks such to Worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must
Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. This Testimony is the more specially to be
observed, for that it is both the first, chiefest, and most ample testimony
which Christ gives us, of his Christian Worship, as different and
contradistinguished from that under the Law. For First, he shows that the
season is now come, wherein the Worship must be in Spirit and in Truth, For the
Father seeks such to Worship him: so then it is no more a Worship consisting
in outward observations, to be performed by man at set times or opportunities,
which he can do in his own will, and by his own natural strength, for else it
would not differ in matter, but only in some circumstances, from that under the
Law. Next, as for a reason of this Worship, we need not to give any other, and
indeed none can give a better than that which Christ gives, which I think
should be sufficient to satisfy every Christian, to wit, GOD is a SPIRIT, and
they that Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. As this ought
to be received, because it is the words of Christ, so also it is founded upon
so clear a demonstration of Reason, as sufficiently evidenceth its verity. For
Christ excellently argues from the analogy, that ought to be betwixt the Object
and the Worship directed thereunto:

God is a Spirit*

Therefore he must be Worshipped in Spirit.

This is so certain that it can suffer no contradiction, Arg.
yea and this analogy is so necessary to be minded, that under the Law, when
God instituted and appointed that Ceremonial Worship to the Jews, because that
Worship was outward, that there might be an analogy, he saw it necessary to
condescend to them, as in a special manner, to dwell betwixt the Cherubims
within the Tabernacle, and afterward to make the Temple of Jerusalem in a sort
his habitation, and cause something of an outward Glory and Majesty to appear,
by causing Fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices, and filling the Temple
with a Cloud* through and by which mediums, visible to the outward Eye, he
manifested himself proportionably to that outward Worship, which he had
commanded them to perform. So now under the New Covenant, he seeing meet in his
Wisdom to lead his Children in a path more Heavenly and Spiritual, and in a way
both more easy and familiar, and also purposing to disappoint carnal and
outward observations, that his may have an Eye more to an inward Glory and
Kingdom, than to an outward, he has given us for an example hereof, the
appearance of his Beloved Son the Lord Jesus Christ, who (instead that Moses
delivered the Israelites out of their outward Bondage, and by outwardly
destroying their Enemies) has delivered and does deliver us by suffering, and
dying by the hands of his Enemies, thereby Triumphing over the Devil, and his,
and our inward Enemies, and delivering us therefrom: he has also instituted an
Inward and Spiritual Worship, so that God now tieth not his People to the
Temple of Jerusalem, nor yet unto outward Ceremonies and Observations, but
takes the heart of every Christian for a Temple to dwell in, and there
immediately appears, and gives him directions how to serve him in any
outward acts. Since, as Christ argues, God is a Spirit, he will now be
worshipped in the Spirit, where he reveals himself, and dwells with the
contrite in heart: Now, since it is the heart of man that now is become the
Temple of God, in which he will be worshipped, and no more in particular
outward Temples, (since as Blessed Stephen said, out of the Prophet, to the
Professing Jews of old, the Most High dwells not in Temples made with hands)
as before the Glory of the Lord descended to fill the outward Temple, it
behoved to be purified and cleansed, Acts 7.48.
and all polluted stuff removed out of it, yea and the place for the Tabernacle
was overlaid with Gold, the most precious, clean, and clearest of all metals;
so also before God be worshipped in the inward Temple of the heart, it must
also be purged of its own filth, and all its own thoughts and imaginations,
that so it may be fit to receive the Spirit of God, and to be acted by it, and
does not this directly lead us to that inward silence, of which we have spoken
and exactly pointed out? And further, This Worship must be in Truth;
intimating, that this Spiritual Worship thus acted, is only and properly a true
Worship, as being that, which for the reasons above observed, can not be
counterfeited by the Enemy, nor yet performed by the Hypocrite.

. XVI. And though this Worship be indeed very different from the diverse
established invented Worships among Christians, and therefore may seem strange
to many, yet has it been testified of, commended, and practiced by the most
Pious of all sorts, in all ages, by many evident Testimonies might be proved,
so that from the professing and practicing thereof the name of Mysticks has
arisen, as of a certain Sect generally commended by all* whose Writings are
full both of the explanation and of the commendation of this sort of worship,
where they plentifully assert this inward introversion, and abstraction of the
mind, as they call it, from all Images and Thoughts, and the prayer of the
will, yea they look upon this as the height of Christian perfection, so that
some of them, though professed Papists, do not doubt to affirm, that such as
have attained this method of Worship, or are aiming at it, (as in a Book,
called Sancta Sophia, put out by the English Benedictines, Printed at Doway,
anno 1657. Tract. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 5.) Need not, nor ought to trouble or busy
themselves with frequent and unnecessary Confessions, with exercising corporal
labors and austerities, the using of Vocal Voluntary Prayers, the hearing of a
number of Masses, or set Devotions, or exercises to Saints, or Prayers for the
Dead, or having solicitous and distracting cares to gain Indulgences, by going
to such and such Churches, or adjoining ones self to confraternities, or
intangling ones self with Vows and Promises, because such kind of things hinder
the Soul from observing the Operations of the Divine Spirit in it, and from
having liberty to follow the Spirit, whether it would draw her. And yet who
knows not, but that in such kind of observations the very substance of the
Popish Religion consists? Yet nevertheless it appears by this and many other
passages, which out of their Mystik writers might be mentioned, how they look
upon this Worship as excelling all other, and that such as arrived hereunto had
no absolute need of the others; yea (see the Life of Balthazar Alvares, in the
same Sancta Sophia, Tract. 3. Sect. 1. cap. 7.) such as tasted of this, quickly
confessed that the other Forms and Ceremonies of Worship were useless as to
them, neither did they perform them as things necessary, but merely for order
or examples sake; and therefore though some of them were so overclouded with
the common darkness of their profession, yet could they affirm, that this
Spiritual Worship was still to be retained and sought for, though there be a
necessity of omitting their outward Ceremonies. Hence Bernard, as in many other
places, so in his Epistle to one William, Abot of the same order, says, Take
heed to the Rule of God, the Kingdom of God is within you: and afterward,
saying that rheir outward orders and rules should be observed, he adds, But
otherwise when it shall happen, that none of these two must be omitted in such
a case, these are much rather to be omitted, than those former; for by how much
the Spirit is more excellent and noble than the Body, by so much are Spiritual
exercises more profitable than corporal. Is not that then the best of Worships,
which the best of men in all ages and of all sects have commended, and which is
most suitable to the Doctrine of Christ, I say, is not that Worship to be
followed and performed? And so much the rather as God has raised a People to
testify for it, and preach it to their great refreshment and strengthening, in
the very face of the World, and notwithstanding much opposition, who do not as
these Mystiks, make of it a mystery only to be attained by a few men or women
in a Cloister, or, as their mistake was, after wearying themselves with many
outward Ceremonies and Observations, as if it were the consequences of such a
labor. But who in the free love of God (who respects not Persons, and was near
to hear and reveal himself as well to Cornelius a Centurion and a Roman, as to
Simeon and Anna, and who discovered his Glory to Mary a poor Handmaid, and to
the poor Shepherds, rather than to the High Priests and Devout Proselytes among
the Jews) in and according to his free love finding that God is revealing and
establishing this Worship, and making many poor Tradesmen, yea young boys and
girls, witnesses of it, do entreat and beseech all to lay aside their own
Will-worships, and voluntary acts performed in their own wills, and by their
own mere natural strength and power, without retiring out of their own vain
imaginations and thoughts, or feeling the pure Spirit of God to move and stir
in them, that they may come to practice this acceptable worship, which is in
Spirit and in Truth. But against this worship they object.

. XVII. First, It seems to be an unprofitable exercise, Obj.
for a man to be doing or thinking nothing, and that one might be much better
employed, either in meditating upon some good subject, or otherwise praying to
or praising God.

I answer, That is not unprofitable, which is of absolute necessity, before any
other duty can be acceptably performed, Answ.
as we have shown this waiting to be. Moreover, those have but a carnal and
gross apprehension of God, and of the things of his Kingdom, that imagine that
men please him by their own workings and actings, whereas, as has been shown,
the first step for a man to fear God, is to cease from his own thoughts and
imaginations, and suffer God's Spirit to work in him: Isa. 1.16, 17.
for we must cease to do evil, ere we learn to do well; and this meddling in
things Spiritual by man's own natural understanding is one of the greatest and
most dangerous evils, that man is incident to, being that, which occasioned our
first Parents fall, to wit, a forwardness to desire to know things, and a
meddling with them, both without and contrary to the Lord's command.

Obj.
Secondly, some object, if your worship merely consist in inwardly retiring to
the Lord, and feeling of his Spirit arise in you, and then to do outward acts,
as ye are led by it, what need ye have public meetings at set times and
places, since every one may enjoy this at home? or should not every one stay at
home, until they be particularly moved to go to such a place at such a time;
since to meet at set times and places seems to be an outward observation and
ceremony contrary to what ye at other times assert?

Answ.
I answer first, To meet at set times and places is not any religious act, or
part of worship, in it self, but only an outward convenience, necessary for our
seeing one another, so long as we are clothed with this outward Tabernacle;
and therefore our meeting at set times and places is not a part of our worshsp,
but a preparatory accommodation of our outward man, in order to a public
visible worship, since we set not about the visible acts of worship, when we
meet together, until we be led thereunto. Secondly, God has seen meet, so long
as his Children are in this world, to make use of the outward senses, as a
means to convey Spiritual Life, as by speaking, praying, etc. which cannot be
done to mutual edification, but when we hear and see one another, but also for
to entertain an outward visible testimony for his Name in the world: he causes
the inward Life (which is also many times not conveyed by the outward senses)
the more to abound, when his Children assemble themselves diligently together
to wait upon him; that, as Iron sharpeneth Iron, so the seeing of the face one
of another, Prove. ^7^1^
when both are inwardly gathered unto the Life, gives occasion for the Life
secretly to arise, and pass from vessel to vessel; and as many Candles lighted
and put in one place do greatly augment the light, and makes it more to shine
forth; so when many are gathered together into the same Life, there is more of
the Glory of God, and his Power appears to the refreshment of each individual,
for that he partakes not only of the Light and Life, raised in himself, but in
all the rest; and therefore Christ has particularly promised a blessing to
such as assemble together in his Name, seeing he will be in the midst of them,
Matthew. 18.20. And the Author to the Hebrews does precisely prohibit the neglect
of this duty, as being of very dangerous and dreadful consequence, in these
words, Heb^ 10.24. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to
good works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is, -- For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge
of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. And therefore the
Lord has shown, that he has a particular respect to such as thus assemble
themselves together, because that thereby a public testimony for him is upheld
in the earth, and his Name is thereby glorified; and therefore such as are
right in their Spirits, are naturally drawn to keep the Meetings of God's
People, and never want a Spiritual influence to lead them thereunto. And if any
do it in a mere customary way, they will no doubt suffer condemnation for it.
Yet cannot the appointing of places and times, be accounted a ceremony and
observation, done in man's will in the worship of God, seeing none can say it
is an act of worship, but only a mere presenting of our persons in order to it,
as is abovesaid, Which that it was practiced by the primitive Church and Saints
all our adverlaries do acknowledge.

Lastly* some object, Obj.
That this manner of Worship in silence is not to be found in all the Scripture.

I answer, We make not silence to be the sole matter of our Worship, Answ.
since as I have abovesaid, there are many Meetings, which are seldom, if ever,
altogether silent, some or other are still moved, either to preach, pray, and
praise, and so, in this, our Meetings cannot be but like the Meetings of the
primitive Churches recorded in Scripture, since our adversaries confess that
they did preach and pray by the Spirit. And then, what absurdity is it to
suppose that at sometimes the Spirit did not move them to these outward acts,
and that then they were silent, since we may well conclude, they did not speak
until they were moved, and so no doubt had sometimes silence, Acts 2.1. Before
the Spirit came upon them, it is said, -- They were all with one accord in one
place: and then it is said, the Spirit suddenly came upon them: but no mention
is made of any one speaking at that time, and I would willingly know, what
absurdity our adversaries can infer, should we conclude they were a while
silent.

Inst.
But if it be urged, that a whole silent meeting cannot be found in Scripture.

I answer, supposing such a thing were not recorded, it will not therefore
follow that it is not lawful, Answ.
seeing it naturally follows from other Scripture precepts, as we have proved
this does, for seeing the Scripture commands to meet together, and, when met,
the Scripture prohibits prayers or preachings, but as the Spirit moves
thereunto: if People met together, and the Spirit move not to such acts, it
will necessarily follow, that they must be silent. But further, there might
have been many such things among the Saints of old, though not recorded in
Scripture, and yet we have enough in Scripture, signifying that such things
were. For Job sat silent seven days with his Friends together; Job 2.13.
here was a long silent meeting. See also Ezra c. 9.4. and Ezekiel c. 1.14. and
20.1. Thus having shown the excellency of this Worship, proving it from
Scripture and Reason, and answered the objections, which are commonly made
against it, which, though it may suffice to the explanation and probation of
our Proposition, yet I shall add something more particularly of Preaching,
Praying, and Singing, and so proceed to the following Proposition.

. XVIII. Preaching, as it is used both among Papists and Protestants, is for one
man to take some place or verse of Scripture, and thereon speak for an hour or
two, what he has studied and premiditated in his Closet, and gathered together
from his own inventions, or from the writings and observations of others, and
then having got it by heart, as a school boy does his lesson, he brings it
forth and repeats it before the people: and how much the fertiler and stronger
a man's invention is, and the more industrious and laborous he is in collecting
such observations, and can utter them with the excellency of speech and humane
eloquence, so much the more is he accounted an able and excellent preacher.

To this we oppose, that, when the Saints are met together, and every one
gathered to the Gift and Grace of God in themselves, he, that ministers, being
acted thereunto by the arising of the Grace in himself, ought to speak forth
what the Spirit of God furnishes him with, not minding the eloquence and
wisdom of words, but the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, and that
either in the interpreting some part of Scripture, in case the Spirit, which is
the good Remembrancer, lead him so to do, or otherwise words of exhortation,
advice, reproof, and instruction, or the sense of some spiritual experiences,
all which will still be agreeable to the Scripture, though perhaps not relative
to, nor founded upon any particular chapter or verse, as a text. Now let us
examine and consider which of these two sorts of preaching be most agreeable to
the Precepts and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Church
recorded in Scripture. For First, as to their Preaching upon a text, if it were
not merely customary or premeditated, but done by the immediate motion of the
Spirit, we should not blame it, but to do it as they do, there is neither
precept nor practice, that ever I could observe in the New Testament, as a part
of the instituted Worship thereof.

But they allege, that Christ took the Book of Isaiah, and read out of it, and
spoke therefrom, and that Peter Preached from a sentence of the Prophet Joel.

I answer, That Christ and Peter did it not, but as immediately acted and moved
thereunto by the Spirit of God, and that without premeditation, which I suppose
our Adversaries will not deny; in which case we willingly approve of it: but
what is this to their customary conned way, without either waiting for, or
expecting the movings or leadings of the Spirit? Moreover, that neither Christ
nor Peter did it as a settled custom or form, to be constantly practiced by all
the Ministers of the Church, appears, in that most of all the Sermons recorded
by Christ and his Apostles in Scripture, were without this, as appears from
Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, Matthew. 5.1, etc. Mark 4.1, etc. and Paul's
Preaching to the Athenians and to the Jews, etc. As then it appears that this
method of Preaching is not grounded upon any Scripture precept, so the nature
of it is contrary to the preaching of Christ under the New Covenant, as expressed
and recommended in Scripture: for Christ in sending forth his Disciples,
expressly mentions, that they are not to speak of or from themselves, or to
sore cast before hand, but that which the Spirit in the same hour shall teach
them, as is particularly mentioned in the three Evangelists, Matthew. 10.20. Mark
13.11. Luke 12.12. Now if Christ gave this order to his Disciples, before he
departed from them as, that which they were to practice, during his abode
outwardly with them, much more were they to do it after his departure, since
then they were more especially to receive the Spirit to lead them in all
things, and to bring all things to their remembrance, John 14.26. And if they
were to do so, when they appeared before the Magistrates and Princes of the
Earth, much more in the Worship of God, when they stand specially before him,
seeing, as is above shown, his Worship is to be performed in Spirit, and
therefore, after their receiving of the Holy Ghost, it is said Acts 2.4. they
spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance, not what they had studied, and
gathered from Books in their Closets in a premeditated way.

Franciscus Lambertus, before cited, speaks well, and shows their
Hypocrisy; Tract. 5. of Prophecy, chap. 3. saying, Where are they now, that
glory in their Inventions, who say, A brave Invention, a brave invention! This
they call invention which themselves have made up, but what have the Faithful
to do with such kind of Inventions? It is not figments, nor yet Inventions,
that we will have, but things that are solid, invincible, eternal and heavenly,
not which men have invented, but which God has revealed; for, if we believe
the Scripture, our invention profits nothing, but to provoke God to our ruin.
And afterward, Beware (says he) that thou determine not precisely to speak
what before thou have meditated, whatsoever it be, for though it be lawful to
determine the Text, which thou art to expound, yet not at all the
interpretation; lest if thou so do, thou take from the Holy Spirit that which
is his, to wit, to direct thy speech, that thou may Prophecy in the Name of
the Lord, denuded of all Learning, Meditation and Experience, and as if thou
had studied nothing at all; committing thy heart, thy tongue, and thy self
wholly unto his Spirit, and trusting nothing to thy former studying or
meditation, but saying with thy self, in great confidence of the Divine
Promise, the Lord will give a word with much power unto those that preach the
Gospel. But above all things be careful thou follow not the manner of
Hypocrites, who have written almost word by word, what they are to say, as if
they were to repeat some Verses upon a Theater, having learned all their
Preaching, as they do that act Tragedies; and afterward, when they are in the
place of Prophesying, pray the Lord to direct their tongue: but in the mean
time shutting up the way of the Holy Spirit, they determine to say nothing but
what they have written. O unhappy kind of Prophets, yea and truly cursed, which
depend not upon God's Spirit, but upon their own Writings or meditation! Why
pray'st thou to the Lord, thou false Prophet, to give thee his holy Spirit, by
which thou may speak things profitable, and yet thou repellest the Spirit?
why preferrest thou thy meditation or study to the Spirit of God? otherwise why
committest thou not thy self to the Spirit.

. XIX. Secondly, this manner of preaching, as used by them, considering that
they also affirm, that it may be and often is performed by men, who are wicked
or void of true Grace, cannot only not edify the Church, beget or nourish true
Faith, but is destructive to it* being directly contrary to the Nature of the
Christian and Apostolic Ministry, mentioned in the Scriptures: For the Apostle
preached the Gospel not in the wisdom of words, lest the Cross of Christ should
be of none effect, 1 Cor. 1.17. But this preaching, not being done by the
actings and movings of God's Spirit, but by man's invention and eloquence in
his own will, and through his natural and acquired parts and learning, is in
the wisdom of words, and therefore the Cross of Christ is thereby made of none
effect. The Apostles speech and preaching was not with enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. That the Faith of
their Hearers should not stand in the Wisdom of men, but in the Power of God, 1
Cor. 2, 3, 4, 5. But this preaching, having nothing of the Spirit and Power in
it, both the Preachers and Hearers confessing they wait for no such thing, nor
yet are oftentimes sensible of it, must needs stand in the enticing words of
man's wisdom, since it is by the mere wisdom of man it is sought after, and the
mere strength of man's eloquence and enticing words it is uttered, and
therefore no wonder, if the Faith of such as hear and depend upon such
Preachers and Preachings stand in the wisdom of men, and not in the Power of
God. The Apostles declared that they spoke not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. But these Preachers
confess that they are strangets to the Holy Ghost his motions and operations,
neither do they wait to feel them, and therefore they speak in the words, which
their own natural wisdom and learning teaches them, mixing them in and adding
them to such words as they steal of the Scripture and other Books, and
therefore speak not what the Holy Ghost teaches.

Thirdly, this is contrary to the method and order of the primitive Church,
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.30, etc. where in Preaching every one is to
wait for his Revelation, and to give place one unto another, according as
things are revealed. But here there is no waiting for a revelation, but the
Preacher must speak, and not that which is revealed unto him, but what he has
prepared and premeditated before hand.

Lastly, by this kind of preaching, the Spirit of God, which should be the
chief instructor and teacher of God's people, and whose influence is that only,
which makes all preaching effectual and beneficial for the edifying of Souls is
shut out, and man's natural wisdom, learning and parts set up and exalted,
which (no doubt) is a great and chief reason, why the preaching among the
generality of Christians is so unfruitful and unsuccessful; yea according to
this Doctrine the Devil may preach, and ought to be heard also, seeing he both
knows the Truth, and has as much eloquence as any. But what avails
excellency of speech, if the demonstration and Power of the Spirit be wanting,
which, touches the Conscience? We see, that, when the Devil confessed to the
Truth, yet Christ would have none of his testimony. And as these pregnant
testimonies of the Scripture, do prove this part of preaching to be contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, so do they also prove that of ours, before affirmed, to
be conform thereunto.

. XX. But if any object after this manner, Have not many been benefited, yea,
and both converted and edified, by the Ministry of such as have premiditated
their preachings, yea and has not the Spirit often concurred, by its divine
influence, with preaching thus premeditated, so as they have been powerfully
born in upon the Souls of the hearers, to their advantage.

I answer, though that be granted, which I shall not deny, it will not infer
that the thing was good in it self, more than, because Paul was met with by
Christ, to the converting of his Soul, riding to Damascus to persecute the
Saints, that he did well in so doing; neither particular actions, nor yet whole
congregations (as we above observed) are to be measured by the acts of God's
condescension, in times of ignorance. But besides, it has often times fallen
out, that God, having a regard to the simplicity and integrity, either of the
preacher or hearers, has fallen in upon the heart of a Preacher, by his power
and holy influence, and thereby has led them to speak things, which were not
in his premeditated discourse, and which perhaps he never thought of before:
and those passing ejaculations, and unpremeditated, but living exhortations,
have proved more beneficial and refreshful both to preacher and hearers, than
all their premeditated Sermons. But all that will not allow them to continue in
these things, which in themselves are not approved, but contrary to the
practice of the Apostles, when God is raising up a people to serve him
according to the primitive purity and spirituality; yea, such acts of God's
condescension, in times of darkness and ignorance, should engage all more and
more to follow him, according as he reveals his most perfect and spiritual way.

. XXI. Having hitherto spoken of Preaching, now it is fit to speak of Praying,
concerning which the like controversy arises. Our adversaries, whose Religion
is all, for the most part, outside, and such, whose acts are the mere product
of man's natural will and abilities, as they can preach, so can they pray, when
they please, and therefore have their set particular prayers, I meddle not with
the controversies, among themselves concerning this, some of them being for set
prayers, as a liturgy, others for such as are ex tempore conceived; it suffices
me, that all of them agree in this, that the motions and influence of the
Spirit of God, are not necessary to be previous thereunto: and therefore they
have set times in their public worship, as before and after preaching, and in
their private devotion, as morning and evening, and before and after meat, and
other such occasions, at which they precisely set about the performing of their
prayers, by speaking words to God, whether they feel any motion or influence of
the Spirit or not; so that some of the chiefest have confessed that they have
thus prayed without the motions or assistance of the Spirit, acknowledging that
they sinned in so doing, yet they said they look upon it as their duty to do
so, though to pray without the Spirit be sin. We freely confess, that Prayer is
both very profitable, and a necessary duty commanded, and fit to be practiced
frequently by all Christians; but as we can do nothing without Christ, so
neither can we pray without the concurrence and assistance of his Spirit. But
that the state of the Controversy may be the better understood, let it be
considered, First, that Prayer is twofold, inward and outward. Inward Prayer is
that secret turning of the mind toward God, whereby being secretly touched and
awakened by the Light of Christ in the Conscience, and so bowed down under the
sense of its iniquities, unworthiness and misery, it looks up to God, and
joining issue with the secret shinings of the Seed of God, it breaths toward
him, and is constantly breathing forth some secret desires and aspirations
toward him. It is in this sense that we are so frequently in Scripture
commanded to pray continually, Luke 18.1. 1 These. 5.17. Ephesians. 6.18. Luke 21.36.
Which cannot be understood of outward Prayer, because it were impossible that
men should be always upon their knees, expressing words of prayer, and this
would hinder them from the exercise of those duties, no less positively
commanded. Outward Prayer is when as the Spirit (being thus in the exercise of
inward retirement, and feeling the breathing of the Spirit of God to arise
powerfully in the Soul) receives strength and liberty, by a superadded motion
and influence of the Spirit, to bring forth either audable sighs, groans, or
words, and that either in public assemblies, or in private, or at meat, etc.

As then inward prayer is necessary at all times, so, so long as the day of
every man's visitation lasts, he never wants some influence, less or more for
the practice of it. Because he no sooner retires his mind, and considers
himself in God's presence, but he finds himself in the practice of it.

The outward exercise of Prayer as needing a greater and superadded influence
and motion of the Spirit, as it cannot be continually practiced, so neither can
it be so readily, so as to be effectually performed, until his mind be sometime
acquainted with the inward; therefore such as are dilligent and watchful in
their minds, and much retired in the exercise of this inward Prayer, are more
capable to be frequent in the use of the outward* because that this Holy
Influence does more constantly attend them, and they being better acquainted
with, and accustomed to the motions of God's Spirit, can easily perceive and
discern them: and indeed as such who are most diligent have a near access to
God, and he takes most delight to draw them by his Spirit, to approach and
call upon him. So, when many are gathered together in this watchful mind, God
does frequently pour forth the Spirit of Prayer among them, and stir them
thereunto, to the edifying and building up of one another in love. But, because
this outward Prayer depends upon the inward, as that, which must follow it, and
cannot be acceptably performed, but as attended with a superadded influence and
motion of the Spirit, therefore cannot we prefix set times to pray outwardly,
so as to lay a necessity to speak words at such and such times, whether we feel
this heavenly influence and assistance, or no; for that we judge were a tempting
of God, and a coming before him without due preparation. We think it fit for us
to present our selves before him by this inward retirement of the mind, and so
to proceed further, as his Spirit shall help us and draw us thereunto, and we
find that the Lord accepts of this, yea and sees meet sometimes to exercise us
in this silent place, for the trial of our patience, without allowing us to
speak further, that he may teach us not to rely upon outward performances, or
satisfy our selves as too many do, with the saying of our Prayers, and that
our dependence upon him may be the more firm and constant, to wait for the
holding out of his Scepter, and for his allowance to draw near unto him, and
with greater freedom and enlargement of Spirit upon our hearts toward him; yet
nevertheless we do not deny, but sometimes God, upon particular occasions, very
suddenly, yea upon the very first turning-in of the mind, may give power and
liberty to bring forth words or acts of outward Prayer, so as the Soul can
scarce discern any previous motion, but the influence and bringing forth
thereof may be as it were, simul and semel; nevertheless that saying of Bernard
is true, that All Prayer is tepid, which has not an inspiration preveening it.
Though we affirm, that none ought to go about Prayer without this motion, yet
we do not deny but such sin, as neglect Prayer; but their sin is in that they
come not to that place, where they may feel that, that would lead them
thereunto; And therefore we question not but many, through neglect of this
inward watchfulness and retiredness of mind, miss many precious opportunities
to Pray, and thereby are guilty in the sight of God, yet would they sin, if
they should set about the act, until they first felt the influence. For, as he
grossly offends his Master, that lies in his Bed and sleeps, and neglects to do
his Masters business, yet if such a one should suddenly get up, without putting
on his Clothes, or taking along with him those necessary tools and instruments,
without which he could not possibly work, should forwardly fall a doing to no
purpose, he would be so far, thereby from repairing his former fault, that he
would justly incur a new censure: and one that is careless, and otherways
busied, may miss to hear one speaking unto him, or even not hear the Bell of a
Clock though striking hard by him, so may many through negligence, miss to hear
God oftentimes calling upon them, and giving them access to pray unto him, yet
will not that allow them, without this liberty, in their own wills to fall to
work.

And lastly, though this be the only true, and proper method of Prayer, as
that, which is alone acceptable to God, yet shall we not deny but he
oftentimes answered the Prayers, and concurred with the desires of some,
especially in times of darkness, who have greatly erred herein, so that some
that have sit down in formal Prayers, tho far wrong in the matter as well as
manner, without the assistance or influence of God's Spirit, yet have found him
to take occasion therethrough to break in upon their Souls, and wonderfully
tender and refresh them; yet as in preaching and elsewhere has before been
observed, that will not prove any such practices, or be a just let to hinder
any from coming to practice that pure Spiritual and acceptable Prayer, which
God is again restoring and leading his people into, out of all superstitious
and mere empty formalities. The state of the controversy, and our sense
thereof being thus clearly stated, will both obviate many objections, and make
the answer to others more brief and easy, I shall first prove this Spiritual
Prayer, by some short considerations from Scripture, and then answer the
Objections of our Opposers, which will also serve to refute their method and
manner thereof.

. XXII. And first, that there is a necessity of this inward retirement of the
mind, as previous to prayer, that the Spirit may be felt to draw thereunto,
appears, for that in most of those places, where Prayer is commanded, watching
is prefixed thereunto as necessary to go before, as Matthew. 24.42. Mark
13.33.14.38. Luke 21.36. from which it is evident that this watching was to go
before prayer. Now to what end is this watching, or what is it, but a waiting
to feel God's Spirit to draw unto prayer, that so it may be done acceptably?
For, since we are to pray always in the Spirit, and cannot pray of our selves
without it, acceptably this watching must be, for this end, recommended to us
as preceding prayer, that we may watch and wait for the seasonable time to
pray, which is when the Spirit moves thereunto.

Secondly, this necessity of the Spirit moving and concurrence appears
abundantly from that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.26.27. Likewise the Spirit
also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings, which
cannot be uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the
will of God. Which, first, holds forth the incapacity of men, as of themselves,
to pray or call upon God in their own wills, even such as have received the
faith of Christ, and are, in measure, sanctified by it, as was the Church of
Rome, to whom the Apostle then wrote. Secondly, It holds forth that, which can
only help and assist men to pray, to wit, the Spirit, as that, without which
they cannot do it acceptably to God, nor beneficially to their own Souls.
Thirdly, The manner and way of the Spirits intercession, with sighs and groans
which are unutterable. And Fourthly, That God receives graciously the prayers
of such, as are presented and offered unto himself by the Spirit, knowing it to
be according to his will. Now, it cannot be conceived, but this order of
prayer, thus asserted by the Apostle, is most consistent with those other
testimonies of scripture, commending and recommending to us the use of prayer.
From which I thus argue.

If man know not how to pray, neither can do it, without the help of the
Spirit, then it is to no purpose for him, but altogether unprofitable, to pray
without it:

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

Thirdly, This necessity of the Spirit to true Prayer, appears from Ephesians. 6.18.
and Jude 20. where the Apostle commands to pray always in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto; which is as much, as if he had said, that we were never to
pray without the Spirit, or watching thereunto. And Jude shows us that such
prayers, as are in the Holy Ghost, only tend to the building up of our selves
in our most holy faith.

Fourthly, The Apostle Paul says expressly, 1 Cor. 12.3. that no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. If then Jesus cannot be thus
rightly named, but by the Holy Ghost, far less can he be acceptably called
upon. Hence the same Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 14.15. that he will pray with the
Spirit, etc. A clear evidence, that it was none of his method to pray without
it.

But Fifthly, all prayer without the spirit is abomination, such as are the
prayers of the wicked, Prove. 28.9. and the confidence, that the Saints have,
that God will hear them, is, if they ask any thing according to his will, 1 John 5.14. So, if the prayer be not according to his will, there is no ground
of confidence that he will hear. Now our adversaries will acknowledge, that
prayers without the spirit are not according to the will of God; and therefore
such, as pray without it, have no ground to expect an answer: for indeed to bid
a man pray without the spirit, is all one, as to bid one see without eyes, work
without hands, or go without feet. And to desire a man to fall to prayer, ere
the spirit, in some measure, less or more, move him thereunto, is to desire a
man to see, before he open his eyes, or to walk, before he rise up, or to work
with his hands before he move them.

. XXIII. But lastly, from this false opinion of praying without the Spirit, and
not judging it necessary to be waited for, as that, which may be felt to move
us thereunto, has proceeded all the superstition and idolatry, that is among
those, called Christians, and those many abominations wherewith the Lord is
provoked, and his Spirit grieved; so that many deceive themselves now, as the
Jews did of old, thinking it sufficient, if they pay their daily Sacrifices,
and offer their customary Oblations, from thence thinking all is well, and
creating a false peace to themselves, as the Whore in the Proverbs, because
they have offered up their Sacrifices of Morning and Evening Prayers. Isa.
66.3. Jer. 14.12.) certainly such Prayers, as are acted in man's will, and by
his own strength, without God's Spirit, must be of that number.

. XXIV. Let this suffice for probation. Now, I shall proceed to answer their
objections, when I have said something concerning joining in prayer with
others: Those, that pray together with one accord, use not only to concur in
their spirits, but also in the gesture of their body, which we also willingly
approve of. It becomes those, who approach before God to pray, that they do it
with bowed knees, and with their heads uncovered, which is our practice.

Obj.
But here arises a controversy, Whether it be lawful to join* with others (by
those external signs of reverence, albeit not in heart) who pray formally, nor
waiting for the motion of the Spirit, nor judging it necessary.

Answ.
We answer, Not at all: and for our testimony in this thing we have suffered not
a little, for, when it has fallen out, that either accidentally, or to witness
against their worship, we have been present, during the same, and have not
found it lawful for us to bow with them thereunto, they have often persecuted
us, not only with reproaches, but also with strokes and cruel beatings; for
this cause they use to accuse us of pride, profanity and madness, as if we had
no respect or reverence to the worship of God, and, as if we judged none could
pray, or were heard of God but our selves. Unto all which, and many more
reproaches of this kind, we answer briefly and modestly, that it suffices us,
that we are found so doing, neither through Pride, nor Madness, nor Prophanity,
but merely lest we should hurt our Consciences: the reason of which is plain
and evident, for, since our Principle and Doctrine, obliges us to believe that
the Prayers of those who themselves confess they are not acted by the Spirit,
are abominations, how can we, with a safe Conscience, join with them?

Obj.
If they urge, that this is the height of uncharitableness and arrogance, as if
we judged our selves always to pray by the Spirits motion, but they never; as
if we were never deceived by Praying without the motions of the Spirit, and
that they were never acted by it: seeing albeit, they judge not the motion of
the Spirit always necessary, they confess nevertheless that it is very
profitable and comfortable, and they feel it often influencing them, which that
it sometimes falls out we cannot deny.

Answ.
To all which I answer distinctly, if it were their known and avowed Doctrine,
not to Pray without the motion of the Spirit, and that seriously holding
thereunto they did not bind themselves to Pray at certain prescribed times
precisely (at which times they determine to Pray, though without the Spirit)
then indeed we might be accused of uncharitableness and pride, if we never
joined with them; and if they so taught and practiced, I doubt not but it
should he lawful for us so to do, unless there should appear some manifest and
evident hypocrisy and delusion. But seeing they profess that they pray without
the Spirit, and seeing God has persuaded us that such Prayers are abominable,
how can we with a safe Conscience, join with an abomination? That God sometimes
condescends to them, we do not deny (albeit now, when the Spiritual Worship is
openly proclaimed, and all are invited unto it, the case is otherwise, than
those old times of Apostasy and Darkness) and therefore, albeit any should
begin to pray in our presence, not expecting the motion of the Spirit, yet if
it manifestly appear, that God in condescension did concur with such a one,
then, according to God's will, we should not refuse to join also; but this is
rare, lest thence they should be confirmed in their false Principle. And albeit
this seem hard in our profession, nevertheless it is so confirmed by the
Authority both of Scripture and right Reason, that many convinced thereof, have
embraced this part before other, among whom is memorable of late Years
Alexander Skein, a Magistrate of the City of Aberdeen, a man very modest, and
very averse from giving offense to others, who nevertheless being overcome by
the Power of Truth in this matter, behoved for this cause to separate himself
from the public Assemblies and Prayers and join himself unto us; Who also gave
the reason of his change, and likewise succinctly, but yet substantially,
comprehended this controversy concerning Worship in some short questions,
which he offered to the public Preachers of the City, which I think meet to
insert in this place.

1. Whether or not should any act of God's Worship be gone about, without the
motions, leadings and actings of the Holy Spirit.

2. If the motions of the Spirit be necessary to every particular duty, whether
should he be waited upon, that all our acts and words may be, according as he
gives utterance and assistance?

3. Whether every one that bears the name of a Christian, or professes to be a
Protestant: has such an uninterrupted measure thereof, that he may, without
waiting, go immediately about the duty?

4. If there be an indisposition and unfitness at some times* for such
exercises, at lest as to the Spiritual and lively performances thereof, whether
ought they to be performed in that case and at that time?

5. If any duty be gone about, under pretense that it is in obedience to the
external command, without the Spiritual Life and Motion necessary, whether such
a duty, thus performed, can in Faith be expected to be accepted of God, and not
rather reckoned as a bringing of strange Fire before the Lord, seeing it is
performed (at best) by the strength of natural and acquired parts, and not by
the strength and assistance of the Holy Ghost, which was typified by the Fire
that came down from Heaven, which alone behoved to consume the Sacrifice and no
other?

6. Whether duties, gone about in the mere strength of natural and acquired
parts (whether in public or private) be not as really, upon the matter, an
image of man's invention, as the popish worship, though not so gross in the
outward appearance? And therefore whether it be not as real superstition to
countenance any worship of that nature, as it is to countenance popish worship,
though there be a difference in the degree?

7. Whether it be a ground of offense, or just scandal, to countenance the
worship of those, whose professed principle it is, neither to speak for
edification, nor to pray, but as the Holy Ghost shall be pleased to assist
them, in some measure, less or more, without which they rather choose to be
silent, than to speak without this influence?

Unto these they answered but very coldly and faintly, whose answers likewise
long ago he refuted.

Seeing then God has called us to his spiritual worship, and to testify
against the humane and voluntary worships of the apostasy, if we did not this
way, stand immovable to the Truth revealed, but should join with them, both
our testimony for God would be weakened and lost, and it would be impossible
steadily to propagate this worship in the world, whose progress we dare neither
retard nor hinder by any act of ours, though therefore we shall lose not only
worldly honor, but even our lives. And truly many Protestants, through their
unsteadiness in this thing, for politic ends, complying with the popish
abominations, have greatly scandalized their profession, and hurt the
reformation; as appeared in the Example of the Elector of Saxony, who, in the
Convention at Ausburg, in the year 1530. being commanded by the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, to be present at the Mass, that he might carry the Sword before him,
according to his place; which when he justly scrupled to perform, his Preachers
taking more care for their Princes Honor than for his Conscience, persuaded
him that it was lawful to it, against his Conscience, which was both a very bad
Example, and great scandal to the Reformation, and displeased many, as the
Author of the History of the Council of Trent, in his first book, well
observes. But now I hasten to the objection of our adversaries, against this
method of praying.

Obj.
. XXV. First, They object, that, if such particular influences were needful to
outward acts of worship, then they should also be needful to inward acts, as to
wit, desire and love God:

But this is absurd:

Therefore also that from whence it follows.

I answer, that, which was said in the state of the controversy, clears
this, because, as to those general duties, Answ.
there never wants an influence, so long as the day of a man's visitation
lasts, during which time God is always near to him, and wrestling with him
by his Spirit, to turn him to himself, so that, if he do but stand still, and
cease from his evil thoughts, the Lord is near to help him, etc. But as to the
outward acts of Prayer, they need a more special motion and influence, as has
been proved.

Secondly, they object, that it might be also alleged, Obj.
that men ought not to do moral duties, as Children to honor their Parents,
men to do right to their neighbors, except the Spirit moved them to it.

I answer, there is a great difference betwixt these general duties, betwixt
man and man* Answ.
and the particular express acts of worship toward God: the one is merely
Spiritual, and commanded by God to be performed by his Spirit; the other answer
their end, as to them, whom they are immediately directed to, and concern,
though done from a mere natural principle of self-love, even as beasts have
natural affections one to another, and therefore may be thus performed, though
I shall not deny but that they are not works accepted of God, or beneficial to
the Soul, but as they are done in the fear of God, and in blessing, in which
his Children do all things, and therefore are accepted and blessed in
whatsoever they do.

Thirdly they object, Obj.
that if a wicked man ought not to pray without a motion of the Spirit, because
his Prayer would be sinful, Prove. 21.4.
neither ought he to plough by the same reason, because the ploughing of the
wicked, as well as his praying is sin.

This objection is of the same nature with the former* Answ.
and therefore may be answered the same way, seeing there is a great difference
betwixt natural acts, such as eating, drinking, sleeping, and seeking for
sustenance for the body, which things Man has common with Beasts, and
Spiritual acts. And it does not follow, because man ought not to go about
Spiritual acts without the Spirit, that therefore he may not go about natural
acts without it. The analogy holds better thus, and that for the proof of our
affirmation, that, as man, for the going about natural acts, need his natural
Spirit, so to perform Spiritual acts, he needs the Spirit of God. That the
natural acts of the wicked and unregenerate are sinful, is not denied, though
not as in themselves, but in so far as man in that state is in all things,
reprobated in the sight of God.

Fourthly, they object, that wicked men, may according to this doctrine, Obj.
forbear to pray for years together, alleging they want a motion to it.

Answ.
I answer, the false pretenses of wicked men do nothing invalidate the truth of
this doctrine: for at that rate there is no doctrine of Christ, which men might
not turn by. That they ought not to pray without the Spirit is granted, but
then they ought to come to that place of watching, where they may be capable to
feel the Spirits motion. They sin indeed, in not praying, but the cause of this
sin is their not watching; so their neglect proceeds not from this doctrine, but
from their disobedience to it: seeing, if they did pray without this, it would
be a double sin, and no fulfilling of the command to pray, nor yet would their
Prayer without this Spirit, be useful unto them, and this our Adversaries are
forced to acknowledge in another case: for they say, It is a duty incumbent on
Christians to frequent the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (as they call it.)
Yet they say, No man ought to take it unworthily, yea they plead that such, as
find themselves unprepared, must abstain, and therefore do usually
excommunicate them from the Table. Now, though according to them, it be
necessary to partake of this Sacrament, yet it is also necessary, that those
that do it, do first examine themselves, lest they eat and drink their own
condemnation, and though they reckon it sinful for them to forbear, yet they
account it more sinful for them to do it without this examination.

Fifthly, they object, Acts 8.22. where Peter commanded Simon Magus, Obj.
that wicked Sorcerer to pray, from thence inferring that wicked men may and
ought to pray.

Answ.
I answer, that in the citing of this place, as I have often observed, they omit
the first and chiefest part of the verse, which is thus, Acts 8. verse 22.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee. So here he bids him first repent, now the
least measure of true Repentance cannot be without somewhat of that inward
retirement of the mind, which we speak of, and indeed where true repentance
goes first, we do not doubt but the Spirit of God will be near to concur with,
and influence such, to pray to, and call upon God.

Obj.
And Lastly, they object, that many Prayers, begun without the Spirit, have
proved effectual, and that the Prayers of wicked men have been heard and found
acceptable, as Achab's.

Answ.
This objection was before solved: for the acts of God's compassion and
indulgence, at sometimes, and to some persons, upon singular extraordinary
occasions, are not be a rule of our actions. For if we should make that the
measure of our obedience, great inconveniences would follow, as is evident,
and will be acknowledged by all. Next, we do not deny but wicked men are
sensible of the motions and operations of God's Spirit oftentimes, before
their day be expired; from which they may at times pray acceptably, not as
remaining altogether wicked, but as entering into Piety, from whence they
afterward fall away.

. XXVI. As to the singing of Psalms, there will not be need of any long
discourse, for that the case is just the same, as in the two former of
Preaching and Prayer. We confess this to be a part of God's Worship, and very
sweet and refreshful, when it proceeds from a true sense of God's love in the
heart, and arises from the divine influence of the Spirit, which leads Souls to
breath forth either a sweet Harmony, or words suitable to the present
condition, whether they be words formerly used by the Saints, and recorded in
Scripture, such as the Psalms of David, or other words, as were the Hymns and
Songs of Zacharias, Simeon and the Blessed Virgin Mary. But as for the formal
customary way of singing, it has in Scripture no foundation, nor any ground in
true Christiansty: yea, besides all the abuses incident to prayer and
preaching, it has this more peculiar, that often times great and horrid lies
are said in the sight of God, for all manner of wicked profane People take
upon them to personate the experiences and conditions of Blessed David, which
are not only false as to them, but also as to some of more sobriety, who utter
them forth: as, where they will sing sometimes, Psalm. 22.14. -- my heart is
like Wax, it is melted in the midst of my Bowels. and verse 15. My strength is
dried up like a Pot-sheard: and my Tongue cleaves to my Jaws; and thou have
brought me into the dust of Death. And Psalm. 6.6. I am weary with my groaning,
all the night make I my Bed to swim: I water my Couch with my Tears. And many
more, which those that speak, know to be false as to them. And sometimes will
confess, just after, in their Prayers, that they are guilty of the Vices,
opposite to those Virtues, which but just before they have asserted themselves
endued with. Who can suppose that God accepts of such juggling? And indeed such
singing does more please the carnal ears of men, than the pure ears of the
Lord, who abhors all Lying and Hypocrisy.

That singing then, that pleases him, must proceed from that, which is PVRE in
the Heart, (even from the Word of Life therein) in and by which richly dwelling
in us, Spiritual Songs and Hymns are returned to the Lord, according to that of
the Apostle, Col. 3.16,

But as to their artificial Music, either by Organs, or other instruments or
voice, we have neither example nor precept for it in the New Testament.

. XXVII. But lastly, the great advantage of this true Worship of God, which we
profess and practice, is, that it consists not in man's Wisdom, Arts, or
Industry, neither needs the Glory, Pomp, Riches, nor Splendour of this World
to beautify it, as being of a Spiritual and Heavenly nature, and therefore too
simple and contemptible to the natural mind and will of man, that has no
delight to abide in it, because he finds no room there for his imaginations and
inventions, and has not the opportunity to gratify his outward and carnal
Senses; so that this form being observed, is not like to be long kept pure,
without the Power: For it is of it self so naked without it, that it has
nothing in it to invite and tempt men to dote upon it, further than it is
accompanied with the Power. Whereas the Worship of out Adversaries, being
performed in their own wills, is self-pleasing, as in which they can largely
exercise their natural parts and invention: and (as to most of them) having
somewhat of an outward and worldly splendour, delectable to the carnal and
worldly Senses, they can pleasantly continue it, and satisfy themselves,
though without the Spirit and Power, which they make no ways essential to the
performance of their Worship, and therefore neither wait for, nor expect it.

. XXVIII. So that to conclude, the Worship, Preaching, Praying and Singing,
which we plead for, is such as proceeds from the Spirit of God, and is always
accompanied with its influence, being begun by its motion, and carried on by
the power and strength thereof; and so is a Worship purely Spiritual, such as
the Scripture holds forth, Joh. 4.23, 24. 1 Cor. 14.15. Ephesians. 6.18, etc.

But the Worship, Preaching, Praying and Singing, which our Adversaries plead
for, and which we oppose, is a Worship which is both begun, carried on and
concluded in man's own natural will and strenghth, without the motion or
influence of God's Spirit, which they judge they need not wait for, and
therefore may be truly acted, both as to the matter and manner, by the
wickedest of men, Such was the Worship and vain Oblations, which God always
rejected, as appears from Isa. 66.3. Jer. 14.12, etc. Isa. 1.13. Prove. 15.29.
John 9.31.

The Twelfth Proposition, Concerning Baptism.
As there is one Lord, and one Faith, so there is one Baptism, which is not the
putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience before
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 6.4. Gal.
3.27. Col. 2.12. Joh. 3.30. 1 Cor. 1.17
and this Baptism is a Pure and a Spiritual thing, to wit, the Baptism of the
Spirit and Fire, by which we are buried with him, that being washed and purged
from our sins, we may walk in newness of Life, of which the Baptism of John was
a Figure, which was commanded for a time, and not to continue for ever; as to
the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere humane Tradition, for which neither
Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the Scripture.

. I. I Did sufficiently demonstrate, in the explanation and probation of the
former Proposition, how greatly the Professors of Christianity, as well
Protestants as Papists, were degenerated in the matter of Worship, and how much
strangers to, and averse from that true and acceptable Worship, that is
performed in the Spirit of Truth, because of man's natural propensity, in his
fallen state, to exalt his own inventions, and to intermix his own work and
product in the Service of God; and from this root sprung all the Idle Worships,
Idolatries, and numerous Superstitious Inventions among the Heathens. For, when
God, in condescension to his chosen People the Jews, did prescribe to them, by
his Servant Moses, many Ceremonies and Observations, as Types and Shaddows of
the Substance, which in due time was to be revealed, which consisted for the
most part in washings, outward purifications and cleansings, which were to
continue until the time of the Reformation, until the Spiritual Worship should
be set up, and that God by the more powerful pouring forth of his Spirit, and
guiding of that Anointing, which was to lead his Children into all Truth, and
teach them to Worship him in a way more Spiritual and acceptable to him, though
less agreeable to the carnal and outward senses: notwithstanding God's
condescension to the Jews, in such things, we see that that part in man, which
delights to follow its own inventions, could not be restrained, nor yet
satisfied with all these observations, but that oftentimes they would be either
declining to the other superstitions of the Gentiles, or adding some new
observations and ceremonies of their own, to which they were so devoted, that
they were still apt to prefer them before the commands of God, and that under
the motion of Zeal and Piety. This we see abundantly, in the example of the
Pharisees, the chiefest Sect among the Jews, whom Christ so frequently reproves
for making void the commandments of God by their Traditions, Matthew. 15.6, 9,
etc. This complaint may at this day be no less justly made, as to many bearing
the name of Christians, who have introduced many things of this kind, partly
borrowed from the Jews, which they more tenaciously stick to; and more
earnestly contend for, than for the weightier points of Christianity: because
that self, yet alive, and ruling in them, loves their own inventions better
than Gods commands. But, if they can by any means stretch any Stripture
practice, or conditional precept, or permission; fitted to the weakness or
capacity of some, or appropriate to some particular dispensation, to give some
color for any of these their inventions, they do then so tenaciously stick to
them, and so obstinatly and obstreperously plead for them, that they will not
patiently hear the most solid Christian reasons against them. Which zeal, if
they would but seriously examine it, they would find to be but the prejudice of
education and the love of self, more than of God, or his Pure Worship. This is
verified concerning those things, which are called Sacraments, about which they
are very ignorant in Religious Controversies, who understand not how much
debate, contention, jangling, and quarrelling there has been among those called
Christians, so that I may safely say, the controversy about them, to wit,
about their number, nature, virtue, efficacy, administration and other things,
has been more than about any other Doctrine of Christ, whether as betwixt
Papists and Protestants, or among Protestants betwixt themselves, and how great
prejudice these controversies have brought to Christians is very obvious,
whereas the things contended for among them are, for the most part but empty
shaddows, and mere outside things, as I hope hereafter to make appear to the
patient and unprejudicate Reader.

. II. That which comes first under observation, is the Name [ Sacrament,] which
is strange that Christians should stick to, and contend so much for, since it
is not to be found in all the Scripture, but was borrowed from the military
Oaths among the Heathens, from whom the Christians, when they began to
Apostatize, did borrow many Superstitious Terms and Observations, that they
might thereby ingratiate themselves, and the more easily gain the Heathens to
their Religion, which practice, (though perhaps intended by them for good, yet
as being the fruit of humane policy, and not according to God's Wisdom) has had
very pernicious consequences. I see not how any, whether Papists or
Protestants, especially the later, can in reason quarrel thus, for denying this
term, which it seems the Spirit of God saw not meet to inspire the Penmen of
the Scriptures to leave unto us.

But if it be said, that it is not the Name, but the Thing they contend for:
Obj.


I answer, Let the Name then, as not being Scriptural, be laid aside, and we
shall see at first entrance how much benefit will redound by laying aside this
traditional term, Answ.
and betaking us to plainness of Scripture Language, for presently the great
contest, about the number of them, will evanish: since there is no term used in
Scripture, that can be made use of, whether we call them Institutions,
Ordinances, Precepts, Commandments, Appointments, or Laws, etc. that would
afford ground for such a debate, since neither will Papists affirm, that there
are only Seven, or Protestants only Two, of any of these forementioned.

If it be said, that this Controversy arises from the definition of the thing,
Obj.
as well as from the name.

It will be found otherwise, Answ.
for whatever way we take their defininition of a Sacrament, whether as an
outward visible sign, whereby inward Grace is conferred, or only signified.
This definition will agree to many things, which neither Papists nor
Protestants will acknowledge to be Sacraments. If they be expressed under the
name of Sealing Ordinances, as some do: I could never see neither by Reason,
nor Scripture, how this title could be appropriate to them, more than to any
other Christian Religious performance: for that must needs properly be a
Sealing Ordinance, which makes the Persons receiving it, infallibly certain of
the promise, or thing sealed to them.

If it be said, it is so to them that are Faithful. Obj.


I answer: So is Praying and Preaching, Answ.
and doing of every good work. Seeing the partaking, or performing of the one
gives not to any a more certain Title to Heaven, yea (in some respect) not so
much, there is no reason to call them so, more than the other.

Besides we find not any, called the Seal and Pledge of our inheritance, but
the Spirit of God, it is by that we are said to be sealed; Ephesians. 1.14. and 4.30.
which is also termed the earnest of our inheritance, 2 Cor. 1.22. and not by
outward water or eating and drinking, which as the wickedest of men may partake
of, so many that do, do notwithstanding it go to perdition: for it is not
outward washing with water that makes the heart clean, by which men are fitted
for Heaven; and as that which goes into the mouth does not defile a man,
because it is put forth again, and so goes to the Dunghill, neither does any
thing which man eats, purify him, or fit him for Heaven. What is said here
in general, may serve for an introduction, not only to this Proposition, but
also to the other, concerning the Supper. Of these Sacraments (so called)
Baptism is always first numbered, which is the subject of the present
Proposition, in whose explanation I shall first demonstrate and prove our
Judgment, and then answer the objections, and re^ute the sentiments of our
Opposers. As to the first part, these things following, which are briefly
comprehended in the Proposition, come to be proposed and proved.

. III. First, that there is but one Baptism, as well as but One Lord, One
Faith, etc.

Secondly, that this one Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a
washing with, or dipping in Water, but a being Baptized by the Spirit.

Thirdly, that the Baptism of John was but a figure of this, and therefore, as
the Figure (to give place to the Substance) which though it be to continue, yet
the other is ceased.

As for the first, viz. that there is but one Baptism, there needs no other
proof than the words of the Text, Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism:
where the Apostle positively and plainly affirms, that as there is but one
Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one God, etc. so there is but one Baptism.

As to what is commonly alleged by way of explanation upon the Text, Obj.
that the Baptism of Water and of the Spirit make up this one Baptism, by
virtue of the Sacramental Union.

I answer, This exposition has taken place, not because grounded upon the
Testiomy of the Scripture, Answ.
but because it wrests the Scripture to make it suit to their principle of
Water Baptism, and so there needs no other reply, but to deny it, as being
repugnant to the plain words of the Text, which says not that there are Two
Baptisms, to wit, one of Water, the other of the Spirit. which do make up one
Baptism, but plainly, that there is one Baptism, as there is One Faith, and One
God. Now there goes not two Faiths, nor two Gods, nor two Spirits, nor two
Bodies, whereof the one is Outward and Elementary, and the other Spiritual and
Pure, to the making up of the one Faith, the one God, the one Body, and the one
Spirit; so neither ought there to go Two Baptisms to make up the One Baptism.

But secondly, if it be said, the baptism is but one, whereof water is the one
part, to wit, the sign, and the spirit, the thing signified, the other.

I answer, this yet more confirms our doctrine, for, if water be only the
sign, it is not the matter of the one Baptism (as shall further hereafter by
its definition appear in Scripture) and we are to take the one baptism for the
matter of it, not for tbe sign, or figure, and type, that went before, even as
where Christ is called the one Offering; in Scripture, though he was tipified
by many Sacrifices and Offerings under the Law, we understand only by the One
Offering, his offering himself upon the Cross, whereof though those many
Offerings were signs and tipes, yet we say not that they go together with that
Offering of Christ, to make up the one Offering; so neither, though
Water Baptism was a sign of Christ's Baptism, will it follow, that it goes now
to make up the Baptism of Christ. If any should be so absurd, as to affirm,
that this one Baptism here were the Baptism of Water, and not of the Spirit:
that were foolishly to contradict the positive testimony of the Scripture,
which says the contrary, as by what follows will more amply appear.

Secondly, that this one Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a
washing with water, appears, first, from the testimony of John, the proper and
peculiar administrator of water baptism, Matthew. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with
water, unto repentance; but he, that comes after me, is mightier than I, whose
Shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire. Here John mentions two manner of baptisings, and two different
baptisms, the one with water, and the other with the Spirit, the one whereof he
was the Minister of, the other whereof Christ was the Minister of: and such, as
were baptized with the first, were not therefore baptized with the second, I
indeed baptize you, but he shall baptize you. Though in the present time they
were baptized with the baptism of water, yet they were not as yet, but were to
be, baptized with the Baptism of Christ. From all which I thus argue.

If those, that were baptized with the baptism of water, were not therefore
baptized with the Baptism of Christ, then the baptism of water is not the
Baptism of Christ:

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

And again,

If he, that truly and really administered the baptism of water, did not
withstanding declare, that he neither could, nor did baptize with the Baptism
of Christ, then the Baptism of Water is not the Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Thereforefore, etc.

And indeed to understand it otherwise would make John's words void of good
sense; for, if their baptism had been all one, why should he have so precisely
contradistinguish them? Why should he have said that those, whom he had already
baptized, should yet be be baptized by another baptism?

Obj.
If it be urged, that Baptism with Water was the one part, and that with the
Spirit the other part, or effect only of the former.

Answ.
I answer, this exposition contradicts the plain words of the text, for he says
not, I baptize you with Water, and he, that comes after shall produce the
effects of this my Baptism in you by the Spirit, etc. or he shall accomplish
this baptism in you; but he shall baptize you. So then, if we understand the
word truly and properly, when he says, I baptize you, as consenting that
thereby is really signified that he did baptize with the baptism of water, we
must needs, unless we offer violence to the text, understand the other part of
the sentence the same way; that where he adds presently, but he shall baptize
you, etc. that he understood it of their being truly to be baptized with
another baptism, than what he did baptize with: Else it had been nonsense for
him for thus to have contradistinguished them.

Secondly, this is further confirmed by the saying of Christ himself, Acts 1.4,
5. but wait for the promise of the Father, which, says he, ye have heard of
me. For John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost, not many days hence. There can scarce two places of Scripture run more
parallel, than this does with the former, a little before mentioned, and
therefore concludes the same way, as did the other. For Christ here grants
fully, that John completed his baptism, as to the matter and substance of it:
John, says he, truly baptized with water, which is as much, as if he had said,
John did truly and fully administer the baptism of water, But ye shall be
baptized with, etc. This shows that they were to be baptized with some other
baptism, than the baptism of water, and that, although they were formerly
baptized with the baptism of water, yet not with that of Christ, which they
were to be baptized with.

Thirdly, Peter observes the same distinction, Acts 11.16. Then remembered I the
word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with Water; but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. The Apostle makes this application upon
the Holy Ghost's falling upon them. Whence he infers, that they were then
baptized with the baptism of the Spirit. As to what is urged from his calling
afterward for water, to it shall be hereafter spoken. From all which three
sentences realtive one to another, first of John, secondly of Christ, and
thirdly of Peter, it does evidently follow, that such, as were truly and really
baptized with the baptism of water, were notwithstanding not baptized with the
baptism of the Spirit; which is that of Christ; and such as truly and really
did administer the baptism of water, did, in so doing, not administer the
Baptism of Christ, so that, if there be now but one Baptism, as we have already
proved, we may safely conclude, that it is that of the Spirit, and not of
water; else it would follow, that the One baptism, which now continues, were
the baptism of water, i. e. John's baptism, and not the baptism of the Spirit,
i. e. Christ's, which were most obsurd.

If it be said further, that, though the Baptism of John, before Christ's was
administered, was different from it, as being the figure only, Obj.
yet now that both it, as the figure, and that of the Spirit, as the substance,
is necessary to make up the one baptism.

I answer, this urges nothing, unless it be granted also that both of them
belong to the essence of Baptism, Answ.
so that Baptism is not to be accounted as truly administered, where both are
not: which none of our adversaries will acknowledge; but, on the contrary,
account, not only all those truly baptized, with the Baptism of Christ, who are
baptized with water, tho they be uncertain whether they be baptized with the
Spirit or not; but they even account such truly baptized, with the baptism of
Christ, because sprinkled, or baptized with water, though it be manifest and
most certain, that they are not baptized with the Spirit, as being enemies
thereunto, in their heart, by wicked works. So here, by their own confession,
baptism with water is without the Spirit: Wherefore we may far safer conclude,
that the baptism of the Spirit, which is that of Christ, is, and may be without
that of Water, as appears in that Acts 11. where Peter testifies of these men,
that they were baptized with the Spirit, though not then baptized with Water;
and indeed the controversy in this, as in most other things, stands beiwixt us
and our opposers, in that they not only often times prefer the form and shadow,
to the power and substance, by denominating persons, as inheritors and
possessors of the thing* from their having the form and shadow, though really
wanting the power and substance; and not admitting those to be so denominated,
who have the power and substance, if they want the form and shadow. This
appears evidently, in that those truly baptized, with the one baptism of
Christ, who are not baptized with the Spirit, which, in Scripture, is
particularly called the Baptism of Christ, if they be only baptized with Water,
which themselves yet confess to be but the shadow or figure. And moreover, in
that they account not those, who are surely baptized with the Baptism of the
Spirit, baptized, neither will they have them so denominate, unless they be
also sprinkled with, or dipped in Water. But we, on the contrary, do always
prefer the power to the form, the substance to the shadow; and where the
Substance and Power is, we doubt not to denominate the Person accordingly,
though the form be wanting; and therefore we always seek first, and plead for,
the Substance and Power, as knowing that to be indispensable necessary; though
the form sometimes may be dispensed with, and the figure or tipe may cease,
when the Substance and Anti-tipe comes to be enjoyed, as it does in this case,
which shall hereafter be made appear.

. IV. Fourthly, that the one Baptism of Christ is not a washing with Water,
appears from 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also
now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of
a good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. So plain a
definition of Baptism is not in all the Bible, and therefore, seeing it is so
plain, it may well be preferred to all the coined definitions of the
Schoolmen. The Apostle tells us, first, negatively, what it is not, viz. Not a
putting away of the filth of the flesh, then surely it is not a washing with
Water, since that is so. Secondly, he tells us affirmatively, what it is, viz.
the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: where affirmatively defines it to be the answer [or confession] (as the
Syriak version has it) of a good Conscience. Now, this answer cannot be, but
where the Spirit of God has purified the Soul, and the fire of his judgment
has burned up the unrighteous nature: and those in whom this work is wrought,
may be truly said to be baptized with the baptism of Christ, i. e. of the
Spirit and of Fire. Whatever way then we take this definition of the Apostle of
Christ's baptism, it confirms our sentence; for if we take the first or
negative part, viz. that it is not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh,
then it will follow, that water baptism is not it, because that is a putting
away of the filth of the Flesh. If we take the second and affirmative
definition, to wit, that it is the answer, or confession of a good Conscience,
etc. then Water Baptism is not it; since, as our Adversaries will not deny,
Water Baptism does not always imply it, neither is it any necessary
consequence thereof. Moreover, the Apostle, in this place, does seem especially
to guard against those, that might esteem Water Baptism the true baptism of
Christ; because (lest by the Comparison induced by him, in the preceding
verse, betwixt the Souls that were saved in Noah's Ark, and us, that are now
saved by Baptism, lest I say, any should have thence hastily concluded, that
because the former were saved by water, this place must needs be taken to speak
of Water Baptism) to prevent such a mistake, he plainy affirms, that it ^s not
that but another thing. He says not, that it is the Water, or the putting away
of the filth of the Flesh, as accompanied with the answer of a good Conscience,
whereof the one, viz. the Water, is the Sacramental Element administered by the
Minister, and the other the Grace or thing signified, conferred by Christ; but
plainly, that it is not the putting away, etc. than which there can be nothing
more manifest to men unprejudicate and judicious. Moreover, Peter calls this
here, which saves the (...) the Antitype, or the thing figured, whereas it is
usually translated, as if the like figure did now save us, thereby insinuating,
that as they were saved by water in the Ark, so are we now by Water baptism.
But this interpretation crosses his sense, he presently after declaring the
contrary, as has above been observed: and likewise it would contradict the
opinion of all out opposers. For Protestants deny it to be absolutely necessary
to Salvation. And though Papists say, none are saved without it, yet in this
they admit an exception, as of Martyrs, etc. and they will not say, that all
that have it, are saved by Water Baptism: for seeing we are saved by this
baptism, as those that were in the Ark, were saved by Water, and that all those
that were in the Ark were saved by water, it would then follow, that all those
that have this baptism are saved by it. Now this consequence would be false, if
it were understood of Water Baptism, because many by the confession of all, are
baptized with water, that are not saved: but this consequence holds most true,
if it be understood as we do; of the Baptism of the Spirit, since none can have
this answer of a good Conscience, and abiding in it, not be saved by it.

Fifthly, that the One Baptism of Christ is not a washing with Water, as it
has been proved by the definition of the One Baptism, so it is also manifest
from the necessary fruits and effects of it, which are three-times particularly
expressed by the Apostle Paul, as first, Romans 6.3, 4. where he says, that so
many of them as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death:
buried with him by Baptism into death, that they should walk in newness of
Life. Secondly to the Gal. 3.27. he says positively, For as many of you as
have been baptized unto Christ, have put on Christ. And thirdly, to the Col.
2.12. he says that they were Buried with him in Baptism, and risen with him
through the Faith of the operation of God. It is to be observed here, that the
Apostle speaks generally, without any exclusive term, but comprehensive of all:
he says not some of you, that were baptzed into Christ, have put on Christ,
but as many of you, which is as much as if he had said, every one of you, that
has been Baptized into Christ, has put on Christ. Whereby it is evident, that
this is not meant of Water Baptism, but of the Baptism of the Spirit; because
else it would follow, that whosoever had been Baptized with Water baptism, had
put on Christ, and were risen with him, which all acknowledge to be most absurd.
Now, supposing all the visible members of the Churches of Rome, Galatia, and
Coloss, had been outwardly Baptized with Water, (I do not say they were, but
our Adversaries will not only readily grant it, but also contend for it)
suppose I say, the case so, they will not say they had all put on Christ, since
diverse expressions in these Epistles to them, show the contrary, so that the
Apostle cannot mean Baptism, with Water, and yet he means the Baptism of
Christ, i. e. of the Spirit, cannot be denied, or that the Baptism wherewith
these were Baptized (of whom the Apostle here testifies, that they had put on
Christ) was the One Baptism, I think none will call in question. Now admit as
our Adversaries contend, that many in these Churches, who had been Baptized
with Water had not put on Christ, it will follow that, notwithstanding that
Water Baptism, they were not Baptized into Christ, or with the Baptism of
Christ, seeing as many of them, as were Baptized into Christ, had put on
Christ, ande. From all which I thus argue,

Arg. 1.
If the Baptism with Water, were the one Baptism, i. e. the Baptism of Christ,
as many as were Baptized with Water, would have put on Christ.

But the last is false:

Therefore also the first.

And again,

Arg. 2.
Since as many as are baptized into Christ, i. e. with the one baptism, which
is the baptism of Christ, have put on Christ, then Water Baptism is not the one
baptism, viz. the baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

. V. Thirdly, since John's Baptism was a Figure, and seeing the Figure gives
way to the Substance, albeit the thing figured remain, to wit, the one baptism
of Christ, yet the other cease, which was the baptism of John.

That John's baptism was a figure of Christ's baptism, I judge will not readily
be denied: but in case it should, it can easily be proved from the nature of
it; John's baptism was a being baptized with Water, but Christ's is a baptizing
with the Spirit. Therefore John's baptism must have been a figure of Christ's.
But further, that Water Baptism was John's baptism, will not be denied: that
Water Baptism is not Christ's baptism, is already proved. From which does arise
the confirmation of our Proposition, thus;

There is no baptism to continue now, but the one baptism of Christ: Arg.


Therefore Water Baptism is not to continue now; because it is not the baptism
of Christ.

That John's baptism is ceased, many of out Adversaries confess: but if any
should alledg it otherwise, it may be easily proved, by the express words of
John, not only as being insinuated there, where he contra-distinguisheth his
baptism from that of Christ; but particularly, where he says, John 3.30. he
[Christ] must increase, but I [John] must decrease. From whence it clearly
follows, that the increasing or taking place of Christ's Baptism is the
decreasing or abolishing of John's Baptism; so that, if Water baptism was a
particular part of John's Ministry, and is no part of Christ's baptism, as we
have already proved, it will necessarily follow, that it is not to continue.

Secondly, Arg.
If Water Baptism had been to continue a perpetual ordinance of Christ in his
Church, he would either have practiced it himself, or commanded his Apostles so
to do.

But that he practiced it not, the Scripture plainly affirms, John 4.2. And
that he commanded his Disciples to baptize with water, I could never yet read.
As for what is alleged, that Matthew. 28.19. etc. (where he bids them baptize) is
to be understood of water baptism, that is but to beg the question, and the
grounds for that shall be hereafter examined.

Therefore to baptize with Water is no perpetual ordinance of Christ to his
Church.

This has had the more weight with me, because I find not any standing
ordinance, or appointment of Christ, necessary to Christians, for which we have
not either Christ's own practice or command, as to obey all the Commandments,
which comprehend both our duty toward God and man, etc. and where the Gospel
requires more than the Law, which is abundantly signified in the 5. and 6.
Chapters of Matthew and elsewhere. Besides as to the duties of Worship, he
exhorts us to meet promising his presence, commands to Pray, Preach, Watch,
etc. and gives precepts concerning some temporary things, as the washing of one
another Feet, the breaking of Bread, hereafter to be discussed, only for this
one thing of baptizing with Water, (though so earnestly contended for) we find
not any precept of Christ.

VI. But to make Water Baptism a necessary institution of the Christian
Religion, which is pure and Spiritual, and not carnal and and ceremonial, is to
derogate from the New Covenant Dispensation, and set up the legal Rites and
Ceremonies, of which, this of Baptism, or washing with Water, was one, as
appears from Heb. 9.10. where the Apostle speaking thereof, says, that it
stood only in Meats, and Drinks, and diverse Baptisms, and carnal Ordinances
imposed, until the time of Reformation. If then the time of Reformation, or the
Dispensation of the Gospel, which puts an end to the Shaddows, be come, then
such Baptisms and carnal Ordinances are no more to be imposed. For how Baptism
with Water comes now to be a Spiritual Ordinance, more than before in the time
of the Law, does not appear: seeing it is but Water still, and a washing
outward man, and a putting away of the filth of the flesh still; and, as before,
those that are so washed, were not thereby made perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience, neither are they at this day, as our adversaries must needs
acknowledge, and experience abundantly shows. So that the matter of it, which
is a washing with Water, and the effect of it, which is only an outward
cleansing, being still the same. How comes Water Baptism to be less a carnal
Ordinance now than before?

Obj.
If it be said, that God censers inward Grace upon some, that are now baptized.

So no doubt he did also upon some, that used those Baptisms among the Jews.
Answ.


Obj.
Or if it be said, because it is commanded by Christ now, under the New Covenant.

Answ.
I answer first, that is to beg the question, of which hereafter

But secondly, we find, that, where the matter of Ordinances is the same, and
the end the same, they are never accounted more or less Spiritual, because of
their different times Now, was not God the Author of the Purifications and
Baptisms under the Law? Was not Water the matter of them, which is so now? Was
not the end of them to signify an outward purifying by an inward washing? And
is not that alleged to be the end still? And are the necessary effects or
consequences of it any better now than before, since men are now by the virtue
of Water Baptism* as a necessary consequence of it, no more than before, made
inwardly clean? And, if some by Gods Grace, that are Baptized with Water, are
inwardly purified, so were some also under the Law; so that this is not any
necessary consequence, nor effect, neither of this nor that Baptism? it is then
plainly repugnant to right reason, as well as to the Scripture Testimony, to
affirm, That to be a Spiritual Ordinance now, which was a carnal Ordinance
before. If it be still the same, both as to its Author, Matter, and end,
however made to vary in some small circumstances. The Sairituality of the New
Covenant, and of its Worship established by Christ, consisted not in such
superficial alterations of circumstances, but after another manner, therefore
let our adversaries show us, if they can (without beging the question, and
building upon someone or other of their own principles, denied by us) where
ever Christ appointed or ordained any institution or observation, under the New
Covenant, as belonging to the nature of it, or such a necessary part of its
Worship, as is perpetually to continue. which, being one, in substance, and
effects (I speak of necessary not accidental effects) yet, beceause of some
small difference in form or circumstance, was before carnal, notwithstanding it
was commanded by God under the Law, but now is become Spiritual, because
commanded by Christ under the Gospel. And if they cannot do this, then, if
Water Baptism was once a carnal Ordinance, as the Apostle positively affirms it
to have been, it remains a carnal Ordinance still; and, if a carnal Ordinance,
then no necessary part of the Gospel or New Covenant Dispensation, and if no
necessary part of it, then not needful to continue, nor to be practiced by
such, as live and walk under this Dispensation. But in this, as in most other
things (according as we have often observed) our adversaries Judaize, and,
renouncing the Glorious and Spiritual Privileges of the New Covenant, are
sticking in, and cleaving to the Rudiments of the old, both in Doctrine and
Worship, as being more suited and agreeable to their carnal apprehensions, and
natural senses. But we, on the contrary, travel above all to lay hold upon, and
cleave unto the Light of the Glorious Gospel, revealed unto us. And the harmony
of the Truth we profess in this may appear, by briefly observing how in all
things we follow the Spiritual Gospel of Christ, as contradistinguished from
the carnality of the legal Dispensation, while our adversaries, through
rejecting this Gospel, are still laboring under the burden of the Law, which
neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear.

For the Law and rule of the old Covenant, and Jews, wus outward, written in
Tables of Stone and Parchments. So also is that of our adversaries. But the Law
of the New Covenant is inward and perpetual, written in the heart; so is ours.

The Worship of the Jews was outward and carnal, limited to set times, places
and persons, and performed according to set prescribed forms and vations; so is
that of our adversaries. But the Worship of the New Covenant is neither limited
to time, place, nor person, but is performed in the Spirit, and in Truth, and
is not acted according to set formand prescriptions, but as the Spirit of God
immediately acts, moves, and leads, whether it be to Preach, Pray, or Sing; and
such is also our Worship.

So likewise the baptism among the Jews under the Law, was an outward washing
with outward water, only to tipifie an outward purification of the Soul, which
did not necessarily follow upon those that were thus baptized. But the Baptism,
of Christ under the Gospel, is the Baptism of the Spirit and of Fire, not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God, and is the baptism that we labor to be baptized withal and
contented for.

Arg.
. VII. But again, If Water baptism had been an ordinance of the Gospel, then
the Apostle Paul would have been sent to administer it, but he declares
positively, 1 Cor. 17. That Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel. The reason of that consequence is undeniable, because the Apostle
Paul's Commission was as large as that of any of them; and consequently he
being in special manner the Apostle of Christ to the Gentiles, if Water Baptism
(as our Adversaries contend) be to be accounted the Badg of Christianity, he
had more need than any of the rest to be sent to Baptize with Water, that he
might mark the Gentiles converted by him, with that Christian sign. But indeed
the reason holds better thus, that since Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles,
and that in his Ministry he does through all (as by his Epistles appears)
labor to wean them from the former Jewish Ceremonies and Observations, (though
in so doing he was sometimes undeservedly judged by others of his Brethren, who
were unwilling to lay aside those Ceremonies) therefore his commission (though
as full as to the preaching of the Gospel and New Covenant Dispensation, at
that of the other Apostles) did not require of him that he should lead those
Converts into such Jewish Observations, and Baptisms, however that practice was
indulged in, and practiced by the other Apostles, among their Jewish
Proselytes; for which cause He thanks God that he baptized so few; intimating
that what he did therein, 1 Cor. 1.14.
he did not by virtue of his Apostolic commission, but rather in
condescendence to their weakness, even as at another time he circumcised
Timothy.

Obi.
Our Adversaries to evade the Truth of this Testimony, usually allege, that by
this is only to be understood, that he was not sent principally to baptize; not
that he was not sent at all.

But this exposition, since it contradicts the positive words of the text, and
has no better foundation, than the affirmation of its assertors, Answ.
is justly rejected as spurious, until they bring some better proof for it, he
says not, I was not sent principally to Baptize, but I was not sent to baptize.

As for what they urge by way of confirmation from other places of Scripture,
where [ not] is to be so taken, as where it is said, Confir. Matthew. 9.13.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice, which is to be understood, that God
requires principally mercy, not excluding Sacrifices.

I say this place is abundantly explained by the following words, Refut.
[ and the knowledge of God more than burnt Offerings] by which it clearly
appears, that Burnt offerings, which are one with Sacrifices, are not excluded,
but there is no such word added in that of Paul, and therefore the parity is
not demonstrated to be alike, and consequently the instance not sufficient,
unless they can prove that it ought so to be admitted here: else we might
interpret, by the same rule, all other places of Scripture the same way, as
were the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.5. That your Faith might not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the Power of God; it might be understood, it shall not
stand principally so. How might the Gospel by this liberty of interpretation,
be perverted?

If it be said, That the abuse of this baptism among the Corinthians, Obj.
in dividing themselves, according to the persons, by whom they were baptized,
made the Apostle speak so, but that the abuse of a thing does not abolish it.

I answer, it is true it does not, Answ.
provided the thing be lawful and necessary; and that no doubt the abuse
abovesaid, gave the Apostle occasion so to write. But let it from this be
considered, how the Apostle excludes baptizing, not preaching, though the abuse
[mark] proceeded from that, no less then from the other. For these Corinthians
did denominate themselves from those different persons, by whose preaching (as
well as from those, by whom they were baptized) they were converted as by the
4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 verses of the third chap. may appear: and yet for to remove
that abuse, the Apostle does not say, he was not sent to preach, nor yet does
he rejoice that he had only preached to a few, because Preaching, being a
standing ordinance in the Church, is not, because of any abuse, that the Devil
may tempt any to make of it, to be forborne, by such as are called to perform it
by the Spirit of God. Wherefore the Apostle accordingly chap. 3.8, 9. informs
them, as to that, how to remove that abuse; but as to Water Baptism, for that
it was no standing Ordinance of Christ, but only practiced as in condescendence
to the Jews, and by some Apostles to some Gentiles also, there so soon as the
Apostle perceived the abuse of, he let the Corinthians understand how little
stress was to be laid upon it, by showing them that he was glad that he had
administered this ceremony to so few of them, and by telling them plainly that
it was no part of his commission, neither that which he was sent to administer.

Some ask us, how we know that baptizing here is meant of water, and not of the
Spirit, Quest.
which if it be, then it will exolude baptism of the Spirit, as well as of
Water.

Answ.
I answer, such as ask the question, I suppose speak it, not as doubting that
this was said of Water Baptism, which is more then manifest: for since the
Apostle Paul's message was to turn People from darkness to Light, and convert
them to God; and that as many as are thus turned and converted ( so as to have
the answer of a good Conscience toward God, and to have put on Christ, and be
arisen with him in newness of life) are baptized with the baptism of the
Spirit. But who will say, that only these few mentioned there to be baptized by
Paul, were come to this? Or that, to turn or bring them to this condition, was
not (even admitting our Adversaries interpretation) as principally a part of
Paul's Ministry as any other? Since then our Adversaries do take this place for
Water Baptism (as indeed it is) we may lawfully, taking it also, urge it upon
them. Why the word baptism and baptizing is used by the Apostle, where that of
Water, and not of the Spirit is only understood, shall hereafter be spoken to.
I come now to consider the reasons alleged by such as plead for Water Baptism,
which are also the objections used against the discontinuance of it.

John 3. verse 34.
First, some object, that Christ, who had the Spirit above measure, was
notwithstanding baptized with Water. As Nic. Arnoldus, against this These,
Sect. 46. of his Theological Exercitation.

I answer, so was he also circumcised; it will not follow from thence, that
Circumcision is to continue; for it behoved Christ to fulfill all
Righteousness, not only the Ministry of John, but the Law also. Therefore did
he observe the Jewish Feasts and Rites, and kept the Passover: It will not then
follow, that Christians ought to do so now; and therefore Christ, Matthew. 3.15.
gives John this reason of his being baptized, desiring him to suffer it to be
so now; whereby he sufficiently intimates that he intended not thereby to
perpetuate it, as an Ordinance to his Disciples.

Secondly, they object, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, Obj.
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

This is the great objection, Answ.
and upon which they build the whole Superstructure, whereunto the first
general and sound answer is, by granting the whole, but putting them to prove
that Water is here meant, since the text is silent of it. And though in reason
it be sufficient upon our part, that we conclude the whole expressed in the
place, but deny that it is by Water, which is an addition to the Text. Yet I
shall premise some reasons why we do so, and then consider the reasons alleged
by those, that will have Water to be here understood.

The first is a maxim yielded to by all, Arg.
that we ought not to go from the literal signification of the Text, except
some urgent necessity force us thereunto.

But no urgent necessity in this place forces us thereunto:

Therefore we ought not to go from it.

Secondly, that Baptism which Christ commanded his Apostles, Arg.
was the One Baptism, id est, his own Baptism:

But the One Baptism, which is Christ's Baptism, is not with Water, as we have
already proved:

Therefore the Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles was not
Water Baptism.

Thirdly, that Baptism which Christ commanded his Apostles, was such, that as
many as were therewith Baptized, Arg.
did put on Christ.

But this is not true of Water Baptism.

Therefore, etc.

Fourthly, the Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles was not John's
Baptism:

But Baptism with Water was John's Baptism.

Therefore, etc.

But first, they alledg, that Christ's Baptism, Allegation
though a Baptism with Water, did differ from John 's, because John only
Baptized with Water unto Repentance, but Christ commands his Disciples to
Baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, reckoning, that in this
form, there lies a great difference betwixt the Baptism of John, and that of
Christ.

I answer, as to that, John's Baptism was unto Repentance, Answ.
the difference lies not there, because so is Christ's also; for our
adversaries will not deny, but that adult persons that are baptized, ought ere
they be admitted to it, to repent, and confess their sins, yea and that Infants
with a respect to, and consideration of their Baptism, ought to repent and
confess: So that the difference lies not here; since this of repentance and
confession agrees as well to Christ's, as to John's Baptism. But in this our
Adversaries are divided, for Calvin will have Christ's and John's to be all
one; Inst. lib. 4. cap. 15. Sect. 7, 8. Yet they do differ, and the difference
is, in that the one is by water, the other not, etc.

Secondly, as to what Christ says, in commanding them to baptize, in the Name
of the Father, Son and Spirit. I confess that states the difference, and it is
great; but that lies not only in admitting water baptism in this different
form, by a bare expressing of these words: for as the Text says no such thing,
neither do I see how it can be inferred from it. For the Greek is (...) that
is, into the Name, now the Name of the Lord is often taken in Scripture for
something else, than a bare sound of words, or literal expression, even forhis
Virtue and Power, as may appear from Psalm. 54.3. Cant. 1.3. Prove. 18.10. and in
many more. Now that the Apostles were by their Ministry, to baptize the Nations
into this Name, Virtue and Power; and that they did so is evident, by these
Testimonies of Paul, abovementioned, where he says, that as many of them as
were baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, this must have been a baptizing
into the Name, i. e. Power and Virtue; and not a mere formal expression of
words, adjoined with Water Baptism, because, as has been above observed, it
does not follow, as a natural or necessary consequence of it. I would have
those, who desire to have their Faith built upon no other foundation than the
Testimony of God's Spirit, and Scriptures of Truth, thoroughly to consider,
whether there can be any thing further alleged for this interpretation, than
what the prejudice of Education and Influence of Tradition has imposed;
perhaps it may stumble the unwary, and inconsiderate Reader, as if the very
Character of Christianity were abolished, to tell him plainly that this
Scripture is not to be understood, of Baptizing with Water, and that this form
of Baptizing in the Name of Father, Son, and Spirit, has no warrant from
Matthew. 28. etc.

For which, besides the reason taken from the signification of [ the Name] as
being the Virtue and Power above expressed, let it be considered, that, if it
had been a form prescribed by Christ to his Apostles, then surely they would
have made use of that form in the administering of Water Baptism, to such as
they baptized with Water; but though particular mention be made in diverse
places of the Acts, who were baptized, and how; and though it be particularly
expressed, that they baptized such and such, as, Acts 2.41.8.12, 13,
38.9.18.10.48.16.15.18.8. yet there is not a word of this form; and in two
places, Acts 8.16.19.5. it is said of some, that they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus, by which it yet more appears, that either the author of this
History has been very defective, who having so often occasion to mention this,
yet omiteth so substantial a part of Baptism (which were to accuse the Holy
Ghost, by whose guidance Luke wrote it) or else that the Apostle did no ways
understand, that Christ by his Commission, Matthew. 28. did enjoin them such a
form of Water Baptism, seeing they did not use it, and therefore it is safer to
conclude, that what they did in administering Water Baptism, they did not by
virtue of that commission; else they would have so used it: for our
adversaries, I suppose, would judge it a great Heresy to administer
Water Baptism without that, or only in the Name of Jesus, without mention of
Father or Spirit, as it is expressly said they did, in the two places above
cited.

Secondly, they say, if this were not understood of Water Baptism, it would be
a tautology, and all one with teaching.

I say nay, baptizing with the Spirit is somewhat further then teaching or
informing the understanding: for it imports a reaching to, and melting the
heart, whereby it is turned, as well as the understanding informed: besides, we
find often in the Scripture, that teaching and instructing are put together,
without any absurdity or needless tautology, and yet these two have a greater
affinity, than teaching and baptizing with the Spirit.

Thirdly, they say, Baptism, in this place, must be understood with Water,
because it is the action of the Apostles, Obj.
and so cannot be the Baptism of the Spirit, which is the work of Christ, and
his Grace, not of man, etc.

I answer, Baptism with the Spirit, though not wrought without Christ and his
Grace, is instrumentally done by men fitted of God, Answ.
for that purpose, and therefore no absurdity follows, that Baptism with the
Spirit should be expressed, as the action of the Apostles: for though it be
Christ by his Grace, that gives Spiritual Gifts, yet the Apostle, Romans 1.11.
speaks of his imparting to them Spiritual Gifts, and he tells the Corinthians,
that he had begotten them, through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. and yet to beget
people to the Faith is the work of Christ and his Grace, not of men; to convert
the heart is properly the work of Christ, and yet the Scripture often times
ascribes it to men, as being the instruments: And since Paul's commission was
to turn People from Darkness to Light, though that be not done without Christ
cooperating by his Grace, so may also baptizing with the Spirit be expressed
as performable by man, as the instrument, though the work of Christ's Grace, be
needful to concur thereunto; so that it is no absurdity, to say, that the
Apostles did administer the Baptism of the Spirit.

Obi.
Lastly, they say, that since Christ says here, that he will be with his
Disciples to the end of the world, therefore Water Baptism must continue so
long.

Answ.
If he had been speaking here of Water Baptism, then that might have been urged;
but seeing that is denied, and proved to be false, nothing from thence can be
gathered, he speaking of the Baptism of the Spirit, which we freely confess
does remain to the end of the world, yea, so long as Christ's presence abides
with his Children.

Obj.
. IX. Thirdly, they object the constant practice of the Apostles in the
primitive Church, who, they say, did always administer Water Baptism to such
as they Converted to the Faith of Christ, and hence also they further urge that
of Matthew. 28. to have been meant of Water, or else the Apostles did not
understand it, in that, in baptizing they used water; or that in so doing they
walked without a commission.

I answer, that it was the constant practice of the Apostles, is denied, for we
have shown, in the example of Paul, that it was not so, since it were most
absurd to judge, that he converted only these few; even of the Church of
Corinth, whom he says he Baptized; nor were it less absurd to think that that
was a constant Apostolic practice, which he that was not inferior to the
chiefest of the Apostles, and who declares, he labored as much as they all;
rejoices he was so little in. But further, the conclusion inferred from the
Apostles practice of baptizing with water, to evince that they understood,
Matthew. 28. of Water Baptism, does not hold: for though they baptized with
water, it will not follow, that either they did it by virtue of that
commission, or that they mistook that place, nor can there be any medium
brought that will infer such a conclusion. As to the other insinuated
absurdity, that they did it without a Commission. It is none at all, for they
might have done it by a permission, as being in use before Christ's Death. And
because the People nursed up with outward Ceremonies, could not be weaned
wholly from them. And thus they used other things, as Circumcision, and Legal
Purifications, which yet they had no commission from Christ to do (to which we
shall speak more at length in the following Proposition concerning the Supper.)

But if from the sameness of the word, because Christ bids them baptize, and
they afterward, in the use of water are said to baptize, Obj.
it be judged probable, that they did understand that commission, Matthew. 28. to
authorize them to baptize with water, and accordingly practiced it.

Although it should be granted, that for a season, Answ.
they did so far mistake it, as to judge that water belonged to that baptism
(which however I find no necessity of granting) yet I see not any great
absurdity would thence follow; for it is plain they did mistake that
commission, as to a main part of it, for a season, as where he bids them go
teach all Nations, since sometime after they judged it unlawful to teach the
Gentiles, yea Peter himself scrupled it, until by a Vision, constrained
thereunto, for which, after he had done it, he was for a season (until they
were better informed) judged by the rest of his Brethren. Now, if the Education
of the Apostles as Jews, and their propensity to adhere and stick to the Jewish
Religion, did so far influence them, that even after Christ's Resurrection and
the pouring forth of the Spirit, they could not receive, nor admit of the
teaching of the Gentiles, though Christ, in his commission to them, commanded
them to preach to them: What further absurdity were it to suppose, that through
the like mistake, the chiefest of them, having been the Disciples of John, and
his Baptism being so much prized there among the Jews, that they also took
Christ's Baptism, intended by him of the Spirit to be that of Water, which was
John's, and accordingly practiced it, for a season it suffices us, that if they
were so mistaken, (though I say not that they were so) they did not always
remain under that mistake, else Peter would not have said of the Baptism, which
now saves, that it is not a putting away of the filth of the flesh, which
certainly Water Baptism is.

But further they urge much Peter's baptizing Cornelius: in which they press
two things, First, that Water Baptism is used, even to those that had received
the Spirit. Secondly, that it is said positively, he commanded them to be
baptized, Acts 10.47, 48.

But neither of these does necessarily infer Water baptism to belong to the New
Covenant Dispensation, nor yet to be a perpetual standing Ordinance in the
Church. For first, all that this will amount to, was that Peter at that time
baptized these men, but that he did it by virtue of that commission, Matthew. 28.
remains yet to be proved. And how does the baptizing with water, after the
receiving of the Holy Ghost prove the case, more than the use of Circumcision
and other Legal Rites acknowledged to have been acted by him afterward; also
no wonder if Peter that thought it so strange (notwithstanding all that had
been professed before and spoken by Christ) that the Gentiles should be made
partakers of the Gospel, and with great difficulty, not without a very
extraordinary impulse thereunto, was brought to come to them and eat with them,
was apt to put this Ceremony upon them, which being as it were, the particular
Dispensation of John the fore runner of Christ, seemed to have greater affinity
with the Gospel, than the other Jewish Ceremonies, then used by the Church, but
that will no ways infer our Adversaries conclusion. Secondly, as to these
words and he commanded them to be baptized, it declares matter of fact, not of
right, and amounts to no more, than that Peter did at that time pro hic and
nunc command those persons to be baptized with Water, which is not denied, but
it says nothing that Peter commanded Water Baptism to be a standing and
perpetual Ordinance to the Church; neither can any man of sound reason say, if
he heed what he says, that a command in matter of fact to particular persons,
does infer the thing commanded to be of general obligation to all; if it be not
otherways bottomed upon some positive precept; why does Peter's commanding
Cornelius and his Household to be baptized at that time, infer Water Baptism to
continue, more than his constraining (which is more than commanding) the
Gentiles in general to be Circumcised, and observe the Law? We find that at
time when Peter Baptized Cornelius, it was not yet determined, whether the
Gentiles should not be Circumcised; but on the contrary, it was the most
general sense of the Church, that they should. And therefore no wonder, if they
thought it needful at that time, that they should be baptized, which had more
affinity with the Gospel, and was a burden less grievous.

Obj.
. X. Fourthly, they object, from the signification of the word [Baptize,] which
is as much as to dip and wash with water, alleging thence that the very word
imports a being baptized with water.

Answ.
This objection is very weak. For since baptizing with water was a Rite among
the Jews, as Paulus Riccius shows, even before the coming of John, and that
the Ceremony received that Name from the Nature of the practice, as used both
by the Jews and by John. Yea we find that Christ and his Apostles frequently
make use of these terms to a more Spiritual signification; Circumcision was
only used and understood among the Jews, to be that of the flesh. But the
Apostle tells us of the Circumcision of the Heart and Spirit, made without
hands. So that though Baptism was used among the Jews, only to signify a
washing with water, yet both John, Christ, and his Apopostles speak of a being
Baptized with the Spirit and with Fire, which they make the peculiar baptism of
Christ, as contradistinguished from that of water, which was John's (as is
above shown.) So that, tho Baptism among the Jews, was only understood of
water, yet among Christians, it is very well understood of the Spirit without
water, as we see Christ and his Apostles Spiritually to understand things,
under the terms of what had been shadows before. Thus Christ speaking of his
body, (though the Jews mistook him) said, he would destroy this Temple, and
build it again in three days; and many more that might be instanced. But if the
Etymology of the word should be tenaciously adhered to, it would militate
against most of our Adversaries, as well as against us, for the Greek (...)
signifies Immergo, that is, to plunge and dip in, and that was the proper use
of Water Baptism among the Jews, and also by John, and the primitive
Christians, who used it; whereas our Adversaries for the most part, only
sprinkle a little water upon the Forehead, which does not at all answer to the
word [ baptism.] Yea those of old among Christians, that used Water Baptism,
thought this dipping and plunging so needful, that they thus dipped Children.
And forasmuch as it was judged, that it might prove hurtful to some weak
constitutions, sprinkling, to prevent that hurt, was introduced; yet then it
was likewise appointed, that such as were only sprinkled, and not dipped,
should not be admitted to have any office in the Church, as not being
sufficiently baptized. So that if our Adversaries will stick to the word, they
must alter their method of sprinkling.

Fifthly they object, John 3.5. Obj.
Except a man be born again of Water and of the Spirit, etc. hence inferring
the necessity of Water Baptism, as well as of the Spirit.

But if this prove any thing, Answ.
it will prove Water Baptism to be of absolute necessity; and therefore
Protestants rightly affirm, when this is urged upon them by Papists, to evince
the absolute necessity of Water baptism, that [ water] is not here understood
of outward water, but mystically of an inward cleansing and washing, even as
where Christ speaks of being baptized with fire, it is not to be understood of
outward material Fire, but only of purifying, by a metonymie, because to
purify is a proper effect of Fire, as to wash and make clean is of Water;
where it can as little be so understood, as where we are said to be saved by
the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Yea Peter says expressly, in the place
often cited, as In the 4 book of his Instit. chap. 15.
Calvin well observes, that the Baptism which saves, is not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh: so that since [ water] cannot be understood of outward
water, this can serve nothing to prove Water baptism.

If it be said, that [Water] imports here necessitatem praecepti, though not
medii. Obj.


Answ.
I answer, that is first to take it for granted that outward Water is here
understood, the contrary whereof we have already proved. Next, Water and the
Spirit are placed here together [ Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit]
where the necessity of the one is urged, as much as of the other. Now, if the
Spirit be absolutely necessary, so will also Water, and then we must either
say, that to be born of the Spirit, is not absolutely necessary, which all
acknowledge to be false; or else that water is absolutely necessary, which as
Protestants we affirm, and have proved, is false: else we must confess that
Water is not here understood of outward Water. For to say, that when Water and
the Spirit are placed here just together, and in the same manner, though there
be not any difference, or ground for it, visible in the Text, or deduceable
from it, that the necessity of water is here praecepti, but no medii, but the
necessity of the Spirit is both medii and praecepti, is indeed confidently to
affirm, but not to prove.

Obj.
Sixthly, and lastly, they object, that the baptism of water is a visible sign,
or badge, to distinguish Christians from Infidels, even as Circumcision did the
Jews.

I answer, This says nothing at all, unless it be proved to be a necessary
precept, Answ.
or part of the New Covenant Dispensation; it not being lawful to us to impose
outward Ceremonies and Rites, and say, they will distinguish us from Infidels.
Circumcision was positively commanded, and said to be a seal of the first
Covenant, but as we have already proved, that there is no such command for
Baptism, so there is not any word in all the New Testament, calling it a badg
of Christianity, or seal of the New Covenant; and therefore to conclude it is
so, because Circumcision was so, (unless some better proof be alleged for it)
is miserably to beg the question. The professing of Faith in Christ, and a holy
life answering thereunto, is a far better badg of Christianity, than any
outward washing, which yet answers not to that of Circumcision; since that
affixed a Character in the flesh, which this does not; so that a Christian is
not known to be a Christian by his being Baptized, especially when he was a
Child, unless he tell them so much; and may not the professing Faith in Christ
signify that as well. I know there are diverse of those called Fathers, that
speak much of Water Baptism, calling it Character Christianitatis, but so did
they also of the sign of the Cross, and other such things justly rejected by
Protestants. For the mystery of iniquity, which began to work even in the
Apostles days, soon spoiled the simplicity and purity of the Christian Worship,
so that not only many Jewish Rites were retained, but many heathenish Customs
and Ceremonies introduced into the Christian Worship, as particularly that word
[ Sacrament] so that it is great folly, especially for Protestants, to plead
any thing of this from Tradition or Antiquity; for we find that neither Papists
nor Protestants use these Rites exactly, as the Ancients did, who in such
things, not walking by the most certain Rule of God's Spirit, but doting too
much upon outward, were very uncertain: for most of them all, in the primitive
time, did wholly plunge and dip those they Baptized, which neither Papists nor
Protestants do,: yea several of the Fathers accused some as Heretics in their
days, for holding some Principles common with Protestants concerning it* as
particularly Augustine does the Pelagians, for saying, that Infants dying
unbaptized may be saved. And the Manichees were condemned, for denying that
Grace is universally given by Baptism; and Julian the Pelagian by Augustine, for
denying exorcism and insufflation in the use of Baptism: all which things
Protestants deny also. So that Protestants do but foolishly to upbraid us, as
if we could not show any among the Ancients that denied Water Baptism, seeing
they cannot show any, whom they acknowledge not to have been heretical in
several things, to have used it, nor yet who using it did not use also the sign
of the Cross, and other things with it, which they deny. There were some
nevertheless in the darkest times of Popery, who testified against
Water Baptism. For one Alanus, page 103, 104, 107. speaks of some in his time,
that were burnt for the denying of it: for they said, that Baptism had no
efficacy either in Children, or adult Persons; and therefore men were not
obliged to take Baptism. Particularly Ten Canonicks, so called, were burnt for
that crime by the order of King Robert of France. And P. Pithaeus tells in his
Fragments of the History of Guienne, which is also confirmed by one Johannes
Floracensis, a Monk, who was famous at that time, in his Epistle to Oliva,
Abbot of the Ausonian Church. I will (says he) give you to understand
concerning the Heresy, that was in the City of Orleans on Childe^-mass-day,
foy it was true, if ye have heard any thing, that King Robert caused to be
burnt alive, nigh fourteen of that City, of the chief of their Clergy, and the
more noble of their Laics, who were hateful to God, and abominable to Heaven
and Earth, for they did stiffly deny the Grace of Holy Baptism, and also the
Consecration of our Lord's Body and Blood. The time of this deed, is noted in
these words by Papir. Masson, in his Annals of France, lib. 3. in Hugh and
Robert, actum Aureliae public anno incarnationis Domini 1022, regni Roberti
Regis 28. indictione 5. quando Stephanus haeresiarcha and accomplices ejus
damnati sunt and exusti Aureliae.

Now for their calling them Heretics and Maniches, we have nothing but the
testimony of their accusers, which will no more invalidate their testimony for
this Truth, against the use of Water Baptism, or give more ground to charge us
as being one with Maniches, than, because some, called by them Maniches, do
agree with Protestants in some things, that therefore Protestants are Maniches
or Heretics, which Protestants can no ways shun. For the question is,
whether, in what they did they walked according to the Truth testified of by
the Spirit in the Holy Scripture; so that the controversy is brought back
again to the Scriptures, according to which I suppose I have formerly discussed
it.

As for the latter part of the Thesis, denying the use of Infant Baptism, it
necessarily follows from what is above said, for, if Water Baptism be ceased,
then surely Baptizing of Infants is not warrantable. But those, that take upon
them to oppose us in this matter, will have more to do, as to this latter part:
for, after they have done, what they can, to prove Water Baptism, it remains
for them to prove that Infants ought to be baptized. For he, that proves
Water Baptism ceased, proves that Infant Baptism is vain. But he, that should
prove that Water Baptism continues, has not thence proved that Infant Baptism
is necessary. That needs something further, and therefore it was a pitiful
subterfuge of Nic. Arnoldus against this, to say, that the denying of
Infant Baptism belonged to the gangrene of the Anabaptists, without adding any
further probation.

The Thirteenth Proposition, Concerning the Communion or participation of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, is inward and Spiritual, which
is the participation of his Flesh and Blood, by which the inward man is daily
nourished, in the hearts of those in whom Christ dwells, of which things the
breaking of Bread by Christ with his Disciples was a figure, which they even
used in the Church for a time, who had received the Substance, for the sake of
the weak: even as abstaining from things strangled, and from Blood, the washing
of one another Feet, and the anointing of the Sick with Oil, all which are
commanded with no less authority and solemnity than the former; yet seeing they
are but the shaddows of better things, they cease in such as have obtained the
Substance.

I. THe Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is a mystery hid from all
natural men in their first fallen and degenerate state, which they cannot
understand, reach to, nor comprehend, as they there abide, neither, as they
there are, can they be partakers of it, nor yet are they able to discern the
Lord's Body: And forasmuch as the Christian World, so called, for the most part
has been still laboring, working, conceiving, and imagining in their own
natural and unrenewed understandings, about the things of God and Religion,
therefore has this mystery much been hid and sealed up from them, while they
have been contending, quarrelling, and fighting one with another about the mere
shadow, outside, and form, but strangers to the Substance, Life, and Virtue.

. II. The Body then of Christ, which believers partake of, is Spiritual and not
Carnal, and his Blood, which they drink of, is pure and heavenly, and not
humane or elementary, as Augustine also affirms of the Body of Christ, which is
eaten, in his Tractat. Psalm. 98. Except a man eat my Flesh, he has not in him
Life Eternal, and he says, the words, which I spoke unto you, are Spirit and
Life, understand spiritually what I have spoken. Ye shall not eat of this Body,
which ye see, and drink this Blood, which they shall spill, that crucify me --
I am the living Bread, who have descended from Heaven; he calls himself the
Bread, who descended from Heaven, exhorting that we might believe in him, etc.

Quest^
If it be asked then, what that Body, what that Flesh and Blood is?

I answer, it is that Heavenly Seed, that Divine, Spiritual, Celestial
Substance, Answ.
of which we spoke before, in the fifth and sixth Propositions. This is that
vehiculum Dei, or Spiritual Body of Christ, whereby and wherethrough he
communicates Life to men, and Salvation to as many as believe in him, and
receive him, and whereby also man comes to have fellowship and communion with
God. This is proved from the 6 of John, from verse 32 to the end, where Christ
speaks more at large of this matter, than in any other place: and indeed this
Evangelist and beloved Disciple, who lay in the bosom of our Lord, gives us a
more full account of the Spiritual sayings and Doctrine of Christ, and it is
observable, that, though he speaks nothing of the ceremony, used by Christ of
breaking Bread with his Disciples, neither in his Evangelical account of
Christ's life and sufferings, nor in his Epistles, yet he is more large in this
account of the participation of the Body, Flesh, and Blood of Christ, than any
of them all. For Christ in this Chapter, perceiving that the Jews did follow
him for Love of the Loaves, desires them (ver. 27.) to labor not for the meat,
which perishes, but for that meat, which endures for ever; but forasmuch as
they, being carnal in their apprehensions, and not understanding the Spiritual
Language and Doctrine of Christ, did judge the Manna, which Moses gave their
Fathers, to be the most excellent Bread, as coming from Heaven. Christ, to
rectify that mistake, and better inform them, affirms, first, that is not
Moses, but his Father, that gives the true Bread from Heaven, ver. 32, 48.
Secondly, This Bread he calls himself, ver. 35. I am the Bread of Life, and
ver. 51. I am the living Bread, which came down from Heaven. Thirdly, he
declares that this Bread is his Flesh, ver. 51. This Bread, that I will give,
is my Flesh, And ver. 55. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink
indeed. Fourthly, the necessity of partaking thereof, ver. 53. Except ye eat
the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. And
lastly, ver. 33. the blessed fruits and necessary effects of this communion of
the Body and Blood of Christ, This Bread gives life to the world, ver. 50. He,
that eats thereof, dies not, ver. 58. he, that eats of this Bread, shall
live for ever, ver. 51. who so eats this Flesh, and drinks this Blood,
shall live for ever, ver. 54. and he dwells in Christ, and Christ in him,
ver. 56. and shall live by Christ, ver. 57. From this large description of the
origin, nature, and effects of this Body, Flesh, and Blood of Christ, it is
apparent, that it is Spiritual, and to be understood of a Spiritual Body, and
not of that Body, or Temple of Jesus Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary,
and in which he walked, lived and suffered in the land of Judea; because that
it is sa^d both that it came down from Heaven, yea that it is he, that came
down from Heaven. Now all Christians at present generally acknowledge, that the
outward Body of Christ came not down from Heaven, neither was it that part of
Christ, which came down from Heaven. And to put the matter out of doubt, when
the carnal Jews would have been so understanding it, he tells them plainly,
ver. 63. It is the Spirit, that quickens, but the Flesh profits nothing.
This is also founded upon most sound and solid reason, because that it is the
Soul, not the Body, that is to be nourished by this Flesh and Blood. Now
outward Flesh cannot nourish nor feed the Soul, there is no proportion, nor
analogy betwixt them, neither is the communion of the Saints with God, by a
conjunction and mutual participation of Flesh, but of the Spirit, He, that is
joined to the Lord, is One Spirit, not by Flesh (I mean outward Flesh, 1 Cor
6.17.
even such as was that, wherein Christ lived and walked, when upon Earth, and
not Flesh, when transported by a metaphor, to be understood Spiritually) can
only partake of Flesh, as Spirit of Spirit, as the Body cannot feed upon
Spirit, neither can the Spirit feed upon Flesh: and that the Flesh, here spoken
of, is spiritually understood, appears further, in that, that which feeds
upon it, shall never die: but the Bodies of all men once die, yea, it behoved
the Body of Christ himself to die, that this Body and Spiritual Flesh and Blood
of Christ, is to be understood of that Divine and Heavenly Seed, before spoken
of by us, appears both by the nature and fruits of it: First, it is said, it is
that, which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world: now, this
answers to that Light and Seed, which is testified of, Joh. 1. to be the Light
of the World, and the Life of Men. For that Spiritual Light and Seed; as it
receives place in men's hearts, and room to spring up there, is as Bread to the
hungry and fainting Soul, that is as it were buried and dead in the lusts of
the World, which receives life again, and revives, as it tastes and partaketh
of this heavenly bread, and they that partake of it are said to come to Christ;
neither can any have it, but by coming to him, and believing in the appearance
of his Light in their hearts, by receiving which and believing in it, the
participation of this body and bread is known. And that Christ understands the
same thing here by his Body, Flesh, and Blood, which is understood, John 1. by
the Light inlightening every man, and the Life, etc. appears, for the Light and
Life spoken of, John 1. is said to be Christ, he is the true Light,; and the
Bread and Flesh, etc. spoken of in this 6 of John, is called Christ, I am the
Bread of Life says he. Again, they that received that Light and Life, John
1.12. obtained power to become the Sons of God, by believing in his Name: so
also here, John 6.35. He that comes unto this bread of Life, shall not hunger:
and he, that believes in him, who is this bread, shall never thirst. So then,
as there was the outward visible Body and Temple of Jesus Christ, which took
its origin from the Virgin Mary, so there is also the Spiritual Body of Christ,
by and through which he, that was the Word in the beginning with God, and was,
and is GOD, did reveal himself to the Sons of Men in all ages, and whereby men
in all ages, come to be made partakers of Eternal Life, and to have communion
and fellowship with God and Christ. Of which body of Christ, and flesh and
blood, if both Adam and Seth, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and
David, and all the Prophets, and Holy men of God had not eaten, they had not
had life in them, nor could their inward man have nourished. Now, as the
outward Body and Temple was called Christ, so was also his Spiritual Body, no
less properly, and that long before that outward Body was in being. Hence the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. that the Fathers did all eat the same Spiritual
meat; and did all drink the same Spiritual drink: (for they drank of that
Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.) This cannot be
understood otherwise than of this Spiritual body of Christ: which Spiritual
body of Christ, though it was the saving food of the Righteous, both before the
Law, and under the Law, yet under the Law it was veiled and shaddowed, and
covered under diverse types, ceremonies and observations, yea and not so, but it
was veiled and hid in some respect, under the outward Temple and Body of
Christ, or during the continuance of it: so that the Jews could not understand
Christ's Preaching about it, while on Earth. And not the Jews only, but many of
his Disciples judged it an hard saying, John ^. 60, 66.
murmured at it, and many from that time went back from him, and walked no more
with him. I doubt not but that there are many also at this day professing to be
the Disciples of Christ, that do as little understand this matter, as those
did, and are as apt to be offended and stumble at it, while they are gazing and
following after the outward Body, and look not to that, by which the Saints are
daily fed and nourished. For as Jesus Christ, in obedience to the will of the
Father, did by the eternal Spirit offer up that body for a propitiation for the
remission of sins, and finished his testimony upon earth thereby, in a most
perfect example of patience, resignation and holiness, that all might be made
partakers of the feuit of that Sacaifice. So has he likewise poured forth into
the hearts of all men, a measure of that Divine Light and Seed, wherewith he is
clothed, that thereby, reaching unto the Consciences of all, he may raise them
up out of death and darkness, by his Life and Light, and thereby may be made
partakers of his body, and therethrough come to have fellowship with the Father
and with the Son.

. III. If it be asked how, Quest.
and after what manner man comes to partake of it, and to be sed by it?

I answer in the plain and express words of Christ, I am the Bread of Life,
(says he) he that comes to me, shall never hunger, Answ.
he that believes in me, shall never thirst: and again, for my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. So whosoever thou art, John 6.35* 55.
that ask this question, or read these lines, whether thou accountest thy
self a Believer, or really feel by a certain and sad experience, that thou
art yet in the unbelief, and find that the outward body and flesh of Christ
is so far from thee, that thou can not reach it, nor feed upon it: yea,
though thou have often swallowed down, and taken in, that which the Papists
have persuaded thee to be the real Flesh and Blood of Christ, and have believed
it to be so, though all thy senses told thee the contrary: or (being a
Luthenan) have taken that bread in, and with, and under which, the Lutherans
have assured thee that the flesh and blood of Christ is: or (being a Calvinist)
have partaken of that, which the Calvinists say (though a figure only of the
Body) gives them that take it, a real Participation of the Body, Flesh, and
Blood of Christ; though they neither know how, nor what way. I say, if for all
this, thou find thy Soul yet barren, yea hungry, and ready to starve, for
want of something thou longest for. Know that that Light, that discovers thy
Iniquity to thee, that shows thee thy barrenness, thy nakedness, thy emptyness,
is that body, that thou must partake of, and feed upon; but that till, by
forsaking iniquity, thou turnest to it, come unto it, receivest it, though
thou may hunger after it, thou can not be satisfied with it; 2 Cor. 6.14.
for it has no communion with darkness, nor can thou drink of the Cup of the
Lord, and the Cup of devils, and be partaker of the Lord's Table, and the Table
of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. But, as thou suffer that small Seed of
Righteousness to arise in thee, and to be formed into a birth, that new
substantial birth, that is brought forth in the Soul, naturally feeds upon, and
is nourished by this spiritual body: yea, at this outward birthlives not, but
as it sucks in breath by the outward elementary air, so this new birth lives
not in the Soul, but as it draws in, and breaths by that spiritual air, or
vehicle: and as the outward birth cannot subsist without some outward body to
feed upon, some outward flesh, and some outward drink, so neither can this
inward birth, without it be fed by this inward flesh and blood of Christ, which
answers to it after the same manner, by way of analogy. And this is most
agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ concerning this matter, for, as without
outward food the natural body has not life, so also says Christ, Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, John 6.53. John 6.57.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And as the outward body, eating
outward food, lives thereby, so Christ says, that he that eats him, shall
live by him. So it is this inward participation of this inward man, of this
inward and Spiritual body, by which man is united to God, and has fellowship
and communion with him. John 6.56.
He, that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood (says Christ) dwells in me,
and I in him. This cannot be understood of outward eating of outward Bread, and
as by this the Soul must have fellowship with God, so also in so far as all the
Saints are partakers of this one body, and one blood; they come also to have a
joint Communion. Hence the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.17. in this respect says, that
they being many, are one bread and one body: and to the wise among the
Corinthians he says, the bread which we break, is the communion of the body of
Christ. verse, 16.
This is the True and Spiritual Supper of the Lord, which men come to partake
of, by hearing the voice of Christ, and opening the door of their hearts, and
so letting him in, in the manner abovesaid, according to the plain words of the
Scripture, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come into him, and will Sup with him, and he
with me. So that the Supper of the Lord, and the Supping with the Lord, and
partaking of his Flesh and Blood, is no ways limited to the Ceremony of
breaking Bread, and drinking Wine at particular times; but is truly and really
enjoyed, as often as the Soul retires into the Light of the Lord, and feels and
partakes of that Heavenly Life, by which the inward Man is nourished, which may
be, and is often witnessed by the Faithful at all times, though more
particularly, when they are Assembled together to wait upon the Lord.

. IV. But what confusion the professors of Christianity have run into
concerning this matter, is more than obvious, who, as in most other things they
have done, for want of a true Spiritual understanding, have sought to tie this
Supper of the Lord to that ceremony (used by Christ before his Death) of
breaking Bread and drinking Wine with his Disciples. And though they for most
part agree in this general, yet how do they contend and debate, one against
another? How strangely are they pinched, pained and straightened to make this
Spiritual mystery agree to that Ceremony? And what monstrous and wild opinions
and conceivings have they invented, to enclose or affix the Body of Christ to
their Bread and Wine? From which opinion, not only the greatest and fiercest
and most hurtful contests, both among the Professors of Christianity in
general, and among Protestants in particular, have arisen, but also such
absurdities, irrational and blasphemous consequences have ensued, as makes the
Christian Religion odious and hateful to Jews, Turks, and Heathens. The
professors of Christianity do chiefly divide, in this matter, into three
opinions.

The first is of those that say, the substance of the bread is
transubstantiated into the very substance of that same body flesh, and blood of
Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary and crucified by the Jews: so that,
after the words of Consecration (as they call them) it is no more bread, but
the body of Christ.

The second is of such, as say, the substance of the Bread remains, but that
also, that body is in, and with, and under the bread: so that, both the
substance of the bread and of the body, flesh, and blood of Christ is there
also.

The third is of those, that (denying both these) do affirm, that the body of
Christ is not there corporally, or substantially, but yet that it is really and
sacramentally received by the faithful, in the use of bread and wine; but how,
or what way it is there, they know not, nor can they tell, only we must believe
it is there, yet so, that it is only properly in Heaven.

It is not my design to enter into a refutation of these several opinions, for
each of their Authors and Assertors have sufficiently refuted one another, and
are all of them no less strong both from Scripture and Reason, in refuting each
their contrary parties opinion, than they are weak in establishing their own;
for I often bave seriously observed in reading their respective writings (and
so it may be have others) that all of them do notably, in so far as they refute
the contray opinions, but that they are mightily pained, when they come to
confirm and plead for their own: Hence I necessarily to conclude, that none of
them had attained to the Truth and Substance of this mystery. Let us see if
Calvin, Inst. lib. 4. cap. 17.
after he has refuted the two former opinions, be more successful in what he
affirms and asserts for the Truth of his opinion, who after he has much
labored in overturning and refuting the two former opinions, plainly
confesses, that he knows not what to affirm instead of them, for after he has
spoken much, and at last concluded, that the body of Christ is there, and that
the Saints must needs partake thereof, at last he lands in these words, sect.
32. But if it be asked me, how it is, I shall not he ashamed to confess that it
is a secret, too high for me to comprehend in my Spirit, or explain in words.
Here he deals very ingenuously, and yet who would have thought that such a man
would have been brought to this strait, in the confirming of his opinion;
considering but a little before, in the same chap. sect. 15. he accuses the
Schoolmen among the Papists, (and I confess truly) in that they neither
understand, nor explain to others how Christ is in the Eucharist, which shortly
after he confesses himself he cannot do. If then the School men among the
Papists, do neither understand, nor yet can explain to others their Doctrine in
this matter, nor Calvin can comprehend it in his Spirit, (which I judge is as
much as not to understand it) nor express it in words (and then surely he
cannot explain it to others) then no certainty is to be had from either of
them. There have been great endeavors used for reconcilement in this matter,
both betwixt Papists and Lutherans, Lutherans and Caluinists, yea and
Calvinists and Papists, but all to no purpose: and many forms and manners of
expressions drawn up, to which all might yield, which in the end proved in
vain, seeing every one understood them, and interpreted them their own way* and
so they did thereby but equivocate and deceive one another. The reason of all
this contention is, because they all wanted a clear understanding of the
Mystery, and were doting about the shadow and the externals. For both the
ground and matter of their contest lies in things intrinsic from, and
unnecessary to the main matter; and this has been often the policy of Satan to
busy People, and amuse them with outward signs, shadows and forms, making them
contend about that, while in the mean time the Substance is neglected, yea and
in contending for these shadows, he stirs them up to the practice of malice,
heat, revenge and other vices, by which he establishes his Kingdom of Darkness
among them, and ruins the Life of Christianity: for there has been more
animosity and heat about this one particular, and more blood shed and
contention, than about any other. And surely they are little acquainted with
the state of Protestants affairs, who know not that their contentions about
this have been more hurtful to the Reformation, than all the opposition they
met with from their common Adversaries. Now all those uncertain and absurd
opinions, and the contentions therefrom arising, have proceeded from their all
agreeing in two general errors concerning this thing. Which being denied and
receeded from, as they are by us, there would be an easy way made for
Reconciliation, and we should all meet in the one Spiritual and true
understanding of this mystery; and as the contentions, so would also the
absurdities, which follow from all the three forementioned opinions, cease and
fall to the ground.

The first of these errors is, in making the communion or participation of the
body, flesh, and blood of Christ to relate to that outward body, vessel or
temple, that was born of the Virgin Mary, and walked and suffered in Judea,
whereas it should relate to the Spiritual body, flesh, and blood of Christ,
even that heavenly and celestial Light and Life which was the food and
nourishment of the regenerate in all ages, as we have already proved.

The second error is, in tying this participation of the body and blood of
Christ to that Ceremony, used by him with his Disciples, in the breaking of
bread, etc. as if it had only a relation thereto, or were only enjoyed in the
use of that Ceremony, which it neither has nor is. For this is that bread,
which Christ in his Prayer teaches to call for, terming it (...), i. e. the
supersubstantial bread, as the Greek has it, and which the Soul partakes of,
without any relation or necessary respect to this ceremony, as shall be
hereafter proved more at length.

These two errors being thus laid aside, and the contentions arising therefrom
buried, all are agreed in the main positions, viz. first, that the body, flesh,
and blood of Christ is necessary for the nourishing of the Soul. Secondly, that
the Souls of believers do really and truly partake and feed upon the body,
flesh, and blood of Christ. But while men are not content with the Spirituality
of this Mystery, going in their own wills, and according to their own
inventions, to strain and wrest the Scriptures, for to tie this Spiritual
communion of the flesh, and blood of Christ, to outward bread and wine, and
such like carnal ordinances, no wonder, if by their carnal apprehensions, they
run into heaps and confusion. But because it has been generally supposed that
the communion of the body and blood of Christ, had some special relation to the
ceremony of breaking bread, I first refute that opinion, and then proceed to
consider the nature and use of that ceremony, and whether it be now necessary
to continue, answering the reasons and objections of such as plead its
continuance, as a necessary and standing ordinance of Jesus Christ.

. V. First it must be understood, that I speak of a necessary and peculiar
relation, otherwise than in a general respect: for, forasmuch as our communion
with Christ is, and ought to be our greatest and chiefest work, we ought to do
all other things with a respect to God, and our fellowship with him; but a
special and necessary respect or relation is such, as where the two things are
so tied and united together either of their own nature, or by the command of
God, that the one cannot be enjoyed, or at lest is not (except very
extraordinarily) without the other. Thus Salvation has a necessary respect to
Holiness, because without Holiness no man shall see God. And the eating of the
flesh and blood of Christ, has a necessary respect to our having life, because
if we eat not his flesh, and drink not his blood, we cannot have life: our
feeling of God's presence has a necessary respect to our being found meeting
in his name, by Divine Precept, because he has promised, where two or three are
met together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them; in like manner our
receiving benefits and blessings from God, has a necessary respect to our
Praying, because if we ask, he has promised we shall receive. Now the
communion or participation of the flesh, and blood of Christ has no such
necessary relation to the breaking of bread and drinking of Wine. For, if it
had any such necessary relation, it would either be from the Nature of the
thing, or from some Divine Precept: But we shall show it is from neither:
Therefore, etc. First, it is not from the nature of it, because to partake of
the flesh and blood of Christ is a Spiritual exercise; and all confess that it
is by the Soul and Spirit that we become real partakers of it, as it is the
Soul, and not the Body, that is nourished by it: but to eat Bread and drink
Wine is a natural act, which in it self, adds nothing to the Soul, neither has
any thing that is Spiritual in it, because the most carnal man that is, can as
fully, as perfectly, and as wholly eat Bread and drink Wine, as the most
Spiritual. Secondly, their relation is not by nature, else they would infer one
another: but all acknowledge that many eat of the bread, and drink of the wine,
even that which they say, is consecrate and transubstantiate into the very body
of Christ* who notwithstanding have not life eternal, have not Christ dwelling
them, nor do live by him, as all do, who truly partake of the flesh and blood
of Christ, without the use of this ceremony, as all the Patriarchs and Prophets
did, before this ordinance (as they account it) was instituted: neither was
there any thing under the Law, that had any direct or necessary relation
hereunto, though to partake of the flesh and blood of Christ in all ages was
indispensibly necessary to Salvation. For as for the Paschal Lamb, the whole
end of it is signified particularly; Exodus 13.8* 9. to wit, that the Jews might
thereby be kept in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt. Secondly, it
has no relation by Divine Precept, for if it had, it would be mentioned in
that, which our Adversaries account the institution of it, or else in the
practice of it, by the Saints recorded in Scripture, but so it is not. For as
to the institution, or rather narration of Christ's practice in this matter, we
have it recorded by the Evangelist Matthew, Mark and Luke. Matthew. 26.16. Mark
14.22. Luke 22.19.
In the first two there is only an account of the matter of fact, to wit, that
Christ brake bread, and gave it his Disciples to eat, saying, this is my Body,
and blessing the cup, he gave it them to drink, saying, this is my blood; but
nothing of any desire to them to do it. In the last, after the bread, (but
before the blessing or giving them the wine) he bids them do it in remembrance
of him; what we are to think of this practice of Christ shall be spoken
ofhereafter. But what necessary relation has all this to the believers
partaking of the flesh and blood of Christ? The end of this for which they were
to do it (if at all) is to remember Christ, which the Apostle yet more
particularly expresses, 1 Cor. 11.26. to show forth the Lord's death. But to
remember the Lord, or declare his death, which are the special and particular
ends annexed to the use of this ceremony is not at all to partake of the flesh
and blood of Christ, neither have they any more necessary relation to it, than
any other two different Spiritual duties. For though they, that partake of the
flesh and blood of Christ, cannot but remember him; yet the Lord and his death
may be remembered (as none can deny) where his flesh and blood is not truly
partaken of. So that, since the very particular and express end of this
ceremony may be witnessed (to wit, the remembrance of the Lord's Death) and yet
the flesh and blood of Christ not partaken of, it cannot have had any necessary
relation to it, else the partaking thereof would have been the end of it, and
could not have been attained without this participation. But on the contrary,
we may well infer hence, that since the positive end of this ceremony is not
the partaking of the flesh and blood of Christ, and that whoever partakes of
the flesh and blood of Christ, cannot but remember him; that therefore such
need not this ceremony to put them in remembrance of him.

But if it be said, that Jesus Christ calls the bread here his body, and the
wine his blood; Obj.
therefore he seems to have had a special relation to his Disciples partaking
of his flesh and blood, in the use of this thing.

I answer, his calling the bread his body, and the wine his blood, Answ.
would yet infer no such thing; though it is not denied but that Jesus Christ,
in all things he did, yea and from the use of all natural things, took occasion
to raise the minds of his Disciples and hearers to Spirituals. Hence from the
Woman of Samaria her drawing water, he took occasion to tell her of that living
Water, which whosoever drinks of shall never thirst, which indeed is all one with
his blood, here spoken of. Yet it will not follow that that Well or Water, had
any necessary relation to the Living Water, or the Living Water to it, etc. So
Christ takes occasion, from the Jews following him for the Loaves, to tell them
of this Spiritual bread and flesh of his body, which was more necessary for
them to feed upon. It will not therefore follow, that their following him for
the Loaves, had any necessary relation thereunto. So also Christ, here being at
supper with his Disciples, takes occasion from the bread and wine, which was
before them, to signify unto them, that as that bread, which he brake unto
them, and that wine, which he blessed and gave unto them, did contribute to the
preserving and nourishing of their bodies, so was he also to give his body, and
shed his blood for the Salvation of their Souls; and therefore the very end
proposed in this ceremony, to those, that observe it, is to be a memorial of
his Death.

But if it be said, that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.16. calls the bread which he
brake, the communion of the body of Christ, and the cup, the communion of his
blood.

I do most willingly subscribe unto it, but do deny that this is understood of
the outward bread, neither can it be evinced, but the contrary is manifest from
the context, for the Apostle in this chapter speaks not one word of that
ceremony; for having in the beginning of it shown them, how the Jews of old
were made partakers of the Spiritual food, and water, which was Christ, and how
several of them, through disobedience and idolatry, fell from that good
condition, he exhorts them by the example of those Jews, whom God destroyed of
old, to flee those evils, showing them that they, to wit, the Corinthians, are
likewise partakers of the body and blood of Christ, of which communion they
would rob themselves, if they did evil, because they could not drink of the cup
of the Lord, and the cup of devils, and partake of the Lords table, and of the
Table of devils, ver. 21. which shows, that he understands not here the using
of outward bread and wine; because those that do drink the cup of devils, and
eat of the table of devils, yea the wickedest of men may partake of the outward
bread and outward wine. For there the Apostle calls the bread one, ver. 17. and
he says, we being many are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of
that one bread. Now if the bread be one, it cannot be the outward, or the
inward would be excluded, whereas, it cannot be denied, but that it is the
partaking of the inward bread, and not the outward, that makes the Saints truly
one body, and one bread. And whereas they say, that the one bread here
comprehends both the outward and inward, by virtue of the Sacramental union;
that indeed is to affirm, but not to prove. As for that figment of a
Sacramental union, I find not such a thing in all the Scripture, especially in
the New Testament, nor is there any thing can give a rise for such a thing in
this chapter, where the Apostle, as is above observed, is not at all treating
of that ceremony, but only from the excellency of that privilege, which the
Corinthians had, as believing Christians, to partake of the flesh and blood of
Christ; dehorts them from Idolatry and partaking of the Sacrifices offered to
Idols, so as thereby to offend or hurt their weak brethren.

But that which they most of all cry out in this matter, Obj.
and are always noising, as from 1 Cor. 11. where the Apostle is particularly
treating of this matter, and therefore from some words here they have the
greatest appearance of Truth for their assertion, as ver. 27. where he calls
the Cup, the cup of the Lord, and says, that they who eat of it, and drink
unworthily, are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and ver. 26. eat and
drink their own damnation, intimating thence that this has an immediate or
necessary relation to the body, flesh and blood of Christ.

Though this at first view may catch the unwary Reader, Answ.
yet being well considered, it does no ways evince the matter in controversy.
As for the Corinthians being in the use of this ceremony, why they were so, and
how that obliges not Christians now to the same, shall be spoken of hereafter:
it suffices at this time to consider that they were in the use of it. Secondly,
that in the use of it they were guilty of, and committed diverse abuses.
Thirdly, that the Apostle here is giving them directions how they may do it
aright, in showing them the right and proper use and end of it.

These things being premised, let it be observed that the very express and
particular use of it, according to the Apostle, is to show forth the Lord's
death, etc. But to show forth the Lord's death and partake of the flesh and
blood of Christ are different things. He says not, as often as ye eat this
bread and drink this cup, ye partake of the body and blood of Christ, but ye
show forth the Lord's death. So I acknowledge, that this ceremony by those, that
practice it, has an immediate relation to the outward body and death of Christ
upon the Cross, as being properly a memorial of it, but it does not thence
follow, that it has any inward or immediate relation to believers
communicating or partaking of the Spiritual body and blood of Christ, or that
Spiritual Supper spoken of Rev. 3.20. for though in a general way, as every
religious action in some respect, has a common relation to the Spiritual
Communion of the Saints with God, so we shall not deny but this has a
relation, as others. Now for his calling the cup, the cup of the Lord, and
saying, they are guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and eat their own
damnation, in not discerning the Lord's body, etc. I answer, that this infers
no more necessary relation, than any other religious act, and amounts to no
more than this, that since the Corinthians were in the use of this ceremony,
and so performed it as a religious act, they ought to do it worthily, else they
should bring condemnation upon themselves. Now this will not more infer the
thing so practiced by them, to be a necessary religious act obligatory upon
others, than when Romans 14.6. the Apostle says, He that regards the day,
regards it unto the Lord, it can be thence inferred, that the days, that some
esteemed and observed, did lay an obligation upon others to do the same: but
yet as as he, that esteemed a day, and placed Conscience in keeping it, was to
regard it to the Lord, and so it was to him, in so far as he dedicated it unto
the Lord, the Lord's day, he was to do it worthily, and if he did it
unworthily, he would be guilty of the Lord's day, and so keep it to his own
damnation: so also such as observe this ceremony of bread and wine, it is to
them the bread of the Lord, and the cup of the Lord, because they use it as a
religious act, and forasmuch as their end therein is to show forth the Lord's
death, and remember his body that was crucified for them, and his blood, that
was shed for them. If notwithstanding they believe it is their duty to do it,
and make it a matter of Conscience to forbear, if they do it without that due
preparation and examination, which every religious act ought to be performed
in, then instead of truly remembering the Lord's death, and his body and his
blood, they render themselves guilty of it, as being in one Spirit with those
that crucified him, and shed his blood, though pretending with thanksgiving and
joy to remember it. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees of old, though in memory of
the Prophets they garnished their Sepulchers, yet are said by Christ to be
guilty of their blood. And that no more can be hence inferred, appears from
another saying of the same Apostle, Romans 14.23. He that doubts is damned, if
he eat, etc. where he speaking of those that judged it unlawful to eat flesh,
etc. says if they eat doubting, they eat their own damnation. Now it is
manifest for all this, that either the doing or forbearing of this was to
another, that placed no Conscience in it, of no moment. So I say, he that
eats that, which in his Conscience he is persuaded is not lawful for him to
eat, does eat his own damnation: so he also, that places Conscience in eating
bread and wine, as a religious act, if he do it unprepared, and without that
due respect, wherein such acts should be gone about, he eats and drinks his
own damnation, not discerning the Lord's body, i. e. not minding what he does,
to wit, with a special respect to the Lord, and by way of special commemoration
of the death of Christ.

VI. I having now sufficiently shown, what the true communion of the body and
blood of Christ is, how it is partaken of, and how it has no necessary relation
to that ceremony of bread and wine, used by Christ with his Disciples, it is
fit now to consider the nature and constitution of that ceremony (for as to the
proper use of it, we have had occasion to speak of before) whether it be a
standing ordinance in the Church of Christ, obligatory upon all, or indeed
whether it be any necessary part of the Worship of the New
Covenant-dispensation, or has any better or more binding foundation, than
several other ceremonies appointed and practiced about the same time, which the
most of our opposers acknowledge to be ceased, and now no ways binding upon
Christians. We find this ceremony only mentioned in Scripture in four places,
to wit, Matthew, Mark and Luke, and by Paul to the Corinthians. If any would
infer any thing from the frequency of the mentioning of it, that will add
nothing, for it being a matter of fact, is therefore mentioned by the
Evangelists; Matthew. 26.26. Mar. 14.22 Lu. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23.
and there are other things less memorable as often, yea oftener mentioned.
Matthew and Mark give only an account of the matter of fact, without any
precept to do so afterward, simply declaring, that Jesus at that time, did
desire them to eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. To which Luke adds these
words, This do in remembrance of me. If we consider this action of Christ with
his Apostles, there will appear nothing singular in it, for a foundation to
such a strange Superstructure, as many in their airy imaginations have sought
to build upon it; for both Matthew and Mark press it as an act done by him, as
he was eating, Matthew says and as they were eating; and Mark, and as they did
eat, Jesus took bread, etc. Now this act was no singular thing, neither any
solemn institution of a Gospel ordinance, because it was a constant custom
among the Jews, as Paulus Riccius observes at length in his Celestial
Agricultur; that when they did eat the Passover, the master of the family did
take bread and bless it, and breaking it gave of it to the rest, and likewise
taking wine did the same; so that there can nothing further appear in this,
than that Jesus Christ, who fulfilled all Righteousness, and also observed the
Jewish Feasts and Customs, used this also among his Disciples, only, that, as
in most other things, he labored to draw their minds to a further thing, so,
in the use of this, he takes occasion to put them in mind of his death and
sufferings, which were shortly to be, which he did the oftener inculcate unto
them, for that they were averse from believing it. And as for that expression
of Luke, Do this in remembrance of me, it will amount to no more, than being
the last time that Christ did eat with his Disciples, he desired them, that in
their eating and drinking they might have regard to him, and by the remembering
of that opportunity, be the more stirred up to follow him diligently through
sufferings and death, etc. But what man of reason, laying aside the prejudice
of Education, and the influence of Tradition, will say, that this account of
the matter of fact, given by Matthew and Mark, or this expression of Luke, to
do that in remembrance of him, will amount to these consequences, which the
generality of Christians have sought to draw from it, as calling it,
Augustissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum, venerabile altaris Sacramentum, The
principal Seal of the Covenant of Grace, by which all the benefits of Christ's
death are sealed to Believers; and such like things. But to give a further
evidence how these consequences have not any bottom from the practice of that
ceremony, nor from the words following, Do this, etc. Let us consider another
of the like nature, as it is at length expressed by John, c. 13. ver. 3,
4.8.13, 14, 15. Jesus rises up from Supper, and laid aside his Garment, and
took a Towel and girded himself. After that he pours Water into a Basin, and
began to wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel, wherewith he
was girded. Peter says unto him, Thou shall never wash my Feet. Jesus answered
him, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. So after he had washed
their Feet, -- He said, Know ye what I have done to you? If I then your Lord
and Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash one another Feet. For
I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I have done to you. As to
which let it be observed, that John relates this passage to have been done at
the same time, with the other of breaking Bread. Both being done the night of
the passover, after Supper. If we regard the Narration of this, and the
circumstances attending it, it was done with far more solemnity, and prescribed
far more punctually and particularly, than the former. It is said only, as he
was eating, he took bread, so that this would seem to be but an occasional
business. But here he rose up, he laid by his Garments, he girded himself, he
poured out the Water, he washed their Feet, he wiped them with the Towel. He
did this to all of them, which are circumstances surely far more observable,
than those noted in the other. The former was a practice common among the Jews,
used by all Masters of Families, upon that occasion: but this, as to the
manner, and person acting it, to wit, for the Master to rise up, and wash the
Feet of his Servants and Disciples, was more singular and observable. In the
breaking of Bread, and giving of Wine, it is not pleaded by our adversaries,
nor yet mentioned in the Text, that he particularly put them into the hands of
all, but breaking it, and blessing it, gave it the nearest, and so they from
hand to hand. But here it is mentioned that he washed not the feet of one or
two, but of many. He says not in the former, that if they do not eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Wine, they shall be prejudiced by it: but here he
says expressly to Peter, that, if he wash not him, he has not no part with
him, which, being spoken upon Peter 's refusing to let him wash his Feet, would
seem to import no less, than not the continuance only, but even the necessity
of this ceremony. In the former he says, as it were, passingly, Do this in
remembrance of me: but here he sits down, again he desires them to consider
what he has done, tells them positively, that as he has done to them, so
ought they to do to one another, and yet again he redoubles that precept, by
telling them, he has given them an Example, that they should do so likewise. If
we respect the nature of the thing, it has as much in it, as either Baptism,
or the breaking of Bread, seeing it is an outward Element of a cleansing
Nature, applied to the outward man, by the command and the Example of Christ,
to signify an inward purifying. I would willingly propose this seriously to
men, that will be pleased to make use of that reason and understanding that God
has given them, and not be imposed upon, nor abused by the custom or tradition
of others, whether this ceremony, if we respect either the time, that it was
appointed in, or the circumstances, wherewith it was performed, or the command,
enjoining the use of it, has not as much to recommend it for a standing
Ordinance of the Gospel, as either Water Baptism or Bread and Wine, or any
other of that kind? I wonder then, what reason the Papists can give, why they
have not numbered it among their Sacraments, except merely voluntas Ecclesiae
and traditio Patrum.

But if they say, that is used among them, Obj.
in that the Pope and some other persons among them use to do it once a year to
some poor people.

I would willingly know what reason they have why this should not be extended
to all, Answ.
as well as that of the Eucharist (as they term it) or whence it appears from
the text, that [ Do this in remembrance of me] should be interpreted, that the
Bread and Wine were every day to be taken by all Priests, or the Bread every
day, or every week by the People: and that that other command of Christ, ye
ought to do as I have done to you, etc. is only to be understood of the Pope,
or some other persons, to be done only to a few, and that once a year. Surely
there can be no other reason for this difference assigned from the Text. And as
to Protestants, who use not this Ceremony at all, if they will but open their
eyes they may see, how that by custom and tradition they are abused in this
matter, as were their Fathers in diverse popish Traditions. For, if we look into
the plain Scripture, what can be thence inferred to urge the one, which may not
be likewise pleaded for the other, or for laying aside the one, which may not
be likewise said against the continuance of the other? If they say, that the
former of washing the Feet was only a Ceremony. What have they, whence they can
show that this breaking of Bread is more? If they say, that the former was only
a sign of humility and purifying. What have they to prove that this was more?
If they say, that one was only for a time, and was no Evangelical Ordinance.
What has this to make it such, that the other wanted? Surely there is no way
of reason to evite this, neither can any thing be alleged that the one should
cease, and not the other, or the one continue, and not the other; but the mere
opinion of the affirmers, which, by custom, education and tradition, has
begotten in the hearts of people, a greater reverence for and esteem of the one
than the other, which, if it had fallen out to be as much recommended to us by
tradition, would, no doubt, have been as tenaciously pleaded for, as having no
less foundation in the Scripture. But, since the former, to wit, the washing of
one another Feet, is justly laid aside, as not binding upon Christians, so
ought also the other for the same reason.

. VII. But I strange, that those that are so clamorous for ceremony, and stick
so much to it, take liberty to dispense with the manner or method, that Christ
did it in, since none that ever I could hear of, who now do it, use it in the
same way that he did it; Christ did it at Supper while they were eating, but
they do it in the morning only by it self. What rule walk they by in this
change?

If it be said, these are but circumstances, and not the matter, and if the
matter be kept to, Obi.
the alteration of circumstances is but of small moment.

Answ.
What if it should be said, the whole is but a circumstance, which fell out at
that time, when Christ eat the Passover? For, if we have regard to that, which
alone can be pleaded for an institution, viz. these words, Do this in
remembrance of me, it does as properly relate to the manner, as matter. For
what may, or can they evince in reason, that these words, Do this, only
signify, eat Bread, and drink Wine; but it is no matter, when ye eat, nor how
ye eat it, and not, as ye have seen me eat it at Supper with you, who take
Bread and break it, and give it you, and take the Cup and bless it, and give it
you, so do ye likewise? And seeing Christ makes no distinction in those words,
Do this, it cannot be judged in reason but to relate to the whole. Which if it
do, all those that at present use this ceremony among Christians, have not yet
obeyed this precept, nor fulfilled this institution, for all their clamours
concerning it.

If it be said, Obj.
that the time and manner of doing it by Christ was but accidentally, as being
after the Jewish Passover, which was at Supper.

Besides that it may be answered and easily proved, Answ.
that the whole was accidental, as being the practice of a Jewish ceremony, as
is above observed: May it not the same way be urged, that the drinking of wine
is accidental, as being the natural product of that Country, and so be pleaded,
that in those Countries, where Wine does not grow, as in our Nation of
Scotland, we may make use of Beer or Ale in the use of this ceremony, or bread
made of other grain, than that, which Christ used? And yet would not our
Adversaries judge this an abuse, and not right performing of this Sacrament?
Yea have not scruples of this kind occasioned no little contention among the
Professors of Christianity? What great contest and strife has been betwixt the
Greek and Latin Churches concerning the bread? While the one will have it
unleavened, reckoning because the Jews made use of unleavened bread in the
Passover, that it was such kind of bread that Christ did break to his
Disciples, the other leavened; therefore the Lutherans make use of unleavened
bread, the Calvinists of leavened: and this contest was so hot, when the
Reformation was beginning at Geneva, that Calvin and Ferellus were forced to
flee for it. But do not Protestants by these uncertainties open a door to
Papists for their excluding the People from the Cup? Will not [ Do this] infer
positively, that they should do in the same manner, and at the same time, which
Christ did it, as well as that they should use the cup, and not the bread only?
Or what reason have they to dispense with the one, more than the Papists have
to do with the other? O! what strange absurdities and inconveniences have
Christians brought upon themselves, by superstitiously adhering to this
ceremony? Out of which difficulties it is impossible for them to extricate
themselves* but by laying it aside, as they have done others of the like
nature. For besides what is abovementioned, I would gladly know how from the
words they can be certainly resolved, that these words [ Do this] must be
understood to the Clergy, take, bless and break this bread, and give it to
others, but to the Laity only, take and eat, but do not bless, etc.

If it be said, that the Clergy was only present. Obj.


Then will not that open a door for the popish argument against the
administration of the cup to the People? Answ.
Or may not another from thence as easily infer that only the Clergy ought to
partake of this ceremony, because they were only those present, to whom it was
said, Do this? But if this [ Do this] be extended to all, how comes it all have
not liberty to obey it in both blessing, breaking, and distributing, as well as
taking and eating? Besides all these, even the Calvinian Protestants of Great
Britain could never yet accord among themselves about the manner of taking it,
whether sitting, standing, or kneeling; whether it should be given to the sick,
and those that are ready to die, or not. Which controversies, though they may
be esteemed of small moment, yet have greatly contributed, with other things,
to be the occasion not only of much contention, but also of blood shed and
devastation, so that in this last respect the Prelatick Calvinists have termed
the Presbyterians Schismatical and Pertinacious, and they them again,
Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Papistical. Who then that will open their eyes
but may see, that the devil has stirred up this contention and zeal, to busy
men about things of small moment, that greater matters may be neglected, while
he keeps them in such ado about this ceremony, while they lay aside others of
the like nature, as positively commanded, and as punctually practiced, and from
the observation of which, half so many difficulties will not follow?

. VIII. How then? Have we not reason, not finding the nature of this practice
to be obligatory upon us, more than those other our adversaries, have laid
aside, to avoid all this confusion, since those that use it, can never agree,
neither concerning the nature, efficacy, nor manner of doing it? And this
proceeds because they take it not plainly, as it lies in the Scripture, but
have so much mixed in their own inventions. For would they take it as Lies, it
would import no more, than that Jesus Christ at that time did thereby signify
unto them, that his body and blood was to be offered for them, and desired
them, that whenever they did eat or drink, they might do it in remembrance of
him, or with a regard to him, whose blood was shed for them. Now that the
primitive Church, gathered immediately after his ascension, did so understand
it, does appear from their use and practice, if we admit those places of the
Acts, where breaking of bread is spoken of, to have relation hereto, which as
our Adversaries do, so we shall willingly agree to. As first, Acts 2.42. And
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, etc. This cannot be understood of any other, than of their
ordinary eating; for as nothing else appears from the text, so the context
makes it plain; for they had all things in common, and therefore it is said,
verse 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart. Who will not wilfully close their Eyes, may see here, that their
breaking being joined with their eating, shows, that nothing else is here
expressed, but that having all things in common, and so continuing together,
they also did break their bread, and eat their meat together. In doing whereof
I shall not doubt, but they remembered the Lord, to follow whom they had with so
great zeal and resignation betaken themselves. This is further manifest from
Acts 6. For the Apostle, having the care and distribution of that money, which
the Believers having sold their possessions gave unto them, finding themselves
overcharged with that burden, appointed Deacons for that business, that they
might give themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word,
not leaving that, to serve Tables. This cannot be meant of any Sacramental
eating, or Religious Act of Worship; seeing our Adversaries make the
distributing of that, the proper act of Ministers, not of Deacons; and yet
there can be no reason alleged, that that breaking of bread, which they are
said to have continued in, and to have done from House to House, was other than
those Tables that the Apostles served; but here gave over, as finding
themselves overcharged with it: now as the increase of the Disciples did
incapacitate the Apostles any more to manage this, so it would seem their
further increase and dispersing in diverse places hindered the continuance of
that practice of having things in common. But notwithstanding, so far at lest
to remember or continue that ancient community, they did at certain times come
together and break bread together. Hence it is said, Acts 20.7. that Paul
coming to Troas, And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued his speech until Midnight. Here is no mention made of
any Sacramental eating, but only, that Paul took occasion from their being
togetther to preach unto them. And it seems it was a Supper they intended (not
a morning bit of bread, and sup of wine) else it is not very probable, that Paul
would from the morning have preached until Midnight. But the 11 verse puts the
matter out of dispute, which is thus, When he therefore was come up again, and
had broken bread, and eaten, and talked along while, even till break of day, so
he departed. This shows that the breaking of bread, was differed till that
time: for those words [ and when he had broken bread, and eaten] do show that
it had a relation to the breaking of bread aforementioned, and that that was
the time he did it. Secondly, these words joined together, [ and when he had
broken bread, and eaten, and talked] show, it was no religious act of worship,
but only an eating for bodily refreshment, for which the Christians used to
meet together some time, and doing it in God's fear and singleness of heart,
does notwithstanding difference it from the eating or feasting of profane
persons, and this by some is called a Love-feast, or a being together, not
merely to feed their Bellies, or for outward ends, but to take thence occasion
to eat and drink together, in the dread and presence of the Lord, as his
People; which custom we shall not condemn; but let it be observed, that in all
the Acts there is no other, nor further mention of this matter. But if that
Ceremony had been some solemn Sacrifice, as some will have it, or such a
special Sacrament, as others plead it to be, it is strange, that that History,
that in many lesser things gives a particular account of the Christians
behavior, should have been so silent in the matter. Only we find, that they
used sometimes to meet together to break Bread, and eat. Now, as the primitive
Christians began by degrees to depart from that primitive purity and
simplicity, so also to accumulate superstitious traditions, and vitiat the
innocent practices of their predecessors, by the intermixing either of Jewish
or Heathenish Rites, so also, in the use of this, very early abuses began to
creep in among Christians, so that it was needful for the Apostle Paul to
reform them, and reprove them therefore, as he does at large, 1 Cor. 11. from
ver. 17. to the end, which place we shall particularly examine; because our
adversaries lay the chief stress of their matter upon it, and we shall see
whether it will infer any more, than we have above granted. First, because they
were apt to use that practice in a superstitious mind beyond the true use of
it, as to make of it some mystical supper of the Lord, he tells them, ver. 20.
that their coming together into one place is not to eat the Lord's Supper, he
says not, this is not the right manner to eat, because the Supper of the Lord
is Spiritual, and a mystery. Secondly, he blames them, in that they come
together for the worse, and not for the better, the reason he gives of this,
is, ver. 21. For in eating every one has taken before his own supper: and one
is hungry, and another is drunken. Here it is plain that the Apostle condemns
them for that, because this custom of supping in general was used among
Christians, for to increase their love, and as a memorial of Christ's supping
with the Disciples, that they should have so vitiated it, to eat it a part, and
to come full, who had abundance, and hungry, who had little at home. Whereby
the very use and end of this practice, is lost and perverted, and therefore he
blames them, that they do not either eat this in common at home, or reserve
their eating, till they come all together to the public assembly: this appears
plainly by the following verse 22. have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or
despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? Where he blames
them for their irregular practice herein, in that they despised to eat orderly,
or reserve their eating to the public assembly, and so shaming such as not
having houses, nor fullness at home, came to partake of the common Table, who
being hungry, thereby were ashamed, when they observed others come thitherfull
and drunken. Those, that without prejudice will look to the place, will see
this must have been the case among the Corinthians; for, supposing the use of
this to have been then, as now used either by Papists, Lutherans, or
Calvinists, it is hard making sense of the Apostles's words, or indeed to
conceive, what was the abuse, the Corinthians committed in this thing. Having
thus observed what the Apostle said above, because this custom of eating and
drinking together some time, had its rise from Christ's Act with the Apostles,
the night he was betrayed, therefore the Apostle proceeded, ver. 23. to give
them an account of that. For I have received of the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread, etc. Those, that understand the difference betwixt a
narration of a thing and a command, cannot but see, if they will, that there is
no command in this place, but only an account of matter of fact; he says not,
I received of the Lord, that, as he took Bread, so I shall command it to you to
do also, there is nothing like this in this place; yea, on the contrary, ver.
25. where he repeats Christ's imperative words to his Apostles, he places them
so as they import to command, this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance
of me. And then he adds, For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup,
ye do show the Lord's death, till he come. But these words [ as often] imports
no more a command, than to say, as often as thou go to Rome, see the
Capitol, will infer a command to me, to go thither.

But whereas they urge the last words, Obj.
ye show forth the Lord's death till he come, insinuating, that this imports a
necessary continuance of that ceremony, until Christ come at the end of the
world to judgment.

I answer, they take two of the chief parts of the controversy here for
granted, without proof. First, that [ as often] imports a command, Anws.
the contrary whereof is shown, neither will they ever be able to prove it.
Secondly, that this coming is understood of Christ's last outward coming, and
not of his inward and spiritual: that remains to be proved, whereas the Apostle
might well understand it of his inward coming and appearance, which perhaps
some of those carnal Corinthians, that used to come drunken together, had not
yet known; and others, being weak among them, and inclinable to dote upon
outward, this might have been indulged to them for a season, and even used by
those, who knew Christ's appearance in Spirit (as other things were, of which
we shall speak hereafter) especially by the Apostle, who became weak to the
weak, and all to all, that he might save some. Now those weak and carnal
Corinthians might be permitted the use of this, to show forth or remember
Christ's death, till he come to arise in them; for, though such need those
outward things, to put them in mind of Christ's Death; yet such, as are dead
with Christ, and not only dead with Christ, but buried, and also arisen with
him, need not such signs, to remember him, and to such therefore the Apostle
says, Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God: but Bread and Wine are
not these things, that are above, but are things of the Earth. But that this
whole matter was a mere act of indulgence and condescension of the Apostle
Paul, to the weak and carnal Corinthians, And likewise the other oriental
versions, as the Arabic, and Aethiopick have it the same way.
appears yet more by the Syriak Copy, which, ver. 17. in his entering upon this
matter, has it thus, In that, concerning which I am about to command you (or
instruct you) I commend you not, because ye have not gone forward, but are
descended unto that which is less (or of less consequence.) Clearly importing,
that the Apostle was grieved that such was their condition, that he was forced
to give them instructions concerning those outward things, and doting upon
which they show, they were not gone forward in the life of Christianity, but
rather sticking in beggarly Elements. And therefore ver. 20. the same version
has it thus, when then ye meet together, ye do not do it, as it is just ye
should do in the day of the Lord, ye eat and drink. Thereby showing to them,
that to meet together to eat and drink outward bread and wine, was not the
labor and work of that day of the Lord; but, since our adversaries are so
zealous for this ceremony, because used by the Church of Corinth, (tho with how
little ground, is already shown) how come they to pass over far more positive
commands of the Apostles, as matters of moment? As first, Acts 15.26. where the
Apostles peremptorily commands even the Gentiles, as that which was the mind of
the Holy Ghost, to abstain from things strangled, and from blood. And Ja. 5.14.
where it is expressly commanded, that the sick be anointed with Oil in the Name
of the Lord.

Obj.
If they say, these were only temporary things, but not to continue.

Answ.
What have they more to show for this, there being no express repeal of them?

If they say, the repeal is employed, because the Apostle says, Obj.
We ought not to be judged in meats and drinks.

I admit the answer, Answ.
but how can it be evited to militate the same way against the other practice?
Surely not at all: nor can there be any thing urged for the one, more than for
the other, but custom and tradition.

As for that of James, they say, there followed a Miracle upon it, to wit, the
recovery of the Sick: But this being ceased, Obi.
so should the ceremony.

Though this might many ways be answered, to wit, Answ.
that Prayer then might as well be forborne, to which also the saving of the
Sick is there ascribed, yet I shall accept of it, because I judge indeed that
Ceremony is ceased, only methinks, since our adversaries, and that rightly,
think a ceremony ought to cease, where the virtue fails, they ought by the same
rule to forbear the laying on of hands, in imitation of the Apostles, since the
gift of the Holy Ghost does not follow upon it.

. IX. But since we find, that several testimonies of Scripture do sufficiently
show, that such external rites are no necessary part of the New Covenant
dispensation, therefore not needful now to continue, however they were for a
season practiced of old, I shall instance some few of them, whereby from the
nature of the thing, as well as those testimonies, it may appear, that the
ceremony of bread and wine is ceased, as well as those other things, confessed
by our adversaries to be so. The first is Romans 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is
not meat and drink; but Righteousness and Peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Here the Apostle evidently shows, that the Kingdom of God, or Gospel of Christ,
stands not in meats and drinks, and such like things, but in righteousness, as
by the context does appear, where he is speaking of the guilt and hazard of
judging one another about meats and drinks. So then, if the Kingdom of God
stand not in them, nor the Gospel, nor work of Christ, then the eating of
outward bread and wine can be no necessary part of the Gospel worship, nor any
perpetual ordinance of it. Another is yet more plain of the same Apostle, Col.
2.16. the Apostle throughout this whole second chapter, does clearly plead for
us, and against the formality and superstition of our opposers: for in the
beginning he holds forth the great privileges Christians have by Christ, who
are come indeed to the life of Christianity, and therefore he desires them,
ver. 6. as they have received Christ, so to walk in him, and to beware lest
they be spoiled through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the rudiments or
elements of the world, because that in Christ whom they have received, is all
fullness. And that they are circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, which he calls the circumcision of Christ, and being buried with him by
baptism, are also arisen with him through the Faith of the operation of God.
Here also they did partake of the true baptism of Christ, and being such as are
arisen with him, let us see whether he thinks it needful, they should make use
of such meat and drink, as bread and wine, to put them in remembrance of
Christ's death, or whether they ought to be judged that they did it not, ver.
16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink. Is not bread and wine, meat
and drink? But why? Which are a shadow of things to come: but the body is of
Christ. Then, since our adversaries confess that their bread and wine is a sign
or shadow, therefore, according to the Apostles Doctrine, we ought not to be
judged in the observation of it. But is it not fit for those, that are dead
with Christ, to be subject to such ordinances? See what he says ver. 20.
Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as
though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances? (Touch not, taste
not, handle not: Which all are to perish with the using) after the commandments
and doctrines of men: What can be more plain? if this serve not to take away
the absolute necessity of the use of bread and wine, what can it serve to take
away? Sure I am, the reason here given is applicable to them, which all do
perish with the using, since bread and wine perishes with the using, as much
as other things. But further, if the use of water and bread and wine were that,
wherein the very seals of the New Covenant stood, and did pertain to the chief
Sacraments of the Gospel and Evangelical Ordinances, (so called) then would not
the Gospel differ from the Law, or be preferable to it? Whereas the Apostle
shows the difference, Heb. 9.10. in that such kind of observations of the Jews
were as a sign of the Gospel, for that this stood only in meats and drinks, and
diverse washings. And now if the Gospel worship and service stand in the same,
where is the difference?

Obj.
If it be said, These under the Gospel have a spiritual signification.

Answ.
So had those under the Law, God was the Author of those, as well as Christ is
pretended to be Author of these. But does not this contending for the use of
water, bread and wine, as necessary parts of the Gospel Worship, destroy the
nature of it, as if the Gospel were a dispensation of shadows, and not of the
Substance, whereas the Apostle in that of the Collossians abovementioned,
argues against the use of these things, as needful to those, that are dead and
arisen with Christ, because they are but shadows; and since, through the whole
Epistle to the Hebrews, he argues with the Jews, to wean them from their
worship, for this reason, because it was typical and figurative. Is it
agreeable to right Reason to bring them to another of the same nature? What
ground from Scripture or Reason can our adversaries bring us to evince, that
one shadow or figure should point to another shadow or figure, and not to the
Substance. And yet they make the figure of Circumcision to point to
Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb, so bread and wine. But was it ever known,
that one figure was the antitypes of the other, especially seeing Protestants
make not these their antitypes to have any more virtue or efficacy than the
type had? For, since as they say, and that truly, that their Sacraments confer
not Grace, but that is conferred according to the Faith of the receiver, it
will not be denied, but the faithful among the Jews received also Grace in the
use of their figurative Worship. And though Papists boast that their Sacraments
confer Grace ex opere operato, yet experience abundantly proves the contrary.

. X. But supposing the use of Water baptism, and Bread and Wine to have been in
the primitive Church, as was also that of abstaining from things strangled, and
from Blood, the use of legal Purification, Acts 21.23, 24, 25. and anointing of
the Sick with Oil, for the reasons and grounds beforementioned. Yet it remains
for our adversaries, to show us, how they come by power or authority to
administer them; It cannot be from the letter of the Scripture, else they
behoved also to do those other things, which the letter declares also they did,
and which in the letter have as much foundation. Then their Power must be
derived from the Apostles, either mediately, or immediately; but we have shown
before, in the tenth Proposition, that they have no mediate Power, because of
the interruption made by the Apostasy. And for an immediate power or command
by the Spirit of God, to administer these things, none of our adversaries
pretend to it. We know, that in this, as in other things, they make a noise of
the constant consent of the Church and of Christians in all ages; but as
tradition is not a sufficient ground for Faith, so, in this matter especially,
it ought to have but small weight, for that, in this point of Ceremonies and
superstitious Observations, the Apostasy began very early, as may appear in
the Epistles of Paul to the Galatians and Colossians; and we have no ground to
imitate them in those things, whose entrance the Apostle so much withstood, so
heavily regreted, and so sharply reproved. But, if we look to Antiquity, we
find, that, in such kind of observances and traditions they were very uncertain
and changeable, so that neither Protestants nor Papists do observe this
Ceremony, as they did, both in that they gave it to young Boys and to little
Children, and for ought can be learned, the use of this and Infant Baptism are
of alike age, though the one be laid aside both by Papists and Protestants, and
the other, to wit, Baptism of Infants be stuck to: and we have so much the less
reason to lay weight upon Antiquity, for that, if we consider their profession
of Religion, especially as to worship and the ceremonial part of it, we shall
not find any Church now, whether Popish or Protestant, who differ not widely
from them in many things, as Dalleus, in his Treatise concerning the use of the
Fathers, well observes and demonstrateth. And why they should obtrude this
upon us, because of the Ancients practice, which they themselves follow not, or
why we may not reject this, as well as they do other things, no less zealously
practiced by the Ancients, no sufficient reason can be assigned.

I shall not nevertheless doubt, but many whose understandings have been
clouded with these Ceremonies, have notwithstanding, by the Mercy of God, had
some secret sense of the mystery, which they could not clearly understand,
because it was sealed from them, by their sticking to such outward things, and
that through that secret sense, diving in their comprehensions, they ran
themselves into these carnal apprehensions, as imagining the substance of the
bread was changed, or that if the substance was not changed, yet the body was
there, etc. And indeed I am inclinable very favorably to judge of Calvin in
this particular, in that he deals so ingenuously, to confess he neither
comprehends it, nor can express it in words, but yet by a feeling experience
can say, the Lord is Spiritually present. Now as I doubt not, but Calvin
sometimes had a sense of his presence, Phh. 5.13.
without the use of this ceremony, so as the understanding given him of God,
made him justly reject the false notions of Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, tho he knew not, what to establish instead of them, if he
had fully waited in that Light that makes all things manifest, and had not
labored in his own comprehension, to settle upon that external ceremony, by
affixing the Spiritual presence as chiefly or principally, though not only (as
he well knew by experience) there, or especially to relate to it, he might have
further reached unto the knowledge of this mystery, than many that went before
him.

. XI. Lastly, if any now at this day, from a true tenderness of Spirit, and
with real Conscience toward God, did practice this ceremony in the same way,
method, and manner, as did the primitive Christians, recorded in Scripture
(which yet none that I know, now do) I should not doubt to affirm, but they
might be indulged in it, and the Lord might regard them, and for a season
appear to them, in the use of these things, as many of us have known him to do
to us, in the time of our ignorance, providing always they did not seek to
obtrude them upon others, nor, judge such, as found themselves delivered, or
that they do not pertinaciously adhere to them. For we certainly know that the
day is dawned, in which God has arisen, and has dismissed all those
ceremonies and rites, and is only to be worshipped in Spirit, and that he
appears to them who wait upon him, and that to seek God in these things is,
with Mary at the Sepulcher, to seek the living among the dead, for we know that
he is arisen and revealed in Spirit, leading his Children out of these
rudiments, that they may walk with him in his Light, to whom be Glory for ever.
Amen.

The Fourteenth Proposition, Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in
matters purely Religious and pertaining to the Conscience.
Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it, therefore it is not lawful for
any whosoever, Luke 9. v. 55, 56. Matthew. 7. v. 12, 13.29. Tit. 3.10.
by virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the Government of this
World, to force the Consciences of others? and therefore all killing,
banishing, fining, imprisoning, and other such things, which are inflicted upon
men for the alone exercise of their Conscience, or difference in Worship or
Opinion, proceeds from the Spirit of Cain, the Murderer, and is contrary to
the Truth, providing always that no man, under the pretense of Conscience,
prejudice his Neighbor, in this life or estate, or do any thing destructive
to, or inconsistent with humane Society, in which case the Law is for the
transgressor, and Justice is to be administered upon all, without respect of
persons.

. I. LIBERTY of Conscience from the power of the Civil Magistrate has been of
late years so largely and learnedly handled; that I shall not need but to be
brief in it; yet it is to be lamented, that few have walked answerably to this
principle, each pleading it for themselves, but scarce allowing it to others,
as hereafter I shall have occasion more at length to observe.

It will be fit in the first place, for clearing of mistakes, to say something
of the state of the controversy, that what follows may be the more clearly
understood.

By [ Conscience] then, as in the explanation of the 5 and 6 Propositions I
have observed, is to be understood that persuasion of the mind, which arises
from the understandings being possessed with the belief of the Truth or Falsity
of any thing, which, though it may be false or evil upon the matter, yet if a
man should go against his persuasion, or Conscience, he should commit a sin,
because what a man does contrary to his Faith, though his Faith be wrong, is no
ways acceptable to God; hence the Apostle says, whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin; and he that doubts, Romans 14.23.
is damned if he eat, though the thing might have been lawful to another, and
that this doubting to eat some kind of meats (since all the creatures of God
are good, and for the use of man, if received with thanksgiving, might be a
superstition, or at lest a weakness, which were better removed.) Hence Ames De
Cas. Cons. says, The Conscience although erring, does evermore bind, so as
that he sins, who does contrary to his Conscience, because he does contrary
to the will of God, although not materially and truly, yet formally and
interpretatively.

So the question is, First, Whether the Civil Magistrate has power to force
men in things religious, to do contrary to their Conscience, and if they will
not, to punish them in their goods, liberties or lives? this we hold in the
negative. But secondly, as we would have the Magistrate avoiding this extreme
of incroaching upon men's Consciences, so on the other hand, we are far from
joining with, or strengthening such libertines, as would stretch the liberty of
their Consciences to the prejudice of their Neighbors, or to the ruin of
humane Society. We understand therefore by matters of Conscience, such as,
immediately relate betwixt God and man, or men and men, that are under the same
persuasion, as to meet together and worship God in that way, which they judge is
most acceptable unto him, and not to incroach upon or seek to force their
neighbors otherwise than by reason, or such other means, as Christ and his
Apostles used, viz. preaching and instructing such as will hear and receive it,
but not at all for men, under the notion of Conscience, to do any thing
contrary to the moral and perpetual statutes generally acknowledged by all
Christians: in which case the Magistrate may very lawfully use his Authority,
as on those who under a pretense of Conscience, make it a principle, to kill
and destroy all the wicked, id est, all, that differ from them, that they, to
wit, the Saints, may rule, and that therefore seek to make all things common,
and would force their neighbors to share their Estates with them, and many
such wild notions, as is reported of the Anabaptists of Munster, which
evidently appears to proceed from pride and covetousness, and not from purity
or Conscience, and therefore I have sufficiently guarded against that, in the
latter part of the Proposition. But the Liberty, we lay claim to, is such, as
the primitive Church justly sought, under the Heathen Emperors, to wit, for men
of sobriety, honesty, and a peaceable conversation to enjoy the liberty and
exercise of their Conscience toward God and among themselves, and to admit
among them such, as, by their persuasion and influence, come to be convinced of
the same Truth with them, without being therefore molested by the Civil
Magistrate. Thirdly, though we would not have men hurt in their Temporals, nor
robbed of their Privileges, as men, and members of the Commonwealth, because
of their inward persuasion, yet we are far from judging, that in the Church of
God there should not be censures, exercised against such as fall into error, as
well as such as commit open evils; and therefore we believe it may be very
lawful for a Christian Church, if she find any of her Members fall into any
error, after due admonitions and instructions, according to Gospel order, if
she find them pertinacious, to cut them off from her fellowship, by the Sword
of the Spirit, and denude them of these privileges, which they had as
fellow members, but not to cut them off from the world by the temporal Sword,
or rob them of their common privileges, as men, seeing they enjoy not these,
as Christians or under such a fellowship, but as men, and members of the
Creation. Hence Chrysostom says well, de Anath. We must condemn and reprove
the evil Doctrins, that proceed from Heretics, but spare the men, and pray for
their Salvation.

. II. But that no man, by virtue of any Power or Principality, he has in the
Government of this World, has power over the Consciences of men, is apparent,
because the Conscience of man is the Seat and Throne of God in him, of which
God is the alone proper and infallible Judge, who, by his Power and Spirit, can
alone rectify the mistakes of Conscience, and therefore has reserved to
himself the power of punishing the errors thereof, as he sees meet. Now for
the Magistrate to assume this, is to take upon him to meddle with things not
within the compass of his jurisdiction, for, if this were within the compass of
his jurisdiction, he should be the proper judge in these things, and also it
were needful to him, as an essential qualification of his being a Magistrate,
to be capable to Judge in them. But that the Magistrate, as a Magistrate, is
neither proper Judge in these cases, not yet that the capacity so to be is
requisite in him, as a Magistrate, our adversaries cannot deny, or else they
must say, that all the Heathen Magistrates, were either no lawful Magistrates,
as wanting something essential to Magistracy, and this were contrary to the
express Doctrine of the Apostles, Romans 13. or else, which is more absurd, that
those Heathen Magistrates were proper Judges in matters of Conscience amongst
Christians. As for that evasion, that the Magistrate ought to punish according
to the Church censure and determination, which is indeed no less, than to make
the Magistrate the Churches Hangman; we shall have occasion to speak of it
hereafter. But if the chief members of the Church, though ordained to inform,
instruct, and reprove, are not to have dominion over the Faith nor Consciences
of the Faithful, as the Apostle expressly affirms, 2 Cor. 1.24. then far less
ought they to usurp this dominion, or stir up the Magistrate to persecute and
murder those, who will not yield to them therein.

Secondly, this pretended power of the Magistrate, is both contrary unto and
inconsistent with the nature of the Gospel, which is a thing altogether
extrinsic from the rule and government of political States, as Christ expressly
signified, saying, his Kingdom was not of this World, and if the propagating of
the Gospel had had any necessary relation thereunto, then Christ had not said
so; but he abundantly has shown by his Example, whom we are chiefly to imitate
in matters of that nature, that its by persuasion and the Power of God, not by
Whips, Imprisonments, Banishments and Murtherings, that the Gospel is to be
propagated, and that those, that are the propagators of it, are often to suffer
by the wicked, but never to cause the wicked to suffer. When he sends forth his
Disciples, he tells them, he sends them forth as Lambs among Wolves, Matthew.
10.16.
to be willing to be devoured, not to devour; he tells them of their being
whipped, imprisoned and killed for their Conscience, but never that they shall
either whip, imprison, or kill; and indeed, if Christians must be as Lambs, it
is not the nature of Lambs to destroy or devour any. It serves nothing to
allege, that that in Christ and his Apostles times the Magistrates were
Heathens, and therefore Christ and his Apostles, not being Magistrates, nor yet
any of the Believers, could not exercise the power, because it cannot be
denied, but Christ, being the Son of God, had a true right to all Kingdoms,
Matthew. 28.18.
and was righteous Heir of the Earth. Next, as to his Power, it cannot be
denied, but he could, if he had seen meet, have called for legions of Angels to
defend him, and have forced the Princes and Potentates of the Earth to be
subject unto him, Matthew. 26.53. So that it was only, because it was contrary to
the nature of Christ's Gospel and Ministry, to use any force or violence in the
gathering of Souls to him. This he abundantly expressed in his reproof to the
Sons of Zebedee, who would have been calling for Fire from Heaven to burn
those, that refused to receive Christ. It is not to be doubted, but this was a
great crime, as now to be in an error concerning the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ. That there was not Power wanting to have punished those refusers of
Christ, cannot be doubted, for they, that could do other Miracles, might have
done this also, and moreover, they wanted not the president of a holy man under
the Law, as did Elias; yet we see what Christ says to them, Ye know not what
Spirit ye are of, Luke 9.55. for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. Here Christ shows, that such kind of zeal was no ways
approved of him, and such as think to make way for Christ, or his Gospel, by
this means, do not understand what Spirit they are of. But if it was not lawful
to call for Fire from Heaven to destroy such, as refused to receive Christ, it
is far less lawful to kindle Fire upon Earth, to destroy those, that believe in
Christ, because they will not believe, nor can believe, as the Magistrates do
for Conscience sake: and if it was not lawful for the Apostles, who had so
large a measure of the Spirit, and were so little liable to mistake, to force
others to their judgment, it can be far less lawful now for men, that
experience declares, and many of themselves confess, are fallible, and often
mistaken, to kill and destroy all such, as cannot (because otherwise persuaded
in their minds) judge and believe in matters of Conscience, just as they do.
And, if it was not according to the Wisdom of Christ, who was, and is, King of
Kings, by outward force to constrain others to believe him, or receive him, as
being a thing inconsistent with the nature of his Ministry and Spiritual
Government; do not they grossly offend him, that will needs be wiser than he,
and think to force men against their persuasion to conform to their Doctrine and
Worship? The word of the Lord says, not by Power, and by Might, but by the
Spirit of the Lord, Zach. 4.6. But these say, not by the Spirit of the Lord,
but by Might and Carnal Power. The Apostle says plainly, 2 Cor. 10 -- 4.
we wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, and the weapons of our warfar are not
carnal, but Spiritual: but these men will needs wrestle with Flesh and Blood,
when they cannot prevail with the Spirit and the Understanding, and not having
Spiritual Weapons go about with Carnal Weapons, to establish Christ's Kingdom,
which they can never do; and therefore when the matter is well sifted, it is
found to be more out of love to self, and from a principle of pride in man, to
have all others to bow to him, than from the love of God. Christ indeed takes
another method, for he says, he will make his People a willing People in the
day of his power, but these men labor against men's wills and Consciences,
Psalm. 110.3.
not by Christ's power, but by the outward Sword, to make men the people of
Christ, which they can never do, as shall hereafter be shown.

But thirdly, Christ fully and plainly declares to us his sense in this
matter, in the parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13. of which we have himself the
Interpreter, ver. 38, 39, 40, 41. where he expounds them to be the children of
the wicked one, and yet he will not have the servants to meddle with them, lest
they pull up the Wheat therewith. Now it cannot be denied, but heretics are
here included, but these servants saw the Tares; and had a certain discerning
of them, yet Christ would not they should meddle, lest they should hurt the
Wheat, thereby intimating, that that capacity in man, to be mistaken, ought to
be a bridle upon him, to make him wary in such matters; and therefore, to
prevent this hurt, he gives a positive prohibition, But he said, Nay, ver. 29.
So that they, that will notwithstanding be pulling up that, which they judge is
Tares, do openly declare that they make no bones to break the commands of
Christ. Miserable is that evasion, which some of our adversaries use here, in
alleging these Tares is meant of Hypocrites, and not of Heretics! But how to
evince that, seeing Heretics as well as Hypocrites, are children of the wicked
one, they have not any thing but their own bare affirmation, which is therefore
justly rejected,

Obj.
If they say, because Hypocrites cannot be discerned, but so may not Heretics.

Answ.
This is both false, and a begging of the question. For those, that have a
Spiritual discerning, can discern both Hypocrites and Heretics; and those that
want it, cannot certainly discern either: seeing the question will arise,
Whether that is a Heresy, which the Magistrate sait his so? And seeing it is
both possible, and confessed by all, to have often fallen out, that some
Magistrates have judged that Heresy, which was not, punishing men accordingly
for Truth, instead of error: there can no argument be drawn from the
obviousness or evidence of heresy, unless we should conclude heresy could
never be mistaken for Truth, nor Truth for heresy, whereof experience shows
daily the contrary, even among Christians. But neither is this shift applicable
to this place, for the servants did discern the Tares, and yet were liable to
hurt the wheat, if they had offered to pull them up.

Obj.
. III. But they object against this Liberty of Conscience, Deuteronomy. 13.5. where
false Prophets are appointed to be put to death, and accordingly they give
example thereof.

The case no ways holds parallel, those particular commands to the Jews, and
practices following upon them, are not a rule for Christians, Answ.
else we might, by the same rule, say, It were lawful for us to borrow from our
neighbors their goods, and so carry them away because the Jews did so by God's
command; or that it is lawful for Christians to invade their neighbors
Kingdoms, and cut them all off, without mercy, because the Jews did so to the
Canaanites, by the command of God.

If they urge, that these commands ought to stand, except they be repealed in
the Gospel. Obj.


I say, Answ.
these precepts and practices of Christ and his Apostles mentioned, are a
sufficient repeal; for if we should plead, that every command given to the
Jews, is binding upon us, except there be a particular repeal, then would it
follow, that because it was lawful for the Jews, if any man killed one, for the
nearest of kindred presently to kill the Murderer, without any order of Law, it
were lawful for us to do so also. And does not this command of Deuteronomy. 13.9.
openly order him, who is enticed by another to forsake the Lord, though he were
his brother, his son, his daughter, or his wife, presently to kill him, or her?
Thou shall surely kill him, thy hand shall be first upon him, to put him to
death. If this command were to be followed, there needed neither inquisition,
nor Magistrate, to do the business; and yet there is no reason why they should
shuffle by this part, and not the other; yea to argue this way from the
practice among the Jews were to overturn the very Gospel, and to set up again
the carnal ordinances among the Jews, to pull down the Spiritual ones of the
Gospel. Indeed we can far better argue from the analogy betwixt the figurative
and carnal state of the Jews, and the real and Spiritual one, under the Gospel.
That as Moses delivered the Jews out of outward Egypt, by an outward force, and
established them in an outward Kingdom, by destroying their outward enemies for
them; so Christ, not by overcoming outwardly, and killing others, but by
suffering and being killed, does deliver his chosen ones, the inward Jews, out
of mystical Egypt, destroying their Spiritual enemies before them, and
establishing among them his Spiritual Kingdom, which is not of this world. And
as such, as departed from the fellowship of outward Israel, were to be cut off
by the outward Sword, so those, that depart from the inward Israel, are to be
cut off by the Sword of the Spirit; for it answers very well, that as the Jews
were to cut off their Enemies outwardly, to establish their Kingdom and outward
worship, so they were to uphold it the same way. But, as the Kingdom and Gospel
of Christ was not to be established nor propagated, by cutting off, or
destroying the Gentiles, but by persuading them, so neither is it to be upheld
otherwise.

Obj.
But secondly they urge Romans 13. where the Magistrate is said not to bear the
sword in vain, because he is the minister of God, to execute wrath upon such as
do evil. But heresy, say they, is evil. Ergo.

Answ.
But so is Hypocrisy also, yet they confess he ought not to punish that.
Therefore this must be understood of moral evils, relative of affairs betwixt
man and man, not of matters of judgment or worship, or else what great
absurdities would follow, considering that Paul wrote here to the Church of
Rome, who was under the Government of Nero, an impious Heathen, and persecutor
of the Church? Now, if a power to punish, in point of Heresy, be here
included, it will necessarily follow, that Nero had this power, yea, and that
he had it of God; for, because the power was of God, therefore the Apostle
urges their obedience. But can there be any thing more absurd, than to say,
that Nero had power to judge in such cases? Surely if Christian Magistrates be
not to punish for Hypocrisy, because they cannot outwardly discern it, far
less could Nero punish any body for Heresy, which he was incapable to discern.
And, if Nero had not power to judge, nor punish in point of Heresy, then
nothing can be urged from this place: since all, that is said here, is spoken as
applicable to Nero, with a particular relation to whom it was written. And if
Nero had such a power, surely he was to exercise it, according to his judgment
and conscience, and in doing thereof he was not to be blamed; which is enough
to justify him in his persecuting of the Apostles, and murdering the
Christians.

Obj.
Thirdly, they object that saying of the Apostle to the Gal. 5.12. I would they
were even cut off, which trouble you.

Answ.
But how this imports any more, than a cutting off from the Church, is not, nor
can be shown. Beza, upon the place, says, We cannot understand that otherwise,
than of Excommunication: Such as was that of the incestuous Corinthian. And
indeed, it is madness, to suppose it otherwise; for Paul would not have these
cut off otherwise, than he did Hymenaeus and Philetus, who were Blasphemers;
which was by giving them over to Satan, not by cutting off their Heads.

The same way may be answered that other argument drawn from Rev. 2.20. Where
the Church of Thyatira is reproved for suffering the woman Jezebel. Which can
be no other ways understood, than that they did not excommunicate her, or cut
her off by a Church censure: for as to corporal punishment, it is known, that
at that time the Christians had not power to punish Heretics, so, if they had
had a mind to it.

Fourthly, they allege, Obj.
that Heresies are numbered among the works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.20. Ergo, etc.

That Magistrates have power to punish all the works of the Flesh, Answ.
is denied, and not yet proved. Every evil is a work of the Flesh, but every
evil comes not under the Magistrates cognizance. Is not Hypocrisy, a work of
the Flesh, which our adversaries confess the Magistrates ought not to punish?
Yea, is not Hatred and Envy there mentioned, as the works of the Flesh? and yet
the Magistrates cannot punish them, as they are in themselves, until they exert
themselves in other acts, which come under his power. But, so long as Heresy
does not exert it self in any act destructive to humane society, or such like
things, but is kept within the sphere of those duties of doctrine or worship,
which stand betwixt a man and God, they no ways come under a Magistrates power.

. IV. But secondly, this forcing of men's consciences is contrary to sound
Reason, and to the very law of Nature. For man's understanding cannot be forced
by all the bodily sufferings another man can inflict upon him, especially in
matters Spiritual and Supernatural: it is arguments and evident demonstrations
of Reason, together with the power of God reaching the Heart, that can change a
man's mind from one opinion to another, and not knocks and blows, and such like
things, which may well destroy the Body, but can never inform the Soul, which
is a free agent, and must either accept or reject matters of opinion, as they
are born in upon it by something proportional to its own nature. To seek to
force minds, in any other manner, is to deal with men, as if they were brutes,
void of understanding, and at last is but to lose ones labor, and, as the
proverb is, to seek to wash the Blackmore white. By that course indeed men may
be made Hypocrites, but can never be made Christians; and surely the products
of such compulsion (even where the end is obtained, to wit, an outward assent,
or conformity, whether in Doctrine or Worship) can be no ways acceptable to
God, who desires not any Sacrifice, except that, which comes througly from
the Heart, and will have no constrained ones: so that men, so constrained, are
so far from being members of the Church, that they are made ten-times more the
Servants of Satan, than before, in that to their Error is added Hypocrisy, the
worst of Evils in matters of Religion, and that, which above all things the
Lord's Soul most abhors.

But if it be said, their error notwithstanding is thereby suppressed, Obj.
and the scandal removed.

I answer, besides that this is a method no ways allowed by Christ, Answ.
as is above proved, surely the Church can be no ways bettered by the
accession of Hypocrites, but greatly corrupted and endangered, for open Heresy
men be aware of, and shun such, as profess them, when they are separated from
the Church by her Censures, but secret Hypocrites may putrify the Body, and
leaven it, ere men be aware. And if the Dissenters prove resolute, and suffer
boldly for the Opinions they esteem right, experience shows, that such
sufferings often tend to the condemnation of the sufferers, but never of the
persecutors: for such suffering ordinarily breeds compassion, and begets a
curiosity in others, to inquire the more diligently into the things, for which
they see men suffer so great losses so boldly, and is also able to beget an
opinion, that it is for some good, they do suffer, it being no ways probable,
that men will venture all, merely to acquire fame, which may as well be urged
to detract from the reputation of all the Martyrs, unless some better arguments
be brought against it, than a Halter or a Faggot. But supposing this principle,
that the Magistrate has power to force the Consciences of his Subjects and to
punish them, if they will not comply: very great inconveniences and
absurdities will follow, and even such as are inconsistent with the nature of
the Christian Religion.

For first it will naturally follow, that the Magistrate ought to do it, and
sins by omission of his duty, if he do it not. Will it not then hence be
inferred, that Christ was defective to his Church, who, having power to force
men, and for to call for legions of Angels so to do, did notwithstanding exert
that power, but lest his Church to the mercy of the wicked without so necessary
a bulwark.

Secondly, seeing every Magistrate is to exercise his power, according to the
best understanding he has, being obliged so to do, for the promoting of what
he in conscience is persuaded to be Truth. Will not this justify all the
Heathen Emperors in their persecutions against Christians? Will not this
justify the Spanish Inquisition, which yet is odious not only to Protestants,
but to many moderate Papists? How can Protestants in reason condemn the Papists
for persecuting them, seeing they do but exercise a lawful power, according to
their Conscience, and best understanding, and do no more to them, than the
sufferers profess they would do to them, if they were in the like capacity?
Which takes away all ground of commiseration from the sufferers, whereas that
was the ground, that gained, of old, reputation to the Christians, that they,
being innocent, suffered, who neither had, nor by principle could, hurt any.
But there is little reason to pity one, that is but dealt by according as he
would deal with others. For to say, they have not reason to persecute us,
because they are in the wrong, and we in the right, is but miserably to beg the
question. Does not this Doctrine strengthen the hands of persecutors every
where, and that rationally, from a principle of self preservation? For who can
blame me for destroying him, that I know waits but for an occasion to destroy
me, if he could? Yea, this makes all suffering for Religion, which of old was
the glory of Christians, to be but of pure necessity; whereby they are not led
as Lambs to the Slaughter, as was the Captain of their Salvation, but rather as
Wolves catched in the snare, who only bite not again, because they are not
able, but, could they get force, would be as ready to lead those the same way,
that lead them. Where is the faith and patience of the Saints? For indeed it is
but a small glory to make a virtue of necessity, and suffer because I cannot
help it. Every thief and murderer is a Martyr at that rate; experience has
abundantly proved this in these last centuries. For, however each party talk of
passively obeying the Magistrates in such cases, and that the power resides in
him, yet it is apparent, that from this Principle it naturally follows that
any party, supposing themselves right, should so soon as they are able,
endeavor at any rate to get uppermost, that they might bring under those of
another opinion, and force the Magistrate to uphold their way, to the ruin of
all others. What Engine the Pope of Rome, used to make of his pretended power
in this thing, upon any pretense of dislike to any Prince or State, even for
very small heresies, in their own account, to depose Princes, and set up their
subjects against them, and give their dominions to other Princes to serve his
interest, they cannot be ignorant that have read the life of Hildebrand; and
how Protestants have vindicated the liberty of their consciences, after this
same manner, is apparent. They suffered much in France, to the great increase
and advantage of their party, but how soon they found themselves considerable,
and had gotten some Princes upon their side, they began to let the King know,
that they must either have the liberty of their Consciences, or else they would
purchase it, not by suffering, but by fighting. And the experience of other
Protestant States shows that, if Henry the Fourth, to please the Papists, had
not quitted his Religion, to get the Crown the more peaceably, and so the
Protestants had prevailed with the Sword, they would as well have taught the
Papists with the Faggot, and led them to the Stake; so that this Principle of
Persecution, on all hands, is the ground of all those miseries and contentions:
for so long as any party is persuaded, that it is both lawful for them* and
their duty, if in power to destroy those, that differ from them, it naturally
follows they ought to use all means possible to get that power, whereby they
may secure themselves in the ruin of their adversaries. And that neither
Papists nor Protestants judge it unlawful to compel the Magistrate, if they be
strong enough to do it, to effect this Experience shows it to be a known Popish
Principle, that the Pope may depose an Heretic Prince, and absolve the People
from the Oath of fidelity, and the Pope, as is abovesaid, has done so to
diverse Princes; and this Doctrine is defended by Bellarmin against Barclay. The
French refused Henry the Fourth, till he quitted his Religion. And as for
Protestants, many of them scruple not to affirm, that wicked Kings and
Magistrates may be deposed and killed; yea, our Scotch Presbyters are as
positive in it as any Jesuits, who would not admit this present Charles the
Second, though otherwise a Protestant Prince, unless he would swear to renounce
Episcopacy, a matter of no great difference, though contrary to his Conscience.
Now how little proportion these things bear with the primitive Christians, and
the Religion propagated by Christ and his Apostles, needs no great
demonstration; and it is observable, that notwithstanding many other
superstitions crept into the Church very early, yet this of Persecution was so
inconsistent with the nature of the Gospel, and liberty of Conscience, as we
have asserted it, such an innate and natural part of the Christian Religion,
that almost all the Christian Writers, for the first three hundred years,
earnestly contend for it, condemning the contrary opinion.

. V. Thus Athanasius, It is the property of Piety not to force, but to
persuade, Athan. in epist. ad solit. vit. ag. ibid.
in imitation of our Lord, who forced no body, but left it to the will of every
one to follow him, etc. But the Devil, because he has nothing of Truth, uses
knocks and axes to break up the doors of such as receive him. But our Savior
is meek, teaching the truth; whosoever will come after me, and whosoever will
be my Disciple, etc. but constraining none, coming to us, and knocking rather,
and saying, My Sister, my Spouse, open to me, etc. and enters when he is
opened to, and retires, if they delay, and will not open unto him, because it
is not with swords, nor darts, nor soldiers, nor armor, that Truth is to be
declared, but with persuasion and counsel. And it is observable, that it was
the impious Arians, who first of all brought in this doctrine to persecute
others, among Christians, whose successors both Papists and Protestants are in
this matter, whom Athanasius thus reproves further. Athan. Apol. 1. de fuga
sua, tom. 1.
Where (says he) have they learned to persecute? Certainly they cannot say
they have learned it from the Saints; but this has been given them, and taught
them of the devil. The Lord commanded indeed sometimes to flee, and the Saints
sometimes fled, but to persecute, is the invention and argument of the devil,
which he seeks against all. And after he says, in so far as the Arians banish
those, that will not subscribe their decrees, they show that they are contrary
to Christians, and friends of the devil,

But now, O lamentable! (says Hilarious) it is the suffrages of the earth,
Hill. contra Aux.
that recommend the religion of God, and Christ is found naked of his virtue,
while ambition must give credit to his name. The Church reproves and fights by
banishments and prisons, and forces herself to be believed, which once was
believed, because of the imprisonments and banishments her self suffered. She
that once was consecrated by the terrors of her persecutors, depends now upon
the dignity of those, that are in her communion. She, that once was propagated
by her banished Priests, now banisheth the Priests. And she boasts now that she
is loved of the world, who could not have been Christ's, if she had not been
hated of the world.

The Church (says Hierom) was founded by shedding of blood, Hieron. epist. 62,
ad. The.
and by suffering, and not in doing of hurt. The Church increased by
persecutions, and was crowned by Martyrdom.

Ambrose speaking of Auxentius, says thus, whom he, Ambr. epist. 32. tom. 3.
(viz. Auxentius) could not deceive by discourse, he thinks ought to be killed
by the sword, making bloody laws with his mouth, writing them with his own
hands, and imagining that an Edict can command Faith. Ambr. epist. 27.


And the same Ambrose says, that going into France, he would not communicate
with those Bishops, that required that Heretics should be put to death. Marc.
epist. ad. Archimand, etc. Mon. Eg. in acta council. Chalce,


The Emperor Marcio, who assembled the Council of Chalcedon, protests, that he
would not force, nor constrain any one to subscribe the Council of Chalcedon,
against his will.

Hosius epist. ad Constir. apud Ath. in epist. ad solit. vit. tom. 1.
Hosius, Bishop of Cordua, testifies, that the Emperor Constance, would not
constrain any to be Orthodox.

Hill. l. 1. ad Constable.
Hilarious says further, that God teaches, rather than exacteth the knowledge
of himself, and authorizing his commandmens by the miracles of his heavenly
works, he wills not that any should confess him with a forced will, etc. He is
the God of the whole Universe, he needs not a forced ebedience, nor requires a
constrained confession.

Ambr. comm. in. Luc. l. 7.
Christ (says Ambrose) sent his Apostles to sow Faith, not to constrian, but
to teach; not to exercise coercive power, but to extol the Doctrine of
Humility.

Hence Cyprian, Cypr. epist. 62.
comparing the Old Covenant with the New, says, then were they put to death
with the outward sword, but now the proud and contumacious are cut off with the
Spiritual sword, by being cast out of the Church: and this answers very well
that objection, before observed, taken from the practice of the Jews under the
Law.

Tertu Apolog. cap. 24. Id. Apolog. c. 28. Idem ad. Scapul. e. 2.
See (says Tertullian to the Heathens) if it be not to contribute to the
renown of irreligion, to seek to take away the liberty of Religion, and to
hinder men their choice of God, that I may not be admitted to adore, whom I
will, but must be constrained to serve him, whom I will not. There is none, nay
not a man, that desires to be adored by any, against their will. And again,
It Is a thing that easily appears to be unjust, to constrain and force men to
sacrifice against their wills: seeing, to do the service of God, there is
required a willing heart. And again, It is an humane right, and natural power,
that every one Worship what he esteems; and one man's religion does not profit
nor hurt another. Neither is it any piece of Religion, to enforce religion,
which must be undertaken by consent, and not by violence, seeing that the
Sacrifices themselves are not required but from a willing-mind.

Now, how either Papists or Protestants (that boast of Antiquity) can get by
these plain testimonies, let any rational man judge. And indeed I much
question, if in any one point owned by them, and denied by us, they can find
all the old Fathers, and Writers so exactly unanimous. Which shows how contrary
all of them judged this to be, to the nature of Christianity, and that in the
point of persecution lay no small part of the Apostasy, which from little to
more, came to that, that the Pope upon every small discontent, would
excommunicate Princes, absolve their subjects from obeying them, and turn them
in and out at his pleasure. Now if Protestants do justly abhor these things
among Papists, is it not said that they should do the like themselves? A thing
that at their first appearance, when they were in their primitive innocence,
they did not think on, as appears by that saying of Luther. Luth. lib. de.
captivitt Babylonica.
Neither Pope nor Bishop, nor any other man, has power to oblige a Christian
to one syllable, except it be by his own consent. And again, I call boldly to
Christians, that neither man, nor Angel, can impose any Law upon them, but so
far as they will; for we are free of all. And when he appeared at the Diet of
Spiers, before the Emperor, in a particular conference he had, before the Arch
bishop of Triers, and Joachim Elector of Brandenburgh, when there seemed no
possibility of agreeing him with his opposers, they asking him, what remedy
seemed to him most fit? He answered, the counsel, that Gamaliel proposed to the
Jews, to wit, that, if this design was of God, it would stand, if not, it would
vanish, which, he said, ought to content the Pope: he did not say, because he
was in the right, he ought to be spared. History of the Council of Trent.
For this counsel supposes, that those, that are tolerated, may be wrong; and
yet how soon did the same Luther, ere he was well secure himself, press the
Elector of Saxony, to banish poor Carolostadius, because he could not, in all
things, submit to his judgment; and certainly it is not without ground
reported, that it smote Luther to the heart (so that he needed to be comforted)
when he was informed, that Carolostadius, in his Letter to his Congregation,
styled himself a man banished for Conscience, by the procurement of Martin
Luther. And since, both the Lutherans and Calvinists not admitting one another
to worship, in those respective Dominions, shows how little better they are,
that either Papists, or Arians, in this particular. And yet Calvin says, Calv.
Inst. c. 19. Sect. 14.
that the Conscience is free from the power of all men. If so, why then did he
cause Castellio to be banished, because he could not, for Conscience sake,
believe, as he did, that God had ordained men to be damned? and Servetus to be
burned, for denying the Divinity of Christ, if Calvin's report of him be to be
credited, which opinion, though it was indeed to be abominated, yet no less was
Calvin's practice, in causing him to be burned, and afterward defending that
it was lawful to burn Heretics, by which he encouraged the Papists to lead his
followers the more confidently to the Stake, as having, for their warrant, the
doctrine of their own Sect-master, which they omitted not frequently to twit
them with, and indeed it was to them unanswerable. Hence, upon this occasion,
the judicious Author of the History of the Couneil of Trent (in his fifth Book,
where, giving an account of several Protestants, that were burned for their
Religion) well and wisely observes it, as a matter of astonishment, that those
of the new Reformation did offer to punish in case of Religion: And afterward
taking notice, that Calvin justifies the punishing of Heretics, he adds, But
since the name of Heresy may be more or less restricted, yea, or diversely
taken, this Doctrine may be likewise taken in diverse senses, and may at one time
hurt those, whom at another time it may have benifited.

So that this Doctrine of Persecution cannot be mentioned by Protestants,
without strengthening the hands of Popish Inquisitors, and indeed, in the end,
lands in direct Popery. Seeing, if I may not profess and preach that Religion,
which I am persuaded of in my Conscience is true, it is to no purpose to search
the Scripture, or to seek to choose my own faith by convictions thence derived,
since whatever I there observe, or am persuaded of, I must either subject to
the jungment of the Magistrate and Church of that place I am in, or else
resolve to remove, or dye. Yea does not this heretical and Antichristian
Doctrine both of Papists and Protestants, at last resolve into that cursed
policy of Mahomet, who prohibited all reason or discourse about Religion, as
occasioning factions and divisions? And indeed, those that press Persecution,
and deny Liberty of Conscience, do thereby show themselves more the Disciples
of Mahomet, than of Christ, and that they are no ways followers of he Apostles
Doctrine, who desired the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. To prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good: and also says, -- unto such as are otherwise
minded, God shall reveal it, Phil. 3.15. not that by beatings and banishments
it must be knocked into them.

. VI. Now the ground of Persecution, as has been above shown, is an
unwillingness to suffer; for no man that will persecute another for his
Conscience, would suffer for his own, if he could avoid it, seeing his
Principle obliges him if he had power, by force to establish that which he
judges is the Truth, and so to force others to it. Therefore I judge it meet,
for the information of the Nations, briefly to add something in this place
concerning the nature of true Christian sufferings, whereunto a very faithful
testimony has been borne by God's Witnesses, which he has raised up in this
age, beyond what has been generally known or practiced for these many
generations, yea since the Apostasy took place. Yet it is not my design here in
any wise to derogate from the sufferings of the Protestant Martyrs, whom I
believe to have walked in faithfulness toward God, according to the
dispensation of Light in that day appearing, and of which many were utter
enemies to persecution, as by their testimonies ugainst it, might be made
appear.

But the true, faithful, and Christian suffering is, for men to profess what
they are persuaded is right, and so practice and perform their Worship toward
God, as being their true right so to do, and neither to do more in that because
of outward encouragement from men, nor any whit less because of the fear of
their Laws and Acts against it. Thus for a Christian man to vindicate his just
liberty, with so much boldness and yet Innocence, will in due time, though
through blood, purchase peace, as this age has in some measure experienced, and
many are witnesses of it, which yet shall be more apparent to the world, as
Truth takes place in the earth. But they greatly sin against this excellent
rule, that in time of persecution, do not profess their own way, so much as
they would if it were otherways; and yet, when they can get the Magistrate
upon their side, not only stretch their own liberty to the utmost, but seek to
establish the same, by denying it to others. But of this excellent patience and
sufferings, the Witnesses of God, in scorn called, Quakers, have given a
manifest proof; for, so soon as God revealed his Truth among them, without
regard to all opposition, or what they might meet with, they went up and down,
as they were moved of the Lord, preaching and propagating the Truth in
Marketplaces, Highways, Streets, and public Temples, though daily beaten,
whipped, bruised, haled, and imprisoned therefore. And when there was any where
a Church or Assembly gathered, they taught them to keep their meetings openly,
and not to shut the door, nor do it by stealth, that all might know it, and who
would might enter: and as hereby all just occasion of fear of plotting against
the Government was fully removed, so this their courage and faithfulness, in
not giving over their meeting together, (but more especially the presence and
Glory of God, manifested in the meeting, being terrible to the Consciences of
the Persecutors) did so weary out the malice of their adversaries, that
oftentimes they were forced to leave their work undone. For when they came to
break up a meeting, they were forced to take every individual out by force,
they not being free to give up their liberty, by dissolving at their command:
and when they were haled out, unless they were kept forth by violence, they
presently returned peaceably to their place. Yea when sometimes the Magistrates
have pulled down their Meeting Houses, they have met the next day, openly upon
the rubbish, and so by innocence kept their possession and ground, being
properly their own, and their right to meet and worship God being not forfeited
to any. So that, when armed men have come to dissolve them, it was impossible
for them to do it, unless they had killed every one, for they stood so close
together, that no force could move any one to stir, until violently pulled
down: so that when the malice of their opposers stirred them to take shovels
and throw the rubbish upon them, there they stood unmoved, being willing if the
Lord should so permit, to have been there buried alive, witnessing for him. As
this patient, but yet courageous way of suffering, made the Persecutors work
very heavy, and wearisome unto them, so the courage and patience of the
sufferers using no resistance, nor bringing any weapons to defend themselves,
nor seeking any ways revenge upon such occasions, did secretly smite the hearts
of the persecutors, and make their Charriot-wheels go on heavily. Thus after
much and many kind of sufferings thus patiently born, which to rehearse would
make a volumn of it self, which may in due time be published to the Nations
(for we have them upon record) a kind of negative liberty has been obtained, so
that at present for the most part, we meet together without disturbance from
the Magistrate. But on the contrary, most Protestants, when they have not the
allowance and tolerance of the Magistrate, meet only in secret, and hide their
testimony: and if they be discovered, if there be any probability of making
their escape by force, though it were by cutting off those that seek them out,
they will do it, whereby they lose the glory of their sufferings by not
appearing as the innocent followers of Christ, nor having a testimony of their
harmlesness in the hearts of their pursuers, their fury, by such resistance, is
the more kindled against them. As to this last part of resisting such as
persecute them they can lay claim to no precept from Christ, nor any example of
him or his Apostles approved.

Obj.
But as to the first part for fleeing, and meeting secretly, and not openly
testifying for the Truth, they usually object that saying of Christ, Matthew.
10.23. when they persecute you in this City, flee ye into another. And Acts
9.4. that the Disciples met secretly for fear of the Jews. And Acts 9.25. that
Paul was let out of Damascus in a basket down by the wall.

Answ.
To all which I answer, First as to that saying of Christ, it is a question if
it had any further relation than to that particular message, with which he sent
them to the Jews, yea the latter end of the words seem expressly to hold forth
so much, for ye shall not have gone over the Citys of Juda, till the Son of man
be come. Now a particular practice or command, for a particular time, will not
serve for a president to any, at this day, to shun the Cross of Christ. But
supposing this precept to reach further, it must be so understood, to be made
use of only according as the Spirit gives liberty, else no man that could
flee, might suffer persecution. How then did not the Apostles John and Peter
flee, when they were the first time persecuted at Jerusalem? But on the
contrary went the next day after they were discharged by the Council, and
preached boldly to the People. But indeed many are but too capable to stretch
such sayings as these, for self preservation, and therefore have great ground
to fear, when they interpret them, that they shun to witness for Christ, for
fear of hurt to themselves, lest they mistake them. As for that private meeting
of the Disciples, we have only an account of the matter of fact, but that
suffices not to make of it a president for us, and men's aptness to imitate them
in that (which for ought we know, might have been an act of weakness) and not
in other things of the contrary nature, shows that it is not a true zeal to be
like those Disciples, but indeed a desire to preserve themselves, which moves
them so to do. Lastly, as to that of Paul's being conveyed out of Damascus, the
case was singular, and is not to be doubted, but it was done by a special
allowance from God, who having designed him to be a principal Minister of his
Gospel, saw meet, in hss Wisdom, to disoppoint the wicked council of the Jews.
But our adversaries have no such pretext for fleeing, whose fleeing proceeds
from self preservation, not from immediate revelation. And that Paul made not
this the method of his proceedure, appears in that at another time,
notwithstanding the persuasion of his Friends, and certain Prophecys of his
sufferings to come, he would not be dissuaded to go up to Jerusalem, which
according to the forementioned rule, he should have done.

But lastly, to conclude this matter, Glory to God and our Lord Jesus Christ,
that now these twenty five years, since we were known to be a distinct and
separate People, has given us faithfully to suffer for his Name, without
shrinking or fleeing the Cross; and what liberty we now enjoy, it is by his
Mercy, and not by an outward working or procuring of our own, but it is he has
wrought upon the hearts of our opposers; nor was it any outward interest has
procured it unto us, but the testimony of our harmlesness in the hearts of our
Superiors: for God has preserved us hitherto in the patient suffering of
Jesus, that we have not given away our cause by persecuting any, which few, if
any, Christians that I know, can say. Now against our unparalleled, yet
innocent and Christian cause, our malicious enemies, have nothing to say, but
that if we had Power, we would do so likewise. This is a piece of mere
unreasonable malice, and a privilege they take to judge of things to come, which
they have not by immediate revelation; and surely it is the greatest height of
harsh judgment, to say, men would do contrary to their professed Principle if
they could, who have from their practice, hitherto given no ground for it, and
wherein they only judge others by themselves: such conjectures cannot militate
against us, so long as we are innocent. And if ever we prove guilty of
persecution, by forcing other men by corporal punishment, to our way, then let
us be judged the greatest of Hypocrites, and let not any spare to persecute us.
AMEN, says my Soul.

The Fifteenth Proposition, Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc.
Seeing the chief end of all Religion is to redeem men from the Spirit and vain
conversation of this World, Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Pet. 1.14. Joh. 5.44. Jer. 10.3. Acts
10.26. Matthew. 15.13. Col. 2.8.
and to lead into inward communion with God, before whom if we fear always, we
are accounted happy, therefore all the vain customs and habits thereof, both in
word and deed, are to be rejected and forsaken by those who come to this fear;
such as the taking off the Hat to a man, the bowings and cringings of the body,
and such other Salutations of that kind, with all the foolish and superstitious
formalities attending them, all which man has invented in his degenerate state,
to feed his Pride in the vain pomp and glory of this world, as also the
unprofitable Plays, frivolous Recreations, Sportings and Gamings which are
invented to pass away the precious time, and divert the mind from the witness
of God in the heart, and from the living sense of his fear, and from that
Evangelical Spirit wherewith Christians ought to be leavened, and which leads
into sobriety, gravity, and godly fear, in which as we abide, the blessing of
the Lord is felt to attend us in those actions, which we are necessarily
engaged, in order to the taking care for the sustenance of the outward man.

. I. HAving hitherto treated of the Principles of Religion, both relating to
Doctrine and Worship; I am now to speak of some practices, which have been the
product of this Principle, in those Witnesses, whom God has raised up in this
day, to testify for his Truth. It will not a little commend them (I suppose)
in the judgment of sober and judicious men, that taking them generally (even by
the Confession of their Adversaries) they are found to be free of those
Abominations, which abound among other Professors, such as are Swearing,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Riotousness, etc. And that generally the very coming
among this People, does naturally work such a change, so that many vicious and
profane persons have been known, by coming to this Truth, to become sober and
virtuous; and many light, vain and wanton ones to become grave and serious, as
our adversaries dare not deny, After this manner the Papists used to disapprove
the sobriety of the Waldenses of whom Reinerius a popish Author so writes.

But this sect of the Leonists has a great show of Truth; for that they live
righteously before men, and believe all things well of God, and all the
articles which are contained in the creed, only they blaspheme and hate the
church of Rome.


yet that they may not want something to detract us for, cease not to accuse us
for those things, which when found among themselves, they highly commend; thus
our gravity, they call sullenness; our seriousness, melancholy; our silence,
sottishness. Such as have been vicious and profane among them, but by coming to
us have left off those evils, lest they should commend the truth of our
profession they say, that whereas they were profane before, they are become
worse in being hypocritical and spiritually proud. If any before dissolute and
profane among them, by coming to the Truth with us, become frugal and diligent,
then they will charge them with covetousness. And if any eminent among them for
seriousness, piety, and discoveries of God, come unto us, then they will say,
they were always subject to melancholy and to enthusiasm, though before when
among them, it was esteemed neither melancholy nor enthusiasm, in an evil
sense, but Christian gravity, and Divine revelation. Our boldness and Christian
suffering, the call obstinacy and pertinacy, though half as much if among
themselves, they would account Christian courage and nobility. And, though thus
by their envy, they strive to read all relating to us backwards, counting these
things vice in us, which in themselves they would extol as virtues, yet has
the strength of Truth extorted this confession often from them, that we are
generally a pure and clean people as to the outward conversation.

But this they say, is but in policy to commend our heresy.

But such policy it is, say I, as Christ and his Apostles made use of, and all
good Christians ought to do; yea so far has Truth prevailed by the purity of
his followers, that if one that is called a Quaker, do but that which is common
among them, as to laugh and be wanton, speak at large, and keep not his word
punctually, or be overtaken with hastyness or anger, they presently say, O!
this is against your profession! As if indeed so to do were very consistent
with theirs, wherein, though they speak the Truth, yet they give away their
cause. But if they can find any under our name, in any of those evils, common
among themselves, (as who can imagine, but among so many thousands there will
be some chaff, since of twelve Apostles one was found so be a devil) O! how
will they insult, and make more noise of the escape of one Quaker, than of an
hundred among themselves!

. II. But there are some singular things, which most of all our adversaries
plead for the lawfulness of, and allow themselves in, as no ways inconsistent
with the Christian Religion, which we have found to be no ways lawful unto us,
and have been commanded of the Lord to lay them aside, though the doing thereof
has occasioned no small sufferings and buffetings, and has procured us much
hatred and malice from the world. And because the nature of these things is
such, that they do upon the very sight distinguish us, and make us known, so
that we cannot hide our selves from any, without proving unfaithful to our
testimony: our trials and exercises have herethrough, proved the more numerous
and difficult, as will after appear. These I have labored briefly to
comprehend in this Proposition, but they may more largely be exhibited in those
Six following Propositions.

1. That it is not lawful to give to men such flattering Titles, as your
Holiness, your Majesty, your Eminency, your Excellency, your Grace, your
Lordship, your Honor, etc. nor use those flattering words, commonly called
[COMPLEMENTS.]

2. That it is not lawful for Christians to kneel, or prostrate themselves to
any man, or to bow the body, or to uncover the head to them.

3. That it is not lawful for a Christian to use superfluities in apparel, as
are of no use, save for ornament and vanity.

4. That it is not lawful to use games, sports, plays, nor among other things
Comedies among Christians, under the notion of recreations, which do not agree
with Christian silence, gravity, and sobriety: for laughing, sporting, gaming,
mocking, jesting, talking, etc. is not Christian liberty, nor harmless mirth.

5. That it is not lawful for Christians to swear at all under the Gospel, not
only not vainly, and in their common discourse, which was also forbidden under
the Mosaical Law, but even not in Judgment, before the Magistrate.

6. That it is not lawful for Christians to resist evil, or to war or fight in
any case.

Before I enter upon a particular disquisition of these things, I shall first
premise some general considerations, to prevent all mistakes; and next add some
general considerations, which equally respect all of them. I would not have any
judge, that hereby we intend to destroy the mutual relation, that either is
betwixt Prince and people, Master and servant, Parents and children, nay not at
all. We shall evidence that our Principle in these things has no such
tendency, and that these natural relations are rather better established, than
any ways hurt by it. Next, let not any judge, that from our opinion in these
things, any necessity of levelling will follow, or that all men must have
things in common. Our Principle leaves every man to enjoy that peaceably, which
either his own industry, or parents have purchased to him, only he is thereby
instructed to use it aright, both for his own good, and that of his brethren,
and all to the Glory of God: In which also his acts, are to be voluntary, and
no ways constrained. And further we say not hereby, that no man may use the
creation more, or less than another. For we know that, as it has pleased God,
to dispense it diversely, giving to some more, and some less, so they may use it
accordingly. The several conditions under which men are diversely stated,
together with their educations answering thereunto, do sufficiently show this:
the servant is not the same way educated as the Master, nor the Tennant as the
Landlord, nor the rich as the poor, nor the Prince as the Peasant. Now, though
it be not lawful for any, however great abundance they may have, or whatever
their education may be, to use that which is merely superfluous: yet seeing
their education has accustomed them thereunto, and their capacity enables them
so to do, without being profuse or extravagant, they may use things better in
their kind, than such whose education has neither accustomed them to such
things, nor their capacity will reach to compass them. For it is beyond
question, that whatever thing the Creation affords, is for the use of man, and
the moderate use of them is lawful, yet per accidens they may be unlawful to
some, and not to others. As for instance, who by reason of his estate and
education has been used to eat flesh and drink wine, to be clothed with the
finest wool, if his estate bear it, and he use it neither in superfluity, nor
immoderately, he may do it, and perhaps if he should apply himself to feed or
be clothed as are the peasants, it might prejudice the health of his body, and
nothing advance his Soul. But if a man, whose estate and education had
accustomed to both courser food and raiment, should stretch himself beyond what
he had or were used to, to the manifest prejudice of his Family and Children,
no doubt it would be unlawful to him, even so to eat or be clothed, as
another, (in whom it is lawful) for that that other may as much mortified, and
have denied himself as much in coming down to that, which this aspires to, as
he in willing to be like him, aspires beyond what he either is able or has
accustomed to. The safe place then is for such as have fullness to watch over
themselves, that they use it moderately, and rescind all superfluities, being
willing so far as they can, to help the need of those, to whom Providence has
allotted a smaller allowance. Let the brother of high degree rejoice in that he
is abased, and such as God calls in a low degree to be content with their
condition, not envying those brethren, who have greater abundance, knowing they
have received abundance as to the inward man, which is chiefly to be regarded.
And therefore beware of such a temptation, as to use their calling as an engine
to be richer, knowing they have this advantage beyond the rich and noble, that
are called, that the Truth does not any ways abase them, nay not in the esteem
of the world, as it does the other, but that they are rather exalted thereby,
in that as to the inward and spiritual fellowship of the Saints they become the
brethren and companion of the greatest and richest, and in this respect let him
of low degree rejoice that he is exalted.

These things premised, I would seriously propose unto all such as mind in
reality, to be Christians indeed, and that in nature, and not in name only,
whether it were not desirable, and would not greatly contribute to the
commendation of Christianity, and to the increase of the life and virtue of
Christ, if all superfluous titles of honor, profuseness and prodigality in
meat and apparel, excess of gaming, sporting and playing were laid aside and
forborne? And whether such as lay them aside, in so doing, walk not more like
the Disciples of Christ and his Apostles, and are therein nearer their example,
than such as use them? Whether the laying them aside would hinder any from
being good Christians, or if Christians might not be better without them, than
with them? Certainly the sober and serious among all sorts, will say yea. Then
surely such as lay them aside, as reckoning them unsuitable for Christians, are
not to be blamed, but rather commended for so doing: because that both in
principle and practice, they effectually advance that, which others acknowledge
were desirable; but can never make effectual, so long as they allow the use of
them as lawful. And God has made it manifest in this age, that by discovering
the evil of such things, and leading his Witnesses out of them, and to testify
against them, he has produced effectually in many, that mortification and
abstraction from the love and cares of this world, who daily are conversing in
the world (but inwardly redeemed out of it) both in Wedlock, and in their
lawful employments, which was judged could only be obtained by such as were
shut up in Cloisters and Monasteries. This much in general.

. III. As to the first, we affirm positively; that it is not lawful for
Christians either to give or receive these titles of honor, as your Holiness,
your Majesty, your Excellency, your Eminency, etc.

First, because these titles are no part of that obedience, which is due to
Magistrates or Superiors, neither does the giving them add to, nor diminish
from that subjection we owe to them, which consists in obeying their just and
lawful commands, not in titles and designations.

Secondly, We find not, that, in the Scripture any such titles are used either
under the Law, or the Gospel: but, that in the speaking to Kings, Princes, or
Nobles, they used only a simple compellation, as O King, and that without any
further designation, save perhaps the name of the person, as O King Agrippa,
etc.

Thirdly, It lays a necessity upon Christians most frequently to lie; because
the persons, obtaining these titles, either by Election or Hereditarily, may
frequently be found to have nothing really in them, deserving them, or
answering them: as some, to whom it is said Your Excellency, having nothing of
Excellency in them: and who is called Your Grace, appear to be an enemy to
Grace: and he who is called Your Honor, is known to be base and ignoble. I
wonder what law of man, or what patent ought to oblige me to make a lie, in
calling good, evil, and evil, good? I wonder what Law of man can secure me, in
so doing from, the just Judgment of God, that will make me count for every idle
word, and to lie, is something more, Surely, Christians should be ashamed, that
such Laws, manifestly crossing the Law of God, should be among them.

If it be said, We ought in Charity to suppose, Obi.
that they have these virtues, because the King has bestowed those titles upon
them, or that they are descended of such as deserved them.

I answer, Charity destroys not knowledge: I am not obliged, Answ.
by charity, either to believe or speak a lie. Now it is apparent, and cannot
be denied by any, but that those virtues are not in many of the persons,
expressed by the titles they bear, neither will they allow to speak so to such,
in whom these virtues are, unless they be so dignified by outward Princes. So
that such as are truly virtuous must not be styled by their virtues, because
not privileged by the Princes of this World, and such, as have them not, must
be so called, because they have obtained a patent so to be; and all this is
done by those, who pretend to be his followers, that commanded his Disciples
not to call any man Master, and told them such could not believe as received
honor one from another, and sought not the honor which comes from God only.
This is so plain to such as will indeed be Christians, that it needs no
consequence.

Fourthly, as to those titles of Holiness, Eminency and Excellency, used among
the Papists to the Pope and Cardinal, etc. and Grace, Lordship and Worship used
to the Clergy among the Protestants, it is a most blasphemous usurpation. For,
if they use Holiness and Grace, because these things ought to be in a Pope or
in a Bishop, how come they to usurp that peculiarly to themselves? Ought not
Holiness and Grace to be in every Christian? And so every Christian should say
Your Holiness and Your Grace one to another. Next, how can they in reason claim
any more titles, than were practiced, and received by the Apostles and
primitive Christians, whose successors they pretend they are, and as whole
successors (and no otherwise) themselves, I judge, will confess, any honor
they seek is due to them? Now, if they neither sought, received, nor admitted
such honor, nor titles, how came these by them? If they say they did, let them
prove it if they can: we find no such thing in the Scripture. The Christians
speak to the Apostles without any such denominations, neither saying, If it
please your Grace, Your Holiness, Your Lordship, nor your Worship: they are
neither called My Lord Peter, nor My Lord Paul, nor yet Master Peter, nor
Master Paul, nor Doctor Peter, nor Doctor Paul, but singly Peter and Paul, and
that not only in the Scripture, but for some hundreds of years after. So that,
this appears to be a manifest fruit of the Apostasy: for, if these titles
arise either from the office or worth of the persons, it will not be denied,
but the Apostles deserved them better, than any now; that call for them. But
the case is plain, the Apostles had the Holiness, the Excellency, the Grace,
and because they were Holy, Excellent and Gracious, they neither used nor
admitted of such titles: but these, having neither Holiness, Excellency, nor
Grace, will needs be so called, to satisfy their ambitious and ostentive
minds, which is a manifest token of their Hypocrisy.

Fifthly, as to that title of Majesty, usually ascribed to Princes, we do not
find it given to any such in the Holy Scripture. But that it is specially and
peculiarly ascribed unto God, as 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Job 37.22. Psalm.
21.5.29.4.43.3.63.1.96.6. Isa. 2.10.24.14.26.10. Heb. 1.3. 2 Pet. 1.16. and
many more places. Hence says Jude, ver. 25. To the only Wise God our Savior
be Glory, and Majesty, etc. not to men. We find in Scripture the proud King
Nebuchadnezzar. assuming this title to himself, Dan. 4.30. who at that time
received a sufficient reproof, by a sudden Judgment which came upon him.
Therefore in all the compellations used to Princes in the Old Testament, is not
to be found, nor yet in the New. Paul was very civil to Agrippa, yet he gives
him no such title: neither was this title used among Christians in the
primitive times. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. page 445.
Hence the Ecclesiastic History of the Reformation of France, relating the
Speech of Lord Rochefort, at the Assembly of the Estate of France, held under
Charles the Ninth, in the year 1560. says, that this harangue was well
remarked, in that he used not the word [Majesty] invented by flatterers of late
years, and yet this Author minded not how his Master Calvin used this
flattering title to Francis the First, King of France, and not only so, but
calls him most Christian King, in the Epistle to his Institutions, though, by
his daily persecuting of the Reformers, it was apparent, he was far from being
such, even in Calvin's own esteem. Surely the complying with such vain titles,
imposed and introduced by Antichrist, greatly tended to strain the Reformation,
and to render it defective in many things.

Lastly, all these titles and styles of honor, are to be rejected by
Christians; because they are to seek the honor, that comes from above, and not
the honor that is from below. But these honors are not that honor, that
comes from above, but are from below. For we know well enough what industry,
and what pains men are at, to get these things, and what party it is that seeks
after them, to wit, the proud, insolent, haughty, aspiring mind. For judge, it
is the meek and innocent Spirit of Christ, that covets that honor? Is it that
Spirit that must be of no reputation in this World, that has its conversation
in Heaven, that comes to have fellowship with the Sons of God? Is it that
Spirit, I say, that loves that honor, that seeks after that honor, Phil. 3.20.
that pleads for the upholding of that honor, that frets and rages and fumes,
when it is denied that honor? Or is it not rather the lordly insulting Spirit
of Lucifer, the Prince of this World, he, that of old affected and sought after
this honor, and loved not to abide in the submissive low place? And so all his
Children are possessed with the same ambitious proud mind, seeking and coveting
titles of honor, which indeed belong not to them. For let us examine, who they
are, that are honorable indeed? Is it not the righteous man? 1 Samuel 2.30.
Is it not the holy man? Is it not the humble hearted man? the meek spirited
man? And are not such those, that ought to be honored among Christians? Now,
of these, may there not be poor men? laborers? silly Fishermen? And if so,
how comes it that the titles of honor are not bestowed upon such? But who are
they, that generally receive and look for this honor? Are they not the rich
ones? Such as have abundance of the Earth? As be like the rich glutton? Such as
are proud and ambitious? Such as are oppressors of the poor? Such as swell with
lust and vanity? and all superfluity of naughtiness? Who are the very
abomination and plague of the Nations: Are not these they, that are accounted
the honorable? that require and receive the titles of honor, proud Haman? Now
whether is this the honor that comes from God, or the honor from below? Does
God honor such as daily dishonor him, and disobey him? And if this be not the
honor, that comes from God, but the honor of this World, Heiron. in his
Epistle to Celant. admonishes her, That she was to be preferred to none for
her nobility, for the Christian Religion admits not of respect of persons,
neither are men to be esteemed because of their outward condition, but
according to the disposition of the mind, to be esteemed either noble or base;
he that obeys not sin, is free, who is strong in virtue is noble. Let the
epistle of James be read.
which the Children of this World give, and receive one from another, how can
the Children of God, such as are Christians indeed, give or receive that honor
among themselves, without coming under the reproof of Christ, who says, that
such as do, cannot believe? But further, if we respect the cause, that most
frequently procures to men these titles of honor, there is not one of a
thousand that shall be found to be, because of any Christian Virtue. But rather
for things to be discommended among Christians. As by the favor of Princes
procured by flattering, and often by worse means, yea, the most frequent, and
accounted among men most honorable, is fighting, or some great martial
Exploit, which can add nothing to a Christians worth: since, sure it is, it
were desirable there were no fightings among Christians at all, and in so far
as there are, it shows they are not right Christians. And James tells us, that
all fightings proceeds from the lusts, so that it were fitter for Christians by
the Sword of God's Spirit to fight against their lusts, than by the prevalency
of their lusts to destroy one another. Whatever honor any might have attained
of old, under the Law, this way, we find under the Gospel, Christians commended
for suffering, not for fighting, neither did any of Christ's Disciples, save
one, offer outward violence by the Sword, in cutting off Malchus's Ear, for
which he received no title of honor, but a just reproof. Finally, if we look
either to the nature of this honor, the cause of it, the way its conveyed, the
terms in which it is delivered, it cannot be used by such as mind to be
Christians in good earnest.

. IV. Now besides these general titles of honor, what gross abuses are crept
in among such as are called Christians, in the use of Complements, wherein not
servants to masters, or others, with respect to any such kind of relations, do
say and write to one another at every turn, Your humble servant, Your most
obedient servant, etc. Such wicked customs have, to the great prejudice of
Souls, accustomed Christians to lie, and to use lying is now come to be
accounted civility. O horrid Apostasy! For it is notoriously known that the use
of these Complements imports not any design of service, neither are any such
fools as to think so, for if we should put them to it, that say so, they would
not doubt to think we abused them, and would let us know they gave us words in
course, and no more. It is strange, that such as pretend to Scripture as their
rule, should not be ashamed to use such things: since Elihu, that had not the
Scriptures, would by the Light within him, which these men think insufficient,
say Job 32.21, 22. Let me not accept any man's person, neither let me give
flattering titles unto man. For I know not to give flattering titles, in so
doing my Maker would soon take me away. This history is reported by Casaubonus,
in his Book of Manners and Customs, page 169. In this last Age he is esteemed
an uncivil Man, who will not, either to his inferior, or equal, subscribe
himself Servant. But Sulpitious Severus was heretofore sharply reproved by
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, because, in his Epistle, he had subscribed himself his
Servant, saying, Beware thou subscribe not thy self his Servant, who is thy
Brother, for flattery is sinful, not a testimony of humility, to give their
honors to Men, which are only due to the One Lord, Master, and GOD.
A certain Ancient devout Man in the primitive time subscribed himself to a
Bishop; your humble servant, wherein I doubt not, but he was more real, than
our usual Complementers: and yet he was sharply reproved for it.

But they usually object, to defend themselves, that Luke says, Most Excellent
Theophilus, and Paul, Most Noble Festus.

I answer, since Luke wrote that, by the dictates of the infallible Spirit of
God, I think it will not be doubted, but Theophilus did deserve it, as being
really endued with that virtue, in which case we shall not condemn those, that
do it by the same Rule. But it is not proved, that Luke gave Theophilus this
title, as that, which was inherent to him, either by his Father, or by any
patent Theophilus had obtained from any of the Princes of the Earth, or that he
would have given it him, in case he had not been truly Excellent, and without
this he proved, which never can, there can nothing hence be deduced against us.
The like may be said of that of Paul to Festus, whom he would not have called
such, if he had not been truly Noble; as indeed he was, in that he suffered him
to be heard in his own cause, and would not give way to the fury of the Jews
against him, it was not because of any outward Title bestowed upon Festus, that
he so called him, else he would have given the same Compellation to his
predecessor Felix, who had the same office, but being a covetous man we find he
gives him no such Style.

. V. It will not be unfit in this place, to say something concerning the using
of the singular number to one Person; of this there is no controversy in the
Latin, for when we speak to one, we always use the Pronoun [TU,] and he that
would do otherwise, would break the rules of Grammar. For what boy learning his
rudiments, is ignorant that it is incongruous to say, [ vos amas, vos legis,]
that is [ you love, you readst,] speaking to one? But the pride of man, that
has corrupted many things, refuses also to use this simplicity of speaking in
the vulgar Languages. For being puffed up with a vain opinion of themselves, as
if the singular number were not sufficient to them, they will have others to
speak to them in the plural. Hence Luther in his plays, reproves and mocks this
manner of speaking, saying, Magister vos es iratus. Which corruption Erasmus
sufficiently refutes in his Colloquys. Concerning which likewise James Howel,
in his epistle to the Nobility of England, before the French and English
Dictionary, takes notice, that both in France and in other Nations, the word
[THOU] was used in speaking to one, but by success of time, when the Roman
Commonwealth grew into an Empire, the Courtiers began to magnify the Emperor
(as being furnished with power to confer dignities and offices) using the word
[You,] yea, and deifying him with more remarkable titles; concerning which
matter we read in the Epistles of Symmachus, to the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinianus, where he uses these forms of speaking, Vestra Aeternitas, your
Eternity, Vestrum numen, your Godhead, Vestra serenitas, your Serenity, Vestra
clementia, your Clemency. So that the word [You,] in the plural number,
together with the other titles and compellations of honor, seem to have taken
their rise from Monarchial government, which afterward by degrees, came to be
derived to private persons

The same is witnessed by John Maresius, of the French Academy, in the Preface
of his Clovis. Let none wonder (says he) that the word [Thou,] is used in this
work to Princes and Princesses. For we use the same to God: and of old the same
was used to Alexanders, Caesar's, Queens, and Empresses. The use of the word
[You] when one person is spoken to, was only introduced by these base
flatteries of men of later ages, to whom it seemed good to use the plural
number to one person, that he may imagine himself alone to be equal to many
others in dignity and worth, from whence at last it came to persons of lower
quality.

To the same purpose speaks also M. Godeau, in his preface to the New
Testament translation. I had rather (says he) faithfully keep to the express
words of Paul, than exactly follow the polished style of our tongue. Therefore
I always use that form of calling God in the singular number, nor in the
plural, and therefore I say rather [Thou,] than [You]. I confess indeed, that
the civility and custom of this world requires him to be honored after that
manner, but it is likewise, on the contrary, true, that the original tongue of
the New Testament has nothing common with such manners and civility, so that
not one of these many old versions we have, does observe it. Let not men
believe, that we give not respect enough to God, in that we call him by the
word [Thou;] which is nevertheless far otherwise, for I seem to my self (may be
by the effect of custom) more to honor his Divine Majesty, in calling him
after this manner, than if I should call him after the manners of men, who are
so delicat in their forms of speech.

See how clearly and evidently these men witness, that this form of speaking,
and these profane Titles derive their origin from the base flattery of those
last ages, and from the delicate haughtiness of worldly men, who have invented
these Novelties, that thereby they might honor one another under, I know not
what, pretense of civility and respect. From whence many of the present
Christians, so accounted, are become so perverse, in commending most wicked
men, and wicked customs, that the simplicity of the Gospel is wholly lost, so
that the giving of men and things their own names is not only worn out of
custom, but the doing thereof is accounted absurd and rude, by such kind of
delicate Parasites, who desire to ascribe to this flattery and abuse the name
of Civility. Moreover, that this way of speaking proceeds from a high and proud
mind, hence appears, because that men usually use the singular number to
beggars, and to their servants, yea and in their prayers to God. Thus the
superior will speak to his inferior, who yet will not bear that the inferior so
speak to him, as judging it a kind of reproach unto him. So has the pride of
men placed God and the beggar in the same Category. I think I need not use
arguments to prove to such, as know congruous language, that we ought to use
the singular number, speaking to one; which is the common dialect of the whole
Scripture, as also the most interpreters do translate it. Seeing therefore it
is manifest to us, that this form of speaking to men, in the plural number,
does proceed from pride, as well as that it is, in it self a lie, we found a
necessity upon us, to testify against this corruption, by using the singular
equally unto all. And albeit no reason can be given, why we should be
persecuted upon this account, especially by Christians, who profess to follow
the rule of Scripture, whose dialect this is, yet it would perhaps seem
incredible, if I should relate how much we have suffered for this thing, and
how these proud ones fume, fret, and gnash their teeth, frequently beating and
striking us, when we speak to them thus in the singular number: whereby we are
the more confirmed in our judgment, as seeing that this Testimony of Truth,
which God has given us to bear, in all things, does so vex the serpentine
nature in the Children of Darkness.

VI. Secondly, Next unto this of titles the other part of honor, used among
Christians, is the kneeling, bowing, and uncovering of the head to one another.
I know nothing our Adversaries have to plead for them in this matter, save some
few instances of the Old Testament, and the Custom of the Country.

The first are such as Abraham's bowing himself to the Children of Heath, and
Lot to the two Angels, etc.

But the practice of these Patriarchs, related as matter of fact, are not to be
a rule to Christians now: Neither are we to imitate them in every practice,
which has not a particular reproof added to it, for we find not Abraham
reproved for taking Hagar, etc. and indeed to say, all things were lawful for
us, which they practiced, would produce inconveniences obvious enough to all.
And as to the Customs of the Nations, it is a very ill argument for a
Christian's practice. Romans 12.2
We should have a better rule to walk by, than the Custom of the Gentiles, the
Apostles desire us not to be conformed to this World, etc. We see how little
they have to say for themselves in this matter. Let it be observed then,
whether our reasons for laying aside these things be not considerable, and
weighty enough to uphold us, in so doing.

First, We say, that God, who is the Creator of Man, and he to whom he owes
the dedication both of Soul and Body, is over all to be worshipped and adored,
and that not only by the Spirit, but also with the prostration of Body. Now
kneeling, bowing, and uncovering of the head is the alone outward signification
of our adoration toward God, and therefore it is not lawful to give it unto
Man. He that kneeleth or prostrates himself to man, what does he more to God?
He that boweth and uncovereth his head to the creature, what has he reserved
to the Creator? Now the Apostle shows us that the uncovering of the head is
that, which God requires of us in our worshipping of him, 1 Cor. 11. But if we
make our address to men in the same manner, where lies the difference? Not in
the outward signification, but merely in the intention, which opens a door for
the Popish veneration of Images, which hereby is necessarily excluded.

Secondly, Men, being alike by creation, (tho their being stated under their
several relations requires from them mutual services, according to those
respective relations) owe not worship to one another, but all equally are to
return it to God: because it is to him and his Name alone, that every knee must
bow, and before whose Throne the four and twenty Elders prostrat themselves.
Therefore for men to take this one from another is to rob God of his Glory:
since all the dutys of relations may be performed one to another, without these
kind of bowings, which therefore are no essential part of our duty to man, but
to God: all men, by an inward instinct, in all Nations have been led to
prostrate and bow themselves to God. And it is plain, that this Bowing to Men
took place from a slavish fear possessing some, which led them to set up others
as Gods, when also an ambitious proud spirit got up in those others to usurp
the place of God over their Brethren.

Thirdly, We see that Peter refused it from Cornelius, saying, he was a Man.
Are then the Popes more, or more excellent, than Peter, who suffer men daily to
fall down at their feet, and kiss them? This reproof of Peter to Cornelius does
abundantly show, that such manners were not to be admitted among Christians.
Yea we see, that the Angel twice refused this kind of bowing from John, Rev.
19.10.22.9. for this reason, because I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
Brethren; abundantly intimating, that it is not lawful for fellow servants thus
to prostrat themselves one to another, (and in this respect all men are
fellow servants.)

If it be said, John intended here a Religious Worship, and not a Civil. Obj.


I answer, that is to say, not to prove: neither can we suppose John at that
time of the day so ill instructed, Answ.
as not to know it was unlawful to worship Angels; only it should seem, because
of these great and Misterious things revealed to him by that Angel, he was
willing to signify some more then ordinary Testimony of respect, for which he
was reproved. These things being thus considered, it is remitted to the
judgment of such as are desirous to be found Christians indeed, whether we be
found worthy of blame for waving it to Men. Let those then, that will blame us,
consider whether they might not as well accuse Mordecai of uncivility, who was
no less singular than we, in this matter. And forasmuch as they accuse us
herein of Rudeness and Pride, tho the Testimony of our Consciences, in the
sight of God, be a sufficient guard against such Calumnies, yet there are of
us, known to be Men of such Education, as forbear not these things, for want of
that they call good breeding, and we should be very void of reason to purchase
that Pride, at so dear a Rate, as many have done the exercise of their
Conscience in this matter, many of us having been sorely Beaten and Buffeted,
yea and several Months Imprisoned, for no other reason, but because we could
not satisfy the Proud unreasonable humors of proud Men, as to uncover our
Heads, and bow our Bodies. Nor does our innocent practice in standing still,
tho upright, not putting off our Hats any more than our Shoes, the one being the
covering of our Heads, as well as the other of our Feet, show so much rudeness
as their beating or knocking us, etc. because we cannot Bow to them, contrary
to our Consciences. Which certainly shows less Meekness and Humility upon their
part, than it does of Rudeness or Pride upon ours. Now suppose it were our
Weakness, and we really under a Mistake in this thing, since it is not
alleged, to be the breach of any Christian precept, are we not to be indulged,
as the Apostle Commanded should be done to such as scrupled to eat Flesh? And
does not persecuting us and reviling us upon this account show them to be more
like unto proud Haman, than the Disciples or followers of the Meek self-denying
Jesus? And this I can say boldly, in the sight of God, from my own experience,
and that of many thousands more, that however small or foolish this may seem,
yet we behoved to choose death rather than do it, and that for Conscience sake:
and that, in its being so contrary to our natural spirits, there are many of
us, to whom the forsaking of these bowings and ceremonies was as death it self.
Which we could never have left, if we could have enjoyed our peace with God in
the use of them, though it be far from us to judge all those, to whom God has
not shown the evil of them, under the like hazard, yet nevertheless, we doubt
not, but to such, as will prove faithful Witnesses to Christ's Divine Light in
their Consciences, God will also show the evil of these things.

VII. The third thing to be treated of, is the Vanity and Superfluity of
Apparel, in which first two things are to be considered, the condition of the
Person, and the Country he lives in. We shall not say, that all Persons are to
be clothed alike, because it will perhaps neither suit their Bodies, not their
Estates. And if a man be clothed soberly and without superfluity, tho they may
be finer, than that, which his servant is clothed with, we shall not blame him
for it: The abstaining from superfluities, which his condition and education
has accustomed him to, may be in him, a greater act of Mortification, than the
abstaining from finer clothes in the servant, who never was accustomed to them.
As to the Country, what it naturally produces may be no vanity to the
inhabitants to use, or what is commonly imparted to them by way of exchange,
seeing it is without doubt that the Creation is for the use of man. So where
Silk abounds, it may be worn, as well as Wool; and were we in those Countries,
or near unto them, where Gold or Silver were as Common as Iron or Brass, the
one might be used as well as the other. The iniquity lies then here, First,
when, from a lust of vanity, and desire to adorn themselves, Men and Women, not
content with what their condition can bear, or their country easily affords,
do stretch to have things, that, from their rarity, and the price, that is put
upon them, seem to be precious, and so feed their lust the more, and this all
sober men of all sorts will readily grant to be evil.

Secondly, when men are not content to make a true use of the Creation, whether
the things be fine or course, and do not satisfy themselves with what need and
convenience calls for, but adds thereunto things merely superfluous, such as is
the use of Ribbons and Lace, and much more of that kind of stuff, as painting
the Face, platting the Hair, which are the fruits of the fallen, lustful and
corrupt nature and not of the new Creation, as all will acknowledge. And though
sober men, among all sorts, will lay, that it were better these things were
not, yet will they not reckon them unlawful, and therefore do admit the use of
them, among their Church Members* But we do account them altogether unlawful,
and unsuitable to Christians, and that for these reason.

First, the use of Clothes came originally from the fall, if man had not fallen,
it appears he would not have needed them. But this miserable state made them
necessary in two respects, 1. To cover his nakedness, 2. To keep him from the
cold, which is both the proper and principle use of them. Now, for man to
delight himself in that, which is the first fruit of his iniquity, and is the
consequence of sin, can be no ways lawful for him; so to extend things beyond
their real use, or to superadd things wholly superfluous, is a manifest abuse
of the Creation, and therefore not lawful to Christians.

Secondly, those, that will needs so adorn themselves in the use of their
Clothes, as to beset them with things having no real use or necessity, but
merely for ornament's sake, do openly declare, that the end of it is either to
please their lust (for which end these things are chiefly invented and
contrived) or otherwise to gratify a vain, proud and ostentive mind; and it is
obvious these are their general ends in so doing. Yea, we see, how easily men
are puffed up with their Garments, and how proud and vain they are, when
adorned to their mind. Now, how far these things are below a true Christian,
and how unsuitable, it needs not great probation. Hereby, those, that love to
be gaudy and superfluous in their Clothes, show they concern themselves little
with Mortification and Self-denial, and that they mind to beautify their
Bodies more than their Souls, which proves they mind little upon Mortality, and
so certainly are more nominal than real Christians.

Thirdly, the Scripture severely reproves such practices, both commending and
commanding the contrary, as Isa. 3. how severely does the Prophet reprove the
Daughters of Israel for their tinkling Ornaments, their Cauls, and their round
Tiars, their Chains and Bracelets, etc. And yet is it not strange to see
Christians allow themselves in these things, from whom a more strict and
exemplary conversation is required? Christ desires us not to be anxious about
our Clothing, Matthew. 6.25. And to show the vanity of such as glory in the
splendour of their Clothing, tells them, that even Solomon in all his Glory was
not to be compared to the Lilly of the Field, which to day is, and to morrow is
cast into the Oven. But surely they make small reckoning of Christ's words and
doctrine, that are so curious in their Clothing, and so industrious to deck
themselves, and so earnest to justify it, and so mad, when they are reproved
for it; the Apostle Paul is very positive in this respect, 1 Timothy 2.8, 9.10. I
will therefore in like manner also, that Women adorn themselves in modest
Apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety, not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or
Pearls, or costly Array: But (which becomes Women, professing godliness) with
good works. To the same purpose says Peter, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. Whose adorning, let
it not be that outward adorning, of platting the Hair, and wearing of Gold, or
of putting on of Apparel. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that,
which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, etc.
Here, both the Apostles do very positively and expressly assert two things,
First, That the adorning of Christian Women (of whom it is particularly spoken,
I judge, because that Sex is most naturally inclined to that vanity, and that
it seems that Christian men, in those days deserved not in this respect so
much to be reproved) ought not to be outward, nor consist in the Apparel.
Secondly, that they ought not to use the platting of the Hair, or Ornaments,
etc. which was at that time the custom of the Nations. But is it not strange,
that such, as make the Scripture their rule, and pretend they are guided by it,
should not only be so frequently and ordinarily in the use of these things,
which the Scripture so plainly condemns, but also should allow themselves in so
doing? For the Apostles not only commend the forbearance of these things, as an
attainment commendable in Christians, but condemn the use of them as unlawful,
and yet may it not seem more strange, that, in contradiction to the Apostles
Doctrine, as if they had resolved to slight their testimony, they should condemn
those, that, out of Conscience, apply themselves seriously to follow it, as if,
in so doing, they were singular, proud, or superstitious? This certainly
betokens a sad Apostasy in those, that will be accounted Christians, that they
are so offended with those, that love to follow Christ and his Apostles, in
denying of, and departing from, the lying vanities of this perishing world, and
so does much evidence their affinity with such, as hate to be reproved, and
neither will enter themselves, nor suffer those, that would.

. VIII. Fourthly, let us consider the use of Games, Sports, Comedies, and other
such things, commonly and indifferently used, by all the several sorts of
Christians, under the notion of divertisement and recreation, and see whether
these things can consist with the seriousness, gravity, and godly fear, which
the Gospel calls for: Let us but view and look over the notions of them, that
call themselves Christians, whether Papist or Protestant, and see, if generally
there be any difference, save in mere name and profession, from the Heathen;
does not the same folly, the same vanity, the same abuse of precious and
irrevocable time abound? The same Gaming, Sporting, Playing, and, from thence,
Quarrelling, Fighting, Swearing, Ranting, Revelling? Now, how can these things
be remedied, so long as the Preachers and Professors, and those who are the
leaders of the People, do allow these things, and account them not inconsistent
with the profession of Christianity? And it is strange to see that these things
are tolerated every where, the inquisition lays no hold on them, neither at
Rome nor in Spain, where, in their Masquerades all manner of Obscenity, Folly,
yea, and Atheism, is generally practiced, in the face of the world, to the
great scandal of the Christian name: but if any man reprove them in these
things, and forsake their superstitions, and come seriously to serve God, and
worship him in the Spirit, he is made a prey, and presently made liable to
cruel sufferings. Does this bear any proportion to Christianity? Do these
things look any thing like the Churches of the primitive Christians? Surely not
at all. I shall first cite some few Scripture testimonies, being very positive
precepts to Christians, and then see, whether such, as obey them, can admit of
these forementioned things. The Apostle commands us, that, whether we eat or
drink, or whatever we do, we do it all to the glory of God. But I judge none
will be so impatient, as to affirm that, in the use of these Sports and Games,
God is glorified. If any should so say, they would declare they neither knew
God nor his Glory: and experience abundantly proves, that, in the practice of
these things, men mind nothing less, than the glory of God, and nothing more
than the satisfaction of their own carnal lusts, wills and appetites: The
Apostle desires us, 1 Cor. 7.29.31. Because the time is short, that they, that
buy should be, as though they possessed not. And they, that use this world, as
not abusing it, etc. But how can they be found in the obedience of this
precept, that plead for the use of these Games and Sports? who, it seems, think
the time so long, that they cannot find occasion enough to employ it, neither
in taking care for their souls, nor yet in the necessary care for their bodies,
but invent these games and sports, to pass it away, as if they wanted other
work to serve God, or be useful to the creation in. The Apostle Peter desires
us to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17 But will any
say, that such, as use dancing and comedies, carding and dicing, do so much as
mind this precept in the use of these things? where there is nothing to be
seen, but lightness and vanity, wantonness and obscenity, contrived, to hinder
men from fear, or being serious, and therefore no doubt calculate for the
service of the Devil. There is no duty more frequently commanded, nor more
incumbent upon Christians, than the fear of the Lord, to stand in awe before
him, to walk, as in his presence, but if such, as use these Games and sports,
will speak from their Consciences, they can, I doubt not, experimentally
declare, that this fear is forgotten in their gaming: and if God, by his Light
secretly touch them, or mind them of the vanity of their way, they strive to
shut it out, and use their gaming as an engine to put away from them that
troublesome gust, and thus make merry over the Just One, whom they have slain
and crucified in themselves. But further, if Christ's reasoning be to be
heeded, who says, Matthew. 12.35, 36. That the good man out of the good treasure
of the heart, brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil
treasure, brings forth evil things: And that of every idle word we shall give
an account in the day of Judgment; it may be easily gathered from what treasure
these inventions come, and it may be easily proved, that it is from the evil,
and not the good. How many idle words do they necessarily produce? Yea what are
Comedies but a studied Complex of idle and lying words? Let men, that believe
their Souls are Immortal, and that there will be a day of Judgment, in which
these words of Christ will be accomplished, answer me, how all these will make
account in that great and terrible day, of all these Idle words, that are
necessarily made use of, about danceing gaming, carding, and comedies acting?
And yet how is it that, by Christians not condeming these things, but allowing
of them, many, that are accounted Christians, take up their whole time in them,
yea make in their Trade and Employment, such as the Dancing-masters and
Comedians, etc. whose hellish conversations do sufficiently declare what Master
they serve, and to what end these things contribute, and it cannot be denied,
as being obviously manifest by experience, that such as are Masters of these
trades, and are most delighted in them, (if they be not open Atheists and
Profligats) are such at best, as make Religion, or the care of their Souls,
their least business. Now, if these things were discountenanced by Christians,
or inconsistent with their profession, it would remove these things: for these
Wretches would be necessitated then to betake themselves to some more honest
livelihood, if they were not fed and upholden by these. And as hereby a great
scandal and stumbling block would be removed from off the Christian Name, so
also would that, in part, be taken out of the way, which provokes the Lord to
withold his Blessing, and by occasion of which things the minds of many
remained chained in darkness, and drowned in lust, sensuality, and worldly
pleasures, without any sense of God's fear, or their own Souls Salvation. Many
of those, called Fathers of the Church, and other serious persons, have
signified their regrete for these things, and their desires they might be
remedied, of whom many Citations might be alleged, which for brevities sake I
have omitted!

IX. But they object, that men's Spirits could not subsist, Obj.
if they were always intent upon Serious and Spiritual matters, and that
therefore there is need of some Divertisement to recreate the mind a little,
whereby it being refreshed, is able, with greater vigor, to apply it self to
these things.

I answer, though all this were granted, Answ.
it would no ways militat against us, neither plead the use of these things,
which we would have wholly laid aside. For that Men should be always in the
same intentiveness of mind we do plead, knowing how impossible it is, so long
as we are clothed with this Tabernacle of Clay. But this will not allow us at
any time so to recede from the Memory of God and of our Souls chief concern, as
not still to retain a certain sense of his fear, which cannot be so much as
rationally supposed to be in the use of these thing, which we condemn. Now the
necessary occasions, which all are involved into, in order to the care and
sustentation of the outward man, are a relaxation of the mind from the more
serious duties; and those are performed in the blessing, as the mind is so
leavened wlth the love of God and sense of his presence, that, even in doing
these things, the Soul carries with it that Divine influence and Spiritual
habit, whereby, though these Acts, as of Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Working,
be upon the matter, one with what the wicked do, yet they are done in another
Spirit, and in doing of them, we please the Lord, serve him, and answer our end
in the Creation, and so feel, and are sensible of his blessing. Whereas the
wicked and profane, being not come to this place, are, in whatsoever they do,
cursed, and their ploughing as well as praying, is sin* Now, if any will plead,
that for Relaxation of mind, there may be a liberty allowed beyound these
things, which are of absolute need to the sustenance of the outward man; I
shall not much contend against it, provided these things be not such as are
wholly superfluous, or in their proper nature and tendency lead the mind into
lust, vanity, and wantonness, as being chiefly contrived and framed for that
end, or generally experienced to produce these effects, or being the common
engines of such as are so minded to feed one another therein, and to propagate
their wickedness, to the impoisoning of others; seeing there are other innocent
divertisements, which may sufficiently serve for relaxation to the mind, such
as for friends to visit one another, to hear or read History, to speak soberly
of the present or past Transactions, to follow after Gardnering, to use
Geometrical and Mathematical Experiments, and such other things of this nature:
in all which things we are not to forget God ( in whom we both live and are
moved, Acts 10.26.) as not to have always some secret reserve to him, and
sense of his fear and presence, which also frequently exerts it self in the
midst of these things, by some short aspiration and breathings, and that this
may neither seem strange nor troublesome. I shall clear it by one manifest
instance, answerable to the experience of all men, it will not be denied, but
that men ought to be more in the love of God, than of any other thing, for we
ought to love God above all things. Now, it is plain, that men, that are taken
with love, whether it be of a woman, or any other thing, if it has taken a
deep place in the heart, and possess the mind, it will be hard for the man, so
in love, to drive out of his mind the person or thing so loved, yea, in his
eating, drinking and sleeping, his mind will always have a tendency that way,
and, in business or recreations however intent he be in it, there will but a
very short time be permitted to pass, but the mind will let some ejaculation
forth toward its beloved. And, albeit such a one must be conversant in those
things, that the care of this body, and such like things call for, yet will he
avoid, as death it self, to do those things, that may offend the party so
beloved, or cross his design in obtaining the thing so earnestly desired,
though there may be some small use in them, the great design, which is chiefly
in his eye, will so balance him, that he will easily look over and dispense
with such petty necessities, rather than endanger the loss of the greater, by
them. Now that men ought to be thus in love with God and the life to come, none
will deny, and the thing is apparent from these Scriptures, Matthew. 6.20. But
lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, Col. 3.2. Set your affection on
things above, etc. And that this has been the experience and attainment of
some, the Scripture also declares, Psalm. 63.1.84. 2 Cor. 5.14.

And again, that these games, sports, plays, dancing, comedies, etc. do
naturally tend to draw men from God's fear, to make them forget heaven, death
and judgment, to foster lust, vanity, and wontonness, and therefore are most
loved as well as used by such kind of persons, experience abundantly shows, and
the most serious and conscientious among all, will scarcely deny, which if it
be so, the application is easy.

X. Fifthly, the use of Swearing is to be considered, which is so frequently
practiced almost among all Christians, not only profane Oaths among the
profane, in their common discourses, whereby the most HOLY NAME of GOD is, in a
horrible manner, daily Blasphemed, but also solemn Oaths with those, that have
some show of piety, whereof the most part do defend swearing before the
Magistrate, with so great zeal, that not only they are ready themselves to do
it upon every occasion, but also stir up the Magistrates to persecute those,
who, out of obedience to Christ, their Lord and Master, judge it unlawful to
swear: Upon which account not a few have suffered imprisonment, and the
spoiling of their goods.

But considering these clear words of our Savior, Matthew. 5.33, 34. Again, ye
have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. But I say unto you,
SWEAR NOT AT ALL, neither by Heaven, etc. But let your Communication be Yea,
Yea: Nay, Nay: for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil. As also the
words of the Apostle James 5.12. But above all things, my Brethren, Swear not,
neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath: but let
your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay. lest ye fall into condemnation. I say,
considering these clear words, it is admirable, how any one, that professes
the Name of Christ, can pronounce any Oath with a quiet Conscience; far less to
persecute other Christians, that dare not swear, because of their Master Christ
his Authority. For did any one purpose seriously, and in the most rigid manner,
to forbid any thing, comprehended under any general, can they use a more full
and general prohibition, and that without any exception? I think not. For
Christ, First, proposes it to us negatively, Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy Head, etc. And again,
Swear not by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath. Secondly, he presses
it affirmatively, But let your Communication be Yea, Yea: and Nay, Nay: for
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. And says James, lest ye fall
into Condemnation.

Which words both all and every one of them do make such a full prohibition,
and so free of all exception, that it is strange, how men, that boast the
Scripture is the Rule of their faith and life, can counterfeit any exception.
Certainly reason ought to teach every one, that it is not lawful to make void a
general prohibition, coming from God, by such opposition, unless the exception
be as clearly and evidently expressed as the prohibition; neither is it enough,
to endeavor to confirm it by consequences and probabilitys, which are obscure
and uncertain, and not sufficient to bring quiet to the Conscience. For if they
say, that there is therefore an exception and limitation in the words, because
there are found exceptions in the other general prohibition of this fifth
chapter, as in the forbidding of divorcement, where Christ says, It has been
said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give her a writing of
divorcement. But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit Adultery; If I say, they
say this, they not only labor in vain, but also fight against themselves,
because they can produce no exception of this general command of not swearing,
expressed by God to any under the New Covenant, after Christ gave this
prohibition, so clear as that, which is made in the prohibition it self:
moreover, if Christ would have excepted Oaths, made before Magistrates,
certainly he had then expressed, adding, except in judgment, before the
Magistrate, or the like; as he did in that of divorcement, by these words,
saving for the cause of fornication: which being so, it is not lawful for us to
except or distinguish, or (which is all one) make void this general prohibition
of Christ; it would be far less agreeable to Christian holiness, to bring upon
our heads the crimes of so many Oaths, which by reason of this corruption and
exception, are so frequent among Christians.

Neither is it to be omitted, that without doubt, the most learned Doctors of
each Sect know, that these forementioned words were understood, by the Ancient
Fathers of the first three hundred years after Christ, to be a prohibition of
all sorts of Oaths: It is not then without reason, that we wonder, that the
Popish Doctors and Priests bind themselves by an Oath, to interpret the Holy
Scriptures according to the universal exposition of the Holy Fathers, who
notwithstanding understood those controverted texts quite contrary to what
these Modern Doctors do: and from thence also does clearly appear the vanity
and foolish certainty (so to speak) of Popish traditions; for, if by the
writings of the Fathers, so called, the faith of the Church of these ages may
be demonstrated, it is clear, they have departed from the faith of the Church
of the first three Ages in the point of swearing. Moreover, because not only
Papists, but also Lutherans and Calvinists, and some others, do restrict the
words of Christ's and James, I think it needful to make manifest the vain
foundation, upon which their presumption in this matter is built.

Obj.
. XI. First they object, That Christ only forbids these Oaths, that are made by
Creatures, and things Created; and they prove it thence, because he numbers
some of these things.

Secondly, All rash and vain oaths in familiar discourses, because he says,
Let your communication be Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay.

To which I answer, First, that the Law did forbid all Oaths made

Secondly, it is most evident, that Christ forbids somewhat, Answ.
that was permitted under the Law, to wit, to swear by the Name of God, because
it was not lawful for any man to swear but by God himself, and because he
says, neither by Heaven, because it is the Throne of God, therefore he
excludes all other Oaths, even those, which are made by God? for he says,
chap. 23.22. He, that shall swear by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and
by him, that sits thereon: whtch is also to be understood of the rest.

Lastly, that he might put the matter beyond all controversy, he neither by
any other oath: Therefore, seeing to swear, before the Magistrate by God, is an
Oath, it is here without doubt forbidden.

Secondly, they object, that by these words Oaths by Gods Name cannot be
forbidden, because the Heavenly Father has commanded them, Obj.
for the Father and the Son are one, which eould not be, if the Son did forbid
that which the Father commanded.

I answer, They are indeed One, Answ.
and cannot contradict one another; nevertheless the Father gave many things to
the Jews, for a time, because of their infirmity under the old Covenant, which
had only a shadow of good things to come, not the very Substance of things,
until Christ should come, who was the Substance, and by whose coming all these
things evanished, to wit, Sabbaths, Circumcision, the Paschal Lamb, men used
then Sacrifices, who lived in controversies with God, and one with other, which
all are abrogated in the coming of the Son, who is the Substance, Eternal Word,
and essential Oath and Amen, in whom the promises of God are Yea and Amen: who
came, that men might be redeemed out of strife, and might make an end of
controversy.

Thirdly, they object, But all Oaths are not Ceremonies, Obj.
nor any part of the Ceremonial Law.

I answer, Except it be shown to be an eternal, immutable, Answ.
and moral preceept, it withstands not; neither are they of so old an origin as
tithes, and the offering of the first fruits of the ground, which by Abel and
Cain were offered, long before the ceremonial Law, or the use of Oaths, which,
whatever may be alleged against it, were no doubt ceremonies, and therefore no
doubt unlawful now to be practiced.

Obj.
Fourthly, they object, that to swear by the Name of God, is a moral precept of
continual duration; because it is marked with his essential and moral worship,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him alone:
thou shall cleave to him, and swear by his Name.

Answ.
I answer, this proves not, that it is a moral and eternal precept; for Moses
adds that to all the precepts and ceremonies in several places: as Deuteronomy. 10.12,
13. saying, And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to love him, and to serve the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul. To keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day? And
chap 14. verse. 23. the fear of the Lord is mentioned together with the Tithes.
And so also Lev. 16.2, 3, 6. the Sabbaths and regard to parents are mentioned
with Swearing.

Obj.
Fifthly, they Object, that solemn Oaths, which God commanded, cannot be here
forbidden by Christ, for he says, that they come from evil: But these did not
come from evil, for God never commanded any thing, that was evil, or came from
evil.

Answ.
I answer, there are things, which are good, because commanded, and evil,
because forbidden: other things are commanded, because good, and forbidden,
because evil. As Circumcision and Oaths, which were good, when and because they
were commanded, and in no other respect; and again, when and because prohibited
under the Gospel, they are evil.

And in all these Jewish constitutions, however ceremonial, there was something
of good, to wit, in their season, as prefiguring some good: as by Circumcision,
the purifications, and other things, the holiness of God was typified, and that
the Israelites ought to be holy, as their God was holy. In the like manner
Oaths under the shaddows and ceremonys signified the verity of God, his
faithfulness and certainty, and therefore that we ought in all things to speak
and witness the Truth. But the Witness of Truth was before all oaths, and
remains, when all oaths are abolished; and this is the morality of all oaths,
and so long as men abide therein, there is no necessity of, nor place for
Oaths, as Polibius witnessed, who said, The use of Oaths in Judgment were rare
among the Ancients, but by the growing of perfidiousness so grew also the use
of Oaths. To which agrees Grotius, saying, An Oath is only to be used, as a
Medicin, in case of necessity: a solemn oath is not used but to supply defect.
The lightness of men and their inconstancy begot diffidence, for which swearing
was sought out a remedy. Basil the Great says, that swearing is the effect of
sin. And Ambrose, that Oaths are only a condescendency for defect. Chrysostom
says, that an Oath entered, when evil grew, when men exercises their frauds,
when all foundations were overturned: that Oaths took their beginning from the
want of Truth. These and the like are witnessed by many others with the
forementioned Authors. But what need of testimonies, where the evidence of
things speak it self? For who will force another to swear, of whom he is
certainly persuaded, that he abhors to lie in his words? And again, as
Chrysostom and others say, For what end will thou force him to swear, whom thou
believe not that he will speak the Truth.

. XII. That then, which was not from the beginning, which was of no use in the
beginning, which had not its beginning first from the will of God, but from the
work of the Devil, occasioned from evil, to wit, from unfaithfulness, lying,
deceit; and which was at first only invented by man as a mutual remedy of this
evil, in which they called upon the names of their idols; yea that, which (as
Hirerom, Chrysostom, and others testify) was given to the Israelites by God,
as unto children, that they might abstain from the Idolatrous Oaths of the
Heathens, Jer. 12.16. whosoever is so, is far from being a moral and eternal
precept; and lastly, whatsoever by its profanation an abuse is polluted with
sin, such as are abundantly the oaths of these times, by so often swearing, and
forswearing, far differs from any necessary and perpetual duty of a Christian:
But oaths are so: Therefore, etc.

Sixthly, they object, that God swore, Therefore to swear is good. Obj.


I answer with Athanasius, Seeing it is certain, Answ.
it is proper in swearing to swear by another, thence it appears, that God, to
speak properly, did never swear, but only improperly: whence speaking to men he
is said to swear; because these things, which he speaks, because of the
certainty and immutability of his will, are to be esteemed for Oaths. Compare
Psalm. 110.4. where it is said, The Lord did swear, Athan. in pass. and cruc.
Domin.
and it did not repent him, etc. And I swore (says he) by my self: and this is
not an Oath, for he did not swear by another, which is the property of an oath,
but by himself. Therefore God swears not according to the manner of men,
neither can we be induced from thence to swear, but let us so do and say, and
show our selves such by speaking and acting, that we need not with our hearers
an oath, and let our words of themselves have the testimony of Truth: for so we
shall plainly imitate God.

Obj.
Seventhly, they object: Christ did swear, and we ought to imitate him.

Answ.
I answer, that Christ did not swear; and albeit he had sworn, being yet under
the Law, this would no ways oblige us under the Gospel, as neither
Circumcision, or the Celebration of the Paschal Lamb. Hier. lib. Ep. part. 3.
tract. 1. Ep. 2.
Concerning which Hierom says, All things agree unto us, who are Servants,
that agreed unto our Lord, etc. The Lord swore, as Lord, whom no man did forbid
to swear: but unto us, that are servants, it is not lawful to swear, because we
are forbidden by the Law of our Lord. Yet, lest we should not suffer scandal by
his Example, he has not sworn, since he commanded us not to swear.

Eighthly, they object, that Paul swore, and that often, Romans 1.19. Phil. 1.8.
saying, Obj.
For God is my Witness, 2 Cor. 11.10. As the Truth of Christ is in me, 2 Cor.
1.23. I call God for a record upon my Soul. I speak the Truth in Christ, I lie
not. Romans 9.1. Behold, before God, I lie not, Gal. 1.20. And so requires Oaths
of others. I object you, says he, before God and our Lord Jesus Christ, 1
These. 5.27. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the
Brethren. But Paul would not have done so, if all manner of Oaths had been
forbidden by Christ, whose Apostle he was.

Answ.
To all which I answer, First, that the using of such forms of speaking are
neither Oaths, nor so esteemed by our adversaries, for, when upon occasion, in
matters of great moment we have said, We speak the Truth in the fear of God,
and before him, who is our Witness, and the searcher of our hearts, adding such
kind of serious attestations, which we never refused in matters of consequence,
nevertheless an Oath has moreover been required of us, with the ceremony of
putting our hand upon the book, the kissing of it, the lifting up of the hand
or fingers, together with this common form of imprecation, So help me God, or
So truly let the Lord God Almighty help me. Secondly, This contradicts the
opinion of our adversaries, because that Paul was neither before a Magistrate,
that was requiring an Oath of him; nor did he himself administer the office of
a Magistrate, as offering an Oath to any other. Thirdly, the question is not,
what Paul or Peter did, but what their and our Master taught to be done; and if
Paul did swear (which we believe not) he had sinned against the command of
Christ; even according to their opinion, because he swore not before a
Magistrate, but in an Epistle to his Brethren.

Ninthly, they object, Isa. 65.16. where speaking of the Evangelical times, Obj.
he says, That he who blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless himself in
the God of Truth, and he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the God of
Truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from
mine Eyes. For behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: Therefore in
these times we ought to swear by the Name of the Lord.

I answer, It is ordinary for the Prophets, to express the greatest duties of
Evangelical times in Mosaical terms, as appears, among others, Answ.
from Jer. 31.38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36.25. and 40. and Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by
my self, that unto me ever knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. Where the
Righteousness of the New Jerusalem, the purity of the Gospel with its Spiritual
Worship, and the profession of the Name of Cbrist, are expressed under forms of
speaking used to Old Jerusalem, under the washings of the Law, under the names
of Ceremonles, the Temple, Services, Sacrifices, Oaths, etc. Yea, that, which
the Prophet speaks here of Swearing, the Apostle Paul interprets it expressly of
confession, saying, Romans 14.11. For it is written, As I live, says the Lord,
Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. Which being
rightly considered, none can be ignorant, but these words, which the Prophet
writes under the Law, when the Ceremonial Oaths were in use, to wit, Every
Tongue shall swear, whereby the Apostle being under the Gospel, when those
Oaths became abolished, expressed by Every tongue shall confess.

Tenthly, they object, But the Apostle Paul approves Oaths used among men, when
he writes, Heb. 6.16. Obj.
For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath of Confirmation is to them an
end of all strife. But there are as many contests, fallacies and differences at
this time, as there were ever: Therefore the necessity of Oaths does yet remain.

I answer, the Apostle tells indeed in this place, Ans.
what men at that time did, who lived in controversies and incredulity, not
what they ought to have done, nor what the Saints did, who were redeemed from
strife and incrudulity, and had come to Christ, that Truth and Amen of God.
Moreover, he only alludes to a certain custom usual among men, that he might
express the firmity of the Divine Promise, that he might excite in the Saints
so much the more confidence in God, promising to them, not that he might
instigate them to swear against the law of God, or confirm them in that: no not
at all, for neither does, 1 Cor. 9.24. teach Christians the vain races, whereby
men often times, even to the destruction of their Bodies, are wearied to obtain
a corruptible prize. So neither does Christ, who is the Prince of Peace, teach
his Disciples to fight, albeit he takes notice, Luke 14.31. what it behooves
such Kings to do, who are accustomed to fight, as prudent warriors therein.
Secondly, as to what pertains to contests, perfidies, and diffidences among
men, which our adversaries affirm to have grown to such an height, that
Swearing is at present as necessary as ever; that we deny not at all, for we
see, and daily experience teaches us, that all manner of deceit and malice
does increase among worldly men and false Christians, but not among true
Christians: but, because men cannot trust one another, and therefore require
Oaths one of another, it will not therefore follow, that true Christians ought
to do so, whom Christ has brought to true faithfulness and honesty, as well
toward God, as one toward another, and therefore has delivered them from
contests, perfidies, and consequently from Oaths.

Eleventhly, they object, We grant, that among true Christians, there is not
need of Oaths, Obj.
but by what means shall we infallibly know them? It will follow then, that
Oaths are at present needful, and that it is lawful for Christians to swear, to
wit, that such may be satisfied, who will not acknowledge this and the other man
to be a Christian.

I answer, It is no ways lawful for a Christian to swear, whom Christ has
called to his essential Truth, Answ.
which was before all Oaths, forbidding him to swear, and, on the contrary,
commanding him to speak the Truth in all things, to the honor of Christ, who
called him; that it may appear, that the words of his Disciples may be as truly
believed, as the Oaths of all the worldly men. Neither is it lawful for them to
be unfaithful in this, that they may please others, for that they may avoid
their hurt: for thus the primitive Christians for some ages remained faithful,
who, being required to swear, did unanimously answer, I am a Christian, I swear
not. What shall I say of the Heathens, some of whom arrived to that degree? For
Diodoris Siculus, relates, lib. 16. that the giving of the right hand was,
among the Persians, a sign of speaking the Truth: and the Scythians, as Qu.
Curtius, relates, said, in their conferences with Alexander the Great, Think
not, that the Scythians confirm their friendship by swearing, they swear by
keeping their promises. Stobaeus, in his third Sermon, tells that Solomon said,
A good man ought to be in that estimation, that he need not an Oath, because it
is to be reputed a lessening of his honor, if he be forced to swear.
Pythagoras, in his Oration, among other things, has this maxim, as that,
which concerns the administration of the Commonwealth: Let no man call God to
witness by an Oath, no not in judgment; but let every man so accustom himself
to speak that he may become worthy to be trusted even without an Oath Basil the
Great commends Clinias an Heathen, that he had rather pay three talents, which
are about three thousand pound, than swear* Socrates, as Stobaeus relates,
Sermon. 14. had this sentence, the duty of good men requires, that they show to
the world, that their manners and actions are more firm than Oaths: the same
was the judgment of Isocrates. Plato also stood against Oaths in his judgments,
De Leg. 12. Quintilianus takes notice, that it was of old a kind of infamy, if
any was desired to swear; but to require an Oath of a noble man, was like an
examining him by the Hangman. Marcus Aurelius Antonius, the Emperor of Rome,
says, in his description of a good man, Such is his integrity, that he needs
not an Oath. So also some Jews did witness, as Grotius relates out of
Maimonides, It is best for a man to abstain from all Oaths. The Esseans, as
Philo Judaeus relates, did esteem their words more firm than Oaths; and Oaths
were esteemed among them as needless things. And Philo himself, speaking of the
third Commandment, explains his mind thus, viz. It were better altogether not
to swear, but to be accustomed always to speak the Truth, that naked words
might have the strength of an Oath. And elsewhere he says, It is more agreeable
to natural Reason, altogether to abstain from Swearing; persuading, that
whatsoever a good man says, may be equivalent with an Oath.

Who then needs further to doubt, but that, since Christ would have his
Disciples attain the highest pitch of Perfection, he abrogated Oaths, as a
rudiment of infirmity, and, in place thereof, established the use of Truth? Who
can now any more think, that the holy Martyrs and ancient Fathers, of the first
three hundred years, and many others since that t^me, have so opposed
themselves, to Oaths, that they might only rebuke vain and rash Oaths by the
Creatures, or heathen Idols, which were also prohibited under the Mosaical Law;
and not also swearing by the True God, in Truth and Righteousness, which was
there commanded, as Polycarpus, Justin Mart. Apol. 2. and many Martyrs, as
Eusebius relates* Tertullian in his Apol. cap. 32. ad Scap. cap. 1. of
Idolatry, c. 11. Clem. Alexan. Strom. lib. 7. Origin. in Matthew. Tract. 25.
Cypr. lib. 3. Athanas. in pass. and cruc. Dom. Christi. Hilarious in Mat. 5.34.
Basil. Magn. in Psalm. 14. Greg. Nyssenus in Cant. Orat. 13. Greg. Nazian. in
dial. contra juramenta. Epiphan. ad versus haeres. lib. 1. Ambros. de Virg.
lib. 3. Idem in Mat. 5. Chrysostom. in Genes. hom. 15. Idem hom. in Act. Apost.
cap. 3. Hieronymus Epist. lib. part. 3. Ep. 2. Idem in Zach. lib. 2. cap. 8
Idem in Mat. lib. 1. cap. 5. Augustine. de sermon. Dom. sermon. 28. Cyrillus in Jer.
4. Theodoretus in Deuteronomy. 6. Isidor. Pel^sio^a Ep. lib. 1. Epist. 155. Chromatius
in Mat. 5. Johan. Damascenus l. 3. c. 16. Casiodorus in Psalm. 94. Isidorus
Hispalensis cap. 31. Antiochus in Pandect. script. hom. 62. Beda in Jac. 5.
Haimo in Apoc. Ambros. Ansbertus in Apoc. Theophylactus in Mat. 5. Pascasius
Ratbertus in Mat. 5. Otho Brunsfelsius in Mat. 5. Druthmarus in Mat. 5.
Euthymius Eugubinus Bilblioth. vet. patr. in Mat. 5. OEcumenius in Jac. c. 5.
v. 12. Anselmus in Mat. 5. Waldenses, Viclevus, Erasmus in Mat. 5. and in Jac.
5. Who can read these places, and doubt longer of their sense in this matter?
And who, believing that they were against all Oaths, can bring so great an
indignity to the Name of Christ, as to seek to subject again his followers to
so great an indignity? Is it not rather time, that all good men labor to
remove this abuse and infamy from Christians?

Lastly, They Object, This will bring in fraud and confusion, for Impostors
will counterfeit probity, Obj.
and under the benefit of this dispensation will be without fear of punishment.

I answer, There are two things only, which oblige a man to speak the Truth:
Answ.
First, Either the fear of God in his heart and love of Truth, for, where this
is, there is no need of Oaths to speak the Truth. Or Secondly, the fear of
punishment from the Judge. Therefore let there be the same or rather greater
punishment appointed to those, who pretend so great truth in words, and so
great simplicity in heart, that they cannot lie, and so great reverence toward
the Law of Christ, that for Conscience sake they deny to Swear in any wise, if
they fail, and so there shall be the same good order, yea greater security
against deceivers, as if Oaths were continued, and also by that more severe
punishment, to which these false dissemblers shall be liable. Hence wicked men
shall be more terrified, and good men delivered from all oppression, both in
their liberty and Goods: for which cause, for their tender Consciences, God
has often a regard to Magistrates and their state, as a thing most acceptable
to him. But if any can further doubt of this thing, to wit, if without
confusion it can be practiced in the Commonwealth, let him consider the state
of the United Netherlands, and he shall see the good effect of it, for there,
because of the great number of Merchants, more than in any other place, there
is most frequent occasion for this thing, and tho the number of those, that are
of this mind, be considerable, to whom the States these hundred years have
condescended, and yet daily condescend, yet nevertheless there has nothing of
prejudice followed thereupon to the Commonwealth, Government, or good order,
but rather great advantage to Trade, and so to the Commonwealth.

XIII. Sixthly, The last thing, to be considered, is revenge and war, an evil
as opposite and contrary to the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ, as Light to
Darkness. For as is manifest, by what is said, through contempt of Christ's
Law, the whole world is filled with various oaths, cursings, blasphemous
profanations, and horrid perjuries, so likewise through contempt of the same
Law the world is filled with violence, Oppression, Murders, ravishing of Women
and Virgins, Spoilings, Depredations, Burnings, Vastations, and all manner of
Lasciviousness and Cruelty: so that it is strange, that men, made after the
Image of God should have so much degenerated, that they rather bear the Image
and nature of roaring Lions, tearing Tigers, devouring Wolves, and raging
Boars, than of rational Creatures endued with reason: and is it not yet much
more admirable, that this horrid Monster should find place and be fomented
among those men, that profess themselves Disciples of our peaceable Lord and
Master Jesus Christ, who by excellency is called the Prince of Peace, and has
expressly prohibited his children all violence, and o^ the contrary, commanded
them, that according to his example, they should follow Patience, Charity,
Forbearance, and other virtues worthy of a Christian.

Hear then what this great Prophet says, whom every Soul is commanded to hear
under the pain of being cut off, Matthew. 5. from v. 38. to the end of the
chapter. For thus he says: Ye have heard, that it has been said, an eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil:
But whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
And if any man will sue thee at law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
Give to him that asks thee; and for him that would borrow of thee, turn not
thou away. Ye have heard, that it has been said. Thou shall love thy
Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you, That ye may be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on
the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. For if ye love them
which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if
ye salute your brethren only, what do you more than others? Do not the
Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which in heaven is
perfect.

These words with a respect to revenge, as the former, in the case of swearing*
do forbid somethings, which were formerly lawful to the Jews considering their
condition and dispensation, and command unto such, as will be the Disciples of
Christ, a more perfect, eminent, and full signification of charity, as also
patience and suffering, than was required of them in that time, state, and
dispensation by the Law of Moses. This not only the judgment of most, if not
all, the Ancient Fathers, so called, the first 300 years after Christ, but also
of many others, and in general of all thsoe, who have rightly understood and
propagated the Law of Christ, concerning Swearing, as appears from Justin Mart.
in Dialog. cum. Tryph. ejusdemque Apolog. 2. Item ad Zenem. Tertul. de Corona
Militis. It. Apolog. cap. 21 and 37. It. lib. de Idolol. c. 17, 18, 19. It. ad
Scapulam cap. 1. It. adversus Jud. cap. 7. and 9. It. adv. Gnost. 13. It. adv.
Mare. c.4. It. lib. de patientia c. 6.10. Orig. con. Celsum. lib. 3.5.8. It. in
Josuam. hom. 12. cap. 9. It. in Mat. cap. 26. Tract. 36. Cypr. Epist. 56. It.
ad Cornel. Lactan. de just. lib. 5. c. 18. lib. 6. c. 20. Ambr. in Luc. 22.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. 5. hom. 18. It. in Matthew. 26. hom. 85. It. lib. 2. de
Sacerdotio. It. 1 Cor. 13. Chromat. in Matthew. 5. Hieron. ad Ocean. It. lib.
Epist. p. 3. Tom. 1 Ep. 2. Athan. de Inc. Verb. Dei. Cyrill. Alex. lib. 11. in
Johan. cap. 25, 26. Yea Austin, although he vary much in this matter,
notwithstanding in these places he did condemn fighting, Epist. 158, 159, 160.
It. ad Judices, Epist. 263. It. ad Darium, and lib. 21. It ad Faustum, cap. 76.
lib. 22. de Civit. ad Marc. cap. 6. as Sylburgius relates. Euthym. in Matthew.
26. and, among others of this age, Erasmus in Luc. cap. 3. and 22. Ludov. Vives
in introduc. ad Sap. J. Ferus, lib. 4. Comment. in Matthew. 7. and Luc. 22.

From hence it appears, that there is so great a connection betwixt these two
precepts of Christ, that, as they were uttered and commanded by him at one and
the same, so the same way they were received by men of all ages, not only in
the first promulgation, by the little number of the Disciples, but also after
the Christians increased in the first three hundred years, even also in the
Apostasy, the one was not left and rejected without the other, and now again
in the restitution and renewed preaching of the Eternal Gospel, they are
acknowledged as eternal and unchangeable laws, properly belonging to the
Evangelical state and perfection thereof, from which if any withdraw, he falls
short of the perfection of a Christian man.

And truly the words are so clear in themselves, that, in my judgment, they
need no illustration, to explain their sense: for it is more easy to reconcile
the greatest contradictions, as these Laws of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the
wicked practices of Wars, for they are plainly inconsistent. Whoever can
reconcile this, Resist not evil, with Resist violence by force; again, Give
also thy other check, with strike again; also Love thine enemies, with spoil
them, make a prey of them, pursue them with fire and sword, or, pray for those,
that persecute you, and those, that calumniate you, which persecute them by
fines, imprisonments, and death it self, and not only such, as do not persecute
you, but who heartily seek and desire your eternal and temporal welfare,;
whoever, I say, can find a means to reconcile these things may be supposed also
to have found away to reconcile God with the Devil, Christ with Antichrist,
Light with Darkness, and Good with Evil. But if this be impossible, as indeed
it is impossible, so will also the other be impossible, and men do but deceive
themselves and others, while they boldly adventure to establish such absurd and
impossible things.

. XIV. Nevertheless because some, perhaps through inadvertency, and by the
force of custom and tradition, do transgress this command of Christ, I shall
briefly show, how much War does contradict this precept, and how much they are
inconsistent with one another, and consequently, that War is no ways lawful to
such, as will be the Disciples of Christ. For

First, Christ commands, that we should love our enemies: But War, Matthew. 5.43.
on the contrary, teaches us to hate and destroy them.

Secondly the Apostle says, that we war not after the flesh, and that we fight
not with flesh and blood: Ephesians. 6.12.
But outward War is according to the Flesh, and against Flesh and Blood, for
the shedding of the one, and destroying of the other.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10.4.
that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual: But the weapons
of outward warfare are carnal, such as Cannon, Muskets, Spears, Swords, etc. of
which there is no mention in the armor described by Paul.

Fourthly, because James testifies, Ja. 4.1. Gal. 5.24.
that Wars and Strifes comes from the Lusts, which war in the Members of carnal
men: But Christians, that is, those, that are truly Saints, have crucified the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts: Therefore they cannot indulge them in
waging war.

Fifthly, Isa: 2.4. Mich. 4.3.
because the Prophet Isaiah and Micah have expressly prophesied, that, in the
Mountain of the House of the Lord, Christ shall judge the Nations, and then
they shall beat their Swords into Plough-shares, etc. and the ancient Fathers
of the first three hundred years after Christ, did affirm these prophesies to
be fulfilled in the Christians of their times, who were most averse from War,
concerning which Justin Martyr, Tertullian; and others, may be seen: which need
not seem strange to any, since Philo Judaeus abundantly testifies of the
Esseans, that there was none found among them, that would make instruments of
War. But how much more did Jesus come, that he might keep his followers from
fighting, and might bring them to patience and charity?

Sixthly, because the Prophet foretold, Isa. 65.25.
that there should none hurt nor kill in all the Holy Mountain of the Lord: But
outward War is appointed for killing and destroying.

Joh. 18. v. 36.
Seventhly, Because Christ said, That his Kingdom is not of this world, and
therefore that his servants shall not fight: Therefore those, that fight, are
not his Disciples nor servants.

Matthew. 26. v. 52.
Eighthly, Because he reproved Peter for the use of the Sword, saying, Put up
again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword, shall perish
with the sword. Concerning which Tertullian speaks well, lib. de idol. How
shall he fight in peace without a sword, which the Lord did take away? For
although Soldiers came to John and received a form of observation, if also the
Centurion believed afterward, he disarmed every Soldier in disarming of
Peter. Idem de Coro. Mil. asks, shall it be lawful to use the Sword, the Lord
saying, that he, that uses the Sword, shall perish by the Sword.

Romans 12. v. 19.
Ninthly, Because the Apostle admonishes Christians, that they defend not
themselves, neither revenge by rendering evil for evil, but give place unto
wrath, because Vengeance is the Lords: Be not overcome of evil; but overcome
evil with good. If thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink:
But War throughout teaches and enjoyneth the quite contrary.

Marc. 8. v. 34.
Tenthly, Because Christ calls his children to bear his Cross, not to crucify
or kill others: to patience not to revenge: to truth and simplicity, not to
fraudulent stratagems of War, or to play the Sycophant, which John himself
forbids: to flee the glory of this World; not to acquire it by warlike
endeavors: Therefore War is altogether contrary unto the Law and Spirit of
Christ.

Obj.
. XV. But they Object, That it is lawful to War, because Abraham did War before
the giving of the Law, and the Israelites after the giving of the Law.

Answ.
I answer as before, 1. that Abraham offered sacrifices at that time, and
Circumcised the Males: which nevertheless are not lawful for us under the
Gospel.

2. That neither defensive nor offensive War was lawful to the Israelites, of
their own will, or by their own counsel or conduct, but they were obliged at
all times, if they would be successful, first to inquire the Oracle of God.

3. That their Wars, against the wicked Nations, were a Figure of the inward
war of the true Christians against their Spiritual enemies, in which we
overcome the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

4. Something is expressly forbidden by Christ, Matthew. 5.26. which was granted
to the Jews in their time, because of their hardness; and, on the contrary, we
are commanded that singular patience and exercise of Love, which Moses
commanded not to his Disciples. From whence Tertullian says well against Marc.
Christ truly teaches a new patience, even forbidding the revenging of an
injury, which was permitted by the Creator. And lib. de patien. The Law finds
more than is lost, by Christ saying, Love your enemies. And in the time of
Clem. Alex. Christians were so far from Wars, that he testified, that they had
no marks or signs of violence among them, saying, Neither are the faces of
Idols to be painted, to which so much as to regard is forbidden: neither sword
nor bow to them, that follow peace, nor Cups to them, who are moderate and
temperate, as Sylvius Disc. de Rev. Belg.

Secondly, they object, that Defense is of natural right, and that Religion
destroys not nature. Obj.


I answer, Be it so, but to obey God, and commend our selves to him in faith
and patience, is not to destroy nature, Answ.
but to exalt and perfect it; to wit, to elevate it from the natural to the
supernatural life, by Christ living therein, and comforting it, that it may do
all things, and be rendered more than conqueror.

Thirdly, they object, that John did not abrogate or condemn war, when
Soldiers came unto him. Obj.


I answer, What then? Answ.
the question is not concerning John's Doctrine, but Christ's, whose Disciples
we are, not John's: for Christ, and not John, is that Prophet, whom we ought
all to hear: and albeit that Christ said, that a greater than John the Baptist
was not among men born of women, yet he adds, Luc. 7. v. 28.
that the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he. But what was John's
answer, that he may see, if it can justify the soldiers of this time? For, if
it be narrowly minded, it will appear, that, what he professes to Soldiers,
does manifestly forbid them that employment, for he commands them, not to do
violence to any man, not to defraud any man, but that they be content with
their wages. Consider then what he discharges to Soldiers, Luc. 3. v. 14.
viz. not to use violence or deceit against any, which being removed let any
tell how Soldiers can war? For is not craft, violence, and injustice, three
properties of War, and the natural consequences or Battles?

Fourthly, they object, that Cornelius, and that centurion, of whom there is
mention made, Matthew. 8.5. were Soldiers, Obj.
and there is no mention that they laid down their Military employments.

I answer, Neither read we that they continued in them. Answ.
But it is most probable, that, if they continued in the doctrine of Christ,
(and we read not any whereof their falling from the Faith, that they did not
continue in them; especially if we consider, that two or three ages afterward
Christians altogether rejected War, or at lest a long while after their time,
if the Emperor Marc. Aurel. Anton. be to be credited, who writes thus: -- I
prayed to my country Gods. But when I was neglected by them, and observed my
self pressed by the enemy, considering the fewness of my forces, I called to
one, and entreated those, who with us are called Christians, and I found a
great number of them: and I forced them with threats: which ought not to have
been: because afterward I knew their strength and force; therefore they betook
themselves neither to the use of darts, nor trumpets, for they use not to do
so, for the cause and Name of their God, which they bear in their Consciences.
And this was done about an hundred and sixty years after Christ. To this add
those words, which in Justin Martyr the Christians answer, (...), that is, We
fight not with our Enemies: and moreover the answer of Martin to Julian the
Apostate, related by Sulpitius Severus: I am a Soldier of Christ, therefore I
cannot fight, which was three hundred years after Christ. It is not therefore
probable, that they continued in warlike employment. How then is Vincentius
Lyrinensis and the Papists consistent with their maxim, That which always,
every where and by all was received, etc. And what becomes of the Priests with
their oath, that they neither ought, nor will, interpret the Scripture, but
accordto the universal consent of the Fathers, so called? For it is as easy to
obscure the sun at midday, as to deny that the primitive Christians renounced
all revenge and War.

And albeit this thing be so much known to all, yet it is as well known, that
all the modern sects live in the neglect and contempt of this Law of Christ,
and likewise oppress others, who in this agree not with them for Conscience
sake toward God, even as we have suffered much in our country, because we
neither could our selves bear arms, nor send other in our place, nor give our
money for the buying of drums, standards, and other military attire: and
lastly, because we could not hold our door, windows, and shops close, for
Conscience sake, upon such days as fasts and prayers were appointed, for to
desire a blessing upon, and success for, the arms of the Kingdom or
Commonwealth, under which we live) neither give thanks for the victories
acquired by the effusion of much blood. By which forcing of the Conscience,
they would have constrained our Brethren living in diverse Kingdoms, at War
together, to have implored our God for contrary and contradictory things, and
consequently impossible; for it is impossible, that two partys fighting
together should both obtain the victory. And because we cannot concur with them
in this confusion, therefore we are subject to persecution. Yea and others, who
with us do witness that the use of Arms is unlawful to Christians, do look
asquint upon us: but which of us two do most faithfully observe this testimony
against Arms? either they, who at certain times at the Magistrates order to
close up their shops and houses, and meet in their assembly, praying for the
prosperity of their Arms, or giving thanks for some victory or other, whereby
they make themselves like to those that approve wars and fighting? Or we which
cannot do these things, for the same cause of Conscience, lest we should
destroy by our works, what we establish in words, we shall leave to the
judgment of all prudent men;

Fifthly, they object that Christ, Luke 22.36. speaking to his Disciples, Obj.
commands them, that he that then had not a Sword, should sell his Coat and buy
a Sword: Therefore say they, Arms are lawful.

I answer, Some indeed understand this of the outward Sword, Answ.
nevertheless regarding only that occasion, otherwise judging that Christians
are prohibited wars under the Gospel: among which is Ambrose, who upon this
place speaks thus: O Lord! Why command thou me to buy a Sword, who forbidest
me to smite with it? why command thou me to have it, whom thou prohibitest
to draw it? Unless perhaps a defense be prepared, not a necessary revenge, and
that I may seem to have been able to revenge, but that I would not. For the Law
forbids me to smite again: and therefore perhaps he said to Peter, offering two
Swords, [it is enough] as if it had been lawful, until the Gospel time, that in
the law, there might be a learning of equity, but in the Gospel a perfection of
goodness. Others judge Christ to have spoken here mystically, and not according
to the letter, as Origin upon Matthew. 19. saying, If any looking to the letter,
and not understanding the will of the words, shall sell his bodily Garment, and
buy a Sword, taking the words of Christ contrary to his will he shall perish.
But concerning which sword he speaks is not proper here to mention. And truly
when we consider the answer of the Disciples, Master behold here are two
swords, understanding it of outward Swords; and again Christ's answer, It is
enough; it seems that Christ would not, that the rest, who had not Swords (for
they had only two Swords) should sell their Coats, and buy an outward Sword.
Who can think, that matters standing thus, he should have said two was enough?
But however it is sufficient, that the use of Arms, is unlawful, under the
Gospel.

Sixthly they object, that the Scriptures and old Fathers, so called, Obj.
did only prohibit private revenge, not the use of arms, for the defense of our
country, body, wives, children, and goods, when the Magistrate commands it,
seeing the Magistrates ought to be obeyed: Therefore albeit it be not lawful
for private men to do it of themselves, nevertheless they are bound to it by
the command of the Magistrate.

I answer, If the Magistrate be truly a Christian, or desires to be so, he
ought himself in the first place to obey the command of his Master, saying Love
your Enemies, etc. and then he could not command us to kill them: but if he be
not a true Christian, then ought we to obey our Lord and King, Jesus Christ, to
whom he ought also to obey: for in the Kingdom of Christ, all ought to submit
to his Laws, from the highest to the lowest, that is, from the King to the
Beggar, and from Caesar to the Clown. But (alas!) where shall we find such an
obedience? O deplorable fall! Concerning which Ludov. Viv. writes well, lib. de
con. vit. Christ. sub Turc. by relation of Fredericus Sylvius, Disc* de Revol.
Belg. p. 85. The Prince entered into the Church, not as a true and plain
Christian: which had indeed been most happy and desirable, but he brought in
with him his Nobility, his Honors, his ARMS, his Ensigns, his Triumphs, his
Haughtiness, his Pride, his Superciliousness, that is, He came into the House
of Christ accompanied with the Devil, and which could no ways be done, he would
have joined two Houses and two Cities together, God's and the Devils, which
could not more be done, than Rome and Constantinople, which are distant by so
long a tract both of Sea and Land. (What communion says Paul, is there betwixt
Christ and Belial?) Their Zeal cooled by degrees, their Faith decreased, their
whole Piety degenerated, instead whereof, we make now use of shadows and
images, and as he says, I would we could but retain these! Thus far Vives. But
lastly, as to what relates to this thing, since nothing seems more contrary to
man's nature, and seeing of all things, the defense of ones self seems most
tolerable, as it is most hard to men, so it is the most perfect part of the
Christian Religion, as that, wherein the denial of self and entire confidence
in God does most appear, and therefore Christ and his Apostles left us hereof a
most perfect example. As to what relates to the present Magistrates of the
Christian World, albeit we deny them not altogether the name of Christians,
because of the public profession they make of Christ's Name, yet we may boldly
affirm, that they are far from the perfection of the Christian Religion;
because in the state in which they are (as in many places before I have largely
observed) they have not come to the pure dispensation of the Gospel, and
therefore while they are in that condition, we shall not say that War,
undertaken upon a just occasion, is altogether unlawful to them. For even as
Circumcision and the other ceremonies were for a season permitted to the Jews,
not because they were either necessary, or of themselves, or lawful at that
time after the Resurrection of Christ, but because that Spirit was not yet
raised up in them, whereby they could be delivered from such rudiments; so the
present confessors of the Christian name, who are yet in the mixture, and not
in the patient suffering Spirit, are not yet fitted for this form of
Christianity, and therefore cannot be undefending themselves, until they attain
that perfection: but for such, whom Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful
to defend themselves by arms, but they ought over all to trust to the Lord.

XVI. But lastly, to conclude, If to give and receive flattering titles, which
are not used because of the virtues inherent in the persons, but are for most
part bestowed by wicked men upon such as themselves; If to bow, scrape and
cringe to one another; If at every time to call one another humble servant, and
that most frequently, without any design of real service, if this be the honor
that comes from God, and not the honor that is from below, then indeed our
adversaries may be said to be believers, and we condemned as proud and stubborn
in denying all these things. But if with Mordecai to refuse to bow to proud
Haman, Esth. 3.5. Job. 32.21, 22.
and with Elihu not to give flattering titles to men, lest we should be
reproved of our Maker; and if according to Peter's example and the Angel's
advice, to bow only to God, and not to our Fellow Servants; and if to call no
man Lord nor Master, except under particular relations, according to Christ's
command, I say if these things be not to be reproved, then are we not
blameworthy in so doing. If to be vain and gaudy in apparel, if to paint the
face, and plait the hair; if to be clothed with gold and silver and precious
stones, and if to be filled with ribbands and lace, be to be clothed in modest
apparel; and if these be the ornaments of Christians, and if that be to be
humble, meek, and mortified, then are our adversaries good Christians indeed,
and we proud, singular, and conceited in contenting our selves with what need
and convenience calls for, and condemning what is more as superfluous: but not
otherwise. If to use games, sports, plays; if to card, dice and dance; if to
sing, fiddle, and pipe; if to use stage plays and comedies, and to lie,
counterfeit, and dissemble, be to fear always; and if that be to do all things
to the glory of God; and if that be to pass our sojourning here in fear; and if
that be to use this world as if we did not use it; and if that be not to
fashion our selves according to our former lusts; to be not conformable to the
Spirit and vain conversation of this world; then are our adversaries,
notwithstanding they use these things, and plead for them, very good, sober,
mortified, and self-denyed Christians, and we justly to be blamed for judging
them, but not otherwise. If the profanation of the Holy Name of God, if to
exact oaths one from another upon every light occasion; if to call God to
witness in things of such a nature, in which no earthly King would think
himself lawfully and honorably to be a witness, be the duties of a Christian
man; I shall confess that our adversaries are excellent good Christians, and we
wanting in our duty: but if the contrary be true, of necessity our obedience to
God in this thing must be acceptable, If to revenge our selves, or to render
injury, evil for evil, wound for wound, to take eye for eye, tooth for tooth;
If to fight for outward and perishing things, to go a warring one against
another, whom we never saw, nor with whom we never had any contest, nor any
thing to do, being moreover altogether ignorant of the cause of the war, but
only that the Magistrates of the Nations foment quarrels one against another,
the causes whereof, are for the most part unknown to the Soldiers that fight,
as well as upon whose side the right or wrong is; and yet to be so furious and
rage one against another, to destroy and spoil all, that this or the other
worship may be received or abolished; If to do this, and much more of this
kind, be to fulfill the Law of Christ, then are our Adversaries indeed true
Christians, and we miserable Heretics, that suffer our selves to be spoiled,
taken, imprisoned, banished, beaten, and evilly entreated, without any
resistance, placing our trust only in GOD, that he may defend us, and lead us
by the way of the Cross unto his Kingdom. But if it be otherways, we shall
certainly receive the reward, which the Lord has promised to those that cleave
to him, and in denying themselves, confide in him.

And to sum up all, If to use all these things, and many more that might be
instanced, be to walk in the strait way that leads to life, be to take up the
Cross of Christ; be to dye with him to the lusts and perishing vanities of this
world; and to arise with him in newness of Life; and sit down with him in the
heavenly places; Then our adversaries may be accounted such, and they need not
fear they are in the broad way, that leads to destruction; and we are greatly
mistaken, that have laid aside all these things for Christ's sake, to the
crucifying of our own lusts, and to the procuring to our selves shame,
reproach, hatred, and illwill from the men of this world: not as if by so doing
we judged to merit Heaven, but as knowing they are contrary to the will of him,
who redeems his Children from the love of this world, and its lusts, and leads
them in the ways of Truth and Holiness, in which they take delight to walk.

The CONCLUSION.
IF in God's fear, candid Reader, thou apply'st thy self to consider this
System of Religion, here delivered with its consistency and harmony, as well in
it self, as with the Scriptures of Truth; I doubt not, but thou will say with
me and many more, that this is the Spiritual day of Christ's Appearance, wherein
he is again revealing the ancient paths of Truth and Righteousness. For thou
may observe here the Christian Religion in all its parts, truly established
and vindicated, as it is a living, inward, spiritual, pure, and substantial
thing, and not a mere form, show, shadow, notion, and opinion, as too many have
hitherto held it, whose fruits declare they wanted that, which they bear the
name of, and yet many of those are so in love with their empty forms and
shadows, that they cease not to calumniate us for commending and calling them
to the substance, as if we therefore denied or neglected the true form and
outward part of Christianity, which indeed is (as God the searcher of hearts
knows) a very great slander. Thus, because we have desired People earnestly to
feel after God near and in themselves, telling them, that their notions of God,
as he is beyond the Clouds will little avail them, if they do not feel him
near: hence they have sought maliciously to infer, that we deny any God, except
that which is within us. Because we tell people that it is the Light and the
Law within, and not the letter without, that can truly tell them their
condition, and lead them out of all evil: hence they say we villifie the
Scriptures, and set up our own imaginations above them. Because we tell them
that it is not their talking, or believing of Christ's outward life,
sufferings, death and resurrection, no more than the Jews crying, The Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that will serve their turn, or justify them
in the sight of God, but that they must know Christ in them, whom they have
crucified to be raised, and to justify them and redeem them from their
Iniquities: hence they say, we deny the life, death, and sufferings of Christ,
justification by his blood, and remission of sins through him. Because we tell
them, while they are talking and determining about the Resurrection, that they
have more need to know the Just One, whom they have slain, raised in
themselves, and to be sure they are partakers of the first resurrection, and
that if this be, they will be the more capable to judge of the second: hence
they say, that we deny the resurrection of the body. Because, when we hear them
talk foolishly of Heaven and Hell, and the last Judgment, we exhort them to
come out of that hellish condition they are in, and come down to the judgment
of Christ in their own hearts, and believe in the Light, and follow it, that so
they may come to sit in the heavenly places, that are in Christ Jesus, hence
they maliciously say, that we deny any heaven or hell, but that which is within
us, and that we deny any general Judgment: which slanders the Lord knows are
foully cast upon us, whom God has raised for this end, and gathered us, that by
us, he might confound the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the
understanding of the prudent, and might, in and by his own Spirit and Power in
a despised People (that no flesh might glory in his presence) pull down that
dead, dark, corrupt image, and mere shadow, and shell of Christianity,
wherewith Antichrist has deceived the Nations, for which end he has called us
to be a first fruits of those that serve him and worship him, no more in the
oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the Spirit. And though we be few
in number in respect of others, and weak as to outward strength, which we also
altogether reject; and foolish, if compared with the wise ones of this world,
yet as God has prospered us, notwithstanding much opposition, so will he yet
do, that neither the art, wisdom, nor violence of men or devils shall be able
to quench that little spark, that has appeared, but it shall grow to the
consuming of whatsoever shall stand up to oppose it. The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, yea he that has arisen in a small remnant, shall arise and go on by
the same Arm of Power in his Spiritual manifestation, until he has conquered
all his enemies, until all the Kingdoms of the Earth become the Kingdom of
Christ Jesus.

Unto him that has begun this work, not among the rich, or great ones, but
among the poor and small, and has revealed it not to the wise and learned, but
unto the poor, unto babes and sucklings, even to him the Only-Wise and
Omnipotent GOD, be honor, glory, thanksgiving, and renown, from henceforth and
for ever. Amen. Halelu- JAH.

A TABLE Of the Authors that are cited in this Book.
A
ALanus 301 Amandus Polanus 157 Ambrosius Ansbertus 379 Ambrosius
Mediolanensis, 80, 344, 345, 380, 388, 482 Amesius 157, 333 Anselmus Bishop of
Canterbury 379 Antiochus 379 Apollinarius 88 Athanasius 6, 342, 375, 379, 382
Augustinus Bakerus 256, 257 Augustinus, 5, 26, 49, 58, 95, 126, 127, 147, 170,
173, 301, 303, 379, 382 Author de vocat. Gentium 79
B
Basil the Great 376, 379 Beda 379 Bellarmin 135, 342 Bernard 6, 257, 266
Bertius 156 Beza 70, 145, 338 Borhaeus 145, 149 Buchanan 127 Bucerus 146
Bullinger 144
C
Calvin, 22, 23, 46, 70, 147, 156, 216, 217, 235, 294, 299, 309, 310, 321, 330,
345, 357 Carolostadius 344 Casaubonus 359 Cassiodorus 379 Castellio 345
Catechism of Westminster 160 Chamierus 145 Chemnitius 147 Christianus
Druthmarus 379 Chromatius 379, 382 Chrysostom 79, 333, 375, 379, 382 Cicero 125
Claudius Alberius Inuncanus 150 Clemens Alexandrinus, 5, 110, 112, 125, 379,
386. Conference of Oldenburgh El. D. 158 Confession of Ausburgh 158, 176
Confession of the French Churches 40 Confession of Faith of the Churches of
Holland 40, 41 Confession of the Divines at Westminster, 40, 46, 132 Council of
Aszanfik 174 Council of Carthage 40 Council of Florence 30 Council of Laodicea
40 Council of Trent 66, 157, 345 Cyprian 345, 370, 382 Cyrillus Alexand. 6,
102, 106, 107, 379, 382
D
Dalleus 330 Diodorus Siculus 378
E
Epictetus 3 Epiphanius 47, 379 Erasmus 360, 380, 382 Essius 150 Eusebius 30
Eutyches 88 Euthymius 379, 382
F
Forbes 146, 147 Franciscus Lambertus 203, 262 Fredericus Sylvius 386, 388
G
Gelasius 174 Gentiletus 157 Gerardus Vossius 107, 159, 176 Godeau 360 Gregory
the Great 6 Gregorius Nazianzenus 379 Gregorius Nyssenus 379
H
Haymo 379 Hierom 6, 47, 51, 173, 344, 358, 376, 379, 382 Hilarious 343, 344,
379 Hildebrand 341 Himelius 150 History of the Council of Trent 345 History of
the Reformation of France 356 Hosius 344 Hugo Grotius 375, 379
I
James Coret 156 James Howel 360 Johannes Damascenus 379 Johannes Ferus 382
Johannes Floracensis 301 John Hus 57 John Maresius 360 Isidorus Hispalensis 379
Isidorus Pelusiota 379 Justin Martyr 112, 125, 380, 382, 384, 387
L
Lactantius 125 Lucas Osiander 81, 209 Ludovicus Vives 382, 388 Luther 6, 80,
129, 131, 189, 345, 346, 360
M
Marcio 344 Martyr 70 Melancthon 6, 145, 176 Musculus 156
N
Nicolaus Arnoldus of Franequer 189, 204, 205, 221, 233, 234, 292, 302
O
OEcumenius 379 Origin 7, 210, 379, 382, 387 Otho Brunsfeldius 379
P
Papirius Masson 301 Paraeus 70, 143 Paschasius Ratbertus 379 Paulus Riccius
298, 317 Philo Judaeus 380, 384 Pithaeus 301 Phocylides 125 Piscator 71 Platina
196 Plato 124, 379 Plotinus 125 Polybius 374 Polycarpus 30, 379 Prosper 79, 80
Pythagoras 378
Q
Quintilianus 124, 379 Quintus Curtius 378
R
Reinerius 351 Richard Baxter 150, 157
S
Seneca 125 Smith, Doctor in Cambridge 7 Stobaeus 379 Sulpitius Severus 386
Synod Arelatensian 80 Synod of Dort 40, 69
T
Tertullian 5, 345, 379, 382, 383, 385, 386 Theophylactus 379 Thomas Aquinas 26
Thysius 144
V
Victor Antiochenus 107 Vincentius Lyrinensis 386
W
Waldenses 379 Wicklef 379
Z
Zanchius 70, 144, 147, 157 Zwinglius 66, 70, 150
Passages of Scripture occurring in this Book.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page i 2 13 ii 17 59 iii 24 ib. iv 6, 7 98 7 149 v 22, 24
169 vi 3 98 5 59 9 169 Exodus. xiii 8, 9 312 xxiii 7 143 xxiv 6 99 Leviticus.
xvi 2, 3, 6 374 Numbers. xi 25, 26 14 xiv 18 99 Deuteronomy. iv 2 57 vi 13 374
x 20 ib. xiii 5, 9 336 xiv 23 374 I Samuel. ii 30 357 x 12 240 I Kings. viii 46
171 xix 18 182 I Chronicles. xxix 11 356 Ezrah. ix 4 260 Nehemiah. ix 20, 30 14
Esther. iii 5 389 Job. i 8 169 ii 13 260 viii 13 159 ix 20 143 xxiv 13 122
xxvii 5 143 xxviii 28 212 xxxii 21, 22 358, 389 xxxvii 22 356 xxxviii 2 210
Psalms. xiv 3 60 xvii 14 78 xxi 5 356 xxv 3 243 xxvii 14 243 xxix 4 356 xxxvii
7, 9, 34 243 xliii 3 356 li 5 56 13 14 liii 2 60 live 3 294 lxiii 1 356, 370
lxxxiv 2 ib. lxxxvi 15 99 xcvi 6 356 cx 3 336 4 375 cxviii 22 116 cxix 11 171
cxxxix 7 14 Proverbs. i 20, etc. 125 24, 25, 26 101, 175 vii 14 269 viii ^, 34
125 xv 29 276 xvii 15 143, 166 xviii 10 252, 294 xx 22 243 xxi 4 249 xxvii 17
258 xxviii 9 269 xxx 6 57 Ecclesiastes. i 3 294 Isaiah. i 13 276 16, 17 258 ii
4 383 10 356 iii 365 v 2, 4 100 23 143 viii 20 52 x 20 238 xiii 11 78 xxiv 14
356 xxvi 3 238 10 356 xxx 18 99, 243 xl 31 243 xlv 23 377 xlviii 16 14 xlix 6
119 lv 4 110 lvi 11 222, 230 lix 2 137, 162 21 25 lxiv 6 155 lxv 16 376 25 383
lxvi 3 276 Jeremiah. ii 13 23 iii 11 143 14 182 vii 4 194 x 3 350 xiv 12 276
14, 15 229 xv 15 99 xvii 9 60 xviii 9, 10 101 xxiii 6 134 21 229 29 111 30, 31,
etc. 229 32 230 xxvii 15 229 xxxi 33 26 38, 39, 40 377 Lamentations. iii 25 243
Ezechiel. i 14 260 xvi 6 134 xviii 20 56 32 67 xx 1 260 xxxiii 11 67, 71, 77 12
to 18 172 xxxiv 2, 3, 8 230 xxxvi 25 377 Daniel. iv 30 356 Hosea. iv 9 187 xii
7 243 Amos. ii 13 91 v 18 105 Micah. iii 5, 11 229 5 224 iv 3 383 vi 8 109
Zachariah. iii 8 243 Wisdom. ii 102 Matthew. iii 8 158 11 181 15 293 v 1 152,
261 23, 34 371 38 to 48 381 43 383 48 167 vi 20, 25 365, 370 vii 12, 13 331 16
62 21 149 29 331 viii 5 385 ix 13 291 x 1, 5 229 5, 6 205 8 180, 230 14 225 16
334 20 229, 261 23 348 xi 27 10 30 169 xii 35, 36 368 48 190 xiii 107 14 102
18, 19 83 31, 32 114 29 to 41 336 xv 6, 9 278 13 350 xvii 26 159 xviii 7 78 20
259 32, 34 101 xix 387 xx 25, 26, 27 230 xxi 33 100 42 116 xxiii 5, 6, 7 230 8,
9, 10 ibid. 22 373 37 101 xxiv 27 94 42 243, 267 xxv 108 13 243 15 83 21, 23
152 26 101 30 152 xxvi 26 313, 317 41 243, 249 52 384 xxviii 296 18 334 19 287
Mark. iii 33, 34 190 iv 107 1 261 12 102 viii 34 384 xii 1 100 10 116 xiii 11
229, 261 33 249, 267 33, 35, 37 243 xiv 22 313, 317 38 267 xvi 15 74 Luke. i 6
169 ii 10 73 52 161 iii 14 385 vii 28 385 viii 10 102 11 107 ix 55 335 55, 56
331 x 22 10 29 143 xii 12 229, 261 48 108 xiii 3 138 34, etc. 101 xiv 31 377
xvi 15 143 xvil 10 152 20, 21 114 xviii 1 265 xix 41, 42 101 42 87 xx 9 100 17
116 xxi 36 243, 249 265 xxii 19 313, 317 36 387 John. i 305 1, 2, 3 10 7 110 9
103 12 67, 306 iii 3 113 5 299 8 94 16, 17 67, 75 18 138 18, 18 175, 267 20 116
30 277, 287 34 292 iv 2 287 14 314 23, 24 254, 276 v 39 52 44 350 vi 16 308 27,
32, etc. 303, 304 35 303, 306 35 307 45 46 53 308 55 307 56, 57 308 60 306 63
21 66 306 vii 7 78 48, 49 2 viii 26 78 ix 31 276 x 1 188 xii 19 78 36 105 40
102 47 76 xiii 3, 4, etc. 318 14 303 17 151, 167 xiv 6 10 16 19 17 388 26 23 xv
1 to 6 196 5 200 18, 19 78 xvi 8 37 13 23, 38 xvii 3 1 14 78 18, 20 ibid. xviii
36 253, 384 Acts. i 4 243 4, 5 282 25 191 ii 1 259 4 21, 229 17 220 41 295 42
322 46 ibid. iii 17 124 iv 11 116 vi 218, 323 10 21 vii 48 255 51 175 viii 12
295 16 ibid. 22 274 ix 4 348 18 295 25 348 x 26 350 34 121 47, 48 295, 297 48
295 xi 16 282 xiii 38 293 46 101, 175 xv 20 303 26 326 xvi 15 295 xvii 11 53
xviii 8 295 xix 5 295 xx 7 323 31 243 32 42 33, 34, 35 223 xxi 9 220 28, etc.
329 xxvi 18 104 xxviii 26 102 Romans. i 9 376 11 295 16 108 17 to 23 87 18 175
ii 4 99 9, 10, 11, 13 123 iii 10 60 20 152 24 149 25 136 iv 15 64 v 66 10 148
12 61, 56 13 64 15 6 18 119 vi 1, 2 173 vi 2, etc. 168 3, 4 285 4 277 14 42 16
162 vii 12, 14 61 19, 24 171 viii 1, etc. 21 2 42 3 167 9 4, 20 13 148, 177 14
5, 38 16 16, 46 26, 27 268 30 144 38 179 x 8 109 8 42, 74 12, 15, 18 109, 110
18 83 xi 183 xii 2 362 6 44, 215 19 384 xiii 338 xiv 6 316 11 377 17 327 23
316, 332 1 Corinthians. i 2 196 14 290 17 229, 263 277 21 78 ii 2 91 3, 4, 5,
13 220, 263 3, 4, 5 263 5 291 8 124 9, 10, 12, 14 11 9, 10 21 12 78 13 263 14
62 iii 4 to 8, 19 291 iii 16 92 iv 15 293 18 229 v 8 303 vi 2 78 11 128, 141 17
162, 240 17 305 19 20 vii 19 150, 167 29, 30 367 ix 11, etc. 220 15 223 18 ib.
24 377 27 178 x 3, 4 306 16 314 16, 17 303 17 308 21 307 vi 362 17, 20 326 17
to 32 324 23 317 26 313 26, 27 315 xii 44 3 269 4 214 4, 5, 6 18 7 67, 83 8, 9,
10, 13 27 9, 10, 11 19 13 203 17, 29 215 xiii 2 229 xiv 15 269 30 263 30, 31,
39 216 34 220 xvi 13 243 II Corinthians. i 22 179, 279 23 176 24 334 ii 17 211
iii 6 187 iv 10, 11 148 v 11 186 14 370 16, 17 113 18, 19, 21 139 19 133 vi 14
162, 307 14, 15, 16 141 16 91 17, 18 195 x 4 383 xi 10 376 xiii 3 199 5 45, 117
148 11 167 Galatians. i, etc. 153 16 11 20 376 ii 8 155 20 155, 169 iii 27 277
iv 156 19 148 v 12, 20 339 24 383 vi 6 220 14 78 Ephesians. i 13 179 14 279 ii
63 4, 5, 6 169 5 148 8 200 15 134 iii 9 10 iv 214 5 18, 277 7, 11, 16 201 11
165, 294 23 239 23, 24 149 24 169 iv 30 279 v 8 104 11 350 13 83, 93 116 25,
26, 27 165 vi 12 383 18 268 Philippians. i 6 177 8 376 21 66 ii 13 155 iii 10
134 14 178 15 346 Colossians. i 13 104 23 83, 108 24 135 27, 28 148 28 74 ii 6,
16, 20 327 8 350 12 277 15 253 19 194 iii 1 325 2 370 16 276 iv 2 243 12 166 I
Thessalonians. i 5 215 ii 12 158 iii 13 166 v 5 104 6 243 12, 13 217 17 265 19,
20 219 21 346 23 166 27 376 II Thessalonians. i 5, 8 158 ii 11, 12 175 I
Timothy. i 19 177 ii 1, 3, 4, 6 75 3 71 8, 9, 10 366 11 220 iii 2 203 2, 3, 4,
5, 6 229 15 193 v 16 220 17 217 vi 5, 6, etc. 229 7, 8, 9, 10 224 8 230 20 209
II Timothy. iii 2 229 15, 16, 17 49 17 166 iv 5 243 7 180 Titus. i, etc 203 7,
8, 9 229 10, 11 230 15 93 ii 11 118, 200 14 134, 164 iii 5 154 7 144 10 331
Hebrews. i 3 356 ii 9 76 iii 14 177 iv 12, 13 110 v 4 204, 229 vi 16 377 vii 26
140 viii 10 26 ix 9 168 10 328 x 24 259 xi 17 6 138 7 14, 15 xii 14 151 16, 17
87 22, 23 169 xiii 7, 8 18 17 217 James. i 21 107 25 249 27 78 ii 24 151 iii 9,
10 170 iv 1 383 v 6 128 12 371 14 303, 326 I Peter. i 5 177 14 350 17 367 23
114 ii 5 205 21 90 22 140 22, 24 134 iii 3, 4 366 18 134 20 99 21 277 iv 7 243,
249 10, 11 202, 229 v 5 217 II Peter. i 4 135, 162 10 45, 179 12, 13 49 16 356
ii 1, 2, 3 230 3 211 1, 3, 14, 15 229 20 78 iii 9 71, 77 15 99 I John. i 1 206
7 133 8 170 ii 1, 2 77 2 to 6 167 15 78 27 27 iii 1, 13 78 2 to 10 167 4 172 5,
8 164 7, 20 149 9 163 iv 4, 5 78 9 75 10 134 13 35, 46 v 3 169 6 35, 46 14 269
19 78 Jude. i 16 229 20 268 Revelation. ii 9 194 20 338 iii 12 174, 179 16 292
20 11, 315 xiv 1 to 5 169 xix 10 363 xxii 9 363 14 151 18 56

A TABLE Of the Chief Things.
A
ABraham's Faith, 15. Adam. See man, sin, redemption. what happiness he lost by
the Fall, 63. what death he died, 59, 66. He retained in his nature no will or
light capable of it self to manifest Spiritual things, 59. whether there be any
relics of the heavenly image left in them, 62, 91. Alexander Skein's Queries
proposed to the Preachers, 271, 272. Anabaptists of Great Britain, 31, 251.
Anabaptists of Munster, how their mischievous actings nothing touch the
Quakers, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Anicetus, 30. Anointing; the Anointing teaches
all things; it is, and abides for ever, a common privilege and sure Rule to
all Saints, 27, 28. Antichrist is exalted, when the seed of God is expressed,
20, 92. his work, 213, 214, 228. Antinomians, their Opinion concerning
Justification, 137. Apostasy, 174, 211. Apostle, who he is, their number was
not limited; and whether any may be now adays so called, 216, 217.
Appearances. See Faith. Arians; they first brought in the Doctrine of
Persecution, upon the account of Religion, 342. Arius; by what he fell into
error, 210.211. Arminians. See Remonstrants. Assemblings are needful, and what
sort, 33, 237, etc. See Worship; they are not to be forsaken, 245. Astrologer,
35. Aurelia; there ten Canonicks were burnt, and why, 301.
B
Baptism is one, its definition, 277, 279, 280, 281, 283, 284. It is the
Baptism of Christ and of the Spirit, not of Water, 277, 279 to 287. the Baptism
of Water, which was John's Baptism; was a figure of this Baptism, and is not to
be continued, 277, 280, 285, 286 to 302. Baptism with Water does not cleanse
the heart, 280, 288. nor is it a badge of Christianity, as was Circumcision to
the Jews, 202, 291, 301. that Paul was not sent to Baptize is explained, 290,
291, 292. concerning what Baptism Christ speaks, Mat. 28.20. it is explained,
293, 204. how the Apostles Baptized with Water is explained, 296, 297, 298,
299. to Baptize signifies to Plunge, and how Sprinkling was brought in, 299,
300. those of old, that used Water Baptism, were plunged, and they that were
only sprinkled, were not admitted to an Ecclesiastic Function, and why, 399.
against the use of Water Baptism many heretofore have testified, 301.
Infant Baptism is a mere humane tradition, 277, 302, Bible; the last
Translations always find fault with the first, 47. Birth; the Spiritual birth,
37. holy birth, 248, see Justification. Bishop of Rome concerning his primacy,
30. how he abuses his authority, and by what he deposes Princes, and
absolveth the people from the Oath of Fidelity, 341, 344. Blood; to abstain
from blood and things strangled, 303, 326, 329. it has been shed, 310. Blood
of Christ; see Communion. Body; to bow the body; see Head. Books Canonical and
Apocryphal; see Canon. Scripture. Bonaventure, 236. Bow; to bow the knee; see
uncover the Head. Bread; the breaking of bread among the Jews was no singular
thing, 317, 321. it is now other ways performed than it was by Christ, 322.
whether unleavened or leavened bread is to be used, also it is hotly disputed
about the manner of taking it, and to whom it is to be given, 321, 322. see
Communion.
C
Calvinists; see Protestants; they deny consubstantiation, 30. they maintain
absolute reprobation, 26. they think Grace is a certain irresistible power, and
what sort of a Savior they would have, 115, 116. of the flesh and blood of
Christ, 307, 309.310. they use leavened bread in the Supper, 321. Canon;
whether the Scripture be a filled up Canon, 55. whether it can be proved by
Scripture, that any Book is Canonical, 55, 56. Castellio banished, 345.
Ceremonies; see Superstition. Christ; see Communion, Justification, Redemption,
Word; He shows himself daily, revealing the knowledge of the Father, 6.
without his School there is nothing learned but busie-talking, 6. He is the
Eternal Word, 9. No Creature has access to God, but by him, 9, 10. He is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, 10. he is Mediator between God and man, 10, 133.
He is God, and in time He was made partaker of man's nature, 10. yesterday, to
day the same, and for ever, 18. the Fathers believed in him, and how, 17, 18.
his Sheep hear his voice, and contemn the voice of a Stranger, 40, 201, 203. it
is the fruit of his ascension, to send Pastors, 50. he dwells in the Saints,
and how, 88. his coming was necessary, 89. By his Sacrifice we have remission
of sins, 89, 119, 120, 133. whether he be, and how he is in all, is explained,
90. being formed within he is the formal cause of Justification, 128, 148. by
his life, death, etc. he has opened a way for Reconciliation, 149, 150. his
obedience, righteousness, death, and sufferings are ours, and it is explained,
that Paul said, he filled up that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ
in his flesh, 135. how we are partakers of his suffering, 167, 168. for what
end he was manifested, 164, 165. he delivers his own by suffering, 265.
concerning his outward, and Spiritual body, 305, 306. concerning his outward
and inward coming, 325. Christian; how he is a Christian, and when he cease
so to be, 4, 8, 20, 21, 23, 24, 169, 290, 191, 193, 200.201. the foundation of
his Faith, 36, 37. his privilege, 37. when men are made Christians by Birth,
and not by coming together, 184, 185. they have borrowed many things from Jews
and Gentiles, 278, 279. they recoil by little and little from their first
purity, 293. the Primitive Christians for some Ages said, We are Christians, we
Swear not, 378. and We are the Soldiers of Christ, it is not lawful for us to
fight, 386. Christianity is made as an Art, 8. it is not Christianity without
the Spirit, 19, 20, 21, 39, 40. it would be turned into Skepticism, 208, 290,
300. it is placed chiefly in the renewing of the heart, 186. wherein it
consists not, 244. what is, and is not the mark thereof, 290, 291, 300. why it
is odious to Jews, Turks, and Heathens, 309. what would contribute to its
Commendation, 354. Church, without which there is no Salvation; what She is.
Concerning her Members, Visibility, Profession, Degeneration, Succession, 181
to 199. whatsoever is done in the Church, without the instinct of the Holy
Spirit, is vain and impious, 203. the same may be said of her, that in the
Schools of Theseus's Boat, 219. in her corrections ought to be exercised, and
against whom, 323. she is more corrupted by the accession of Hypocrites, 340.
the Contentions of the Greek and Latin Churches about Unleavened or Leavened
Bread in the Supper, 321. the lukewarmness of the Church of Laodicea, 192.
there are introduced into the Roman-Church no less (...) and Ceremonies, than
among (...) and Jews, 185. Circumcision a Seal of the Old Covenant, 298.
Clergy, 214, 218, 216, 226, 227, 321. Clothes; that it is not lawful for
Christians to use things superfluous in Clothes, 364, 365, 366, 388, 389.
Comforter for what end he was sent, 6, 7. Commission. The Commission of the
Disciples of Christ, before the Work was finished, was more legal than
Evangelical, 202. Communion. The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is a
Spiritual and inward thing, 303. that Body, that Blood is a Spiritual thing,
and that it is that heavenly Seed, whereby life and Salvation was of old, and
is now, communicated, 303, 304. how any becomes partaker thereof, 307, 308,
309. it is not tied to the Ceremony of breaking Bread and drinking Wine, which
Christ used with his Disciples. This was only a Figure, 304, 308 to 316.
whether that Ceremony be a necessary part of the New Covenant, and whether it
is to be continued, 316 to 331. Spiritual Communion with God through Christ is
obtained, 59. Community of Goods is not brought in by the Quakers, 333, 352,
353. Complements. See Titles. Conscience. See Magistrate. Its definition, what
it is. It is distinguished from the Saving Light, 92, 93, 94, 332. the good
Conscience, and the Hypocritical, 176. He that acts contrary to his
Conscience, sins, and concerning an erring Conscience, 332. What things
appertain to Conscience, 332. what sort of Liberty of Conscience is defended,
333. It is the Throne of God, 333. It is free from the Power of all men, 345.
Conversion; what is man's therein is rather a Passion, than an action, 102.
Augustine's saying, 95. this is cleared by two Examples, 95, 96. Correction;
how and against whom it ought to be exercised, 333. Covenant. The difference
betwixt the New and Old Covenant-worship, 26, 232, 233, 253, 254, 255, 289,
290. See also Gospel, Law. Cross. The Sign of the Cross, 301.
D.
Dancing. See Plays. Days; whether any be holy, and concerning the Day,
commonly called, The Lord's Day, 235, 316. Deacons, 323. Death. See Adam,
Redemption; it entered into the World by sin, 65, 66. in the Saints it is rather
a passing from Death to Life, 66. Devil. He cares not at all how much God be
acknowledged with the mouth, provided he be worshipped in the heart, 8, 116,
117. he can form an outward sound of words, 16. he haunts among the wicked,
165. how he came to be a a Minister of the Gospel, 211, 212, 213. when he can
work nothing, 249, 250. he keeps men in outward signs, shadows, and forms,
while they neglect the Substance* 310, 311, 323. Dispute. The dispute of the
Shoemaker with a certain Professor, 208, 209. of an Heathen Philosopher with a
Bishop in the Council of Nice, and of the unlettered Clown, 209, 210. Divinity.
School Divinity, 200. how pernicious it is, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213. Dreams.
See Faith, Miracles.
E
Ear. There is a Spiritual and a bodily Ear, 7, 16. Easter is celebrate
other-waies in the Latin Church than in the Eastern, 30. the celebration of it
is grounded upon Tradition, 30. Elders, 14, 217. Elector of Saxony; the scandal
given by him, 272. Eminency. Your Eminency. See Titles. Enoch walked with God,
169. Epistle; see James, John, Peter. Esau, 241. Ethics, or Books of Moral
Philosophy are not needful to Christians, 209. Evangelist; who he is, and
whether any now adays may be so called, 216, 217. Excellency; your Excellency;
see Titles. Exorcism, 301.
F
Faith; its definition, and what its object is, 14, 15, 16. how far, and how
appearances, outward voices, and dreams were the object of the Saints Faith,
16. that Faith is one, and that the Object of Faith is one, 17. its foundation,
36, 37. see Revelation, Scripture. Farellus, 321. Father; see Knowledge,
Revelation, 14. Fathers, (so called) they did not agree about some Books of the
Scripture, 39, 48. they affirm, that there are whole Verses taken out of Mark
and Luke, 29. concerning the Septuagint Interpretation, and the Hebrew Copy,
48. they preached universal redemption for the first four Centuries, 78. they
frequently used the word [ Merit] in their Doctrine, 158, 159. concerning the
possibility of not sinning, 172, 173. the possibility of falling from Grace,
176. many of them did not only contradict one another, but themselves also,
211. concerning Baptism and the sign of the Cross, 301. concern-in an Oath,
372. Feet; concerning the washing of one another feet, 317, 318, 319.
Franequer, 222. Freely; the Gospel ought to be preached freely, 180, 221, 222.
G
Games; see Plays. Gifted Brethren, 198. GOD; how he has always manifested
himself, 3. unless he speak within, the Preacher makes a rustling to no
purpose, 5, 6. None can know him aright, unless he receive it of the Holy
Ghost, 5, 6, 7. God is to be sought within, 7. he is known by sensation, and
not by mere speculation and syllogistic demonstrations, 6, 7. he is the
Fountain, Root, and Beginning of all good works, and he has made all things by
his eternal Word, 10. God speaking is the object of Faith, 15. among all, he
has his own chosen ones, 5. he delights not in the death of the wicked; see
Redemption. He has manifested his love in sending his Son, 132, 149, 150. see
Justification; he rewards the good works of his Children, 157, 158. whether it
be possible to keep his Commandments, 159, 160. he is the Lord, and the Only
Judge of the Conscience, 331, 333. he will have a free exercise, 339. Gospel;
see Redemption; the truths of it are as lies in the mouths of profane and
carnal men, 12, 23, 24. the nature of it is explained, 25, 26. it is
distinguished from the Law, and is more excellent than it, 26, 42. see
Covenant, Law; whether any ought to Preach it in this or that place is not
found in Scripture, 42, 200. its works are distinguished from the works of the
Law, 152. how it is to be propagated, and of its propagation, 334. the worship
of it is inward, 289, 290. it is an inward Power, 107, 108. Grace; the Grace of
God can be lost through disobedeince, 174, etc. Saving Grace (see Redemption)
which is required in the calling and qualifying of a Minister; see Minister. In
some it works in a special and prevalent manner, that they necessarily obtain
Salvation, 96, 97. Your Grace; see Titles.
H
Hai Ebn Yokdan, 126. Hands; laying on of Hands, 199, 327. Head: of uncovering
the head in salutations, 350, 352, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 388, 389. Heart;
the heart is deceitful and wicked, 45, 59, 60, 61. Heathens; albeit they were
ignorant of the history, yet they were sensible of the loss by the Fall, 124.
some Heathens would not swear, 378. heathenish Ceremonies were brought into the
Christian Religion, 301. Henry IV. King of France, 341. Heresies, whence they
proceeded, 244. Heretics, 336. High; see Priest. History of Christ; see
Quakers, Redemption. Holy of Holys; the High Priest entered into it once a year,
14, 15. but now all of us at all times have access unto God, 27. Holiness; your
Holiness; see Titles. Honor; see Titles. Hypocrite, 336, 340.
I
Jacob, 241. James the Apostle; there were of old diverse Opinions concerning
his Epistle, 40. Idolatry, 232, 245. whence it proceeded, 277. Jesting; see
Plays, Games. Jesuits; see Sect Ignatian. Jesus; see Christ; what it is to be
saved, and to be assembled in his Name, 119, 120, 132, 238. Jews; among them
there may be Members of the Church, 182, 183. their error concerning the
outward succession of Abraham, 190. their worship is outward 290. Illiterate;
see Mechanics. Indulgences, 130. Infants; see Sin. Iniquities; spiritual
iniquities, or wickedness, 244. Inquisition, 340. Inspiration; where that does
not teach, words without, do make a noise to no purpose, 5, 6. John the
Apostle; concerning his second and third Epistles, and the Revelation there
were sometime diverse Opinions, 40. John the Baptist did not Miracles, 198. John
Hus is said to have Prophesied, 57. John Knox, in what respect he was called
the Apostle of Scotland, 217. Judas fell from his Apostleship, 191. who was his
Vicar, 293. his Ministry was not purely Evangelical, 205. he was called
immediately of Christ, and who are inferior to him, and plead for him as Patron
of their Ministry, 205, 206. Justification; the doctrine thereof is and has
been greatly vitiate among the Papists, and wherein they place it, 129, 149,
131, 132. Luther and the Protestants with good reason opposed this doctrine, tho
many of them ran soon into another extreme, and wherein they place it; and that
they agree in one, 131, 132, 136. it comes from the love of God, 133, 149, 150.
to justify signifies to make really just, not to repute just, which many
Protestants are forced also to acknowledge, 135, 136, 141, 142, to 147. the
revelation of Christ formed in the heart is the formal cause of justification
not works (to speak properly) which are only an effect, and so also many
Protestants have said, 128, 130, 131, 132, 134, 135, 141, 146, 147, 148, 149.
We are justified in works, and how, 128, 135, 136, 149 to 160. this is so far
from being a Popish doctrine, that Bellarmin and others opposed it, 129, 135,
156, 157.
K
Kingdom of God, 256, 327, 334. Knowledge; the height of man's happiness is
placed in the true knowledge of God, 1. error in the entrance of this knowledge
is dangerous, 1, 2, superstition, Idolatry, and thence Atheism has proceeded
from the false and feigned Opinions concerning God and the knowledge of him, 3.
the uncertain knowledge of God is diverse ways attained, but the true and
certain only by the inward and immediate revelation of the Holy Spirit, 3, 4,
5. it has been brought out of use, and by what devices, 8, 9. there is no
knowledge of the Father but by the Son, nor of the Son but by the Spirit, 3, 9,
10, 11, 12. the knowledge of Christ, which is not by the revelation of his
Spirit in the heart, is no more the knowledge of Christ, than the prattling of a
Parret, which has been taught a few words may be said to be the voice of a
man, 12, 13.
L
Laics, 214, 218, 219. Laity, 219, 321. Lake of Bethsaida, 94. Law; the Law is
distinguished from the Gospel, 26, 290. the difference thereof, 26, 167, 168.
see Gospel; under the Law the people were not in any doubt, who should be
Priests and Ministers, 188. see Minister of the Law; Worship. Learning; what
true learning is, 205, 206. Letter; the letter kills, quickens not, 168.
Light; the innate Light is explained by Cicero, 125, 126. Light of Nature; the
errors of the Socinians and Pelagians, who exalt this Light, are rejected, 57,
58, Saving Light (see Redemption) is Universal: it is in all, 83, 84. it is a
Spiritual and heavenly Principle, 86, 87. it is a Substance, not an accident,
88, 89. it is Supernatural and Sufficient, 104, 107. it is the Gospel Preached
in every creature, 107, 108. it is the Word, nigh in the mouth and in the
heart, 109, 110. it is the ingrafted Word, able to save the Soul, 114.
testimonies of Augustine and Buchanan concerning this Light, 127. it is not any
part of nature, or relics of the Light, remaining in Adam after the Fall, 91.
it is distinguished from the Conscience, 92, 93. it is not a common gift, as
the heat of the fire, and outward Light of the Sun, as a certain Preacher said,
118. it may be resisted, 84, 86, 94, 95, 174, 175. by this Light or Seed, Grace
and Word of God, he invites all, and calls them to Salvation, 111, 112, 113.
none of those, to whom the history of Christ is preached, are saved, but by the
inward operation of this Light, 113, 114, 115; 116, 117. it is small in the
first manifestation, but it grows, 114. it is slighted by the Calvinists,
Papists, Socinians and Arminians, and why, 114. none can put it to silence,
117. there are and may be saved by the operation thereof, who are ignorant of
the history of Christ, 67, 68, 84, 89, 90, 112, 117 to 125. an answer to the
objection, that none can be saved, but in the Name of Jesus Christ, 119, 120,
132. Literature; humane literature is not at all needful, 206, etc. Liturgy;
236, 251. Logic, 209, 210. Lord, there is One Lord, 17, 18. Love; of a
Love-feast, 324, 325. Lutherans; (see Protestants) they affirm
Consubstantiation, 30. of the flesh and blood of Christ, 309, 310. they use
unleavened bread in the Supper, 321.
M
Magistrate; concerning his power in things purely religious, and that he has
no authority over the Conscience, 331 to 349. nor ought he to punish according
to Church censure, 334. concerning the present Magistrates of the Christian
World, 387, 388. Mahomet prohibited all discourse and reason about Religion,
346. he was an Impostor, 93. Majesty; your Majesty; see Titles. Man; (see
Knowledge) his spirit knows the things of a man, and not the things of God,
11. the carnal man esteems the Gospel truths as lies, 12. and in that state
he cannot please God, 20. the new man and the old, 37, 38, 88, 89. the natural
man cannot discern Spiritual things; as to the first Adam he is fallen and
degenerate, 37, 48, 57, 67, 68. his thoughts of God and Divine things, in the
corrupt state, are evil and unprofitable, 57. nothing of Adam's sin is imputed
to him, until by evil-doing he commit his own, 59, 64, 65, in the corrupt state
he has no will, or light capable of it self, to manifest Spiritual things, 59,
60, 61, 62, 63, 133. he cannot, when he will, procure to himself tenderness of
heart, 94. whatsoever he does, while he does it not by, in, and through the
Power of God, he is not approved of God, 248, 249. how the inward man is
nourished, 305, 306, 307. how his understanding cannot be forced by sufferings;
and how his understanding is changed, 338, 339. Merchandise; what it is to make
Merchandise with the Scriptures, 211. Mass, 232, 236, 251, 272. Mathematician,
35, 36. Mechanics, 218. they contributed much to the Reformation, 219. Merit;
see Justification. Metaphysics, 209. Minister of the Gospel, it is not found
in Scripture if any be called, 43, 199. Teachers are not to go before the
teaching of the Spirit, 50. the Popish and Protestant errors concerning the
Grace of a Minister are rejected, 57, 63. they are given for the perfection of
the Saints, etc. 165. concerning their call, and wherein it is placed, 180, 186
to 199. qualities, 180, 198 to 212. Orders and distinction of Laity and Clergy,
108 to 219. of separating men for the Ministry, 211. concerning the
sustentation and maintenance of Ministers and their abuse of the idleness,
riot, and cruelty of Ministers, 181, 220 to 228. what kind of Ministry and
Ministers the Quakers are for, and what sort their adversaries are for, 229,
230, 233, 234. Minister of the Law; there was no doubtfulness concerning them
under the Law, 188, 204, 205. their Ministry was not purely spiritual, and,
while they performed it, they behoved to be purified from their outward
pollutions, as now those under the Gospel from their inward, 187, 188, 204.
Miracles; whether they be needful to those, who place their Faith in objective
revelation, 15, 16, 198. Moses, 124, 252, 255, 277, 304. Munster; see
Anabaptists; their mischievous actings, 28. Music, 276. Mystery of iniquity,
214, 257.
N
Name of the Lord, 293, 295. to anoint in the Name of the Lord, 326. Nero, 338.
Noah's Faith had neither the Scripture, nor the prophecy of those going before
him, 120. it is said of him that he was a perfect man, 169 Number; of using the
singular Number to one person, 359, 360.
O
Oath; that it is not lawful to Swear, 352, 374, 380, 389. Obedience is better
than sacrifice, 44. Object of faith; see Faith. Ordinance; sealing Ordinance,
279. Oil; to anoint with Oil, 303, 326, 329.
P
Papists; the rule of their Faith, 30. they are forced ultimately to recur unto
the immediate and inward revelations of the Holy Spirit, 36. what difference
there is betwixt the cursed deed of those of Munster and theirs, 31, 32, 34.
they have taken away the second Commandment in their Catechism, 47. they make
Philosophy the handmaid of Divinity, 50, they exalt too much the natural
power, and what they think of the Saving Light, 115. their doctrine concerning
Justification is greatly vitiate, 129. concerning their manners and Ceremonies,
184, 185, 193, 194, 196, 197. their literature and Studies, 207. of the modern
Apostles and Evangelists, 217. whom they exclude from the Ministry, 219. they
must be sure of so much a year, before they Preach, 221. they do not labor,
227. the more moderate and sober of them exclaim against the excessive Revenues
of the Clergy, 224. their worship can easily be stopped, 250, 251. albeit they
say none are saved without water baptism, yet they allow an exception, 30. of
Baptism, 299, 300. of the flesh and blood of Christ, 308, 309, 310. of an Oath,
372. Parable of the Talents, 101, 107. of the Vineyard entrusted, 88. of the
Sower, 107, 108. of the Tares, 336. Paschal Lamb; the end thereof, 312.
Patriarchs, 306, 312. Pelagians, 58. how we differ from them, 24, 95, 96, 301.
see Light of Nature. Pelagius denied that man gets an evil seed from Adam, and
ascribes all to the will and nature of men. He said, that man could attain unto
a state of not sinning, by his mere natural strength, without the Grace of God,
173. Persecution upon the account of Religion, 342 to 348. see Magistrate.
Perseverance; the Grace of God may be lost through disobedience, 160, 173, 174,
175, 176, 177. yet such a stability may, in this life, be attained, from which
there cannot be a total Apostasy, 161, 174, 177, 178, 179. Peter; whether he
was at Rome, 30. he was ignorant of Aristotle's Logic, 50. there were of old
diverse Opinions concerning his second Epistle, 40. Pharisees, 278, 316.
Philosopher; the Heathen Philosopher was brought to the Christian Faith by an
illiterate Rustic, 209. Philosophy, 200, 209. Physics, 210. Plays; whether it
be lawful to use them, 350, 352, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 389. Polycarpus the
Disciple of John, 30. Pray; to pray for remission of sins, 172, 173. concerning
the Lord's Prayer, 245. to pray without the Spirit is to offend God, 249, 369.
concerning the Prayer of the will in silence, 256. see Worship. Prayer; the
Prayers of the People were in the Latin Tongue, 207. Preacher; see Minister.
Preaching; what it is termed; the Preaching of the Word, 211, 218, 233, 234. to
Preach without the Spirit is to offend God, 249. see Worship; it is a permanent
Institution* 291. it is learned as another Trade, 218. Predestined; God has
after a special manner predestined some to Salvation, of whom if the places
of Scripture, which some abuse, be understood, their objections are easily
solved, 97. Priest; under the Law God spoke immediately to the High Priest, 14,
27. Priests; see Minister of the Law, 187. 188, 205, 220, 221. Profession; an
outward profession is necessary, that any be a member of a particular Christian
Church, 183. Prophecy and to prophecy what it signifies, 215, 216. of the
liberty of prophesying, 217. Prophets; some Prophets did not miracles, 198,
199. Protestants; the rule of their Faith, 30. they are forced ultimately to
recur unto the immediate and inward revelation of the Holy Spirit, 36. what
difference betwixt the execrable deeds of those of Munster and theirs, 30, 31,
32, 33. they make Philosophy the handmaid of Divinity, 50. they affirm John
Hus prophesied of the Reformation, that was to be, 57. whether they did not
throw themselves into many errors, while they were expecting a greater light,
83. they opposed the Papists not without good cause in the doctrine of
Justification, but they soon ran into another extreme, 130, 131. they say, that
the best works of the Saints are defiled, 136. whether there be any difference
between them and the Papists in superstitions and manners, and what it is, 184,
185, 197, 198. what they think of the call of a Minister, 188, 189, 190, 191,
192, 196, 197, 198, 199. it is lamentable that they betake them to Judas for a
Patron to their Ministers and Ministry, 205. their zeal and endeavors are
praised, 206. of their School Divinity, 210, 211. of the Apostles and
Evangelists of this time, 217. whom they exclude from the Ministry, 219. that
they Preach to none, until they be first sure of so much a year, 221. the more
moderate of them exclaim against the excessive Revenues of the Clergy, 224. tho
they had forsaken the Bishop of Rome, yet they would not part with old
Benefices, 226. they will not labor, 227. whether they have made a perfect
Reformation in worship? 231, 232. their worship can easily be stopped, 251.
they have given great scandal to the Reformation, 272. they deny water baptism
to be absolute necessary to Salvation, 285. of water baptism, 299, 300, 301. of
the flesh and blood of Christ, 308, 309, 310. they use not washing of feet,
320. how they did vindicate liberty of Conscience, 341. some affirm that wicked
Kings and Magistrates ought to be deposed, yea, killed, 342. how they meet,
when they have not the consent of the Magistrate, 248, 249. of Oaths and
Swearing, 372, 373. Psalms; singing of Psalms, 275.
Q
Quakers, i. e. Tremblers, and why so called, 117, 242. they are not contemners
of the Scriptures, and what they think of them, 38, 40, 41, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55,
89. nor of Reason, and what they think of it, 91, 92. they do not say, that all
other secondary means of knowledge are of no service, 9. they do not compare
themselves to Jesus Christ, as they are falsely accused, 88. Nor do they deny
those things, that are written in the Holy Scriptures concerning Christ, his
conception, etc. 89, 141. they were raised up of God to show forth the Truth,
83, 84 115, 116, 126, 212, 243. their doctrine of Justification is not Popish,
129, 134, 151, 158. they are not against meditation, 248. their worship cannot
be interrupted, 250. and what they have suffered, 249, 252. how they vindicate
Liberty of Conscience, 346, 347. they do not persecute others, 349. Their
adversaries confess, that they are found for the most part free from the
abominations which abound among others, yet they count those things Vices in
them, which in themselves they extol as notable Virtues, and make more noise
about the escape of one Quakea, than of an hundred among themselves, 351, 352.
they destroy not the mutual relation, that is betwixt Prince and People, Master
and Servant, Father and Son, nor do they introduce community of Goods, 352,
353. Nor say, that one man may not use the Creation more or less than another,
353.
R
Ranters; the blasphemy of the Ranters or Libertines, saying, that there is no
difference betwixt good and evil, 167. Reason; what need we set up corrupt
reason, 23. concerning Reason, 30, 92, 93. Rebekkah, 241. Reconciliation; how
reconciliation with God is made, 136 to 141. Recreations; see Plays. Redemption
is considered in a twofold respect. First, performed by Christ without us; and
secondly, wrought in us, 134, 135. it is Universal. God gave his Only begotten
Son Jesus Christ for a Light, that whosoever believes in him may be saved, 67,
68, 103, 104. the benefit of his death is not less Universal, than the seed of
sin, 67. there is scarce found any Article of the Christian Religion, that is
so expressly confirmed in the holy Scriptures, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76. this
doctrine was Praached by the Fathers (so called) of the first 600 years, and is
proved by the sayings of some, 78, 79. those that since the time of the
Reformation, have affirmed it, have not given a clear testimony, how that
benefit is communicated to all, nor have sufficiently taught the Truth, because
they have added the absolute necessity of the outward knowledge of the history
of Christ, yea they have thereby given the contrary party a stronger argument
to defend their precise decree of Reprobation, among whom were the Remonstrants
of Holland, 68, 80, 81, 82. God has now raised up a few illiterate men to be
dispensers of this Truth, 89, 90, 116, 117. this doctrine shows forth the
Mercy and Justice of God, 83, 84, 96, 97. it is the foundation of Salvation,
84. it answers to the whole tenor of the Gospel promises and threats, 84. it
magnifies and commends the merits and death of Christ, 84. it exalts above all
the Grace of God, 84. it overturns the false doctrine of the Pelagians,
Semi-pelagians and others, who exalt the Light of Nature, and the freedom of
man's will, 84. it makes the Salvation of man solely to depend upon God, and
his condemnation wholly and in every respect to be of himself, 84. it takes
away all ground of Despair, and feeds none in security, 85. it commends the
Christian Religion among Infidels, 85. it shows the Wisdom of God, 85. and it
is established, tho not in words, yet by deeds, even by those Ministers, that
oppose this doctrine, 85. it derogates not from the atonement and sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, but does magnify and exalt it, 89. there is given to every one
(none excepted) a certain day and time of visitation, in which it is possible
for them to be saved, 83, 84, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. the testimony of Cyrill
concerning this thing, 102. it is explained what is understood, and not
understood by this day, 86. to some it may be longer, to others shorter, 86.
many may outlive this their day of Visitation, after which there is no
possibility of Salvation to them, 86. some examples are alleged, 87. the
objections, and those places of Scripture, which others abuse, to prove that
God incites men necessarily to sin, are easily solved, if they be applied to
these men, after the time of their visitation is past, 87, 97, 98. there is
given to every one a measure of the Light, Seed, Grace, and Word of God,
whereby they can be saved, 83, 84, 97, 102 to 112. which is also confirmed by
the Testimonies of Cyrill and others, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111. what that Light
is, see Light; many tho ignorant of the outward history, yet have been sensible
of the loss that came by Adam, which is confirmed by the Testimonies of Plato
and others, 124, 125. many have known Christ within as a remedy to redeem them,
tho not under that denomination, witness Seneca, Cicero, and others, 124, 125.
yet all are obliged to believe the outward history of Christ, to whom God
brings the knowledge of it, 89. Reformation; wherein it is not placed, 188.
Mechanic men have contributed much to it, 218. what has been pernicious to
it, 310. Relation; see Quakers. Religion; the Christian Religion, see
Christianity; how it is made odious to Jews, Turks, and Heathens, 309.
Remonstrants of Holland; see Arminians. Redemption; they deny absolute
Reprobation, 30. how we differ from them, 95. they exalt too much the natural
power and free will of man, and what they think of the Saving Light, 114, 115.
their worship can easily be stopped, 251. Reprobation; see also Redemption;
what absolute Reprobation is, is described, 68, 69. its doctrine is horrible,
impious and blasphemous, 69, 73, 74. it is also so called by Lucas Osiander,
81. it is a new doctrine, and Augustine laid the first foundation thereof, which
Dominicus, Calvin, and the Synod of Dort maintained, 69, 80, 81. also Luther,
whom notwithstanding Lutherans afterward deserted, 80, 81. it is injurious to
God, and makes him the author of sin: proved by the sayings of Calvin, Beza,
Zanchius, Paraeus, Martin, Zwinglius, and Piscator, 70, 71. it makes the
Preaching of the Gospel a mere mock and illusion, 71, it makes the coming of
Christ and his propitiatory Sacrifice to have been a testimony of God's wrath,
72, 73. it is injurious to mankind, and makes his condition worse than the
condition of Devils, Beasts, Jews under Pharaoh, and the same, which the Poets
applied to Tantalus, 72, 73. Revelation; God always manifested himself by the
revelations of the Spirit, 3, 11, 12, 34. they are made several ways, 3. they
have been always the formal object of Faith, and so remain, 3, 13 to 24. and
that not only subjectively, but also objectively, 23, 24, 25, 26. they are
simply necessary unto true Faith, 3, 28, 36. they are not uncertain, 27, 28,
29. yea it is horrible sacrilege to accuse them of uncertainty, 22. the
examples of the Anabaptists of Munster do not a whit weaken this doctrine, 29,
31, 33, 34, 41. they can never contradict the holy Scripture nor sound Reason,
3, 34, 50, 51. they are evident and clear of themselves, nor need they another
Testimony, 3, 35, 36. they are the only, sure, certain, and unmovable
foundation of all Christian Faith, 36, 37. carnal Christians judge them nothing
necessary, yea they are hissed out by the most part of men, 3. of old none were
esteemed Christians, save those, that had the Spirit of Christ, but now adays
he is termed an Heretic, who affirms that he is led by it, 3, 4. the
Testimonies of some, concerning the necessity of these Revelations, 5, 6, 7,
21, 22. by whose and what devices they have been brought out of use, 83.
Revenge; see War, 379, 380. Rule of Faith and manners; see Scripture. Rustic;
the poor Rustick's answer given to the proud Prelat, 195. he brought a
Philosopher unto the Christian Faith, 209.
S
Sabbath, 234, 235. Sacraments; of their number, nature, etc. how much
contention there has been, and that the word Sacrament is not found in
Scripture, but borrowed from the Heathens, 278, 301. its definition will agree
to many other things, 279. whether they confer Grace, 328, 329. Salvation;
without the Church there is no Salvation, 181. Samaria; the woman of Samaria,
313. Sanctification; see Justification. Saxony; the Elector of Saxony; of the
scandal he gave to the Reformation, by being present at the Mass, 272.
Sceptick, 208 School; without the School of Christ nothing is learned, but mere
talk, and a shadow of Knowledge, 4, 5, 6. whether public Schools be
necessary, 207. Scriptures of Truth; whence they proceeded, and what they
contain, 38. they are a declaration of the Fountain, and not the Fountain it
self, 38. they are not to be esteemed the adequate primary rule of Faith and
manners, but a secondary, and subordinate to the Spirit, and why, 38 to 57,
199. their certainty is only known by the Spirit, 38.39, 143. they testify
that the Spirit is given to the Saints for a Guide, 38, 48, 49, 52, 53, 54, 55.
their authority depends not upon the Church, or Council, nor upon their
intrinsic virtue, but upon the Spirit, nor is it subjected to the corrupt
reason of men, but to the Spirit, 38, 50. the testimonies of Calvin, the French
Churches, the Synod of Dort, and the Divines of Great Britain at Westminster
concerning this thing, 39, 40. the contentions of those that seek the certainty
of the Scriptures from something else than the Spirit, 39, 40. diverse Opinions
of the Fathers (so called) concerning some Books, 39, 40. concerning the taking
away, and the corruption of some places, the Translation, Transcription, and
various Lections of the Hebrew Character, and of the Greek Books, the
Interpretation of the Septuagint, concerning the Hebrew Books, and of admitting
or rejecting some Books, 47, 48, 49. of the difficulty in their explanation,
50, 51. Augustin's judgment concerning the Authors of the Canonick Books, and
concerning the Transcription and Interpretation, 49. the use of them is very
profitable and comfortable, 41, 49. the unlearned and unstable abuse them, 50.
there is no necessity of believing the Scripture to be a filled up Canon, 55.
many Canonick Books through the injury of time lost, 55. whether it can be
proved by Scripture, that any Book is Canonical, 55, 56. they were sometime as
a Sealed Book, 207. to understand them there is need of the help and revelation
of the Holy Spirit, 5, 6 no man can make himself a Doctor of them, but the Holy
Spirit, 6. Sest; the Ignatian Sect loves literature, 207. they call those that
are sent unto India, Apostles, 217. Seed of Righteousness, 247. the seed of
sin; see sin, Redemption. Self-Denial, 247. Semi-Pelagians, their Axiom
Facien^^ quod in se est Deus non denegat gratiam. Servant; whether it be lawful
to say, I am your humble Servant, 358. Servetus, 345. Shoemaker; he disputes
with the Professor, 208 Silence; see Worship. Simon Magus, 222 Sin; see Adam,
Justification; it shall not have dominion over the Saints, 42. the seed of sin
is transmitted from Adam unto all men, but it is imputed to none, no not to
Infants, except they actually join with it by sinning, 57, 58, 64, 65, 66. and
this seed is often called Death, Original sin. Of this phrase the Scripture
makes no mention, 66. by virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ we have remission of
sins, 90, 132. forgiveness of sin among the Papists, 129. a freedom from actual
sin is obtained, both when, and how, and that many have attained unto it, 160
to 174, every sin weakens a man in his Spiritual condition, but does not
destroy him altogether, 161. it is one thing not to sin, another thing not to
have sin, 170. whatsoever is not done through the Power of God is sin, 249.
Singing of Psalms, 275. Socinians; see natural light; their rashness is
reproved, 19. they think Reason is the chief rule and guide of Faith, 19, 30.
albeit many have abused Reason, yet they do not say, that any ought not to use
it, and how ill they argue against the inward and Immediate Revelations of the
Holy Spirit, 29, 30, 31. yet they are forced ultimately to recur unto them, 36.
they exalt too much their natural power, and what they think of the Saving
Light, 115. their worship can easily be stopped, 92. Son of God; see Christ,
Knowledge, Revelation. Soul; the Soul has its senses as well as the body, 7.
by what it is strengthened and fed, 248, 311. Spirit; the Holy Spirit; see
Knowledge, Communion, Revelation, Scriptures. Unless the Spirit sit upon the
heart of the hearer, in vain is the Discourse of the Doctor, 6, 16. the Spirit
of God knows the things of God, 11. without the Spirit none can say, that
Jesus is the Lord, 6 11, 12. he rested upon the Seventy Elders and others, 14.
he abides with us for ever, 18, 19. he teaches and brings all things to
remembrance, and leads into all Truth, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 38. he differs from
the Scriptures, 19, 20. he is God, 19. he dwells in the Saints, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23. without the Spirit Christianity is no Christianity, 20, 30, 40
whatsoever is to be desired in the Christian Faith is ascribed to him, 19, 20.
by this Spirit, we are turned unto God, and we triumph in the midst of
Persecutions, 21. he quickens, etc. 21, 22. an observable Testimony of Calvin
concerning the Spirit, 22, 23, 39, 40. it is the Fountain and Origin of all
Truth and right reason, 34, 35. it gives the belief of the Scriptures, which
may satisfy our Consciences, 39. his Testimony is more excellent than all
reason, 39. he is the chief and principal Guide, 46. he reasons with and
striveth in men, 98. those, that are led by the Spirit, love the Scriptures,
50, 183, 184. he is, as it were, the Soul of the Church, and what is done
without him, is vain and impious, 208. he is the Spirit of order and not of
disorder, 213. such, as the Spirit sets apart to the Ministry, are heard of
their Brethren, 214. it is the earnest of our inheritance, 237. Spiritual
iniquities, 243, 244. spiritual discerning. 336. Stephen spoke by the Spirit,
21. Suffering. How Paul filled up that, which was behind of the afflictions of
Christ. How any is made partaker of the Sufferings of Christ, and conformable
to his Death, 168, 169. Superstition, 231, 232. whence superstitions sprung,
244, 277, 300. Supper; see Communion, Bread, it was of old administered even to
little Children and Infants, 3.7.
T
Tables, 323. Talent; one Talent is not at all unsufficient, of it self. The
Parable of the Talents, 101, 102, 107. those that improved their Talents well,
are called good and faithful Servants, 152. he, that improved well his two
Talents, was nothing less accepted, than he, that improved his five, 161. Talk;
see Plays. Taulerus was instructed by the poor Laik, 200. he tasted of the love
of God, 237. Testimony; see Spirit. Theseus his Boat, 219, Thomas a Kempis,
236. Tithes were assigned to the Levites, but not to the Ministers of this day,
220, 221. Titles; it is not at all lawful for Christians to use those Titles of
Honor, Majesty, etc. 352, 354 to 360, 388. Tongue; the knowledge of tongues is
laudable, 200, 206, 207. Tradition; how unsufficient it is to decide, 30. it is
not a sufficient ground for Faith, 329. Translations; see Bible. Truth; there
is a difference betwixt what one says of the Truth, and that, which the Truth
it self, interpreting it self, says, 6. Truth is not hard to be arrived at,
but is most nigh, 6. Turks; among them there may be Members of the Church, 182,
183.
V
Vespers; 236. Voices; outward Voices; see Faith, Miracles.
W
War; that it is not lawful for Christians to resist evil, nor wage War, 352.
380 to 389. Washing of Feet, 212, 213. William Barclay, 342. Woman; a Woman can
Preach, 214, 220. Luther also. 303. Word; the Eternal Word is the Son. It was
in the beginning with God, and was God: it is Jesus Christ, by whom God created
all things, 10, 87. what Augustine read in the writings of the Platonists
concerning this Word, 126. Works are either of the Law, or of the Gospel, 152.
see Justification. Worship; what the true and acceptable worship to God is, and
how it is offered, and what the superstitious and abominable is, 231, etc. the
true worship was soon corrupted and lost, 231, 232. concerning the worship done
in the time of the Apostasy, 235, 267. of what worship is here handled, and of
the difference of t he worship of the Old and New Covenant, 232, 233, 252, 253,
254. the true Worship is neither limited to times, places, nor persons; and it
is explained how this is to be understood, 231, 233, 234, 258, 259, 266, 267,
289, 290. concerning the Lord's Day, and the days upon which Worship is
performed, 234, 235. of the Public and Silent Worship, and its excellency,
236 to 261. of Preaching, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264. of Prayer, 264 to 276. of
singing of Psalms, and Music, 275. what sort of Worship the Quakers are for,
and what sort their adversaries, 276.
FINIS.

