BAPTISM, INFANT BAPTISM, AND QUAKERISM Briefly, but Impartially Considered, in
a Letter to a Friend. WITH A short Disswasive from the Impiety, Atheism, and
POPERY of our AGE, in another Letter.

With an Appendix.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1674.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have had the Happiness of these Papers Company some years; they have lain by
me in this defensive posture, thou now find them, a long time, and I assure
thee they have demeaned themselves very quietly, though Men of War, without
offending any, as I hope they will still, since they first Quartered with me,
there have been many Insurrections, many a Battle fought, many a Line drawn,
and many a Trench closely Besieged: These Controversies of Infant Baptism and
Quakerism have of late been hotly bandied to and again. I have, after several
attempts made by my self and others, proved vain and ineffectual through the
Authors modest loathness to appear in Print; I have (I say) at length prevailed
with the Author to Commission them to go out into the Camp, and contribute all
they can toward the Peace and quiet of Religion, I have extorted leave of him
to press them to the public Service, and yet I hope they will demean
themselves as victorieusly as other Volunteers that have gone out to slay. This
is all I thought good to Advertise thee; and so I leave thee to the Authors
previous Advice.

TO THE READER.
Un^^^^^diced, and Impartial Reader,
FOR so these papers suppose thee, if they mistake, I am sorry for it; if thou
art not Impartial, I wish ^^ou were so; if not unprejudiced and unpre-engaged,
may they make thee so; if thou art hot cither pro or con, here is no treatment
for the (at least, not in the first at puter if thou come with a pious
inaifferency to possess thy self of Truth and verity, read and welcome, soon,
and prosper.

The deagn of those prefactory Lanes is not to Court thy Acceptance, or suborn
thy sa rane, for to bride thy vote, nor yet to fort-stall thy judgment, for
this would be very unlake the lasiness of the dispute they usher in, which is,
^^t to beg, but by strength of reason command thy assent, not to desire the
favor, but by dint (...) Argument to require the justice of thee to believe
the Truths defended, and dis-believe the Erros confuted, it is hoped both are
modestly enough done. I request of thee only to be clam, sedate, and
impartial, and be what thou will eise.

It is not knnecessary (I think) to let thee know, that these were real, not
feigned Letters, thou art not the first they were sent to, nor the Friend meant
in the Title page, though now at the second hand thou art, and I hope they will
give thee no cause to be otherwise, so that thou may be assured the reason of
the Title is not any emulatton of the Fashion of writing (even) contraversies
that has of late so much obtained, A Letter to a Friend of 700. pages
sometimes, which me thinks, should be added to the Title, that the Friend might
know how long the Letter would keep him from business, and matters of
concernment, without the trouble of turning to the end of the Book before he
has scarce sa his eye upon the beginning. Know also this both Letters were
writ so long ago as 1668. both of them without the least intent or purpose of
publication. That the first was writ in a sheet of paper, which you must be
remembered for the us derstanding of an Expression in the close of it. That in
the close of the last Letter, the Roman Innovations are intended, and how much
reason there has been since the Year 666. to fear the corrupting of the Truth,
and the defacting of the Religion of England by Popish contrivances, I need not
tell thee, therefore if thou take the sense, meaning, or design to be that
the Church has not the power to regulate necessary Circumstances (not
expressed in Scripture) in the Worship of God, thou do mistake. And lastly,
take notice, that brevity was studied in both Letters, and therefore thou can
not expect as much here on the Subjects treated of, as thou may in larger
volumes, yet I think I may say thou will find more in a little here than thou
can any where else, so much brevity, reason, and distinctness couched
together (if I mistake not) thou will miss in many other books; thus much I
hope I may say without any arrogance or immodesty.

ERRATA.
Reader,
THou may well wonder to see so many Errata's in so few Leaves, and so large
a Catalogue of Errors in so little a Book: nor are here all, some are on^^ted
because they will not much disturb the sense, others because they will not
easily escape they another. Share the fault between the Authors Absence, and the
Printers Negligence, and then Correct before there Read.

Preface 1. line 11. r. Truth. 2 preface l. 11. r. Pre fatory. The Book. p. 2.
l. 24. for that r. not. p. 4. l. 10. r. Act 8.36. l. 21. r. it, not God. p. 6.
l. 9. r. sure. l. 10. r. not p. 10. l. 1. for now, r. when. l. 11. between
they, and are, r. that. p. 11. l. 10. after Baptism, r. to come, to the
sprinkling used in the Law which signified the san^^^ bing that Baptison does.
p. 16. l. 3. for and, r. the l. 10. for and, r. 1. l 16. r. tremulous l. 25. r.
Devtl. p. 18. l 2. to them, add Isa. 8.20. l. 13. for of is, r. in p. 19. dele
of. l. 22. dele. not. p. 20. l. 25. r. these. p. 22 l. 17. for of it, r. not.
l. 23. r. Evasion. p. 23. l. 11. r. tenent. p. 24 l. 15. r. idioms. p. 26. l.
16. after only, add every. p., 29. l. 17. r. Willingly. p. 32. l. 10. add to
which, when. p. 33. l. 13. r. ever. p. 42. l. 18. r. Ratiocinoso's. p. 43. l.
6. r. Wittynesses. l. 7. r. We. p. 46. l. 7, and 10. r. Master, not Minster. l.
8. r. are generally, not and generally.

BAPTISM, INFANT BAPTISM, AND QUAKERISM CONSIDERED.
Dear Cousin,
THese Lines, etc. -- The Question is, Whether Infants are the Subjects of
Baptism? Or, Whether Insante may be baptized? Answ. I affirm it, and shall lay
down my mind in these following positions concerning Baptism.

1. Baptism is an Ordinance, a Command that claims every Christians Obedience
while he is on this side the end of the world: One known proof (to prevent
tediousness) shall serve my turn, Mat. 20.19. Teach (...) Disci^^s all Nations,
Baptising, etc. A pl^^ proof that Christ would have all Nations, who pretend to
be his Discipies, to be baptized; and if this be a Commandment a Christ, furely
they that have any love for him should keep this as well as other commandments,
John 14.15. Is it not then (...) dangerous aspersion upon the wisdom (...)
Christ to call it a Carnal Ordinance? Is it not extremely hazardons to load the
Institutions of Christ with Carnal, outward, us profitable, and the like
ignominious terms. And is it not as much so it neglect then, and take our
selves to be unconcerned in his Commands, when yet we profess to love him?
Surely those persons that so usually, so easily neglect this Command under the
Notion of an unprofitable one, would have much more done so, were they in our
Father Adam's stead, with the prohibition of eating of the Tree of Knowledge,
and look (...) upon it as a very inconsiderable, and insignificant Command; and
may we that fear they will by the neglect of this Command forfeit all
happiness, and cast themselves (and every one else, if they can prevail with
them) into equal, into greater misery than Adam did us by his Fall? To forbear
doing our Blessed Saviors Commands till we know why, and wherefore, and what
reason he had to command them, is pride, and presumption too great for a
Christian to be guilty of. To fix bounds to the Commands of Christ, when
himself does not so; to say they reached no further than the end of that
dispensation, when he himself says to the end of the World: Or that it was to
be of force no longer than till Christ came in his Spirit, when sure the
Christians in those times had his Spirit; nay, when the Apostles had no sooner
received the Spirit in an extraordinary manner, but the first thing they
preached, was, Repent, and be Baptized, Acts 2.38. And when all along after we
find them executing this Command, and mentioning it in their Epistles, Ephesians 4.5.
etc. To say that we find God binding the phrases of (for ever) to the end of
the World, and the like in the Old Testament to a certain period of time,
therefore Man may do it now, are all Argumentations as wild and Extravagant as
they are proud and impudent; and certainly, Men that Argue at this rate are
arrived to the highest pitch of pride, and Arrogance. I wonder these men do not
blot out Teaching as well as Baptizing when they go together in the same
command. Teach all, etc

2. Baptism is a privilege: It is a Command, therefore Christians must Obey
it. It is a privilege, and so they have a right to it, and should bless God
for it: that which does distinguish between Believers and Unbelievers is a
privilege, but Baptism does so: No Indians, no Heathens, ^^nay, no Children
but them of Believing. Parents may be Baptized; that it is a privilege, is
plain, from Acts 36.37.

3. Baptism confers not Grace, of it self it does not, nor does God give Grace
a^ part of the Nature of Baptism, for many have Grace before they are Baptized,
and yet are really Baptized after Conversion; therefore it is a gross mistake,
that Infants are Baptized, because Baptism makes them Holy or Gracious, but
they are so, because God Commands they should be; and because they have a
Covenant, Holiness before hand, and so have a right to God, 1 Cor. 7.14.

4. Baptism is what Circumcision was, Circumcision was an outward sign of
invisible Grace, so is Baptism. The Apostle makes Circumcision and Baptism to
shadow out the same thing, Col. 2.11, 12.

5. Circumcision was a sign or Seal of the Covenant, Genesis 17.11. Romans 4.11.

6. Baptism is the same, it is sign of the Covenant, for that which signifies
the grace of the Covenant must needs be a sign of it: but Baptism does so, Col.
2.12. If it be come in the room of Circumcision, and that was a sign of the
Covenant, then Baptism must needs be so; if Circumcision was a privilege, and
Believers under the Gospel have more privileges than they before it, then
either Circumcision is yet to be practiced (as it must be, being the Command of
it has never been repealed, and it was given before the date of the Ceremonial
Law, if nothing is done in it is stead) I say, Believers are yet to be
Circumcised, or it was no privilege, or we under the Gospel want a great
privilege, which they before it enjoyed, or Baptism must be come in it is room;
and so we enjoy the privilege of a Seal of the Covenant in Baptism. If the
Covenant was a privilege, the Sign of it must be so too; now, if Circumcision
was a privilege, and Infants were Circumcised notwithstanding their Actual
unbelief, and Baptism be come in it is room, then Infants may be baptized,
though they do not Actually believe; or Believers since the coming of Christ
are still bound to Circumcision, and have less privileges than they before.

7. Being in Covenant is the proper (...) son of, and a sufficient reason for
Baptism. Baptism is a sign of the Covenant, and th^^ that have a right to the
thing signified, wh^^ is the greater, have to the sign, which is (...) less,
but they that are in Covenant have (...) right to the thing signified; either
being (...) Covenant is the proper reason of Baptism (...) or there is no such
reason for the administering it: what true Faith, for we can ne^^ be sure where
that is, and if it be not (...) Faith, I am sure it cannot be the profession of
it.

8. The Infants of Believers are in Covenant. If they were so in the Old
Te^^ment, that they should not be so in the Ne^^ is very strange; that they
were in the Old is plain, from Genesis 17.10, 11, 12. that th^^ are so in the New,
is as plain, from Acts. (...) 39. The promise is to you and your Children. It
is indeed usually objected, that (...) is to them, when they come to believe,
wh^^ as it is to them when they believe upon (...) former account the promise
is to you; (...) that if this Exposition be true, the la^^^ part (and to your
Children) must sign^^^ just nothing at all; and what encouragement could it be,
to tell them, the promise was to their Children, when they believ^^ when it was
so to every body else.

9. The Infants of Believers may be baptized; if the former positions be true,
this cannot be denied, therefore I will not insist upon it, nor shall I enlarge
into other reasons, it would be too tedious; but surely if Children be Holy or
Saints, 1 Cor. 7.14. (the word being in the Original the same with that 1 Cor.
1.2. and 6.2.) If Christ did bless them, Mat. 19.15. unless we take his
blessing to be no more than that insignificant Ceremony that Old people use to
their Children or God Sons, if he would have them come to him, as in the 140.
If they be a part of all Nations, and Christ commands to Baptize all Nations,
Mat. 28.19. and if they may be saved, as who so uncharitable us to think
otherwise? I say, if these things be true, then surely they may be, they must
be Baptized; and they may be, they must be reproved that forbid them Baptism,
Mat. 19.14. And now I shall lay down a few positions, which (I hope) shall
prevent and anticipate the usual Objections, and they are these.

1. That Infants are being expressed in Scripture, Commands or Examples is not
a sufficient Argument, to exclude them from Baptism, for by that reason Women
should not receive the Lords Supper, nor Merchants or Mercers be Baptized,
because we never read in Scripture any such Commands or Examples; nay, more,
Men and Women should not be Baptized, because we fin^ not expressly that Men and
Women in Contradistinction to Children, were Baptized (...) for the word (Men
and Women) where ever used to that purpose, signifies in the Original (Men kind
and Women-kind) but Infants are so, therefore they may as well as others be
Baptized.

2. That Christ's Commanding, Teachin^ or Repentance, and Baptizing to go
together, compared with Infants inability to t^^ former is not a good
conclusion against infant baptism.

1. Because that would equal have ^^^cluded Infnats from Circumcision under
(...) Old Testament, because God says to A^^ham, when he commanded Circumcision
Walk before me, and be perfect, Genesis 17.(...) as a Condition of the Covenant on
his p^^ therefore Infants who could not do the^^ thing, should not be
Circumcised, and y^^ we find they were; therefore,

2. When Christ says, Teach all Nati^^ Baptizing them he means, Teach them t^^
are capable of being taught, and Bapti^^ them that are capable of Baptism; and
(...) (...) valid reason to prove that none were ^aptized but they that were
first taught and ^^^pented, because Teaching and Repentant is set before
Baptizing in Scripture, then it is as valid a reason that some were Baptized
before they were Taught or Repented, because Baptizing is set before Repenting
and Teaching; let said, ( John Baptized in the Wilderness, and Preached the
Baptism of Repentance) first Baptized, then Preach^^ Mark 1.4. but,

3. Infants are capable of Repenting ( i.e. (...) Original sin) and believing,
or else none (...) them are saved, for without Faith and repentance there is no
Salvation, but surely (...) that have a spark either of Grace, (...), or
Charity, will venture to think (...) all infants are damned.

4. The often mention of Men's being baptized, and of their Repentance concludes
not (...)-Baptism unlawful, because when the (...) and Christianity were
Preached, and (...) command of Baptism first given, it found ^any, nay, all
Unbelievers most Heathens (...) they were Men; now, Heathens were (...) to be
baptized, because there was no (...) to believe them in Covenant, therefore
Repentance was necessary as the only ^^^ment of their being in Covenant, and
they being in Covenant; now Men must necessarily be baptized when Men, for they
could not be born again that they might b^ Infants; the case was then as it
would be^ Ministers in our days should go and Preach to the Indians, their
Conversion must necessarily precede their Baptism; and being Converted (their
Conversion being an Infallible token of their being in Covenant) they must as
necessarily be baptized; and yet this hinders not but that they are in Covenant
before their Conversion (as Infant are) may be baptized. Nor.

4. Does Infants appearing, when the come to Age, to be Unbelievers, argue the
they may not be baptized, for they may be in Covenant, though unconverted, Gal
may reach their hearts afterward; beside this would Argue against
Circumcision, because many of the Jews proved Revolters (...) Apostates; and do
not many that are baptize in Man's estate prove so too? Ha^^ not our Times
given us too many sad instances of it?

The next thing I shall do, shall be to l^^ down two or three positions about
the manner of Baptism; whether by dipping, (...) sprinking; and,

1. It is more than probable, that sprinkling is the manner, because it is a
Prophecy of Gospel times that Christ shall (sprinkle many Nations) Isa. 52.15.
which if it mean not that Christ in Gospel times should bring many Nations into
his Church, and in initiating and entering them into his Church, as a Seal or
Sign of their being in Covenant, sprinkle them by Baptism: I say, if this be
not the meaning of it, or if it be metaphorical, whence but from Baptism the
Metaphor should be borrowed, I cannot Imagine.

2. The Apostle Paul (who knew what Baptism was well enough) calls sprinkling
baptizing, which proves nothing more plainly, then that in his times the way of
baptiizing was by sprinkling; that he does so, is plain from 1 Cor. 10.2. they
were all baptized in the Cloud, that is, some dewy drops fell from the Cloud
upon them; for to say they were dipoed, or plunged in the ^^nd is too absurd.

3. At the furthest, it is indifferent whether it be by dipping, or sprinkling,
because Christ no where says, go, and dip all Nation, but, go, and baptize
them; and the word in the Original, is used for washing; new, when any thing is
washed water is cast upon it, as is on Infants when they are baptized by
sprinkling, nor is it any where used for plunging or dipping in the water; but.

4. It Infants may be baptized, it is not indifferent, whether by sprinkling or
dipping, for God rathers Mercy than Sa^^ines, and it were a sin to hazard the
Life of Children by dipping, when they may be baptizeds by sprinkling, as they
may, if it be indifferent, whether it be done by dipping or sprinkling.

5. Those Expressions in Scripture, of (there was muon water) and that of
(going down into the water) conclude nothing but that water was scarce in those
hot Countries, and a little water was therefore called much; and that the River
lay in a steep place, or at the bottom of an Hill, all so they were fain to go
down to it.

6. Circumcision was the cutting off the fore skin of one part of the Body (by
a trope for the whole) which yet signified (...) Spiritual Circumcision of the
whole Soul, Dent. 30.6. God will Circumcise thy Heart, that is, thy Soul, Jer.
4.4. Be Circumcise and take away the fore skins of your Heart. that is, the
Original bent and propensity (...) your Souls to sin. Now, if Baptism suc^^^
Circumcision, then this may also be of out part for the whole, to deaote the
washing of the whole S^^ from the power and guilt of sin, and what part of the
B^^ly is more fi^^ (...) our Faces, which outing uish us fr^^ (...) other
Creatures; and so where chie^^ (...) Image of God lies, the Face wh^^ (...)
Perch of the Souls Palace, the Heaad (...) the ^es and keeps Court; and thus
(...) with this point. I have not, (...) the least invective against the People
that hold the adverse Opinion, because I have a high esteam for most of them; I
have all this while only spoken of the thing, not of the Persons that deny what
I here defend, or defend what I deny; only I wish they would not hold that
Opinion, or having held it, would do so no longer if any gives them Reason and
Scripture to the contrary; but these few Lines I have hastily written only for
your own perusal, though such success as the satisfying of you is beyond my
hopes.

The next Question which you and I Discoursed about, was concerning the
Quakers, Persons that pretend to a greater Light, a higher perfection than the
inspired Saints, whom God made use of to manifest his will, that in spite of
Scripture, which says, ( other Foundation can no man lay than that is laid,
which is Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11.) lay the Foundation of their Faith (if they
have any) on a Light within, a Comet instead of that Star that came out of
Jacob, Number. 24.17. Jesus Christ. A Light that is king led (I fear) by
Hellfire, prepared for Satan and his Accomplices that sometimes transform
themselves into Angels of light; Persons that labor to destroy all the
Fundamentals of Christian Religion, of whose Arrogance and Pride their
rejecting Sacred Writ is not the least Argument; and therefore if I be a little
severe and Satirical against them you must pardon me.

The first thing to be considered, is the Light within; the Question then is,
Whether there be a Light in every man, which if he follow will lead him to
Salvation? That is, whether a Natural Man may be saved, for that which is in
every Man is Natural to Men, therefore is this Light be in every Man it goes to
the making up of a Natural man; in that the Question is, Whether a Natural man
may be saved? I deny it; for,

1. He that knows not the things of God cannot be saved; but the Natural man
knows not the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. (...) man can love, or believe in
that which he knows not, nor can any be saved without believing in, and loving
Jesus Christ; therefore the Natural man that can none of these things cannot be
saved.

2. All men dead in sins and trespasses, and in the state of Nature cannot,
notwithstanding any Light they have, be saved; for what Light has any dead
man? and what can he follow that has no Life? what good Action can he Act,
that has no Principles to Act it from? Now, following a good Light is a good
Action, and a man dead in trespasses, sins, has no good Principle to Act from,
for he that has a principle of Life is not dead in sins, and trespasses, but
he that has a Light within, that will, if followed, lead him to Salvation,
has a principle of Life. Again, they that are in the state of Nature, are
unregenerate, for they that are not born again are unregenerate, and they that
are not so, cannot see God, John 3.3. And they that are in the state of Nature
are not born again, for they that are but once born, are not born again, but
they that are in the state of Nature are but once born, and that of the flesh,
John 3.6. Now, some men are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. in the state
of Nature, Ephesians. 2.3. Therefore all men have not a Light within which will lead
them to Salvation, and if they had, cannot follow it, and therefore not be
saved. And Quakers hold they can follow it; if all this be true, then it is as
true that there is not a lIght within every man, which if followed, will bring
them to Heaven.

3. If there be a Light in every man, it is the Light (that is the knowledge)
of Christ or it is not; if they grant that it is the Light of Christ, and deny
that it is in every man, for they that are in darkness, or in the dark have no
Light; but some (go knows) (...) many, and many of them (I fear) that dream of
a Light, and think they see, are in darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Again, they that have
not head of Christ, have not the Light of Christ, (...) Faith comes by Hearing,
Romans 10.14. (...) But how many in the Iodies, and other Hes then parts of the
World have not heard of Christ, and so cannot believe in him, can not be saved,
Mark 16.16. If they say, it is not the Light of Christ, I deny that if a man
follow it he shall be saved, for there is not Salvation in any other, Acts
4.12. Them is no Salvation without believing in Christ, and that he is the
Messiah, John 8.24. But as to the Quakers Light in particular.

4. That Light which is not from God cannot save us, but that Light which
forbids us doing those things which God in his Word Commands is not, cannot be
from God, for that God that is infinitely perfect cannot contradict himself;
but the Quakers hight bids us leave those Ordinances (as the Sacraments) which
God has Commanded us, if therefore they will reject Scripture, and exalt their
Light to be a Rule in it is stead, let them bring Miracles that we may believe
them Divinely inspired otherwise (nor indeed if they could bring Miracles which
they never have done) we can never believe, that that word which Commands the
Sacraments is not the word of God, or that God intended they should inst no
longer than the rising of their tumulus blazing Stars; nor yet will they (I
doubt) work a greater Miracle than they have, namely, that men endued with
Reason, should be so foolish, so extremely sottish, as to desert the Word of
their great Creator, and substitute in its room their own fond, unreasonable,
and unsteady contrite; for sure it is above the power of Nature, and deceit
must have a hand in it; but (now, having rescued the Word of God to be still
our Rule) if there be a Light in ^^^^y man, etc. the Quakers are no men, for
that they have not any Light, I prove thus.

5. They that speak not according to (...) Word of God have no Light in them,
h^^ the Quakers speak not according to (...) Word of God, therefore the
Quakers, (...) all their blazing abroad their imaginable Light, have indeed no
Light in them; a^^ it is plain that they speak not according (...) the Word,
from their rejecting the Sarments, and from what shall follow.

1. They deny the Trinity and yet Un^^ of God, which I shall prove against th^^
with this one Argument, grounded oph^^ Scripture, which is this they deviate
fr^^

Arg. If there be three that bear Record in Heaven, then there are three
reasonable Persons, for things without Reason cau^^ bear Record to any thing;
but there (...) three, 1 John 5.7. That these three are Col^^ is plain, for
unless they differ in Nature (...) being God) from the Saints, there (...) more
than three that bear Record in Hoven, (viz.) the Angels and Saints T^^ the
Father is God none denies, that (...) Son is God, I prove thus; He that (...)
from Everlasting, before the Creation, my be God; for if he was not God, then
he (...) Crealed, and if he was Created, he (...) not before the Creation, but
Jesus Cl^^, the Essential Word of God (by which the World was made) was from
everlasting and before the Creation, Prove. 8.22.23 and throughout the Chapter.
That the Holy Ghost is God, I prove by the same Argument; He that was before
the Creation, and is part of God (if I may have leave (...) speak so for our
better understanding) is God; but the Spirit of God was before the Creation,
Genesis 1.2. if he was not, then but was Created, and if so, then a part of God
(give me leave to use the expression) was Created, and so was God partly
Created, and partly uncreated; an absurd piece of Blasphemy that would
introduce a composition of such imperfection into the Nature of God, for then
one part of God was created by the other part, whereas nothing (no part of God)
but an infinite, wholly perfect God can Create; then also God would not be
Eternal wholly, but a part of him ^^ly, and so would not be God; and he that
cannot press his Faith to believe such ^^inconceivable piece of Blasphemous
nonsense, so much more un-intelligible than that, great and tremendous Mystery
I am now speaking of, must first do the greatest violence imaginable to his own
faculties, and all this to damn for ever, damn his precious and immortal Soul:
what shall we think of them then, I mean those foolish (I had most said)
Devilish Quakers, that make light a matter of denying this wonder Mystery, and
think themselves very (...) and sccure from the judgment of God, wh^ with a
mighty Pride and disdain they ^ab^^ to overthrow all the Principles of Relig
(...) but to return, if then there be three (...) sons, and these three are
God, and th^^ three are-one, 1 John 5.7. Then there (...) three Persons, and
yet but (...) God. (...) next thing that they speak not according the Word of
God, is,

2. That a man may be absolutely (...) in this Life, that is, that he (...)
fulfill the commands of God without the least (...) for he that sins at all is
therefore impen^^ I deny it.

1. Because if all do offend in many th^^ then all are not perfect in every
thing, (...) all do offend in many things, James 3^^. That the Apostle speaks
this of all Christi^^ in general is so plain, that it need no pr^^^ however it
cannot be denied, but he spe^^^ it of all the Christians in these times, and to
what a high degree of ostentation ha^ those men's good conceits of themselve
^^^ried them, that will dare to give the insp^^ Apostle the lie, or prefer
themselves bes^^ (...) the Christians of these times, who were ^^^^ted by our
dear Savior himself, water^^ by his dear Apostles, and to whem his (...) our
Heavenly Father guve the Increase.

2. If we have no (...), we have no (...) of Christ's Mediatien, (...), and the
like; and if once we (...) ^ad will our Condition be? If (...) have while to
Price themselves in (...), much good may it do theth; for my pa^^, been
willing, and I think every good Christian is so a degree beyond content, to
gloriy in such needs, wants, and Insirmities, especially having the great
Apostle for our Companion, 2 Cor. 11.30. And I wish these men's so great
Civility to themselves do not a length Convert that follish imaginary light
they so much talk of, into everlasting senes in an Eternal Hell.

3. We cannot confessed and pray for formeness of that we have not, but we are to
confess and pray for forgiveness of sins, therefore we have sin, Mat. 6.12.
Luke 13.(...) ^^ames 3.16. 1 John 1.9.

4. We cannot Live or Act but according to our knowledge, but we know the will
of God but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. therefore we do it, or live up to it but in
part; now, what is done only in part, is not done perfectly, therefore we cannot
do the Wi^^^ God perfectly, and are poor imperfect O^^ turts; whatever the
Quakers are, not be sedious, I refer you to these follow Scriptures, 1 Kings
8.46. Ecsl. 11. (...) 2 Cor. 4.16. Gal. 5.17. there are none a conceited of
themselves, as to think th^^ are without sin, but those men that l^^ upon
themselves with their own (...) Lights, now, if I can but prove that (...) are
not perfect, either poor humble S^^^ will need no proof but their own
exper^^ces, and therefore thus I attempt it.

5. They that deceive themselves, (...) have not the Truth in them, are not
perfect but sinful, but the Quakers do streno^^^ deceive themselves, and the
Truth is it (...) them which I prove thus; they that (...) they have no fin,
deceive themselves, and the Truth is not in them, 1 John 1.8. But the Quakers
do so; therefore the Quakers are not perfect, but sinful Creatnes as w^^ as we.
I know their usual Reasons is ri^^^ do not say they have no sin, but they do^^^
obey it. To which I answer, they the transgress the Law of God, not only ha^^
sin, but obey sin, but they that sin transg^^^ the Law, because sin is a
transgression of (...) Law, 1 John 3.4. and can a man have ^^^nsgression of the
Law, and not Trans^^^ is it (...) I cannot see how it is possible; and doubt
whether I shall ever, unless by their light. So that these men, for all their
^^at pretenses, do sin (as much, shall I (...)?) or most abundantly more than
almost the worst of Persons out of their Number, which who that knows any of
them well, knows not, how much more does God?

(...) to that petty tonement about saluting, was so simple a one, being
confuted by the whole corrent of Scripture, that it would ^^ue nothing but
Vanity, and little to do ^^ay to spend his time upon it. I shall only say this
therefore; If we ought not only is Salute our Friends, but others, then
Sa^^^ation is not only Lawful, but our Duty, (...) we ought to Salute, not only
our Friends, but others, Mas. 5.47. Now, if Salutation he Lawful, and pulling
off Hats, and ^^^ing Courtesies (which are kinds of Sa^^^tion) be unlawful, it
must certainly be a beach of the eleventh Commandment, for I am sure it is not
of any of the rest: So much for that Vanity. There is one other that vies folly
with this, and that is the Religions Ciritisms of ( thou and you) which because
they are of the same follish complexion with the former, I shall (...) salu^^
them, and so take my leave; (...) therefore.

1. If we find ( you) used to one Perf^^^ in Scripture we may use it; but (
you) used to one Person in Scripture, Job 18.2.3. But,

2. To strive about this is to strive wh^^ speaks best English, it is not
contended who speaks most Holily, but who most Englishly; and we care not much
if we a^^^^ them to be better English men, though p^^^haps we might be quit
with them, if (...) should call to mind some other of their (...) osms, but let
them be better English m^^^ they are not at all the more Religious (...) that,
unless every good Christian must (...) cessarily be a good English man, and,
then must not allow them of other Nation though they were Quakers, the named
Christians. If they are better critics, the English Tongue, they are no nearer
Haven than the top of Babel, than we that (...) securely at the bottom; and yet
surely we being nothing else but the expressions of (...) mind, while others
know what we nie^^ when we say ( you) to them, it being (...) usual way of
expression we speak as g^^^ English as they. It Is strange, that signify^^ our
will to others should be no sin, and yet saying ( you) which is an expression
of our thoughts to another should be one; if you glease therefore this shall be
a breach of the twelfth Commandment, but these are trifles wothy of none, and
unbecoming any but Persons given up to Vanity and Follym, and left by God to
follow me Light of their own Fires. It remains that I briefly Answer or ^evernt
some Objections usually made; I shall choose the latter way, because its more
^^^pendious, and therefore shall lay down (...) or three positions concerning
the Light within that may serve to prevent their Ar^^ments in defense of it.

1. Where the Scripture says, there is a Licks within every man, it says no
more than what we grant, for we acknowledge, and ^^ss, God for it, that every
man is en^^ed with the Light of Reason and Consciture? Only we think that these
Quakers ^^e the least Portion, and that makes them ^^k so much of it, like them
that Live where ^ere is half year Nights, or like a blind man ^at wonders what
the Light is which he ^es but very darkly, and so talks of it the ^^re; if they
will have Scripture to savor (...) Opinion, they must show us where it (...)
not only that there is a Light in every man, but that there is such a Light in
every man, which if he follow, will save him.

2. Where Scripture says, that Christ enlgihtens every man coming into the
World, John 1.9. It says not more than what we grant, for all the Mercres we
have outward, as the Light of the Sun, and inward, as the Light of Reason, and
Conscience, we acknowledge to come to us by Jesus Christ, by virture of the
Eternal Compact made between the Father and him, that he should come and Redeem
the fallen, decayed, corrupted, and (by the Fall of Adam) cursed world and thus
Christ Lightens every Man wi^^ the Sun, Reason, and Conscience, and only new
man, and Member of the new C^^ation with the Light of saving Grace, it behooves
them to prove by Scripture that this Light by which Christ enlightens every
man, will (if followed) lead them to Salvation and withal that it is any more
than this, that Christ enlightens every man that is enlgitned, besides that
this proves not that them is a light in every man, but that every man is
enlightened.

3. That in Luke 17.21. (the Kingdom of God is within you) has nothing in it
for the Quakers tenement, for, what mention is here of a light within that will
bring al^ that follow it to Heaven? None at all; It Is evident from the context,
that by (the Kingdom of God) is meant the times when the Messiah should be
revealed, and his Kingdom come, so that the meaning is no more than this, The
Messiah is come, and he is among you, or within you, that is, within the Jewish
Nation. The next thing I shall do, is to lay down some positions that may
prevent some Objections about perfection; and to that end.

1. Those Proofs in Scripture that mention I perfection by an Imputed
Righteousness, God's looking upon Believers as perfect, through the merits of
Christ, does not prove thsolute perfection, but the cvontrary, because he that
needs another Righteousness ^ath no perfect Righteousness of his own,
otherwise he would not need another.

2. Those Proofs that exhort to perfection brove not perfection attainable in
this life, no more than those that exhort us to seek Heaven, that Heaven is
attainable in this life.

3. Those Proofs that mention a Compatative Righteousness in respect of others,
prove not an absolute Righteousness, for that which is Comparative only, is not
absolute.

4. Those Proofs that mention a constant Trade in sin, and free Believers from
that, do not therefore free them from some (...) of Innrmity, and more
especially that Proof, 1 John 3.(...). The word in the Original signi^es to
make a Trade of ^n, and to no tree behever ^^th, ^^t every Believer (...)
sometimes over-taken with sins of weakness, and if he say be hatin to sin, he
has no Truth in (...). Behever; but he conses, his (...) with the Father; to
one of taese four positions you may ted^^e all your Proofs for Perfection, and
because (...) low, I care not if I fill (...) Paper with one word to their
silert meeting, and (...) more than they themselves will ali^^^ them.

That which ten^s not to Edification is not to be cone, 1 Cor. 14.20. (Let all
(...) done to edifying) and this place is the more to (...) need, because it is
spoken patt^oulatly of their Meetings; now, how People can I lifie, or do one
another good by con^^^g a Company of them into the sant (...) any (...) ^ther
warm (...) Charnis^^ Cornjuriations them (...) needs have more light than
Ordian^^^ (...) aiting thee the Apostles were Commanded, Acts 1.4. can
patronize this, they must prove that the Apostles staid in the sune Chami^^r
all the while, that they said nothing, as it is everant they did, v. 15. and
when that is done, they must evening, all the (...) of them, and make a silent
Meeting, which shall continue as long as the Apostles old, and by that time
they will be as willing to break up their Meeting as I am to (...) have writing
And if that place (be hent all Flesh) prove any thing to this purpose, it
proves more that they are never to speak at all; and if they will do this, with
all my heart: we shall have less (thouing) and d^^nding other Meetings, as was
the manner of the men, however this willing pre^ails with me so far as to make
me now silent, and rest

Your Loving Cousin.

Honored Cousin, etc. --
WE are tied to Love each other by a three-sold Cord; as we are Cosins, as we
are Friends, and as we are Christians; the last of them (Christianity) is (as I
take it) the most firm and insol^ble tie. It is that (if our profession of it
be sincere, without Hypocrisy, and Found don a Principle of Grace) which will
be our Comfort, Joy, and Solace, when our Friends, our Relations, our Riches,
yea, our Lives will leave us. God has been Teaching you and (...) by
Experience that Lesson which Solomon (...) often inculcates, All is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit; that we cannot choose but have it by heart by this time:
There is no so^^^ Peace, no Tranquillity, no rest, no security in any thing but
Christ, and an Interest in him. We have known the Vanity of Fridns, and how
their promises have dyed, and been buried with our Parents: We have also seen
Riches take to themselves Wings, and fly away with th Love and Promises of our
Parents Friends on their backs: And as for our-present dying Lives, Divien
Providence has most abundantly displayed and manifested to us the vanity and
frailty thereof, when our Fathers and Mothers, and almost all but our selves
are gone, and have taken their last leave of this vain and miserable World; and
left us to grapple with all the fie^ce fiery Temptations wherewith the Devil
shall assault our Souls, and all the Afflictions and Troubles that (like our
shadows) shall continually follow our Bodies; what remains therefore, but that
we seriously set us about that great work of eternal Concernment, examining our
selves what progress we have made in our Journey to Heaven; how far we are gone
toward Happiness, or whether we are gone any thing at all; how great the work
we have to do, is, and how short the time we have to do it in: and why should
we (unless because the Devil will have it so) be backward in Catechizing our
selves about these things, things that so much comport with reasonable Souls,
things too that so loudly call for the greatest and exactest care; for
methinks there is so much of Reason in Religion and Piety, and so much of it
wanting in Irreligion and Luxury, that there is none at all in them that choose
the way of sin, whatever Joy or Encouragement it may vainly promise them,
before Grace and Virtue, though clothed in Rags, and attended with the
greatest Misery the World can lay upon them, what pleasure can there be in
Vice? Or what delight in sin? Is there any thing in them Consonant to the
generous Principles of Reason, or to those more generous Principles of real
Happiness? Can there be any thing taking in Gluttony, Drunkenness, or Luxury,
in which we are most experienced and perfect, we have but very fairly converted
our selves into Beasts that perish, and turned our selves a grazing (like
Nebuchadnezzar) with the Beasts of the Field? A brave Commendation for a
Reasonable Soul! For indeed, if we do but obey that other half ofour selves
(our Reasonable Souls) and yield to it is dictates, we shall soon be convinced
that there is a God; for could the World, so glorious a Fabric, being of a
Compound Nature, make it self before it was? Could eachpart come together
without some Mover? Or could each part move before it was? Could it bear the
rest of the most curious and Critical Reason, and be found to be exactly
Consonant to the highest Reason, and yet be made by something that had no
Reason at all! It must then be either Created, or Eternal; and if it were
Eternal, it is very strange that we should have no Records, no Chronicles of
any Persons or their Actions before Adam: That the World should be doing
nothing from Eternity till six thousand years ago is more incredible than the
greatest error in Religion; and if they did any thing, it is as strangely, so
that we should never hear of it: And why those Persons (the Egyptians) that
pretend to the highest Antiquity, do yet acknowledge a beginning; why no
particular Beings (that God we erve excepted) did erect, or could with any
shadow of Reason assert themselves Eternal without making themselves the
objects of the greatest Ridicle and Laughter? Or why no particular Nation or
People have ever claim a right to the highest Antiquity ( viz. Eternity) Or,
lastly, why Eternity must (when nothing ele can) exist only in Universals and
Generals, and not in Particulars, or Individuals, are all Paradoxes beyond
belief incredible. If then there be a God (as it is Infallibly certain there
is) and if he has Created us, it is a Natural, and most reasonable Inference
that he should be adored and Worshipped: how disingenious should we be, if
instead of serving him, we should take those Courses that are most displeasing
in his eyes, as the least sin, and the most minute vice is; and if he must be
Worshipped, it is all the Reason in the World he should acquaint us how, and
that we can no way know but as he is pleased to reveal his Will by his word,
the Scriptures; and therefore it is your and my safest way to Regulate our
Devotions, and all our Actions by his Word. If we should not Worship him
according to his Word, according to what else should we? Is it not most
probable, that God would rather appoint us our way of Worship i^ his Word, then
hazard us to he vain Traditions and uncertain dictates of a fallible, though
Roman Church? Is it not more safe to follow the Word ofGod than the Commands of
Idolatrous Men, under what plausible Titles soever they go? How far therefore
the Great, Infallible, and Massy men of our days are out, when they are so
importunate with us to serve God according to their Fanatic Breviaries, and
yet will not give us leave to Worship him according to his Word, without the
imputation of Heretics, is soon discerned by one with half an Eye. We Live
(Dear Cousin we Live in Times and Places that it is but Ordinary to hear men
talk in Company against the Being of a God, and cry down Religion as a vain and
Melancholy fancy; and others make as light of the Word of God as the former do
of God; and therefore we had need be well principled in Religion, and know the
grounds and Reasons of our Faith against the Huffing Atheists on the one hand,
and the proud and imposing Papacy on the other. To my desire that we might be
so, impute this large a Harangue. And now I am sufficiently sensible how
tedious I have been, how much I need your pardon, and hoping that you will
grant it, you shall rest, and I remain

Yours, etc.

Appendix.
I AM not Ignorant of Mr. Danve^s his Book against Infant Baptism, nor of
others about Quakerism, and against Atheism, that have come ou^ since these
Letters were written, which I have neither time, leisure, nor necessity to take
notice of, however, upon that Account, perhaps, it my be needful to add a word
o^ two concerning each point: Concerning infants born in Covenant, and so
having a right to the sign of it, I offer this Argument further, when the Jews
are called (which most of our Brethren do believe) either their Children shall
be the Subjects of the sign of the Covenant or not; if they shall, then our
Children are so now, and this sign must be either Baptism or Circumcision, but
not the latter, therefore the former; if not, then it is as plain as th Sun at
Noon day, that they will want a privilege which they had before the coming of
Christ; which was theirs before the giving out of the Ceremonial Law; and
therefore no p^^t of i^, and before the distin^^^ between J^r an^ Gen^ile, and
therefore not prope^ to the Jews (though the^^ and that God (...) give a sign
that he will (...) Covenant, or the Grace of the Covenant of Grace to ^^me more
o^ ^^oner than others, or that he will enter them into any part (though but the
outward) of it, is (one would think) a great privilege. And whether t^as p^ece
of Sup^rstition may ^ot be an Obstacle and hindrance to the Co^^^rsion of the
Jews, as at this day the Idolatry of the Bom^^n^s^^ is, I leave it to the
judicious, and unpr^j^^i^ed to consider.

For the f^rther obviating that tri^e and plausible objection, What command
have you ^or Infant Baptism? Bring me one plain Scripture Precept for it
without Consequences; is not Believers Baptism plainly Commanded Go, and Teach
all Nations, Baptizing them?

1. Take notice, that it is granted by us that Believers Baptism is clearly
Commanded, but not that only: Insant-Baptism is no less so, we are for
Believers Baptism, and only for that in the same Case that Christ and his
Apostles were, if the Go^p^^ were Preached amongst Heathens, or the like, but
(supposing the Text to be understood in their confined sense of Men and Women,
or Believers only) our case (...) not the same now, and therefore the Argument
will not hold. But,

2. Here is no plain Command for Baptizing Men and Women, no, nor Believ^
without a Consequence, for here is no m^^tion of Men or Women, or Believers;
b^^ some such Argument must be framed, and we must draw some such Consequence
(...) Conclusion as these; only they that are, ^^pable of being Taught, or
only those that receive the Teachings of Christ and his M^^sters are to be
Baptized, but Men and Wom^^ or Believers only are so, therefore they only are
to be Baptized. And now, my good Friends, where is your Plain Scripture Proof
for the Baptizing of Men and Women, or Believers without Consequences? Or, if
you could produce it for that, were for them only; we desire leave therefore
f^^ your further Conviction (if you please) to retort your question upon you,
where is your Plain Command? Answer it, if you can, yet,

3. I humbly conceive that Text, M^^ 28, 19, 20. is a plainer, and more direct
Command for Baptizing Children than Men and Women, which (besides that the
meaning of it (if my former assertions should not hold) seems very fairly
without any wresting and distortion of it, to be this, As before my Coming you
have given Circumcision the then Sign of the Covenant, to the l^ws, and their
Children; so now give Baptism (which I appoint for the future to be a Sign of
the Covenant)to the Gentiles (all Nations) upon their accepting of the Covenant
(which she Jews reject) and to their Children.) ^esides this, I say, I attempt
to prove thus. That place which Commands Baptism before Teaching does not
directly and plainly Command Men and Women to be Baptized, for they are to be
taught before they be Baptized; but this does so. Baptize, in the 19. v. and
then Teach, in the 20. (...) Teach by Instructing, and our Brethren know very
well, for they contend that the Teach, in the 19. v. is not rightly rendered,
but should e Translated Disciple, ((...)) or make Disciples, or Scholars; now,
we know Children are sent to School, not because they have Learnt, but that
they may Learn, they are truly Schola^s as soon as they are entered into the
School, and given up to the Care and Tuition of the Master, before they have
leard a Letter: so Children are entered into the Church of Christ, (and Baptisin
is, as is were, their entrance money) before they learnt any Lession, when they
are solement given up, and devoted by their Partents to Je2us Christ; and if it
be granted that Infants may be Baptized as soon as they an capable of Learning
any of the Commands of Christ, and so may be Scholars indeed; this grant will
overthrow our Baptized Brethrens Opinion. See here theresore my good Friends,
a plainer Command for the Baptizing of Children than you hay for Baptizing Men
and Women.

Councerning the Second Dispute, it may be thought I am too tart, and Satirical
against the poor Quakers; if I am so any where, I desire to be understood of
the censorious, the wilfully Ignorant, the haughty, the persect of them, such
as that Quking Pope, George Fox, with whom it is at impossible to Write calmly
and Christianly as it is to Write Sense. I have a great deal of Charity for
many of those People who walk according to their Light, and are not tainted
with the Socinian Mysteries of the Trade; such I hope there are amongst them;
and I am for Union, even here also, so as to keep up an a micable
correspondence with them, that we may Live Civily and unictly together like Men
and Christians, without damning, infesting, and railing at death other.

I know the Ingenious and Nobly-designing Author of the Asiddle-wayes has
studiously attempted a Reconciliation between us about Perfection: but I fear
they will not be content with an Allowance of an Evanelical, unless he grant
them also a Legal Perfection; against which my Arguments and Discourse about
that point altogether militate.

I must add one word further, with Respect to the Second Letter, against
Atheism, and particularly concerning the Eternity of the World, which I take to
be the surest and strongest Refuge of the Atheist, if he can maintain it; and
for this reasion I am apt to think the new Philosophy has not deferved so ill
of Divines as the Old; but neally merits more civil entertainment than she
usually meets with: it being much the easier Province to prove that the World
is not the Product of the Concourse, or jumblement of Atoms, than it is
Non-Eternity against this grand Fancy of the Atheist, I offer these two
Arguments. Ad Hominem.

1. That which is imperceptible, (not a be perceived) by the Senses, is not,
but the Eternity of the World is imperciptible, neither to be seen, felt,
heard, nor smelt; if the former Assertion be false, then doch the Atheists
great Objection against the Baing of a God, or a Soul falls to the grount; if
the latter be true, then oh you Atheistion Clubs, where alone is the constant
Reldence of Wit. Oh, you at are the gray and only Wittist; of the Age, you
that has so long ago engrossed to your selves all reason, and had the Monoply of
all Ingenuity; for Love (who is your only Deity) I say, for Loves sake,
produce one of your grea Racierinose's, some Mighty Leviathan it Rea2on, (for
you are all so;) some presound Admirer of Dame Nature, your Leving Mother and
Mistress too, that shall irrefragably demonstrate the Eternity of the World by
Sense, and tell us boldly, and bravely (for that he may as well as that there
is no God) that he has often seen (and admired we may be sure) that grea
Beauty, Eternity of the World: and heard her play the most melodious Music
that over was heard. If there be any other Principle of Reasoning besides
Sense, what is it? How came we to have that knowledge that never came by our
Senses, (I mean, by being the Objects of them) or those Notions which we are
sure Sense could never teach us? What reason can your Witnesses give, why she
should not have an insenlible, or immaterial pringiple of discerning, as well
as a material, or corporeal Principle of Sensing, or perceiving by the Senses.
But if you will needs have it so, that there is noshing but what is seen, and
nothing else is to be believed to be: then produce the Eternity of the World,
and let us also see and admire her.

2. If the World be Eternal, all the parts of it are so, or some parts only:
not the former, for we see Living Creature which are it is Noblest parts, have
their Beginning, not the latter; for if any parts are Eternal, the chiefest and
best parts, and for whose use the World is, are so. But this is false. Man, who
is the Noblest part, we see, step into the World, and dye before our Faces. We
see him both begin and end his Life, and are therefore sure by the Atheists one
Arguments of sense, that he is not Eternal. And the Atheist is very well
satisfied that there is never a Being better than himself. We see no man comes
into the World without a Cause, nor can there be any Reason given, why any one
man should be without a Cause, or Eternal, and not the rest; there is no such
thing as Humane Nature, our of an Individuum, or a particular Person; and
therefore Man, or Humane Nature could not be Eternal by any Succelsion of Men,
or Humane Nature un individuated; if then there be no Humane Person or
Iudividuum Eternal, Humane Nature cannot be so; And if Man was not Eternal, to
what purpose should the Sun, Moon, Stars, or Earth be so? Since we see plainly
that all these things are (however it comes about) for the use of Man, since
the Chiel est and Noblest parts of the World, which we do know are temporal,
and hare had a beginning; why may we not conclude that those things we do not
know are so too, and did we but know them as well as we do these, we should as
little dispute whether they had a beginning, as we de now whether men, Beasts,
Cities, etc. have. The Father is Eternal (without Beginning) to the Child,
because he was in the Work before, and he did not see him come in^ it. The
Atheist, because God made and Furnished a World for him before he made him,
disputes against God, and because the World was before him, he will therefore
needs conclude, that it was always. How much more would he have been displeased
if God has made him when there was no World, and sent him into a naked Nothing.
The World then is not Eternal, and if it be not, then it is made either by a
fortuitious concourse of Atoms, that is, by Chance or Fortune; or by an
Infinitely perfect, powerful, and wise Being, that is, by God, not by Chance or
Fortune, for that is nothing; there is no such thing in Rerum Naturae, and can
we imagine all things to be made by nothing? If not, then God made the World,
and he will as surely judge it.

I have now done; only give me leave, I pray you, oh you Protestants of
differing Judgments, most especially Presbyterians, Independents, and
Anabaptists, though you differ in Matters of Church Government, or about the
Timing or Subjects of Baptism, yet in the Name of the Eternal God let me beg of
you, Cement, Cement, Love one another more, bear with one another Ignorance
(we all know but in part) and pardon each others Imperfections. Cannot you have
different apprehensions of the things of God, but you must dishonor him,
disgrace Religion, disparage Holinest, and envy one another? What means your so
great absenting your selves from one another Meetings? Why must you have only
such Preachers of your own Party to Preach at your Lectures, and not some of
all? Why when Doctor or Minister such a one comes up, and severally; his
Auditiors, especially Ministers, of his own Party only? And why again, when
Doctor or Minister, such a one comes up, the Scene it changed, and behold, a
new set of Faces! Does not God bear with your Ignorance, and will not you bear
with one another? Does not he Love you, though he very well knows that you
neither know, nor do what you ought? and cannot you do the same for one
another? It is dreadful to think what heats, and heart-burnings! what
Jealousies and surmises! what scorn and Contempt! what Reproaching and
backbiting, vilifying and defaming there is amongst you, one against another!
Will you never leave these things? Or could you have thought ten or eleven
years ago when you Prayed, Preached, and heard together in corwded Corners,
when you mourned and Fasted together, when you be wailed together the sins of
your Prosperity, your Animosities, your contentions, Pride, and
self-interestedness: oh, could you then have thought, or would you have
believed, if one had told you that so soon, within so few years, you would have
stood aloof off, and looked askew upon one another, as now (God and the World
knows) you do? Have you forgot, and have you already forgot when the Almighty
saw your Tears trickling down your Cheeks for your Divisions, when he heard
your Promises, your Vows, that you would Reform and Unite? And have you so soon
broke all? Will you yet return, with the Dog, to his Vomit, and lick up your
bitter choler one against another, and then Vomit it up again in each others
Faces? Is this the course you intend always to take? Will you always run in
this dreadful Round, this Devilish Conjuring Circle, and raise yet more storms
upon your selves? Will you go on to wrest yet greater Judgments out of the
hands of God's Mercy upon your selves, your Nation, and the so rented, torn,
and divided Church of God? will you never have done biting, and backbiting
each other? I know you do sometimes confess these your divisions, but alas!
what will that avail, if you Reform not? I know too you sometimes Preach and
Pray, and Discourse, and that with seeming warmth for Unity, but then (...) it
comes to proctice, and your Notions are to be^^^^ duced to Action, then you
fall back; and what (...) this avail? Shall What is he? What Party is he of
(...) always the great and most weighty Question that me (...) turn the Scale
of Respect or dis-esteem? Shall it (...) ever be the Character of the
Non-Conformists, (...) Lord deliver every good Christian from it. Do you long
to be hurtied together into Prisons again? W^^^ no place Unite you, but a nasty
Dungeon? N^^^ thing Sodder you but Persecution? Oh beware (...) ware, you
provoke not the Almighty God to lash you again; the next time he may Chastise
you with Fa^ gots, with Scorpions, with Devils; and do not thin, if once you
are under Hathces again, that a few colloguing sighs, Prayers, or Promises
shall redeem you vet may e're long (you know not how soon) be deing Penance
together in Popish Llmbo's, gawky to ^^ there under the sad Yoke of their
Pressing Sevention, and hatrssed with their unmerciful Mortificalors. Nay, who
knows but you may e're long be cahaled gether into Heaven out of a fiery
Chaniot ^^^ I agg as? And is it for you thus to stand at a distance from, these
to gnaw and bate one another? And when not you (...), Pray, and hear together?
God for hid! Ah! my Bre hren, it you have any love so Ged, who ^^ by these
things dishonored, any teny derness for your own Souls, that are by these
thing so much hazarded; any pity for the distressed Churel of God that lie
bleeding; any Compassion for you Native Land that is e'ne quite Ruined and
undone; of any regard for your Posterity, follow, and follow has after Unity;
if you will not, the Lord be Merciful to us!

FINIS.

