THE LATE TRAVELS Of S. Giacomo Baratti, An Italian Gentleman, Into the remote
Countries of the Abissins, or of Ethiopia Interior.

Wherein you shall find an exact account of the Laws, Government, Religion,
Discipline, Customs, etc. of the Christian people that do Inhabit there, with
many Observations which some may improve to the advantage and increase of Trade
with them.

Together, with a Confirmation of this Relation drawn from the Writings of
Damianus de Goes, and Jo. Scaliger, who agree with the Author in many
particulars.

Translated by G. D.

London, Printed for Benjamin Billingsley at the Printing-Press in
Broad-street, and at the same sign in the Piazza over against Popes-head-alley
near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1670.

To the Worshipful Thomas Windham Esquire
SIR,
HEre are the Travels of our Italian Gentleman, that you have so long desired
to peruse in our Language. It is an excellent description of that Great Empire
that is so near related unto us by Religion, and nevertheless at such a
distance from us. I hope it will fully answer your expectation, for you shall
find in it most delightful passages, with an exact account of the Manners,
Laws, Government, and of all other particulars in the Dominions of Ethiopia,
worth the notice of an Ingenious Traveller. It may be that this small Treatise
may meet with the ill fortune which such are to expect that thwart or
disapprove of grand designs and furt^us enterprises. It matters not what
aspersions may be raised to darken its Truth, and hinder its appearance and
credit; I hope the probability of all the matters* related, and that may be
also gathered from the place where it was first published, will dissipate all
envious vapors, and cause Ethiopia to appear amongst ^s in its own shape and
form. Our Gentleman had committed an act not agreeable to that Judgment that he
shows in his writings to publish things of a Kingdom so well known to most
parts of Italy, by reason of the continual correspondency that the Princes of
it do entertain by their Factors with the Grand Neguz) had there been any thing
in his Relation not real, ^r untrue. His Book had not found that universal
applause to be twice honored with the Press, had it not found amongst his
Countrymen a reception suitable to its worth. Let the ill-natured and pe^vish
minds, that credit nothing but what they see, esteem of this I ra^slation, and
of the original as they please; I know Sir, that all sober-minded Persons as
your self, will find both Sweetness and Profit in the Reading of it; however I
should desire, that you will look upon these labors as a Confirmation of tha
Title that I shall always covet, I mean of

Sir, Your most faithful and obliged Servant, G. D.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY OF Precious John, Vulgarly called PRESTER JOHN.
THe Empire of Aethiopia, is not inferior to the largest in the World, if we
consider that vast Continent that was anciently, and should be now under the
Command of the lawful Heir. It contained above thirty large Kingdoms, and many
fruitful Provinces well furnished with Men, and stored with Rich Commodities;
but the late unhappy Wars with the Neighbor Kings have much weakened this
growing Empire, and reduced it to a little number.

The Turks, the Gialas, the King of Mozambique, the Moors, and several others
that surround this Christian Principality, have dis-membred the Provinces and
Kingdoms that were anciently subject to it, and submitted them to their several
Jurisdictions. The Moors have seized on the Seacoast, the Turks have conquered
the most fruitful Kingdoms that confine upon Egypt, the Gialas a warlike
Re-publick of Africa, command several large Territories that belong unto this
Imperial Crown. The King of Mozambique and the rest have robbed it of its chief
Jewels and Ornaments, so that at present it is nothing so large, nor so
considerable as formerly it was. The cause of these great Losses must be
attributed to the Cowardice and unexperience of the Inhabitants more inclinable
to Superstition than warlike feats, and to the diversity of Religion in which
these Nations differ much from the Abyssins. The Turks and Moors are nourished
up in the Mahumetan, the Gialas and they of Mozambique in the Heathenish
Idolatry (which cannot comply with the Christian Truth.) The Professors of the
former, have a natural antipathy against the Proselites of the latter;
insomuch, that they can scarce suffer them to breath in the same air. This
hatred entertained by the different ways of worshipping the Creator, has
fomented all these wars and troubles that have for many hundred years shaken
the Abyssin Empire, and separated from it the most excellent, and the largest
Provinces that did belong unto it; so that at present it is reduced to a very
narrow Circuit in comparison of what it was. The Emperor nevertheless
maintains the same State as he did formerly, and claims a right to all those
Kingdoms that he has lost. His present Dominions are not above 800 English
miles in length, and 600 in breadth; they contain these Kingdoms, Amara,
Tigremahon, Angot, Xoa, G^^ama, Bagamidri, Damut, Fategar, Barnagaez, Baru,
Tigrai, Vangue,; so that they are limited on the North by Nubia, and the
Mountains and Sands that separate them from Egypt; on the East, by the Kingdoms
of Zangebara, Aiana and Adel, which lie upon the red Sea; on the South, the
Provinces of Cafutes and Fungi do shut it, and on the West this Empire confines
upon Congo, Medra and the Blacks. This Rich and Inland Country I have
discovered by my Travels, and now that I am so happily returned to my own
Native soil, after so long and troublesome a Journey, I owe to my Country a
Relation of those things that I have learned, which I may say, never any knew
so much of this place before, as the Reader may find in this Book. In the year
1655. some Merchants of Florence were preparing to sail for Alexandria, I
resolved to adventure my self in their Company, out of a great desire to visit
the Holy Land, and see foreign places. I had then received some discontent at
home, which made me seek my satisfaction abroad; having therefore furnished my
self with large sums of money, and a Man Servant, I embarked with them in a
Dutch bottom, and in a fortnights time we landed in that ancient City which
Alexander had built. The plague was then very hot in that place, which obliged
us to a short stay there. Some French Merchants were then going for Grand
Cairo; my company persuaded me to take my journey with them, and visit the
curiosities of that large City; I was not willing to take that Road so soon,
for I desired first to pay my devotions at the Sepulcher of our Lord, but the
persuasions of my friends forced me to leave that journey until my return,
because we could not find a fit opportunity to travel into the Holy Land I went
therefore with the French Merchants to Catro, and spent some days there in
viewing all the Rari^^es of that Great City; we had a sight there and in our
way of many Antiquities which are so well known to all the world, that I shall
not so much as mention them. I had not been there a month, but a Caravan was
preparing for the Red Sea. The French Consul, at whose house I lay, encouraged
me to take that occasion of discovering those Parts where Christians of of
Quality seldom adventure themselves; assuring me, that it would be worth my
while to see those remote places, and discover something to the Christian
world, which was not known before. It happened that as I was meditating upon
this journey, an Abuna or a High Priest of the Abyssins came to the Patriarchs
house from Jerusalem, in his journey toward Ethiopia, intending to take the
same way as the Caravan, because it was the safest. This accident I looked upon
as an invitation of providence amongst those African Christians that are not
well known to our Northern Climates. Having therefore furnished my self with
Moneys and Bills of Exchange for so long a journey, I sought the acquaintance
of the Abuna before my departure. It was no difficulty to obtain, for he was
learned in the Italian Tongue, and well versed in the manner and Customs of the
Franks; he was a Man of a swarthy countenance, both pleasant and grave, of a
high stature, about 60 years of age, very lusty; he had not many to attend him,
for he was not willing to discover himself amongst the Turks, who might have
made advantage of him, by obliging him to larger disbursements than his Estate
could allow: I was resolved to accompany him into his own Country, and visit
the Court of the great Neguz so famous all over the world; we therefore engaged
our selves in the Caravan. I went for an Italian pilgrim, whose Person is much
respected amongst the Heathens themselves, and least subject to the affronts
and insults of strangers. The Abuna was also in the disguise of a Merchant, he
had with him some Goods of a small value; we began our journey in the month of
March, and through several misfortunes we arrived at the Port Town of the Red
Sea called Suez, a famous place for Trade, it is the passage into Arabia
Indostan and all other Countries of Asia. Here are therefore a great company of
Merchants of all Nations that enrich this place, which otherwise would be very
unconsiderable. It is a City fortified with a Castle and a Fort upon the mold
as big as Pisa. The buildings are large, fitter for Merchants than Noblemen;
some are beautified with black and white Marble curiously wrought. Here is a
Synagogue of the Jews much frequented on the Sabbath day, here is also an Idol
Temple for the Gentiles, but the poor Christians have no other place appointed
for their Devotions, but their Chambers and Houses. The Abuna found here some
Abyssin Merchants, at whose dwellings he was courteously received, and
honouraby entertained; they invited me to share with him in their Hospitality;
I accepted their kind offer, because I had no mind to separate my self from
him, seeing my design was to accompany him as far as his Emperors Court. Here
we remained several months, because we heard of an Army of Turks and Moors that
were making an Inroad into the Territories of the Abyssins, we were advised to
expect with patience their return, for otherwise we might have met them in the
way and been brought back into Captivity, our liberty was too precious a thing
to be unconsiderately ventured we; therefore remained a long while in this City
expecting a fair opportunity to be gone. At last one presented it self not
unworthy of our acceptance, the Turks Basha of Egypt sent an Ambassador to the
Precious John, who coming to Suez, we thought we could not meet with a greater
happiness if we could be admitted into his retinue. We had some difficulty to
obtain this favor, but upon the offer of 200 Crowns, it was readily granted.
He took his leave of this City with a great Train, and we accompanied him upon
Mules, we passed through many different Soils, some fruitful, especially of
Date-trees, others very barren. The most part of our way was over craggy
Mountains, where nothing did present it self to our view but wild Beasts far
different from those that I have seen in Europe. We passed through some
inhabited Land, where very strong Castles were erected to defend the Country
from the enemies, the Moers did possess them, for this Nation is dispersed all
over this Country, we found also some straggling Tents of Arabians that wandered
up and down, we met with nothing remarkable, but Poverty and Misery, that seem
to have taken up their Residence amongst the people that inhabit in this part
of the world far in the Country. Their diet is such things as this barren
habitation will afford them; their bread is a root, their flesh is of such wild
Creatures as they can happily kill, their Clothing proclaims their needy
condition, it is made of a large leaf of a Tree that grows in the Forests and
Woods, neither is it sufficient to cover the back, so it hides the pudenda
hominis, they are abundantly content; for that purpose a string is tied above
their middle unto which these leaves are fastened, so that like so many
Pendants they fall down and cover what nature teaches to hide. They have one
convenience and advantage which they enjoy above our common people, as our
Princes and Noblemen of Europe they wear not their Apparel long, they change
often, almost every day. These rascally sort of people that nature has brought
forth amongst these mountains, did appear unto us almost like Savages, they did
not willingly come in our company, nor are they desirous to change their
habitation, their bodies were big, and their Members thick and swarthy, they
spoke a mixed Arabian, not well to be understood but by those that know all the
dialects of that language; those that live in the fortified places are far more
sociable, they had chosen the most convenient seats for their residence, some
of the ground was fit to Sow and Plow, and to feed Cattle. We were admitted
into one of these Castles that was erected in the passage of a mountain very
conveniently to hinder and stop the course of any enemy; the Commander in chief
was a Moor, he received us with some expressions of affection, but before we
deparred we were forced to pay dear for our entertainment, ten Dollers a piece,
for that is a Coin that is current over all the world. The Ambassador and
those that did wait upon him were free, but for all strangers that did follow
him in his journey, they were obliged to lay down the money or return back
again. This little Tyrant had gathered together some numbers of men, who lived
thus in this difficult place upon all passengers, forcing them to contribute to
the maintenance of their lazy bodies. There are many such people that exact
upon strangers, the Governors for the Turk do wink at them, because at a
certain time of the year they send a sweet perfume unto them, a Purse full of
Gold and Silver, and in consideration of this yearly tribute, they suffer them
to exact, cheat and rob the poor Travelers and Merchants. We advanced far into
the Country many days journey before we came to the Turks Army, they were upon
their return from pillaging the Christians, they were laden with spoils and
slaves. They made as much haste as they could in their march, for the Precious
John had gathered his Army together, and was in the pursuit of them from Suez;
we came first into the Country called by the Inhabitants Ganfila, next to
Dafroha, and so through Barnagasso, Lacca and part of Dangali; we arrived at
last upon the borders. The body of the Turks Army when we met it was near a
large lake full of excellent fish. The people of this Country are ignorant of
all kind of Arts, they have not the address of fishing; with Bows and Arrows,
they kill Birds and Beasts upon which they feed and live; they own the Turks
for their Masters against their will. This lake is in the Kingdom of Bamagasso,
which was lately conquered and taken from the Great Neguz, the people retain
some Relics of Christianity, but with that ignorance, that one can scarce
distinguish them from the Heathens, unless it be by the name, up and down the
Country some sorry houses are erected, fitter for wild beasts than men. The
walls are of mud and stones, the roofs of a sort of slender Cane and Reeds
which grow near the water side, and in low places, the middle of it is
supported by a Pillar of wood that stands in the huts, and keeps the whole
Fabric from falling to the ground, for this miserable people are not
acquainted with the Art of Architecture. The Towns are composed of this sort of
dwellings, there are not many of them, but those that are, have chosen the best
Land for their scituations near some fresh waters or lakes; for unless it be in
these places the ground is parched up all the year long, but during the time of
the Rains. In Egypt they never fall, but in Aethiopia they are very
extraordinary about the month of January and February. Such violent showers do
pour down, that no creature is able to abide without a shelter, several parties
of the Turks Army were straggling up and down, but the main body was at the lake
Gueresh. When we came up to them they were composed of Horse and Foot about six
thousand, not able to abide a a combat with the Abyssins; therefore they
thought upon nothing else than a safe retreat. They had plundered the Country
people that were yet subject to Prester John, and had carried men, women and
children into captivity. A sad sight it was unto us that were Christians, to
behold our brethren and our Christian name so miserably abused by the enemy of
Christ, our Abuna could not refrain from tears, he labored to relieve some of
them, and to comfort them in their affliction, but for fear of discovering
himself, he was not willing to express too much grief or kindness to them. The
Ambassadors credit saved us from all affronts, we lodged two nights with them;
for during that time they expected the coming up of some Troops that were sent
to pillage. It is the custom of the people that border upon the Abyssins, once
a year to visit their Territories, for they meet with a considerable deal of
plunder with little or no hazard. The Abyssins are more superstitious than
warlike, they have been renowned for Valor, but at present they are Cowards,
they suffer every petty Nation that is daring to destroy their borders, which
is the fault chiefly of their Governors; for having so much Riches as they
have, so many Mines of Gold, and other considerable Commodities, they might
allow a part to some warlike people to fight under their banners, and assist
them against their troublesome Neighbors. At present they have little
communication with people of their Religion, which if they had, it would be a
mighty support to them and their interest; When the Portugueses were sent with
an unconsiderable party into those Dominions, the Abyssin Emperor felt the
benefit of foreign succors, for the enemy was beaten in two battles, and
forced to yield to the Christian Valor. Amongst the Prisoners several
Noblemens children were seen, who by their Mien and Garb were distinguishable
from the ordinary sort. These poor creatures were led to be sold in Turkey and
other places as beasts, and the worst is, they were to be forced to renounce
their Religion. What a grief was it to their Christian Parents, to suffer such
a loss, to have their Sons and Daughters amongst the Infidels? This
inconveniency might be prevented, did these Inland Christians keep a strong
Guard upon their confines, or with a stout resolution labor to drive these
Robbers far from their habitations, or labor to revenge themselves, by
carrying the War into their own Land, or by seizing on the Sea coast, and the
passages of the mountains that limit their Country, where they might place such
strong Castles and numerous Guards as might keep the Turks and Moors from all
such attempts: But when we have fully taken a view of Abassia or Aethiopia
Superior, and of the Emperor and Government, we may be better able to see the
cause of these disorders that happen almost every year in some corner of the
Land. Having therefore spent some days in the view of our Christian brethren
that were led into Captivity, we took our leave of them and of the Turks Army,
and marched on our journey toward a large Town of the Kingdom of Tigremahon
called Bashaw* it lies beyond a large River that runs through Africa, it
receives the tribute from other small Rivers, and then it runs through many
Countries until it discharges it self into Nilus, the people of the Country
call it in their language Togassi and others Guekrahock. Were it not for this
River, it were not possible to subsist in this Inland Country, but it divides
it self into so many branches, and waters so large a Territory, that no part of
the Emperors Country is without some benefit that it brings unto it. The
Country round about did hear the Marches of the enemies rage and fury, the
Towns were burnt to the ground, the people either fled or carried into
captivity, the land and trees were not spared in some places, for they had cut
down a great quantity to facilitate their passages over some Rivers. Here we
came into a Country far more fruitful than any other I had seen in Africa, it
was capable of more improvement; did the Inhabitants skill and industry answer
the goodness of the soil, I do not find but this part might bear as excellent
Fruits as any other place of the world. The heat of the climate quickens nature
in the production of all Vegetatives, so that it is blessed with two Springs
every year, or at least with two Crops of every thing that is sown or planted,
unless it be in those places that want the benefit of water; we met here with
some flying parts of the Turks Army riding apace after the main body, for they
were pursued by several troops of the Abyssins. Those thieves had adventured
almost near the Imperial Tents without resistance, not without considerable
plunder able to reward them for their labors; we proceeded on our way about
two leagues before we came to meet with the inhabitants of the Country, the
first were a party of horsemen very well mounted pursuing their enemies, they
complained unto the Ambassador of the Turks violences, we were afraid that
they would have violated the Law of Nations upon him, they received us with
that rage; the presence of the Abuna hindered them from offering injury to his
Person; Him they received with all expressions of honor and kindness, and
suffered some of them to return back to guard him, the rest continued on their
way. They overtook the Turks at the ford of a little River very busy to get
over their Captives and Goods, we heard that they fell upon them with a
wonderful fury and recovered much of the spoils, killing great numbers of them.
They returned afterward in triumph with much honor, having so successefully
encountered with their enemies. In the mean whiles we proceeded in our journey
toward the Emperor of Abassia, who hearing of the Abuna's arrival, sent some
of his Court to Complement him and bid him welcome; where ever he passed the
Clergy and people came to receive him with more signs of kindness than pomp,
the processions of the people came to meet us at the entrance of the towns, and
when we came within sight of the Emperors tents, he sent all the Court to
receive the Abuna. I did carefully observe all the ceremonies of Reception and
Instalment. The Abuna as soon as he came within the tents, went to kiss the
Emperors Girdle. He was standing in a stately tent erected in the middle of
the rest, about it was a large place much like to a Market, where the Courtiers
are accustomed to walk, at the right hand is another very beautiful, where the
Emperors Wives and Concubines dwell; at the top of the Princes tent is a
Golden Cross with an Angel holding it in his left hand, with a drawn Cymeter in
the right. The Abuna went to change his habit and put on another, according to
the Abyssin custom. It is a very singular one, none but the High Priest has
the liberty to wear it, for it is the badge or character by which he is
distinguished from the other Papa's or Bishops of that Country, and from the
rest of the Clergy, he was conducted next, to pay his respects to the Emperor,
he was in the Kingdom of Beleguaze near a town very well peopled and situated
in a pleasant plain called Ikroah, about six leagues distant from the River
Tagassi, I had the satisfaction to accompany the Abuna, for he was a man of a
very mild and kind spirit, very pleasant in company, yet grave and serious, he
was led by the Master of the Ceremonies into the Inner room where the Emperor
lay upon a curious Bed of White Cotton Bed with a large fringe of Gold, behind
him stood his naked Sword, and round about were the Lords of his Privy Council;
above was a Canopy of cloth of Gold, with green silk interwoven, the room it
self was hung with the same stuff; as soon as the Abuna entered the room he
kneeled three times on the ground, and then ascended the steps to the Bed to
perform his respects; In the mean whiles the Emperor rose from his couch and
half up embraced the Abuna, wishing him much felicity in his Empire, they
discoursed some time together, and then he was dismissed with all honor and
civility; the Emperor was pleased to take notice of his retinue, and
particularly of my self. I was also admitted to the honor of kissing his
Girdle, a ceremony only due to the Prince. I followed the Abuna, who received
me into his own lodgings, and would not suffer me whiles I was in that Country
to be obliged to any other place for my retreat. Now I have brought my Reader
into the Imperial tents of Abassia, it is convenient that we should take a view
as from a high place of all the inferior orders of men, and of all particulars
which his curiosity may be inquisitive. And first

Of the Emperor.
THe Emperor of the Abyssins is a Prince highly honored of his subjects,
because they fancy him to be lineally descended from that noble and Religious
King that first planted the Christian Religion amongst them; and as they are
extremely devoted to it; so much, that they appear almost extravagant in many
of their practices, they have no small respect to his Posterity, who first
brought them the advantage of the Christian Faith. None has access to him of
his subjects unless it be upon solemn occasions, but the chief Officers of his
Crown, when he rides or is carried abroad in a Royal Throne, all his people
fall upon their knees and adore him; this throne is a kind of Sedan, but far
more stately, with steps ascending to it made of wood gilt over, covered with
Gold, it is carried upon men's shoulders, or between four Horses, the Emperor
appears in it with much state, and with more glory than in any other thing that
I have seen; He never stirs out of his tents, but 600 men do follow him at his
heels, they are his daily guard, they wear a Livery and a Habit distinct from
all other people, on their head a Scarlet bonnet with three white plumes
fastened behind with a blew cross on their shoulders, they have a very
convenient Coat that comes down to their middle, with a Girdle or Sash, over it
a Roman Mantle hangs, more proper for State than action; the color is green,
it is not very long, nor troublesome when they are obliged to make use of their
hands; sometimes they ride, sometimes they go afoot, as the Emperors occasion
requires; for that purpose he has always ready in his Stables great numbers of
Horses. The Emperors Person is whiter than any of his Kingdom, for the
Abyssins are tawny, a color drawing near to black. I never saw any others of
his Relations or kindred, but I hear they are all of the same color. The
people interpret this to his advantage, that God by this distinction, has
singled out that Family that is to Reign amongst them, out of which they always
choose their Emperor; their custom is, that he should never marry until he be
crowned; then, with the consent of his Nobles he chooses two Wives out of his
Kingdom, he entertains besides as many Concubines as he pleases. They are
always with him in his tents with all their Attendants. The first Male-child
usually succeeds the Father in his Kingdom. As Soon as the children are named,
they are carried to a very delicious place in the middle of a large mountain
called Amarak, where a stately Castle is built encompassed with the River
Borohr, and fortified with a strong wall. There they are kept with the other
precious things belonging to the Emperor, they never go out unless it be in
the Gardens and places of Recreation, with which this territory is abundantly
furnished; and then they never loose the sight of their governors and guard;
when the Father is dead the chief Officers of the Empire come to this place,
and unless the eldest be incapable of the honor, they take him to succeed in
his Fathers room. If there be no Sons, the eldest Daughter takes the Scepter.
During their Fathers life, they are kept here as in a Seraglio, to learn all
exercises proper to their Sex and age. They are taught the Hebrew and Arabic
tongues, humane Philosophy and the Principles of Christian Religion. Here is
for that purpose a large Library of above ten thousand Volums all in
Manuscripts, some told me that they had there the most ancient Books of the
world written by the Egyptian Sages in the time of Moses, by Phaenicians
afterward, and by the Learned of all Ages. I saw some in the Library (into
which I had the leave to enter) that were made of the Egyptian leaf called
Papyrus, and others made of old Parchment that did bear the marks of antiquity.
I asked the Subdi an Officer that led me in to see the curiosities, how they
did to preserve the Books so many years from consuming, he told me that they do
usually transcribe them when the leaves are worn or likely to decay, and that
for that intent there are twenty three Persons appointed with a good
maintenance for them by the former Emperors; their employment is only to
transcribe and copy out the books that age threatens to spoil; they have not
the excellent use of Printing, for want of communication with their European
brethren. Hither are also sent the chief Noblemens sons of the Empire to keep
company with the Royal blood, and to receive with them the instructions which
this place only affords, for here is maintained a Learned Bishop with: several
inferior Priests that have the charge of instructing and tutering the Children
that are committed to their custody. The Bishop is Governor of the Castle, and
Overseer of the Diocese o^ Kingdom of Amara; here is his Palace and place of
abode, he seldom stirs to Court. The Emperor visits this place oncea year with
his Wives. When he is chosen, then all his brethren accompany him to his
Coronation; a great solemnity in this place as well as amongst our Christian
Princes; afterward the Males are sent to govern Provinces, the Maids are
disposed of in Marriage to Noblemen, who commonly expect this time as an
opportunity to advance themselves by such an alliance. The Emperor is first
crowned with thorns before he puts on the Imperial Diadem, in imitation of our
Savior, or to express the troublesome employment that he is to undertake. The
Abuna puts both upon his head, in the place appointed for the devotions of the
people, in the presence of all the Nobility of the Country. At that time the
Prisons are opened, a thousand slaves are released at the Emperors charge, and
the poor are relieved, actions that become a Christian Emperor, besides a
great Feast is kept several days with all the splendour that becomes so great a
Prince, and s^ large a Fortune and great Revenue. The present Emperou^ name is
Abraham, he is a young man about thirty years of age, his Mien is comely and
pleasant, his body is straight and tall, the features of his face are very wel^
proportioned; so that he passet^ for a great Beauty amongst them his eyes are
quick and large, he i^ much delighted with the sport o^ hunting the wild
Beasts, for tha^ intent he keeps excellent Horse and great Mastives that are
fetch^ out of Indostan and Arabia; the chief Officers that are near his Person,
are his Bishur, the Lieutenant General of his Armies; the Zoroah, the Treasurer
and superintendant of his revenues; the Bikir, the grand Marshal of the Kingdom
who is also the supreme Judge of Affairs of consequence; the Huloh, the
Secretary of State; Diriharvah Neguz, the Captain of the Guard, or preserver of
the great Emperors Person; Satyrhab is the Chamberlain of his Household; the
Grashun is the keeper of his Horses; several other Officers are in his Court,
whose names I omit; when they come to their Emperor they bow their knee three
times to the ground. The Ambassadors of the Infidels do never receive the
honor of speaking to him, but they are dealt with by the mediation of some
appointed for that purpose. The Abuna is much respected at Court; what he
speaks, is received by all as a Law. The former Emperor was a man of War, but
this is a Peacemaker to his own prejudice, and that of his Subjects. He has
this good quality, that he is severe against all vices, against Swearing and
Drunkenness, etc. He is fitter to sit upon a peaceable Throne than to govern
one that has so many watchful enemies about it as his has. He is very
inquisitive into all Affairs, he suffers none to be dispatched without his
knowledge. He is not easily overruled by Council, but sticks fast to his own
opinion and resolution, sometimes to his prejudice; he is very Religious, and a
great observer of the Ceremonies of his Church, hating all things that appear
with the face of Innovation; by this means it happens that all about him look
so serious in their Religious duties, and show less profaness in their
Practices, their Princes example encourages them. If any be named debauched, he
is certain to be disgraced as soon as the fame has reached his Masters ear. A
great favorite of the Emperor, one that attended on him continually, was
suspected to have some familiarity with another Wife, the suspicion was blown
by some envious persons into the Emperors ear, who presently sent for him, and
dismissed him his service. This good severity causes his Laws to be well
obeyed. Did this Emperor know as well how to deal with his enemies, as he does
know how to govern his Subjects, he would be as much feared abroad as he is
reverenced at home, and all his Neighbors would stand in aw of him. I doubt
not but the Empire of Ethiopia would be again restored to its former Greatness,
could he but as well manage a Sword as a Scepter. But that weakness is to be
attributed to the manner and place of his Education, he has been shut within
the narrow limits of a little Territory unto which he did confine his ambition
when he was produced in the world; his larger fortune did not increase his
pretentions, but being content to what he then enjoyed, the increase was looked
upon as a super fluity, besides this manner of Education weakens the spirits
that should have a compass and a larger scope to act than a narrow mountain or
a small Territory. He was there so accustomed to a Pedantick life, that he knew
not how to handle the helm of State, and act supreme in the business of the
Empire. His Governors I conceive did so domineer over him, as it is their
custom, that he was ignorant in any other thing but how to obey. As therefore
our Countryman Machiavel wisely advises, let the Prince that is to succeed his
Father be nursed up in the Camp, and in the midst of business amongst men of
courage and resolution, that he may take impressions suitable to the employment
he is to have in the world; for were a Prince to judge of a proposition of
Divinity, or to compose a piece of Latin or Greek, I would then shut in the
wandering thoughts of his youth, and not suffer them to see the world abroad:
but seeing he is to command men, rather than Scholars; and to compose those
Affairs upon which depend his Subjects quiet and happiness, I think it is
wisdom to train him up accordingly, and let him see the face of Soldiers as
well as of Pedants, a Gun and a Sword as well as Books, that he may not only be
a Master, but a King. My business is not to enlarge upon the manner of
Education proper to a Prince, only I take notice of the defaults I have marked
in Ethiopia in the bringing up their young Nobility, and the Person that is to
wear the Crown, that if these Memoirs have the happiness to fall into the hands
of any of our Princes of Italy, they may not make their Children so bookish
that they may not be able to handle a Sword. This present Emperor of Ethiopia
is the most Learned of all his Dominions, he speaks Arabic, Persian, Hebrew,
and many other Languages; he is read in Philosophy, in Astrology: He is fitter
for contemplation than for action.

Of the Imperial Court.
UNder so Religious and Learned a Prince we may look for Courtiers of the same
temper, for although some may follow their inclinations, it is common to see
them frame themselves according to their Princes will and disposition. Never
any Court was better modelled. Solomon from whom this Emperor gives out to
have derived his Pedigree, did never order his Household in a more excellent
manner. Every Officer is to be dil igentin his place, if any be careless or
corrupt, the She^^va^ous, the Comptrolers and Officers appointed to take notice
(...) all misdemeanors; lesser offenses are punished with the discredit of
losing the place, greater with imprisonment and loss of Estate and life. The
Neguz himself is so severe, that lately at the request of his Mother he would
not pardon a murderer, one of his Attendants, when he had killed a child of an
Inferior birth and Parentage, but caused him to be forthwith banished out of
his Territories.

Besides the Bishops that wait upon the Court, here are ten Chaplains,
Ministers of the Inferior Orders of the Clergy, who do on the Sabbath day
expound before the Emperor in their turns, some Text of Scripture according to
the ancient manner of the Jews who had their Synagogues, where the Law was read
and explained to the people every week. The Saturday is the day appointed in
this place for public Devotion. The manner observed at that time, I shall set
down in its place; all Orders of men do resort to their Churches to assist in
the service of God.

In the Court are entertained all the Princes sons that have any dependency
upon this Empire; when they come of age whiles they are young, they are kept in
the Castle of Amara, and there brought up with the young Emperor; a policy not
unuseful to this State, for by this means they are taught be time to know and
respect their future Prince, and when they are of age to manage and govern the
Affairs of their several jurisdictions; they are more faithful to his interest,
for whom they have had a kindess from their Infancy, for nothing nourishes love
so much as an early acquaintance; and nothing lays a better foundation to a
sincere friendship and loyalty, as a familiarity from their tender years. They
are there taught to honor and respect the Emperors Children, and he is also
obliged to a loving correspondency with them. But as soon as they come of age,
the Emperor calls them to Court, and there they are further instructed and
tutored before he commits unto them their Fathers Estates and Kingdoms. This
obliges also the Parents to stick close to the Emperor, for their sons are as
pledges in His Court of their fidelity and obedience.

The Emperor is not to dwell in any house, nor to make any long residence in
any Town, for they look upon it as beneath his Grandeur to be confined within
the Walls of any habitation; and they judge it not consistant with the benefit
of the public, that one place should constantly enjoy him; therefore it is
provided by the Statute Law of that Nation, that the Prince shall never stay
above four days in any Town, for that reason, when he has been beaten by his
Neighbors, he shut not up himself in Cities or Fortresses, but saved himself
into the remotest and Desert places, where none did offer to seek him out, or
to adventure themselves but the wild beasts. The people of the Country that
hold from him all their Lands and Tenements, do never suffer him to be long in
that distress, but they flock about him out of a fear to lose the right or
privileges of his protection; so that if he loses one battle and his people be
destroyed whiles there are any remaining in the Land, he is able to make a head
against the enemy, for all are obliged in such cases to appear in Arms from
sixteen years old to^ sixty, unless sickness does furnis^ them with any
reasonable excuse.

There is one practice remarkable in this Court, every morning^ all the
Officers of the Neguz d^ pay their respects unto him about eight a clock, not
to his Person^ but to something that represent^ it. In the Antichamber of the
Emperor is a couch of Stat^ standing under a glorious Canopy^ upon three steps
above the couch^ is a Golden Scepter richly set with precious Stones and
Pearls, it commonly leans against the hanging of the room. Before this empty
seat are always waiters to observe all that omit to pay their daily homage. It
is the duty of every one to present himself, and kneel three times to the
ground before it every morning whether the Emperor be there or not. The
Abyssins never stir their hats, nor discover their heads, but in the Churches
at their devotions, then they observe the practice of all other Christians.
Lesser civilities are paid only with a bow of the body, and an inclination of
the head, holding the right hand close to the breast; greater respects are
expressed with the bow of the knee, the kissing of the girdle or the thigh, and
of the ground upon which the person that we intend to honor walks.

Women are rarely seen amongst the men at Court, they have a private place unto
which none is admitted but the Abuna, and some of the most Religious Persons.
They have Eunuchs that wait upon them, usually Blacks, they appear at the
Churches, but in a place separated from the rest. Sometimes when the Emperor
will show his Grandeur and happiness to his Courtiers, he sends for his Chief
Queen, who must appear in all the State and Glory that her Industry or Beauty
can produce, she is received by the Emperor with some expressions of kindness,
and then she is admitted to sit down on his right hand, for the left is the
place of honor in Abassia.

Once every year he has a great Feast kept at Court, with wonderful
expressions of joy, it is the day of the Emperors Birth. It is the custom that
the Neguz should give entertainment to all that will be pleased to accept of
his kindness, he is the next day after requited with Presents of the most
considerable Persons of his Court.

This Imperial Court is never fixed in any one place, but Marches with the
Emperor, about 6000 Tents do always pitch about him, in such an excellent
order, that in a moment, from the farthermost tent one may come to that of the
great Neguz, where a strong guard watches about his Person day and night. The
Soldiers of the Kings guard are very neatly attired, and well furnished with
Bows and Guns; they are mixed at present, since the use of Powder was
introduced amongst them by the Portugueses.

Of the Government.
THe Emperor has several great Kingdoms that acknowledge his jurisdiction,
and seven or eight crowned heads that are under him; His name is Giam Belul,
that is, Precious Giam Or John, a name of the same signification as Illustrious
Serenus, Excellent, etc. Titles that we give to our Princes. When he writes,
this is his style,

In the name of God, the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, of
things visible and invisible; in the name of God the Son Jesus Christ, who is
the same with the Father from the beginning of the world, Light of Light, true
God of true God, and in the name of God the Holy Spirit, who is also a living
God proceeding from the Father. This Letter you shall receive from a mighty
King, whose name the Lions do respect, by the grace of God I am called Athani
Tinghib; that is, the Incense of the Virgin, the son of K. David, the son of
Solomon, the Son of the King by the hand of Mary, the Son of Naw according to
the flesh, and the son of S. Peter, and S. Paul, according to grace, the
beloved of God, the Pillar of the Faith, who has taken upon him the name of
Abraham Emperor of the Great and upper Ethiopia, and of large Kingdoms and
dominions, King of Xoa, of the Cafates, of Fatigar, of Angote, of Baru, of
Baliganze, of Adea, of Vangue, of Goiame, where is Nilus source of Damaraa, of
Vaguemedri, of Ambea, of Vagne, of Tigremahon, of Sabaym, the Country of the
Queen of Saba, of Bamagaes, and Supreme Lord as far as Nubia that confines upon
Egypt, etc. Many Titles and Kingdoms are heapt together to express his
Grandeur; at present he enjoys but the Titles alone of many of those Kingdoms,
whiles others do eat up the reversion, eleven or twelve of them do remain
faithful to him, sometimes the Inhabitants are disturbed by their warlike
Neighbors, but they could never be subdued by any other Prince, for his sake
they endure the loss of their Goods, Estates, Children, and often times they are
driven into extreme Poverty, because they cannot leave their lawful Prince; but
they must also renounce Religion with him before they can be accepted of by
their enemies.

This consideration ties them fast to the Neguz interest, and obliges them to
be most faithful unto him notwithstanding all their losses.

The Government of this Great Prince is partly Arbitrary, and partly Subject to
the written Laws that are contained in two Volums, written as they say by the
Apostles themselves. The first they call Manida, the other they name Abethilis,
they comprehend the Rules of Government, relating to right or wrong; they
further observe much of the politic Law of Moses, which he commanded the Jews.
In those other occasions of which these Books are silent, the Emperors or the
Judges pleasure and reason passes for a Law. The first Books called Manida and
Abethil, are full of most excellent Rules and Statutes. Some wise man of that
Empire composed them for to direct the Prince in the execution of his Office:
and that they might receive more credit, he caused it to be bruited abroad,
that these books had been found in the ruins of the Church where St. Lycanon,
who was sent into Ethiopia by St. Philip the Apostle, did teach and that they
had been composed by the Disciples of our Savior assembled together in a
general Council. As Soon as this religious lie had been divulged, every one was
desirous to see and hear the Contents of this Book, when they saw therefore
that the matter was answerable to the fame of it, they began really to credit
it, so that they do as religiously obey the commands of these Books as the
Gospels, and the word of God. When the Emperor dines or sups, some small
portion of it is read before him after the Music, which in this country is
very pleasant and grateful to the ear, more than in any other place out of
Italy, although the instruments upon which they play be not like ours.

The Emperor has one Judge called Bikir over all his dominions, to judge of
matters of right or wrong, under him are the Sudh^drie's, provincial Judges
that are to give up an account of their actions to him, they are often removed
at the least complaint, and others placed in their rooms. It is a great
disgrace to receive a bribe, they all do follow the dictates of reason in
pronouncing their sentences, in proportioning the penalties according to the
nature and hainousness of the offenses. These Judges have only a power over the
people, the Clergy and Monks have other Officers and Superintendants that do
judge of their matters.

Besides these inferior Judges, every other year the grand Marshal or Supreme
Bikir sends men into several Provinces to hearken after the behavior, and
examine the deportment of the Judges. If any be found guilty of any crime, he
is severely punished and shamefully thrust out of his Office with a mark of
Infamy, that renders him incapable of having any public employment in this
Country. Such seldom remain there long, for the shame and obloquy of the people
forces them to be gone and seek other habitations in a remote Country. The
Bikir has also his Lieutenants, like unto our Colonels, disposed of in all the
dominions of grand Neguz, each Lieutenant gives him account of all the men he
is able to provide for the service of the Prince in case of necessity, and he
governs the people, keeps all things in order, assists the Bikir and all his
inferior Officers in the execution of their Offices, when they are required;
for that purpose, they have so many men ready upon all occasions to obey their
orders; these receive a continual salary from the Emperor, although they are
otherwise employed in several Trades. At the least summons they assemble at the
Rendezvous, and follow their Leaders, who by this means keep all the Country in
awe, and appease the tumults and disorders that may happen amongst a mixed
multitude.

In the time of the Wars, these Lieutenants of distinct places gather their men
together at the place appointed, and then march with them according to order,
usually to the place where the great Neguz is himself, to guard and defend his
Person. They carry with them their Provisions and Victuals proportionable to
the time appointed for them to stay in Arms. These officers have places
allotted to them for their maintenance by the Emperor, who is Lord and sole
owner of all the Land within his great Empire. All the people are but his
slaves, their substance and goods are his when he will require them; unto
persons more eminent than the rest he appoints certain Lands and places for to
recompense them for the pains they take in his service. All the people pay the
tenth part of all fruits to the King, that Revenue belongs to the Crown: they
always pay the tribute and taxes in the Commodities of the Country, in Salt,
Gold, Silver, Corn, Hides, Elephants Teeth, the horn of the Rhinocerot, slaves
and such like.

Now this manner of Government is only in the Territories, more immediately
subject to the Neguz, the others, where tributary Kings do Reign, are not thus
subject to his power, the Kings give no account of their actions to him, or to
his Officers, but play the sovereigns in all their jurisdictions, causing money
to be stamped in their names, tributes and customs to be levied according to
the public wants, disposing of all offices and places within their territories
at their will.

Of late they have brought in stamped Coin, which before was not known in this
Empire. The name and titles of the Neguez is Printed in one side, and a large
Cross on the other, with some Characters signifying that he is a defender of
the Cross. There are yet some little pieces of Gold, Brass and Iron, with
Pepper, and all other Merchandises, that serve instead of Coin in the places
far from the Imperial Court, and where Coin cannot so easily be obtained nor
made. Those that are found guilty of crimes, are not ordinarily punished with
death (they use to deprive them for their offenses of some of their Limbs) of
their eyes, hands, or feet, forcing them to a continual sufferance the rest of
their days. If any commit sacrilege, he is burnt without mercy in the fire;
and those that murder, by their Law are to lose their lives, unless the Prince
will mitigate the punishment by a perpetual prison or banishment.

In the Manda are several penal Statutes, amongst the rest, that if a Priest be
guilty of any crime, as of murder, of perjury, adultery, etc. he is to be
punished in the same manner as the rest of the people, that he is to be called
before the common Judge after that the Bishop has notice of the fact, and that
both together are to pronounce the sentence that he deserves without any mercy.

It is commanded in that book, that all, both Secular and Ecclesiastic persons
are to abstain from all carnal Copulation during the space of twenty four hours
next immediately before they enter into the Churches.

There is in it a very wholesome Law that concerns the good of the public: It
is that two times every year there shall be an Assembly called of the most
Reverend and Eminent Persons of the Nation to consult of the Affairs of the
Church, and establish Laws according to the occasions and times. That then the
Abuna shall sit as President with the Emperors chief Judge, and that of the
Clergy and Friars, there shall be called out of all parts to make Decrees for
the good of the Empire.

Adulterers are punished with death in this manner. The Man and the Woman are
stripped naked and tied up by the legs to some high tree, where they are to
remain to feed the Fowl of the air, until their bones and flesh fall to the
ground. It is no less than death to touch them, or to offer to show favor to
their dead Carcasses. By this exemplary punishment of these offenders, men grow
more wary how they venture to defile their Neighbors Bed, and Women are not so
free of their Tails as amongst our jealous Italians. Men in this Country
pretend not so much Courtship and Gallantry, and Women dare not countenance the
declarations or passion of a secret Lover. Custom here teaches women as much
privacy as in any other place, but not with that strictness that might render
them ridiculous, but they abuse it not as other people do, the better to hide
their foul actions, and the meetings of their Gallants. There is more innocence
in the behavior of the women; as much modesty, but less craft and subtilty; as
much freedom, but little debauchery.

Murder is no less hateful in this place, it has a punishment allotted to it
no less grievous: The murderer that knew how to destroy others, is forced to
destroy himself also; in this manner a Sword is put into his hands, and he is
laid upon a large piece of Iron flat, as long and as broad as a man's body, it
is supported with four feet under it, a gentle flame is entertained that heats
it, and puts him by degrees to cruel torments, the pain and rage forces him to
thrust the weapon into his own bowels, by that means to deliver himself from
the unmerciful fury of the fire, and abridge his tortures. This kind of death
is practiced in Tigremahon and Angote, in other places, the murder is executed
in another manner, they flea him alive, and cut his eye lids, and then they
expose him to the Sun in that raw condition in some eminent place, rubbing him
over with honey to invite the Bees and Wasps to feed upon him. This kind of
death is the most inhumane that I ever beheld. The pain is both grievous and
tedious, death creeps upon them by degrees, and suffers them not to die till
they have endured a world of misery.

The Noblemen and Grandees of the Court that offend the Neguz, or commit any
other crime worthy of death, are not executed in the common manner, nor in the
usual places appointed for that purpose. There is in the Kingdom of Damut a
high Mountain naturally well fortified with a steep ridge of hills on every
side, a narrow passage leads up to the top, where a Castle is erected kept by
the Soldiers of the Neguz guard. There all noble men are brought that venture
to break the Laws of the Land, or to displease their Sovereign Lord. The
Territory round about is very barren, and the place extreme cold most part of
the year; whether it be the nature of the Soil, or the elevation of the
Mountain into the second Region of the Air, none could tell me, but here these
Persons of Quality are famished to death, imprisoned, and put to suffer several
other sorts of puments according to the pleasure of the Neguz. This place is
very convenient for that purpose, for the Friends and Acquaintance of the
offenders cannot come to learn the miseries that they endure, nor the cruelties
that they suffer; which if they did know, might oblige them to a revenge, or
ill will against their Emperors.

Of several Customs of the Abyssins.
THe Emperor and people have so great a respect for the Churches, that they
never ride by them upon their Horses, as soon as they come within a hundred
paces, they alight and walk a foot bowing at the public places of their
Devotion, in honor of that great God that has named them his Houses of
Prayer, as they pass by.

When the Emperor makes any progress far from the usual place of Residence,
certain Religious men do carry before him upon their shoulders, a banner with
some pious representation in it, with an Altar or Table of Stone, upon which
they use to Celebeate their Communion, before them marches a fellow with a
Censer in one hand, and a little Bell in the other, at the sound of it the
horsemen come down, the people stand by, and all do prepare themselves to let
their Prince pass.

They never use to send their thoughts one to another in writing, but by
messengers, either out of ignorance or superstition, for they fancy the use of
writing so sacred, that they will not profane it in ordinary business, because
God has been pleased to commit his Holy Word in writing; yet of late, seeing
the inconveniences their scrupulous fancies have reduced them to, they have
made use of writing in several occasions, as in Registring the Affairs of the
Kingdoms, in setting down the expenses, disbursements and Receipts of the
Emperors Revenues, etc. But the characters are distinct from those of the
Bible, or of their Sacred Books. And when the Emperor sends an Ambassador, he
then dispatches with him some Credential Letters.

They are not to make Wine but by stealth, none but the Abuna and the King may
cause the Grapes to be strained; for they are afraid that if Wine did grow
common, it would introduce much debauchery and many disorders, which could not
find a remedy. They do not forbid it out of superstition as the Turks, but for
some politic considerations that Wine may not grow so common amongst them,
that they might neglect the other drinks which encourage Husbandry, for they
use a sort of drink made of a leaf which they sow, it is of a pleasant taste,
much like unto old Mede, a drink made of Honey. They drink also water steeped
with Barley, and other Grains. The Emperor and the Abuna have liberty to drink
and make Wine by their Laws. All the Wine of this Country is very black, but a
great Cordial, it burns not so much the stomach as others do in hot places, but
cherishes and refreshes the body.

The towns in this Country are not numerous, in Houses they seldom contain
above 2000. I never ^aw a walled City, some Castles of late have been built for
pleasure rather than for defense.

Their houses are but mean and low, covered with a thick thatch, their beds are
Hides tied up at the four corners. They eat upon couches, with a little round
and low table placed before them that supports a large dish; they have some
Vessels made of earth of a shining black very beautiful, these are their cups
to drink; of late they have the use of Gold and Silver in their houses.

They have several sorts of weapons, short Lances, Swords, Bows and Arrows
without Feathers, Helmets and Head-pieces; they have got some field Guns
purchased from Merchants at an extraordinary rate, to encourage them to import
more.

The Abyssins are natural liars and deceivers, they seldom speak truth when
they swear, unless they be brought to take a solemn Oath, or be forced to swear
by the Head of their Neguz, or be scared with the thoughts of Excommunication,
for they apprehend that above all corporal punishments.

This is their manner of administering an Oath, the party that is to swear
follows two Priests to the Church-door, they carry before him Fire and Incense,
as soon as the party comes, the Priests cause him to lay his hand on the door,
saying unto him these words: If thou swear an untruth, as the Dragon devoureth
the beasts of the Forest, so let the infernal Devils devour thee, as the
Grapes are bruised in the Wine Press, so let them bruise thy body, and as the
fire consumes the wood, so let thy soul for ever burn in hell. The party that
swears answers to every one of these imprecations Amen. But if thou speak the
truth, let thy life be prolonged with honor, and thy soul at last be received
into heaven; and again he answers Amen, which being ended, he tells what he
knows of the business required from him.

They have not the liberty to kill an Ox without the Governors leave, although
it belong to them, for they are careful to preserve Cattle in that place from
the excess of Luxury; here are no shambles therefore in the towns, as in
Europe; their ordinary victuals are Mutton, Herbs, Fruit, Fowl, wild Beasts,
and such like. The wild Goats do increase here in such a manner, especially
near the Mountains, that they eat up all the Corn and Grass, other wild things
are here in great numbers; they do not therefore suffer their tame Cattle to be
destroyed (whiles they have so many wild, that they threaten the Fruits of the
earth with destruction) to encourage the hunting of them, they forbid the
ordinary use of Beef. This Inland people is naturally of a lazy disposition,
they have therefore many Laws to quicken them, and oblige them to labor and
provide for their own preservation. As the not killing of their Oxen without
License, the refusing alms to beggars, they are not to suffer any in the
Kingdoms of the Neguz that will not work, unless they be so sick and maimed,
that they are not able to help themselves, then the Religious houses do
administer comfort to them, for they are endowed for that purpose with many
Lands and Reversions.

The Abyssins are very devou^ in all holy duties, and in holy places they pay
unto them a great respect, they will neither spit nor sit down in their Churches,
nor suffer any Dogs nor Cats, nor any other unreasonable creature to enter into
them; but instead of seats, they use Crutches very conveniently made to lean
upon. At the Church door there stands a multitude of them, every one takes his
own, and draws as near the Preacher as possible he can. They perform their
prayers sitting, confess their sins standing, hear the expositions and Lectures
of the Bible leaning.

They often use washing, especially before prayer, they wash face, hands and
feet, for they love to appear before Almighty God with decency, they will not
touch any unclean or dead thing, and if they do by chance, they dare not
present themselves in their Churches till they have made use of washing.

Their women are employed about all servile work, but are not reduced to that
slavery as other women, their Neighbors amongst the Moors and Gentiles. The
ordinary work of those that necessity constrains not to be industrious, is to
spin Silk and Cotton to make the excellent stuffs that come from thence and the
East Indies.

Their Marriages are very pleasant, before the door of the bridegroom a bed is
prepared according to his estate, then come three Priests with a silver Cross
which they lay upon it, followed by the Bridegroom, Bride, and all their
Friends; they altogether walk three times about the bed, crying Allelujah, and
then they command the young couple to set down, cutting off a Lock of the head
of the Bridegroom, and another of the Bride, which they sprinkle in water
sanctified, then they tell the Bridegroom, laying their hands upon his head, do
that which God has commanded in his Gospel, and think now that you are not two
but one flesh; which is no sooner said, but they all depart, and a tent being
erected about the bed, they presently obey the Commandment. Then follows a
three days Feast, where all magnificence is expressed amongst the great ones.

Polygamy is permitted and much practiced amongst them, but those that wait
upon their Churches, or that perform any office in them, are by no means
suffered to have two Wives, whosoever of the Clergy keeps a Concubine or two
Wives, is degraded ipso facto, and loses his title to all Spiritual promotion
or employment in the Church, thereby they recommend a greater degree of
abstinence from fleshly lusts to men of the Holy function, than to others; they
require them to live according to the strictest rules of Christianity, and to
be exemplary in their conversations.

They have another frequent abuse in the matter of Marriage, they do grant unto
the woman a Letter of divorce upon slight occasions: But the Priests do not
approve of this practice, therefore they provide against it as much as lies in
their power; they lay upon that person that shall break first the Marriage-bond
a grievous penalty, or a curse to oblige the parties for fear of being liable
unto it, to be faithful and constant to one another. Nevertheless the great
ones many times find se(...) pretenses to excuse their dissoy(...)ty, and to
procure a separati(...) when they do not agree. Among^ them it is also lawful
to marry the Brothers Wife, if she be Child less according to the Law of Moses;
but this is only practiced by the Grandees. The other sort of people are more
Christian in t(...) customs, they suffer not any to marry before the age of 18.
the reason they give of this Law, i^ that by early Marriages nature (...)
brought to decay, which they labor to hinder, by appointing ^ moderate age
capable of the trouble and inconveniences of that estate. They foresee also
that i^ Marriage were permitted before* it would both lessen and weak(...) the
next Generation of men.

There are here two sorts of Religious men, the Priests whose business is to
reach and instruct the people, whereof some are dispersed all over the Country,
having their particular precincts; the other live together in a Fellowship and
Society in Buildings appointed for that purpose; the chief business of these is
to Visit the sick, provide for the poor, and perform charitable deeds. The
other sort of Religious men are Monks and Friars that live a retired life, as
the Anachorets did; for that intent they have Covents built at some places
distant from the towns, upon delicate Mountains, and in pleasant Valleys.
Neither of these sort of people are useless in that Empire, they are not to beg
as our Friars in Italy and Spain, they have no need of it, for the former
Emperors have appointed a considerable Revenue, and great territories to the
maintenance of these Houses, and of their owners besides, they have the liberty
to traffic and increase their Riches every one has a trade to employ himself,
some spend their life i^ Contemplation, and in discovering those things and
Secrets that may be for the public benefit, others do till their own ground,
sow, reap and dress their Gardens.

These places were not first founded in vain, they were for the benefit of the
public, especially of Strangers and Pilgrims that are there to be received and
entertained without any charge to them. And if any wa^ become an extravagant in
wasting his Estate, it was laid up for him in these Religious Houses, and
employed to the best advantage by these Friars. But that th(...) Revenue may
never be wasted, they are never to marry whiles they remain in the Covent, if
the fancy of marrying seizes upon any man, he is to depart with a small
portion, and to dispose of himself at his own pleasure. These men live such
pleasant lives, that none can think of marrying whiles he remains amongst them;
they have plenty of all things provided for them, brought out of all parts of
the world by means of their traffic; they have excellent company among
themselves, free from all troubles of the world. Some time they spend in their
devotions morning and evening, they are constantly together at their
Church-offering, their prayers to Almighty God for the Emperors person, and
the Empire. The rest of their time they spend in the improvement of their
talents, and in their several affairs for the benefit of their Covent; they do
n(...) weary themselves late in the(...) works, but at a convenient ho(...)
toward the evening they repair (...) their lodgings, and there take together
such civil Recreations as an innocent and retired life will afford. I look upon
the condition of these men the most happy i^ the world, they are neither
burdened with commands, nor vexed with taxes, nor disturbed with suits in Law,
nor tormented with the cares of this world, nor consumed with the unlawful
pleasure^ of it, nor disquieted with many miscarriages which do naturally
attend men of business; but here they live neither idle nor useless, but having
employed themselves moderately, they have time to revive their spirits with
some Recreation. If there be a Paradise on earth, I think it is in Ethiopia
amongst these Monks and Friars; they are so far from begging, that at solemn
times of the year, at the Nativity of our Savior, at Easter, Pentecost,
Michaelmas, and the birthday of the Emperor, they send their liberalities to
all the poor people round their Covents, especially to those that are burdened
with numbers of Children, and have nothing to make them subsist but their daily
labor. Were our Friars, our Franciscans, Mendicants, and the other Orders of
Religious men of this disposition in his Holiness dominions, the people would
honor and respect them, and they would gain much credit to the Roman Church by
such practices, and to themselves. These Fyers that are thus retired out of the
great concourse of the towns and people, are of several fraternities, some are
called the Moncks of St. Anthony, these are the most numerous. Their founder
was an Anachoret of Egypt that spent his latter days in the desert places in
tilling and dressing the ground. He drew unto him such numbers of people that
were weary with the toil and troubles of the great world, that he saw many
thousands imitate his example before he dyed. The other fraternities are those
of St. Paul, of St. Maconius, whose employment is the same with the Monks of
St. Anthony, they differ only in their names. In every Covent they elect every
year a Superintendant whom they call Loucana; he is to keep good orders, and to
answer all the miscarriages that are committed by the Society, if he allows of
them.

These blessed places are to pay no Revenue to the Emperor, but of their
prayers. All other Lands are at his disposal by the Statutes of the Empire, he
is the Lord of them, but these that belong to the Friars are none of his, and
free from all impositions. So are all the other Lands and places that belong to
the Clergy; for we may take notice that the tithes of all things belonging to
the Emperor, the Clergy and those that attend in the worship of God have a
maintenance appointed unto them out of certain Lands and territories: which
they must see manured as well as the rest of the people do theirs, for they
receive little or no benevolence from the Country, they depend not upon them
for their maintenance: so that by that means they are highly honored of all
men, and beloved because they rather give to them, than take from them; and
although they are well rewarded for their pains from the Lands allotted to
them, their good Offices look as favors and kindnesses done to the people,
because nothing proceeds from their labors or Estates to reward the Priests
instructions and Attendance.

The Churches are separated into three distinct places or rooms according to
the manner of the Jews. At the entrance of the Temple, about six paces there is
a Curtain drawn that makes the first separation, every body may go into the
Church, but none but those that have been sanctified by the Abuna have liberty
to go into that place, and pass the first Curtain. This was wisely enacted to
oblige all the Nobility and Persons of Quality to receive that benefit from the
High Priest, and by tha^ means to endear him unto them. Next to this place
before the Altar-table, is drawn another Curtain, beyond which none has
liberty to pass but the Priests themselves when the Communion is administered.
These curtains are drawn, but the people keep themselves in their several
distinct places until the time of the Communion.

The Churches are very neatly adorned with Pictures, which these people do not
worship, but only as Ornaments to their Religious Houses, they place them
there. The Churches are built of Lime and Stone, which they use not in their
common buildings; for they think it decent that the places set apart for the
Service of God should have no common materials. None therefore but some select
houses of the Emperor are built in this manner, and with the same substance.

When the Priest has lost his Wife by death, he may not marry again unless he
will lose the power of executing his function, yet the Patriarch may give a
License to marry again, but without that License it is altogether unlawful.

They bury their dead with the greatest ceremony imaginable, they cloth them
in all their most gaudy attire, and carry them in a Chair with their faces and
hands uncovered, if the dead has been a Soldier, he has the honor to go
armed into the grave; before, march the Priest and the Religious men, saying
some good sentences, advising the people to prepare to depart; then comes the
Corpse seated in his Chair of State trimed with Garlands and Flowers, and with
some white Feathers, if he be young, with yellow if he be of a middle age, and
with black if he be old. The sight is so pleasant, that it would almost give
every one a mind to be in the room of the dead; the Parents follow with a badge
of mourning upon their heads, a handful of ashes, the next come their friends
and acquaintance; thus they proceed to the Grave in order, where the first chapter
of the Gospel of S. John is read, and the noble Actions and virtues of the dead
are rehearsed, all hearing with much devotion, then the Priest as they put the
body in the Grave pronounces these words, Dust thou art, and to dust thou
shall return. The next day they give alms, and send gifts to their friends in
the name of the deceased, and bring upon his Grave a banquet according to the
Quality of the Persons. And every day for a month they continue to visit the
Sepulcher of the dead, and to offer up some prayers for him to Almighty God,
for they imagine something of purgatory, and of the unsealed estate of the Soul
immediately after its departure out of this life, which obliges them to entreat
for them, that they may enter into the joys of the blessed.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE Several Kingdoms Subject TO THE NEGUZ.
Of Barnagasso.
THis Kingdom is as fruitful as it is large and populous: It is limited on the
South by a pleasant River called Abagni, that discharges it self into Nilus, on
the West it has an Island called by the Inhabitants Souhador, by our people
Gueyter^* which Island the River Nilus forms as it runs through Ethiopia
toward Egypt; on the North is the Kingdom of Dafila, and on the East the Red
Sea, where there is a very convenient Port for Ships, now possessed by the
Turks and Moors called Erc^cc^. This Kingdom is full of little towns, the most
considerable places are Finash, Carne, Timei, Bara, Barvo; there is over it a
Lord or a King that commands in chief, and has it by inheritance, he that is
there now is called Ishmael, he pays tribute both to the Turks and to the
Neguz; the Country abounds in Silk, Cloth of Silver that is made by the
Inhabitants, and in Cottons. It is fruitful, of Dates, Pomgranates Peaches,
Apricocks, Corn of all sorts, especially Oats, the people make of it a drink
very pleasant. Here are also many Vineyards, the Wine they make by stealth, as
in other places of the dominions of the Neguz.

The Country is for the most part Champaign, unless it be toward the Red sea,
there a ridge of hills stretches it self all along the Coast and encloseth many
lakes and pools of water enriched with excellent fish, that which is called
Mazamo, is the most considerable because of its pleasant situation that has
invited thither many Religious men that have planted upon the sides of it six
Monasteries. It lies convenient for trade, for near unto it is the Red sea,
from whence these holy Anachorets do fetch their Merchandise, to convey them to
the rest of the Kingdom; and because they border upon the Moors, they pay unto
them a yearly tribute to have the liberty of passing through their territories
unmolested by their means, the Kingdom receives a considerable benefit; they
have great numbers of Mules, Asses, Camels, Rhinocerots, Elephants especially
in the Mountains where these creatures are wild.

There is one thing very remarkable in the mountains near a little town called
Abbarah, is a large fountain of such strange nature, that whatsoever is cast
into it, turns within a days time into a hard stone, whether it be Wood, Flesh,
Earth, or any other substance.

And not far from it at certain times, amongst the common people it is
reported, that there are appearances in the mountains very dreadful, when I
passed by that place my curiosity carried me to it; I did really hear strange
voices and names in the air, but saw nothing, but I did attribute the cause to
the wind, and the disposition of the mountains that are so placed, that when a
strong gale blows upon the Rocks there are unusual names heard; the wind
strikes also through several Caves, and at the entry many shreiks and cries are
heard, so that the Country people dare not adventure in to know the cause of
them. The vulgar opinion is, that this place leads into hell, and that the
Souls of the damned tormented in these lower-parts of the earth, do send up
here their complaints. I did visit these Caves, near them none would come with
me for fear of mischief. I perceived the cause of the wonder, and did discover
it to some of the Friars, but their igrance and superstition would never
believe me; from their infancy they had been bred up with an apprehension of
these dark Caves, which no reason could possibly remove from them: I went to
see all the curiosities of this Country with my guard, being accompanied by
some Persons belonging to the Emperors Court, they led me into a deep valley,
where we heard nine Eccho's or returns of our voices one after another. At the
end of it near a large fountain, the ground being very stony, we found several
slates very white that had Images of Beasts and men imprinted in them in a blew
character, so perfectly, that no hand could ever paint them better.

Nature sometimes delights to show her Industry or Art amongst the most
contemptible trifles, and to cast her Gold and Pearls in vessels and places not
answerable to the price of these things. The Prince of this Kingdom received us
with much civility, but not with more State than is proper to such remote and
barbarous people. The Abuna made his progress all over his Diocese, he visited
the Court of this King amongst the rest, and in his company I went to see much
of Ethiopia, he had a train suitable to his estate, several of the Grandees
out of curiosity did accompany us; His business was in every place to see to
the behavior of the Clergy, to appoint Bishops careful of the Public
Interest, and to look that they that were already appointed might do their
office without respect of persons: He displaced three during our progress, and
established others in whom he confided; they were the Bishops of Balgada, of
Abuguna, and Fungi, men that had not behaved themselves well in their function.

Of the Kingdom of Tigremahon.
IT is the best territory of Neguz, but much ruined by the Wars of the Turk, it
is watered with many little Rivers that run into Nilus, so that all the Summer
it yields a pleasant Prospect, and as great advantage to the Inhabitants, for
in most places they reap two Crops of every thing that is sown or planted: It
contains about sixty leagues in length, from the River Nilus to Darngali, and
thirty in breadth. The Emperor lives here for the most part, and therefore he
appoints Governors over several places of it. Three Provinces it contains,
Sabami, Torrates, Balgada; In that of Sabami are several Mines of Gold, out of
which the Neguz digs five Millions of Dollars every year; over this Province is
a Sebesh, a Governor that takes care to gather the Emperors Revenue, and to
keep good order in every place: It is not so fruitful as the other Provinces,
but in recompense, it furnishes a great quantity of that Rich Metal that others
do want. This place is said to be the country of the Queen of Saba that visited
Solomon; the Abyssins do tell many stories of her Voyage to Jerusalem, and of
her return that caused all the Kingdoms that acknowledged her jurisdiction to
become Jews.

In this Kingdom was a famous City called Caxumo, it was the Metropolis of all
Ethiopia, but it has been mightily ruined by the Wars, so that at present it
shows but a few houses that serve to receive Shepherds and Graziers, for here
is abundance of Cattle of all sorts, round about stand many old Ruins
overgrown with herbs, but yet they declare the importance and greatness of the
City that did give Laws to this part of the Country, although it is so near the
line the air is very temperate, not so much by reason of the continual brises
that blow very fresh from three a clock till the afternoon, as because of the
abundance of fresh water Springs that are very cold in the hottest time of
Summer. Near this City is a fountain that contains much water, but never yields
any until the Beasts do come to drink, and when they do approach it flows over,
and gives a very plentiful stream of clear water very grateful to the Palate.
We had here a sight of a strange sort of a Cat, about the bigness of a Leopard,
the Inhabitants do use the dung in many sort of medicines, and to dye their
Cloth and Cottons in blew. It is not so fierce as other beasts of that
bigness, but extreme fearful, it keeps for the most part in inaccessible
mountains and Rocks, and seldom adventures it self in the plain Country,
although it runs as swift as any creature I have seen. Here are also great
quantity of Rhinocerots, Tigers, Leopards, Wolfs, etc. for here are many Woods
that serve for a retreat to these furious kinds of creatures.

I must not omit a memorable story that is spread amongst the people of a
certain hill that is situate between Dongali and Tigremahon, where a Saint,
very much respected by the Country people, was shut up in prison and condemned
by the Pagans that possessed this place to die in the beginning of
Christianity: He was to be famished to death in a high mountain on the top of a
rock unto which he was tied hand and foot: he continued there many days exposed
to the fury of the Eagles and Vultures, and other ravenous Birds without any
harm. These cruel fowl instead of feeding upon his naked body unable to defend
it self, did bring up to him of the choicest meat that they could steal in the
lower Country, and on the top of that hard Rock there burst forth a large
stream of living water so near his head, that he had the liberty to sup some
up, and refresh himself when he was dry.

The spring continues yet to run, it falls down above sixty fatham high from a
steep rock down a precipice. They say that their forefathers when they saw
this miracle, and that at the end of two or three months he was in perfect
health, as formerly, they embraced the Christian faith. They show besides the
Tomb of this Saint that dyed amongst them in a very old age. It is visited by
several pilgrims that come from the other Kingdoms of the great Neguz.

The Inhabitants are excellent Marks-men, they have been tried in the wars
against the King of Adel, so that they have approved themselves the best
Soldiers of the Emperors dominions. They use Bows and Arrows, a long lance
much like to a Roman, of late they have fire Arms, and some few pieces of
Artillery.

The Emperor chooses out of this Kingdom his common guards, because that they
are not only good Soldiers, but have a mien more manly than the ordinary sort
of people of these Regions.

In this Kingdom that is the largest, and the best belonging to the Neguz,
great numbers of Jews are dispersed. The Christians treat them with much
civility, they suffer them to trade amongst them to reap the fruit of the earth
to enjoy the liberty of their Religion, by that means great numbers have
embraced that profession that did teach love and kindness to strangers, hoping
to meet with greater advantages when they should become brothers, for there is
no invitation more powerful upon the spirits of a man to oblige him to initiate
himself in Religion than a sincere affection expressed by the professors of it.
The advantages to be expected in Christianity are sufficient to persuade us,
violence better becomes a Mahomet than Christ, he never made use of his whip,
but to drive men out of his Church.

The Jews have here their Synagogues, but they are at present so little
frequented, that I think the name will be one day lost by reason of their great
numbers that daily turn Christians.

It was in this Kingdom that I saw a Black-a-moor with two heads joined one to
another, and two faces, one behind and another before, the rest of his body was
very well proportioned. It was a monster of about twenty years of age, he was
way strong in his Limbs, he discoursed unto us with one Tongue, sometimes with
the other, and sometimes both together; he was obliged to feed^ behind and
before, he eats as much as two men. The heads were distinct and separated until
they came to the neck bone there they joined together. This irregularity in
nature happens more frequently amongst the beasts than amongst the men of this
Country, for the heat that commands their inclinations moves their blood, and
carrys them to unlawful Copulations when they meet together, as they often do
at the Springs of fresh water.

Of the Kingdom of Angote.
IT is not so large as the former, but no less populous: Belequanze is on the
South of it, Tigremahon on the West and North, and the Kingdom of Adel on the
East, it stretches it self about twenty leagues in length, from Fatigar to
Dangali, it contains two fruitful Provinces, Buguna and Guanamora; they are
full of all manner of Fruit Trees, especially of Dates and Pomgranates, for
here the Inhabitants are far more industrious than their Neighbors in
improving their ground to the best advantage.

Here are many Religious houses built as they say upon the Sepulchers of their
Saints, that were there interred, several good towns do belong to it, Demars,
Angote, and Buguna, are the chief near the latter, which is not far distant
from a large River that bursts forth of the lake Barceum; situate beyond the
mountains of Ainora is a large Pool of water called the Pool of Pontius Pilate,
if any should cast into it a stone, or any other thing the water would rise,
swell, grumble, and in an impatient manner run over the sides, although that
which is cast in be never so inconsiderable; but if the water be let alone, it
remains without motion. About 15 leagues from that place toward Adel is a
little Town called Bachlar, where in the Church at one end of it grows a Vine,
the Inhabitants name it the Holy Vine, it grows within the walls of the Church
in a room that is made a purpose for it; It is planted upon the Sepulcher of
one St. Maximin that was buried here. The people told me it was above a
thousand years of age, and would subsist until doomsday, that the Saint at his
death commanded it to be planted there, telling them, that as often as any twig
should wither, they would receive a considerable loss from the enemies, and
that when it should dry up, Christ would come to judge the world, or the
Infidels would overpower the Christians; I was admitted to visit and pay my
devotions to it, the cluster of Grapes that it yields are very big, I could not
see whether they grew naturally upon the branches, that curiosity was
unseasonable amongst a people that would admit of no contradiction, and that
did find a great benefit from this belief, for both Heathens and Christians are
possessed with this vulgar error, that the story is true. I that was not so
apt to receive such unusual tales upon trust, did desire to touch the Grapes
and examine their reality, but the Priest forbad me, telling me, that it was an
impurity that never any had been yet guilty of, and that he wondered how I that
waited not upon the Altar did dare to handle such holy things. I did not offer
to examine further the business after this severe reprehension. It discovered
to me as much as I was desirous to know, that piae frauds are in use in that
Climate as well as in ours; a continual profit makes them nourish this opinion,
and cherish it in themselves and others.

The Priest sells the leaves, and the Grapes he says that he keeps them for the
Wine in the Sacrament, the leaves are good for many sorts of diseases, as
Agues, Fevers, Consumptions, etc. Many cures are said to have been effected by
them, but I think that the fancy of the sick has rather cured them than the
virtue of the leaf.

Of Beleguanze.
THis Kingdom is more barren than the rest, the Kingdoms of Fungi, Amara,
Bagamidri, Angote, Tigremahon, do shut it in on all sides; It is a plain
Country, but full of sand, only on that side where the River passes is
fruitful, the most considerable Towns are Dahrab, Shubi, and Grochar, all three
in sight of the Current; there is nothing memorable in this Kingdom, but some
places where the Inhabitants do pick up golden sand, which they refine and sell
to the Merchants of Melinde that bring hither their Camels.

This Country has no Barley, nor Wheat, but instead of those grains they have
Tafo Daguza, seed with which they make a bread very pleasant to the taste, but
much more sweet than ours. It grows in any ground, the worst as well as the
best, nature has thus provided for all Countries and people a means to supply
themselves by their industry, if they will make use of it. This Country is
extreme hot, and the most unfit for dwelling of any one that I have seen in the
Territories of the Neguz, the beams of the Sun beat against the sandy ground*
and meeting there with an obstinate resistance, they return back into the face
and uncovered part of the body; so that it is not possible to walk here abroad
about noon by reason of the excessive heat, therefore the inhabitants do keep
themselves within their Houses from ten of the clock, until two. In the Houses
that are all thatcht and supported with posts, it is very cool, the Sunbeams
have not the power to enter in through the Reeds.

Of Amara.
ALthough this Kingdom is directly under the Line, there is not a more pleasant
place to dwell in all over the world. It is full of Mountains and Valleys about
twenty leagues in circumference, adorned with high Woods and Forests, the
ground is extreme fruitful, the people very civil, the Clergy devout, the
Nobles gallant and brave. In the mountains are many little Villages planted in
the low ground, and in the midst of them is a strong Castle that looks like a
Town, for the outmost wall contain about two miles in circumference. Here the
Kings Children are kept with the Emperors as Hostages of their fidelity. They
are all trained up in several exercises, the only inconveniency is that they
are here confined to live, which it may be to them is no inconveniency, for
they never see any thing else but these mountains, and think the world has no
other place for a dwelling but here. The Bishop of Amara, a very grave man
introduced us into the Castle where the Emperors Children were kept, they were
then but young, the eldest was not above four years of age. His countenance was
promising, we had a sight of the Gardens and Walks full of pleasant Fountains
and Rivulets, artificially brought into these high places. The Walks were
covered with a Tree not usual in our Country, the branches were twisted one
with another in such a manner that no Sun could penetrate them, they were
entertained always green, for at the root of the Trees on both sides of the
Walk a little Current of fresh water does always run, that refreshes the
roots, and preserves them from the droughth of Summer. It is as delicious a
place as any I have seen in Europe, the Children have the liberty to hunt and
divert themselves out of the Walls of this Castle, but they are never to go out
of the mountains while their Father lives; for that purpose a strict guard is
kept at the passage where no man can go or come without leave. It is both
narrow and steepy, made with the hand, a few persons are able to keep it from
all the world; in the castle are places appointed for the exercise of the
youth, and over them they have Masters learned and experienced in all those
Sciences and Disciplines that they are to know. Here are excellent Astrologers*
for that is a Science unto which this Country people is addicted. They have
some here learned in the Arabian and Indian Tongues, others that give
themselves over to the study of Philosophy and Nature, but very few do trouble
their brains with Divinity; this makes them less notional, but more practical,
for they know no niceties in Cases of Conscience to excuse their actions and
inclinations

The other Kingdoms are less remarkable, only that of Damut and Goiame are full
of Mines of Gold. The Emperor keeps them with above 6000 men in Arms
continually. Tegrai and Vangue are mountainous, and peopled with wild beasts
and trees more than with men. Xoa is rich and fruitful, but in it nothing else
remarkable.

Of the Religion of the Abyssins, and of the manner of their Discipline.
THey do all profess the Christian faith with much zeal, the Church of the
Queen Candaces, whose name they say was Indich, first brought this Religion
into their Country, that was for the most part possessed with the Jewish. St.
Thomas afterward went into that Country, and there did confirm them in the
Christian Religion, obliging all the inhabitants by the greatness and number of
his Miracles to embrace it. Some opposition he met with from the Grandees that
had always retained the Pagan superstitions, especially in the Kingdom of
Damut, where there is a mountain that bears yet his name. The Heathens subject
to the Emperor of Aethiopia had got him into their possession, and were
resolved to make him suffer for the destruction and neglect of their Idols,
they had often attempted upon his life, but neither Sword nor Poison could
injure his Person, they sought therefore to drown him in a lake, and when that
could not procure his death, they shut him up in a Tower built in the top of
these unpleasant mountains, where he remained prisoner until an Angel took him
from thence, leaving all his keepers dead on the ground, and brought him again
to the Imperial Court, where he complained of the violence and unjustice that
had been done unto him, which the Emperor going about to revenge, raised an
Army to seize upon the King of Damut that had consented to the imprisonment of
the Apostle. He remained here many years, until he departed into the Indies,
where he preached also the Gospel. He left behind him many thousand Christians,
and as they say, he brought unto them the two books, Abelil and Menda, and
established here the Discipline that is used amongst them, with all the
Ceremonies practiced. They and the Capties of Egypt differ much in point of
ceremony, but in belief they are Eutycheans as for the most part. Some there
are that have true and Orthodox opinions of Christ.

Here is the form of their belief published in writing amongst them, by which
we may judge of them further.

WE believe in the Name of the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, who are but one Lord; three names, but one Divinity; three faces, but
one similitude. The conjunction of the persons is equal in the Divinity, for
there is but one Kingdom, one Throne, one Judge, one Charity, one Word, and one
Spirit; The word of the Father, and of the Son, and the word of the Holy Ghost
and the Son, is the same word; The word with God, and with the holy Spirit, and
with himself is the son of the Father, and from the Father without the least
deficiency or division, without (...)y beginning he was the son of his Father
without Mother; no body can know the Mystery of his filiation, unless it be the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Now this Son was in the beginning the
Word, and this Word was the Word with God, and the Word was God. The spirit of
the Father the holy Spirit, the spirit of the Son is the ^ame divine Spirit,
the holy Spirit is without diminution or increase; this Divine Spirit is called
the Comforter, a living God, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, he spoke
by the mouth of the Prophets, he descended in a flame of fire upon the Apostles
in Sion. They published all over the world, and preached the word of the
Father, and this word is the Son Besides, the Father is not first, because he
is the Father, nor the Son the last because he is Son, so the Holy Ghost is
neither the first nor the last. They are three Persons and one God, that sees
all, and is seen of no body, he has by his own counsel created all things,
afterward the Son for our Salvation, with the consent of the Father, and of
the divine Spirit descended from the highest Heavens ^^ incarnate by the Holy
Ghost of the Virgin Mary, who was adorned with a twofold Virginity, with a
spiritual and carnal. He was born without an^ corruption, his Mother Mary
remaining a Virgin after his Birth, for by a great miracle she brought her Son
Jesus Christ without effusion of blood or pangs. He was a just man without sin,
perfect God, and perfect man, having but one Person; when he was a Child he
grew up by degrees, sucking the Milk of his Mother the Virgin Mary, and when he
came to be thirty years of age, he was baptized in the River Jordan; As other
men he walked, sweat, hungered, thirsted, and was weary. He suffered all things
willingly, and showed many miracles. By the power of his Divinity, he restored
sight to the blind, he healed the lame, cleansed the lepers, raised the dead;
at last of his own accord he was taken prisoner, whipped, buffeted, crucified, he
languished and dyed for our si^s; by his death he did overcome death and the
Devil; by his sufferings, he satisfied for our sins, and bore our infirmities;
with the Baptism of his blood which is that of his death, he baptized the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets; he descended into Hell, where were the Souls of Adam,
and of his Sons, and of Christ himself which is of Adam. This soul of Adam
Christ did receive from the Holy Virgin Mary, by the power and Authority of his
Divinity, and efficaciousness of his Cross, he broke the strong gates of hell,
and of death; he confined Satan to his chains, and redeemed Adam and his Sons.
All this Christ did because he was filled with the Divinity, and the Divinity
itself was with his soul, and with his most holy body, which Divinity has
granted virtue to the Cross, this Divinity he enjoys common with the Father as
he ^^ ways did; At last he was buried, (...) the third day, Jesus Christ the
f(...) of the Resurrection, our greatest delight, the chief Priest Jesus
Christ* the great King of Israel rose ^^ from the dead by his own strength and
power. And when all was accomplished that had been foretold by the holy
Prophets, he ascended into Heaven with glory, and is sat down at the right
hand of the Father; he shall come again with glory, having before him a Cross,
and in his hand the Sword of Justice to judge both the quick and the dead, of
whose Kingdom there shall never be any end. We believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church, we believe one Baptism for the remission of sins, we hope
^or the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the World to come. Amen.

This is their Creed, they often do repeat it in their Churches, especially
every new Moon, with many gests which they have retained of their former
Religions. The Priest that officiates says it alone, and three or four times
the people do repeat these words, This is our Faith.

Since they have had knowledge of the Roman Catholic Religion, they have added
something to their Creed by the consent of one of their general Assemblies, for
they were careful to hinder their people from receiving any other Opinions than
those that they had formerly embraced; for when they saw that our Priests and
Jesuits were busy in drawing them to the faith of the Church of Rome; they
published a little addition to their Creed, to inform every one of their
judgments, and hinder them to receive any opinions which they do not approve of.

We believe that the Virgin Mary is a pure Virgin, before and after the Birth
of Christ; as she is the Mother of God, she ought to be loved and respected
accordingly, but we neither worship Her nor pray unto Her. We believe that the
Cross of Christ is a useful sign, it was upon it that he suffered for our sins,
and purchased unto us Salvation with his own blood; His Cross is a scandal to
the Jews, and a folly to the Gentiles, but to us Christians it is in much
esteem and honor, we believe that the Cross of Christ is sufficient to redeem
us, as S. Paul has taught us, but the outward sign and use of it we employ
more for distinction, than out of duty: And that we may never think it a scorn
to wear the badge of our Profession.

We believe that S. Peter was the first of the Apostles, that the Stone that
Christ mentions upon which his Church is built, is his Law and Faith; which Law
is established upon the Prophets and Apostles, unto them was granted the power
of governing the Church, of binding and loosing, and to them was committed the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. But we do not acknowledge the Superiority that
his Successors the Popes of Rome do derive from S. Peter; nor do we believe
that he ever had any privilege which the others did not enjoy. We believe that
the holy Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs that are in glory did follow the
footsteps of our Savior Christ, and that they have received from him the
pardon of their sins, as we do. We believe that we must honor them with the
holy Angels, but we do not approve of prayers made unto them, nor of the
sufficiency of their Merits to benefit us, or the Church of Christ. We believe
that it is well done to confess our sins before the Ministers of the Church,
for by their prayers we may be assisted and comforted* We receive all the books
of the Old and New Testament, as they were delivered unto us by S. Thomas,
without any addition or innovation. We believe that our Clergy have liberty to
Marry, as the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior were, but that it is not
lawful for a Priest to have two Wives or a Concubine. We believe that we are
bound to obey in Conscience cur Supreme Lord ^iam Belul, and under him the
Abuna of our Church, with all the rest of our Ecclesiastical and Civil
Magistrates and Superiors, but no other. We religiously believe that there is
a place where the less Regenerate persons do go after this life, which is
neither Hell, nor Heaven; what it is, and what the souls do suffer in it, we
are not able to define. We believe that none can be saved without the blood of
Jesus Christ, that it is sufficient to cleanse us from all our sins, without
any other assistance, and that we are not to trust upon the Merits of the
Apostles and Saints that were but sinful men as we were. We believe that there
shall be a day of Judgment where Christ shall appear in glory to Judge all
men; that we must all appear before him to give an account of our actions, and
that after that we shall all either go to hell or heaven; the wicked to
everlasting burning, and the Righteous to eternal bliss. Amen.

This is the faith that the subjects of Precious Giam, which we are to maintain
until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. God grant us grace that we may never
forsake it, notwithstanding all the persecutions and persuasions of the enemies
of Christianity.

This addition was lately made, since the Portugueses and other Europeans have
traveled into those parts; for when some Religious men did endeavor to
persuade the Emperor to submit to the Sea of Rome, and join with the other
Christian Princes in their obedience to the Popes power. He would never do it,
not would never suffer the divulging the opinions which we do embrace in Italy.

They do believe whatsoever is in their Books called Manda and Abetil, as the
Gospel it self; they do fancy that the Apostles and Disciples being assembled
together at Jerusalem, did cause them to be written for the benefit of
Christianity. In them are contained these precepts.

To fast every Wednesday in remembrance of the wicked resolution of the Jews
made upon that day to crucify Christ.

To fast every Friday, because on that day Christ was crucified for our sins,
on these days it is commanded to fast until the evening.

To observe forty days Lent, especially the Passion week, and then to feed
upon nothing but bread and water.

To meet together on the Lords day, and then to hear the Reading of the holy
Writings of the Apostles and Prophets, which are to be expounded by some
appointed for that purpose.

To meet also upon the Sabbath Day, and then to spend the time in prayer and
holy duties, in which days it is not permitted to do any servile work. The
Saturday they keep because God on that day had finished the great Work of the
Creation of the world; The Lord's Day is also set apart for Religious duties,
because Christ on the first day of the week did rise from the dead.

Several other days of the year are kept holy, some are those that are observed
in our Church, others are particular days appointed to continue the Memory of
some great deliverances and particular favors which that Church and Empire
have received.

They do believe that in their Festival days; and in the Sabbath and Lord's Day,
the souls of the damned are released from their torments until the Evening, but
that they can never come out of that place of darkness.

Some thoughts they have of Purgatory, but not as we in the Catholic Church;
they do not think that Masses, Prayers, or any other pious actions can convey
any benefit to the miserable souls that are there frying in the subterraneous
ovens; therefore they never bestow their Estates for the dead, but when they
are departed, they leave them to their fortunes, as they do us to ours. One
thing is very commendable amongst them; when any are dead that have left some
visible estate, they send for the poorest persons of that place, and offer unto
them gifts in the name of the deceased; they make a Feast for others better
qualified, and spend two or three days in Mirth and jollity at the expenses of
the dead; a custom derived from the Scythians, who did thus rejoice when their
friends departed out of the world, and did celebrate their entrance into it
with the effusion of tears, or rather this practice is derived from the belief
of a Resurrection, and the assurance that the party that is dead is free from
all the sense of misery and affliction, unto which the living are exposed daily.

They do not believe that Masses can redeem the souls of men from the
punishments unto which they are liable by their miscarriages, therefore they
never see the Priest to huddle up before the Altar any prayers for them, nor do
the dying persons leave any annual rents for Masses to be said in remembrance
of him, or to fetch him out of the flames of Purgatory.

The Sacrament of the Eucharist they do administer, sometimes every Sunday or
Sabbath Day, but as it was anciently practiced by the the Christians of
Primitive times in both kinds. They are not afraid of that inconvenience that
the wise men of our latter days have thought upon, of profaning the blood of
Christ upon every unhallowed lip, or by spilling it on the ground, therefore
the people do receive with the Priest in a most humble manner, almost prostrate
to the ground, before they take it into their hands, they make three bows to
express the sacred Trinity of persons, and then with lifted up eyes and hands
they eat the wafer, or the bread, and drink of the cup, kissing it before they
part with it out of their hands. They have as much reverence for that
Sacrament, as we in Italy, but they do not think the bread to be
Transubstantiated into flesh, nor the wine into blood, nor do they pay any
respect unto it, but only when they do receive it. I did enquire of some of
them why they did eat it with that reverence, seeing they did not fancy it
other than our ordinary bread; the answer was, that it was consecrated to a
holy use, and that some respect was therefore due unto the Elements of Bread
and Wine; but when that should not be, the most humble posture was most decent
for those that received from Almighty God, so great a favor as the signs of
Christ Crucified. They do not preserve either the Bread or Wine upon their
Altars (that are much like ours) to another day, nor do they send it to comfort
the sick; that custom they do not approve of, because they may so frequently
receive it every where, that they do not stand in need of it in so short a time
as their sick persons do continue in their crazie estate.

This custom they have amongst them, that when any has received the Bread and
Wine, he never ventures to spit all that day, but retains all the humidity that
flows into his mouth, and swallows it for fear of casting to the ground any
part of that Cup that was intended for to increase their faith. This custom is
kept so Religiously, that there is a great penalty put upon every one that is
seen to suffer any water to go out of his mouth that day, until the evening;
he is forced to pay to the poor, and toward the reparations of their Church a
large sum of money, and to suffer an imprisonment six days, during which time
he has scarce enough of water allowed unto him to drink. Thus they punish
excess or want of abstinence by want of necessaries, a good way to make a man
sober. They give the Sacrament not only to men grown up in years, but also to
Babes and Children, for they do imagine, that seeing Christ and his Apostles do
esteem them holy, of the body of the Church, and commands them to be admitted
into the Communion of Christians, that therefore it is lawful to grant unto
them the privileges of Christian people, as if they had an actual faith as
those that are more aged have. They are ignorant of those great disputes that
have lately alarmed Europe, and are not acquainted with theniceties that have
put us together by the ears about the Eucharist. They know nothing of
Transubstantiation, the words of the Consecration they understand, without any
interpretation, that they declare unto us the use and benefits that we are to
receive by this Sacrament in the Christian Church. They do not trouble their
heads whether personally or virtually, whether corporally or spiritually Christ
is present in his Ordinance. They hope for salvation without the knowledge of
these curiosities, and I think they will attain unto it before us that are
carried by these disputes of the Schools to deadly animosities against our
brethren; we had been in Europe very happy, if the liberty of believing in this
particular had been left to every one of us, but the Devil cannot fish but in
troubled waters, and turbulent men have raised these disputes for their own
interest, but could never bring any benefit to the public by them, but ruin
and destruction. If like the Abyssin Church, we had not troubled our selves
about trifles, we had spared the blood of many Christian Nations, and might be
more ready to oppose the Turk, that daily incroaches upon us. In the
celebration of the Sacrament, they use no ceremonies, nor insignificant
gestures at the Consecration, but as Chirst commanded, so they practice; the
Bread is of the ordinary bread that they use in those Kingdoms, they take of
the better sort for this use, and lay it in a large plate of Gold or Earth of a
blew color, and the Wine is of the juice of the Grape squeezed out of it on
purpose. They place both very handsomely upon a Table or Altar at the end of
the Church, and after the Consecration, the Priest followed by some Attendants,
goes to the several Separations, where he delivers both kinds to them, and they
receive them with the greatest expressions of humility and thankfulness
imaginable; after all is done, they sing a Hymn in the Church, and the Priest
gives them leave to depart with a blessing.

They baptize both Male and Female, the Male on the tenth day, the Female on
the eighth. This Sacrament they often do reiterate, but not out of necessity,
but out of a custom that has continued many hundred years derived as some do
conceive from the practice of the Jews, that thought the bodily washing able to
contribute to the salvation of the soul. These people therefore that were
zealous Professors of that Religion, do yet retain many of their customs,
although they do not believe those things that occasioned them at first for
that reason they circumcise, they often wash, and to render their washing more
beneficial, the Priest on the day of Epiphany repeats over to the persons
sprinkled the words of Baptism, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc.
All of them do declare that they retain this custom not out of the belief of
its necessity, but only because it has continued so long time amongst them for
so many hundred years, they know not how to reform it. But I think that they
have no mind to reform or leave it, because it flatters the interest of both
Priest and people; for on that day the Princes officers do make a Feast, and
give gifts in the name of their Emperor to several persons, they rejoice and
suffer none to do any servile work. This custom is strengthened by a Law very
ancient, that whosoever is then baptized should be free from some small
impositions that are laid upon them by the Prince. Their former Kings have thus
interessed the people in the obedience to their pious commands, so that
although they see how the performance is insignificant and useless,
nevertheless they do as Religiously observe this custom, as if upon it did
depend their eternal salvation; when the Children are baptized, they give the
Bread of the Sacrament softened in some Liquor to them.

Their Religion in general is a mixture of the Jewish and Christian, for they
observe many of the Ordinances of the Law of Moses that were merely ceremonial,
only because their forefathers did so. This people has always had a great
Veneration for that which is derived unto them by inheritance, and in which
they were first educated, so that they dare not venture to alter what was
recommended unto them by their Ancestors practice, they wisely foresee the
disorders that change would bring amongst them, especially when the customs and
ceremonies observed are in themselves indifferent.

If any be polluted according to the Law of Moses, they forbid him to enter the
Church until twenty four hours be past, and then he must cleanse himself with
water.

For their Churches they have a great Veneration, insomuch, that in them they
neither spit nor suffer any unclean creature to enter, when they do go in, they
take off their shoes, the reason that they do allege is this, because Moses
was commanded to appear before the bush with naked feet, their Temples being as
holy as that place on which he did tread, they think themselves obliged to
follow the same Religious practice. They will not also suffer any to walk up
and down in their Churches, nor to discourse of their private business, nor to
laugh, so highly do they reverence them; our people in Italy do profess as much
outward respect, but they bear less to the Houses of prayer, for it is ordinary
amongst us to make the great Churches a Rendezvous of Lovers instead of praying
to a Saint, many whisper their devotions to their Mistresses that are at their
sides; and they do return answers accordingly; thus they cheat the world that
fancies them at their prayers, and they profane the holy places with unhallowed
and lascivious actions. The Abyssins do show unto such an excellent example of
piety and and devotion. They are no l^ss Religious in the other observances of
Religion; the water in Baptism it is true they do not sanctify by exorcisms,
nor do they mingle any other ingredient, but as the Eunuch of Queen Candaces
was Baptized by pure water, so do they dip or sprinkle with the same element
free from mixture; all that are baptized, they either dip or sprinkle them,
that is left to the pleasure and choice of the Minister as he sees convenient,
or as the condition of the child requires he accordingly deals with it And when
the child is but besprinkled with water, he is looked upon as well baptized as
if he had been washed in the main Ocean over head and ears, for they think not
that the quantity of water does bring any advantage to the soul, nor that an
entire washing is essential to the Sacrament of baptism, but rather so much
only as may suffice to signify the inward washing and clensing of the mind
from all filthy inclination.

Their circumcision as we have said, they will not leave, but they do not
esteem themselves for it, nor do they dis-esteem other Christians for wanting
it, for they are sensible that the ceremony does not render them more
acceptable to Almighty God, nor does it give them a pre-eminence above others.
It were to be wished that Christians over all the world were of their
disposition, they would not then curse and damn their brethren for trifles, nor
send them to hell because they do not jump with them into the same opinions,
and follow the same frivolous customs invented by themselves. A Christian
condescension becomes us, we should not rack and send to the flames, men of the
same profession, because only they do not join with us in indifferent
performances; but my design is not to show the unjustice of the Court of
Inquisition, nor the cruelty of our Prelates against the dissenting persons
that are scattered all over Italy and Spain, but to declare the practice of the
Aethioplan Church, and their moderation.

They have not that uncharitable opinion of unbaptized Infants as we have, they
do not judge them in hell or any other place out of Paradise, because they have
not had the happiness to receive the Seal of the Covenant, but they name them
half Christians here, and think that heaven is prepared for them as well as for
the rest of mankind hereafter, because that they are born of Christian Parents,
sanctified from the womb and in the womb, by drawing some nourishment from the
Sacrament of the Eucharist when their Mothers do receive it, the least part of
that being sufficient to sanctify them.

They often make use of Confession, not as we do, but in a manner that commends
their moderation, their wisdom and modesty. The persons that are to confess do
meet the Priest at certain days in the Church before prayers do begin, where
they privately confess unto him in general all those sins of which they are
guilty; they name them not unless they be heavy upon their consciences, then
they consult him about the remedies proper to satisfy themselves, and about
the means to avoid such miscarriages for the future. I could never learn that
they were tied to this by any other Law, but that which is derived from their
own necessity and good; they are not tied to particularize their crimes unless
they see it convenient for their comfort and reformation. The Priest assists
them in this occasion, assures them of the mercy of God, of the pardon of their
sins if they continue in that repentant, sorrow, and if it can produce the
amendment of their lives. He prays for them, and then sends them away with a
blessing. The woman that is near the time of her travel is wont to seek this
comfort from her Ghostly Father. The man that is to undertake some long or
perilous journey unloads and discharges his conscience thus to render himself
more ready to undergo the hazard. Those that march out with the armies, take
with them some word of exhortation and comfort from their Priests, they esteem
this custom necessary to them for the maintenance of Christian Religion, and
stir up from time to time men's drowsy and sottish spirits in the duties of
Religion. By this means also the Priests do creep into the favor of every one,
and become necessary in their Generation. We are naturally prone to contempt
and sloathfulness in devotion, this practice is most proper to remove and rid
us of those vices. Their confessions are more modest, more beneficial and
Christian-like than ours are. The Priest does not by any power granted unto him
pretend to absolve them, but he shows them the gracious promises of God in his
word, and tells them how pleased he is at repentance, what hopes there are of
his mercy, he also warns them to forbear from ill company, and other
temptations that do endanger our estate; after confession they receive the
Eucharist.

They acknowledge the Old and New Testament without any addition to them 46 of
the old 35 of the new are the number of the books; unto these they think it not
lawful to make any addition, but they observe many other things that are not
contained in these books. Their Menda and Abetil directs them in the manner of
Discipline and Order that is to be observed in those Countries; besides, they
obey the constitutions and degrees of their Abuna, and his Clergy, who commonly
assemble once in two years at the Imperial Court to consult about the public
business, and give such orders as may prevent the mischiefs that the Mahumetans
and Gentiles do daily plot against them; for their Priests and Religious men do
labor to incroach upon the simplicity of the Abyssins, and to abuse their good
nature, by making it a means to increase the Professors of their Religion; they
disguise themselves into Merchants and other necessary persons, that they might
have the liberty to convey, with less difficulty, their venomous Doctrines to
the sillypeople whom they Court with all manner of civility. To prevent
therefore their designs, and to give order to all the contingencies that do
happen in a large Empire very often. This great assembly meets in the presence
of their Emperor to consult about the preservation of themselves and of
Religion; the Abuna sits in the Chair, unless when the Emperor appears amongst
them himself, then the Abuna sits at his feet, and a Throne is erected a
purpose for the Neguz, the Clergy, Bishops and other persons called from all
the Kingdoms, are round about in a Ring in several ranks; when any is to speak,
he rises from his place and goes forth into the middle, and after an humble
obeisance to the Abuna or Emperor, he declares his judgment, the plurality of
voices determines the business in hand.

The affirmative part do lift up their forefinger, and profess at the same
time their consent, and if the plurality be on their side above two or three
persons, their judgment is good and lawful, otherwise the business is debated
until that number be found in either side. Their decrees are confirmed by the
Emperor and his Privy Counsel, and nothing is lawful without his consent. He
is the only Prince that governs in his dominions, none dares but by force of
Arms pretend any jurisdiction over his subjects but himself, therefore he
suffers nothing either in Church or State to be obeyed or imposed without his
cognizance. The Bishops and Clergy have a power to execute their office, teach
the people their duty, and see to their several charges, but they dare not
innovate or command the least new thing although it be very necessary, without
the Emperors leave. He commonly declares his pleasure by granting a writing,
unto which his Picture is annexed as a Seal, with a great Cross in his left
hand, and a sword in his right. This Proclamation is conveyed into those parts
that it concerns, where the people do in a most humble manner receive it. When
P. Clem. solicited him to submit to the Sea of Rome, he would never do it, but
commanded the Ambassador that had made that proposition, to depart out of his
dominions, where he had created a great disturbance, by divulging Doctrines
that were not known in those parts before.

Thus the Emperor is sole Lord of both Spiritual and Temporal, and will not
give an account of his actions to any one upon earth. He is respected according
to his Authority or Power, none dares oppose or contradict his commands, but
they all yield a blind obedience unto them, professing their willingness to
submit by kissing on their knees the writing that is brought unto them.

They make little conscience in the choice of their meats, but because it has
been the custom of their forefathers to abstain from some sorts of flesh, they
do imagine that they had some reason to do it which they do not understand,
therefore they continue the same customs to this day, they will not eat of any
Beast prohibited by Moses to the Jews, nor will they suffer any of them to be
killed amongst them unless it be in hunting. If any such creature be dead, they
bury him immediately; they will neither eat of flesh torn in pieces, nor that
has been hanged, stifled, or of which some other beast has been suffered to
feed; they will not eat any blood nor flesh where the blood remains; in these
particulars, they are Religious observers of the Law of Moses, not out of
conscience, but they know not how to leave customs unto which they were bred up
from the beginning.

They have no corporal penalties imposed upon them by their Confessors, unless
it be in the Covents and Religious Houses. In the Country those that commit any
sin, do suffer for it the reproach of his Neighbor and separation from the
Eucharist, until he professes his repentance, which commonly is done at the
door of the Churches when the people and the Priest go out, the Penitent
presents himself with ashes upon his Head, and a sorrowful countenance
confesses his guilt, promises an amendment and restitution of the damage if
any be received by the Neighbor, then the Priest absolves him, by declaring
that for the time to come he shall have liberty to come to the Lords body.
Those that are refractory and obstinate they punish by forbidding their
Neighbors to converse with them. Every one observes this so Religiously, that
they flee from an excommunicated person, as from a Pestilencious body, so that
he is forced unless he will become an Anachoret and run from the conversation
of the world, to reconcile himself again to the Church by begging the pardon of
his offense. The power of Excommunication is in the Bishop of every Diocese,
who is informed by the Priests of every Region or Precinct, of the misdemeanors
of the people; when he is rightly informed, not only by the Priest, but also by
the congregation, he dispatches an officer called a Shimcru, to give leave to
Excommunicate the offending person. The Priest in a full assembly informs the
people of his commission, declares unto them the ill behavior of the person,
his wicked life, and the scandal that he had given to his Neighbors, he makes
a long discourse of the means employed to recall him of his obstinacy, in
despising the Fatherly admonitions that had been made to him; and further shows
the danger to let him continue in their Communion. He concludes with an
Excommunication, and to render this action more dreadful, he gives leave to the
infernal spirits to seize upon such a person, casting into the Air a
firebrand* with some kind of execration.

But this kind The Translator.
of severity is not often used, the offenses must be very grievous to oblige
the Church to cast upon them her thunderbolts, and when she does it, is done
with that precaution, and with that time, that the offender has leisure to
repent, and every one is fully satisfied that it neither proceeds from malice
nor design. When men by their open profaneness and horrid crimes do disgrace
the Christian profession, when they continue in this manner of life, and
declare their contempt of God and his power; It is then only time to separate
such from our Communion, who have already separated themselves from Christ, and
declard their unworthiness to participate with us in the privileges of
Christian Religion. This was the practice of the Apostles, and of the primitive
Churches, they did shut them out of Heaven who declared they had no desire to
come thither, and published to the rest the esteem that every one was to have
of their persons. Amongst them the power of Excommunication was sacred and
holy, it was only employed at the extremity when no other means, neither
reprehension nor shame could recall men from their abominable vices; It was then
esteemed accordingly, men were as fearful to fall under it, as to be cast into
the flames of hell. And then it was followed by such effects as did declare the
dreadful power of it; the evil spirits did take the excommunicated person into
their possession, and did begin to torment him in the same manner that he shall
be in hell, so that many times people being sensible of their woeful condition
did fall upon their knees, and beg the pardon of the Church. It was also the
custom of old Christians never to come near an Excommunicated person, all his
acquaintance and friends did shun his company; so that when he did see himself
abandoned by every one, shame and grief did work upon him and obliged him to an
amendment of life. In the time of the Christian Emperors this power of
Excommunication began to be horribly abused and profaned in civil Matters, to
satisfy hatred and vengeance, some Bishops did Excommunicate others; at the
least displeasure, they would send their adversaries to hell, and suffer no
correspondency to be further entertained between them on earth; by this means
they did proclaim a public war one against another, and made use of the sacred
weapons of Excommunication to make good their quarrel, as if God were bound to
espouse their particular interests and sins with them against those for whom
they had conceived a displeasure. Victor Bishop of Rome with one thunderbolt of
the Vatican was resolved to cast all the Eastern Churches from the hopes of
arriving to Heaven. The Bishops of Constantinople Excommunicated those of
Alexandria, and they excommunicated them of Constantinople; and in the same
City these thunderbolts of Excommunication were heard against several
factions, mere scar-crows when ill applied; when Excommunication is abused to
promote our secular interests, it is like the (...), of the Heathens, or the
Canonisation of the Papists, a Chimera, a vain and frivolous action, if that
may be so named, that profanes or disgraces one of the most sacred parts of
Religion, and misapply that divine power with which Christ has entrusted the
Rulers of his Church. Let them take heed how and upon whom for the future they
employ this holy weapon, for they may by the abuse of it bring a contempt upon
themselves and Religion, that all their policy and severity will never be able
to remove; I pray God to grant unto those amongst us such Christian wisdom and
moderation, that piety may be cherished, and the profaneness discouraged; that
peace and unity may Reign amongst us, and that they may advance the interest of
Christianity as well as of this or of that faction.

The Abyssins never burn an excommunicated person, nor do they use any violence
against his Person or Goods, unless he offers to break the public peace, or to
pronounce something to the prejudice of the Government, then they lay hold of
him and secure him in a convenient Prison. They never make use of
excommunication, but in cases that concern the customs and manners of a man,
and never then, unless he continues in his evil practices after admonition;
when they restore a man to his former privileges, at his repentance, they do
not impose any pecuniary or corporal penalty, as we do in Rome, but he is
admitted after the Bishop has been acquainted with it, only by declaring it
unto the Congregation with the signs of his repentance; for as much as I could
learn they do not think that our purses or our bodily punishments can further
our Reception into Gods favor, unless the soul be really humbled and contrite.
The flagellations and macerations of the body usual in many of our Cities of
Spain and Italy, were never seen amongst them unless it be upon the borders of
their Kingdoms amongst the Mahumetans and Gentiles, whose Religions do
recommend unto the Professors of them voluntary penances as high expressions of
devotion; but this kind of devotion is not in practice amongst these Christians
of Abassia, therefore they know nothing of indulgencies and pardons granted by
the Rulers of the Church. This trade was never introduced amongst them.

They have an excellen order amongst them in the Church. The Abuna is the
chief, he is as the Pope in Rome, or as the Archbishop, his power is to command
over all the Kingdoms subject to the Neguz in matters of Religion, and to see
that the Orders or Decrees of the assembly that meets every other year be
obeyed under him. Bishops are appointed in the several Kingdoms, but they do
not receive any into holy Orders; That Office belongs to the Abuna, but these
Bishops have the power of excommunication, and of reproving the Clergy (...)er
them that behave themselves not well in their function; every Bishop is usually
seated in the most considerable place of the Kingdom, where he has so much
Land belonging to him and his office as is able to maintain him in that degree
of honor.

The rest of the Priests owe nothing to him out of their allowance; he
officiates as the rest, and is no otherwise distinguished from them but by his
habit, that is not the same with theirs, and by the respect that every one pays
to his gravity, for never any young men are admitted to that honorable place
in the Church, only merit assisted by the esteem the people and their Prince
have for them, when they come to such an age, that all their youthful
inclinations are past, d(...)ise them to the Episcopal Chair.

The Abuna has some dependency upon the Patriarch of Alexandria, Resident at
Grand Cairo. When he is dead the Emperor sends to the Monks of Jerusalem, of
the Order of St. Anthony the Hermit; they immediately proceed to the choosing
of one fit for so great an employ when he is pitched upon and sent away, he
passes by Grand Cairo, salutes the Patriarch in Egypt, and then Marches on his
journey to the Imperial Court, where the Emperor and all the Nobles do welcome
him with all expressions of respect and honor. He seldom remains in one place,
but often Visits the Kingdoms of the Emperors dominions, to see and provide to
all disorders that do daily happen. The rest of the Bishops are placed or
displaced by him, but with the Emperors consent and appointment, unto whom
they may appeal in case injury is done unto them. When there is any vacancy the
Emperor grants the Lands and the Office to whom he pleases, the Abuna must
afterward approve of the choice; all the degrees of the Clergy are
distinguished from one another, and from the people by some badge or habit,
which signifies the office that they have undertaken.

The Translator.
THis Relation is agreeable to the account that we have formerly received of
the Abyssins, written by Damianus Deo Ges a Portuguese, and received from Zaga
Zabo, the Abyssin Ambassador sent from the Neguz into Portugal to King John
about the year 1526. Damianus de Goes contracted a Friendship with this
Ambassador, and obliged him to discover unto him the customs and Religion of
the Christians in Abassia, both Relations do agree in many things, I conceive
that De Goes does favor the interest of the Roman Religion in many
particulars, but in others he declares how the Abyssins are different from the
Papists; the Reader may consult the Author, a piece of it is here translated
for puklick satisfaction.

Zagazabo the Emperor of Abassias Ambassador in Portugal.
AFter that I was come into Portugal, I had often many disputes with certain
Doctors, especially Didacus Ortifius Bishop of the Isle of St. Thomas, and
Dean, of the Kings Chapel, and with Peter Margalho about the choice of Meats.
It will not therefore be amiss to speak now something about it. First you must
know that according to the Old Testament were observed the Rules for to choose
our Meats, which was commanded by Gods Word, that did afterward take flesh of
the Virgin Mary, he did walk and converse amongst his Apostles. This word of
God is always the fame and ever living, never subject to change, therefore
what he commanded should not be eaten because of its uncleanness, he never gave
leave afterward in his Gospel to eat it. It is true, he tells us that what
enters in by the mouth; does not defile the man, but that which proceeds from
the mouth, but he does not say it, that he might contradict what he had before
established, but only that he might refute the superstition of the Jews that
did reprove the Apostles for eating with unwasht hands. And the Apostles
themselves whiles they lived with our Savior Christ Jesus, never made use of
unclean beasts, nor did ever taste of those things that we^^ prohibited in the
Law, and no^^ of them did offer to transgress i^ this particular. After our
Saviou^ Passion when the Apostles beg^^ to preach the Gospel, none (...) ever
prove by the Sacred Record^ that they did ever eat or kill (...) unclean beast.
It is true, St. P(...) says, whatsoever comes in t^^ shambles eat, inquire not
of it (...) conscience sake; after that (...) says, if any unbeliever does
inv^ you to a Feast and you have ^ mind to go, of whatsoever is p(...) before
you eat, inquiring after nothing because of conscience. Again, if any shall say
this was sacrificed to an Idol, do not eat of (...) because of him that told
thee, an^ because of conscience, etc. Al^ this St. Paul says to please the^
that were not sufficiently confirmed in the faith, because between them and the
Jews there were many disputes and contentions; to the end that he might appease
them, he sided with, and labored to please the Christians that were not
confirmed in the faith. This he did not to break the Law, but only by granting
something of the ceremonies, he might win them to the faith. The same Apostle
says, Let him that eats not despise him that eats, ^or him that eats not
judge him that eats; for he that eats, eats to the Lord, and he that
eats not, eats not to the Lord.

Therefore it is an unworthy act to reprove foreign Christians so fiercely and
in a hostile manner, as I have been for this and other matters that concern not
true faith. It were more wisely done to bear with such Christian men as the
Greeks, Armenians, and Ethiopians are, to treat them with kindness and charity,
and to suffer them to live and converse with other Christians, for we are all
baptized in the same baptism, and subscribe unanimously to the same belief.
There is no cause wherefore any should so furiously dispute about ceremonies,
let every one observe his own without hatred and railing one against another,
for that the correspondency between Churches should not be interrupted, if afar
off they use customs in those Provinces proper to the place and genius of the
people. Besides, we have in the Acts of the Apostles, how Peter saw the Heavens
opened, and a certain vessel come down like a great sheet bending on the four
corners to the earth, in the which were all sorts of four-footed Beasts and
Serpents of the earth, with the Fowls of the Air, unto him the voice did say,
Rise Peter and eat, unto whom Peter answered, Far be it from me Lord, for I
never did eat any common or unclean thing. The voice answered him, What God
has purified do not thou call it unclean; which being often repeated, the
vessel was taken up into Heaven.

These things being done, the spirit sent him to Caesarea to Cornelius a pious
man, and one that did fear God, unto whom as Peter did preach: The Holy Ghost
fell upon all that heard the word of God, and Peter did baptize, etc.

This Vision is thus interpreted by us in Ethiopia, the clean Beasts are the
Children of Israel, the unclean the Gentiles, who are thus called, because they
are worshippers of Idols, and act the unclean works of the Devil. And whereas
the voice said unto Peter, Peter rise and kill, we thus understand it, Peter,
Baptize, Eat; that is, preach and publish the faith and the Law of our Lord
Jesus Christ to the people of Israel, and to the Gentiles. It is certain that
it can never be found, that Peter, or any other of the Apostles did either kill
or eat unclean Beasts after this Vision. Now when the Scripture mentions food,
in several places it intends to signify unto us Christ and his Doctrine; we
must not therefore understand it of any corporal or nourishing food. All the
learned do agree that this sheet that was shown unto Peter, did teach him high
and sublime matters, and not the inferior things of the world that relate not
to our salvation, neither are we to gather from thence that we have liberty to
eat of unclean things, seeing that can never be gathered out of Scripture;
wherefore do the Apostles amongst the Decrees of their Council command us not
to eat of creatures hanged, strangled, ^orn in pieces, or half eaten by other
beasts, or of blood; for God loves cleanness and sobriety, and hates
gluttonness, and uncleanness. God loves them also that abstain from flesh, and
much more them that feed upon bread and herbs, and are content with water, as
St. John Baptist that lived a Hermit beyond Jordan, he always fed upon herbs,
St. Paul the Hermit led a sparing life in the desert 80 years, St. Anthony,
and St. Macarius, and many of their followers never tasted any flesh. Therefore
my brethren you must not contemn, nor revile us, for St. James says, he that
speaks evil of his brother, or Judges his bother, speaks evil of the Law, and
Judges of the Law; and S. Paul advises to be content with our own traditions,
and not to dis-pute about the Law of Moses with Christians, wherefore it is not
handsome to quarrel with our brethren about the Law, or the choice of Meats,
for meats do not render us more or less acceptable to God; therefore let us
seek after the heavenly food, and set aside these frivolous disputations about
meats.

These things that I have here written about traditions, proceed not out of an
itch of disputation, nor out of contention, but only that I might justify my
own people from the cruel accusations of many who having no respect for my
Master the most Potent Emperor Precious Giam, ^or for us his subjects, do
revile us and call us Jews and Mahumetans, because we observe the Saturday as
the Jews, and fast till Evening as the Mahumetans; they say these things should
not be done by Christians, they do also complain against us for the Marriage of
our Clergy, who have the same liberty as the other people: and because we are
rebaptized every year, as if we did distrust the efficacy of the first
baptism, because we circumcise men and women, which custom the Jews do not
observe so punctually; because we keep the Law of Moses in the choice of meats;
and because we judge more charitably of Christian children before baptism than
they do, and esteem them not as Pagans, but as half Christians. I have been
forced to publish this that I might justify my own people from their slanders
that accuse us, and that I might oblige the Doctors of the Church of Rome to be
the more kind to us. I know not by what Religious instinct they have been moved
to forbid me to participate with them in the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, since I am come into Portugal, neither do I know wherefore I am
esteemed amongst my Christian brethren as a Heathen and an excommunicated
person which has caused me much grief, but to him that sees and Judges all
things I remit my cause.

I am not sent by my most mighty Lord the Emperor of Ethiopia, to the Bishop
of Rome, and the most Serene Prince John King of Portugal, only to entertain
them with disputations; but to conclude a firm league, and open a
correspondency between them, not to discourse about humane traditions, but to
inquire about the errors of Arrius the Prince of Heretics, and know whether
the Christians of Europe do join with us in opposing his opinions; and further,
that I might know whether it be the custom of the European Christians to
assemble in Counsel twice every year about Matters of faith, as the Apostles
have commanded in their Synodial book, the first assembly they order to be met
on the day of Pentecosts, the second on the tenth of October.

Besides, I am come to know how we agree about the errors of Macedonius of
Nestorius, and of Eutiches; about the last the Council of Calcedone assembled,
but the Bishops broke up the assembly before any Conclusion, retaining their
own opinions; My Lord, the most Mighty Emperor hath-all the books of the
General Councel's, and is much grieved, so are all his subjects; for the
discords and errors, these Tares that the Devil has sown in the Lords field;
the Bishop of Rome, we have always est comedus, the first and most powerful
Bishop of the world, and were it not for the Mahumetans, whose Country being
between us, do hinder our passage, and for the great distance of places, we
should send to his Court very often. King Emanuel of blessed Memory did first
open a way to us from the Red sea, etc.

Having spoken of these things, I will say something of our Emperor, and of
our Patriarch. You must know first, that our Patriarch is thus solemnly elected
by and out of our Monks of Jerusalem that there do dwell at the Sepulcher of
our Lord. When the old Patriarch is dead, the Emperor dispatches away with all
speed an express to the Monks that live at Jerusalem, as soon as they have
received the news of the death of the Abuna with the Presents that the Emperor
sends to our Saviors Sepulcher, they proceed to the election of another Abuna,
whom they choose by the plurality of voices. It is not lawful to pitch upon
another for that office, but only upon an Inhabitant of Alexandria, and upon
one whose life is irreproachable. When they have chosen him, they give unto him
his dispatches with the messenger that came to give them notice of the former
Abuna's death. They go together to Grand Cairo, to meet the Egyptian Patriarch
that has there his ordinary residence, to the end that he may be acquainted
with the election. The Patriarch when he approves of the sufficiency of the
person for so eminent an office; he sends him into Ethiopia with the messenger,
who must always be according to the ancient custom, a Monk of the Order of St.
Anthony the Hermit, with him this messenger hasten^ toward Ethiopia,
wherewith all expressions of joy and honor they are received of all men.
Sometimes a year or two passes before this business can be dispatched. In the
mean while the Neguz disposes of the great Revenue of the Abuna according to
his pleasure. Now the chief office of an Abuna, is to confer Holy Orders, none
but he can give them, or ought to take them away, or degrade the Priests. He
never affects to meddle with the giving of Bishoprics, or of Benefices that do
belong to the Precious ^iam, who may do with them according to his pleasure.
And when the Patriarch or Abuna is dead the Emperor is the Heir of his Estate,
which is very great. It belongs also to the Patriarch to excommunicate
contumacious offenders. He never grants any Indulgencies of those penalties
that are imposed for grievous faults. The Sacraments of the Church are never
prohibited to any unless it be for the crime of Murder. Our Patriarch is called
in our language Abuna, he that is at present in this place is called at his
baptism Mark; a man aged of about 100 years. Moreover it is to be noted that we
begin the year the first of September, which is with us the Eve of St. John
Baptists day, the rest of the Feast days we keep at the same time that they are
kept by the Church of Rome. We must not omit that St. Philip the Apostle came
into our Country, and did there preach the Gospel of our Savior Christ.

You must further know the name of our Emperor, that it is Precious John or
^iam, and no^ Priest John, as here it is falsely reported; for it is written in
our language ^iam Belul, that is, Precius or high John in the Chaldaique
Language, it is written John E^coe, which has the same interpretation Precious
or excellent John. He is not to be named Emperor of the Abyssins, as Matthew.
has written, but of the Ethiopians. He being an Armenian, could not know our
affairs perfectly, especially those that concern our Religion; for that reason
he declared many things to King Emanuel of happy Memory, which are not so
amongst us, not out of any design of deceiving him, for ^e was a good man, but
because ^e was well acquainted with our Religion.

The Empire many times does ^ot fall to the share of the Eldest Son of the
Emperor, but to him unto whom the Father will give ^^. He that now governs is
the ^hird Son of the last Emperor, ^e has deserved that honor by ^is piety
and respect which he had ^or his Father; for when he was upon his deathbed, he
commanded all his Sons one after another ^o sit upon the Imperial Throne, which
they did, he only excepted; Far be it from me, said he, that I should ascend to
the Seat of my Lord and Father, which pious mo^esty procured him the Empire
^^om his Father; his name is David, his Empire is very large, and contains both
Christians and Heathens. In it are many Kings and Princes, Earls, Barons,
Grandees and much Nobility, that is mo(...) obedient to him. Gold and Silver
are given and exchanged by weight. Amongst us are many Towns and Cities, but
not such as I have seen in Portugal, because Precious Giam does always live i^
a flying Camp, and in Tents* This Custom is observed, that the Nobility might
exercise themselves continually in Military Actions, for we are surrounded on
all with sides the enemies of our faith with whom we have often many Conflicts,
always, or for the most part with success, through the goodness of God.

This is the account Zaga Za^i gives of his own Country, his Relation may be
consulted by those that desire more satisfaction; for brevity sake, much of it
is omitted. Scaliger in the eighth Book of his de Emendatione temporum, speaks
thus of the Ethiopians.

We have not been the first that have heard of the Ethiopian Chri(...)ans, for
they have Churches, not only in Constantinople, but also at Rome and Venice,
where for a while they have had liberty to perform their devotions. From the
Voyages of the Portugueses, and the Journal of Francis Alvarez, who passed into
the heart of Ethiopia, many things may be known of them, and of their customs;
until this time we have heard only of the name of Ethiopia, but it is strange
that in the time of our forefathers, we first heard that there were Ethiopians
from those of Asia; for about 300 years ago they did command in Asia,
especially Drangiana upon the confines of Sufiana, also in India, and amongst
the Chinenses a great Continent, until the Emperors of the Tartars did drive
them out of Asia; for the Abyssins being vanquished, were driven out of China
by Cingi King of the Tartars, when Uncam the great Emperor of Ethiopia was
killed Afterward Cincan Son of Cingis, and his Son Bathin Can, Emperors of
the Tartars, pursued the Abyssins, and forced them out of Moni and all the
Region of the Chinenses, and obliged them to return into Africa. We may at
present wonder that this Nation should be so ignorant of the Art of Navigation,
who was so powerful by Sea, and by Land, that it commanded from Ethiopia as far
as China; from that time we have heard of the Emperor of Ethiopia by the name
of Prestegiani, which in the Persian language (that is in Asia as universal as
the Latin is in Europe) signifies Apostolic. Padescha Prestegiani, the
Apostolic King, that is, the Christian King. The Arabians call him Melich
Ressuli, and the Ethiopians, Negusch Chavvariavvi. There are many Crosses yet
standing in Asia, in Japan, China, and other places, that declare how large the
Empire of the Ethiopians was in that Continent; besides, in Malabar there is a
Temple of St. Thomas yet to be seen, that is of the Structure and manner of
building of the Ethiopians.

A Continuation of Segn. ^. Barat(...) Of the Growth and Commodities of the
Country.
THis Country stretches (...) self about eight degrees North, and as many South
from the Line; So that it lies exposed to the fury of the Sun beams. The soil
nevertheless in many places is extreme fruitful, and the ay^ temperate,
especially toward the Evening, then the great Dew^ come to refresh the herbs
and fruits that the parching Sun had injured. Part of this Country is very
barren and incommodious for habitation, sometimes we have felt such extreme
heats, that it was not possible to subsist out of the shade, and about six
miles further between the Mountains and amongst the trees, we had such a
pleasant air, that I never saw any more temperate in Europe. I met with a great
many Lakes and fresh Rivers, especially upon the borders of Tigremahon, where
the ground yields all manner of Fruit, Trees, and Corn; Pomegranates of
extraordinary bigness, Apples, Pears, Peaches, and Apricocks are very small,
but of a very pleasant taste. They have here a Fruit that they call Cavashau
that grows in their Gardens, it is very delicious, and much like unto our
little Muskmellons* but of a contrary taste. The Abyssins make a great account
of it in their Feasts.

The Corn of this Country is very good, bigger than that of Italy in most
places. They have Beans, Pease, Lentils, Barley, Wheat, and all sorts of
Grains, but where the Country is so dry and barren that it will not answer the
labor of the Husbandman nature has provided instead o^ Corn, a wild Grain
called Taf^ Deguza, of this the Inhabitants make a Bread which is as course and
unpleasant as the Climate.

In many places Oranges and Limons grow naturally in the Woods; here is also
many Trees that yield an odoriferous smell* and a great deal of Brazil-wood,
Sugar Canes in great abundance, which the Inhabitants do make use of not as we
do, for they have not the Art to extract the Sugar, but they feed upon them raw.

They have no Oil nor Olive Trees, but an Herb that serve^ them instead of
Olives, it is called Henar, they steep it and draw out the juice that looks
like Gold, very beautiful to the eye, and n^ less pleasant to the taste, for
the Oil or Liquor extracted from it has neither smell nor taste, and is very
fat as Oil uses to be; so that the Inhabitants are by that means supplied with
that which serves them as well as the best Oil of Italy.

The Woods and Rocks are full of Bees, so that they have much Honey and Wax,
with which they make Candles, for they have no Tallow, because they do not kill
many tame Beasts. Here is a great Trade of Raw Silks and Stuffs which the
Blacks fetch from hence to carry into their Country, where no Trees are to be
found to harbor the Silkworm. Upon the confines of the Neguz dominions near
the Kingdom of Damut are Mines of Gold about the lake, out of which the River
Niger proceeds, so that this river carrys away some of the sandy part, and
rowls it with the stream that is extreme fierce, (for it falls from high
Mountains) and runs with a great impetuosity to the main Ocean; upon the sand
the Negers do pick up much Gold which crumbles from the Rocks, and proceeds out
of the Mines that are dispersed all over the Country.

The N(...) has people daily at work in them, they are commonly men taken
Captives from their Enemies. When the Ethiopians go out to War, they save the
lives of all those that submit themselves to their mercy, and send them to
these places to prepare the Gold, and fit it for the use of the people.

Some Silver Mines are also here, but not so many as of Gold, for the hot
country is not so proper for that kind of Oar. The parching Sun is more
powerful in this Climate in the bosom of the earth, so that all the ground that
is proper for the substance of Gold, it turns it into this Metal. The Mines are
not so deep as in other Kingdoms, they are much like unto our Quarries of Stone
in Italy. The Stone or Rock with which the Gold is mingled is very sandy, so
that it will crumble without any difficulty. The mine does usually run in a
vain, it is easy to distinguish it by the color, which is distinct from the
other part of the Rock. The Inhabitants say that all along the River that
bursts forth of the Lake Laira, many such Golden Quarries are to be found, so
that the violence of the stream does sometimes unloose the more precious part
from the rest, and carry it away to the great benefit of the Inhabitants, who
gather it up along the shore after great Rains; and afterward they carry it to
Gui^y, or to Mozambique, and other places of note where Merchants resort. In
the Land toward the Country of the Blacks, lives a people very deformed and
misshapen, different from the rest of men, not in the main composition of the
body, but in the disproportion of the parts. They do not love to appear amongst
persons that have the true form of men; necessity constrains them to entertain
a Trade, which they do in such a strange manner, that they are not like to the
rest of Nations. They inhabit the Country called Guangara and Media, it is
mountainous and inconvenient for passengers, whom they never suffer to go
through their dominions. The River Niger, so full of Gold passes along their
Territories, and furnishes them with that Commodity, to exchange for those
other Commodities that nature requires, and that they have not in such plenty
as their Neighbors. It is a business of difficulty to speak with some of them
they are so savage. Those that Trade upon the River, may Land their Goods and
see them afar off, but they seldom do show themselves. They are very just in
their dealings, and will not wrong strangers of a farthing, which if they did,
it might put a stop to their Trade, without which they cannot probably live*
They seem to have some Government amongst them, for upon the mountains, places
are fortified, and the passages blockt up, and they have been seen to observe a
Decorum in their manner of Life and behavior.

From this place many Nations of Europe have their Golden dust, for the ships
go up the River many hundred leagues to Trade with this obscure sort of people,
who show themselves afar off, leaving with their Merchandise such tokens and
signs, that may express their demands, but they always retreat at the same
time into the Woods, and will not suffer any to come near. This has been
related to me for certain by many eyewitnesses, and by persons of Credit and
Worth; this is a strange sort of people, which none of their Neighbors can
certainly know.

Ethiopia yields many other Commodities, Hides are very plentiful, especially
of the wild Beasts and Buff-skins, which in this Country are bigger and
thicker than in any other. Here are stuffs made of the Bark of the Indian-tree
that grows also here in every place; the common people are employed to fit it
for sale and work. Some Spices, Drugs, and Roots do naturally come forth in
this Climate called by the ancients the Torrid Zone. The Merchants of Adel, and
Mozambique, and of other places adjoining to the Sea do enter into the Land in
times of Peace to Trade with the Inhabitants and fetch from them their
Commodities, to convey them afterward to the Seaside, where the Moors, the
Arabs, and Banyans of the Indies do meet them, with the Factors of other
Nations, to take from them their Goods. Now this is the policy of all the
Princes that keep the Sea shore, not to suffer an Abyssin unless he be an
Apostate to have liberty to Trade out of the Country of the Neguz, of whose
power they are very jealous, least he should recover again the Dominion of the
Sea, which he has lost, with all his Ships and Seaport Towns, some few years
since. When he offers to stir, all his Neighbors do join together to force him
into his bounds, for he is looked upon as their common enemy. Some nevertheless
of the Abyssin Monks have correspondency with the Indians and Chinese, but it
is only for those Merchandises that are for the supply of their own territories.

A short Relation of some of their Emperors found in an ancient Ethiopian
Record* that the Author has brought with him into Itaty.
THis Empire is very ancient, and was as large in its first beginning, the
people were warlike, incroaching daily upon their Neighbors, especially upon
those that live in Egypt, and about the River Nilus. The Egyptians have had
continual wars with them. In the time of the Pharoes our Emperors were famous;
Moses the Lawgiver of the children of Israel was the General of Pharaoh, or of
King of Egypt, he was ordered to march with a party of Israelites against
Mouchadir Emperor of Ethiopia, he readily obeyed, and with a small party he
routed the great Army of our Emperor, not s^ much by valor as by the
assistance of a divine power; the King of Egypt was grown jealous of him and of
his people, and therefore he sent them to this war, hoping to free himself from
his fears by the swords of the Ethiopians, who were become terrible to all
their Neighbors, but God caused that which was intended for the mischief of
the Israelites to turn to their advantage, for by the Victory, they purchased
unto themselves the esteem and admiration of all their enemies. It is true,
that the King did then begin to vex the Children of Israel with hard burdens
and grievous taxes, thinking by that means to weaken their spirits, and disable
them from in^uring either himself or any other, but this also turned to their
benefit, for it procured their freedom, and the ensuing miracles that forced it
from those that kept them in bondage. When the Egyptians were overthrown, the
Ethiopians had wonderful success against them, they subdued all the Country as
far as Thebis bordering upon the Red Sea, but about thirty years afterward
there rose a King of Egypt that was valiant in war that recovered with his
small numbers of men, all the dominions belonging to his Predecessors, as far
as the Mountains where the River Nilus has a terrible downfall. In his race it
continued until the time of Cambyses who entered Egypt, and conquered it, but
could never subdue Ethiopia; for when he sent his Ambassadors to our Emperor,
they were sent back with a defiance of his Power, as he was passing over some
of the sandy hills between Ethiopia and Egypt with some of his Troops, they
lost a great number of men in a storm of wind, for they were there buried
alive; some of them saved themselves with their King out of the violent storm,
but this overthrow prevented his coming into our Country, where our Emperor
expected him with all his people. The wind did fight for us against our
enemies, it saved us the trouble and hazard of venturing against them with our
swords.

In the time of King Solomon, our Empire was governed by Queen Maqueda, she
sent Ambassadors to him, and afterward went to visit him her self, she was
kindly entertained at her return, she was brought to bed of a Son which she had
by Solomon, called Melich, she brought Circumcision into the Land, and laid the
foundations of the Jewish Religion, which her Son afterward when he was come
from Jerusalem did establish, commanding all people under his command to
receive it. After him many Kings did Reign in Ethiopia, the most famous was
Ubsharem, Habraini, David the 1 Solomon, the 1 and many others. The Scepter
has always continued in the same race since that time until now. Ubsharem was
a warlike Prince, he conquered all the Provinces as far as the Seacoast
South-wards, and made all the Kings his Neighbors to send Presents to him, but
when he was forty years old he grew amorous and wanton, so that his new
conquered subjects took advantage of him in a Battle, where he lost all that he
had conquered with his life, his successor labored to revenge this affront,
but in vain, until the days of David the first, none ever did recover the vast
dominions that did formerly own the Ethiop. Scepter. This Prince was wise and
very politic, sufficiently qualified to fit at the Helm of State, but he was
no Warrior for want of Courage; to manage the affairs in desperate occasions,
he appointed a General, Zecharia, a stout man that did perform the Office of
his Prince in this particular. He was very successful against all our
Neighbors, especially against the Blacks that inhabit beyond the sands, their
Princes came to do homage unto our mighty Emperor, and to pay their yearly
tribute; they continued in their obedience many years, until the Reign of
Joseph the third, a Prince that was given to all manner of debauchery, he
Reigned ten years, and was afterward killed by his chief Officers* who were
willing to preserve the State from total ruin; which would have happened had
he continued longer upon the Throne, for he did not only permit, but also
invite the enemies of the Empire to enter into his dominions, that they might
revenge him of those Princes that he did not love, and that he did not dare to
punish himself, therefore he made use of the strangers weapons to vex them that
he could not otherwise overcome. From that time we have nothing remarkable,
until Christ's death at Jerusalem; for all the Princes that did rule until that
time were neither good nor bad, they contented themselves with their own
limits, and if they did lose any part of their possessions, they never made any
great noise by raising their Armies to retake them. Queen Candace was a most
pious and Religious Woman, her Eunuch of the Race of Black a-Moors did follow
her steps, he made his Pilgrimage to Jerusalem every five years from that
place, he brought the Christian faith that did daily increase, insomuch that
not one was found opposing it within two hundred years after. The eldest Son of
Candace, for whom she did govern was Shediahr, a mostvertuous man, he
encouraged Christian Religion in his dominions, but would never suffer the old
ceremonies to be abolished, so that since, the Jewish and Christian are mingled
together; he pulled down many Idol Temples upon the borders, which caused the
revolt of some of his most superstitious subjects, but one battle brought them
under his command again. His Son was Adreschek, he succeeded his father when he
was but sixteen years of Age. A certain Heathen Priest had crept into his
favor so much, that for his sake he did labor to oppose the success of the
Christian and the continuance of the Jewish Religion in Ethiopia. His Princes
could not suffer him long, they conspired against him, and placed his young
brother in his place, but him they sent into the Kingdom of Damut, into a close
Prison that has always been in those parts; he did afterward escape out of it
and fled to the Blacks, who did come against Ethiopia with a strong Army, but
they were vanquished and forced to suffer their Fugitive Prince to become a
Prisoner again. The eldest Son of this King was an accomplished Prince, so that
his Uncle had some jealousy of him, and therefore clapped him in a close prison
with his Father, but when he was dead, the Grandees fetched him out of his
confinement, and raised him to the Throne during the life of his Father, who
consented to the promotion of his Son. After him Absalom was a famous Prince,
renowned for his careful provision against the enemies incursions, for he
caused certain Forts to be built in convenient places to bridle them in. They
were afterward neglected and ruinated by the Wars. He first began to encourage
Shipping, by offering great advantages to the Mariners and men that did study
the Art of Navigation. This good policy caused all the idle persons to render
themselves excellent in the Sea affairs, and laid the Foundation to that
greatness, unto which the Ethiopian Empire did afterward rise.

Benjamin Reigned forty years, about the year 600 after Christ, from his time
we have a good account of all our Kings, but before none are named but those
that have been excellent for some virtue, or infamous by their notable vices.
This Prince was full of piety, he reformed the disorders of the Clergy, and put
them in that form of Government in which they are at present; before, the
persons that did wait upon the Worship of God, had no settled allowance; the
people gave them what they pleased, so that unless they did work as other
people for their livings, they were reduced to great necessities, which
nevertheless did happen in many places, for he that depends upon his peoples
kindness, shall be enentertain'd with course Diet; unto this great evil that
entroduces many others in a Nation; this Religious Prince did bring a Remedy.
As he was the sole Lord of all the Lands of his Empire, and that none enjoyed
them but from him, he caused such a quantity of ground to be set apart for the
maintenance of the Priests and Bishops, as might entertain them with the yearly
Revenue, and caused this Land to be separated from the rest, by granting unto
it the privilege of immunity from all saxes and Imposts, so that they depend
no longer upon the Crown. This liberality redeemed the Clergy from contempt,
and raised them in the esteem of the people, that usually treats them, not
according to their desert, but according to that State that they maintain.

After the good Prince, his second Son Hechakiah did Reign, he followed his
Fathers footsteps, therefore he was blessed with a prosperous Reign, his
greatest enemies did respect him, he continued in the Throne about thirty five
years, and a few months.

His Brother Abraham the first, succeeded, he held the Scepter ten years, and
then left it to his Son, with all the Wealth his Brother had gotten.

His Sons name was Haroahki, a Warlike Prince, he began to leave the Cities,
and to pass his time in Tents, for in the beginning of his Reign all the
Nations subject to the Neguz, began to revolt from him, he could not appease
the tumult so soon; he was therefore forced to live in the Camp, and to be in
continual action all the time of his Reign. He caused it to be enacted for the
security of the State, that the Ethiopian Emperor should never spend above six
days in a Walled Town at a time, but should live in the open Field. All the
Nobility that does follow the Princes custom, imitates him in this particular.
They look upon it as a great expression of weakness and fear to run into a
fortified place. This has caused them to neglect such places, and suffer them
to be dismantled by time, so that at present in all the Empire there are but
few Walled Towns, and they are so pitiful that the weakest enemy might storm
them. In the time of this Prince, Trade and Shipping did mightily increase, so
that he was dreadful to his Neighbors, when he had governed the Empire twenty
six years, he dyed.

H^li his Son succeeded him, he was the youngest, his Father had for him a
great kindness which was increased by his address and handsome behavior. His
elder brethren were set aside, and he was raised upon the Throne, he was very
happy all his time, and enjoyed a firm peace with most of his Neighbors, he
continued Emperor forty seven years and three months. After him Hell the
second Melach, Charvah, Bou^i, Grimshach, Habraim ^. etc. with about thirty
Kings are to be reckoned from that time to the year, 936. In which year the
Ethiopian Emperors that were grown so potent by Land, adventured to enlarge
their dominions by Sea in Asia; for that intent David Emperor of Ethiopia,
prepared a Fleet of above 500 Sail of ships small and great to transport his
Army, composed of 60000 Men, both Horse and Foot; with this numerous Army he
Landed in Arabia, and conquered all that part of the Country that lies upon the
Sea-shoar. The Abyssins found their abode in Asia far more pleasant than in
Africa, therefore great numbers of men went over and passed the Seas into the
new conquests. The Persians and Arabians did oppose their designs, but our
Emperor being there in person, did so order his business that all the Forces
that were sent against us were routed, many battles were fought between us with
various success.

The last was near the place where the River Euphrates discharges it self into
the Sea, seven Kings were met upon the place with all the men that they could
conveniently bring to withstand our Emperor. The enemies reckoned about two
hundred thousand men in their Army; we had then about forty thousand, this
unequal number did encounter them, and by the wonderful goodness of God they
did overcome them. This Victory opened a way to our success in Asia, for it
rendered the name of Ethiopia most terrible, so that none did dare to meet us
with equal numbers of men, every year our people sent great numbers of men with
their Families, to inhabit in Asia, and by that means to secure their interest
from the ancient Inhabitants by force of Arms. The next that succeeded in the
Empire was Uncan I. A man no less Valarous than his Father, a great lover of
Learning and of the Learned men, he enlarged his dominions beyond the River
Indus, and conquered all that part of the Country that is so fruitful, that the
Asiatiques esteem it the best and most fruitful Province of that part of the
world. This Prince had several encounters with his Neighbors (...) Asia, where
he made for the mo(...) part his residence. In one the King of Malabar came
against him with 40000 Foot and Horse* The Ethiopians were full of valoue and
courage, but the numbers of their enemies put them to great straits, so that
they offered to render themselves into their hands in case they would suffer
them quietly to depart with their lives saved. The enemy would not accept of
that offer, to his own detriment, for ours being refused the condition
proposed, and seeing nothing but death, or at least but bondage and misery
prepared for them and their Prince, they tool courage, encountered the enemy
with a great resolution broke the first ranks of them, and then pursued them
with that fury, that they left not killing until the whole multitude with their
King at their head fled away, leaving all their own spoils, and the Goods that
they had taken in the former advantages they had had against our Emperor.
Several Emperors did succeed him, but not to his Fortune and Success unless it
be Joseph, 3. Judahr, Macarius, and Paulus. They carried the terror of our
Arms into China, and there possessed themselves of many large Provinces which
we enjoyed until the year 1436. The Tartars about that time made some In-roads
into China, and finding the Climate good, and the Country fruitful, they
invited their Countrymen into those Regions. Some few years after they had
gathered a numerous Army to enter China, they conquered the Emperor of that
Country, who had desired our assistance against them, we complied with their
desires, our Emperor sent 30000 men to their assistance, but by the stratagems
and valor of the Tartars, our men were almost all slain. The Chinenses being
destitute of that succor, yielded themselves to the mercy of the Conquerours,
who thought upon nothing but how to revenge themselves upon us; they came
therefore with their own forces, and with those that they had gathered in the
Country, and drive out our people out of China, giving no quarter to those that
submitted to them. There arose some dispute between some of our Generals at
that time, that assisted the Tartars against us, so that when Uncan was killed
in a battle by Cingi the Tartar Prince, all our Countrymen left Asia, with all
hopes of returning thither again. Since, we have had many grievous encounters
with our enemies the Mahumetans and Gentiles, who have sometimes persecuted us
into the heart of the Country when they took us at an advantage. About the year
1434 the King of Adel with many of our Neighbors stormed our Seaport Towns
when our Emperor was but young, and so shut us in, that we have no place to
entertain Commerce with any Nation without their leave.

In the year of our Lord several Portugueses came from Goa into our Country,
our Emperor dispatched away some Ambassadors with them to Rome and Portugal,
1486 came into Ethiopia from John King of Portugal, Pedro de C^^ilham ec a
lenzo de Pavia to Alexander our Neguz, that treated them well.

Claudius succeeded Alexander, and after him Adamas, who was inclined to favor
the Heathens superstitions, he persecuted the Christians, but met at last with
a just Reward of his Actions, for he was killed by his enemies in a battle.

FINIS.
Books sold by Benjamin Billingsley at the Printing-press in Broadstreet, and
at the same sign near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
BArtholinus Anatomy Eng. by Culpepers fol, 10 s.

Riverius Practice of Physic fol. 20 s.

Schroders Dispensatory Eng. by W. Rowland 10 s.

Lord Bacons Not. History fol. 7 s.

Reynolds Gods Revenge of Murder. 10 s.

Culpepers London Dispensatory Octavo. 4 s.

English Physician Octavo 3 s.

Directory for Midwives Octavo 4 s.

Last Legacy Octavo 2 s. 6 d.

A Treatise of Wind offending Man's Body, with its speedy and easy Remedy
Octavo 1 s.

A Touchstone for Physic Octavo 1 s.

A Discourse touching Generation collected out of L^vinus L^mniu^ Twelves 1 s.
6 d.

Edlins Observationes Astrologicae Octavo 1 s.

Pharmacop^ia Londinensis twenty-four, Latin 1 s. 6 d.

Burrows Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment Quarto 2 s. 6 d.

The Vulcano's or Fire-Vomiting Mountains, etc. 1 s.

Hudsons Vindication of the Church-Catholick 3 s.

Bourns Directions concerning Marriage 1 s.

The Epitome of the whole Art of Husbandry, the second edition much enlarged
Octavo 2 s.

Loveday's Letters Domestic and Foreign Octavo 2 s. 6 d.

Janua Linguarum, Latin and Eng. adorned with Copper Cutts 2 s. 6 d.

Present State of Europe Quarto 3 s.

Now in the Press, Culpepers Semioti^a Vranica, or his Astrological Judgment of
Diseases.

The late Travels of Signior Giacomo Barati an Italian Gent. into the remote
Countries of the Abyssines, with a description of the Kingdoms Subject at this
present to the Great Neguz of Ethiopia.

FINIS.

