A GENERAL EPISTLE TO THE Flock of God, But more particularly, in CUMBERLAND,
In the Openings of Love, and Fresh spring of Life, am I drawn forth, to visit
you with this Epistle.
Dear Friends, and Brethren,
LOok to the Rock from whence ye were hewn, and to the hole of the Pit from
whence ye were dug, (that is to say) never forget from whence you came, no
more than to what length and degree you are attained, what you were when the
Lord first visited you; and what you still are of your selves, without the
help, assistance and abillity of his Power; hold this fast in your Remembrance,
and it will greatly tend to humble you, and keep you little and low in your own
Eyes, in a true Self-Denial: So shall the Lord alone be exalted, and his
Glorious Power extolled over all.

It was the Lord that visited with the dayspring of his Love from on high, by
the shining forth of his Glorious Light, out of Darkness (where your Region
was) in a Land of Darkness, a Country where there was a Famine, not of Bread
nor Water, but of the preaching of the Gospel; and brought us to a Land and
Country, where Light and Life is, and that slows with Milk and Honey. Forget
not the way of your Souls Travel; and you that have not known it yet, must
tread the same Path, before you can come to be sharers with those that have so
done, who have known what it was when they entered their Journey, or beginning
of the Work (to Drink a bitter Cup) and also of a sweet One (and do) extolled
be the Right Arm of the Lord, the great and mighty Power of God (the bitter Cup
was Judgment) set up to bring Down, Judge out, and Burn up all that which was
contrary; and as a Sword to slay the Enmity, and of twain to make one new Man.

Then was the Weeping, then was the Mourning, then was the Quaking and
Trembling; then was the time of Travel with our hands upon our Loins; then did
the Earth Tremble at the presence of the Lord (the way of Sion's Redemption
being through Judgment) love it still, and dwell in a sense of it to the End,
and the Enemy shall never prevail against you; dwelling in him to whom all
Judgment is committed both in Heaven and in Earth (in Christ) and so in the
Light, in the Life, in the quickening Spirit.

Has this been the way of your Soul's Travel, from the beginning (that have
known the True and Right beginning) in and through many Afflictions, various
Trials, and deep Temptations, Straits, Hardships and great Besetments, both
within and without.

Dear Friends, in a sense of the tendering Life and Love of God, let me ask,
who delivered, who saved, who has kept and preserved until now, (in and
through this Refining Furnace) surely you can say with my Soul, the Lord alone
by his own Hand and Arm of Power, and mighty Strength; by which he has never
failed, nor never will fail those that trust thereto, and rely thereupon;
Therefore Dear and Tender Children of the Light and of the Day, trust therein,
and keep thereto unto the End, and then you shall be Eternally happy.

For Dear Friends, although on this wise you have known the Travel of your
Souls, in passing from Death to Life, and out of Darkness into the Light, which
is the Path that the Younger Generations, that is coming up must Tread and
Travel in; you can tell them by learned Experience, for their Encouragement,
the Lord by his Power will never leave them, nor forsake them, if they follow
him in the way of his Judgments (which he mixeth with Mercy) that must be owned
and loved, to bring down Self, and the Man's part, and whatever would exalt it
self above the pure; you can tell them, that when your hands did hang down, and
your knees smote one another; so that sometimes your Hearts were fearful,
whether they should be lifted up, or strengthened again, yet having Faith, and
being taught by the Grace of God, to have Patience also to wait the Lord's
time; he by his Power appeared, to lift up the hands, and strengthen the knees,
and make the fearful Heart strong by the Might of his Power.

Yea, the Lord having so often wrought your Deliverance, and done wonderful
Things for you, beyond expectation, or what you then could see, so that you
have been ready to say, Oh! I hope I shall never meet with such Exercises,
Trials and Temptations, as heretofore I have met with, and especially if any
thing of self was set up, to glory above what was meet, because of what the
Lord had done for you, has not the only Wise God seen it good, after all this,
to try and prove you again? Both without and within, that you might be kept
truly humble and low before him, always depending upon his Power, and nothing
of your own, yea to try your Faith and Patience, and for a time has hid his
Face from you; and that you have had but little (if any) either Bread or Water,
in so much, because of your weakness and faintness, the Enemy has been very
busy to Tempt you to despair of the sufficiency, of the Power, Love and Mercy
of the Lord, or to turn you aside from the way of Truth, useing all his
subtilty, to keep out of your Remembrance, and from calling to mind how, and in
what way and manner, the Lord heretofore brought you over great Mountains, and
high Hills, and levelled them all.

And through great Depths, and sore Pangs of Soul; yea, your Hopes sometimes
have been so little, that some of you have been ready to say, with one in the
Days of Old, Lord have thou forgotten to be Gracious.

And yet has not the Lord, after all this and much more, renewed your Hope and
Strength again, and by the Glorious Appearance of the Pure Light of his
heavenly Son, has again and again, time after time broken forth, and
Gloriously shined in your Hearts and inward Parts, to the manifesting and
clearly discovering unto you the Enemies Wiles and Working, with all the Mists,
Foggs and Darkness he brings in with him, to the expelling and driving away the
same, through the strength and ability of the Power that is received in the
Light, even the Light of Life; that thereby you might see and find out, what
has been the cause of your being so exercised, so long after your
Convincement; and not only so, but after you have known many Deliverances, and
have traveled through much, and have known watering Showers, and fruitful
Seasons, for that end, when found out, and discovered to be brought to the
Judgment and Sentence of Condemnation; that all that is of that old cursed
Self, in which the Enemy works to the hurt of the Soul, may be slain with the
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, and consumed with the Fire of
the Lord.

Thus has the only Wise God taught you by his Light, Grace and holy Spirit,
and thereby you have learned experience, and spiritual skill, with a true
willingness wrought in you, how to come to his Judgment Seat, that you might
come to his Mercy Seat also; that so you might know the way of your Soul's
Travel, from Death to Life, (through Weeping and Mourning, to Joy and Gladness)
through poverty and weakness, to feed at the Table of the Lord, and so come to
have your strength daily renewed, to fit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, in
that Rest prepared of God in Him, where his Glory Shines in your indwellings,
that will make you to Shine as the Stars of Heaven; as you keep your Station in
the inward watchfulness, and waiting in the true Light, (in the true silence)
and inward stillness.

Where the mind as it gets thither, and is stayed there, is unmovable, for its
stay and strength is the sure Rock and Foundation of God, his great and
glorious Power (out of which, both the Water and Honey does proceed) this is
the sweet Cup) oh! the meltings of it, oh! ^he divine sweetness that is in it,
who can set forth the Greatness, the Goodness and Excellency thereof?

As you know Dear Brethren, and Tender Sisters, how that our Souls many times
when together, have been made rich partakers, and livingly to possess and enjoy
the same, in the living enjoyment, of the life-giving Presence of our God (and
one another Near and Dear) when our Bottles have been so filled with the sweet
Wine of his Kingdom (as my Soul at this moment of time is) that we have not
been able to contain, but Tears of Joy have often run, that have far exceeded
the Tears of our Sorrow, Oh! how do I love and like the running of them, and
how does my Soul delight therein; even in the fresh springing up of Life, as I
know a Remnant of you so do.

Dear Friends, whom my Soul loves in all true Tenderness, and unto whom I am
unseperably joined, in the Unity of the Spirit of Life and Love (though at this
distance, my Heart unto you-ward is full, yet streameth forth, as a stream of
Love and Life, that flows from the living Fountain, with rolling of Bowels for
all your Eternal Good, both Old and Young, anciently, and of late convinced
(that you Ancient ones, whose time cannot be long here) may finish in that in
which you have begun, in the freshness, in the livingness and true tenderness,
to the receiving of the Crown, that so it may be well with you for evermore.

And that all you that are younger in the Truth (and Years of Age) please not
your selves with long Life (but Good and Godly) nor yet with Worldly
Preferment; but wait with all Diligence and true Fear, to feel the work of the
Converting, Changing, Melting, Moulding, Heart Tendering Power, of the Great
and Mighty God, to work a true Change in you, throughout, both in Body, Soul
and Spirit, that so it may be well with you, when Death looks you in the Face.

And Oh my Dear and Ancient Friends, Be Careful that you never forget, nor
depart from your first Love, and true Tenderness; and all you Younger that have
not so fully known it, wait dilligently for it, that you may know the blessed
effects of it, as the Ancients have done, that through the Fear of God, placed
in the Heart (and that because of his Chastisements) and Awe and Dread of the
Lord, that was upon them in that day: You may come to say with them; Oh! that I
may never speak a word that may offend him, nor do any evil Action that may
greive his Good Spirit, nor break my Peace with him, Oh! that I may neither Eat
nor Drink to Excess, nor wear any thing in Apparel contrary to the pure Truth,
neither be found in any Carriage or Behavior, in Conversation nor
Communication, in the whole Course of my Life, amongst the Sons and Daughters
of Men, that may give any occasion, or whereby Truth may suffer; this was and
is the desire, and cry of all the Faithful, and those that truly fear the Lord,
and have known what the first Love is, and the blessed effects of it.

Oh! this was a growing time, when nothing was valued like unto the Truth; and
it is so still, with all that love Truth and Righteousness. -- No Hardship, no
Scoffing, no Scorn, no Reproach for the Name of Jesus, no Suffering nor
Spoilling of Goods, nor Imprisonment of Body, Principalities nor Powers, things
present nor to come, shall be able to separate such from the Love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

All this, and much more than I am able to express, was the effects of your
first Love and true Tenderness (that have known it) that was begotten in you
thereby; keep to it, live in it, and never depart from it, nor forget it; that
so you may continue unto the End, and in the End, in that in which you have
begun; as those which the Lord in his Love, and by his Power, has thus far
preserved, so shall you be Everlastingly happy, when time here shall be no more.

And so Dear Friends, in that I am thus far clear of what lay upon my Spirit to
put you in Mind (where we were) when the Lord first visited us in the Morning
of his Day, and what the Lord has done for us, with the younger Generations
that are coming up, and what we still are, without the help and assistance of
the Lord's Power.

I have yet something to signify unto you (what we were) when we were first
visited, with a few words of Counsel and Encouragement to Friends, in and under
suffering, that all may have their Eve, to, where true Safety, Preservation,
Growth and Prosperity is, in all that which is good.

Dear Friends, were we the Wisest, the Greatest, the Mightiest, or Richest
amongst the Sons and Daughters of Men? (what were we) but such most of us, as
in the Prophets, Christ and the Ap^stles time, that were accounted Foolish,
Weak, Mean, Base and Contemptible, like the Jews in the days of the Prophet
Nehemiah, that were called feeble by the Enemies of God, and of his People (
Sanballat, Tobiah and Gesham, who mocked and laughed them to Scorn) and said,
what do these feeble Jews, not knowing what work the the Lord had determined
to do by them; in answer unto the prayer of the Prophet put up unto the Lord.

Who accordingly has done great and wonderful things in this his Day, through
the strength and might of his own Power; by those he has called and chosen out
of the World, though counted Weak and Feeble, yet made able and strong, through
his renewing of their strength, and here is encouragement given by our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ, even for all true Believers, and faithful Followers of
him, through many Tribulations: Behold, says Christ, I give unto you Power to
tread on Serpents, and Scorpions, and over all the Power of the Enemy, and
nothing by any means shall hurt you, Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that
the Spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice that your Names are
written in Heaven. In that hour Jesus Rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I thank
thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou had hid these things from
the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes (even so Father) for so
it seemed good in thy sight.

What remains for you then to say, oh says the truly humbled, what manner of
Love is this where withal the Lord my God has loved me, and visited my Soul?
And more especially, in a day and time, when I was an Enemy in my Mind to him
by wicked works (oh says such) I am constrained to love him again, and to fear
him always, that I may in no wise offend him, so Good and Gracious a God, so
Dear and Tender a Father, Lord and Master, who has dealt so kindly and
favorably with me, not according to my desert, for says some, I was unworthy
that his Love should reach me.

What, were we such? And yet notwithstanding all this, and much more, has the
Lord, with whom there is no respect of Persons, loved us freely, in a time
acceptable never to be forgotten (though you were such) oh! be humbled, bowed and
laid low before him, under the consideration and sense of his love, that our
Hearts may be often broken, and truly tendered thereby; for if the love of God
do not work that effect therein, (nothing can) but all that carefully, in true
fear, dwell in a sense thereof, because of what thereby the Lord has done for
them; the secret cry of their Soul is, oh! I can never do enough for the Lord,
to answer his love, and the Knowledge of his blessed Truth he has given me
(and not only so) but because of the Divine Sweetness and abounding thereof,
that I have many times felt to spring a-fresh in my Heart and Soul, in waiting
upon him.

Wherefore such is made often to say, there is nothing that I have and do
enjoy, that is so near and dear to me, but I can freely part with, and forgo,
for the Lord and his worthy names sake, being all I have and do Enjoy (it is
the Lord's) so can his redeemed say with a good understanding, not only their
Souls and Bodies, but all they have and do enjoy is his.

So Dear and Suffering Friends, blessed and happy are all, whose Godly
Resolution this is, that is thus redeemed by his Power (hold fast and continue
your Godly Resolution) unto the end, in the true Faith, and look not out, nor
give way to the reasoning part, for that may hurt you in your Suffering
Testimony; but look in, and keep near the Lord (in his pure Light) and rely
upon the sufficiency of his Power; that by waiting and watching therein, you
may receive strength; then you will be Strong and Courageous, Bold and Valliant
for the Truth upon Earth; for he, for whose Names sake you suffer, has
sufficient in store to reward all your Losses, Crosses, Trials and Sufferings,
both here and eternally hereafter; and assuredly will not withhold it from you,
as you stand faithful unto him in your Suffering Testimony unto the end; unto
which the Lord by his own Power, and Arm of Mighty Strength, preserve you all,
Amen.

Dear Friends, I being well stricken in Years, cannot promise long time to my
self in this World (neither ought the Youth) I was willing, in answer to the
Motion of God's blessed Spirit, moving upon me, to send this Epistle abroad
amongst you, as a manifest token of my entire love, and tender care over the
Flock of Christ; wishing that Grace, Mercy and Peace, in and through him, may
be multiplied and increased amongst you, and that Brotherly Love and Unity, in
the one Spirit of Life may continue, and abound more and more, and that in all
your Meetings and Families, you may be blessed with heavenly blessings in
Christ Jesus.

From your Friend and Brother in the Covenant of Light and Life, John Banks.
Given forth at Meare in Somersetshire, the 23 d. Day of the 5 th. Month, School.

