A Discourse OF TRADE.

BY N. B. M. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn for the Author, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
THe Greatness and Riches of the United Provinces, and States of Venice,
Considered, with the little Tract of Ground that belongs to either of their
Territories, sufficiently Demonstrate the great Advantage and Profit that Trade
brings to a Nation.

And since the Old Ammunition and Artillery of the Grecians and Romans are
grown out of Use; such as Stones, Bows, Arrows, and battering Rams, with other
Wooden Engines, which were in all Places easily procured or made: And the
Invention of Gunpowder has introduced another sort of Ammunition and
Artillery, whose Materials are made of Minerals, that are not to be found in
all Countries; such as Iron, Brass, Lead, Saltpeter, and Brimstone; and
therefore where they are wanting, must be procured by Traffic. Trade is now
become as necessary to Preserve Governments, as it is useful to make them Rich.

And notwithstanding the great Influence, that Trade now has in the Support
and Welfare of States and Kingdoms, yet there is nothing more unknown, or that
Men differ more in their Sentiments, than about the True Causes that raise and
promote Trade.

Livy, and those Ancient Writers, whose elevated Genius set them upon the
Inquiries into the Causes of the Rise and Fall of Governments, have been very
exact in describing the several Forms of Military Discipline, but take no
Notice of Trade; and Machiavel a Modern Writer, and the best, though he lived
in a Government, where the Family of Medicis had advanced themselves to the
Sovereignty by their Riches, acquired by Merchandising, does not mention Trade,
as any way interested in the Affairs of State; for until Trade became necessary
to provide Weapons of War, it was always thought Prejudicial to the Growth of
Empire, as too much softening the People by Ease and Luxury, which made their
Bodies unfit to Endure the Labor and Hardships of War. And therefore the
Romans who made War, (the only Way to Raise and Enlarge their Dominion) did in
the almost Infancy of their State, Conquer that Rich and Trading City of
Carthage, though Defended by Hanibal their General, one of the greatest
Captains in the World: so that, since Trade was not in those days useful to
provide Magazines for Wars, an Account of it is not to be expected from those
Writers. The Merchant, and other Traders who should understand the true
Interest of Trade, do either not understand it, or else, lest it might hinder
their private Gain, will not Discover it. Mr. Munn a Merchant, in his Treatise
of Trade, does better set forth the Rule to make an Accomplished Merchant, than
how it may be most Profitable to the Nation; and those Arguments every day met
with from the Traders, seem biased with Private Interest, and run contrary to
one another, as their Interest are opposite.

The Turkey-Merchants Argue against the East-India-Company, the Woollen-Draper
against the Mercers, and the Upholster against the Cain-Chair-Maker; some think
there are too many Traders, and Complain against the Number of Builders; others
against the Number of Alehouses; some use Arguments for the Sole making of
particular Commodities, others Plead for the Sole Trading to particular
Countries: So that, if these Gentlemen's Reasons might prevail in getting those
Laws they so much solicit, (which all of them Affirm, would be for the Advance
of Trade, and Public Good of the Nation) there would be but a few Trades left
for the next Generation of Men to be Employed in, a much fewer sorts of Goods
to make, and not a Corner of the World to Trade to, unless they purchase a
License from them.

And how fair and convincing soever their Premises may appear for the Enlarging
and Advancement of Trade, the Conclusions of their Arguments, which are for
Limiting and Confining of it to Number, Persons and Places, are directly
opposite to the Enlarging of it.

The Reasons why many Men have not a true Idea of Trade, is, Because they Apply
their Thoughts to particular Parts of Trade, wherein they are chiefly concerned
in Interest; and having found out the best Rules and Laws for forming that
particular Part, they govern their Thoughts by the same NOTIONS in forming the
Great BODY of Trade, and not Reflecting on the different Rules of Proportions
betwixt the Body and Parts, have a very disagreeable Conception; and like
those, who having learnt to Draw well an Eye, Ear, Hand, and other Parts of the
Body, (being Unskilful in the Laws of Symmetry) when they join them together,
make a very Deformed Body.

Therefore, whoever will make a true Representation of Trade, must Draw a rough
Sketch of the Body and Parts together, which though it will not entertain with
so much Pleasure as a well-finish't Piece, yet the Agreeableness of the Parts
may be as well discerned, and thereby such Measures taken, as may best suit the
Shape of the Body.

THE CONTENTS.
OF Trade and the Stock, or Wares of Trade. Of the Quantity and Quality of
Wares. Of the Value and Price of Wares. Of Money, Credit, and Interest. Of the
Use and Benefit of Trade. Of the Chief Causes that promote Trade. Of the Chief
Causes of the Decay of Trade, and the Fall of the Rents of Land.
A DISCOURSE OF TRADE.
Of Trade and the Stock, or Wares of Trade.
TRADE is the Making, and Selling of one sort of Goods for another; The making
is called Handy-Craft Trade, and the maker an Artificer; The Selling is called
Merchandising, and the Seller a Merchant: The Artificer is called by several
Names from the sort of Goods he makes. As a Clothier, Silk-weaver, Shoo-maker,
or Hatter, etc. from Making of Cloth, Silk, Shoes, or Hats; And the Merchant
is distinguished by the Names of the Country he deals to, and is called,
Dutch, French, Spanish or Turkey Merchant.

The chief End or Business of Trade, is to make a profitable Bargain: In making
of a Bargain there are these things to be considered; The Wares to be Sold, the
Quantity and Quality of those Wares, the Value or Price of them, the Money or
Credit, by which the Wares are bought, the Interest that relates to the time of
performing the Bargain.

The Stock and Wares of all Trade are the Animals, Vegitables, and Minerals of
the whole Universe, whatsoever the Land or Sea produces. These Wares may be
divided into Natural and Artificial; Natural Wares are those which are sold as
Nature Produces them; As Flesh, Fish, and Fruits, etc. Artificial Wares are
those which by Art are Changed into another Form than Nature gave them; As
Cloth, Calicoes, and wrought Silks, etc. which are made of Wool, Flax, Cotton,
and Raw Silks.

Both these Sorts of Wares are called the Staple Commoditys of those Countries
where they chiefly abound, or are made. There are Different Climates of the
Heavens, some very Hot; some very Cold, others Temperate; these Different
Climates produce Different Animals, Vegitables, and Minerals. The Staples of
the hot Country, are Spices; the Staples of the Cold, Furrs; but the more
Temperate Climates produce much the same sorts of Commoditys; but by difference
of the Quality or Convenience of place where they abound, they become the
Staple of each Country, where they are either best or easier acquired or
exchanged: Thus, Herrings, and other Fish are the Staples of Holland; the Dutch
living amongst the Water, are most naturally inclined to Fishing: English Wool
being the best in the World, is the Staple of England, for the same reason.
Oils of Italy, Fruits of Spain, Wine of France, with several other sorts of
Commoditys, are the Staples of their several Countries.

Staple Commodities may be divided into Native or Foreign; the Native Staple
is what Each Country does Naturally and best produce; Foreign Staple, is any
Foreign Commodity, which a Country acquires by the sole Trade to a Foreign
Place, or sole possession of a particular Art; as Spices are the Staple of
Holland; and the making of Glass and Paper, were the Staple of Venice.

From the Stock, or Wares of Trade, these Three Things are Observable:

1. The Native Staple of each Country is the Riches of the Country, and is
perpetual, and never to be consumed; Beasts of the Earth, Fowls of the Air, and
Fishes of the Sea, Naturally Increase: There is Every Year a New Spring and
Autumn, which produces a New Stock of Plants and Fruits. And the Minerals of
the Earth are Unexhaustable; and if the Natural Stock be Infinite, the
Artificial Stock that is made of the Natural, must be Infinite, as Woollen and
Linen Cloth, Calicoes, and wrought Silk, which are made of Flax, Wool, Cotton,
and Raw Silks.

This shows a Mistake of Mr. Munn, in his Discourse of Trade, who commends
Parsimony, Frugality, and Sumptuary Laws, as the means to make a Nation Rich;
and uses an Argument, from a Simile, supposing a Man to have 1000 l* per Annum,
and 2000 l. in a Chest, and spends Yearly 1500 l. per Annum, he will in four
Years time Waste his 2000 l. This is true, of a Person, but not of a Nation;
because his Estate is Finite, but the Stock of a Nation Infinite, and can never
be consumed; For what is Infinite, can neither receive Addition by Parsimony,
nor suffer Diminution, by Prodigality.

2. The Native Staple of Each Country* is the Foundation of it*s Foreign
Trade: And no Nation have any Foreign Commodities, but what are at first
brought in by the Exchange of the Native; for at the first beginning of
Foreign Trade, a Nation has nothing else to Exchange; The Silver and Gold
from Spain; the Silks from Turkey, Oils from Italy, Wine from France, and all
other Foreign Goods are brought into England, by the Exchange of the English
Cloth, or some other Staple of England.

3. That Foreign Staples are uncertain Wealth: Some Countries by the Sole
Trade to another Country, or by the Sole Possession of some Arts, gain a Staple
of Foreign Commodities, which may be as profitable as the Native, so long as
they enjoy the Sole possession of that Trade or Art. But that is uncertain; for
other Nations find out the way of Trading to the same place: The Artists for
Advantage, Travel into other Countries, and the Arts are discovered. Thus
Portugal had the Sole Trade of India; afterward the Venetians got a great
Share of the Trade, and now the Dutch and English, have a greater share than
both: The Arts of making several sorts of Silks, were chiefly confined to
Genoa, and Naples; afterward Traveled into France, since into England and
Holland, and are now Practiced there in as great perfection as they were in
Italy; So have other Arts wandered, as the making of Looking-Glasses from
Venice into England, the making of Paper from Venice into France and Holland.

Of the Quantity and Quality of Wares.
THE Quantity of all Wares are known by Weight or Measure. The Reason of
Gravity is not understood, neither is it Material to this Purpose; Whether it
proceeds from the Elastisity of the Air, or Weight of the utmost Spheer, or
from what other Causes, its sufficient, that the ways of Trying the Weights of
Bodies are perfectly discovered by the Balance. There are Two Sorts of Weights
in Common Use, the Troy, and Averdupois.

The First are used to Weigh Goods of most Value, as Gold, Silver and Silk,
etc. The Latter for Coarser, and more Bulky Goods, as Lead, Iron, etc.

There are Two Sorts of Measures, the one for Fluid Bodies, as the Bushel,
Gallon and Quart, for Measuring Corn, Wine and Oil; the other for the Measuring
the Dimensions of Solid Bodies, as a Yard, Ell, etc. to Measure Cloth, Silk.
etc.

The Weights and Measures of all Countries differs, but that is no Prejudice to
Trade; they are all made certain by the Custom or Laws of the Place, and the
Trader knows the Weight or Measure in Use, in the Place he Deals to. It is the
Care of the Government, to prevent and punish the Fraud of False Weights and
Measures, and in most Trading-Cities, there are Public Weigh-Houses, and
Measurers: The Fraud of the Balance, which is from the unequal Length of the
end of the Beam, is least perceivable; and therefore in Weighing Goods of
Value, they usually Weigh them in both Scales.

The Qualities of Wares are known by their Color, Sound, Smell, Taste, Make,
or Shape.

The Difference in the Qualities of Wares are very difficultly distinguished;
those Organs that are the proper Judges of those Differencies, do very much
disagree; some Men have clearer Eyes, some more distinguishing Ears, and other
nicer Noses and Tastes; and every Man having a good Opinion of his own
Faculties, it is hard to find a Judge to determine which is best: Besides,
those Qualities that belong to Artificial Wares, such as depend upon the
Mixture, Make or Shape of them, are more difficultly discovered: Those Wares,
whose Quality are produced by the just Mixture of different Bodies, such as
Knives and Razors, whose sharpness arise from the Good Temperament and Mixture
of the Steel and Iron, are not to be found out, but by the Use of them: And so
does the Mixture, and well making of Hats, Cloth, and many other things.

Because the Difference in the Qualities of Wares, are so difficultly
understood, it is that the Trader serves an Apprenticeship to learn them; and
the Knowledge of them is called the Mystery of Trade; and in common Dealing,
the Buyer is forced to rely on the Skill and Honesty of the Seller, to deliver
Wares with such Qualities as he affirms them to have: It is the Sellers
Interest, from the Expectation of further Dealing, not to deceive; because his
Shop, the Place of Dealing, is known: Therefore, those Persons that buy of
Pedlars, and Wandering People, run Great Hazard of being Cheated.

Those Wares, whose Chief Qualities consist in Shape, such as all Wearing
Apparel, do not so much depend upon the Honesty of the Seller; for though the
Trader or Maker, is the Inventor of the Shape, yet it is the Fancy and
Approbation of the Buyer, that brings it into Use, and makes it pass for a
Fashion.

Of the Value and Price of Wares.
THE Value of all Wares arise from their Use; Things of no Us, have no Value,
as the English Phrase is, They are good for nothing.

The Use of Things, are to supply the Wants and Necessities of Man: There are
Two General Wants that Mankind is born with; the Wants of the Body, and the
Wants of the Mind; To supply these two Necessities, all things under the Sun
become useful, and therefore have a Value.

Wares, useful to supply the Wants of the Body, are all things necessary to
support Life, such are in Common Estimation; all those Goods which are useful
to supply the Three General Necessities of Man, Food, Clothes and Lodging; But
if strictly Examined, nothing is absolutely necessary to support Life, but
Food; for a great Part of Mankind go Naked, and lie in Huts and Caves; so that
there are but few things that are absolutely necessary to supply the Wants of
the Body.

Wares, that have their Value from supplying the Wants of the Mind, are all
such things that can satisfy Desire; Desire implys Want: It is the Appetite of
the Soul, and is as natural to the Soul, as Hunger to the Body.

The Wants of the Mind are infinite, Man naturally Aspires, and as his Mind is
elevated, his Senses grow more refined, and more capable of Delight; his
Desires are enlarged, and his Wants increase with his Wishes, which is for
every thing that is rare, can gratify his Senses, adorn his Body, and promote
the Ease, Pleasure, and Pomp of Life.

Amongst the great Variety of things to satisfy the Wants of the Mind, those
that adorn Man's Body, and advance the Pomp of Life, have the most general Use,
and in all Ages, and amongst all sorts of Mankind, have been of Value.

The first Effects that the Fruit of the Tree of knowledge wrought upon the
Parents of Mankind, was to make them cloth themselves, and it has made the
most Visible Distinction of his Race, from the rest of the Creation: It is that
by which his Posterity may write Man, for no Creatures adorn the Body but Man:
Beside, the decking of the Body, does not only distinguish Man from Beast, but
is the Mark of Difference and Superiority betwixt Man and Man.

There was never any part of Mankind so wild and barbarous, but they had
Difference and Degree of Men amongst them, and invented some things to show
that Distinction.

Those that Clothed with Skins, wore the Skins of those Beasts that are most
difficultly taken; thus Hercules wore a Lions Skin; and the Ermins and Sable,
are still Badges of Honor. The Degree of Quality amongst the Affricans, is
known by the waste Cloth, and amongst those that go naked, by adorning their
Bodies with Colors, most rare amongst them, as the Red was the Color most in
Esteem amongst the Ancient Britains.

And the most Ancient and best of Histories, the Bible, shows, That amongst the
Civilized People of the World, Earrings, Bracelets, Hoods and Vails, with
Changeable Suits of Apparel, were then worn: And the same Ornaments for the
Body are still, and ever since have been Worn, only differing in Shapes and
Fashions, according to the Custom of the Country.

The Shapes of Habits are much in use, to denote the Qualities of several men;
but things rare and difficult to be obtained, are General Badges of Honor:
From this Use, Pearls, Diamonds, and Precious Stones, have their Value: Things
Rare are proper Ensigns of Honor, because it is Honorable to acquire Things
Difficult.

The Price of Wares is the present Value; And arises by Computing the
occasions or use for them, with the Quantity to serve that Occasion; for the
Value of things depending on the use of them, the Over-pluss of Those Wares,
which are more than can be used, become worth nothing; So that Plenty, in
respect of the occasion, makes things cheap; and Scarcity, dear.

There is no fixed Price or Value of any thing for the Wares of Trades; The
Animals, and Vegetables of the Earth, depend on the Influence of Heaven, which
sometimes causes Murrains, Dearth, Famine, and sometimes Years of great Plenty;
therefore, the Value of things must accordingly Alter* Besides, the Use of most
things being to supply the Wants of the Mind, and not the Necessitys of the
Body; and those Wants, most of them proceeding from imagination, the Mind
Changes; the things grow out of Use, and so lose their Value.

There are two ways by which the value of things are a little guessed at; by
the Price of the Merchant, and the Price of the Artificer: The Price that the
Merchant sets upon his Wares, is by reckoning Prime Cost, Charges and Interest.

The Price of the Artificer, is by reckoning the Cost of the Materials, with
the time of working them; The Price of Time is according to the Value of the
Art, and the Skill of the Artist. Some Artificers Reckon Twelve, others
Fifteen, and some Twenty, and Thirty Shillings per Week.

Interest is the Rule that the Merchant Trades by; And Time, the Artificer, By
which they cast up Profit, and Loss; for if the Price of their Wares, so alter
either by Plenty, or by Change of the Use, that they do not pay the Merchant
Interest, nor the Artificer for his Time, they both reckon they lose by their
Trade.

But the Market is the best Judge of Value; for by the Concourse of Buyers and
Sellers, the Quantity of Wares, and the Occasion for them are Best known:
Things are just worth so much, as they can be sold for, according to the Old
Rule, Valet Quantum Vendi potest.

Of Money, Credit and Interest.
Money is a Value made by a Law; And the Difference of its Value is known by the
Stamp, and Size of the Piece.

One Use of MONEY is, It is the Measure of Value, By which the Value of all
other things are reckoned; as when the Value of any thing is expressed, its
said, It Is worth so many shillings, or so many Pounds: Another Use of Money is;
It is a Change or Pawn for the Value of all other Things: For this Reason, the
Value of Money must be made certain by Law, or else it could not be made a
certain Measure, nor an Exchange for the Value of all things.

It is not absolutely necessary, Money should be made of Gold or Silver; for
having its sole Value from the Law, it is not Material upon what Metal the
Stamp be set. Money has the same Value, and performs the same Uses, if it be
made of Brass, Copper, Tin, or any thing else. The Brass Money of Spain, the
Copper Money of Sweeden, and Tin Farthings of England, have the same Value in
Exchange, according to the Rate they are set at, and perform the same Uses, to
Cast up the Value of things, as the Gold and Silver Money does; Six Pence in
Farthings will buy the same thing as Six Pence in Silver; and the Value of a
thing is well understood by saying, It is worth Eight Farthings, as that it is
worth Two Pence: Gold and Silver, as well as Brass, Copper and Tin Money, change
their Value in those Countries, where the Law has no Force, and yield no more
than the Price of the Metal that *bears the STAMP: Therefore, all Foreign Coins
go by Weight, and are of no certain Value, but rise and fall with the Price of
the Metal. Pieces of Eight, yield sometimes 4 sh. 6 d. 4 sh. 7 d. and 4 sh. 8
d. as the Value of Silver is higher or lower: And so does Dollars, and all
Foreign Coin, change their Value; and were it not for the Law that fixes the
Value, an English Crown Piece would now yield Five Shillings and Two Pence, for
so much is the Value of it, if it were melted, or in a Foreign Country. But the
chief Advantage of making Money of Silver and Gold, is to prevent
Counterfeiting; for Silver and Gold, being Metals of great Value, those who
design Profit by Counterfeiting the Coin, must Counterfeit the Metals, as well
as the Stamp, which is more difficult than the Stamp. There Is another Benefit
to the Merchant, by such Money; for Gold and Silver being Commodities for other
Uses, than to make Money; to make Plate, Gold and Silver Lace, Silks, etc. And
Coins of little Bulk, in respect of their Value, the Merchant transmits such
Money from Place to Place, in Specie, according as he finds his Advantage, by
the Rise of Bulloin; though this may be a Convenience to the Merchant, it often
proves a Prejudice to the State, by making Money scarce: Therefore, there are
Laws in most Countries, that Prohibit the Transportation of Money, yet it cannot
be prevented; for in Spain, though it be Capital, yet in Two Months after the
Gallions are come home, there is scarce any Silver Money to be seen in the
Country.

Some Men have so great an Esteem for Gold and Silver, that they believe they
have an intrinsic Value in themselves, and cast up the Value of every thing by
them: The Reason of the Mistake, is, Because Money being made of Gold and
Silver, they do not distinguish betwixt Money, and Gold and Silver. Money has a
certain Value, because of the Law; but the Value of Gold and Silver are
uncertain, and varies their Price, as much as Copper, Lead, or other Metals:
And in the Places where they are dug, considering the smalness of their Veins,
with the Charges of getting them, they do not yield much more Profit than other
Minerals, nor pay the Miners better Wages for digging them.

And were it not for the Waste, made of Gold and Silver, by Plate, Lace, Silks,
and Guilding, and the Custom of the Eastern Princes, to lay them up and bury
them, that Half which is dug in the West, is buried in the East. The great
Quantities dug out of the Earth, since the Discovery of the West Indies, would
have so much lessened the Value, that by this time, they would not have much
exceeded the Value of Tin, or Copper: Therefore, How greatly would those
Gentlemen be disappointed, that are searching after the Philosopher's Stone, if
they should at last happen to find it? For, if they should make but so great a
Quantity of Gold and Silver, as they, and their Predecessors have spent in
search after it, it would so alter, and bring down the Price of those Metals,
that it might be a Question, whether they would get so much Overplus by it, as
would pay for the Metal they change into Gold and Silver. It is only the
Scarcity that keeps up the Value, and not any Intrinsic Virtue or Quality in
the Metals; For if the Virtue were to be considered, the Affrican that gives
Gold for Knives, and Things made of Iron, would have the Odds in the Exchange;
Iron being a much more Useful Metal, than either Gold or Silver. To Conclude
this Objection, Nothing in it self has a certain Value; One thing is as much
worth as another: And it is time, and place, that give a difference to the
Value of all things.

Credit is a Value raised by Opinion, it buys Goods as Money does; and in all
Trading Citys, there is more Wares sold upon Credit, then for present Money.

There are Two Sorts of Credit; the one, is Grounded upon the Ability of the
Buyer; the other, upon the Honesty: The first is called a Good Man, which
implys an Able Man; he generally buys upon short Time; to pay in a Month, which
is accounted as ready Money, and the Price is made accordingly. The other is
accounted an Honest Man; He may be poor; he Generally buys for three and Six
Months or longer, so as to pay the Merchant by the Return of his own Goods; and
therefore, the Seller relys more upon the Honesty of the Buyer, than his
Ability: Most of the Retail Traders buy upon this Sort of Credit, and are
usually Trusted for more than double they are worth.

In Citys of great Trade, there are public Banks of Credit, as at Amsterdam
and Venice: They are of great Advantage to Trade, for they make Payments easy,
by preventing the Continual Trouble of telling over Money, and cause a great
Dispatch in Business: Public Banks are of so great a Concern in Trade, that
the Merchants of London, for want of such a Bank, have been forced to Carry
their Cash to Goldsmiths, and have thereby Raised such a Credit upon
Goldsmiths Notes, that they pass in Payments from one to another like Notes
upon the Bank; And although by this way of Credit, there has been very Vast
Sums of Money lost, not less then too Millions within five and Twenty Years, yet
the Dispatch and Ease in Trade is so great by such Notes, that the Credit is
still in some Measure kept up.

Therefore, it is much to be wondered at, that since the City of London is the
Largest, Richest, and Chiefest City in the World, for Trade; Since there is so
much Ease, Dispatch, and Safety in a Public Bank; and since such vast Losses
has Happened for want of it; That the Merchant and Traders of London have not
long before this time Addressed themselves, to the Government, for the
Establishing of a Public Bank.

The Common Objection, that a Public Bank cannot be safe in a Monarchy, is not
worth the Answering; As if Princes were not Governed by the same Rules of
Policy, as States are, To do all things for the Well-fair of the Subjects,
wherein their own Interest is concerned.

It is True, in a Government wholly Dispotical, whose Support is altogether in
it is Millitary Forces; where Trade has no Concern in the Affairs of the
State; Brings no Revenue, There might be a Jealousy, That such a Bank might
tempt a Prince to Seize it; when by doing it, he does not Prejudice the Affairs
of his Government: But in England, where the Government is not Dispotical; But
the People Free; and have as great a Share in the Sovereign Legislative Power,
as the Subjects of any States have, or ever had; where the Customs makes great
Figures, in the Kings Exchequer; where Ships are the Bullworks of the Kingdom;
and where the Flourish of Trade is as much the Interest of the King as of the
People, There can be no such Cause of Fear: For, What Objections can any Man
make, that his Money in the Bank, may not be as well secured by a Law, as his
Property is? Or; Why he should be more afraid of Losing his Money, than his Land
or Goods?

Interest is the Rent of Stock, and is the same as the Rent of Land: The First,
is the Rent of the Wrought or Artificial Stock; the Latter, of the Unwrought,
or Natural Stock.

Interest is commonly reckoned for Money; because the Money Borrowed at Interest,
is to be repayed in Money; but this is a mistake: For the Interest is paid for
Stock: for the Money borrowed, is laid out to buy Goods, or pay for them before
bought: No Man takes up Money at Interest, to lay it by him, and lose the
Interest of it.

One use of Interest: It is the Rule by which the Trader makes up the Account
of Profit and Loss; The Merchant expects by Dealing, to get more then Interest
by his Goods; because of bad Debts, and other Hazards which he runs; and
therefore, reckons all he gets above Inteterest, is Gain; all under, Loss; but
if no more than Interest, neither Profit, nor Loss.

Another use of Interest, is, It is the measure of the Value of the Rent of
Land; it sets the Price in Buying and Selling of Land: For, by adding three
Years Interest more than is in the Principle, Makes the usual Value of the Land
of the Country; The difference of three Year is allowed; Because Land is more
certain than Money or Stock. Thus in Holland, where Money is at three per. Cent.
by reckoning how many times three is in a Hundred Pounds, which is Thirty
Three; and Adding three Years more; makes Thirty Six Years Purchase; the Value
of the Land in Holland: And by the same Rule, interest being at six per Cent.
in England, Land is worth but Twenty Years Purchase; and in Ireland, but
Thirteen; Interest being there at Ten per Cent: so that, according to the Rate
of Interest, is that Value of the Land in the Country.

Therefore, Interest in all Countries is settled by a Law, to make it certain; or
else it could not be a Rule for the Merchant to make up his Account, nor the
Gentleman, to Sell his Land By.

Of the Use and Benefit of Trade.
THe Use of Trade is to make, and provide things Necessary: Or useful for the
Support, Defense, Ease, Pleasure, and Pomp of Life: Thus the Brewers, Bakers,
Butchers, Poulterers, and Cooks, with the Apothecaries, Surgeons, and their
Dependencies provide Food, and Medicine for the support of Life: The Cutlers,
Gun-smiths, Powder-makers, with their Company of Traders, make things for
Defense; The Shoomakers Sadlers, Couch, and Chair-makers, with abundance more
for the Ease of Life: The Perfumers, Fiddlers, Painters, and Booksellers, and
all those Trades that make things to gratify the Sense, or delight the Mind,
promote Pleasure: But those Trades that are employed to express the Pomp of
Life, are Infinite; for, besides those that adorn Man's Body, as the Glover,
Hosier, Hatter, Semstriss, Tailor, and many more, with those that make the
Materials to Deck it; as Clothier, Silk-Weaver, Lace-Maker, Ribbon-Weaver, with
their Assistance of Drapers, Mercers, and Milliners, and a Thousand more: Those
Trades that make the Equipage for Servants, Trappings for Horses; and those
that Build, Furnish, and Adorn Houses, are innumerable.

Thus Busy Man is employed, and it is for his own Benefit; For by Trade, the
Natural Stock of the Country is improved, the Wool and Flax, are made into
Cloth; the Skins, into Leather; and the Wood, Lead, Iron and Tin, wrought into
Thousand useful Things: The Overplus of these Wares not useful, are
transported by the Merchants, and Exchanged for the Wines, Oils, Spices, and
every Thing that is good of Foreign Countries: The Trader has One Share for
his Pains, and the Landlord the Other for his Rent: So, that by Trade, the
Inhabitants in general, are not only well Fed, Clothed and Lodged; but the
Richer sort are Furnished with all things to promote the Ease, Pleasure, and
Pomp of Life: Whereas, in the same Country, where there is no Trade, the
Landlords would have but Coarse Diet, Coarser Clothes, and worse Lodgings* and
nothing for the Rent of their Lands, but the Homage and Attendance of their
Poor Barefooted Tenants, for they have nothing else to give.

Trade Raises the Rent of the Land, for by the Use of several sorts of
Improvements, the Land Yields a greater Natural Stock; by which, the
Land-lord's Share is the greater: And it is the same thing, whether his Share
be paid in Money, or Goods; for the Money must be laid out to Buy such Good's:
Money is an Immaginary Value made by a Law, for the Convenience of Exchange: It
is the Natural Stock that is the Real Value, and Rent of the Land.

Another Benefit of Trade, is, That, it does not only bring Plenty, but has
occasioned Peace: For the Northern Nations, as they increased, were forced from
the Necessities of their Climates, to Remove; and used to Destroy, and Conquer
the Inhabitants of the Warmer Climates to make Room for themselves; thence was
a Proverb, Omne Malum ab Aquilone: But those Northern People being settled in
Trade, the Land by their Industry, is made more Fertile; and by the Exchange of
the Nations-Stock, for Wines and Spices, of Hotter Climates, those Countries
become most Habitable; and the Inhabitants having Warmer Food, Clothes, and
Lodgings, are better able to endure the Extreamitys of their Cold Seasons: This
seems to be the Reason, That for these Seven or Eight Hundred Years last past,
there has been no such Invasions from the Northern part of the World, as used
to destroy the Inhabitants of the Warmer Countries: Besides, Trade Allows a
better Price for Laborers, than is paid for Fighting: So it is become more the
Interest of Mankind to live at home in Peace, than to seek their fortunes
abroad by Wars.

These are the Benefits of Trade, as they Relate to Mankind; those that Relate
to Government, are many.

Trade Increases the Revenue of the Government, by providing an Employ for the
People: For every Man that Works, pay by those things which he Eats and Wears,
something to the Government. Thus the Excise and Custom's are Raised, and the
more every Man Earns, the more he Consumes, and the King's Revenue is the more
Increased.

This shows the way of Determining those Controversies, about which sort of
Goods are most beneficial to the Government, by their Making, or Importing: The
sole difference is from the Number of hands employed in making them; Hence the
Importation of Raw Silk, is more Profitable to the Government than Gold, or
Silver; Because there are more Hands imployd in the Throwing, and Weaving of
the First; than there can be in working the Latter.

Another Benefit of Trade is, It is Useful for the Defense of the Government;
It Provides the Magazines of War. The Guns, Powder, and Bullets, are all made
of Minerals, and are wrought by Traders; Besides, those Minerals are not to be
had in all Countries; The great Stock of Saltpeter is brought from the East
Indies, and therefore must be Imported by the Merchant, for the Exchange of the
Natives Stock.

The last Benefit is, That Trade may be Assistant to the Enlarging of Empire;
and if an Universal Empire, or Dominion of very Large Extent, can again be
raised in the World, It seems more probable to be done by the Help of Trade; By
the Increase of Ships at Sea, than by Arms at Land: This is too large a Subject
to be here Treated of; but the French King's seeming Attempt to Raise Empire in
Europe, being that Common Theme of Men's Discourse, has caused some short
Reflections, which will appear by Comparing the Difficulty of the one, with the
Probability of the other.

The Difficulties of Raising a Dominion of very Large Extent; especially in
Europe, are Many.

First, Europe is grown more Populous than formerly, and there are more
Fortified Towns and Cities, than were in the time of the Roman Empire, which
was the last extended Dominion; and therefore, not easily Subjected to the
Power of any one Prince.

Whether Europe be grown more Populous, Solely by the Natural Increase of
Mankind; There being more Born than Dye, which first Peopled the World?

Or, Whether, since the Inhabitants of Europe being Addicted to Trade, the
ground is made more Fertile, and yields greater Plenty of Food; which has
prevented famine, that formerly destroyed great Numbers of Mankind: So that no
great Famines, has been taken Notice of by Historians, in these Last Three
Hundred Years?

Whether by Dreining Great Bogs, Lakes, and Fens, and Cutting down vast Woods,
to make Room for the Increase of Mankind, the Air is Grown more Healthy; So
that Plagues, and other Epidemical Diseases, are not so destructive as
formerly? none so violent, as Procopius and Wallsingham Report, which destroyed
such Vast Numbers in Italy, that there were not left Ten in a Thousand; and in
other Parts of Europe, not enough alive to Bury the Dead. Whereas, the Plague
in (1665) the Greatest since, did not take away the Hundredth Person in
England, Holland, and other Countries, where it Raged?

Whether, since the Invention of Guns and Gunpowder, so many Men are not slain
in the Wars as formerly? Xerxes lost 260000 in one Battle against the Grecians;
ALEXANDER, destroyed 110000 of Darius's Army; Marius, slew 120000 of the
Cimbri; and in great Battles, seldom less than 100000 fell: But now 20000 Men
are accounted very great Slaughter.

Whether, since the Northern People have fallen on Trade, such vast Numbers,
are not destroyed by Invasions?

Whether, by all those Ways, or by which of them most, Europe is grown
Populous, is not Material to this Discourse: It is sufficient to show, That the
Matter of Fact is so, which does appear by comparing the Ancient Histories of
Countries with the Modern?

In the Ancient Descriptions, the Countries are full of Vast Woods, wild
Beasts; the Inhabitants barbarous, and as wild, without Arts, and the
Governments are like Colonies, or Herds of People: But in the Modern, the Woods
are cut down, and the Lions, Bears, and wild Beasts destroyed; no Flesh-Eaters
are left to inhabit with Man, but those Dogs and Cats that he tames for his
Use: Corn grows where the Woods did, and with the Timber are built Cities,
Towns and Villages; the People are Clothed, and have all Arts among them; and
those little Colonies and Families, are increased into Great States and
Kingdoms; and the most undeniable Proof of the Increase of Mankind in England,
is the Doom-Day-Book, which was a Survey taken of all the Inhabitants of
England, in the Reign of William the Conqueror; by which it appears, that the
People of England are increased more than double since that time: But since the
Mosaical Hypothesis of the Increase of the World, is generally believed amongst
the Christians. And the late Lord Chief Justice Hales, in his Book of the
Origination of Mankind, has endeavored to satisfy all the rest of the World.
It would be misspending of Time, to use any other Topic for the further Proof
thereof, than what naturally follows in this Discourse, which is from the
Different Success of Arms, in the Latter and Former Ages.

In the Infancy of the World, Governments began with little Families and
Colonies of Men; so that, when ever any Government arrived to greater Height
than the rest, either by the great Wisdom or Courage of the Governor, they
afterward grew a pace: It was no Difficulty for Ninus, that was the oldest
Government, and consequently, the most Populous, to begin the Assyrian Empire;
nor for his Successors to continue and enlarge it: Such Vast Armies of Cyrus,
Darius, Hystospis and Xerxes, the least of their Forces amounting to above
500000, could not be Resisted, when the World was but thin Peopled.

These great Armies might at first sight, seem to infer, That the World was
more Populous than now; because the Armies of the greatest Princes, seldom now
exceed the Number of Fifty, or Sixty Thousand Men: But the Reason of those
great Numbers, was, They were not so well Skilled in Military Arts, and show
that the World was in the Infancy of its Knowledge, rather than Populous; for
all that were able to bear Arms, went to the Wars: And if that were now the
Custom, there might be an Army in England of above Three Million, allowing the
Inhabitants to be Seven Millions; and by the same Proportion, the King of
France's Country, (being four Times bigger) might raise Twelve Millions; such a
Number was never heard of in this World.

The next Difficulty against the enlarging of Empire by Arms, is, That since
Printing, and the Use of the Needle has been discovered, Navigation is better
known, and thence is a Greater Commerce amongst Men, the Countries and
Languages are more understood, Knowledge more dispersed, and the Arts of War in
all Places known; so that, Men fight more upon equal Terms than formerly; and
like two Skilful Fencers, fight a long Time, before either gets Advantage.

The Assyrians and Persians Conquered more by the Number of Soldiers, than
Discipline; the Grecians and Romans, more by Discipline than Number; as the
World grew older, it grew wiser: Learning first flourished among the Grecians,
afterward among the Romans; and as the Latter succeeded in Learning, so they
did in EMPIRE. But now both Parties are Equally Disciplined and Armed; and the
Successes of War are not so great; Victory is seldom gained without some
Considerable Loss to the Conqueror.

Another Difficulty to the enlarging of Dominion by Arms, is, That the Goths
Overcoming the greatest Part of Europe, did by their Form of Government, so
settle Liberty, and Property of Land, that it is difficult for any PRINCE to
Change that Form.

Whether the Goths were Part of the Ten Tribes, as some are of Opinion, and to
Countenance their Conjectures, have Compared the Languages of the Inhabitants,
Wales, Finland and Orchadis, and other Northern Parts (little frequented by
Strangers, which might alter their Language) and find them to agree with the
Hebrew in many Words and Sound, all their Speech being Guttural. This is
certain, their Form of Government seems framed after the Examples of Moses's
Government in the Land of Canaan, by dividing the Legislative Power, according
to the Property of Land, according to that Ancient Maxim, That Dominion is
founded upon Property of Land. There Monarchy seems to be made by an easy
Division of Land into Thirds, by a Conquering Army, setting down in Peace; the
General being King, has one Third; the Colonels being the Lords, another Third;
and the Captains, and other Inferior Officers being Gentlemen, another; the
Common Soldiers are the Farmers, and the Conquered are the Villains: The
Legislative Power is divided amongst them, according to their Share in the
Land; it being necessary that those that have Property of Land, should have
Power to make Laws to Preserve it.

There seems to be but two settled Forms of Government; The Turkish, and
Gothic, or English Monarchy: They are both founded upon Property of Land; in
the First, the Property and Legislative Power is solely in the Prince; In the
Latter, they are in both the Prince and People: The one is best fittted to
raise Dominion by Armies; for the Prince must be Absolute to give Command,
according to the Various Fortunes of War: The other is Best for Trade; for men
are most industrious, where they are most free, and secure to enjoy the Effects
of their Labors.

All other Sorts of Government, either Aristocracy, or Democracy, where the
Supreme Magistrate is Elective, are Imperfect, Tumultuous, and Unsettled: For
Man is Naturally Ambitious.; he inherits the same Ruleing Spirit that God gave
to Adam, to Govern the Creation with: And the oftener that the Throne is Empty,
the oftener will Contentions and Struggles Happen to get into it: Where deter
digniori is the Rule, War always Ensues for the Golden Prize. Such Governments
will never be without such Men as Marius and Scilla, to disturb them; nor
without such a Man as Caesar to Usurp them; notwithstanding all the Contrivance
for their Defense by those Politicians who seems fond of such Forms of
Government.

The Gothic Government being a well fixed Form, and the People so free under
it, is great hinderance to the Enlarging of Dominion; for a People under a good
Government do more Vigorously Defend it: A free People have more to lose than
Slaves, and their Success is better Rewarded than by any Mercenary Pay, and
therefore, make a better Resistance: It was the Freedom of the Grecians and
Romans that raised their Courage, and had an equal Share in raising their
Empires, with their Millitary Discipline: The free City of Tire put Alexander
to more Trouble to Conquer, than all the Citys of Asia.

The People of Asia, living under a Dispotick Power, made little Resistance;
Alexander subdued Libia, Phaenicia, Pamphilia, without much Opposition in his
Journey to meet Darius; Egypt came under Subjection without Fighting, and so
did many Countries, being willing to Change the Persian Yoke: Besides, he
Fought but two Battles for the whole Persian Empire; and the Resistance of
those slavish People was so weak, that he did not lose 500 Grecians in either
of the Battles, though Darius Number far exceeded his; the one being above
260000, and the other not Forty; And there was as great Disproportion in the
Slaughter; for at the Battle in Cilicia he slew 110000, and that at Arbela
40000; whereas, the Spartan, a Free People, about the same time, fought with
Antipater his Viceroy of Macedon; and in a Fight, where neither Army exceeded
60000, slew 1012 of the Macedonians, which was more than Alexander lost in both
his Battles: So great is the Difference of fighting against a Free, and a
Slavish Effeminate People.

For the same Reasons, That the World is grown more Populous, That the Arts of
War are more known. That the People of Europe live under a Free Government. It
is as difficult to keep a Country in Subjection, as to Conquer it. The People
are too Numerous to be kept in Obedience: To destroy the greatest Part, were
too Bloody, and Inhuman; To Burn the Towns, and Villages, and so force the
People to remove, Is to lose the greatest share in Conquest; for the People are
the Riches and the Strength of the Country, And it is not much more Advantage
to a Prince, to have a Title to Lands, in Terra Incognita, As to Countries
without People.

Besides, Countries and Languages being more known; And Mankind more acquainted
than formerly: The Oppressed People remove into the next Country they can find
Shelter in, and become the Subjects of other Governments. By such Addition of
Subjects, those Governments growing stronger, are better able to Resist the
Incroaches of Empire: So that, every Conquest makes the next more difficult,
from the Assistance of those People before Conquered; To Transplant the
Conquered into a Remote Country, as formerly, Is not to be Practiced; There is
now no Room, the World is so full of People.

To Conquer, and leave them Free, only paying Tribute and Homage, Is the same
as not to Conquer them: For there is no Reason to expect their Submission
longer, than till they are able to Resist; which will not be long before they
make the same Opposition, if they continue in the same Possession; and
therefore, though the Romans in the Infancy of their Government, did leave
several Countries Free, as an Assistance to other CONQUEST; yet, when they grew
stronger, they turned all their Conquest into Provinces, being the surest way
to keep them from Revolting.

These are the Difficulties of enlarging Dominion at Land, but are not
Impediments to its Rise at Sea: For those Things that Obstruct the Growth of
Empire at Land, do rather Promote its Growth at Sea. That the World is more
Populous, is no Prejudice, there is Room enough upon the Sea; the many
Fortified Towns may hinder the March of an Army, but not the Sailing of Ships:
The Arts of Navigation being discovered, has added an Unlimited Compass to the
Naval Power. There needs no Change of the Gothic Government; for that best
Agrees with such an Empire.

The Ways of preserving Conquests gained by Sea, are different from those at
Land. By the one, the Cities, Towns and Villages are burnt, to thin the People,
that they may be the easier Governed, and kept into Subjection; by the other,
the Cities must be enlarged, and New ones built: Instead of Banishing the
People, they must be continued, in their Possession, or invited to the Seat of
Empire; by the one, the Inhabitants are inslaved, by the other, they are made
Free: The Seat of such an Empire, must be in an Island, that their Defense may
be solely in Shipping; the same way to defend their Dominion, as to enlarge it.

To Conclude, there needs no other Argument, That Empire may be raised sooner
at Sea, than at Land; than by observing the Growth of the United Provinces,
within One Hundred Years last past, who have Changed their Style, from Poor
Distressed, into that of High and Mighty States of the United Provinces: And
Amsterdam, that was not long since, a poor Fisher-Town, is now one of the Chief
Cities in Europe; and within the same Compass of Time, that the Spaniard and
French have been endeavoring to Raise an Universal Empire upon the Land; they
have risen to that Height, as to be an equal Match for either of them at Sea;
and were their Government fitted for a Dominion of large Extent, and their
Country separated from their Troublesome Neighbor the Continent, which would
Free them from that Military Charge in defending themselves, they might, in a
short Time, Contend for the Soveraignity of the Seats.

But England seems the Properer Seat for such an Empire: It is an Island,
therefore requires no Military Force to defend it. Besides, Merchants and
Soldiers never thrive in the same Place; It has many large Harbors fitting
for a large Dominion: The Inhabitants are naturally Courageous, as appears from
the Effects of the Climate, in the Game Cocks, and Mastiff Dogs, being no where
else so stout: The Monarchy is both fitted for Trade and Empire. And were there
an Act for a General Naturalization, that all Foreigners, purchasing Land in
England, might Enjoy the Freedom of Englishmen, It might within much less
Compass of Time, than any Government by Arms at Land, arrive to such a
Dominion: For since, in some Parts of Europe, Mankind is harrassed and
disturbed with Wars; Since, some Governors have incroached upon the Rights of
their Subjects, and inslaved them; Since the People of England enjoy the
Largest Freedoms, and Best Government in the World; and since by Navigation and
Letters, there is a great Commerce, and a General Acquaintance among Mankind,
by which the Laws and the Liberties of all Nations, are known; those that are
oppressed and inslaved, may probably Remove, and become the Subjects of
England: And if the Subjects increase, the Ships, Excise and Customs, which are
the Strength and Revenue of the Kingdom, will in Proportion increase, which may
be so Great in a short TIME, not only to preserve its Ancient Sovereignty over
the Narrow Seas, but to extend its Dominion over all the Great Ocean: An
Empire, not less Glorious, and of a much larger Extent, than either Alexander's
or Caesar's.

Of the Chief Causes that Promote Trade.
THE Chief Causes that Promote Trade, (not to mention Good Government, Peace,
and Situation, with other Advantages) are Industry in the Poor, and Liberality
in the Rich: Liberality, is the free Usage of all those things that are made by
the Industry of the Poor, for the Use of the Body and Mind; It Relates chiefly
to Man's self, but does not hinder him from being Liberal to others.

The Two Extremes to this Virtue, are Prodigality and Covetousness: Prodigality
is a Vice that is prejudicial to the Man, but not to Trade; It is living a
pace, and spending that in a Year, that should last all his Life: Covetousness
is a Vice, prejudicial both to Man and Trade; It starves the Man, and breaks
the Trader; and by the same way the Covetous Man thinks he grows rich, he grows
poor; for by not consuming the Goods that are provided for Man's Use, there
arises a dead Stock, called Plenty* and the Value of those Goods fall, and the
Covetous Man's Estates, whether in Land, or Money, becomes less worth: And a
Conspiracy of the Rich Men to be Covetous, and not spend, would be as dangerous
to a Trading State, as a Foreign War; for though they themselves get nothing
by their Covetousness, nor grow the Richer, yet they would make the Nation
poor, and the Government great Losers in the Customs and Excises that arises
from Expense.

Liberality ought Chiefly to be Exercised in an equal Division of the Expense
amongst those things that relate to Food, Clothes, and Lodging; according to
the Portion, or Station, that is allotted to every Man, with some allowance for
the more refined Pleasures of the Mind; with such Distributions, as may please
both sect of Philosophers, Platonist and Epicureans: The Belly must not be
starved to cloth the Back-Part.

Those Expenses that most Promote Trade, are in Clothes and Lodging: In
Adorning the Body and the House, There are a Thousand Traders Employed in
Clothing and Decking the Body, and Building, and Furnishing of Houses, for one
that is Employed in providing Food. Belonging to Clothes, is Fashion; which is
the Shape or Form of Apparel.

In some places, it is fixed and certain; as all over Asia, and in Spain; but in
France, England, and other places, the Dress alters; Fashion or the alteration
of Dress, is a great Promoter of Trade, because it occasions the Expense of
Clothes, before the Old ones are worn out: It is the Spirit and Life of Trade;
It makes a Circulation, and gives a Value by Turns, to all sorts of
Commodities; keeps the great Body of Trade in Motion; it is an Invention to
Dress a Man, as if he Lived in a perpetual Spring; he never sees the Autum of
his Clothes: The following of the Fashion, Is a Respect paid to the Prince and
his Court, by approving his Choice in the shape of the Dress. It lies under an
ill Name amongst many Grave and Sober People, but without any Just Cause; for
those that Exclaim against the Vanity of the New Fashion, and at the same time,
commend the Decency of the Old one, forget that that every Old Fashion was once
New, and then the same Argument might have been used against it. And if an
Indian, or Stranger, that never saw any person Clothed before, were to be
Judge of the Controversy, and were to Determine upon seeing at the same time a
well Drest-Courtier in the New Fashion, and another in the Old, which is
accounted Decent; and a third in the Robes of an Officer, which by common
Esteem, had a Reverence: It will be Two to One, against any One of the Grave
Fashions; for it is only Use and Custom by which Habits become Grave and Decent,
and not any particular Convenience in the shape; for if Convenience were the
Rule of Commendation, there would arise a Question not Easily to be Determined,
Whether the Spanish Garb made strait to the Body, or the loose Habit of the
Turks, were to be Chosen? And therefore since all Habits are equally handsome,
and hard to know which is most Convenient: The Promoting of New Fashions, ought
to be Encouraged, because it provides a Livelihood for a great Part of Mankind.

The next Expense that chiefly promotes Trade, is Building, which is natural to
Mankind, being the making of a Nest or Place for his Birth, it is the most
proper and vible* Distinction of Riches, and Greatness, because the Expenses
are too Great for Mean Persons to follow. It is a Pleasure fit to entertain
Princes; for a Magnificent Structure does best represent the Majesty of the
Person that lives in it, and is the most lasting and truest History of the
Greatness of his Person.

Building is the chiefest Promoter of Trade; it Imploys a greater Number of
Trades and People, than Feeding or Clothing: The Artificers that belong to
Building, such as Bricklayers, Carpenters, Plaisterers, etc. employ many Hands;
Those that make the Materials for Building, such as Bricks, Lyme, Tyle, etc.
employ more; and with those that Furnish the Houses, such as Vpholsterers,
Pewterers, ande. they are almost Innumerable.

In Holland, where Trade has made the Inhabitants very Rich, It is the Care of
the Government, to Encourage the Builder, and at the Charge of the State, the
Grafts and Streets are made. And at Amsterdam, they have three Times, at great
Expense, Thrown down the Walls of their City, and Dreined the Boggs, to make
Room for the Builder: For Houses are the Places where the Artificers make their
Goods, and Merchants Sell them; and without New Houses, the Trades and
Inhabitants could not Increase.

Beside, There is another great Advantage to Trade, by Enlarging of Cities; the
Two Beneficial Expenses of Clothing and Lodging, are Increased; Man being
Naturally Ambitious, the Living together, occasion Emulation, which is seen by
Out-Vying one another in Apparel, Equipage, and Furniture of the House;
whereas, if a Man lived Solitary alone, his chiefest Expense, would be Food. It
is from this very Custom; If the Gentry of France Living in Cities, with the
Invention of Fashion; That France, though a Country no way fitted for Trade, has
so great a share of it: It is from Fashion in Clothes, and Living in Cities,
That the King of France's Revenues is so great, by which he is become
troublesome to his Neighbors, and will always be so, while he can preserve
Peace within his own Country; by which, those Fountains of Riches, may run
Interrupted into his Exchequer.

Of the Chief Causes of the Decay of Trade in England, and Fall of the Rents of
Land.
THE Two Chief Causes of the Decay of Trade, are the many Prohibitions and high
Interest.

The Prohibition of Trade, is the Cause of its Decay; for all Foreign Wares
are brought in by the Exchange of the Native: So that the Prohibiting of any
Foreign Commodity* does hinder the Making and Exportation of so much of the
Native, as used to be Made and Exchanged for it. The Artificers and Merchants,
that Dealt in such Goods, lose their Trades; and the Profit that was gained by
such Trades, and laid out amongst other Traders, is Lost. The Native Stock for
want of such Exportation, Falls in Value, and the Rent of the Land must Fall
with the Value of the Stock.

The common Argument for the Prohibiting Foreign Commodities, is, That the
Bringing in, and Consuming such Foreign Wares, hinders* the Making and
Consuming the like sort of Goods of our own Native Make and Growth* therefore
Flanders-Lace, French Hats, Gloves, Silks, Westphalia-Bacon, etc. are
Prohibited, because it is supposed, they hinder the Consumption of
English-Lace, Gloves, Hats, Silk, Bacon, etc. But this is a mistaken Reason,
and arises by not considering what it is that Occasions Trade. It is not
Necessity that causes the Consumption, Nature may be Satisfied with little;
but it is the wants of the Mind, Fashion, and desire of Novelties, and Things
scarce, that causes Trade. A Person may have English-Lace, Gloves, or Silk, as
much as he wants, and will Buy no more such; and yet, lay out his Money on a
Point of Venice, Jessimine-Gloves, or French-Silks; he may desire to Eat
Westphalia Bacon, when he will not English; so that, the Prohibition of
Foreign Wares, does not necessarily cause a greater Consumption of the like
sort of English.

Besides, There is the same wants of the Mind in Foreigners, as in the English;
they desire Novelties; they Value English-Cloth, Hats, and Gloves, and Foreign
Goods, more than their Native make; so that, though the Wearing or Consuming of
Foreign Things, might lessen the Consuming of the same sort in England; yet
there may not be a lesser Quantity made; and if the same Quantity be made, it
be a greater Advantage to the Nation, if they are Consumed in Foreign
Countries, than at Home; because the Charge, and Employ of the Freight, is
Gained by it, which in bulky Goods, may be a Fourth Part of the whole Value.

The particular Trades that expect an Advantage by such Prohibition, are often
mistaken; For if the Use of most Commodities depending upon Fashion, which
often alters; The Use of those Goods cease. As to Instance, Suppose a Law to
Prohibit Cane-Chairs; It would not necessarily follow, That those that make
Turkey-Work Chairs, would have a better Trade. For the Fashion may Introduce,
Wooden, Leather, or Silk Chairs, (which are already in Use amongst the Gentry,
The Cane-Chairs being grown too Cheap and Common) or else, they may lay aside
the Use of all Chairs, Introducing the Custom of Lying upon Carpets; the
Ancient Roman Fashion; still in Use amongst the Turks, Persians, and all the
Eastern Princes.

Lastly, If the Suppressing or Prohibiting of some sorts of Goods, should prove
an Advantage to the Trader, and Increase the Consumption of the same sort of
our Native Commodity: Yet it may prove a Loss to the Nation. For the Advantage
to the Nation from Trade, is, from the Customs, and from those Goods that
Imploys most Hands. So that, though the Prohibition may Increase, as the
Consumption of the like sort of the Native; yet if it should Obstruct the
Transporting of other Goods which were Exchanged for them, that Paid more
Custom, Freight, or lmployed more Hands in making; The Nation will be a loser
by the Prohibition: As to Instance, If Tobacco or Woollen-Cloth were used to
Exchange for Westphaly-Bacon, The Nation loses by the Prohibition, though it
should increase the Consumption of English-Bacon; because the First, Pays more
Freight, and Custom; and the Latter, Imploys more Hands. By this Ruse it
appears, That the Prohibiting of all unwrought Goods, such as raw Silk, Cotton,
Flax, etc. and all Bulky Goods; such as Wines, Oils, Fruits, etc. would be a
Loss to the Nation; because nothing can be sent in Exchange that Imploys fewer
Hands than the First, or Pays greater Freight than the Latter.

It does not alter the Case, If the Balance of the Account, or all the Foreign
Goods, were bought by Silver or Gold; For Silver and Gold, are Foreign
Commodities; Pay but little Freight, and Employ but few Hands in the Working;
And are at First brought into England, by the Exchange of some Native Goods,
and having Paid for their coming hither, must Pay for the Carriage out. It is
true, That if our Serge, Stuffs, or Cloth, are Exchanged for Unmanufactured
Goods, it would be a greater Advantage to the Nation, because of the difference
in Number of Hands in the making of the First, and the Later.

But all Trading Countries Study their Advantage by Trade, and Know the
difference of the Profit by the Exchange of wrought Goods, for unwrought: And
therefore, for any Nation to make a Law to Prohibit all Foreign Goods, but such
only as are most Advantageous; Is to put other Nations upon making the same
Laws; and the Consequence will be to Ruin all Foreign Trade. For the
Foundation of all Foreign Trade, is, from the Exchange of the Native
Commodities of each Country, for one another.

To Conclude, If the bringing in of Foreign Goods, should hinder the making and
consuming of the Native, which will very seldom happen; this disadvantage is
not to be Remedied by a Prohibition of those Goods; but by Laying so great
Duties upon them, that they may be always Dearer than those of our Country
make: The Dearness will hinder the common Consumption of them, and preserve
them for the Use of the Gentry, who may Esteem them, because they are Dear; and
perhaps, might not Consume more of the English Growth, were the other not
Imported. By such Duties, the Revenue of the Crown, will be Increased; And no
Exceptions can be taken by any Foreign Prince, or Government; Since it is in
the Liberty of every Government, To Lay what Duty or Imposition they please.
Trade will continue Open, and Free; and the Traders, Enjoy the Profit of their
Trade: The Dead Stock of the Nation, that is more than can be Used, will be
Carried off, which will keep up the Price of the Native Stock, and the Rent of
the Land.

The next Cause of the Decay of TRADE in England, and the Fall of Rents, is,
That Interest is higher in England, than in Holland, and other places of great
Trade: It is at Six per Cent. in England, and at Three in Holland; For all
Merchants that Trade in the same sort of Goods, to the same Ports, should Trade
by the same Interest.

Interest is the Rule of Buying and Selling: And being higher in England, than
in Holland; The English Merchant Trades with a Disadvantage, because he cannot
Sell the same sort of Goods in the same Port, for the same Value as the Dutch
Merchant. The Dutch Merchant can Sell 100 l. worth of Goods, for 103 l. And the
English Merchant must Sell the same sort, for 106 l. to make the same Account
of Principal and Interest.

When Sir Thomas Gresham had almost the sole Trade of Spain, and the
Turky-Company the sole Selling of Cloth into Turkey, and several other places;
The Difference of Interest was then, no prejudice to Trade, though Interest was
then in England, at Eight per Cent. Because, whoever has the sole Trade to a
place, may set what Price he pleases upon his Goods: But now, Trade is
dispersed, the same sort of Manufacture, is made in several Countries. The
Dutch and English Merchants, Trade in the same sort of Goods, to the same
Foreign Parts, and therefore they ought to Deal by the same Interest, which is
the Measure of Trade.

Besides, And the English Merchant has the same Disadvantage in the Return of
the Goods he Buys; for the Dutch Merchant making his Return in the same sort of
Goods, can under-Sell him.

By this Difference of Interest, Holland is become to be the great Magazine,
and Storehouse of this Part of Europe, for all sorts of Goods: For they may be
laid up Cheaper in Holland, than in England.

It is impossible for the Merchant when he has Bought his Goods, To know what
he shall Sell them for: The Value of them, depends upon the Difference betwixt
the Occasion and the Quantity; though that be the Chiefest of the Merchants Care
to observe, yet it Depends upon so many Circumstances, that it is impossible to
know it. Therefore if the plenty of the Goods, has brought down the Price; the
Merchant lays them up, till the Quantity is consumed, and the Price rises.
But the English Merchant, cannot lay up his, but with Disadvantage; for by that
time, the Price is risen so as to pay Charges and Interest at Six per Cent. the
same Goods are sent for from Holland, and bring down the Price: For they are
laid up there, at Three per Cent, and can therefore be Sold Cheaper.

For want of Considering this, in England, many an English Merchant has been
undone; for, though by observing the Bill of Lading, he was able to make some
Guess of the Stock that was Imported here; and therefore, has kept his Goods
by him for a Rise: But not knowing what Stock there was in Holland, has not
been able to sell his Goods to Profit, the same Goods being brought from thence
before the Price rises high enough to pay Ware-House-Room, and Interest.

So that, now the great part of the English Trade is driven by a quick Return,
every Day Buying and Selling, according to a Bill of Rate every day Printed. By
this Means, the English Trade is narrowed and confined, and the King loses the
Revenue of Importation, which he would have, if England were the Magazine of
Europe; and the Nation loses the Profit, which would arise from the Hands
employed in Freight and Shipping.

Interest being so high in England, is the Cause of the Fall of Rents; for
Trade being confined to a Quick Return: And the Merchant being not able to lay
up Foreign Goods, at the same Interest as in Holland, he Exports less of the
Native; and the Plenty of the Native Stock Brings down the Rent of Land; for
the rest of the Land that produces the Stock, must fall, as the Price of the
Stock does.

Whereas, if Interest were at the same Rates as in Holland, at Three per Cent.
it would make the Rent more certain, and raise the Value of the Land.

This Difference of Three per Cent. is so Considerable, that many Dutch
Merchants Living in Holland, having Sold their Goods in England; give Order, to
put out their Stock to Interest in England; thinking That a better Advantage
than they can make by Trade.

It will raise the Rent of some Estates, and preserve the Rent of others: For
the Farmer must make up his Account, as the Merchant does; the Interest of the
Stock, must be reckoned, as well as the Rent of Land: Now if the Farmer has
300 l. Stock, upon his Farm, that is so easily Rented, that he Lives well upon
it; he may add 9 l. per Annum more to the Rent, when the Interest is at Three
per Cent. and make the same Account of Profit from the Farm: As he does now
Interest, is at Six per Cent. And those Farmers that are hard Rented, having
the same Stock, will have 9 l. per Annum Advance in the Account, toward the
Easing the Rent: For although the Farmer gets nothing more at the Years end, yet
in making up of Account, there must 9 l. add to the Value of Land, and taken
from the Account of the Stock. If Interest were at Three per Cent. there would
always be a Magazine of Corn and Wool in England, which would be a great
Advantage to the Farmer, and make his Rent more certain; for there are Years of
Plenty, and Scarcity; and there are more Farmers undone by Years of great
Plenty, than Recover themselves in Years of Scarcity; for when the Price is
very low, the Crop does not Pay the Charge of Sowing, Farming, and Carrying to
Market; and when it is Dear, It does not fall to all Men's Fortune that were
losers by Plenty, to have a Crop: Now if Interest were at Three per Cent. Corn
and Wool in Years of great Plenty, would be Bought and Laid up to be Sold in
Years of Scarcity. The Buying in Years of Plenty, would keep the Price from
Falling too Low; and the Selling in Years of Scarcity, would prevent it from
Rising too High; by this means, a moderate Price, being best upon Corn and
Wool; the Farmers Stock and Rent of the Land, would be more certain.

But now Holland being the great Magazine of Corn, Man will Lay up any
considerable Quantity in England at Six per Cent. when he may always Buy as
much as he wants, that was Laid up at Three per Cent. and may bring it from
thence, as Soon, and as Cheap, into any Parts of England, as if it were Laid up
here.

Thirdly, If Interest were at Three per Cent. the Land of England, would be
worht from Thirty Six, to Forty Years Purchase; for Interest, sets the Price in
the Buying and Selling of Land.

The bringing down of Interest, will not alter the Value of other Wares; for
the Value of all Wares, arriveth from their Use; and the Dearness and Cheapness
of them, from their Plenty and Scarcity: Nor will it make Money more Scarce. For
if the Law allow no more Interest, than Three per Cent. they that Live upon it,
must Lend at that rate, or have no Interest; for they cannot put it forth any
where else to better Advantage. But if it be supposed, That it may make Money
scarce, and that it may be a Prejudice to the Government, who want the Advance
of the Money; It may be provided for, by a Clause, that all that Lend Money to
the King, shall have 6 l. per Cent.; such Advantage would make all Men Lend to
the Government: And the King will save two per Cent. by such a Law.

The seeming Prejudice from such a Law, is, It will lessen the the Revenue of
those who live upon Interest: But this will not be a General Prejudice; for
many of those Persons, have Land as well as Money, and will get as much by the
Rise of one, as the by the Fall of the other. Besides, many of them, are
Persons that live Thriftily, and much within the Compass of their Estates; and
therefore, will not want it, but in Opinion. They have had a long Time, the
Advantage of the Borrower; for the Land yielding but 4 l. per Cent. and the
Interest being at 6 l. per Cent. a new Debt is every Year contracted of 2 l.
per Cent. more than the Value of the Debt in Land will pay, which has Devoured
many a good Farm; and eat up the Estates of many of the Ancient Gentry of
England.

Moses, that Wise Lawgiver, who designed, that the Land, divided amongst the
Jews, should continue in their Families; forbid the Jews to pay Interest, well
knowing that the Merchants of Tire, who were to be their near Neighbors,
would, by Lending Money at Interest, at last get their Lands: And that this
seems to be the Reason, is plain; For the Jews might take Interest of
Strangers, but not pay; for by taking Interest, they could not lose their
Estates.

The Lawyers have invented Intails, to preserve Estates in Families; and the
bringing down of Interest to Three per Cent. will much help to continue it;
because the Estates being raised to double the Value, will require double the
Time, after the same Proportion of Expense to Consume it in.

The raising the Value of Land, at this Time, seems most necessary, when the
Nation is Engaged in such a Chargeable War: For the Land is the Fund that must
support and preserve the Government; and the Taxes will be lesser and easier
paid; for they will not be so great: For 3 sh. in the Pound, is now 133 Part of
every Man's Estate in Land, reckoning at Twenty Years Purchase. But if the Value
of the Land be doubled, it will be the 226 Part of the Land, which may be much
easier born.

Campinella, who Wrote an 100 years since, upon considering of the great Tract
of the Land of France; says That if ever it were United under one Prince, it
would produce so great a Revenue; It might give Law to all Europe.

The Effect of this Calculation, I since, seen by the Attempts of thy present
King of France: And therefore, since England is an Island, and the Number of
Acres cannot be In creased; It seems absolutely necessary* That the Value of
them, should be raised to Defend the Nation against such a Powerful Force: It
will be some Recompense to the Gentry, whose Land must bear the Burden of the
War to have the Value of their Estates Raised; which is the Fund and Support
of the Government; Is a great Advantage to the whole Nation; and it is the
greater, because it does not Disturb, Lessen, nor Alter the Value of any Thing
else.

FINIS.

