ROBERT BARCLAY's APOLOGY For the true CHRISTIAN Divinity Vindicated From JOHN
BROWN's Examination and pretended confutation thereof, in his book, called,
QUAKERISME The Pathway to PAGANISM.

In which VINDICATION I. B. his many gross perversions and abuses are
discovered, and his furious and violent Railings and Revilings soberly rebuked,
By R. B.

Whereunto is added A Christian and Friendly Expostulation with ROBERT
MACQUARE, touching his Postscript to the said book of J. B. written to him by
LILLIAS SKEIN, wife of Alexander Skein, and delivered some months since at his
house in Rotterdam.

Isaiah 51: 7. Hearken unto me, ye, that know righteousness, the People, in
whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of
their revilings.

Matthew. 5: 11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and speak all manner of evil falsely against you for my Name's sake.

Printed in the Year. 1679. And are to be sold by Benjamin Clerk, Stationer, in
Georgeyard Lumberstreet, At LONDON.

The PREFACE To the READER.
Serious READER,
I shall not need to trouble thee here with a long Preface, most of what is
commonly inserted in such Epistles being proposed to thee in the first Section,
only I will take occasion here, ingenuously and solemnly to profess that no
delight in controversy has induced me to undertake this Treatise, but pure
necessity, to vindicat the Truth, professed by me, from the many gross
perversions wherewith this Author has abused it. For as for his Personal
Reflections at me, which are very frequent, and whereby he labors to represent
me to his Reader, as the veryest Fool, Ignorant, Senseless, Non-sensical, and
yet Proud, Presumptuous and blasphemous Miscreant (for such are his
expressions) that can be imagined; I should not have troubled my self nor the
world with a Vindication, being persuaded none who truly knows me, will
believe him, and that none of solidity and judgment, who knows me not, will so
easily agree to his Censur: as for such credulous creaturs (if his book find
any such, for I have heard of severals of the same faith with him, who much
condemn his Railing still) who will judge of me upon so small and suspicious
evidence, I must be contented, as many better men have been before me, to abide
the rash judgment of those inconsiderat Souls. As for the book, from which he
assumes and pronounces this character of me, thou will find it here vindicated,
and see that hideous masque, wherewith he labored to vail it, that he might
rail the more securely, taken off. I could easily show the lightness of his
judgment, by filling the other scale with a pressed-down measur of the
Testimonys, both by word and write, of several Persons at home and abroad, who
are not Quakers, and yet such, to whom without disparagement he must give the
precedence, both for Parts, Piety and Learning; but I desire not to raise my
reputation that way; it is his work that needs a Postscript of that nature: and
truly he has saved me this pains, while at other times he manifestly implies
a contradiction to this character, while he persuades the Reader of the
necessity he was under to write so great a Volumn, as if the whole Christian
Commonwealth had been in danger to be overturned, and many Souls in hazard to
be hurt by the Quakers (among whom both he and his brother R. M. C. give me and
my writings a chief place, as their Goliath, patron, sharpest and neatest pen)
if not seasonably supplied by this his antidot. For sure had it been so
inconsistent and contradictory a piece of work, as he sometimes represents it
to be, as being written by so silly and pittyfull an Ignoramus, as he is
sometimes pleased to term me, there could not have been so great cause of fear,
nor such need of so great a volumn, especially to such as could not understand
mine, being not yet extant in a language they skilled, to whom he principally
directs his, and though they had, could have no great hurt, if he speak true,
when he represents me frequently to write things unintelligible, and yet he is
so wise as to apprehend he has refuted what he confesses he does not
understand. But the reason of his thus contradicting himself is, that, albeit
his malice to the Truth and my self, was such, that he could not say enough to
render both it and me despicable, yet forgeting himself at other times, he was
forced to acknowledge what I say considerable, that he might render his own
work of some value, and himself a champion, which he could never have done,
albeit he might be supposed to have rebuked and refuted a piece of pitiful
nonsense. Thus the man, while he stretches to exalt himself, and abase me;
overturns, on the one part, what he affirms on the other: but if he can have so
far pity upon himself, as to think in time, of repenting, I do with my whole
heart freely forgive him, and whether he do, or not, I can assure him, as I
should never have valued my self upon his commendation, so I am nothing moved
by his abuses, save only to pity and commiserat him. I must entreat this of
the Reader, that, if he desire to be fully informed in this controversy, he
will be pleased first to read my Apology, which for his benefit will I hope be
extant in our own language, ere this comes to his hands, and then perhaps he
will little need an antidot against the pretended confutation, but if any
scruple there remain, it will easily be removed by seriously perusing this
Vindication. And because before his book he places a great list of that he
accounts the blasphemous assertions of the Quakers, that so he may preposses
his Reader with prejudice at the very entry, to remove which, thou will find
inferted at the end a List of so many of them as are utterly false, besides
many of them are Perversions, and not owned in the terms he asserts them, and
yet a great part of them he pretends not so much as to deduce from any words
written by me, but has fished for them in the writings of others of our
adversarys, which piece of injustice is in the last Section demonstrated. Not
desiring to detain thee any longer, I shall only wish the God of all Grace to
minister to thee such a measur thereof, and give thee such Light and
understanding by the holy influence of his Divine Spirit, that thou may, for
his Glory and thy Soul's Salvation make a right judgment of the present
Controversy, and come truly to discern which doctrine it is, and who speaks
most consonantly to the Holy Scripturs,

So wishes he, who is a real friend to all men, R. B.

ADVERTISMENT.
IT is hoped that the more moderat, sober and serious among the Presbyterian
Preachers, and who have a true regard as well to the Peace of their own
Consciences as to the Christian reputation of their cause and interest among
sober and honest Christians, will show their readyness to do justice to
themselves, as well as right to the injured Author of this Treatise, not only in
respect to the appeal added to the end of the last Section, but also to the
many other gross abuses, falsehoods and railings detected herein, to be most
impudently asserted by John Brown, since he comes forth under no less character
than a Presbyterian David, and that given him by so eminent a man as Robert
Macquare is reputed among them: which justice is also the more hoped for, since
the more moderat Presbyterians have themselves felt the fruit of J. B. his
violent, furious and unchristian temper, in his fomenting Divisions among them,
and encouraging Cameron by his Letter, whom they repute an Heady, Turbulent
Incendiary, and the effects of whose work strengthened by J. B. have produced
no small mischief both to the Cause in general, and to many poor People, who
have been thereby ruined, if the occasion some of themselves represent of the
late rising in Scotland be true.

ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to correct these following Errors, which have escaped
the Press: other literal ones, which do not so much touch the sense, are left
to his discretion, and if any others considerable have not been observed and
here remarked, it is hoped the courteous Reader will not impute them to the
Author, because of his absence from the Press.

In the Preface, page 1. line 20. for still read style. P. 3. l. 24. for which
r. them. P. 4. l. 6. r. who that speaks. -- In the Book, page 16. l. ult. r.
own. P. 17. l. last save two, r. Sects. P. 22. l. 6. r. do. P. 23. l. last but
two, r. preparatory. P. 26 l. 25. after may d. not. P. 32. l. 4. d. of. P. 34.
l. 25. r. spirits. d. of. P. 43. l. 26. r. bonds. P. 57. l. 9. r. arcady. P.
68. l. 9. r. him. P. 83. l. 13. d. by which. P. 88. l. 11. r. he. P. 102. l. 5.
after is, read not. P. 78. l. 2. add after dye for themselves; If he mean a
natural death, but if not, I see no reason of admitting his figure, nor is
there any strength in it to prove that it imports his dying in their room and
stead, as he would have it. P. 98. l. 34. r. is. P. 101. l. 14. r. say. l. 15.
r. is. P. 110 l. 28. r. sine. P. 113. l. 16. d. by. P. 135. l. 16. r. by
Papists against Protestants. Page 184. l. 15. r. he has but said it. l. 18. r.
so as all. P. 192. l. ult. r. and. P. 168. l. 17. for proof read reply. P. 180.
l. 3. r. corruptions. P. 175. l. 34. for and r. add.

R. B's. APOLOGY For the true Christian Divinity VINDICATED From J. B's.
Examination and pretended Confutation thereof, in his book, Called QUAKERISME
the pathway to PAGANISM.
Section I. Containing the Introduction, and the Method, the Author proposes
to himself, in this Treatise; with the reasons wherefore, together with some
general Considerations relating to I. B's. whole book, and Remarks on his
Epistle to the Reader.
1. AMong the many evils, that abound amongst those, that bear the name of
Christians, this is a great one, that, in the unhappy difference they have
among themselves, there appears so much malice, bitterness and envy; and so
little of that candor and sincerity, true and unmixed zeal, and of the
meekness, peacablness and gentlness of Jesus: so that there is oftentimes
observed an eager willingness to represent their Opposits other ways than they
are. But, among all sorts of such, as profess Christianity, I know none have
more reason to complain of this abuse, than we; who, albeit we have not a
little labored to make known to all, the plain Truth, held by us; yet our
words have been most miserably perverted upon many occasions, and we most
horribly misrepresented, as is abundantly manifest to many, who are acquainted
with the books writ against us, and our answers: wherein many, if not most, of
the arguments used against us are not levelled at those things we truly hold,
but at the monstrous and horrid conceptions, which our adversarys have framed
to themselves, and then would needs fasten upon us, as our Principls and
doctrins. Many of us have been thus exercised in the controversys, wherein we
have been concerned, and I my self, in some small rencountres that have
heretofore fallen to my share, have had my part, but I confess inferior to many
of my Brethren. But now that I. B's work appears, I think (considering the bulk
and nature of it, hereafter more particularly to be viewed) I may come up with
most. For I scarce think that ever a man's words were so horridly and
constantly throughout perverted, or that ever a book of controversy, of its
bulk, to wit, (as I take it) betwixt 70 and 80 sheets of paper, was so stuffed
with a continual strain of Railing, from the very first page unto the last.
Yet, when we consider the man's design, which appears from the nature of his
work, perhaps there will be less occasion of wonder.

For either he, or some brother of his abroad, having, without any provocation
from us, the People called Quakers, fallen into the most gross and vilest sort of
railing against us, in a Post script to S. R's Letters, and that without the
least offer of probation, it seems they judged themselves concerned to give the
people some reason for their so doing. And there could not be a finer knack to
beguil the credulous and implicit Multitud, than to answer a book writ in
Latin, and not extant in their Mothertongue: for there a man, as to them, (who
can not read, understand, and compare it with that, to which it relates) may
pervert words, as he will, draw consequences at pleasur, and make to himself
what monsters best please his fancy, or like his humor best to batter. And yet
he can not find in it by all his perverting enough to make us so black, as he
would have us, so that he is oftentimes constrained to fish for this, by
citing the writings of some, that have writ against us, and bring us up some of
their old threed-bare calumnys, long ago answered by us: in which his injustice
shall be afterward observed. And so he, being thus furnished, can the more
easily abuse, especially while he is almost secure, that the generality of
those he writes to, are such, as will not call in question, as to the truth of
it, what is said by one esteemed by them a precious and gracious Minister, and
sufferer for the good cause, to boot. But (blessed be God!) the number of such
implicit believers grows daily less, and many (that had wont to do
other-wise) begin to love to see with their own eyes, and not to pin their
faith so much upon the Clergy's sleeve, as they had used formerly to do. For
this cause, had I had to do only with the more judicious and Learned, who could
have well understood the Latin edition, I should have thought my self the less
concerned to have said any thing to this answer: But knowing that his may come
to the hands of many, and may be read by them, who do not understand Latin:
and that not a few, who do understand it, love rather to read and consider
things in their own language; this made me hasten an English edition (not one
sheet whereof was committed to the press several weeks after I. B's book came
out) and now it being abroad, as to those, who are diligent and judicious, and
willing seriously to compare, as to the argumentative part, I should not be
much concerned to answer him, judging the English edition, with all such, a
sufficient reply to this pretended examination, however he oftentimes sings a
triumph to himself, saying in many places, What will our Quaker say now?
Contrary to the rules of sobriety, and to what the Scriptur teaches him,
saying, Let not him boast, that puts-on his armor, but he that takes it off,
besides what his brother, in a most fawning flattering manner, adds in his
Postscript. (To which something may be said hereafter.) But, because too many
out of malice, prejudice and ignorance, may be too apt to credit him, I resolve
here to take notice of his gross perversions and abuses upon every These, and
of his most unreasonable and brutish railing, which being subjected to the
Readers view, will give him a great in-sight in the matter, and let him see
what kind of man this is, and what kind of work it is that comes from him. And
likewise in respect he insults very much, I may labor to allay it, in taking
notice of his chiefest arguments, that are any ways to the purpose. This I know
will satisfy the moderat and judicious, who bring not along with them an
understanding already prepossessed, but are willing patiently to hear both
partys, and then make a judgment accordingly. And as for others, who are wholly
prepossessed with malice and prejudice, and have no ears to hear, but
(according to the Author of the Postscript his advice) avoid the least of that
kind as poison: I say, as for such, I wish the Lord open their eyes, and give
them a heart more just and equal, I shall not be much concerned if my writing
have no great influence upon them at present.

But, if any strange that so small a Treatise, as this may seem to be, should
answer so great a bulk, the considering of these particulars following will
easily remove that wonder.

1. If we consider how much is taken up in mere railing, of which few pages are
found free, and somtimemes takes up near the whole page, besides that almost
every paragraph ends with a dish of this desert: saying, O what hell-hatched
heresies these abominable Quakers maintain! and the like: besides many little
sentences, such as, This is an answer fit for a Quaker. This is like the
Quakers nonsense. I see the Quakers can dream waking, and such like stuff. I
need not set down pages to prove this, for, as thou will find a specimen of it
in the first half side to the Reader, so indeed thou wilt scarce open the book
but thou will meet with it: so that I may safely say, to speak within bounds,
there are 20 sheets (if it were all put together) that are mere railing, either
by way of admiration, detestation, or execration, which have nothing of
argumentation, neither from Scriptur nor Reason, but the mere strong affirmo of
the assertor; all which (albeit I may remark it as I go on) I think not my self
concerned to answer, nor do I conceive will any sober man judge I am, and my
answer thereto, as now to the bulk of it, so may perhaps prove not much more
all along, than The Lord rebuke that railing spirit in thee I. B., and, if it
may stand with his will, redeem thee from it, that thou may learn sobriety,
of that Grace of God thou so much fightst against. It is a trade I love not,
nor do I skill or think to learn it, I will readily grant him both the
preference and victory in this art of Billingat's rhetorik, or, to speak yet
more plain to all our Scots capacitys, of kail-wives, oratory. So I say, Let
all this railing in his book be laid aside: and whereas he would insinuat in
several places, as if there were much railing in my Apology, saying, I rage,
and such like expressions, how great an abuse this is, I leave to the judgment
of the intelligent Reader.

2. If all his excursions be laid aside, wherein he runs out oftentimes into
long homilies, by way of explanation of their judgment, descanting upon the
several opinions of their Divines, as he calls them, in which he oftentimes
not only bestows several pages, but sometimes diverse sheets, as in its place
may be observed. In all which tedious preachments (some whereof are may be
shies of old rusty sermons, that have been lieing by him) I think my self no
more concerned, than if the man had writ a great volumn of their Divinity,
which I should not perhaps have bestowed the pains to read, far less looked upon
it as my business to answer it.

3. If all his citations out of Hicks, Faldo and others, that have written
against us, all which are long ago answered, though not heeded by him, were
laid aside, which is not only most impertinent, but likewise unjust, (as shall
be after more particularly observed) and likewise his long citations out of the
Westminster confession of faith and larger Catechism, a good part whereof he
has transcribed and inserted in his book, albeit it had been a great deal
easier to have cited the chapters, and referred to them, the book being so
common: but it seems it pleases the man's humor to see a great bulk go under
his name, however it be filled up.

4. Lastly: If his many perversions be considered, wherein he either wilfully
orignorantly mistakes my meaning, and sets up to himself a man of straw, and
then batters at it: I say, this being laid aside, which takes up no small part
of his work, will make a considerable abatement. Now all these things
considered, and all this superfluous and chassy stuff being laid aside, which
is little or nothing to the purpose, the Reader will find that what remains
will go into a pretty narrow compass, and bear no great disproportion, if any
at all, with these my observations.

4. But, ere I make an end of this section, I judge it needful to take some
notice of his Epistle, where the manner of his introduction is very odd. Men
use to be sober and moderat, that write controversys, in the beginning at lest,
and not seek to prepossess the Reader with prejudice against their adversarys,
until, by the strength of their Reasons, they have proven them to deserve it:
but this man is so full fraughted with malice, and so in love with railing,
that he can not forbear the first page, where we have him calling us Locusts,
of whose ministry the Devil makes use, only Masculine in Malice against Christ,
etc. -- breathing forth nothing but that Putrid porson, that innate Serpentine
Venom, etc. And of this strain is the whole of his Epistle, where we are termed
Apostat -Quakers, Runagado Page 2 and 3.
Quakers, etc. But methinks it should have been more rational, to have forborne
this until he had proved us such, and not to have begun thus to rail without
the least probation. But however this may take with malicious or credulus
persons, it will give the Judicious a sufficient taste of the nature of his work,
and we are not afraid of great prejudice by this kind of arguing. But as he
goes on, he gives us a clear specimen of what spirit he is of, and abundantly
shows, that, if either he had power, or were able to influence the Magistrate
thereunto, he would have saved himself the labor of all this confutation, by
making short, in cutting us all off. For since he represents us not only as the
worst and vilest of heretics, but as the sworn and most desperate enemies of
Jesus Christ in all his offices, we need not doubt, considering his judgment
expressed in the case of Liberty of Conscience, what he would have done with
us. And albeit it might have been judged that in prudence he should have let it
alone, until that place where it seemed to be most proper, and only might be
inferred by way of consequence, yet in this, as in most other things, his
malice outdoes his prudentials, and therefore he can not let 3 pages pass, and
that in the Epistle, till he discover his temper in this; for there he tells us
a story of a Turk, who caused punish a Jew for blaspheming of Christ, to the
shame of Christians, who have not so much zeal, etc. -- and a redress of this
(says he) is called for at the hands of one and other, according to their
Place and Station. The language of this is sufficiently understood, and bears
no small reflection upon Magistrates, as not being so forward to persecut, as I.
B. would have them. And, if we consider that flood of railing that follows,
the application is easy: and then, as he goes on, he takes a very convenient
way that he may rail securely and calumniat without fear of being discovered,
for he would fright People from so much as coming near us, yea he will have all
fleeing from us more hastily than from persons having the black botch (such is
his comely expression) yea and under the dreadful hazard of incurring Anathema
Maranatha, so much as to enter into a friendly communing with us, give us the
least token of kindness and affection by word or deed! (What! not feed us, if
ready to starve? or cloth us, if naked? which Christ commands all his
Disciples Prove. 25: ver. 21. Matthew. 5: 44. Romans 12: 20. Romans 7: 2. Ephesians. 5: ver.
25.
to do to their greatest enemies.) But how would this man have a husband
behaving toward his wife, or a wife toward her husband, if, turning Quaker,
they must show one another no token of kindness and affection either in word or
deed, when the Apostle encourages Christian husbands and wives to live with one
another respectively, if they be willing, albeit professed Heathens and open
Idolaters? But with him, they must not so much as show a token, so much as by
one cast of the eye, far less by more homely discoursings: and after the same
manner a little after, he would have all forbear so much as looking into our
writings, to which, according to his ordinary style, he gives such epithets as
his railing Genius affords him; a very ready way for him to belie and calumniat
us at pleasur. But upon this occasion I would ask him this question, If he
judges it reasonable, that he, that reads his Examination should look into
the Apology to which it relates, or unto that which is said by way of reply to
it, or if he would have them taking all upon trust from him? Were not this a
brave way of examining controversys? and does not this fairly lead to the blind
ignorance and implicitness of the Church of Rome, and to the custom of the
Turks and Mahumet's rule? (whom he has so often in his mouth.) I would
willingly know if the man would avow himself so irrational, as to require or
desire this of any body in their wits: and yet he must be so irrational, or
otherwise allow the breaking of the Rules he so earnestly presses.

5. After he has proceeded at the same rate of railing, accusing us of Devilry,
and what not, (as for the number of the poisonous assertions, which he says he
has gathered together, it shall be spoken of hereafter, and his gross abuse
therein detected.) he comes at last to apprehend that some will think he is too
large, but he has a quick way of solving that difficulty, by answering himself
with a contrary apprehension, that more will blame him for not being larger,
and so this objection is easily dispatched. As for the reason he gives of his
prolixity, to wit, because of the temper of the Quakers, who would have been
ready to vaunt and triumph, if he had omitted any thing. But for all this
boast, it shall be shown, that several times (as large as he is) he has
omitted whole considerable Paragraphs, where he found he would be pinched, and
that the matter was too hot for his fingers, that he durst not meddle with it.
At last he comes to an honest and ingenuous confession, that in most of the
heads, he has adduced, for confirmation, only their Confession of Faith, and
Catechism: A very plain acknowledgment of the nature of his work, for he is very
good at begging the question, and proceeding upon Principles denied by him he
has to do with. But the judicious Reader may judge whether his proofs be very
valid and binding, which are only confirmed by that which is denied by me, and
which needs to be confirmed no less than the arguments deduced from it: since
I account it no confession of the true Faith, this is just as if a Papist,
arguing against a Protestant, should tell him he uses only, for confirmation,
the decrees of the council of Trent, how ridiculous this is any judicious man
may judge. But since he has so great a veneration of the confession of Faith,
and also such an itch of scribbling, methinks he should not suffer it to lie so
long under the censur of that examen which was written several years ago, and
lies yet (for ought ever I could learn) unanswered, all the notions of which
albeit I will not espouse, yet I think all I. B's Clergy and Reason will not
solidly reply to it, and I am well assured it has disgusted hundreds of that
confession; (who are not Quakers) and also how weakly the Confession is
confirmed, and how grossly the Scripturs are perverted, to make them serve it,
I have given a taste in the last chapter of my book, entitled, a Catechism and
Confession of Faith, which is not only extant in English, but he will find also
printed in Low Dutch, and should in reason have been removed by him, ere he had
used it only for confirmation in controversy against me. But there is something
more in this expression, for, when the Confession of Faith and Catechism is
only adduced for confirmation, what becomes of the Scripturs, that, in words,
are so highly exalted? It seems, notwithstanding all these verbal
commendations, he has no more use for them than for an old Almanac, the
Confession of Faith and Catechism is that which is to be minded. It seems what
he brings of them in this controversy is only pro forma, for the confession of
Faith is only adduced for confirmation; it is the good antidot against the many
Errors of the Times: and whereas he speaks of apposit passages of Scriptur,
those, that will compare them with the things they are pointed to, to prove,
will find in most not the least correspondence, of which I have given some
proof in that place before mentioned.

6. But indeed he has spoken out the truth of the matter, for all their great
talk of the Scriptur, it is manifest to such as will narrowly look into it,
that not the Scriptur, but the confession of Faith and Catechism is their Rule
of Faith and Manners: for the Scripturs must serve the Confession of Faith, not
the Confession of Faith answer the Scripturs, which must be turned, twined and
wrested, to suit to the Confession of Faith. Hence if a man believe the
Scripturs ever so firmly, and square his faith accordingly, unless he agree to
every point of the Confession of Faith, all is to no purpose, he must pass for
an Heretik.

At last, to conclude, he having, it seems, said all he has to say, makes
provision not to be put upon the necessity to vindicat his gross perversions
and calumnys. As for his comparison of Rats and mice their dealing with books,
he must know I intend not to square these observations to gratify his humor,
it will be enough for me to satisfy the candid and judicious Reader. He doubts
not to make a judgment of things not yet in being, and therefore expects no
answer, that shall savor of Reason, Religion, Candor and Plainness. We have
seen that of him, which gives us ground to believe he has bad enough thoughts
of us: but however, he must not expect to be judge in his own cause, and
whereas he says, he will not be troubled at our Railings and Barkings, one may
wonder the man has the confidence to accuse others of what himself is so highly
guilty of; but he shall not need fear to be troubled with such stuff, and
whether he gives or gets most of that, is referred to the judicious Readers, to
whose judgment and censur, whether he will or not, as his writings will be
liable, so to them, and to their Christian consideration, I freely submit what
is written in these Observations.

Section II. Wherein his two first Chapters, containing Remarks upon my
Preface, and the first These of the true ground of knowledge, are considered.
1 UPon the Preface of my Theses, which is but about half a dozen of lines, he
bestows no less than 12 pages, all which being either bare assertions or
railing (as can not escape the diligent Readers observation.) will therefore
require the shorter reply. He has not got the length of a dozen of lines, when
with a piece of confidence he will seem so modest, as not to preoccupy the
Reader's judgment, by calling the Theses, Ethnical or Diabolical, but methinks,
if he has not forgotten his epistle, which we will in reason suppose the Reader
to have first viewed, in which (as is above observed) there is enough of that
sort said to preoccupy his judgment, so that he must needs put out his eyes,
that does not see that his pretended modesty and forbearance is not real.

2. Next, because these Theses are directed by me to Clergy men of all sorts in
the Christian world, he will needs have it that I acknowledge a Christian world,
to which my self and those I patronize do not belong: but how he makes this
consequence appear he leaves us to divine, for there is no proof brought for
it, but his own assertion. He needs not wonder that I acknowledge a Christian
world, unless he had known me somewhere todeny it, for in respect of Profession
(which distinction himself elsewhere uses) all these may be accounted of it,
who make an outward profession of Christ, besides that I have sufficiently
acknowledged my belief that in severals of them the inward life of Christianity
is to be found; as for what follows, he needs not doubt, but I am as much
against the distinction of Laity and Clergy, as himself can be. But since I
writ to such, many whereof own it, my using it to them, for distinction's sake,
will not infer my approving of it. With his usual candor, he will have this
direction to import no less than a chartal to provoke all those, it is directed
to, to a dispute, as if a man for removing of mistakes and misrepresentations,
could not give an account of his faith, without it be esteemed a provocation to
dispute: if he really believes I intended so, I must tell him he is greatly
mistaken, and I apprehend I should know my own intentions large as well as he.
He is offended that our doctrines should be thought as different from Papists
as Protestants, but with how little ground, will after appear; and he also
refers it to a fitter probation. Then, after he has knocked as hard as he can
upon me, for my confidence, he tells me, that there is little said by me but
what was refuted, ere I was born, by the orthodox writing against Pelagians,
Socinians, Arminians, Enthusiasts, Anabaptists and Papists. But methinks then
there was the less need of troubling the world with his volum, yet he has for
that a ready salvo, he must answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be
wise in his own conceit. Some other reasons he adds for engaging in this his
work, which the Reader may judge of, whether they be of any weight.

3. As he goes on, he is greatly offended I should style my self a servant of
the Lord, and will have it to be upon no better ground, than Thomas Muncer and
the Anabaptists of Munster. But because all this is founded upon the
supposition of my being a false prophet, and preaching another gospel than the
true, we must leave it to the Reader's judgment, after he has taken time to
consider of the whole debate. But, because he speaks here of the producing
credentials, I would willingly have him producing his credentials for being a
Minister of the Gospel, and it may be then seen, if I can not produce as valid,
for any thing I style my self, only he must remember, that, as his must have
something more than his own affirmation, or those of his party, so he must
overturn mine with some stronger arguments than mere railing.

4. He needs not apprehend, as he would insinuat, that the omission of any
words in the Theses prefixed to the Apology proceeds from my being ashamed of
the name QUAKER; since himself bears witness in the very same page, that I
fully acknowledge it, in the explanation of the 11 Thesis. Here he has a
descant upon Trembling, and seems to strange that any Quaker should bring the
example of Moses and Habbakkuk, to show that such a thing was not so much to be
wondered at in the Saints: but why this should be esteemed impertinent by him he
does not tell us. As for the foaming at the mouth, he talks of, both here and
elsewhere, it is returned upon him as a calumny, and he is desired to prove it;
but it must be by some more credible and impartial testimony than his Mr
Stalham, for Partys use not to be admitted as witnesses. For his denominating
us by that name of distinction, I shall not quarrel: but as for his insinuation
in the beginning of page 5. where he says, It is like we would gladly have them
casting away their Bibles, as no more to be regarded, than the Turks Alcoran,
it bespeaketh the height of malice, as to which I shall only say, The Lord
forgive him for so gross a calumny, which he, that is the Searcher of hearts,
knows to be a most horrible lie. He goes on after his usual manner, saying, I
inveigh against all humane learning, that has been any ways made use of in
Theology; but where he finds this asserted by me I know not, whether the words
he would deduce it from, to wit, (that man has rendered the plain and naked
Truth obscure and mysterious by his wisdom) will bear such a consequence is
left to the Readers judgment. But he thinks he has found out our secret design
of being against Learning and Schools of Learning. (which is neither our
affirmation nor principle, but his own false supposition.) We would (says he)
have all those banished, that we might the more easily prevail with our errors.
But methinks the man should be more wary in venting his own false imaginations,
unless he could bring some ground for them: for his assertion is so far untrue,
that, if he had been rightly informed, he might have known that we have set up
schools of Learning for teaching of the Languages and other needful Arts and
Sciences, and that we never denied its usefulness; only we denied it to be a
qualification absolutely necessary for a Minister, in which case alone we have
opposed its necessity.

5. He confesses I speak not amiss, in saying, the world is overburthened with
books, but thinks that my Apology of 50 sheets adds some considerable weight:
but methinks he of all men should have here been silent, who has troubled the
world with an examination of it a great deal larger; albeit he confesses all,
that is in it, has been refuted by the Orthodox long ago, and not only so, but
since that he has written a book near twice as large upon one point, to prove
the first day of the week to be the Christian Sabbath, and yet it is but the
first time, and seems but to be the porch of what he intends upon that subject.
With his usual candor he says, I am against disputes and debates, or books
written of that nature: But to infer simply that I am against all such, because
I reprove the vain jangling that has been and is among the Schoolmen, is an
ill consequence: he shall not find me any where speaking against useful and
solid controversys, for clearing and maintaining of Truth. He seems not to
disapprove what I speak against School Divinity, confessing the abuse of it,
albeit he thinks it has been of use: and as for this imagination of my being
acquainted with it, we will place it among his other mistakes. He proceeds
page 8 to say, I am against the labors of those that have writ commentarys,
but his conclusion here is like others of this nature. When I mention
commentarys, it is with relation to what goes before, he will not deny but many
books are written under the notion of commentarys on the Scriptur, by which the
Truth has been more darkened than cleared; will it therefore follow that he
condemns Commentarys indefinitly? As for such writings, tending to the opening
of the Scriptur, in which the Authors are acted and influenced by the same
Spirit, from which the Scripturs came, and which alone can give the true
meaning of them, I am so far from condemning them, that I highly approve them,
as very beneficial to the Church of Christ. As for his talk here of our
disrespect to the Scripturs, I shall have occasion to take notice of it where
they are particularly treated of: but he is apt to think, that the real ground
of my prejudice against such books, is, because so much is to be found in them
against my old errors; for I can not but know (says he) that whoever reads
these must see my nakedness and folly, without much study. As for this
imagination we must take it with much more, upon trust; but this helps to prove
the needlesness of his large Examination.

6. At his usual rate of Perverting he goes on to say, that the account I make
of all the learned men of the World, is, that they are Scribes and disputers of
the World, etc. But for proof of this we have nothing: he confesses the words
to be those of the Apostle, and how he proves that I have a different meaning
from the Apostle, I know not. After he has commended his learned men, and
loaded the Quakers with reproaches, he concludes this Paragraph, page 8. with
another falsehood, and yet he will have it remarked, to wit, that, according to
my judgment, the pure and naked Truth of God was never unfolded nor declared,
until the generation of the Quakers arose, but where he finds me saying so he
tells not, and indeed can not, since such a thing was never asserted by me. For
answer to my saying, that God has laid aside the wise and learned, and made use
of illiterat men, as to letterlearning, after he says, it is affirmed without
proof, (not considering how improper it was not to expect any formal probation
upon the occasion and manner it was delivered) he gives us diverse citations out
of the Apostle Paul, warning against seducers, all which I acknowledge to be
true, but the question lies in the right application; and yet since, (albeit
he believes they very appositly agree to us) he thinks it not his present
business to demonstrat it, it will need no reply. After he has proceeded in his
10 page, according to his usual sort of railing, affirming the great difference
betwixt our doctrine and that of the Apostles, he brings forth a mighty charge,
that I usurp the Throne of God, and judge of men's hearts and intentions: (but
how guilty himself is of that crime, has been in part already shown, and will
hereafter more appear.) but why do I so? because I say, the Clergy have clouded
the Truth, that the common People might maintain and admire them? But have not
Protestants, and that truly, asserted this of the Popish Clergy? and is not
the Thesis directed to such? Will it not then hold true, according to his own
judgment, of a great, yea the greatest part of those, to whom it is directed?
what then will become of his clamors? Yea if it were needful, I could give
instances of very mean thoughts he and his Party have of many of the Protestant
Clergy, yea and reflections not much, if any thing, inferior to this, to verify
with how little ground he quarrelleth me here. As for his malicious aspersion,
that there are shrewd presumptions our stock lies at Rome, he should have
produced some of them, if he could; we could never yet obtain for this old
calumny from our adversarys the least probation, and it will be found as hard
for him to prove it, as he may think it for such, who strongly affirm their
great IDOL, the COVENANT, was contrived at Rome, and came from thence. As for
his reflections upon our Church, as being all eyes and ears, it will be proper
to speak of it in its own place. Next, to prove the positions of the Quakers to
be such, as overturn and destroy the Gospel, he brings, page 11, diverse
citations out of Mr Norton and Mr Stalham, (as he terms them) adding more may
be had out of Mr Hicks, but such witnesses will have small credit with
impartial Readers. If he himself had dealt impartially, he should have first
read our answers to them, ere he had given them such authority. It were easy for
me, by way of reply, to transcribe what our Friends have written particularly
by way of answer to them, did I as much affect to have my writings bulky, as it
seems he does. He closes up this with a fit of railing, and, after he has
quarrelled me, page 12. for having an high conceit (as he imagines) of my
Theses, he falls fresh to that work again, telling, they have weight to sink
into the bottomless pit the poor Soul that embraces them. I never sought any
should receive doctrins, as truth, upon my bare testimony, and therefore he
needs not upbraid me with so doing: and whereas, on the contrary, as himself
immediately observes, I leave what I say to the LIGHT in every man's Conscience,
it shows with how little reason he made his former alledgance, after he has
pleased himself with making an impertinent conjectur of the import of these
words, that so he might, if he could, render them ridiculous, he comes at last
to the true understanding of them; and truly he needed not fear at my being
offended that he should make a judgment of what I writ, according to his
Conscience; but he went the wrong way to work, when his labor is to pervert
and wrest, and make them speak what they do not. This apparently proceeds from
malice and prejudice, and the Light of his Conscience, if he had minded it,
would never have prompted him so to do. Thus I am come to the end of the first
chapter.

7. In the second chapter, entitled, Of the true ground of knowledge, I find
he can not contradict what is asserted by me. only, because he must be carping,
he makes a noise that Joh. 17: 3. cited by me, so much of the sentence was not
set down in the first as second edition. What a pitiful cavil this is the
Reader may easily judge, since the place was noted, it was enough, though never
a word had been set down, but this with him is a bad Omen, let the judicious
judge of this man's judgment in the matter. But, because he can not quarrel at
what is said, he will quarrel that so much is not said as he judged meet: but
he may be pleased to understand that I judged my self under no necessity to
advise with him what was needful for me to write. But (says he) since I take
upon me to teach the whole world, (it is strange it should be so natural for
this man to write untruths, since I direct my Theses only to the Christian
world: but if it may render me odious, such Peccadillo's pass with him it seems
but for Piae frauds) I intended never to write of those things, concerning
which we do not differ from others. But let us see wherein he accounts me
defective. I have written nothing (says he) of the nature and attributes of
God. I write not to Atheists, but Christians, who already acknowledge, and I
judge it not my work to write books to persuade men of that they already profess
to believe. But I write not expressly and distinctly of the Trinity, yet
himself after acknowledges, page 24, that it would seem I am orthodox herein,
that he finds not any clear ground to the contrary. I writ as expressly and
distinctly of that, as is expressed in Scriptur, which I hope I. B. will not
say is defective in sufficiently expressing this article of Faith.

8. The third challenge is, I speak nothing of God's Decrees, by which some are
praedestinated to Life, others foreordained to death. (for the man without
ceremony takes the doctrine for granted) But if I have spoken nothing of this,
(though perhaps not in the method he would) how extravagant must he be, that
writes a whole chapter upon Reprobation, as pretending to refute what I have
said concerning it. With the like confidence, not to say impudence, he accuses
me of silence, in relation to the Covenants, to the Redemption purchased by
Christ, his taking flesh upon him, to the work of Grace and Sanctification, to
obedience to the Law of God. Which gross abuse any one that reads my book will
easily see, considering how much, and how particularly these things are spoken
to, in the explanation of the 5, 6, 7 and 8 Theses. Last of all, he accuses me
for giving no account of the Resurrection of the Body. But do I not expressly
in my conclusion affirm, that those, that accuse us of denying of it, belie us?
and does not that clearly import an owning? But as to that matter (because I
love not repetitions, as he does, who will be upon one matter often, and out of
its proper place) I will referr what further I have to say, until I come to
his last chapter. At last, after he has confessed in part to what I affirm, he
craves liberty, because some may put a wrong Foundation for the right to examine
what by me is placed for it: which liberty is freely granted him, (for I am a
great enemy to implicit Faith, as well the Popish as Presbyterian, who in that
are much what alike) and I will take also liberty to re-examin his examination,
that I may free my self of those many abuses, wherewith he has injured me.

Section III. Wherein his third Chapter of Inward and Immediate Revelations is
considered.
1. THat I may not trouble the Reader with a long and taedious pursuit of I. B.
in all his extravagant rambls and unreasonable railings, wherein he accuses me
as an Ignoramus, writing nonsense and confusion. page 39. More of that kind in
page 31. while yet, to his own confusion, page 40 and 41, he says, he knows
not what I mean, nor what I would prove, nor what my arguments must conclude:
wherein if he speak true, he declares himself incapable to judge of, and far
less to answer, my arguments, a large disquisition of his impertinency in which
things I willingly omit, and will consider this his chapter, as well where he
misses, as where he truly in any measur urges the matter. And first to
dispatch what is superfluous, all that is said by him against false revelations
and delusions of the Devil, against which he speaks sometimes more largely,
sometimes more overly, in page 21. 22. 34. 35. 36. 47. no judicious Reader will
think is any thing to the purpose; since I never did plead for False
revelations, but for the necessity of the true Revelation of the Spirit to all
real Christians. And though it could be proved that either I, or any other
Quaker, so called, were deluded by a false revelation, yet it will not thence
follow, that our asserting the necessity of true revelation to the building up
of true faith, is erroneous, more than, in I. B's own sense, the Arminians or
Socinians asserting false doctrins, pretending to have for them the authority
of Scriptur, will make him judge, that their asserting the Scriptur to be the
only and adequat rule of faith, is false, in his judgment, since he therein
agrees with them. And therefore his disingenuity as well as weakness does
notably appear, page 46, 47, and 48. where coming to take notice of what I have
said, in showing how the same may be returned upon such as own the Scriptur,
Reason and Tradition to be the Rule of their faith, he gives it no answer, and
most effrontedly comes up with his often reiterated story of John a Leyden and
Munster, (with which we are less concerned than himself) notwithstanding that I
show, that even men pretending to the Scriptur, and to be led by it, and in
particular his ow Brethren, had don no less vile actions, than those of
Munster, and yet he would not think it well argued to infer thence that it were
dangerous to follow the Scriptur, as the Rule. To all this he returns no
answer, which takes up 6 pages in my Apology, Lat. ed. page 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31. unless it be a sufficient answer, to say he needs not take notice of my
trifling answers, and that it is a mere rapsody. But the truth is, to use his
own expression, it was too hot for his fingers; and therefore he judged best to
shuffle it by so easily. but his unfairness in this is so much the more
considerable, where the pinch of the question lay, and his own and his
Brethrens reputation was so highly concerned, as being charged as guilty of no
less abominations than the Monsters of Munster, in that he boasts, in his
epistle to the Reader, that he has examined every thing asserted by me,
particularly, which he gives as the reason of troubling him with so prolix a
Treatise.

2. Now albeit I might in reason pass his new enforced objection, till he have
satisfied to this so shameful an omission, yet lest he should fancy any
strength in it, and to show him the sillyness of it, I will here consider and
remove it: it runs thus, page 46.

If since the Apostles and other extraordinary Officers fell asleep, and after
the Arg.
canon of the Scripturs was completed, All that have pretended to immediate
Revelation have been led by a spirit of Error, Then that is not the Way of
Christ.

But the former is true:

Therefore so is the other.

Such an objection is not like to signify much, where, in both Propositions
Answ.
the question is most miserably begged, and the thing in debate taken for
granted: for, albeit the connection of the Major should be granted, yet the
question is there, in a great part of it, begged, to wit, that such Officers in
the Church, as were the Apostles, are not now, neither as to the nature of their
Office nor manner of their being led by the Spirit. Next, that the canon of the
Scripturs is completed, that is to say, No writings are ever hereafter to be
expected or believed to be written by the Spirit, both which I deny, and he has
not so much as offered to prove, and therefore his argument, if I should go no
further, can conclude nothing. Next his Minor, to wit, that all pretending to
Immediate revelation have been led by a spirit of error, is not at all proved by
him, for albeit it might be said of all those old Scots, named by him, and of
the German Enthusiasts, yet that is not sufficient proof, unless he can make it
appear that there was never any other but were so also, which yet remains for
him to prove, and will trouble him to effect. For to affirm there were never
any, because he has never heard nor read of them, were an argument a great deal
more ridiculous, than rational. And for his challenging me to show them,
(albeit the instance of the Quakers be enough to spoil all his argument, as
will after appear) yet by his good leave I am not bound, Affirmanti incumbit
probatio, and that this answer is sufficient, I have the testimony of his
learned Brother, John Menzies, Professor of Divinity at Aberdeen, in his book
entitled Papismus Lucifugus, where he answers the Jesuit's Minor the same way,
and proves it to be sufficient. And surely he has not taken notice, that by
this he has condemned, as led by a spirit of error, all the primitive
Protestant Martyrs, that prophesied at any time, such as John Hus and George
Wishart our Countryman, and many others, by reason of whose prophesying I. B.
and his Brethren have valued their cause; since these Prophecys were said by
them to proceed from inward and immediate Revelation, and so they pretended to
it, albeit not as the ground of their faith and obedience in all matters of
Doctrine and Worship, yet as the ground of that Faith, by which they believed
these Revelations to proceed from God, and not from the Devil: and of that
Obedience by which they published and declared these things. Moreover he
overturns all, by the last instance, which he gives to prove it, to wit, that
the Quakers who pretend to immediate Revelations are led by a spirit of Error:
for proof of which we have only his bare affirmation, and yet, till this be
proved, his objection is naught. For indeed this is a rare way of debating with
an adversary, to make use of an argument by which he must be concluded already
as erroneous, in order to convince him that he is such: if this be not, as they
say, to put the plough before the Oxen, I know not what can be said to be so,
for I. B's argument, to make it plain, amounts to this,

If the Quakers be led by a spirit of error, Then the Quakers err, in affirming
inward and immediate Revelation to be the ground and foundation of true faith:

But the Quakers are led by a spirit of Error:

Therefore, etc.

Which is just as if I should argue thus:

If I. B. be a Knave, a manifest Liar and Calumniator, Then he is not a true
Minister of Christ, nor fit to write in Religious matters:

But I. B. is such:

Therefore, etc.

Is not this a notable way of arguing, and a quick way to dispatch
controversies? What says Rob. Macquair? Does not this well become his
singularly acute, solidly learned, and truly gracious Author? Postscript page
559.

3. The next thing to be considered, is, his stating the controversy, where,
according to his custom, he all along beggs the question; for having writ down
his opinion, and taken it for granted, without offering to prove it, he goes on
and builds thereon without more difficulty, as if it were not to be further
questioned: This appears in page 20. 28. 29. 30. 34. 35. 36. 37. 40. 43. 44. in
which places he states his opinion of the Immediate Revelation of the Spirit, as
not being such, as presents any Truths to be believed objectively, but only in
removing the Vail of the Eye of the Understanding, and spiritually Illuminating
the Mind, and Working effectually upon the Heart, to embrace and receive the
Truth already revealed and proposed in the Scripturs. Now for not using this
distinction and holding revelation in this his sense, he greatly blames me, as
jumbling things together, and darkning and prejudging the Reader, and bestows
upon me ever and anon many railing words, with the repetition of which I will
not trouble the Reader. And yet notwithstanding this accusation, in
contradiction of himself, he cites me page 42 and 28, taking notice of this
very distinction, as used by some, and also refuting it. Surely the man must
have miserably forgot himself, and will verify the Proverb Liars should have
good memorys. Next, since he judges I err, in not holding this manner of
Revelation, and that he builds all his superstructur upon it, as the Truth; he
should have offered to prove it to be such, for since he says they willingly
grant to these Scripturs noted by me, as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
etc. Romans 8: 9-14. together with 1 John 2: 27. Joh. 6: 45. Joh. 14: 16, 17. By
which Scripturs he can not deny but the manner of the Apostles being led, as
well as of all Christians, is included, since some of them were directed to the
Apostles particularly, in all which there is no ground for his distinction, and
assertion: It is not said, The Comforter, that I will send, shall lead you the
Apostles immediately, by proposing Truth, to be believed objectively, to you,
and this shall be accounted extraordinary, but, after you, it shall only lead
other Christians by illuminating their Understandings, and that shall be the
ordinary leading. And since then it is a rule granted by all, that we must hold
to the plain words of Scriptur, unless an urgent necessity force us to the
contrary, he should show us where this necessity lies; and prove his assertion
to be the true and genuin meaning of the words, and that we ought not to take
them, as we do, according to their plain and naked signification and import.
For I would willingly hear any ground from Scriptur of this nature, of
Extraordinary and Ordinary Revelations, as pertinent to this debate; for albeit
things extraordinary may be revealed to some, and not to others, that only
respects the things revealed, not the manner of Revelation. For a man telling
me extraordinary things, and ordinary, albeit the things may differ in their
nature, yet neither my manner of hearing nor his of speaking do thence
necessarily differ.

But perhaps the man does apprehend, that what he says, page 20. 30. 31. 40.
44. 45. is some proof of his assertion, (which if he do, the Reader may easily
observe his mistake) where he would insinuat, as if the manner of Immediate
Revelation by the Spirit, asserted by me, rendered all other means, even those
of Teaching and Exhorting, which are appointed by God, useless, and took away
all obligations of obeying the commands of God conveyed by others. And yet he
takes notice, page 23. that I acknowledge other means of Knowledge as
profitable, neither has he ever heard me deny, but men are obliged to obey the
commands of God through one another as well as in themselves, as the children of
Israel were those of Moses and the Prophets, and the Christians those of Christ
and his Apostles. But I suppose he will affirm with me, that no man's Obedience
to any command will avail him any thing, unless upon inward belief and
conviction that the thing commanded is of God,, since Whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin. If he say, that, albeit I do not deny such an obligation, yet it
necessarily follows from my Principle. That this is untruely alleged will
easily appear, since I suppose he will not deny but the rest of the Apostles,
who were alive when Paul's Epistls were written were obliged to receive them,
and obey them, as the dictats of the Spirit, yea and were benefited by them,
and so the Apostle Paul by others: albeit on both sides he will acknowledge
them to have had such revelations as he accounts Immediate and Extraordinary.
And so we see that to have such revelations and yet to be mediatly instructed
are not inconsistent, nor do they render one another useless, and indeed to
affirm they do so is rather a presumptuous accusing of God, who has appynted
both in their order, for the edification of his Church, than a refuting of such
as assert them. Such are his reasonings page 45. Besides that, this objection
may be easily refuted, for since I. B. affirms, as particularly page 42. that
the Scriptur is a complete Rule in all things concerning Faith and manners in
reference to Salvation, might it not be said that this takes away the use of
all Commentarys and expositions, and other books, especially since he and his
Brethren do with all affirm, that it is clear and intelligible to all, in
things essential to Salvation, let him show how this is weaker as to him, than
the other as to me. With the like presumption he blasphemously asserteth, that
even these revelations, which he himself calls and acknowledges to be
inward, immediate and extraordinary, are uncertain, for this reason, because
many men have been deluded by the Devil: on which he also insists in the
following page. And page 34. and 48. where he sums up his matter in this
question, How comes that others pretending to Revelation as much as I, have
been deceived? But as I said before, How comes that others, pretending to be
led by the Scriptur as the Rule as much as I. B. have been deceived, since the
Scriptur declares nothing but Truth? But how silly this is I have above shown,
and more largely in my Apology in those paragraphs, which I observed he most
foully omitted. And indeed this is a fine argument he has provided for Atheists
and Sceptiks, for it renders all Faith, even that of the Patriarchs, uncertain:
for since the ground and warrant of their writing the Scripturs was, in his own
account, inward, immediate and extraordinary revelations, and if such be, as he
affirms, uncertain, then the truth of the Scripturs, which depends upon such,
must necessarily be uncertain, since the stream can not be more pure than the
fountain, nor the superstructur more sure than the foundation. And therefore
most weak is his reasoning, page 46. where he pleads that such Revelations
can not be more sure than the Scripturs, which are the objective revelations of
the Apostles written down, since the certainty of these writings depends upon
the certainty of these revelations, by which they were written, and certainly
if in any case that maxim of the Schools do hold, it must in this, Propter quod
unum quod que est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale.

5. It will not be amiss here in the third place to take notice of his most
uncharitable and unchristian insinuations, contrary to all Christian and fair
rules of debate, as first, page 24. where he will needs infer our denying of
the Trinity, albeit he can not deny but he finds it owned by me, groundlesly
coupling us with the Socinians: and to help him in this he brings-in the
testimony of one Mr Stalham, as he terms him, an open Opposer of ours, which
Witness to receive against us is most unjust. But I desire here in the entry
that it be observed, that I intend to take little or no notice of his many
citations, to prove what we hold, out of the writings of our open Opposers, and
shall give such a sufficient reason for my so doing, ere I make an end, as I am
hopeful shall satisfy all judicious Readers, as well of our innocence, as his
unjustice therein: but by this the man's temper may be seen, and that his
design is not so much to refute what we truly hold, as to make the world
believe that we hold what we does not, to render us the more odious. And thus
he proceeds also basely to insinuat, that I deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the
Son of God, albeit he does not so much as pretend to any color for it from my
words, only he finds some Quakers give an indistinct answer in this matter, but
who they are or what their answer is he tells not: In pursuance of this, in the
following page he insinuats, as if I mean'd not the first but the second
Creation, and so joined with Socinus, which is a gross calumny like the former;
as also is what he says, page 31. number. 18. where he raileth against me as
writing things contrary to the Scripturs, and as one, whose revelations are not
from God, but from Satan. For all this the only proof is, [I. B. says so]
which I must plainly tell him is with me of no weight at all. Of the same nature
is what is asserted by him, page 33. nu. 20. wherein he insinuats, that we
contemn the Scripturs, telling a lying story from his Author Mr Hicks of one
Nicolas Lucas, which I desire him to prove the next time, not by Hicks, for he
is accuser, but by some more indifferent Witness, else to be justly held as a
Calumniator. And whereas he says, We should not obtrude any thing upon them,
without Scriptures, this is another lying insinuation; for where do we obtrude
any doctrins without offering to confirm them by Scriptur, as much as he and
his Brethren? For if he say, that our confirmations are not valid, that is not
to the purpose, we can easily say so of his, and do as truly believe it: but
the question is, Whether we obtrude any doctrins upon any to be believed,
telling them they ought to believe it, albeit we either will not or can not
confirm them by the Scriptur? Now he knows in his Conscience this to be a
lie, since I affirm of the Scripturs, Apol. Lat. ed. p. 47. and n. 60. that
they are the most fit outward judge of controversies, of which himself also
takes notice in that place. And lastly, of the nature of these malicious
insinuations is what he says, page 48 and 49, and last paragraph of this
chapter, where, after he has repeated what he terms my monitory conclusion, he
infers, that I mean, that a man should believe that Natur's dim light is the
Spirit of God and the Holy Ghost, and that he may burn the Bible, and with
confidence assert he is led by the Holy Ghost, whatever Scriptur or common
sense say to the contrary. This is all affirmed by him without the least proof,
which as it is the height of injustice, so it is with respect not only to my
words, but belief and intention, (God the Searcher of hearts knows) a most
horrid falsehood and calumny.

6. Now albeit what is said, may seem sufficient for a reply to this chapter,
and is indeed enough to give any sober man a disgust of it; yet that he may not
have reason to complain that any thing, wherein he may judge there is weight,
and is directly to the purposs, is omitted, I will now in the last place
consider and answer what he says against the validity of my Arguments, to
which an answer has not been included in what is already said. To begin then
like himself, which to be sure is with some calumny or other, he says page 14.
I stigmatize with the black mark of being carnal and natural Christians all,
that assent not to what I say: but he takes no time to prove it, and indeed can
not, for, albeit I say that it is like many natural and carnal Christians will
condemn what I say, yet it will not follow I account them all such who will not
fully agree with me in this matter. Of the same kind is his calumny, p. 22. n.
5. where he allegeth the citations of the Fathers so called prove no more than
his sense of Revelation above expressed, but whether he speaks true here or not
the Reader may judge, by seriously reading over these citations, and then let
him see if they do not hold out an inward and immediate teaching of the Spirit
of God in the Soul as the firm ground of Knowledge without which all outward
teaching is in vain: but to inserr this, he tells they writ against such as,
being Impostors and led by the spirit of the Devil, pretended to Revelations.
What then? Can not men write against false revelations, without they deny the
necessity of true ones? That is an odd conclusion. If I. B. were well acquainted
with the writings of the Quakers, (so called) he would find them as much
against false Pretenders, as any other But page 24 and 25 he finds fault with
my argument, deduced from these words, that there is no knowledge of the Father
but by the Son, because I take notice, as a first instance, of God's creating
all things by Jesus Christ, adding, Was this so difficult a point to be proved,
that I was constrained to go back to the first Creation for an argument? Answ.
No: but I judged it not improper (however he may) to show first, as prepatory,
God's more general way of working by his Son Jesus Christ, ere I come to that,
which is more particular, and this was the reason as well of my putting these
Propositions into that order as of my using of that instance, by which that
pretended abomination, which he pretends lurks under words, evanisheth. For the
man is very good at drawing inferences from other men's words, which they, that
spoke and wrote them, never thought of, as I for one can very well witness, since
the least can be allowed me is to know my own thoughts and purpose, which how
he should come to assure himself he knows better than I, is more than I can
fathom. For the same reason above mentioned I used the instance of God's moving
in his manifesting himself in his creaturs, and of the Spirit of the Lord's
moving upon the face of the waters, which, page 26. he flouts at, but does not
answer: and it is strange, that he, of all men, should be offended with such
preparatory considerations, where the matter is in a few pages after closely
come to, who has used so many remote arguments and several not pages only but
sheets, yea quires of paper, in order to prove the first day of the Week to be
the Christian Sabbath. He objects, page 26. against my affirming that God's
communion with man was by immediate manifestation of the Spirit, from Adam to
Moses, because so few are mentioned, and he supposes the rest, not mentioned,
had it only by their instruction. But since these few, that are mentioned, are
said to have had immediate revelation, and that the rest had no written Rule as
I. B. will confess, it seems there was more of God's immediate revelation in
those dark times, even by his confession, than now under the Gospel, where the
chief Pastors of the Church, according to him, are to expect no such thing;
neither is it proved that others, not mentioned, had no immediate revelations,
albeit they might have been instructed by these Patriarchs, which I have shown
before to be very consistent. And thus may be easily answered (seting-aside his
railings) what he says page 27. against my urging the frequent revelations
that men had during all the time of the Law betwixt Moses and Malachy, (by
which himself confesses the Scripturs of the Old and New Testament to have
been written) that that does not prove that every one had such revelations.
What then? I lay not the stress of the proof of every one's having immediate
revelations upon this, but this is clearly proved from it, that since immediate,
inward and objective revelations were so frequent during all the time of the
Law, which was the less glorious administration, and that of the Letter, it is
grossly absurd to say, as I. B. and his Brethren do, that they are now ceased
under the Gospel, which is said to be more glorious, and the pouring-forth of
the Spirit more abundant and Universal, and that not only for a little time, to
wit, to the Apostles, with restriction to them and their times, (for which he
never produced the least proof from Scriptur) but to the end of the world. And
if so that immediate Revelation be not ceased, there is a great deal of the
point gained, albeit I. B. confidently affirm that there can be proved nothing
by these reasonings, but what no body will deny, since the Divines of
Westminster have denied, and I. B. no doubt with them will deny, that immediate
revelation now is, since they positively say that it is ceased, and James
Durham, whom I. B. applauds as a reverend Brother, and Pastor of the Church,
has most absurdly affirmed, in his Treatise upon the Revelation, that when
John finished that book, God spoke his last words to his Church.

7. When he comes, page 28. to my Proposition, asserting that these
revelations were of old the Formal Object of Faith, he begins to inquire and
conjectur what I mean by the formal object, and upon that he bestows the
following page. For answering then his scruples in that matter, I say, In a
Divine revelation two things are to be considered, 1. the thing revealed, and
2. the revelation: the thing revealed is indeed the Material Object, the
revelation is the Formal Object; In which may be considered not only the manner
of the Revelation, that is, the voice, or speech of God unto the Soul, or his
imprinting in the soul, by a Divine manifestation the things revealed, but also
God himself so operating: both which, to wit, Deus loquens, id est, God
speaking, is the formal object of Faith, He himself, his Veracity is the
original ground of our Faith, his voice, holy Influence and manifestation, by
which he expresses himself, gives us the certainty and assurance that it is
He; and is very distinguishable, by those of a Spiritual discerning, from the
most subtle appearance and transformations of the Devil, since Christ says,
My sheep hear my voice, and will not hear that of a stranger: even as the voice
and appearance of two men of the most contrary and different humors, staturs
and complexions, are different and distinguishable by a man of sharp sight to
whom those men are well known; but of this I wrote more largely in my Letter to a
certain Ambassador, printed the last year at Rotterdam, at the end of the
Letter written to the Ambassadors of Nimwegen, whereto I referr him for further
satisfaction. But I wholly deny the consequence deduced by him, that, if God's
Veracity, because it is God that speaks and commands, be the formal object
of faith, Therefore it is all one, whether it be mediat or immediate: since
albeit that be the original ground, yet the immediate revelation is necessary,
that we may certainly know that it is he. For what avails it me to believe that
all, that God commands, is true, and ought to be obeyed, if I do not certainly
know the things I believe as truth do come from him? And the question is,
Whether certain knowledge can be had without immediate revelation, and therefore
to this his question, in the following page 30, What was the formal object of
the faith of the People to whom the Patriarchs and Prophets said [Thus says
the LORD] I answer, The inward Testimony of the Spirit in their heart, assuring
them that the things spoken were from the Lord, and not the Divinations of the
men's brains that spoke them, and therefore inclining their hearts to receive
and acknowledge these things as the commands of God unto them; since, as I. B.
confesses, they were not to believe them, because spoken by those men, but
because of the Authority of God, it must be that, which wrought this persuasion
and assurance in them, was the formal object of their faith, as the things
spoken were the material: Even as the Light serves, by way of formal object, to
make us see what is proposed unto us.

8. Page 31 and 32. he acknowledges that Divine and inward revelations need not
be tried by the Scriptur as a more noble Rule, by him, who has such a
revelation, but by those to whom he delivers it; and then gives the instance
of the Bereans being commended: to which I shall willingly assent, judging no
man, that delivers or declares a revelation to another, ought to be offended,
that he try it by the Scriptur, which no true revelation can contradict. But
that such may not also try it by the Testimony of the Spirit of God in their
hearts I can not deny, and that it is the more noble Rule, as being most
universal: since some Divine revelations, such as Prophecys of contingent
truths, or things to come, can not be tried by the Scripturs, as was that of
George Wishart concerning the Cardinal's death: for had another taken upon him
at that time to prophesy the quite contrary, I would willingly be informed, by
what Scriptur it could be deduced or known that the one was false, or the other
true: yet who will be so absurd, as to deny but that it could, by the immediate
Testimony of the Spirit? As for his proof that the Scriptur is the most certain
Rule, taken from those words 2 Pet. 1: 19, 20. We have also a more sure Word of
Prophecy, etc. it is but a begging of the question, in supposing that Peter by
this understood the Scriptur, and indeed is most ridiculous to affirm. For
since the Apostle reckons this Word, more sure than the voice they heard with
their outward ears, and the vision they saw with their outward eyes, it were
absurd to affirm that the description or narration of a thing were more sure
than the immediate seeing and hearing it. Can any description I may receive of
I. B. however true, give me so certain a knowledge of him, as if I saw him and
spoke with him? Yet without any absurdity it may be said, that the Inward Word
or Testimony of the Spirit in the heart is more sure, in things spiritual, than
any thing that is objected to, or conveyed by the outward senses, as that
vision was, of which the Apostle there speaks; since the inward and spiritual
senses are the most proper and adequat means of conveighing spiritual things to
the Soul, by which the saints, after they have laid down this body, and have no
more the use of the outward senses, which are seated in it, do most surely
enjoy the blessed vision of God, and fellowship both with him and one another.
As for that of Isa. 8: 20. To the Law and to the testimony, etc. and that of
Joh. 5: 39. Search the Scripturs, etc. mentioned here by him, I shall have
occasion to speak of them hereafter. It Is true John tells we are not to believe
every spirit, but it will not thence follow that the Scriptur is a more sure
rule than the Spirit, for such a trial. Page 35. he thinks my saying, that the
Divine revelation moves the understanding well disposed, confirms what he
says, and spoileth all my purpose, because then every revelation pretending to
be Divine is not to be submitted to. But where did ever I say so? What he talks
further of this well disposed intellect, page 36. I spoke to, in my answer to
Arnoldus, page 18, 19. to which I referr. For I believe all men in a day have,
by the gracious visitation of God's Love, an understanding well disposed, to
some Divine revelations, which becomes disposed for others, as these are
received; which will after in its place be discussed. And some Divine
revelations, which are prophetik of things to come, may so far manifest
themselves by their self-evidence even to men not regenerat, as to force an
assent, as in the case of Balaam, mentioned by him, did appear. What he says
further, page 36 and 37. inquiring how and after what manner these revelations
were the object of the Saints faith of old, is easily answered, by applying it
to what is before mentioned in answer to his querys and conjecturs of the
formal object. For those of old that had these revelations immediately, the
formal object of their faith was God manifesting himself and his will in them,
to them, by such revelations: and those, who received and obeyed the things
delivered by the Patriarchs and Prophets, those things, so delivered, (as he
confesses) were not the Formal, but Material Object of their Faith, but the
Formal Object was GOD, by the secret and inward Testimony of his Spirit,
persuading them in their hearts that these things declared to them were really
his command, and thence inclining and bowing their minds to an assent and
obedience to them. And albeit page 38 he terms this a wild assertion, yet he
has but said and not proven it to be so, and till he prove, he needs no
further refutation, neither is it nonsense nor yet a destroying of the cause,
as with the like proofeless confidence he affirms, p. 37 that, where
revelations are made by outward voices, or in a manner objected to the outward
senses, the cause or motive of credibility is not so much because of what the
outward senses perceive, as because of the inward testimony of the Spirit,
assuring the Soul, that it is GOD so manifesting himself. Which testimony, to
answer his question, is distinguishable from what is objected to the outward
senses, albeit it go always along with it simul and semel, as they use to say;
since he with me accounts it a serious truth to say the Devil may delude the
external senses, and he can far more easily deceive them, than the true inward
and spiritual senses of the Soul, by counterfeiting the inward testimony of the
Spirit, since by that, the Apostle says, we know and partake of that, which
neither eye has seen nor ear heard.

9. Page 39. He confesses with me, that the formal Object of the Saints faith
is always the same. But yet, that he may say something, he spends the
paragraph in railing, accusing me, as writing nonsense, and being an
Ignoramus, because I bring instances which relate to the material object, which
himself confesses also to be the same in substance. But by his good leave, for
all he is so positive in his judgment, I must show the Reader his mistake: for
those exampls of Abraham, and others, are adduced by me, to show the one-ness
of the formal object, neither has he shown that they are impertinent for that
end, since as the formal object of Abraham's Faith was God's speaking to him by
Divine revelations, so is the same the Formal object of the saints now, and
therein stands the unity or one-ness of our faith with him, and not in the
material object, which often differs; for to offer up his son was a part of the
material object of his Faith, which is none of ours now. And so for as much as
he desires to know of me, what was the material object of Adam's faith before
the fall, (a question not to the purpose) he must first tell me, why he so
magisterially and positivly denis Christ to have been the object of his faith,
and then he may have an answer* And whereas he flouts at that reason, that
actions are specified from their objects, as non-sensical, he should have
proved and shown wherein, and then I might have answered him: he might have wit
enough to know, that no man of reason will be moved by his bare railing
assertions, page 40. besides a deal of railing, wherein he accuses me of
confusion and darkness, he accounts my arguing for immediate revelation, from
the revelations the Patriarchs and Prophets had, impertinent; to which I
answered before: the sum of which is, that, since these immediate revelations
were so frequent under the Law, it must be very absurd, to say, they are ceased
under the Gospel. He himself proves, page 41, that under the New there is a
more clear discovery, according to that of Paul, 2 Cor. 3: 18. But we all with
open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, etc. which being
brought by him, albeit against himself, I leave him to answer. In this page and
the next, 42, he allegeth the sayings of Christ and his Apostles, brought by
me, and my arguments thence, do prove no more than he confesses: but whether
they prove not all I plead for from thence, is left to the Readers judgment.
Here, according to his custom, (though I condemn the Socinians) he will be
insinuating, that I agree with them, to whose notions of the Spirit, albeit I
assent not, yet I desire to know of him, in what Scriptur he finds these words,
that the Spirit is a distinct Person of the Trinity; for I freely acknowledge,
according to the Scriptur, that the Spirit of God proceeds from the Father
and the Son, and is God, and by what authority he seeks to obtrude, upon
others, expressions of the chief articles of faith, not to be found in
Scriptur, or to accuse such as will not accept of them, and assent to them, or
whether any has reason to think he truly makes the Scriptur the Rule of his
faith, (notwithstanding his pretense) when he either will not or can not find
words in it to express the chief articles of his Creed.

10. Page 43. By a strange mistake he would have me prove, that, since I make
use of these promises of Christ relating to the Spirit, I would prove that all
have warrant to write Scriptur: as if no man could have immediate revelation,
without he write Scriptur, whereas himself confesses that many of the
Patriarchs had it, before Moses, who yet wrote no Scriptur, yea and Cain, whom I
suppose he judges to have been no writer of Scriptur. And by the like mistake,
page 45. he confesses all I plead for, and contradicts all he has been
fighting for, in affirming, that Believers now have free access to Christ, the
great Teacher of his People, always to get his mind known and written in their
hearts, but not to get prophetik revelations. But where does he find me plead
for prophetik revelations as common to all? And whether the former words do not
grant immediate objective revelation, in the largest sense I plead for it, I
leave the Reader to judge. Here he accuses me of speaking basely of the
Scriptur, but neither tells me where, nor what I say, which is indeed a base way
of reviling, though familiar to him. To my last argument, page 49. 35. he
answers little, but railing. The minor [to wit, that whereas Protestants call
the Scripturs their Rule, yet, if asked why they believe them, do say, because
in them is delivered the Will of God, which was revealed objectively and
immediately to holy men] he says, destroys the whole argument, but why I
know not; since surely that proves they at last recurr to the immediate
testimony of the Spirit, as the certain and infallible ground of Faith, which
is my conclusion. That I thence infer that Protestants are for the uncertainty
of immediate objective revelation, is most falsely and disingenuously asserted by
him, for I seek not to infer any such thing from the medium of that argument;
but having shown thereby how they are forced to recurr to this revelation, as
the primary ground of their Faith, I add, that it is strange then they should
seek to represent that as dangerous, or uncertain, which they are thus forced
to recurr to. And whether he does not so, ever and anon repeating the story of
Delusions, to nauseating, through this chapter, any that reads it may see, and
easily perceive his base disingenuity in that part: as also in the following
lines, where he says, their concession makes nothing for the falsely pretended
immediate and objective revelations which Quakers boast of, for where does he
find me pleading for any such? Neither is it the question, Whether the Quakers
do falsely pretend to immediate revelation, yea or nay? but, Whether Quakers do
well, and are sound in believing that immediate Divine inward revelation is
necessary to every Believer, for the building up of true faith? But it is usual
with him, where he can not answer, to turn-by the question, and fill-up the
paper with railing and reviling!

Section IV. Wherein his Fourth Chapter of the Scripturs is considered.
1. WE may judge of this chapter of the Scripturs by the first sentence, which
contains a lie, saying, he finds the third Thesis in somethings altered, and
more clearly set down in the Apology, than in the single sheet; whereas there
is not one word of difference, but the misplacing of a word by the Printer: but
it is become so familiar with him to speak untruth, that he can not forbear it!
Indeed this whole chapter is a complex of railing, calumnys and malicious
groundless insinuations: and indeed the man is so troubled, that he can not
find any thing in what I write, (which he ought according to his title and
undertaking only to examine and confute) that in stead of that he bestows
several pages out of Stalham and Hicks, and his considerations upon them, whose
lies and calumnys are long ago answered, and unreplyed to by them. So that the
Partys concerned having already vindicated themselves, it is not my place to
meddle in it; and if I. B. would do any thing in this to the purpose, he should
take up this debate, where his friend Mr Stalham and his brother Mr Hicks the
Anabaptist (whose authority he uses so often, and to whom he gives so much
credit) have given it over, by a reply to these answers. Having solaced himself
in the repetitions of these men's calumnys, (for that appears to be his delight)
he digresseth to prove the Scripturs to be the Word of God. But if they be
granted to be the words of God, which no Quaker, that ever I knew of, did or
will deny, wherein are they derogated from? since they are many words, and not
one. But if he will plead they are the Word of God, (...), or per eminentiam,
to say so, seeing the Word of God is ascribed to Christ, must either equal them
with him, or speak nonsense, seeing that one epithet can not be predicated of
two things, (...), without a gross contradiction. That the Word of the Lord
came to the Prophets, and that what they spoke was the words that came from
that Word, is granted, nor was it ever denied by us, who are against all false
revelations and lying fancys of men's imaginations, as much as he, which he here
in this chapter repeats over and over again, to nauseating: but it will not
thence follow, that the Word, spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1: 19. is the
Scriptur, which he has not yet proven, and I have shown the contrary in the
former Section

2. At last, page 54. n. 5. he comes to treat of of the Divine authority of the
Scripturs, and reckons it confusion and self-contradiction in me, to assert,
that the authority of the Scripturs does not depend upon any efficacy or virtue
placed in these writings, but is wholly to be ascribed to that Spirit from
whence they came; and yet, within half a dozen of lines, he confesses the
same, saying, we stoop unto the authority of the Scripturs of Truth, because
delivered by the Inspiration of God, so the confusion and contradiction is his
own. Yea the exampls he brings, of the Acts and Statutes of Parliament, do very
well prove what I say, for we do not submit to these status, because of the
matter in them, or things commanded, but because of the Authority commanding:
for when the Parliament by an Act appoynts a tax of so much money to be levied
from the Subjects, it is not the matter or substance of this Act, that makes us
obey it, but because of the Magistrates Authority. But he says, they are Divine
revelations, and therefore must have the stamp of Divine authority. Answ. The
stamp of Divine Authority lies not in the things revealed, but in the manner of
the revelation, as being the voice and manifestation of God; else great
absurdity would follow, as I shall briefly show, being to pursue him in this
point, as he has it lieing up and down in his rambling discourse, whose way is
not to follow one matter to a period, but to touch it here and there,
intermixing other things, that so his nauseating repetitions and often reiterated
railings may be the more covered. And therefore I intend not to tie my self to
follow him page after page immediately, lest I should embark my self in the like
disorder, and make such a confused hodg-podg, as he has done; but to follow
every matter as he has it scattered up and down. And of this I thought fit to
acquaint the Reader in this place, once for all, as being the method I purpose
to use, throughout this treatise. So from this 55 page we have him not upon
this matter, until page 61, where he takes notice of my citations out of
several Protestant Confessions and Calvin, and will not have them to favor me,
giving most disingenuously, as one reason, because they expressly say, that the
work of the Spirit is by and with the Word, and not an inspiration, distinct
and separated from it: thereby he would make his Reader believe, as if this
were said by all of them, whereas it is only said by the Westminster Divines,
of whom I particularly observed, that they spoke not so clearly as the other.
The French confession says, it is by the inward persuasion of the Holy Spirit:
and the Belgik, that it is by the testimony of the Spirit in our hearts: and
Calvin says, the Spirit of God must inwardly teach us that Moses and the
Prophets spoke from God. But that testimony of the Spirit, which is in our
hearts, and by which the Spirit teaches us there, albeit it be not different
from and contrary to the things it teaches us of, yet it is certainly distinct
and separat; albeit all the things taught were the very same, which here is
not. Else, because a man may be taught that, by a Jesuit at Rome, which I. B.
may teach another man in Holland, therefore that Jesuit and I. B. are not
distinct and separat. Are these good reasonings? But let us now see whether
these be any better, by which, in the two following pages, 62 and 63, he
prosecutes the same matter, the sum whereof amounts to this, that there are
such evident characters of Divinity in the Scripturs, which do as manifestly
prove them to be of God, as the Sun does its shining, to a man whose eyes are
opened: and that the work of the Spirit, is, only to take the vail from offmens
eyes, that they may see these Characters of Divinity, and not that the Spirit,
by any inward immediate revelation, does signify to the Soul, by way of object,
that these Books proceeded from the Dictats of the Spirit of God: in which he
places the difference betwixt himself and the Quakers. Now whether these
aforesaid Testimonys of Calvin and the rest do not confirm this last, rather
than the other, I leave the Reader to judge. But further, it is like the man has
not been aware into what inextricable Difficulty he has run himself, by his
reasoning here; for, if this opening of the eyes by the Spirit be needful, to
perceive these Divine Characters (as the opening of the natural eyes is
needful, to see the outward Sun) then the Characters can not be seen, but by
those, whose eyes are thus opened, that is to say, who have a well disposed
intellect. And thus recurr upon himself all the difficultys and absurditys he
would urge upon me, in his former chapter, for saying, that Divine Revelations
are evident to a well disposed Intellect. For it may be query'd Whether all have
this well disposed Intellect? their eyes thus opened? If yea, then all men have
subjective revelation: yet at other times he accounts this a privilege of the
Saints, and thence denies it, in confessing, page 63, that some are blind, and
see it not; and then again the question recurrs, How a man knows he has it, so
that he may not think he sees it, and has it, when he has it not? This can not
be decided by the Scripturs, for they are the matter under debate, and that
were to run in a Circle. And since, as he says, the Devil is God's Ape, and
that there are so many Delusions of the Devil and false imaginations of the
phansy which men are subject unto, as he has told over and over again; how is
he sure that he is not thus deluded by the Devil, and abused by his fancy, in
imagining he sees, when indeed he is blind? And to give him his own argument
and query, since some and even The Examiners of the Westminster Confession.
Protestants have affirmed Books, denied by him, to be of the Canon, such as
the Wisdom of Solomon and Esdras, and to have these Divine Characters; and Some
Lutherans.
others deny some to be of the Canon and to have these Characters, as the
Epistle of James, which he says has it, how is he sure that they are blind,
and deceived, and not he? So that he must either confess all his former
reasonings, as also here page 83: 86. to be to no purpose, or else acknowledge
that all he says here for the Scripturs is of no force, and that he has no
better certainty nor ground for his faith of the Scripturs verity (to give him
back his own durty example he throws at me, p. 64.) than for the Turks Alcoran;
and thus is dispatched also what he says, p. 64. n: 18 where he confesses,
some approved Books, which others rejected. And whereas he says, p. 86 and 87
that sad Experience has taught the World, what devilish Doctrins have been
invented under the Notions of New Revelations, of which after he gives a list,
since the same sad Experience has taught the World, what Devilish doctrins have
been taught, under the notion of being revealed in the Scriptur, such as in his
own account, those of the Socinians, Arminians, Antinominians and present
English Anabaptists, to wit, his Author Hicks and his Brethren; and yet what
will more follow the one against the Spirit of Revelations now, than from the
other against the Scripturs?

3. Like to this are his reasonings, page 87 concerning the Canon of the
Scripturs, that there are just so many Books, neither more nor less: for I have
proposed this to be proved by Scriptur, it being an Article of their Faith,
since they judge all such should be proved by Scriptur. To this, in stead of
offering any Scriptur-proof, he says they have the Characters of Divine Light,
the weakness of which is above observed; and then he brings two Exampls, one of
the Acts of Parliament, another of a man's writing ten letters to his wife. But
exampls are poor arguments, especially to prove Articls of Faith, when not one
Scriptur can be brought to do it by such as say the Scriptur is the adequat and
only Rule of their Faith; neither will his exampls do. For if in a Nation one
Part should differ from the other, alleging spurious Acts, not made by the
Parliament, were by the industry of some, printed and recorded with the right,
as the case is now among the Professors of Christianity, concerning the Canon
of Scriptur, the written Acts could never decide this question, but either these
Legislators, if alive, or a new Parliament having equal Authority and
Legislative power with those that made the former. And if a Woman should doubt
that five of the ten Letters, subscribed with her Husband's Name, were not his,
she could not know the certainty, but by her Husband's own Testimony, and since
he himself has said, that, to discern these Characters, a subjective
concurrence of the Spirit is necessary, which since he says some have not,
they can then not be sure of this Article of Faith: his Example here of the
five Fingers is yet more silly than the former. And albeit he confidently
affirms he has above shown this, we shall by examining it show the contrary, as
p. 74 and 75. answering to that of mine, where I show that in Prove. 30: 5, 6.
there is the same Prohibition of not adding, that is Rev. 22: v. 18. and
therefore it would follow, that all written after Solomon's time was against the
mind of God. To this he gives a rare answer! what is spoken of that Book (I
suppose he means the Revelations) and elsewhere of the Commands of God, is
consequently to be understood of all; but this is to repeat that against which
the argument is formed, in stead of answering it. Either that of Revelations
must not be understood as he does it, or that of Proverbs makes the same
exclusion, since the words are the same, and the Authority also. But the
Prophecys of the Prophets (says he) were but Explications of the Law of God:
but such Explications go to make up the Canon, and will he admit that yet? No.
But the Lord did not (says he) bind up his own hand; but has he bound up his
hands now, that he can not move any of his Servants by his Spirit to write? I
suppose he will not say he has. He confesses there were Prophets after John's
days, who truly foretold Events, but were not to write Scriptur. But is not a
part of that, which he accounts the Canon, a foretelling of Events? and yet
that excludes it not from the Canon. Here, because he is pinched, he takes his
usual retreat by falling a railing, and comparing us with Papists, who he says
use this Argument. And what then? I could tell him an hundred arguments, used
by him, which the Papists also use against us, will he say it follows, they are
invalid? But at last he thinks he has found a mysterious Riddle, that will do
the business, and therefore he leaves it with a defiance, Let him un-riddle
this mystery, if he can, to wit, when shall our Canon be completed? when will
there be no more need of Revelations? But might not this same question have
been proposed to the Christians that lived before John wrote his Book of the
Revelation? And, as I suppose they would have answered, (to many of whom
perhaps it was not revealed that John should write such a Book afterward) so
shall I directly answer his question, When it shall please God, in whose Power
it is to reveal himself, when, how, and so long as he pleases, and who (as he
says) has not bound up his own hand.

4. I come now to consider what he says of the perfection of the Scripturs:
and because he is very clamorous in accusing me, as derogating therefrom, it
will be manifest whether he has any reason so to do. P. 55. n. 6. he quarrels I
forget the narration of the first Creation, and that the Exampls are
instructive. But who will deny, or when did I, that the remarkable Providence
of God toward his Children are instructive? Do not I expressly show how they
are instructive, p. 46. which himself also noticeth? And was the first Creation
no part of God's Providence toward Man, who was to rule over it? Is it not
then there included? But I make no mention of the promises and threatenings: but
are not they any part of the Doctrins of Christ, nor included in any part of
these precious Declarations, which I say the Scriptur contains? Next, he carps
at my saying [the Chief Doctrins of Christianity] asking where we may find the
whole Doctrins of the Christian Faith? I answer freely, in the Scripturs: and
let him prove, if he can, this to be any contradiction, seeing my saying [the
Chief Doctrins of Christianity] is indefinit, excluding none. And therefore
most base and abominable is that lie he makes of me in the last part of this
paragraph, where he says, I say the Scriptur only bears Testimony to some of
them, to wit, of the Chief Heads of Christianity, which I dare him to prove
ever to have been said or written by me. And of the like nature are his lying
conjecturs and his malicious insinuations from my words, in the two following
paragraphs, which I utterly renounce and return upon him as his own false and
fictitious apprehensions: for do not I declare the Authority of the Scriptur,
when I testify they are from the Spirit, and that such commands require
obedience, as has been above shown? But what he urges of this further, p. 57
and 59, from the saying of some Quakers, affirming that is not a Command to
them, which is given to another, albeit I might justly reject it as
impertinent, till he prove it, for the reasons upon this occasion above
declared; yet, because he mentions Benjamin Furly in Rotterdam having some
knowledge of that matter, I answer, Whether will he say all the Commands in
Scriptur to every person, there mentioned, are binding upon every individual
now? If he dare not say they are, as I know he dare not, how must I then
distinguish betwixt what binds me and binds me not? Must it not be by the
Spirit (suppose it were only subjectively, as he will confess) inlightening the
Understanding? To make this distinction then, it seems it is the operation of
the Spirit that makes them know their duty, and sure they can not obey before
they know. But, if he say that though they should want that operation of the
Spirit, and did not know nor acknowledge them to be their duty, yet they are
binding upon them: neither B. F. nor any Quaker will deny but even the Commands
of God's Spirit and the Precepts of the Scriptur, which now concern all, are
binding upon all, so that they shall be justly condemned for not obeying,
albeit that by the perverseness of their hearts and wills they either refuse to
obey, or will not acknowledge them. So that his urging of that, p 60 and 61. n.
13. and his pleading for it, is unnecessary, and needs no answer: yet who would
say, they could obey, to any advantage of their Souls, without this operation
of the Spirit, since what soever is not of Faith is sin? But as to these words
said to be written by B. F. he is here challenged to prove they are his, without
adding or diminishing, (and it is well known the adding or diminishing of two or
three words in a few lines will quite alter the sense) and before he has
answered this challenge, and freed himself from the just censur of a
Calumniator, albeit he take the help of his Author Hicks, he will find his
folly, in accusing men at second hand, proofs, and upon the testimony of their
adversarys. What follows in this paragraph and p. 60. is mere railing and
perversions, comparing us with Papists, as is before observed; and indeed all
of it is overturned by that one assertion of mine, that what revelations are
contrary to the Scriptur are to be rejected.

5. Page 57. n. 10. he faith, I come nearer to the core of my design, which is
to set up Enthusiasmes, in affirming that the Scripturs are not the Fountain,
but a declaration of the Fountain: and yet the man within 3 or 4 lines
confesses it himself, ascribing it to my folly to dream any man thinks so,
(thus he goes backward and forward!) which he illustrats by the example of
Laws. But if it be so, are not they to be blamed that account them the
principal Original of all Truth and knowledge? Whether the other branch of my
deduction follow from this, that they are not to be accounted the primary Rule
of Faith and manners, will appear, when the arguments and objections, relating
to that, come particularly to be mentioned. And whereas he thinks this is
absurd, and not making for my design, because God himself is the Fountain, and
yet not the Rule, he mistakes the matter as urged by me; for I argue that the
Scripturs are not the original ground of knowledge, but GOD, not simply
considered, but as manifesting himself in Divine immediate revelations in the
hearts of his Children: which being the New Covenant's dispensation, as in the
last section is proven, is the primary and adequat Rule of Christians.. For I
was never so absurd as to call God, simply considered, or the Spirit of God [in
abstracto] (not as imprinting Truths to be believed and obeyed in men's hearts,
not contrary but according to Scriptur, for he can not contradict himself) the
Rule of Christians: and this may serve to answer all his cavills upon this
Theme. And whereas he wondereth in the following page 58. why any revelations
even from the Spirit should be more primary than the Scripturs, since they are
confessed to come from the inspiration of the Spirit, (for why he uses the
Latin word afflatus, and does not interpret it, I know not, unless to fright
ignorant folk, that they may think it is a piece of the witchcraft of the
Quakers whom he accuses) it is strange he should have so little sense, as to
make it a matter of admiration, as if that were not more primary to a man which
comes immediately from the Spirit of God in his heart, than that which (albeit
it come from the Spirit) yet is through another, and so must needs be but
secondary, albeit it be confessed they writ them not for themselves, but for
others, which I deny not. Of the same nature is, and the same way is answered,
what he says, p. 65. n. 19. to wit, that I confound the Principal Leader with
the Original Rule, because I say the Spirit is the Prime and Principal Leader:
but I deny his consequence, neither does his example of the Wind and Compass
prove it; the Spirit is the Principal Leader, as imprinting upon man's Soul the
Rules he should walk by: but indeed he would prove a very uncertain Pilot that
had no compass but only a description of it, and a journal how other men had
steered that course, and such Pilots is he and his Brethren, according to their
own confession. But he thinks I drive at something more intolerable, to wit,
that the Revelations the Quakers pretend to, or the Light within, is to be
preferred, as the more primary and principal Rule, to the Scripturs: If the
Quakers did affirm any revelations, they speak of, as coming from that Light,
either were or could be contrary to the Scripturs, he would say something,
otherwise it will amount to no more but that commands, as they are imprinted
upon the Soul, that is, the Law written in the heart by the Spirit, is more
primarily and principally the Rule than the same things written and received
only from another; as to which I will only ask him, Whether those things, which
the Apostles received immediately from the Spirit commanding them to go here or
there to preach the Gospel, or the like, were, as to these ends, more primarily
and principally the Rule to them, than any thing that was recorded in the
Scriptur, where they could not learn their duty, as to those particulars? And
that I make not the Scripturs and the Spirit all one, I have above shown; and
therefore his malicious insinuations of Socinianisme fall to the ground: but he
thinks he has found-out a mighty dilemma in the end of this paragraph, p. 66.
Or will I say that the Light within me is really the Increated Spirit? This
(says he) must be blasphemy with a witness -- to be heard with horror, and
therefore needing no other confutation. Poor man! how apt is he to make a noise
about nothing? If there be any blasphemy, it is his own. For what if I should
say Is not GOD a LIGHT? and is not he in every man? and is not this Light
within the Increated Spirit? The Reader may judge how easily these windy boasts
of his are blown away: how the Spirit rules us and yet is not confounded with
the Rule, I have above shown, so that what he says to that in the rest of this
page, where he vapers and rails, is but superfluous. Next, after he has a
little played the Pedant upon the words magis originaliter, he concludes his 22
paragraph, with asking me, why the revelations I pretend to should be accounted
more One with the Spirit himself, than those revelations by which the Scripturs
were dictated? but this is his allegiance, none of my affirmation. Next, I
never said that the Revelations, by which the Scripturs were dictat, were less
primary than any other whatsoever, albeit no revelation, which is written and
transmitted to a man only by the report of another, can be so primary and
immediate to him as that which he receives in himself: he confesses here with
me, p. 67. that the Spirit is the Prime and Principal Leader; whether that
makes for my cause, as also what follows, will after in its place be examined.

6. But because he foundeth his assertion of my detracting from the perfection
of the Scripturs, because I deny them to be the primary and original Rule, (for
he acknowledges that I confess them to be a secondary one) I will examine the
ground by which he goes about to prove it, as also his answers to my arguments
proving the contrary. His first is from the parable, Luke 16: 31. where it is
said, They have Moses and the Prophets, whom if they hear not, neither will
they be persuaded, if one be raised from the dead: but this proves only that
one raised from the dead is not able to convince those that will not hear Moses
and the Prophets, not that the Scriptur is a more primary and principal Rule
than what the Spirit immediately reveals in the Soul; for that consequence will
not nor does follow, nor is in the least proven by him, neither can be, unless
he first prove, that, albeit the testimony of one from the dead be less
powerful to persuade than the Scripturs, yet it is more than the immediate
testimony of the Spirit in the heart, which I deny, and rests for him to prove,
before he conclude any thing from this place. Next, this Parable was used by
Christ to the Jews, to show them their hypocrisy, who, albeit they deceitfully
pretended so much to reverence and follow Moses and the Prophets, (as many now
adays do the Scripturs) yet they did not really hear them, else they would have
acknowledged him, of whom Moses and the Prophets did so clearly write, since he
also did as great and convincing miracls before them, as if they had the
testimony of one raised from the dead. And this leads me to take notice of what
he says, p 68. n. 24. in answer to my argument drawn from the difference
betwixt the Law that is written without and the Gospel that is written within;
where he accuses me of contradiction, because of my argument drawn from the
revelations that were under the Law and the same-ness of the object: but I have
answered this cavil, in the former section. Yet since the strength of this
resolves in his supposing I affirm there is no written Rule under the Gospel,
which he after concludes, the whole falls to the ground; for I never denied
the Scriptur to be a secondary Rule, and that is some Rule, for to say I affirm
there is no written Rule, because the written is not the primary, is a wild
conclusion. And therefore all the rest of his talk to prove that Christ
inspired the Apostles to write things to be a Rule to Christians, is merely
superfluous, since that that is a Rule, though not the primary, was never
denied by me: and it may be here observed, that all his arguments to prove the
Scriptur to be a Rule, unless they prove them to be the primary and principal
one, conclude nothing, and are against me to no purpose.

7. His second argument is deduced from 2 Timothy 3: 16. where he cites the
Apostle saying of the Scripturs, they are able to make wise unto Salvation, and
to make the man of God perfect. Where is first to be observed, his perverting
of the Apostl's words, by an addition of his own, (and therefore no wonder that
he so frequently pervert mine) for the Apostle says not, they are able to make
the man of God perfect, but, All Scriptur given by inspiration is that the man
of God may be perfect, that is, contributeth in its kind and order toward the
perfection of the Saints; but it follows not thence, that they are the Primary
Rule, no more than though I. B. will affirm that his book is written, that the
man of God may be perfect, that is, to help him to perfection, that thence it
is to be esteemed the primary and chief Rule. Thus is answered that of John 20:
31. But these are written, that ye may believe, etc. cited by him, p 74.. For
his book is also written for that end, yet the consequence will not follow:
that they are able to make wise unto Salvation is not denied, in so far as they
declare of the grace that brings Salvation and directs to the Light which leads
to it; but how he thence infers they are the primary Rule, he must inform us
the next time, since he has forgotten to do it now. And this may serve to
answer those places, where he (according to his custom) repeats it over and
over again, as p. 74. 77 and 82. where he has again the forementioned
perversion, and enumerated the particular uses, applied to the Scriptur, he
concludes its perfection, as wanting nothing. Now I deny not that every book
as well as chapter and verse of Scriptur is perfect as to its end, that is, so
far to express the mind of God, as he was pleased at that time, and also with a
respect to its Author, as being written by the dictats of the Spirit: but that
place will not conclude its perfection, either as the primary only or adequat,
that is, entire, Rule, else all the other Scripturs, which were written after
that Epistle of Paul, (as he will not deny but there were some so written) must
be denied being any part of the Rule, and so to be any way necessary for that
end. The like absurditys follow upon his using 2 Cor. 3: 14. where the Apostle
speaks of a Testament, since he dare not deny a great part of that Testament
was written afterward. And thus is also answered what he urges from Psalm. 19:
7. (page 74 and 79) The Law of the Lord is perfect, etc, and from other
Scripturs of like import: for if he understand perfection in the first sense,
it is not denied; if in the second, which indeed is the question, it concludes
nothing, without rendering all the Scriptur, written afterward, no part of the
Rule or Canon, to use his own term. As for that of Peter, which he insists
upon, in the end of his paragraph, p. 70. I deny it to be understood of the
Scriptur, and gave my reasons before; and yet the man takes that for granted,
and thence argues from it, which is a most silly manner, albeit very familiar
to him, to beg the question.

8. Next, he comes to consider my answer to their objections, but how he
removes them may be judged by the first he observes, p. 71. where, in stead of
proving that these words of Isa 8: 20. usually brought by them, To the Law and
to the Testimony, etc. are meant of the Scriptur, which I desired, ere any
thing could be inferred for it, he answers, As if any, that ever read the
Bible, could be ignorant, what is all along meaned by these words. Is not this
a goodly proof, Reader? I am one that have read the Bible, and know by the
[Law] is sometimes meant the outward, sometimes the inward, and thousands more
are yet to be convinced, that that place speaks only of the outward, and will
need some better argument than this of his, ere we change our judgment. But to
proceed, he thinks my saying that the Law was in a more special manner given to
the Jews, and more principally than to us, to be a railing and roaving, and a
contradicting what I said in the former These: but this cavil, often repeated
before, I did answer above. The like he judges my arguing therefrom, that as
they were to try all things by the outward Law, so we are to try all in the
first place by the Word within: but here his base disingenuity appears, for he
has left-out these words [in the first place] that he might introduce the
better the difficulty he phancyeth to himself to have brought me to afterward;
for by this argument (says he) I prove more than I ought, to wit, that the
Scripturs shall not be so much as a less principal Rule. Who will be so foolish
as to conclude that the saying things ought [in the first place] to be tried by
the Word within, excludes things [in the second place] to be tried by the
Scripturs? and is not that still to own it as a secondary and subordinat Rule?
And so he may see my feet here are easily rid, and that he held them not so
fast as he phancyed. And as for the other part of his alternative, the
consequence is of the like nature, that what was a principal Rule then is now
only subordinat: for albeit I said it was more principal to them than now to
us, yet I said not it was the most principal to them, or then more principal
than what came immediately from the Spirit, which he confesses to have been
frequent under the Law, yea more frequent than now, according to his Principle,
and my saying so could only infer that consequence. He rejects what I urge
from the version of the Septuagint as spurious, but for that we must take his
word, else want a proof. And then because he can not come off better, according
to his custom, he concludes with a gross perversion and falsehood, saying, it is
my opinion, that the Law, id est, the outward Law, was given the Jews for a
Rule, even above the Spirit's revelations: which if it be mine, (as I utterly
renounce it) I desire to know where I have asserted it; he might have been at
the pains to mark it, but he knew, it is like, it was not convenient. Next, he
comes to prove, that these words Search the Scripturs, etc. Joh. 5: 39. do
evince the Scripturs to be the primary and adequat Rule, because if Christ's
doctrins should be tried by them, much more private Euthusiasmes: but who denies
that? Yet he does not thence prove, that the Scripturs are the primary Rule, by
which all things must be tried in the first place, which is the thing in
question. Secondly, I would ask him, Whether the words Christ spoke to the
Jews, which are recorded in Scriptur, were less a Rule to them, or less
binding and obliging upon them, than the sayings of Moses and the Prophets? If
he say they were less, then he overturns all his own tedious reasonings, by
which he labors to prove the obligation of what Christ and the Apostles
delivered, (p. 84. at the end) as well as what Moses and the Prophets, without
the need of a new obligation: and likewise he must show us how these sayings
come to be as binding upon us now, as Moses and the Prophets, or how they
acquired greater authority, after Christ spoke them, than they had then, or why
they wanted then that authority. If he say, they were binding and obliging to
the Jews, because spoken by Christ, then his proof falls to the ground. He is
angry that I say the words may be interpreted, Ye search the Scripturs, as well
as Search the Scripturs, albeit the Greek word signify the one as well as the
other, and for answer, very magisterially tells it is quite contrary to the very
words of Command, Search the Scripturs; but the question is whether that be the
words, and that was what he should have proven: but he makes no bounds of
begging the question, telling, Tolet and Maldonat say it is so taken by all the
Fathers, except Cyrill. And what then? Did I undertake to subscribe to all
these Authors writings? He must give me a reason why, ere I do it, and let him
deny it, if he dare, that the Greek word fignifies Ye search the Scripturs, as
well as Search the Scripturs; and if it do, before I conclude the one more than
the other, I must have some better argument than his bare affirmation. But to
finish this, he will conclude all by the words of the Apostle James, c. 1: v.
25. where he says the Apostle calls the Scripturs the perfect Law of
Liberty, but that does not prove them to be the primary Rule. Suppose it were
granted the Apostle meant the Scripturs, which remains yet by him to be proven,
and is not done by what he cites chap. 2: 8. by his desiring them to fulfill
the Royal Law, according to Scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, which proves it not at all; yea to understand it of the Scripturs were to
make the Apostle's words scarce good sense, as if he had said fulfill the
Scripturs according to the Scripturs, whereas it suits the place much better,
that the Apostle meaned they should fulfill the Royal Law in their hearts,
which was one with the Scripturs, that also command the same thing: that the
Apostle means the outward Law, and not that written in the heart, chap. 4: 12.
he has affirmed, but not proven. Next, he comes to the Bereans being commended
for searching the scripturs, Act. 17: 11. But this is the same way answered as
the former, for if the Bereans were obliged to believe and receive Paul's
testimony, because he preached the Truth to them, by authority from God, then
their using or his commending them for using the Scriptur will not prove the
Scriptur to be the Primary Rule, yea more a Rule than the doctrine they tried by
it. In the rest of what he says in this n. 28. he but sights with his shadow,
for I never said they excluded the Law of Nature, in affirming the Scriptur to
be the Rule; or did I ever deny but that the Sriptur reveals things which Nature
could never have discovered? But the question is, whether that truth, that Man
is the Off spring of God, from which the Apostle argues with the Athenians, was
discovered to any by mere Nature, or by a Divine Principle? and this is that he
should have proven, and therefore yet remains for him to do; but to be like
himself, he concludes this also with a gross lie, saying, I affirm the Scriptur
to be no more our Rule, than the Heathen Poets, which no ways follows from my
words, neither has or can he ever prove it.

9. He thinks the Scriptures not determining of many things, nor having any
Rule for them, which he seems to acknowledge, is no argument against their
being the primary and adequat or only Rule, for that he apprehends no rational
man will think needful to a complete Rule. Why? because general Rules are
enough, and thence he thinks it would follow, that the Quakers must have a new
particular revelation for every act and word, such as eating, drinking,
walking, etc. But I deny this consequence: these acts, as simply considered,
are natural; and it will not follow, because to spiritual acts, relating to
Faith and my immediate service toward God, I need a spiritual motion and
influence of the Spirit, that therefore I need such a thing to natural acts. If
he say these natural acts, under some circumstances, may be sin, or duty; I
confess then the revelation of the Spirit is needful: for if I be sitting,
sleeping, or eating in one place, when it is the mind of God I should be
preaching and praying in another, I do sin: but how can the Scriptur give me a
Rule here? All that he answers to this, p. 76 and 77. resolves into this, that
all such doubts may be solved applying the general rules of Scriptur, by
Christian Wisdom, Prudence and Discretion, etc. But how shall I know that I
truly make this application? And to give him his own often repeated argument in
the case of Revelation, have not some thought they have made this application
by Christian prudence, when they did not? And not to go further than I. B's own
Brethren, the Presbyterians, yea the chief and most eminent Teachers among
them, did not some of them judge it Christian prudence, according to the
Scriptur Rule, to draw near and adhere to the Remonstrance which others called
publik Resolution men, denied? Do not some of them think it Christian prudence,
to go hear the Bishops Curats, which others deny? Did not those chief men among
them, as George Hutcheson and others, think it Christian prudence, to accept of
the Indulgence, Anno 1668, in entering according to the limitations proposed by
the Council to their Places, which others, especially of the banished Brethren,
and perhaps himself was highly offended at? whence these men were termed
Council-Curats. Other instances among them I could give. But how shall all this
be decided? What Scriptur-Rules can he assign, that clearly do it? Let him
answer this distinctly, and not pass it over, lest he be suspected to leap,
where he can not step. He confesses to my alleging 1 Cor. 12. and Romans 12.
and after a little railing, he tells, p. 78. that he that is to rule is to do it
with diligence, etc. but that the Scriptur says not that James or Peter should
take-on this or that Office, by which confession he destroys all, since the
question is, How James and Peter knew they should take upon them to rule? This
he says he has shown above, but how insufficiently my reply will evidence. He
thinks no less impertinent, p. 78. for me to argue against their being a Rule
as to all things, because they do not tell a man that he has the marks of true
Faith, upon which knowledge the assurance of Salvation is founded; as if I must
think the Laws of the Land must prove that R. B. is a Quaker, or that if R. B.
had murdered a man, it is a sufficient defense to say the Law does not name R.
B. But such examples are poor arguments, and do miserably halt: R. B.
confessing himself to be a Quaker, acknowledging every one of their doctrins,
is enough to prove him one, in the sense of the Law of the Land, and the Judge
is to condemn him a murderer, if convict by Witnesses that he really did the
deed. And both these relate to outward things, which can be proven by outward
restimonys, for without the certainy of the evidence the Judge can not
pronounce his sentence. But is a man's own confessing or affirming he has the
true marks of faith enough to prove he has them? And what are the Witnesses, to
apply the example of committing the murder, by which a man shall know he has
these marks? and who must examine the Witnesses, and judge of the certainty or
clearness of their evidences? Must it be the man that is accused? who uses
that method? Does not the man see how miserably his pittyfull example
claudicats?

10. To my objection against the Scripturs being the Only and Adequat Rule, the
example of deaf persons, idiots, infants, such as can not read, and are
ignorant of the Original Tongues, so called, all which in some measur, less or
more, are deprived of the benefit of the Scripturs, so as to apply them to
themselves immediately and effectually for a Rule, he asks, Whether if any such
person in a land should kill a man, or do any thing contrary to the Law, would
it not punish them? And this he repeats, n. 35. in other words, which urges
nothing, but upon supposition that the will of God can not be known otherwise
than by the Scriptur, which supposition is false, and therefore his argument
concludes nothing, yea himself confesses that some things, and in particular
murder, may be known by the Light of Nature, and so overturns his own argument.
But he asks What use can children, or idiots, or mad men make of the Light
within? Answ. The Light within being affirmed by us to be a Living Principle,
that quickens the Soul, may influence such persons, but so can not any
writings. As for his learned Dr. Owen's book, which he recommends, he may find
it answered long ago by Samuel Fisher a Quaker, which because the Doctor found
too hot to reply to, I. B. that is so busy a body may supply that want. But
most rare of all is his answer, p. 80. to my Conclusion, that Christ would not
leave his own to be led by a Rule obvious to so many doubts, which is, and yet
we see he has done it; if this be not to beg the question in the highest
degree, the Reader may judge. He confesses the Spirit is the chief Leader: but
to seem to come off with some credit, he falls a railing upon me, for not
distinguishing, but confounding the Spirit's work and the Scripturs, and then
bestows many words, to prove they are distinct, with a heap of citations in the
next p. 81. all which he might have spared, until he had proved first that I
denied they were distinct, or shown where or when I confound them. What he
writes, n. 38. and 39. p. 82. is mere railing, as the Reader by looking unto
them may observe: he flouts there at my affirming I know one, that could not
read, discover an error in the version, saying, but the good luck was, himself
was Judge; what he would infer hence I see not, unless that their version is
free of errors, which if he will adventur to affirm, his mistake may be shown
by the testimony of learned men among themselves and his own correcting it
diverse times, which will after be observed. He says, my speaking soberly of
the Scripturs is only out of Policy, because the Quakers could not effectuat
their point, which was to have the Scripturs quite laid-by, as an old Almanac
But such malicious lies and railings need no answer. To this he adds two other
gross calumnys, to conclude his paragraph, that it is the Quakers fixed
opinion, that the Scripturs are not to be made use of in their assemblys, it
being below them to expound any portion of it there, or to adduce any testimony
therefrom for confirmation of their assertions. This can be proved to be a
manifest untruth by the testimony of many that are not Quakers, who have been
witnesses of the contrary. The other, which he calls their constant opinion,
is, that when one comes to hearken to the Light within, he has obtained the
whole end of the Scripturs, so that they become wholly useless to him: this is
also a horrid calumny.

11. In his examining of what I assert to be the end and usefulness of the
Scripturs, p. 83, 84. he can not find fault with what I ascribe to them, but
that I give them not all; and whether I do wrong denying that to them which he
would seem to give, the former debate will show. But that he may be here like
himself, he seeks to infer from my words most gross and malicious consequences,
which are utterly false, and till he prove them, they need no other answer, but
to observe them, and deny them, which I utterly do, such as, that albeit Christ
has ordained Pastors, and the Scripturs under the Gospel, to make the man of
God perfect, yet the Quakers think they may be both laid aside as useless:
that, according to me, the Scripturs are not so much as a subordinat Rule: that
the Quakers would have all others save themselves to look upon themselves as not
concerned in the Scripturs, that so they might be the sole keepers of these
Oracles, and then, he says, they shall quickly know what shall become of them:
and that the Quakers always suppose that what the Spirit within them says, can
not contradict the Scriptur, and therefore what they say contrary to the
Scriptur from the Spirit within must be supposed to be seeming, and not real:
this he repeats again (according to his custom) in the next page; if he mean
the Spirit of God, I hope he will not deny it, and if he mean any other spirit,
we deny it. But he would be fastening that upon us here, which may be justly
said to them of their exalting their Confession of Faith above the Scripturs,
as in the first section upon his Preface I observed. But he has an objection
which he urges, p. 67. and by which he thinks to overturn all, asking if I
believe the testimony of the Scripturs to be true? Yes I do believe them,
because the Testimony of the Spirit in my heart obliges me so to do, and
therefore being persuaded they are true I make use of them, though, in respect
to my self, not in the first and primary place, but in a secondary, next to the
Spirit; yet as to him I may urge them every way, because he accounts them so:
and as to their testimony for the Spirit's being the Principal Leader, upon my
using of which he founds his objection, (albeit, since he acknowledges it, he
has the less reason to carp at it) I believe it from the Scriptur testimony,
but not as the primary ground of my faith which I derive from the Spirit it
self; yet as a ground and that a very weighty one. As for his other question
Whether I be of the same mind with other Quakers, of whom Mr Hicks reports, I
answer, that what is there reported by Hicks is false: and I here dare I. B.
and his Author Hicks to prove it to have been said by any Quaker, which till
they can do by good and sufficient proof, they are both to be held as lying
Calumniators.

Section Fifth, Wherein his Fifth and Sixth Chapters, entitled by him, Of
Man's Natural State, and Of Original Sin, are considered.
1 AFter he has repeated some of my words, he complains I speak darkly, and
having given his usual malicious insinuations, that I do it of design, and
have some mysteries under it. He takes upon him to endeavor to guess at my
meaning, and bestows many pages, to frame one conjectur after another, and then
spends many words to refute these shaddows, and men of straw of his own making:
and yet at the end of all he confesses he doubts whether he has got or hit my
meaning, and to be sure then he must be as uncertain that he has refuted it;
and therefore knows not but all his reasonings against his own conjecturs are
impertinent, for after he has written one conjectur, and bestows much labor
in refuting it, his own words are, p. 91. n 5. if this be not his true meaning,
let us try another Conjectur. Which shows he knows not whether what he said
before was to the purpose: thus he spends page 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94,
95, 96, 97, 98. in which last page he is very angry that I should condemn the
Socinians and Pelagians; but the reason is manifest, because he would so
willingly have it believed that I am one with them; and albeit I could not in
reason be obliged to say any thing more to these pages, yet that none of these
fictitious and false conjecturs may catch any unwary Reader, I do freely affirm
that I believe man fell and was degenerated both as to Soul and body, and I
understand the first Adam, or earthly man, to comprehend both, but that there
was something in Adam, which was no part of his Soul and body, nor yet
constitutive of his being a man, in my judgment, which could not degenerate,
and which was in Adam by the fall reduced to a seed, and could never have been
raised in him again, to his comfort, but by a new visitation of Life, which
from Christ by the promise was administered unto him, and is to all men in a
day, (for to say the affirming such a Seed remained in Adam, when he fell, does
infer his understanding was not hurt, and as he does p. 94. is a consequence I
deny, and remains for him to prove) That to believe there was such a thing in
Adam, which the Scriptur calls spiraculum vitarum, the breath of Lives, is no
new coined doctrine, these may see, that will read Athanasius, de
definitionibus, and his third dialogue de Trinitate, and 4 oration against the
Arians, and Cyrillus Alexandrinus in his Treatise upon John, lib. 2. and 3. and
lib. 8. 47. and in his Thesaurus, lib. 4. and others that might be mentioned.
As for his arguing, p. 96. that because I affirm the Seed of God is a
Substance, therefore according to me the seed of sin must be a substance also,
which consequence I deny, and therefore what he builds against me upon this
supposition falls to the ground. What he says, here and there scattered in
these pages, of the Light, will in its proper place come more fully to be
considered.

2. Page 98. n. 17. after he has saluted me with the titles of effronted and
impudent, he will have me one with Socinians and Pelagians, because I deny
outward death to be a consequence of the fall; but where he proves I do so, I
see not. It Is true I say the death threatened, Genesis 2: 17. was not outward
death, for Adam did not so dye the day he did eat, and I do still believe so,
neither offers he me any thing to give me ground to alter my mind: but to
conclude thence I deny outward death to be a consequence of the fall, was too
hastily inferred. But what if I were undetermined in this matter, and that it
remained a mystery to me? (for I believe not the being positive therein
essential to my Salvation) which if I were, truly what he says seems not to me
sufficient to proselyt me to his opinion, for albeit I willingly confess with
him that sickness and all the other miseries attending this life, yea and death
it self, considering the anguishes wherewith it is now generally accompanied,
are the consequence of the fall and of sin; yet I see not how it would thence
follow that Adam should not have dyed, seeing death to him, if he had not fallen,
would have been freed of all these miseries, and rather a pleasur than a pain,
which has been known to have befaln many Saints. As for his n. 19. he
confesses the matter of it is left to the next chapter, where I may meet him.

3. Page 100. n. 20. he goes on at an high rate of perverting, for after he has
said, Who would suspect but I mean honestly? he applies to me the saying of
Solomon, he that hates, dissembleth with his lips, we must not believe him,
for there are seven abominations in his heart. But why am I, with him, guilty
of this great charge? Because, albeit I affirm that man is wholly degenerat,
yet I say, Whatever good man does in his nature, that does not proceed from him,
but from the Divine Seed in him. Answ. These words are none of mine, but a
forgery of his own, so incident it is for the man to lie and pervert; and
therefore all his vaporing and absurd inferences drawn from this, throughout
this Paragraph, fall to the ground. My words are, that the nature, by which the
Apostle says, the Gentiles did the things contained in the Law, cannot be
understood of the proper corrupt nature of man, but of a Spiritual nature which
proceeds from the Seed of God, as he receives a new visitation of the Divine
Love. Where it is very plain, I consider man as visited anew, and that in the
strength of that Grace thereby received (not of his degenerat nature) he does
that which is good. Nor do I any where say, as he falsely insinuats, That this
Spiritual Nature is in all men, though I do say That all men are visited by God,
in order to beget this spiritual Nature in them, as will after come in its place
to be spoken of. Now all his battering of this my assertion in the three
following pages depends upon this supposition, That the good acts, done by the
Gentiles, are not done by virtue of any such visitation, but only by a Light of
corrupt nature, which remained in them after the fall: so that it is but a mere
begging of the question, until that be first debated. But he thinks he has
brought me under a great dilemma, p. 103. urging, That, since I say all their
imaginations are evil, I must say every Heathen has this Spiritual nature in
him, yea and the Devils must be partakers of it, because they believe there is
a God, which is a good thought. Answ. He is too hasty in his reasonings: for
that the knowledge a man may receive from the Divine Seed makes him instantly
to partake of the Divine Nature, is not proved by him, and he knows I believe
all men to be visited by this Divine Seed, which may give them an
head-knowledg, which they may retain, as some men do the Truth, in
unrighteousness, and yet not receive it in the love of it; so though they have
it from a Divine Seed, yet it will not follow they must necessarily so receive
it, as to become partakers of the Divine Nature. And as for the Devils, he will
confess that once they had this knowledge from a Spiritual Nature, and though
they have fallen, yet they may retain the memory of it, for that their fall and
Man's is every way alike he will not affirm. He says p. 102. That to believe
good done by Heathens (that is, by such as have not the benefit of the outward
knowledge of Christ) is done in virtue of a Divine Seed, overturns the Gospel,
but he leaves the confirmation of it to the sequel, where I shall attend him. N.
25. he tells me very fairly, the Apostle does not contradict himself, as if I
had ever imagined he did, but the question is whether the meaning he gives the
Apostl's words implys not a contradiction, which indeed he can no ways
reconcile but upon the supposition above denied; and the Reader may judge
whether he or I do most fully acknowledge Man's fall, and most truly exalt the
Grace of God, he that affirms that Man, notwithstanding the fall, yet
retains some relics of the Image of God, yea so that the Law of God, which
is holy, just, good and Spiritual, is written in his heart, page 105. and all
this considered as fallen man, without receiving any Grace and benefit from
Christ; or I, who affirm That Man by the fall was wholly degenerated, retaining
nothing of the Image of God, in whom albeit there remained a Seed of
Righteousness, yet no other ways than as a naked Seed in barren ground, in
virtue of which he can do nothing, until visited by a new visitation which he
receives by virtue of Christ as Mediator. And yet while he ascribes all this
to unregenerat men, he says in a few lines, that the Apostle and all regenerat
men are, in a certain respect, carnal: so his Divinity will run thus, the Devil
and all unregenerat men are in a certain respect spiritual, and the Apostle and
all regenerat are, in a certain respect, carnal.

4. But he thinks in the following page 106. he has gotten me in a notable
contradiction, so that he concludes if I may have occasion to contradict the
Truth, I care not how often I contradict my self, and that is, by asking me
this question, Wherein appeared the wisdom of the wise men among the Greeks, if
not in the knowledge of the things of God? I answer: in the wise and prudent
management of worldly affairs, for he has not proved that is necessarily
united to a knowledge of God and things Spiritual, since it is said of some
beasts, that they have something of this, such as Bees and Ants, etc. And
whereas he asks, wherein man differs from Brutes then? I say, in many things;
as in the knowledge of Numbers and Mathematical and mechanical demonstrations;
is the knowledge of such natural Truths (as 2 and 3 makes 5: and the whole is
greater than the part and all that is deduced therefrom) the knowledge of the
things of God? And yet is not this further than what Beasts know? And to show
him his forwardness in this, let him show me, if he admit not this, how the
Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God, and the Wisdom of God foolishness
with men. At last he comes, p. 107 and to the end of this chapter, to prove
that there does remain in Man some relics of the Image of God,
notwithstanding the fall; which he builds upon that saying of the Apostle, Romans
1: 19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, and the
reason he urges, is, because it was known not to a few only. Answ. This is
very true, but makes nothing for him, for here (as for the most part elsewhere)
he with an unparalleled confidence, not to say impudence, every where begs the
question: First, in that he supposes that this (...), or what is to be known
of God, is somewhat that man retained in the fall, and no new Visitation of
Light and Grace, which he knows I deny. And Secondly: That it must be so,
because all men have it, where he supposes that all men receive not such a
visitation, which he knows I also deny, and yet he concludes, without offering
to prove either of them. Who but one desperate, and that cares not how
ridiculous and absurd he be, if he can but heap together a company of railing
words, would urge his adversary by mediums which he knows he denies, without
first proving them, or at lest attempting so to do?

5. Next follows his sixth chapter, entitled of Original Sin, in which
nothing of what he says can touch me, but so far as he proves That those who
never actually sinned, such as Infants, are guilty of Adam's sin: Therefore
what he says of others, who affirm that Man sustained no hurt by Adam but by
imitation, concerns me not, since I say no such thing, and yet he thinks it a
paradox for me to say (albeit he can not deny but it is true) that I deny the
errors of such. And of this nature is what he writes in the first 4 pages of
this chapter, in the last of which he goes, after his custom, as it were, to
pump for the meaning of my words, that he may insinuat to the Reader, as if I
wrote all in the dark, and had great mysteries under them; whereas any one that
reads them may see they are so plain, that they need no commentary: for who is
so weak, as not to understand me saying, that the seed of sin is not imputed to
Infants, until they actually join with it? He comes p. 114. n. 8. to examine
what he says I say in defense of this error. And first, he will take notice of
what I say of Augustine, whom he alleges I abuse, because I say that he was
the first among the Ancients that opened the way to his opinion, in his
declining age, out of zeal: but will he deny that Augustine wrote most zealously
against Pelagius in his declining age? Next he shows here his great
disingenuity, for while he names many of the Ancients as being of the same
mind, and whom Augustine also cited against Pelagius, he gives none of their
words, that it might have been seen whether it was in this that they condemned
him, to wit, that Infants are not guilty of Adam's sin: for these citations may
relate to that which was accounted indeed Pelagianisme, to wit, that Man by
nature without the Grace of God could fulfill the Law, yea that he needed not
Grace to perform the will of God, which was the thing for which Pelagius was
condemned by the African Synod. As for the citation he gives of Augustine,
saying, he was of the same mind, since the beginning of his Conversion, seeing
in this place Augustin's words, which he says he has held, are no more than
the express words of the Apostle, Romans 5: 12 which I. B. has not yet proved to
import that Infants are guilty of Adams sin: so if he has no better way to
prove Augustin's positive judgment in the case than this, he does but give a
token of his own effrontedness and shameless boldness, not of mine. But since
he seems so great an admirer of Augustine as an honored instrument of the Lord,
and an holy Father, as he terms him, then I desire to know whether he will
agree to all that Augustine has written; which if he will not do, he does ill to
accuse me for condemning Augustine as erroneous in some things; and if he will,
I may then show him, that Augustine both commended and practiced things which he
and his Brethren cried-out against, as superstition, will worship and
abominable Popery and Idolatry, and for far less than which they have
excommunicated their fellow-Preachers: which shows in effect meaner thoughts of
him than I have yet expressed. My argument drawn from Ephesians. 2: 3. where the
Apostle ascribes the reason of men's being children of wrath to their evil
deeds, he says was the Fathers against Pelagius. And what then? does that
render it null? But his own answer to it is rare, saying, he thinks I put out
my eyes that do not observe how the Apostle changes the second person, saying,
Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, -- and were by nature
the children of wrath: whence the man wisely infers That Paul and the Jews were
the children of Wrath, which is not denied; but they must have quick eyes
indeed that see it from thence to be inferred that they were such, ere they
committed any actual sin, since the Apostle expressly mentions his and their
having had their conversation among the World as a reason of their having been
in the same condition. He says further, I confess 1 Cor. 2. that (...) is to
be understood of the Rational soul: and what then? Therefore so soon as they
partake of the Rational soul they become children of Wrath; This is indeed a
rare consequence, but he must excuse me for not admitting it, till better
proved. It would seem much more rational, to say, that so soon as they come to
the exercise of their Rational soul, and then do evil, they become guilty; for
he can not deny that the Gospel nor condemns nor threatens any man but him
that has actually sinned, and whether this destroys not his cause the Reader
may judge: That except a man be born-again, he can not enter the Kingdom, I
never denied. Albeit children be capable of death, yet it will not follow that
they are guilty of sin, since death is no punishment but rather an advantage to
such, to whom it is a transition to a better Life. He thinks, p. 117. that my
saying such as homologat their fathers sins, God will visit the iniquitys of
their fathers upon them, is not worth noticing; but whether his answer be worth
noticing, the Reader may judge, which is, That Adam's sin was not a personal
sin, as other men's are, and his own after-sins; but the man forgot to prove
this, and therefore may do it next: but he thinks the children of Core, Dathan
and Abiram, of Achan and the Sodomites, were judged guilty of their Fathers
sins, for unless he proves that, he says nothing, but for what reason I know
not, unless that they were outwardly destroyed: but until he prove that infers
guilt, he must for bear making his conclusion. He is highly offended I should
say their opinion is contrary to the Justice and Mercy of God, alleging, it is
without proof: but if to account one guilty for a sin committed by another
thousands of years ere they had a being, and to punish for it, be not against
Justice, and inconsistent with Mercy, I desire to know of him what is more
unjust and unmercifull. To say that this is an accusing of God is but a silly
begging of the question, until he has first proved his opinion to be true;
it is no accusing of God to condemn men's opinions, when contrary to his Nature.
He will have it to be a rapsody of nonsense, when I say, this proceeds from
self-love founded on their opinion of absolute Reprobation; but whether it be
or not, the Reader may judge, sure his saying it makes it not so. That this of
Infants being guilty of Adam's sin, and therefore many of them being damned,
depends upon their doctrine of Reprobation, no Man of sense, that knows their
doctrine, will deny; since they say some Infants are saved, because elected. Are
not the rest then, according to them, damned, because reprobated? He gives me
nothing here in answer but railing, and so concludes this Paragraph with this
notable saying, Woe, I say (that is, I. Brown forsooth) and thrice woe to such,
as drink-in this Man's doctrine, and live and dye accordingly. p. 118. n. 14.
He thinks my saying Papists are more charitable in allowing a Limbus to
children shows my affection to them, but he has not heard me allow of their
notion of a Limbus, as he does, in the chapter of Justification, p. 310. of the
opinion of a certain Popish Cardinal, preferring it not only to what is said by
William Forbes a Protestant Bishop, but even, as it would appear, to Richard
Baxter his ancient Presbyterian Brother; and in pursuance of this he asks, how
they come to Heaven, meaning Children, who have nothing to do with Christ? But
then, what will he say of those he accounts elect children? go they to Heaven
without Christ? If not, the difficulty is the same way solved. To prove
Children are under a law, and subject to transgression, he gives the common
practices among men who forfeit children, yea such as are unborn, with their
fathers, for great crimes. But in what country do they use to kill all the
children, when the father is put to death for a crime? and unless this were
done, his comparison infers not the point. His plain answer (he says) is, Adam
his being a public person, of which hereafter. To my citation Ezech. 18: 20.
the son shall not bear the father's iniquity, he preaches at large upon the
Prophet's words, alleging his meaning is, that those persons he wrote to had so
much sin of their own, that God might justly judge them, albeit he did not
visit them for their fathers iniquitys; and this is the quick dispatch he says
this place receives: it is a quick way to dispatch indeed, if it were valid, to
make the meaning destroy the Text; but men of sense use not to be sudden in
receiving such dispatches. The words are plain and positive The son shall not
bear the father's iniquity; therefore, until he give ground from plain
Scriptur to take it away, it must stand, to the overthrow of his Doctrine; for
the greater sinners those men were, the more justly and deservedly might their
Fathers iniquity be laid upon them.

6. Page 120. n. 17. he comes from my confession that Adam was a public
person, to infer That the guilt passes from him to all, and first in this page
he affirms that this sin of Adam's, from whence Original sin proceeds, is the
sin of the whole nature of Mankind, and not like Adam's after sins and the sins
of other Men, which he confesses are not the sins of the whole Nature: and
because upon this depends much of what he infers, he had don well to have
proved this in the first place by some Scriptur, till which time his inference
is not to be received. For did Adam cease to be a public person, after he had
committed that sin? If he say Yea, let him prove it by plain Scriptur, for I
deny it: if not, then his other sins must be imputed to all men (which he
denies) or else nothing can be urged from his being a public person; and while
to urge it he asks Did ever any hear one stated as a public person, whose
failings could have no effect, until the persons represented did testify
their approbation of it? For here speaking of Failings, he must either
conclude, in contradiction to himself, that Adam's sins are laid to the charge
of his Posterity, or his instance is wholly impertinent. And yet, to go round
again, he takes notice, p. 125. that the Apostle names One Offense in the
singular Number, as if thence he would infer that one sin is only transmitted;
but how he proves his consequence thence he has not shown: for albeit by that
first offense he gave entrance to sin, that being his first, yet it will not
follow he then ceased to be a public person, and if not, nothing can be proved
from granting him to be such, as is above observed. Next, the words are the
offense of one, and not one offense, as he would insinuat; which (though in the
singular number) may include many, yea all his offenses. For whatever way he
seek to urge this from this place as to Adam, the parallel will allow it to be
interpreted of Christ, where the Apostle speaking of his Righteousness uses
also the singular number, and thence according to him we might say that it is
only the first act of Christ's righteousness that is imputed unto us, and none
of the rest, so that we have nothing to do with his Death, Sufferings and
Resurrection. What thinks he now of his own Divinity? Let him loose his knot
the next time, to give him one of his own modestest proverbs. The absurdity he
seeks to draw from denying this consequence of his being a public person, that
if Adam had stood, infants should have no advantage by him, since they have no
hurt by his fall, touches not me at all, who no where say that Infants have no
hurt by Adam's fall. Adam by his fall lost his glory, his strength, his
dominion by which he could have easily withstood the Devil, and came under
great weakness, whereby the Enemie's tentations had already access to him, and
he became very obnoxious to fall under them; and so all his Posterity are come
under the same weakness and obnoxiousness to the Enemie's tentations, who
influenceth them by entering into them, and powerfully inclining them to sin:
and this malignant influence is that seed of sin in all men, whereunto they
become obnoxious, by reason of the fall, which though in it self really sin,
yet is it not Man's, but the Devil's, until Man give way to it. But I deny not
but the least yielding is Man's sin, among which I reckon concupiscence to be
one, and so differ from Papists. For albeit the tentation simply considered, or
as presented by the Devil, be not Man's sin, yet if he have the least love or
desire to it, albeit he join not actually, that shows his mind is already
defiled and corrupted, and that he is become a partaker of it. Thus are
answered his reasonings and questionings how this seed of sin can be, and yet
not the persons sin, p. 121, 122, etc. as the Reader by comparing may observe:
only it is remarkable, p. 121. where he seems to put a great stress upon the
judgment of Augustine, and citing him he brings him in saying these words among
others, concerning Infants, Shall they sin that are under no command? Now since
they who are under no command are under no Law, for every Law imports a
command, how will he reconcile this saying of his holy Father, which he brings
as a matter of authority, with his accounting it both foolish and strange in me
p. 119. to prove children are under no Law? So that either the authority of
Augustine he brings is not to be regarded, or his reasonings to prove children
under a Law, that is, a command, must be naught: let him choose which he will,
and clear himself of impertinency. His argument in this page, that as the Seed
of Grace denominats a man gracious, even while not exercising works of Grace,
so the seed of sin must denominat a man sinful, is but a begging of the
question, as in its place will appear, when I come to treat of the Seed of
Grace.

7. When he comes, p. 123. n. 18. to reply to my answer to their objection
Romans 5: 12. among his preliminary observations the first is very proper, where
he says, It is observable the Apostle makes comparison betwixt Adam and
Christ. I answer: it is indeed so, for as the righteousness of Christ is not
imputed to men for justification, until they actually join with it, or
apprehend it by faith, (as himself will acknowledge, for I suppose by his
accounting the Antinomians heretics he will not with them affirm that men are
justified before they believe.) so neither is the unrighteousness and
disobedience of Adam imputed to men for condemnation, until they actually join
with it. but this comparison spoils all his doctrine. Then after he has begged
the question a while, by mere allegations, affirming his doctrine to be so
clear, from the Apostle's words, that it can not be contradicted, without doing
violence to the Text; he forms an argument thus:

That sin, which is so described to us by the Apostle, that he says it brought
death upon all men, that men sinned by it, and were made sinners, even they who
could not as yet actually sin, that thereby all became guilty of death and of
condemnation, that sin by imputation is the sin of the whole nature, included
in Adam, and rendereth the whole nature obnoxious to death, and to condemnation.

But the first sin of Adam is described to us by the Apostle, etc.
Ergo That sin is the sin of Nature, etc.
This argument may perhaps satisfy such as are already proselyts of his Theme,
but will not convince one, that either believes other ways, or doubts; since the
Major is a mere begging of the question: and if any thing be a foisting-in of
words to the text, this must be it, since he foistsin the thing in debate, and
words not in the text, such as [even they who could not as yet actually sin]
and joyneth them with the words of the text, without distinction, and not as an
interpretation, that his unwary Reader may conclude them to be of the text, and
yet the man has the impudence in the same page to accuse me of intolerable
boldness, as foisting words into the next, while I expressly show it is but an
interpretation, by saying That is, etc. so much is he blinded with
self-interest: but I am content there be neither addition nor so much as
consequence made use of. Let him show me the plain Scriptur that says Infants
are guilty of Adam's sin. If he say it must be necessarily inferred from these
words [in whom all have sinned] I say it as necessarily follows that it is only
to be understood of all that could sin, which Infants could not, as not being
under any law, as I have above proved, and Augustine (whom he so much
reverenceth) does affirm, if his citation from him be true: and therefore
finding this to pinch him, he brings it up again, p. 126. where bringing me in
saying, Infants are under no Law, he answers, but the Apostle says the
contrary. He would have done charitably to have told me where, that I might
have observed it. What he says in this as well as the former page in answer to
my affirmation that (...) may relate to death, and that it is understood [upon
which occasion man sinned] urging absurditys by the like application of
Christ's Righteousness, is solved by a serious observation of the comparison,
as stated by me, betwixt Christ and Adam. His arguing from Childrens dying does
not conclude, until he prove Death simply considered necessarily to infer
guilt in the Party dying, of which I have spoken before, p. 126. n. 20. to my
answer to Psalm. 51: 5. alleged by them, wherein I show that David says not my
Mother conceived me sinning, and therefore it proves not his assertion. His
reply is, after he has given a scoff, it quite crosses David's design. But
why so? because in that Psalm he expresses his sorrow and humiliation for his
sins? and what then? might not David lament upon that occasion, that he was not
only a sinner himself, but also came of such as were so? But when I urge this
place further, showing their interpretation would make Infants guilty of the
sin of their immediate Parents, since there is no mention here of Adam, his
answer to this is a repetition of his own doctrine. A rare method of debate,
very usual to him! And then taking it for granted he asks me whether this
originated Sin (of which he supposed David spoke, for he never offers to prove
it, though it be the matter in debate) came from another Original than Adam?
What he affirmed here of my insinuating Marriage-Dutys to be Sin, is but a
false conjectur; but as to the hurt and loss that Man got by Adam, which I
ascribe to no other Original, as being no Manichee, I spoke before: but he
should first prove, before he obtrude such things upon others (and I desire yet
to be informed of him) in what Scriptur he reads of Original Sin, and whether,
if the Scriptur be the only Rule, he can not find words in it fit enough to
express his faith, or must he shift for them elsewhere?

8. Page 127. n. 21. He urges Paul's saying the wages of sin is death, and to
my saying This may be a consequence of the fall, but that thence it can not at
all be inferred that iniquity is in all those that are subject to death, he
says, it is in plain terms (but my modesty dare not speak it out) to say, the
Apostle speaks not truth. Answ. Is not this to take upon him to judge of
another man's heart, which elsewhere he accounts a great presumption? and why
takes he no notice, or gives he no answer to the absurdity I show followed from
thence? since the whole Creation received a decay by Adam's fall, and yet we
say not Herbs and Trees are Sinners: and while he would make-out this great
charge of my contradicting the Apostle, he forgets the half of his business,
which is, to prove the Apostle meaned, in that place, Natural death, and not
Eternal, since the Apostle opposes it there to Eternal Life: and eternal death
he will confess is the wages of Sin, which the Apostle shows they shun by Jesus
Christ's obtaining Eternal Life, whereas Natural death they do not avoid.
Likewise he should have proved that all the Scripturs mentioned by him, p. 128.
are meant of natural death, which he will find not very easy. As for his citing
Death as mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. the Apostle's words ver. 56.
confirm what I say, That death is only a punishment to the wicked, not to the
Saints, for the words are, The sting of death is Sin; so where sin is taken
away, there death has no sting, and that is the Saints Victory. Now he can not
apply this to Infants, without supposing that they have sin, which were to beg
the question. And whereas he asks Whether Death be NO punishment for Sin? I
answer that I said not so, neither is that needful for me to affirm, seeing it
is sufficient, if it be not always a punishment of sin; which if it be not, it
can not be concluded that because infants dye, therefore they must be guilty of
sin. Since then the absurditys he after urges follow from his supposition that
death is No punishment for sin (which I say not) they do not touch me. He
judges, p. 128. n. 22. that I run wilder than Papists, in saying we will
rather admit the supposed absurdity of saying all Infants are saved, to follow
from our doctrine, than with them say, that innumerable Infants perish
eternally, not for their own, but only for Adam's fault. This he reckons a
contradicting of my doctrine of Christ's dying for all, saying, I here grant
that all Infants will be saved without Christ. What horrible lie is this? Where
say I that all Infants will be saved without Christ? If he say, it is by
consequence that I say so, (which he must needs do, or else be an impudent
unparalled liar) then he infers it either from my saying Christ dyed for all,
Therefore if all Infants are saved, it must be without Christ; or that, If all
Infants be saved, Christ can not have dyed for all: for one of these two must
be, if I contradict my self. But such consequences are only fit for such an
Author as seems to have abandoned all sense of honesty and Christian
reputation, and resolvs per fas aut nefas, and without rhyme or reason, as the
proverb is, to bespatter his adversary. As for his adding they that have no
sin, have no need of a Savior to save them from sin, he overturns it all by
asking me, (in which also lies the pinch of his matter) since I affirm they
have a seed of Sin in them, which is called Death and the Old man, how can they
put-off this, and sing the Song of the Redeemed, which all that enter into
Glory must do? Does not this then show I believe they have need of Christ as a
Savior, who dyed for them, to deliver them from this? and is not the
contradiction his own, in urging this question? which I thus answer, How are
those he accounts elect Infants saved, whom he affirms to be really guilty of
Adam's sin, and so in a worse condition than I affirm Infants to be? (for he
will not say with Papists and Lutherans that the adminstiring of that they call
the Sacrament of Baptism does it.) When he answers this, he will solve his own
argument. To insinuat that some Infants are damned, he asks me what I think
of those of Sodom, Jude v. 7. the words are these, Even as Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the Citys about them, in like manner giving themselves over to fornication,
and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire. But it is strange the man should be so desperately
audacious, as to proclaim his own sottishness to the world. Is there a word
here of Infants? Is not the very reason of suffering the vengeance of eternal
fire given? because of their giving themselves over to Fornication: which reason
could not touch Infants. Page 129. he thinks I wrong Zuinglius upon the credit
of the Council of Trent; but if the Council of Trent wronged Zuinglius, in
condemning him for that he was not guilty of, he and his Brethren have the
honor to have their judgment approved by that Council, while ours is
condemned: and let him remember how he uses to upbraid me with affinity with
Papists, yea in this very chapter, upon less ground. Page 130. he goes about to
prove his matter from several Scripturs, but how shallowly, the Reader may
easily observe. (1.) He cites Genesis 6: 5. Man's thoughts are evil continually.
What then? Are Infants therefore guilty of Adam's sin, that is the thing in
question. But the Hebrew signifies a pueritiis, from their infancy. What then?
how proves that the case? I do not deny but Children may become guilty of sin
very early, but the question is Whether they be guilty of Adam's sin, even in
their Mothers womb? And hereby we may see he thinks not their version so exact,
but I. B. must take upon him to correct it, to help himself at a dead lift, as
they say. The same way is answered the other Scripturs, that follow, Ezech. 16:
4. Matthew. 15: 19. Ephesians. 2, 3. which are yet more impertinent, as the Reader by
looking to them may see; and I might easily by examining them particularly
show, if it were not that I study brevity, and delight not to glory over the
man's impertinency. And though Infants perished in the flood, and that was
brought upon the men and women that sinned, for their iniquitys; yet it will
not follow thence that infants are guilty of sins, until he better prove that
natural death is always, and to all, the wages of sin, albeit I confess with
the Apostle eternal death is. And indeed if these infants were punished at all,
it must have been for the sins of their immediate Parents, which he will not
affirm, since the flood is not said to have come for Adam's sin, but for their
own: so this instance clearly overturns his assertion. I leave to the Readers
judgment the Scripturs not mentioned at length, but set down by him, in this to
judge whether they prove the thing in debate, to wit, that Infants are guilty
of Adam's sin. The citations out of Augustine and Origin, brought by him in the
next page, 131. the Reader may also judge of, (in case they be truly cited,
which I can not examine at present) whether they have weight enough to overturn
what has been here proved from Scriptur. The words of Eliphaz (Job 15: 14.)
speak of a Man, not of a child, and therefore not to the purpose; neither do I
believe, though the Spirit of God gave a relation of what Eliphaz said, that we
ought to build our Faith upon his affirmations. Next he urges Genesis c. 5: v. 3.
And Adam -- begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; but this would
prove Adam's sons as guilty of all sins, as that first, which he denied, or let
him show a ground for such a distinction. And thus is further answered what he
says, next page, Genesis 17: 14. where it is said, the man-child that is
uncircumcised shall be cut off, which he thinks so strong, that in a vapor he
desires me to chew my cud upon it; for if this cutting-off was a punishment of
these children for sin, it must be for that of their immediate parents, who
neglected to circumcise them, which Adam could not do, and therefore could not
sin in omitting it; and since he will not say this, he can urge nothing from
that place. He says the Fathers used to make use of these words of Christ,
Ioh. 3: 5. Except a man be born of water, etc. but their using it was upon
their mistake that Baptism took away Original sin, and that therefore infants
unbaptized could not be saved. That regeneration is needful to Infants I deny
not: and whereas he asks how are they regenerat? I answered that before, asking
him how those he accounts Elect Infants, whom he confesses to be guilty of
Adam's sin, are regenerat? He confesses the Fathers argument, taken from
sprinkling infants with water, (which they and he falsely call Baptism) will
conclude nothing against me: but since he names here Initial Sacraments, in the
plural number, which the Fathers made use of, it seems they had some more than
Baptism. And since he and his Brethren make use of no more as Initial but
Baptism, it seems he differs from them, in what they judged needful here, as
well as the Quakers. I have shown above how I evite both contradicting myself,
as to Universal Redemption, and excluding infants from the benefit of Christ's
death. And for his last question, wherein did Christ excel other Infants, if
they be born without sin? (he should have said [not guilty of Sin] I answer, In
that he had no Seed of Sin in him, as other infants have, and that not only,
but he had nothing of that weakness and propensity to yield to the evil
influence thereof, as other Infants; but was in greater strength, glory and
dominion over it, than Adam, even before he fell: This shows his privilege
above others, and in nothing contradicts what I have said before.

Section Sixth, Wherein his Seventh and Eighth Chapters Of Reprobation and
Universal Redemption are considered.
1. IN his seventh chapter of Reprobation he expatiateth himself at great
length, in large and tedious homilies, which will make my reply the shorter,
who look not upon it as my concern to answer them; because these controversies
are largely handled by others, and what is said by him is abundantly answered:
yet if he will affirm he has said something that is new, upon this Theme, and
point to it, it is like it may not want an answer. And indeed the Reader may
observe him much pained and strained to put a fair face upon these foul
doctrins; and though what he says here may be, and it is most probable, is to
be understood of the reason he gives, in his Epistle, in being so large,
because of the opposition of others, besides Quakers; and also because I
touched these things but passingly, as being a Theme much debated, and common
to us with others, I might pass it by, with a reference to those Authors, who
largely treat of them; yet I will take notice of what he says in direct answer
to what by me is affirmed. And first, as for his accusation of me as not being
positive and punctual enough, in setting down my judgment of the Decrees of
Election and Reprobation, it is of no weight. All do at times confess that it
is not safe nor proper too curiously to inquire into the Decrees of God, though
this man dive into them, and be as positive in telling the several causes of
them, as if he were upon the Secret Counsel of the Almighty! I judge I have
said that which is needful and sufficient, to wit, that God calls every Man
every where to repent and be saved, through faith in Jesus Christ, who tasted
death for Every man, and is given for a Light to inlighten the Gentiles, and to
be God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth; and therefore that Every man ought
to apply himself to repent and believe, and obey, without believing that God
has foreordained him to be damned, and therefore has withheld from him Grace
and Power to do what he finds himself commanded and obliged to do: which if it
were true, as he supposes it to be of most men, there can be no reason why
they ought not to believe the Truth. If he say they either ought or need not,
because they know it not; Let him remember what pains he has been at, in the
former chapter, to prove that ignorance of a truth does not take away the
obligation of believing it: so he must either overturn all, or be content this
absurdity stick to his doctrine. As for his saying that the Opposers of it do
arraigne God, and give a sign of their Pride and arrogance, because they can
not comprehend it with their corrupt and blinded understandings, it is but a
silly begging of the question, and supposing it to be true. Thus every Impostor
might intrude upon sober Christians wild absurd and non-sensical notions,
contrary to God's Justice and Mercy; and because they would not accept of them,
tell them, they arraign God, are proud and arrogant, and not receiving the
Truth, because not comprehended by their corrupt Understandings. Would not this
thinks he be wisely reasoned? But page 135. n 3. he thinks I run so furiously
against this doctrine, that I run my self blind. And why so? because I say they
affirm That God did predestinat to everlasting damnation the most part of men,
without any respect had to their sin, only to demonstrat the glory of his
justice: and upon this he rants as a ridiculous and false representation of
their meaning. But this storm is quickly blown away, for all his great noise;
for their Westminster confession of Faith says, chap. 3. expressly, that GOD
ordained such as are not elected for dishonor and wrath, to the Praise of his
glorious justice. And the same Confession says, in the same chapter, that
nothing future, or what was to come, even as foreseen by God, was the cause of
God's Decree; and this himself also affirms, p. 137, 138, 139. What then is
become of all his boast? But if he place it here, and say, Sin became the cause
so soon as [to demonstrat the glory of his justice] became the end, and
therefore they say it was for their sin he so Decreed. This may serve for a
rattle to please fools and children, but not such as are spiritually wise, and
look more narrowly unto things, since they so manifestly contradict themselves,
telling, Sin, nor any futur thing is not the cause of God's Decree, and yet in
a few lines, that God ordained or decreed men to wrath for their sin, to
manifest the glory of his justice, which is as much as to say, God decreed men
to be damned without respect to sin, and yet he decreed them to be damned for
their sin. How makes he this hang together by Scriptur proofs? Besides, all
will confess that the cause of all God's decrees is his own Glory, which is
exerted in his Divine attributes, whereof Justice is one, so that this must be
a cause, (before sin can have any place to be a cause) since they deny it has
any. He tells me, p. 136. n. 5. that the Orthodox have written copiously on this
subject, and very far above my reach; there was the less need then for him to
write so many pages upon it, which must be little but a transcribing out of
their writings, unless he think he has written more accuratly and copiously
than any of them. (which I judge he will hardly affirm) I might easily, if I
would, trouble the Reader with a tedious discourse, also transcribe an answer
out of those, who write copiously against these his supposed Orthodox, but
truly Heterodox, men; but I rather choose to pass it by, (not affecting to be
admired for the bulk of my writings) to come to what he says directly in
answer to me, which is the business properly in hand.

2. After he has premised what he thinks meet, he comes, p. 143. n. 12. to take
notice of what I say; and first wherein I misrepresent them, in which he says
he has found no less than 12 untruths: but how untrue this assertion is shall
shortly appear. The first is, that I say, God, for perfecting of this, that is,
for bringing his Decree to pass, did appoint, that these miserable souls should
necessarily sin; this he says is a mistake. But if the restimonies of Calvin,
Zanchius, Piseator and others, cited by me, whose testimonies must have more
weight than his, to prove the Calvinists principle in this; do not prove this
to be no mistake, then I may conclude that 2 and 3 makes not 5. Calvin says
that God not only predestined men to sin, but to the causes of it, which is
sin: the Reader may look the other passage of it in my Apology. Several of his
other untruths, p 144. he builds upon supposing that I insinuat that they
believe the Gospel is once preached to every person, that every reprobat had
the knowledge of Christ, and that God had given to every one, that hears the
Gospel, sufficient Grace to embrace it. But truly I was never so mad as to
insinuat they believed these things, for not believing of which I condemn them;
neither will his pedantism upon the word subtrahendo make it out, since to
withdraw or withold may be said of things that man never had, without any
great impropriety: and yet, according to him, all men had a will and power to
obey God's Law, in Adam, so his ordaining Adam should fall, was even in that
sense a withdrawing of what they once had in their Foederal Head, according to
his phrase and notion. Another of his alleged mistakes, is, that I say they
affirm God did decree men should not obey; but whether these passages, I cited
out of their Anthors, do not make out this, the Reader may judge; yea his
Coufession does ascribe the withholding of Mercy, which is the means, to agree
to the Decree of Reprobation: so that all the fig-leaf coverings, whereby this
man would fain shelter this opinion contrary to their public Confessions of
Faith and positive sentences of their chief Doctors, are too short and narrow
to hide the ugglyness of it. He confesses the Ancients say little of this
before Augustine, I never so used their testimony, as to build my faith upon it,
or to reject their doctrine merely for its dissent from them, which he
insinuats, and yet to his own self-contradiction confesses I say I would not
much regard all that, if it had any ground in Scriptur; and he denies not his
union with the Dominicaus, and that he may show how little he cares for good
company, he willingly rejects the chief and first Reformers, to wit, the
Lutherans, whom, according to his charity, he denies so much as the name of
Reformed Protestants.

3. Page 146. n. 16. He comes to prove that this their doctrine makes not God
the author of sin, but he labors here like a man in a sweat, and gives so
little of a direct answer, as scarce deserves any reply, such as amounts to
this, being by way of retortion, that, if I acknowledge God foresaw sin,
permitted it, and might have hindered it, I will make God the author of sin too,
but I deny the parity, and he has forgoten to prove it. His other answer is
from the authority of Cicero and Plautus, who oppose author to dissuasor, and
then he asks whether they say God persuades any man to sin? But Zanchius,
one of their Doctors, says, he moves the thief to kill, and that he sins,
God putting him, yea forcing him to it, and sure that is more than persuading.
But the poor man must be at a low ebb, when he is forced to go to the Heathens,
of whom he has expressed he has so mean thoughts, for a shelter to his doctrine!
At last, to come off with some seeming credit, he desires me to confute the
Apostle, Romans 9: 11, 12, 13. because that he thinks from that, as much as from
their doctrine, this charge may be inferred: but here he does only beg the
question, he and I do both agree that the Apostle makes not God the author of
sin; but it does not thence follow that their doctrine does not infer it, since
from the positive saying of their Doctors and the doctrine itself it is
manifest, as is more largely shown in my Apology, and this remains yet by him
to be removed. For his desiring me to refute the Apostle is no more answer,
than if to all his arguments in his book I should only say, Confute the
Scriptur, which contains our Doctrine, and therefore dispute no more against us,
until thou first do that. Would he reckon this suffieient? As for their
misapprehensions of Romans 9. he may find them refuted in many Authors, that have
written upon that subject, particularly in the examination of West. Confess of
Faith, chap. 3. to which I refer him. To the citations I give him of their
Authors making God the author of Sin he says, If they give more ground than
the very expressions of Scriptur, he will not own them. And what then? the
consequence is but very small, whether he will or not. It is enough for me that
I have shown the absurdity of their doctrine, which even by the testimony of
their chief Doctors makes God the author of Sin; unless he will reply all this
is nothing, because I, I. B. will not own them: and if to say he that forces
another to do a thing is the cause and author of it, who, without contradicting
their own Reason, can deny they make God the author of sin? As for the many
testimonies of Scriptur, brought by him, I own them; and both agree they make
not God the author of sin, but that the saying of their Divines does it, what
is above said does evince. Page 149. He comes (but as may be observed,
unwillingly) to vindicat the twofold will they ascribe to God, the one
revealed, by which he commands men to repent; and the other secret, and quite
contrary: how he is pained here, the Reader may observe by his [IFs] [and ANDs]
thinking to turn it by, without any direct answer. The sum of what he says
resolvs in this, That the Purpose of God is not of the same nature with his
Command: but what if that should be granted? The question is Whether they be
quite contrary, and that in respect to one and the same subject; so that, when
a man is commanded by God to do a thing, by his secret Purpose he is forced to
do the quite contrary? Page 150. n. 19. He comes to answer my saying that their
affirming Man sins willingly, will not avail; because, according to them,
his propensity of Inclination to sin is necessarily imposed upon them by God.
To this in stead of answer he refers me to Romans 9. of which before; and, for
want of reason, he falls a railing, calls me a proud Quaker, saying, I agent
the Devil's cause: but whether that be to remove my objection, or vindicat
their doctrine, the Reader may judge. Page 151. n. 20. In answer to my showing
their doctrine is injurious to God, because it makes him delight in the death
of a sinner, contrary to Ezech. 33: 11. 1 Timothy 2: 3. 2 Pet. 3: 9. he says
nothing directly, but would be retorting, that, if I prove any thing from this,
then I must say That God did absolutely Decree that all men should be saved.
But I deny this consequence; albeit it is injurious to God, to say he decrees
that which he declares to take no delight in, it will not follow that it is
injurious to him, to say he permits what he delights not in. For on all
hands it is confessed he permits sin, and yet on no hand that he delights
in sin; so that this injuriousness of their doctrine to God is no ways removed
by him, albeit he would fain be mincing and covering it, saying, they do not
say that God purposes to punish any not for their sins, but merely to satisfy
his own Pleasur: but such silly shifts must only satisfy blind men. Do not
they say God purposed to damn Many to eternal torment, and that Sin is no ways
the cause of this purpose? And will he say to be eternally tormented is no
punishment? And was not this a purpose to punish men, and not for their sin?
His alleging, in this page, that this is not injurious to Christ's Mediation,
is upon the supposition that Christ dyed not for all, which comes after to be
examined.

4. Page 152. n. 22. He comes to prove their doctrine makes not the Gospel a
mere mock, as I show it did, by proposing the offer of Salvation to many, who
yet by an irrevocable Decree are excluded from receiving any benefit by it: and
to this he gives the instance of Moses being sent to Pharaoh, whose heart was
hardened, and Esai to the People of Israel, to make their ears heavy and shut
their eyes, with others of like import. But this is easily answered,
considering I grant many men outlive the day of God's Visitation to their
Soul, and are justly hardened; and yet the offers of Mercy and Peace is no
illusion, because they were once in a capacity to have by it received it. But
he thinks here he has gotten me in a contradiction, because he supposes that I
willingly grant that the Light within may continue to exhort such to repent and
turn, whose Day of Visitation is expired; but it is no wonder the man's
arguments are weak, that are built upon so groundless suppositions. For I will
never grant that the operations of the Light are every way the same in man
after, as they were before, his Days of Visitation were expired; for, albeit
before they judge, reprove and condemn for sin, yet this is accompanied with a
gentle drawing and Invitation to Life; but that he has this afterward I
utterly deny, as is clear by Christ's weeping over Jerusalem. To prove, p. 153.
that this their doctrine is not injurious to Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice, by
making it a great judgment and plague to many; he asks Must not Christ be for
the fall of many in Israle? Luke 2: 34. citing other Scripturs of the like
import. Answ. All this urges nothing but upon supposition that all these never
had a Day of Visitation: so that he does but beg the question. His supposed
contradiction, which he repeats again here, is before removed. Page 154. N. 24.
To prove their doctrine puts not men in a worse condition than Devils, he
says, Devils are under no offer of Mercy now, and hear not the Gospel: but is
not this a pretty solution? whereas he confesses this offer of Mercy and
hearing is no advantage, nor was ever intended to advantage those who are
damned; and therefore foreseeing the weakness of this he brings-in my words,
where the pinch of the matter lies, to wit, Devils had once a possibility of
standing, but so not Men, according to their doctrine: to this he has no answer,
but that all Mankind once stood in Adam. But did not God decree that Adam
should fall? Let him answer me this directly: where then was their capacity of
standing, or his either? If he say not, let him take home his own reasonings,
that something came to pass, which God decreed not, and consequently, according
to him, foresaw not. But suppose this difficulty were solved, let men of sense
and Reason judge whether men be not put, by their doctrine, into a worse
condition than Devils; while they affirm that Devils had once a standing, and
fell by their own personal disobedience and presumption, but Men had only a
standing in Adam, fell by his act, and not by any of their own, all of them,
before they had a being, and many several thousand years before. but, to befool
his Reader, he says, in the end of this paragraph, their Doctrine is consonant
to that Rev. 22: 17. -- and whosoever will, let him take of the waters of Life
freely; and this he repeats in the end of the next paragraph. But how
deceitful he is in this, cannot be hid from the understanding Reader, since
that invitation signifies nothing to those, that are by an absolute Decree
excluded from the benefit of it, and is but to deal with such invited ones, as
the Poet feigned of Tantalus, who was up to the chin in water, but restrained
from drinking; which he takes notice of, as objected by me, p. 155. and labors
to remove it, but in vain. What he says to that end resolvs in this question,
Have Heathens or Reprobats as great a desire to Salvation as Tantalus had of
drinking? And what if they had not? the comparison is not impertinent, for he,
that has resolved to starve a man, whether he do it by hindering him to eat, or
by destroying his stomach, that he has no appetit, and therefore does perish;
does equally contribute to his death. And the like does their false doctrine
most injuriously ascribe to God. As for the Scripturs here brought by him, such
as, all men have not Faith 2 Thessalonians. 3: 2. and others of the like import, they
are not to his purpose; for the question is not Whether all men have the
exercise of those gifts that lead to Salvation? but Whether the most of men be
by an irrevocable Decree, before they had a being, yea from all Eternity,
secluded from all means of obtaining these Gifts, that they may be saved; and
that because ordained to be damned, albeit by the Gospel, as the revealed will
and command of GOD, invited to repent and be saved?

5. Now I come to his 8 chapter of Universal Redemption, where I shall not have
much ado, for many pages; for after, according to his custom, he has introduced
himself with railing and reproaches, and that in the first 4 pages he has told
the various opinions of those that held universal Redemption, and at last his
own, as conceived in the Westminst. Confess. of Faith; he goes about to prove
that there is no Universal Redemption, and that upon this medium, that there
was a Covenant betwixt God and the Mediator, which would be destroyed by such
as assert this Universal Redemption, because, according to them, it might have
faln-out, notwithstanding that Eternal transaction that not one person should
be saved. Upon this he enlarges, endeavoring to show the absurdity of it both
from Reason and Scriptur, unto page 194. All which touches me not at all, who
do not say that Christ by his Death purchased a mere possibility, against which
he battereth thtough all these pages; since I have expressly affirmed, and he
himself observes it, that Christ's death purchased not only a sufficiency of
Grace for all, but also such a prevalency for some, by which they were
necessarily brought to Salvation: and yet is so unjust, as to affirm that I am
for this mere possibility, saying, p. 178. n. 28. I embrace this opinion with
the Arminians. and p. 179. n. 30. he says, -- or as this Quaker says, who in
effect says, that it may so fall-out that there shall be no application:
whether this be malice or forgetfulness himself best knows. But this is sad, he
seldom forgets to be malicious, but often to be just; yet as to the bulk of his
reasonings of that matter, perhaps he bestows them for the confutation of those
others he speaks of besides the Quakers, against whom he says he writes; who,
if they judge it their concern, may answer it. Yet in this prolix disputation
he has cast-in some arguments, which seem not only to urge against this mere
possibility, as he terms it, but also against Christ's dying for all in any
respect, such as from page 169, N. 19. to page 175. But these are such, as his
usually are, which only proceed upon the question's being begged; for whereas
he says that those for whom Christ dyed, he dyed to take-away their sins, it
is not denied, provided they resist not the Grace purchased thereby, so that
faith and repentance be wrought in them. But he urges this in the following
page, 170. that since this nonperformance of the Condition is a sin, if he
dyed for all sins, he must have dyed for this also; and if there be another
Condition imagined, for that too, and so in infinitum. I answer: This reasoning
would infer those to be saved by the death of Christ, who never repent,
especially with those who judge men may sin, yea must sin all their lifetime,
and yet be saved; neither does the absurdity reach those who affirm Christ to
have dyed for all, as to obtain remission of sins that are past, and Grace
sufficient to work faith and repentance, yea and restore those that may fall
into sin after their conversion, if not resisted: and this is sufficient to
infer that Christ dyed for all, neither can that absurdity more reach them,
than the Apostle, who speaks of such as denied the Lord that bought them. And
since the Evangelist places the benefit upon the reception, saying but unto as
many as received him he gave power to become the sons of God; all these
Scripturs, afterward cited by him, signifiing the efficacy of Christ's Blood,
is not denied; they themselves confess it was sufficient and of value enough to
have redeemed every man: but that does not hinder it from proving ineffectual
to such as will not receive it, as is above shown. And therefore his question,
p. 172. If Christ dyed for the sins of all persons, how comes it that they are
not all actually pardoned? is easily answered: Because of their non-reception
of the Grace by which his Death should be made effectual to them: and albeit
this makes Free Will author of condemnation, as himself will acknowledge, yet
not of Salvation, as shall after appear. His next argument, p. 174. is, that If
Christ had dyed for all men, all men should be saved, because he has purchased
Faith and Salvation for all for whom he has dyed, and this he supposes he has
shown before; but his confidence in his own arguments does not influence other
men, I am yet to see where he has proved any such thing. The Scripturs he
brings, such as Romans 8: 32-39, etc. to prove this, speak of those who had
really received the Grace, and in whom regeneration was working by it, and do
indeed very well prove that Christ dyed for them, yea what if I should say has
purchased them Grace prevalent to Salvation? Yet they will not prove that he
has not dyed for others also that may miss of Salvation. Page 175. N. 25. he
says, It is considerable That no where in Scriptur, we find it expressly
affirmed, That Christ dyed for all Men. Why then is all this trouble made? But
is it not expressly said, Heb. 2: 9. that we see Jesus, -- that he by the Grace
of God should taste death for every man. Let him tell us what less that
imports, yea if it be not more emphatik, to say, Christ tasted death for
Every man, than to say, Christ dyed for all Men. It is much the man would so
proclaim his ignorance!

6. After more of his tedious and superfluous reasonings against this mere
possibility, as he calls it, he comes p. 195. n. 48. to overturn my grounds for
Universal Redemption; and first, in answer to the Angels song, Luke 2: 10.
urged by me, wherein they hold-forth the coming of Christ as tideings of great
joy to all People, This he says is to show the Offer was to be made now to all
Kindreds, Nations, Tongues and Languages. And what then? It is not said only
so, excluding all Particulars of these, since the word ALL, in the common
acceptance, comprehends every Particular, as well as all sorts; and he should
have given some reason from Scriptur, why he restricts it here; but, in stead
of that, he contradicts himself, in the very following words, saying, for he
was to reign over the house of Jacob. Luke 1. v. 13. for this if it urge any
thing, it will exclude his former concession, if it be not exclusive, he can
prove nothing from it. Neither does he more pertinently allege Matthew. 1: 21.
that he was to save his People from their sins, for that Scriptur does not say,
that he purchased not a capacity for some to be his People, who, by their
resisting, lost the benefit oftered them. How often would I have gathered you,
-- and ye would not? says Christ, Mat. 23: 37. Luk 13: 34. He says further,
this would not have been glade tideings, if it had been a mere possibility. But
I affirm no such thing. To my urging Christ's commission, Mark 16: 15. to
preach the Gospel to every creatur, and that of Paul, Col. 1: 28. he says, it
will no more, prove that Christ dyed for all men, than for Devils, and Beasts:
for they are creatures. But how silly and perverse this answer is, is easily
apparent; for is it lawful to preach the Gospel to Beasts and Devils? or is it
as unlawful to preach the Gospel to any men, as it is to do it to Beasts and
Devils? But, on the contrary, since he will not deny but it is a duty to preach
the Gospel to all men indefinitly, yea in this place he acknowledges it, they
being the proper subjects of it; so that of them must be understood [every
creature] here mentioned. Page 196. N. 50. To my arguing the Gospel inviteth
all, and that it would be a mocking of men, if Christ dyed not for all, to
command them all to believe that Christ dyed for them, he says, This is built
upon an untruth, that the Gospel does not command all, to whom it is preached,
to believe that Christ dyed for them, but only to flee to an all-sufficient
Savior. But what is the preaching of the Gospel, especially in his sense, even
as a little before acknowledged by him, but a declaring and offering of
Salvation to all, to whom it is preached, Mercy and Good Will, through the
merits of Christ who dyed for them? Next, the argument still holds good, if
the Gospel commands (as he says) to flee unto an all-sufficient Savior; for
unless it be possible for such, who are so commanded, to do it, the preaching
of it to them is a mocking of them, and that to purpose, if this impossibility
be imposed upon them, by him, by whose command the Gospel is thus preached. The
example of Moses to Pharaoh, and Esaias to the Jews, has been before answered.
He ends this paragraph, begging the question, as if the Gospel could be said no
where to be, but where there is an outward dispensation of it, by the ministry
of men.

7. Page 197. N. 51. He confesses there is no Scriptur that says Christ has
not dyed for all men, and there is, that says, he has tasted death for every
man, which is rather more, and not a probation by consequence only, as I have
already shown: then he comes to consider my argument from 1 Timothy 2: 13, 4-6.
showing that Salvation can not be impossible for all, since we are commanded to
pray for all; and that, since Christ gave himself a Price of Redemption for
all, it can not be impossible that all should be saved, as is more largely
illustrated in my Apology. Now how he is pained in answer to this, and in his
nibblings about the particle [all], even unto page 204. the Reader may easily
observe. First he distinguishes upon the word possible, it is meant (says he)
here of such a thing as may be, abstracting from the decree, yea in respect of
the Decree, the contrary whereof is not decreed by God, but not a thing simply
so. The man it is like thinks he has found-out a very subtle distinction, but
it servs for little, save to show his own confusion; for to be possible,
abstracting from the Decree, and with a respect to the Decree, is for a thing
to be impossible, if God had not decreed the contrary, and yet to be possible,
because God has not decreed the contrary. But to leave this piece of confused
pedantry: he denies that we may pray for every one, because John says, --
there is a sin unto death, I do not say, ye should pray for it. But this is in
plain words to say, the Apostle Paul was deceived, and therefore his brother
John reproved him: for the man labors more in this to make these two Apostles
contradict one another, than to refute me. But for all this we see they are no
ways at variance, we may pray for all, because all may in a day be saved,
though, when some have outlived that Day, it may not be sit to pray for them;
but if Salvation were by an absolute decree made impossible for most of men, it
were madness to pray for them: he thinks it may as well be inferred that we
should give thanks for all men. This I suppose he reckons absurd: but why so?
May not men give thanks to God, for, and in the behalf of, all men, for his
Grace that he has given to all men, and also for his daily care and good
Providence over all men? That, which he says afterward in many words, amounts
to this, that men have prayed allowably for that, which, by reason of God's
decree, was impossible; and therefore may pray in faith for that, which is
impossible: of this he gives one great instance, from Christ's praying, save me
from this hour, which is always with a submission to God's will. But this may
diverse ways be answered, for he has not proved that Christ's praying to save
him from this hour, was in him a real desiring, however submissivly, that he
might not undergo that which he knew he came into the world to do. Neither can
this be affirmed without importing that Christ was unwilling to do his Father's
will, and desirous to shun it; which to affirm were blasphemy, to accuse him,
who in all things was found willing and obedient. So that his Prayer was not a
desiring the thing might not be, but that he might be saved and and preserved
from being overwhelmed with the difficultys and distresses that in that hour
did and might attend him, and in this his prayer was answered; for, albeit
these difficultys were not removed, yet he triumphed over them. That a man pray
for the life of his father, or friend, who notwithstanding dies at that time,
is not denied; but it will not thence follow, that it was impossible that those
Prayers could have been answered. For to conclude from the events, that things
could not have been other ways, were to conclude all things come to pass by a
Stoical fate, so that God himself were Agens necessarium; and to favor of
Spinosa, then it had been impossible for I. B. to have omitted, though at the
earnest desire of his friends, one word of what he has written, or to have
added one word more, and yet he says, in some places, he might have said more.
But the Apostle's desiring to pray here is founded upon the positive mind of
God, who wills all men to be saved: this (he says) is most false in the
sense asserted by me, else all men should be saved; but I never took it in that
sense. The question is, Whether in any true sense it could be said that he will
all men to be saved? and that given as a reason why we should pray for all, if
God had made it always simply impossible for many to be saved. To show that
God's will of Precept (as his phrase is) may be impossible in respect of his
decree, he says, God commands all, perhaps Devils and Damned to love him
perfectly, and yet this is not now possible. But this [perhaps] spoils all this
inference, for until he be certain of it, he can conclude nothing from it. He
bestows diverse pages upon the universal particle all, to show how it is
diversely taken, and by an instance of several Scripturs, to prove it sometimes
is not taken for all and every one: but in this (had he not loved to be longsom
and tedious) he might have spared his pains, since that was never denied by me.
But the question is, that since the proper, common and most universal
signification of [all] is to signify every one, whether, in the places brought
by me, the most common signification should not be made use of, according to
the general rule of all Interprerers? And therefore if he had said any thing to
the purpose, he should have proved that in these places there must be a
restriction, and not have bestowed many words to prove [all] sometimes to be
restricted, which I never denied: and the pinch lies here, wherein I desired
to be satisfied, but find not as yet he has given any answer. Where is [all]
made use of in Scriptur, to express of two numbers the least? which yet,
according to their principle, they make it to do; since they usually affirm
that the number of the Elect is much less than that of the Reprobats. After the
like manner, ere he make an end of this, he would turn-by the word [World] as
being understood of a part, and not all; but he is mightily pinched upon this
occasion, where he comes, p. 208. n. 64. to answer what I urge from 1 Ioh. 2:
1, 2. where Christ is said to be a Propitiation for the sins of the whole
World; and that he may do it the more easily, he omits a long time the word
[whole] to show that the word World is sometimes taken with a restriction: and
at last he tells us fairly, that the phrase the Whole World can not prove any
thing, and that It is but rational to suppose, that the whole World here
denotes no more, etc. and for this he refers to Rev. 3: 10. and 12: 9. and
13: 3. etc. But these Scripturs are so far from hurting me, or making against
what I say, that they confirm it; for I argued that all and every one was
included by the Apostle in these words, wherein he says, Christ was a
Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, because he mentions the Saints
before, -- not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World, and so
it must be the whole world, as contradistinguished from the Saints. Now these
places of the Revel. cited by him do denote all and every one, as
contradistinguish'd from the Saints, which himself I judge will not deny; for
will he say that the hour of tentation (Rev. 3: 10.) came upon every one, as
contradistinguished from the Saints? and that the Beast (12: 9.) did in this
sense deceive the World, that is, all and every one? and that (13: 3.) all the
World wondered after him? The other places, marked by him, have no relation to
the Whole World, in the sense I here urge it; which is, that the whole World,
when used in contradistinction from the Saints, expresses all and every one:
and the thing he should have done, if he would have truly re^u^ed me, which he
has not so much as attempted, was to prove, that the Elect, or any part of
them, as expressed by the word [We] or [Us] by any of the Penmen of Scriptur,
are contradistinguished from the Elect, or any part of them, under the term of
the [whole World,] until he do which, he no ways overturns my argument, and
therefore what he says besides this, is beside the purpose.

7. Page 204. N. 59. In answer to Ioh. 3: 16. compared with 1 Ioh. 4: 9. God so
loved the World, etc. and God sent his Only-begoten Son into the World, etc. he
tells whosoever (albeit indefinit) is not universal, unless it be in a necessary
matter, which this is not. But he should have defined what he means by a
necessary matter distinctly, and then proved this not to be such; till both
which be done, that is now omitted by him, his answer is deficient. His next
quibble is, that the world in these two places is not the same, the one being
understood of the Habitable World, and the other of the Inhabitants; but the
last may be understood of the Inhabitants as well as the first: where is the
absurdity of saying God sent his Son into the world, that is, unto men, or
among men? 3. He supposes I will not say, God sent his Son into the World,
that all Inhabitants might live the life of Faith, for all men have not faith,
and all men will not be saved, or God should be disappointed of his Intentions;
and therefore he adds, as his commentary upon Rev. 3: 3, 4. -- what if some do
not believe? shall their unbelief make the unchangeable Purposes of God of none
effect? No. Answ. I perceive, as most of the man's reasonings are built upon
suppositions, so most of his suppositions are false; for God sent his Son into
the World, to put all men into a capacity to live the life of Grace: and
therefore who do not, the fault is their own, nor are God's unchangeable
Purposes of none effect, since God has not unchangeably purposed to damn any,
which he supposes he did. And upon this mere and unproved supposition,
according to his method, he builds his matter. He adds Ioh. 3: 16 is directly
against the meaning of his Adversaries (I judge he means all those, who assert
Universal Redemption) who build much upon it, albeit I had not the wit to
improve it: but it seems had I had a great deal more wit than I have, he
judges himself to have wit enough to prove it all to no purpose. why? because,
according to the Greek, it is, for God so loved the World, -- that all
believing (or all believers, or every one that believes) in him might not
perish, etc. And what then? we must prove, that either all are, or shall be
Believers, and then he will easily grant, without disput, that Christ dyed for
them all. But the man has not here well heeded what he says, there is no
necessity of proving that all are, or shall be Believers; it is enough, to
prove that all are put in a capacity to believe, and that Faith is not made by
an absolute decree impossible to most: this in part is done already, and more
of it will appear hereafter; that Christ by this place intended to show, that
his Death should not be restricted to the advantage of the Jews only, is not
denied. In answer to Heb. 2: 9. that he tasted death for every man, he says,
that the Greek here, for every man, imports in their room and stead, shall we
think that Christ dyed so for every man, and yet many of these men dyed for
themselves? But if any absurdity be inferred here, it will redound upon himself
no less than upon me, who will confess, as his after words make manifest, the
saying here Christ tasted death for Every man imports his dying here for the
Elect, and yet do not many of the Elect dye for themselves? Here again he says,
this shows the benefit of his death is not restricted to the Jews, which is
granted; but that proves not that it is not therefore Universal. Next, he
takes notice of the context, where it is said, it became him, in bringing many
sons unto glory, etc. and therefore these are the all for whom he dyed. But
this is strongly to affirm, not to prove; albeit Christ brought many sons unto
glory, and called such Brethren, it does not follow he tasted death only for
such. The Apostle shows us first the general extent of Christ's death, in
saying, he tasted death for every man; and then shows us, how it became
effectual to many: and yet the man is so confident (albeit he has urged
nothing, but only affirmed) that he adds, If this context do not sufficiently
confute this conceit, we need regard the Scripturs no more. But here he has
spoken out the truth, as it is, for this evidently shows, that for all their
pretense to exalt the Scripturs, yet they regard it no more than it favors
their opinion. This is the account, for which they regard the Scripturs; if it
favor their opinion, and confute their advetsaries; but if it do not, they
need no more regard it, else surely he should have said, If the Scripturs do
not confute that which he esteems an error, then he will not judge it so any
more, but regard the Scripturs more than his own judgment; but, on the
contrary, he is resolved, if the Scriptur do not confute what he thinks a
conceit, that he need no more regard them. Likewise in the rest of this page he
gives himself a notable stroke, for to my saying, that their doctrine would
infer that Christ came to condemn the world, contrary to his own words. Ioh. 3:
17. 12: 47. he answers, that prejudice has so blinded mine eyes, that I can
not see the beam in mine eye, for in my opinion, not one man might have been
saved, because Christ only procured a mere possibility, and no certainty for
any one man, etc. But, as I have above observed, I assert, as my judgment, the
express contrary, that Christ has so dyed for some, that they can not miss of
Salvation; and this himself also noticeth afterward, p. 276. I would know
then, and let all honest men judge, if there be any spark of honesty left in
him, whether himself be not the man, whom prejudice has blinded. Almost at the
same rate, p. 207. he asks me, if my argument from 2 Pet. 3: 9. the Lord is
-- longsuffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come unto repentance, do hold; What will I do with those that outlive
the day of their Visitation? is the Lord willing to give them repentance? I
answer, No: and yet no overturning of my argument; for, in respect all had a
day of visitation, wherein they might have repented, God may be said to be
long-suffering, and not to have been willing any should have perished, etc. But
this can not be said, if none ever had such a day, or season, as they affirm.
He would insinuat as if this made all to depend upon Free Will, but how
frivolous this calumny is, will after appear: and whereas both in this and the
following page he rants at an high rate, as if I did fight against God's
Omnipotency, saying, God will be God, whether I will or not, and that Christ
must turn a petitioner, and supplicat Lord [Free-Will,] exclaiming, O cursed
Religion! the man does but show his malitiousness and weakness. For, if God's
Omnipotency, because he does whatsoever he will, be urged, to prove that men
can not resist his will; and that therefore whatsoever men do, even the
wickedest actions are willed by God, then violence is offered to the will of
the creaturs, and the liberty and contingency of second causes are necessarily
taken away; which yet is expressly denied by the Westminst. Confess. chap. 3.
Nor will all his distinctions, far less affirmations, solve this; that Peter
speaks only of the Elect, because he mentions them elsewhere, unless he
prove [all] here to be restricted, is but a begging of the question.

8. Page 210. n. 65. He quarreleth my bringing some testimonies of Antiquity
agreeing with what I say, which he terms a fouling of fingers with humane
writings, saying, himself lays not so much weight upon the authority of men
in this matter: and yet afterward he cites some, as making for his purpose. He
may know, I as little build upon the testimony of the Ancients, as he can, for
the bottoming of faith; and yet to show their agreement with us, and against
them, is a good check to their shameless objection of Novelty, considering how
the same is objected to them as strongly, and with no less reason, by their
Mother, the Church of Rome, whom, when pinched by us, they begin to run to, for
the ground of their Church, Ministry and Maintenance. That ever I said, the
Quakers, whom he terms to be of yesterday, have only found the Truth, is false;
albeit I say, they have a more clear and full discovery of it. But one would
think, notwithstanding his pretending he lays little weight upon the Authority
of Antiquity, in this matter, that it is not so; else why does he so often in
this matter upbraid us with the heresy of Pelagius, as contradicting the sense
of the ancient Church, and their Doctors? Who are those, whose testimony he
calls the authority of men, in this matter?

Section Seventh, Wherein his IX. Chapter Of Universal Salvation Possible: his
X. Of Universal Grace and Light. XI. Of the necessity of this Light to
Salvation. and his XII. Of the Salvation of Heathens without hearing the
Gospel, are considered.
1. HE begins his 9 chapter Of Universal Salvation Possible, according to
his custom, with railing, accusing me of ignorance, folly, pride and pedantry;
but he thinks it not worth his pains to spend words to discover it: yet he
gives a main reason for all, to wit, I suppose our opinions were never known in
the world, before we were raised up to declare them. Which being a manifest
untruth, and never said by me, the Reader may thence judge of the grounds he
has for this his Railing, however he supposes they are but old errors clothed
with new notions, and which himself has sufficiently enough enervated, in his
former chapter of Reprobation and Universal Redemption; which being the basis
of them is by him (if he may be admitted judge in his own cause) already
overturned. And then he thinks it was impertinency, to say, that Quakers can by
sensible experience be confirmed in their doctrine; and so brings to an end his
first two paragraphs. His next work is to play the Commentator, and to tell his
Reader my meaning, which to be sure is to pervert it, as he does in this
chapter throughout, affirming it to be my belief, that every man has power and
ability moral to lay hold of Salvation, and that there is not requisite
thereunto any new grant of Grace and Divine help to quicken the man; -- he has
a stock from his Mothers womb, which is sufficient, this he calls the proper and
native face of my doctrine; and this he puteth down as my opinion, and charges
me with it, p. 214. And 218. he says it further, without any concurrence of
Divine Grace. Page 220. he says, I conclude Man has power to believe and obey
the Gospel without the Spirit of God, as also the like, p. 221. twice. And p.
222. he says, I conclude that the wicked have power, of themselves, without the
Spirit of Regeneration and Grace, to do what is commanded in reference to Life
eternal, and further, p. 223, 224 and 226. he affirms the like of me; which
is utterly false, and was never believed nor asserted by me: and it is
observable, that in all these places where he thus charges me, he does not so
much as once point to any one page in my Apology; and not only so, but not so
much as from the words or writings of any other Quaker, borrowed from some of
his usual Authors, which is his most frequent refuge. And therefore the Reader
may judge, what he builds upon his false supposition, or batters against it,
falls to the ground, without further refutation. After he has branded this brat
of his own begeting, p. 214. with Pelagianism, Jesuitism, Arminianism and
Socinianism, thence accusing the boldness and confidence of the Quakers, and of
my self in particular, in terming it a new discovery of ours; he ends this
page with a fit of Railing, and begins in his next to wonder, how the
Heathens can be said to have a day of Visitation, since nothing can be called a
day of Visitation, in reference to Salvation, but what is in and through the
preaching of the Gospel. But this wonder is built upon his supposition that the
preaching of the Gospel is no where, but where there is an outward
administration of it; wherein his mistake will come hereafter to be manifested,
into which mistake he falls, in the next page, and elsewhere in this chapter,
where I shall pass it over, until I come to speak of it in its proper place.
In this page, 215. he thinks that since I affirm their doctrine makes God
unjust, as denying to some the means of Salvation, that, which I affirm may be
likewise so charged, because some may think God is not just, in not granting to
all an equally long day of Visitation: but the question is not what some may
think, but whether these thoughts be built upon Justice and Reason? All men
know it is manifest unjustice to punish a man, and torment him, for
nonperformance of that, which he, that commands him to perform, has by an
invincible necessity barred and hindered him from doing; and therefore to
suppose this of the most Just God, must be a great error and abuse: but it is
no injustice to punish a man, for not performing that, which he had received
sufficient power to do, albeit another had received more, to say so, is like
the laborers whom Christ reproves in the parable, for murmuring that those,
that came-in after them, received equal wages with them, Matthew. 20: 12, 13, 14.
That the preaching of the Gospel is not a mocking of those, whose day of
Visitation is expired, as it is to the Reprobats among them, I have in the
former section shown; but he asks here whether such become obdured before or
after their Day of Visitation be expired? What if I shall say both, though not
in the same manner and degree? it was before removeable, but not after; since
albeit simply considered the same, and always pardonable, yet with a respect to
certain persons and their circumstances, unpardonable, or not pardonable. That
God permits sin to be in the world I never denied, nor accused their Divines
for so saying: but whereas he says, it is a manifest untruth, that I would
make the Reader believe, they say, God does impell men to sin necessarily, he
seeks to hide their doctrine, and beguile the simple Reader, since P. Martyr
upon Romans 1. says expressly that God forces the will of wicked men unto great
sins. and Piscator says that the wicked are absolutely decreed necessarily to
sin, and therefore to sin, that they may be justly punished. Now these being
more eminent Divines among them than I suppose I. B. presumes, for all his
scribbling, he is to be accounted; the Reader may judge, and by the passages
elsewhere cited by me, whether he does not here most untruely charge me with an
untruth: that the sins charged upon the Gentiles were only such as were against
the Light of Nature, he has affirmed, p. 217. but not proved; for the great
reason of their condemnation is, because what was to be known of God is
manifest in them, and that this is not only the light of Nature, will after
appear. If what he urges from Romans 11. concerning the Jews and the imprecation
those brought upon themselves, who said, His blood be upon us, and upon our
children, hold true, we must suppose no Jew since that saying of Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 13: 46. to have been really converted. But how came any of them
to be converted before, since that imprecation was long before Paul and
Barnabas spoke these words of their turning to the Gentiles? and, according to
this reasoning, all the preaching of the Gospel, which the Jews have since
heard, and do hear, is in vain. I have sufficiently explained what I mean by
this Day of God's Visitation to every Man, in the explication of the 5 and 6
Theses in my Apology, n. 17. And albeit he think otherwise, as I know I have
satisfied many moderat Readers, who are not Quakers, so I hope to have
satisfied all that are truly unprejudicat. After he has, p. 218. given large
citations, to show their doctrine, out of the Confession of Faith and Catechism,
and thereafter made a kind of preachment thereupon, he comes at last, p. 221.
to examine the proofs I bring for my assertion.

2. And first to my argument drawn from the reproofs in Scriptur to men, for
rejecting of God's Visitation and Love, he answers, that my Proposition is
universal, and these complaints and reproofs only particular, and so can prove
nothing. The like he answers, p. 224. to what I urge from Esai 5: 1, 2, 3, 4.
where the Vineyard is expostulated with, as likewise Mat. 23: 33. Mark 12: 1.
Luk 20: 9. and p. 225. to what I urge from Mat. 23: 37. Luk 13: 34. and 19: 41,
42. where Christ expostulateth with, and lamenteth over Jerusalem. But for
answer to all this, albeit these places were granted all of them to be
particular, yet so much is gained by them, that so me, that did perish, had a
day of Visitation, in which they might have been saved; and thus his doctrine
Salvation was never possible to any, but to such as must necessarily be saved
is overturned, and he should at least have answered them as to this. Further,
all the Scriptur reproofs and complaints are not particular, but some of them
general, and one general one is enough to prove my assertion, (albeit as to
that I may see what he says hereafter, to answer that by which, as to the
universality, it is more particularly proven in my Apology) such as Genesis 6: 3.
which is spoken of men indefinitly: and whereas he supposes this striving of
God with men to be only by his Word and Servants, meaning the outward Word; he
does but beg the question. Likewise that of Micah 6: 8. he has shown thee, O
man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? where the word [but] does
show this is all that is required, and that no more is required than is shown
to man indefinitly: others might be mentioned. And whereas in this and other
places he says, my argument will not prove that men have power to lay hold on
Salvation, without the Grace and Spirit of God; it is true, for as I never
affirmed any such thing, as is above observed, so I never intend to bring any
argument to prove it. Page 222. n. 14 in answer to 1 Pet. 3: 20. brought by me,
he says, I foresaw it would be answered, that the long-suffering of God,
there mentioned, was not unto Salvation. But the man is unhappy in his
conjecturs of other men's thoughts; it will not follow, it was not to Salvation,
because the Partys, toward whom it was, remained obstinat, and so perished:
and albeit the Apostle Peter (2 Pet. 3: 15.) be speaking to his Brethren, who
might have been advanced in Grace, yet he shows not how it thence follows,
that the long-suffering, there mentioned, is restricted to them only, the Text
says no such thing, and what though this Epistle of Peter was not particularly
directed to the Romans, to whom Paul wrote? yet this being a general epistle
included the Church of Rome among the rest, and others had need to have seen
Paul's Epistles to the Romans, since according to him it was a part of their
Principle, and only Rule of Faith and manners. But to overturn what I observed
here from Peter's taking notice of some wresting Paul's writings, he brings
nothing but his own affirmation. His answer to what I urge from the Riches and
Bounty of God toward men, spoken of Romans 2: 4. which could not be, if
Salvation were impossible to them, is, that the [riches] there mentioned is
understood of the good things of this Life, contrary to the express words of
the Text; which shows that the nature of that Riches and Long-suffering is, to
lead to repentance, and ver. 7. eternal life is proposed as the reward of such,
as by not despising of those Riches are led to Repentance, and continue in
well-doing. And whereas he adds, this can not be done by the mere strength of
Nature without the Grace of God, I never said so; and therefore like to this
calumny is what he says, p. 225. where, that he may take occasion to rail and
reflect, he would make his Reader believe that I argue, that, because men can
do evil, they have therefore a power to do good, and then pleases himself to
add, these are Quaker-like inferences that want all solidity, and no little of
sobriety. At last he desires me to prove, that by the Talents, mentioned Mat.
25: 15. is understood Saving Grace; but, if he think that be not meaned by
them, I would know of him what is meaned: for it is observable, he does not
(because he dare not) deny that Saving Grace, or the means of Salvation, is
meaned by them. Does not Christ make use of this parable, to compare the
Kingdom of Heaven to it? and is it not of the same import with the former of
the ten Virgins, five whereof, who had Oil in their Lamps, (I suppose he will
confess this was Saving Grace) entered with the Bridegroom? Is it not said to
those, that improved their Talents, Well done, good and faithful servant, enter
into the joy of thy Lord? It is much the man had confidence to insinuat so much
as a denial, that saving Grace is here meaned. As to what he adds of this being
not Universal, and not proving that men have power of themselves, without Divine
help and Grace, I have answered it above.

3. I come now to his tenth chapter, entitled of Universal Grace and Light,
where he grows warm to purpose, and rails almost constantly. He is scarce well
entered this chapter, when he accounts the further piece of our Divinity, as he
terms it, and against which himself writes, as nonesense and the soaming of a
distracted brain, yea p. 228. such as he doubts whether it can be understood at
all, page 230. whose meaning is unintelligible. But what need he bestow near 40
pages, to refute unintelligible nonsense? For, if it be so, he can not be sure
he has refuted it, since no man can be sure he has answered that sufficiently
he does not understand. And his malice has so overdriven him, that he writes
down his own judgment, saying, page 227. some may justly blame him, for
spending words, and wasting time, upon such a non-sensical, self-contradictory
Proposition; yet the man will be doing that, for which he confefesseth he is
justly blameable, and so much the more, as he further confesses, p. 261. that
nonsense can not be well answered. Of this violent railing take one instance,
p. 248. where, in answer to my saying, that the Light of Christ will not
consent to any abomination, but taketh-away blindness, opens the
understanding, and directs the judgment and Conscience; he adds, And while
the Quakers preach up this, as a sure guide to life eternal, they are
abominable Pelagian, and Socinian deceivers, who should be fled from, as the
most impudent and sworn enemies of the Grace of God, and of his Gospel, that
ever appeared out of the bottomless pit; a company of pure Pagan-preachers,
whose doctrine is Paganism, and drives thereunto The Reader may judge of the
rest, which he may find in terms no less abusive very frequent, page 227. 233,
234. 237, 238. 240. 248. 258. 260. 261. 266. All which railing, as it occurreth
in these pages, needs no answer, but that of Michael to the Devil, who is the
Author of such stuff, The Lord rebuke thee. This method of answering is no less
unreasonable, than his railing, for it is either by supposing things not proved
by him, by concluding things not following from my assertions, or by manifest
perversions, all improved by the height of abuse, to render the things, that
displease him, absurd and ridiculous: of these I shall take notice in order.
First: He supposes nothing to be the Gospel, save the outward preaching, and
that there is no Gospel, where there is not an outward administration of it;
and this he never offers to prove: what he says to contradict my asserting the
Gospel to be, where the outward may not be, will after be examined. Upon this
his mere supposition he accounts me absurd, page 226. and upon this supposition
he urges all men's not having Grace, as not having the Gospel, p. 235, 236. 240.
that to preach the Light within, is to despise the Gospel, p. 244. that,
acording to me, the preaching of the Gospel is not necessary to Salvation.
Another of his suppositions is, that, because the Light within is common to
all, therefore it can be nothing but Nature. And upon this false and unproved
ground he raileth, and enlarges, p 229. where he calls it the Pelagian Grace of
of God, that is, Man's free will, doubting whether I will say so much as did
Pelagius; which is nothing to the purpose, neither proves his inference, which
is false, as the Scripturs, brought by me, in my Apology, to prove there is a
Saving Spiritual Grace given to all, do evince. What he says in answer to any
of them, as it occurs, will hereafter be considered; and yet upon this false
inference he concludes, p. 233. the height of the Quakers Divinity is but what
a Natural Conscience can teach a Man-eater, and to the same purpose, p. 234.
and then battereth against it, p. 237. saying, Christ in the Saints the hope of
glory is not brought about by Nature, which I never said; and therefore he but
fights with his own shadow, as he does upon the like occasion, page 231, 232.
236-238. 241. 256. where he says, that Men are not made partakers of the
privilege of the Saints, in their natural state, and the Scriptur says not
there is any thing in the heart of man by nature, which produces Christ in the
Soul, etc. which things were never asserted by me. More of his mistakes of this
kind may be seen, page 257. 262. 265. where he concludes the Quakers Religion
and Gospel to be nothing, but what mere Nature teaches; but it is observable,
that, in that, almost one and only argument, which he brings, to make this
inference good, (albeit much of his work and exclamations depends upon it) he
involvs himself in a notable contradiction, for (p. 234. n. 7.) to prove there
is no Universal Light, or Seed, that bears witness against all evil deeds; he
asks, How came it, that this Light and Seed did not bear witness against the
Cilicians, who lived upon theft; and against the Messagetians, who use their
wives, in common; -- and against such as used to kill men and eat them? Now
these can make nothing for his purpose, unless for this reason, that because
these people commonly and avowedly did these things, therefore they had no
Light that reproved them for them, otherwise their doing of them will not
import the Light did not bear witness against their so doing, more than men
under the Presbyterian Ministry, committing adultery and murder, will import
there was no witness born against these sins, by the Presbyterian Preachers.
But he has overthrown this his reason himself, by affirming, p. 232. and 235.
that there is a Natural Conscience, or the Law of Nature, left in every man, as
God's deputy, informing of some good, and testifiing against some evils, of
which elsewhere he particularizeth murder and adultery, and yet here he says,
it is observed there is hardly one point of the Law of Nature, which some
nation has not violated, not only by their customs, but by their very Laws. If
then their thus violating the Law of Nature do not prove they had not the Law
of Nature, or were not reproved by it,) which he himself has confessed all had)
then neither will their doing those things prove they had no Divine Light, nor
Seed, or were not thereby reproved; for if it prove they had not that, it will
as much prove they had no Natural Conscience, no Law of Nature, which yet he
confesses is in Every man.

4. In this chapter also he would insinuat and infer, to render that, which he
writes against, odious, that the asserting of an Universal Gospel, by which
Salvation may be possible, to such as want outward preaching, renders outward
preaching needless: but this cavil, used often before by him, is already
answered, in the 3 and 4 Sections; and therefore what he repeats of this again
here, p. 229. 236. 245. needs no further answer. And whereas he asks upon this
occasion, p. 244. how can the believing of the history of the Gospel be
necessary, as I say it is, to such as hear it, if they may be saved without it?
Because God commands every one to believe these Truths, to whom he brings the
knowledge of them. (albeit not them, to whom he has rendered it impossible) Has
he forgotten their own distinction of some things being necessary necessitate
praecepti, that are not so necessitate medii? Neither do I intend by this
belief (which the proposing of the outward knowledge requires) a belief merely
historical, as he maliciously would insinuat. I shall now take notice of his
gross perversions and calumnies, which, as he advances, I observe grow thicker,
and are in this chapter very numerous: as first, from my saying that we
understand by the Light, or Seed, a Spiritual and Heavenly Principle, in which
GOD, as he is the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, dwells: from this he
infers, p. 231. It may be, he does not acknowledge a Trinity, etc. But if there
be any ground for such an inference from these words of mine, I leave it to all
rational men to judge. Page 255. Because I say, it is Christ's flesh and blood,
which came down from Heaven, he asks, if Christ had no other flesh and blood?
and then, as if I had answered He had not, he concludes Us deniers of the
incarnation of Christ, asking, Whether the death of Christ, his resurrection,
and ascension, and all the history of his Life, be but dreams and lies? which
malicious insinuation and perversion is returned upon him, as false and
groundless. And whereas he says here, he will ask one word more, Where I read
that Christ's flesh and blood came down from heaven? (for so my words should be
translated) it seems he is either very ignorant or forgetful of the Scripturs,
and therefore let him read John 6: 51. where Christ says, he is the Living
Bread, that came down from heaven, adding, that Bread to be his Flesh. In like
manner is his other malicious perversion denied, and returned upon him, where
he would infer upon us, that each of us esteemed our selves as much the Christ
of God, as Christ was: so that the blasphemy, he exclaims against, is his own,
who speaks evil of others without a cause. Another of his perversions is, p.
236. where repeating my words he rendereth them thus, out of the Latin, this
is that inward Christ, of which we Only and so often speak, whereas it should
have been translated, which we so much and so often speak for, as the English
edition does verify; the Latin word tantum signifies so much, as well as only,
and was so intended here by me: that it must be so, both the context, and what
I say elsewhere, shows. But he would have it only, that he might pervert and
rail the more liberally, albeit he can not be ignorant, that the Latin word
tantum signifies so much, as ordinary Dictionaries show, and Cicero, saying,
nec tantum proficiebam, quantum volebam, nec quicquam posthac non modo tantum,
sed ne tantulum quidem praeterieris. Those, who debate fairly, use not to
strain their adversaries words, to abuse them, when they know they may bear a
better interpretation. His next perversion is yet more gross and abusive, p.
238. where from my denying that we equalour selves to that Holy Man, the Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, he
concludes I affirm him to be no more but a Holy Man; and, because I use the
words plenitudo Divinitatis, that I deny his Deity, which is an abominable
falsehood, I detest that doctrine of the Socinians, and deny there is any ground
for their distinction, and when I confess him to be a Holy Man, I deny him not
to be GOD, as this man most injuriously would insinuat, for I confess him to be
really both true God and true Man. And whereas he rails and exclaims here and
in the following page at a monstrous rate, as if the comparison I bring of the
difference betwixt every saint and the Man Jesus, from the sap its being other
ways in the Root and Stock of the Tree, than in the branches, did further
confirm our equalling our selves to him; he does but show his folly: since
Christ himself uses the same comparison, Ioh 15: 5. I am the Vine, ye are the
branches, to which I alluded; and upon this he runs out in a vehement strain
of railing, p. 239. exclaiming against us, as if we denied the Deity of Christ
and his Incarnation, which is utterly false, and therefore his work there, to
prove what I deny not, is in vain. And yet he repeateth this calumny, p. 242.
adding, that my saying, that we believe what is written of the Conception,
Birth, Life and Death of Christ, etc. to be true, does not vindicat us from it;
and then he subjoyns, Do you believe, that that Body, which was crucified at
Jerusalem, rose again and is now in glory? Speak your mind here, if you dare;
this defiance to all men of reason will insinuat, as if I did not believe this,
or durst not speak my mind of it, and therefore if this be found false, he
must, in the judgment of all sober men, pass for a malicious perverter: for
answer then, I say, I do believe that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was crucified at Jerusalem, was again raised by the Power of God, in which
glorified Body the Lord Jesus Christ dwells; and I dare him to show where in
my Apology, or elsewhere, I ever said or wrote any thing to the contrary. Of the
like nature to these perversions is what we says, p. 264. where, from my
urging from Heb. 4: 12, 13. the Word of God is said to be a discerner of the
thoughts of the heart, he would infer, that the Quakers then must know other
men's thoughts, who have this in them, and are sensible of it. But the absurdity
here is his own, do not they say, Every true Believer has the Spirit of God in
them? And albeit the Spirit know all things, yet every Believer knows not all
things: since he is so ready by consequences to make men blasphemers, for
asserting Scriptur truth, how can he avoid passing this censur upon the
Apostle, who says, 1 Cor. 2: 15. he that is Spiritual, judges all things; and
no man can judge any thing but what he knows? And whereas he rails here, in
saying, we ascribe to the Light within, the property of God, and have no other
Christ; as also to the same purpose, p. 242. 237. saying, the Christ we command
to believe in, is not the Christ the Scripturs testify of, but one born with
every man, neither God nor Man, etc. is all answered, and the absurdity he
draws from it, removed, by what George Keith has said, in his book, called,
The Way east up, wherein he shows by the extension of the Soul of Christ, how
this is no denying of the Man Jesus, but, on the contrary. And, if either I, or
any other, have called the Light within, God, or ascribed to it the property of
God, it is no more upon this hypothesis, than they do, who say, the Man Christ
is God, and, by reason of the personal union, ascribe sometimes the actions of
the one nature to the Person denominated by the other, as the West. Confess. it
self acknowledges, chap. 8. And since R. Macquair has promised a refutation of
that book of G. K. by I. B. in his name, when we see it, this may be further
spoken to, if need be; upon which also will depend the full discussion of that
question, mentioned, p. 240, 241. whether the Seed be a Substance, since he
will not deny the Soul of Christ is a Substance, and consequently distinct from
Reason: as also that, of Christ's being crucified in the Wicked, which p. 246.
he calls a non-sensical dream: and of the Seed's being a distinct Principle from
the Soul, spoken of p. 247. the full treating of all which being referred
until that promised work of his appear, as to that I shall only say in short,
at present, that whereas I say, this Seed is not the being of God, simply
considered, he adds, p. 230. that then all men are partakers of the being of
God some other way considered; and what blasphemy is wraped up here, he leaves
to any that will, to judge. But there is no man of reason, dealing impartially,
will judge any blasphemy to be here, more than in the Apostle's concession to
the Athenians, Act. 17: 28. that we are the Off spring of God, and live, and
move in him. And whereas he mocks, p. 241. at my saying the Seed is a
Substance, because it abides in the hearts of the Ungodly, even while they
remain in ungodlyness, asking, does not Pravity, Ignorance, Rebellion, etc.
remain in their hearts? Are these therefore Substances? But he allays his own
windy triumphs, by my following words, that notwithstanding this Seed is in
them, they are not denominated by it, which wicked men are by their
wickednesses, while they continue in them, and therefore it is a substance,
since no accident can be in a subject, unless the subject be denominated
therefrom. To this he asks why a man in whom this Seed and Grace is, may not be
denominated graced and enlightened? and, as if it were absurd to deny they
might be so denominated, he concludes, And thus this Substance shall be turned
into an accidens, by this man's philosophy. But the reason is clear, because
they partake not of the virtue of it, nor have not suffered it to work in them,
as by the example of physik being in a sick man I did show; and therefore he
has no go-by for this, but a pitiful impertinency, that if there be such a
difference betwixt this Seed and Holiness, as betwixt Physik and Health, then
it is no part of Holiness: for I never said there was such a difference, in
every respect, but only in respect of the difference betwixt a Substance and an
accident, for clearing of which only, the example was brought. And whereas he
would several times insinuat here in this p. 232, 233. my asserting the Seed to
be in all, did import Christ dwelling in all; that no such thing follows, I
have shown in my Apology, which himself elsewhere observes: for I show there
is a difference betwixt mere in-being and inhabitation, the last imports union,
and not the first. Themselves confess God to be every where, and yet they will
not say God dwells in the wicked; yea notwithstanding God's Omni-presence, it is
said, Some are without God in the world, by reason of their being not united to
him. And thus is answered his cavils, p. 243. so that I need not further urge
(until he has removed this difficulty) from Amos 2: 12. only it is observable,
how great pains the man is at here, to show how faulty their translation of the
Bible is, but how can it then be a sure Rule of faith to any? And whereas he
says, p. 236. that when it is said, the Seed is received in the heart, it is
supposed, it was not formerly there. I deny that consequence, money may be
brought unto a man's house, and yet he not have received it; the piece of
silver which the woman, Luk 15. in the parable, had lost, (and to which the
Kingdom of God was compared) was in her house, and yet she rejoiced not, until
lighting the candle and sweeping the house she had found it. What he repeats so
often, to make an odious noise, of my making this Grace Universal, that Turks,
Japonians, Cannibals, etc. have it, who never heard of Christ, is impertinent;
since he has a chapter afterward for that, of purpose, where it shall be
examined: as also what he says, p. 245. he thinks strange, any such should
partake of the benefit of this mystery, for I speak not of their knowing the
mystery. That Is one of his usual tricks, to foist-in other words, to alter the
matter.

5. Having thus traversed his tedious perversions unto p. 251. n. 25. where he
pretends to have traced me to my den, while he has only fallen into the pit of
his own making; I come to examine his pretended examination of the grounds I
bring, for this he terms my wild assertion: and first unto Ioh. 1: 9. That was
the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world. In stead
of an answer he tells a long story of some taking it one way, some another, then
after he has played the Dictator a while, in telling his own conception, he
concludes at last, that every one is not to be understood of all without
exception, because the Scriptur tells of many, whose understandings are
darkened, who are under the power of darkness, who abide in the darkness. What
then? that will not prove, that Light is not come to them, in order to bring
them out of that darkness, since Christ says expressly, Ioh. 3. of such, that
Light is come, but men love darkness rather, and these that love it, are under
the power of it, and as they continue to love it, and hate the Light, they
abide in it. But it seems, not being satisfied with his own answer he proceeds,
p. 252. n. 26. to confess all men are enlightened, but not spiritually,
supernaturally and savingly, but for this he gives no proof, but his own
assertion; and truly he must be much puzzled with this Scriptur, for he knows
not what way to take it,: first, he understands every man only of Believers,
and then he will have the enlightening to be saving and spiritual then he
understands it of all indifferently; and then he will have it to be common and
not saving: but with these his guessings and divinings he is not like to
satisfy any sober Christian. He goes-on at the same rate of uncertainty, p.
253. upon these words, that the Life is the Light of Men, doubting what is the
meaning of them. After he has told Calvin's, Origen's and Marlorat's thoughts,
he concludes, that though Light be come into the world, yet men love darkness
better, and none become children of the Light, but by believing, and that all
are not children of the Light, which I never denied? He goes-on to tell
Calvin's further thoughts of the following words, all which shows this place
pains him, but overturns nothing of what I have asserted, and then p. 254. n.
29. he refers me to his 8 chapter, to prove, that every man here admits an
exclusion, which a little before he confessed it did not, adding, that the text
it self infers a restriction, when it tells darkness did not comprehend the
Light. But this imports no more than somes rejecting, which I deny not, but
not, that the Light shined not: for it is expressly said, it shined in the
darkness, so it was there, which is the thing in debate, and the Text says
positivly, this true Light lights every man; and therefore it is but to cover
his own shame and weakness, that in stead of something more solid, he closes
this paragraph with a ridiculous bob, saying, Quakers are good at dreaming: but
this silly covering will not serve him, with such as are not blind. To what I
have said to show that (...) is to be referred to the Light, and not to John,
he teturneth his contraary assertion, in stead of reason. My she wing it, by
its being said, That all might believe through him, which all could not do
through John, as not hearing him, in stead of answering, he tells me, I may
learn thence how to take the particle [all], which in effect is nothing, but by
his own bare authority, to command me to take [all] not universally; but I find
no virtue in his order, to persuade, and therefore will wait for probation, ere
I obey. That John, as an instrument, might be useful, to bring people to
believe in the Light, I deny not; and therefore he might have spared his pains
in this page to prove that: but it will not thence follow that (...) is
referred to John, until he first remove the ground given against it by me, in
showing [all] is not understood here universally, which is incumbent for him to
do, since he denies it.

6. Page 256. n. 31. In answer to my arguing, that this Light is saving and
sufficient, because it is the Light of Christ, whereby all ought to believe, he
says, they know no Light sufficient, which is not efficacious, that is, which
certainly does not save. But besides that this answer is but a mere begging of
the question, it is contrary to many Scripturs, which I have at length shown
before, in proving, many, that have had a day, have resisted the Mercy and
Grace thereof. What he says further here against those, who affirm that the
emproving of Nature aright shall obtain Grace, touches me not, who affirm no
such thing. He begins his n. 32. p. 257. with a perversion, as if I denied
that we received what is natural and common from Christ, because I say, the
Evangelist John c. 1. is treating of what we receive from Christ as Mediator,
Therefore I deny we receive from Christ what is common and natural. But in
answer to my urging the Light's being supernatural, (to pass-by his pedantik
quibble, which he adventureth not to insist upon) because the darkness, that
is, man in his natural estate, comprehends it not, but man in that estate can
comprehend what is natural to him; he tells me, they thence infer, that man in
that estate is void of all spiritual Light. Is not this a learned refutation of
my reason, Reader? But suspecting this would not serve, he adds another quibble
upon the word comprehend, that though man in his natural state can comprehend
that which is natural, yet he can not comprehend the God of Nature. I say not
that in his natural state he can, nor yet in his spiritual; comprehend being
taken in the most comprehensive sense, but otherwise being understood of
receiving or apprehending, for so (...) may be understood, he may receive it by
virtue of the Power, which from the Light he receivs, so to do. That the
Quakers exhort people to believe in a mere creatur, is a mere calumny, with
which like stuff this page is filled; and therefore my argument of the Light
being saving and supernatural, because we are commanded to believe in it,
remains unremoved. Page 258. In answer to what I urge from the parable of the
Sower, Matthew. 13. and the word of faith, Romans 10. and the engrafted Word, Iam.
1: 21. he only opposes his mere assertions and railing, calling it
Quaker-dotages, and a fancifull dream. And to the argument drawn from the
Talents, Mat. 25. he denies them to signify Saving Grace, of which above. Page
259. When he comes to answer what I urge from Col. 1: 23. of the Gospel's being
preached in every creature, which is not only a declaration of good things, but
the Power of God; he gives his mere assertions, that the Gospel was the doctrine
delivered by men: but the doctrine was not the Power of God, which the Gospel
is, albeit it declared of it, no more than a recept of Physik is the
ingredients. Next he asserts, that if the Gospel be in them, it needs no
Preacher, but this he proves not. A man may have good herbs in his garden, and
yet need another to tell him the right use of them, yea and discover them unto
him. And what if I would say, as he desires, that it was preached from the
beginning of the world in a measur, that it wrought in men's hearts, in order to
save them; albeit the full, plain and manifest discovery, and precious effects
thereof, was reserved to the ministration of Christ and his Apostles? And
therefore his assertion, in the next page, 260. is false, that according to the
Quakers principle, the Gospel was alike manifest, in all ages. Was not the
promised Seed a preaching of the Gospel to Adam? How poorly he has shown the
restriction of the particle all (albeit the words here be every creatur, which
is more pathetik) in his 8 chapter, is before evinced. And whereas he desires
to know where the Gospel is taken properly for that inward strength that is
common to all men, I have shown him, the Gospel is called the Power of God
expressly, Romans 1. and that is an inward Power and strength; and then again I
have shown him, that this Gospel is preached to or in every creatur, which is
plain words, what is preached to every creatur, is common to all men: and
therefore, until he answer this, his calling me a babbler and a Pagan-preacher
(as he does in this place) with such like stuff, will have little weight with
men of reason. The rest of this page, and the following, 261 and 262. is a
complex of railing, that the Quakers Gospel is mere heathenism, worse than
Pelagianism, Socinianism, Arminianism and Jesuitism, because they say, that
what is manifest from God in man, is by the Gospel, and that which reveals
justice and equity, is the Gospel, which this man supposes only to be the
light of Nature, and thereupon concludes, the Quakers Gospel is but Nature's
dim and corrupt light. All which is but to beg the question, as he does,
where he supposes that man naturally can perceive the eternal Power of the
Godhead, in the outward Creation, without any supernatural light, which he
should prove, and not mock at my being otherwise minded, for this savours more
of Pelagianisme, than any thing asserted by me. He asks me, by what authority I
make (...), that is, what is to be known of God (for it seems he was feared to
speak plain Scots of it, lest every one should have seen his impertinency) and
the knowledge of God, one and the same? For to see this, he says, he wants the
Quakers spectacls. But indeed he must be as dark-lighted inwardly, as these are
outwardly, that need spectacls, if he deny that the knowledge of God is
somewhat of what is to be known of him, and then what is to be known of God
indefinitly must comprehend the knowledge of God. He adds, that if by inward
revelation the Heathens know the will of God, then the Apostle was quite out
here: but this follows no more than that a Master teaches not his scholar
navigation, because he makes use of the compass and outward observations, to
demonstrat it to him. Page 262. n. 38. as also n. 40. In answer to what I urge
from Romans 10. of the Word being near in the heart and in the mouth, he
returns railing, and mere assertions: for his saying that this word is not in
every man, is but to affirm strongly, not to prove. As for his asserting that
the Apostle speaks of outward preaching, I deny not; and that by an outward
testimony the mystery, that had been hid, and even sparingly revealed, in the
visible Church, was openly declared by Christ and his Apostles, I acquiesce to:
but from all that it will no ways follow, that the Apostle spoke only of
outward preachers, and that it was not in the hearts of all men, though they
had not a distinct knowledge of it. He confesses the mystery of Adam's fall was
not known to the Gentiles, but by the Scriptur; yet that hindered not but they
were hurt, yea and according to him, all of them defiled, by it. His saying,
that I confirm here my desperate design, and overturn the foundations of the
Christian Religion, with his exclamations, O desperate Souls! O wretched error!
with much more of this kind of stuff, uttered by him, for want of better
arguments; may fright fools, but will not move men of reason. At last, to
conclude this chapter, he alleges the testimonies of the Fathers, brought by
me, do not expressly prove my assertions; yet he tacitly and indirectly
acknowledges such testimonies may be found among the most ancient of them,
while (albeit to their disadvantage) he says, it is observable, that some of
them had so put-on Christ, as not fully to have put-off Plato.

7. Page 267. Comes his XI. chapter, entitled, Of the necessity of this Light
to Salvation, where, according to his custom, he begins with proofless
affirmations, and railing; saying, the Universal Gospel, pointed at by me, is
no Gospel, not the Gospel revealed in the word, making the whole Gospel and
Grace of God null and void, as that by which the outward administration thereof
by the Apostles is unnecessary, to which is answered before. And then after an
enumeration of many Scripturs, wherein the Apostle Paul glories in his being
an instrument of the preaching of it, with which he has not shown our doctrine
inconsistent, he concludes, O what wretched desperado's must these Quakers be,
who thus undervalue and trample upon the riches of the wisdom and grace of God,
and instead of the true Gospel, give us pure Paganism! This is a fit
introduction for such a chapter, wherein there is much of the same sort of
stuff (which I shall willingly pass) and which, that he may end, as he begins,
has the like railing conclusion, p. 281. Then, when he enters upon the matter,
n. 5. and p. 269. and comes to examine what I say, to show wherein we differ
from some other assertors of Universal Redemption, and for that end, to show
why one is saved, and not another, seeing all have sufficient Grace, among
others he mentions these my words, Moreover we believe that in that special
time of every man's visitation, as man of himself is wholly impotent for
working with grace; so neither can he make the least progress out of his
natural state, till grace lay hold on him. So that it is possible for him to
suffer and not resist, as it is also possible for many to resist. By these
words of mine, cited by him, the Reader may easily observe how falsely he
charged me in the foregoing chapter, with asserting that men could be saved by
mere Nature, without the operation of the grace of God, and yet he is not
ashamed to re-iterat the same calumny here, p. 279. But to proceed, he says,
this my answer is not satisfactory: the reason of which (besides some tedious
discourse of the opinions of the Arminians, Jesuits and Molinists, concerning
the difference betwixt sufficient and effectual Grace, which is not my work to
answer, neither needs any as he gives it here and there, p. 270, 271, 272-274.
280. amounts to this, that since the working of the grace comes from this
non-resistence, which he says is a positive act of man's will, then Salvation
depends upon Free Will, and this he labors to aggravat by diverse odious and
sometimes ridiculous expressions, such as Grace must stand, cap in hand, to
Lord Free Will, and more of that kind, alleging that the two examples of sick
men, and men lieing in a deep cave, brought at length by me, in my Apology,
Lat. ed. p. 91. n. 17. do not free me of this absurdity. To which I reply (1)
That the question is here only concerning such as have only a sufficiency of
Grace, and not of those who have a prevalency of Grace, which I confess to
some. (2) That I say not that any man can convert himself by any Light, Grace,
or Seed in him, until quickened, visited and stirred-up by a new visitation of
Life from God. (3) That on both hands it is confessed, that there must be a
concurring of the will of man, in the act of Conversion: for no man is saved
against his will. (4) That I say, as well as he, that this concurrence of man's
will and pliablness to the Grace of God, proceeds not from man's will
naturally, but is the product and effect of the Grace: then what has man to
glory in? O (says he) such as are saved, may say I was not so ill disposed, my
will was not so averse as another, that had the like sufficient Grace; and what
then? his aversion and resistance is the cause of his condemnation, that is not
denied, but it follows not from thence, that the non-resistence is the cause of
the others Salvation; I deny that consequence, for his non-resistence did not
procure him that visitation from God. Where then is his absurdity? it may
resolve in one of these two, that it was possible for those that are damned, to
have been saved; or for some of those that are saved, to have been damned. What
will the supposing that these, that are damned, might have been saved, amount
to, but that their damnation is of themselves, which all acknowledge? And if he
think it is absurd to say, any that are saved, might have been damned, why is
Salvation preached to any? or to what end is pains bestowed upon any, in order
to Salvation? or how does that signify any thing really to their Salvation, if
damnation was altogether impossible to them? When he has sufficiently answered
this, he will solve his own difficultys. But because the man will always be
nibbling, where he can not give a solid answer, therefore he falls a quarreling
at some comparisons, brought by me, page 273-275-277. showing they do not hitt
in that for which I did not bring them, whereas I took notice that the
comparison did not hitt every way. (since all comparisons claudicat) The first
is, because I say, that Grace softens the heart, as the fire softens the wax,
therefore he concludes, that, according to me, Grace does not change the heart,
because fire changes not the nature of the iron; and what then? It was only
with a respect to the softening that I brought the comparison, albeit, had he
been a good Chemist, he might have known, that by the fire the nature of
metals may be changed also. The example of the sun's hardening clay, and
softening wax, was brought by me, to show that the sun loses not its effect,
though the operation in the subject be different, and for no more, albeit the
sun also work a disposition toward the producing its effect in some creaturs,
which by their resisting or not resisting may be hindered.

8. When he comes, p. 277. to examine the proofs I bring to prove the necessity
of this Grace to Salvation, he mistakes the end, for which I bring them, and
thence either alleges upon me false insinuations, or judges them
insufficient for not proving of that, for which they were never intended: for
the end, for which I bring these proofs here, is, to show, that, whatever use,
profitablness, or necessity of believing, to those, to whom they are revealed,
may be in outward knowledge, yet Salvation chiefly depends upon the inward work
of Grace, bringing about regeneration in the Soul; and this in order to show,
that where this is wrought, (albeit the outward be wanting) Salvation will
follow. Now when he shows this is not proven by the arguments I here bring,
he may be answered, and till then, it is in vain for him to say, I would infer
a destroying of the ordinances of Christ, which is false, or that this does not
prove that this common and sufficient Grace is able to effectuat the new birth,
that not being the matter here to be proved. Page 178. n. 13. he denies the
new Creation, spoken of 2 Cor. 5: 16, 17. proceeds from this Light and Grace:
but his mistake herein will be shown hereafter, from Tit. 2: 11. when I come to
speak of that place. He says that the manifestation of the Spirit, given to
every one, spoken of 1 Cor. 12: 7. is only understood of those within the
Church, but for this gives no proof: if there be an enumeration made of all
the several virtues wrought by it in the visible Church, it does not thence
follow, that none have it without it; the text says, it is given to every man
indefinitly and absolutely, not to every one only within the Church, that
remains for him to prove. He would fasten a contradiction upon me, p. 279. n.
14. because I say the Seed is small in its first manifestation, and though it
be hid in the earthy part of man's heart, because a thing can not be both hid
and manifest, and upon this he triumphs, as if he had discovered a great
absurdity; but does he not know that that may be said to be hid, with respect
to a great and clear and full manifestation, which yet may be in some respect
manifest, at sometimes? I do not say that absolutely it is hid and manifest at
one and the same time. In answer to Luk 17: 20, 21. brought by me, where Christ
says, the kingdom of God is in the Pharisees, he tells, judicious Calvin thinks
these words were spoken to the Disciples: but he it seems is not of his mind
(and therefore I know not to what purpose he brought him, since he follows not
his sense) for he will have it to signify [among], and the meaning to be, that
the Kingdom of God was near and among them. But his proof for this it not
valid, for (...) is sometimes interpreted among; but the question is if it
should be so interpreted here? and till he prove that, he says nothing. But
his mistake here is greater than he is aware of, for the Greek word is (...),
not (...), which signifies intus, [within] and I desire him to show me, in the
New Testament, where it signifies among. All the Scripturs brought by him are
impertinent, none of which is (...) as in this place, but (...). He confesses,
p. 280. the Calvinists make Grace an irresistible power, but says that they
have reason so to do, because the Scriptur speaks of Grace as a drawing and
teaching, for that may draw, which draws not irresistibly. And because I say
the Papists, Socinians, and Arminians deny this little seed and manifestation
of Light to be that supernatural and Saving Grace of God, given to all, to
Salvation, he brings two passages of the Arminians, wherein they confess the
Spirit of God works immediately upon the will, giving it strength to believe,
desiring me then to tell him wherein I differ from Arminians: but will my
agreeing with Arminians in this prove I differ not from them? does not himself
agree with the Arminians, in saying, (as he affirms they do) that the power of
believing is conferred by irresistible grace? And if he agree with them as well
as I, may not I ask him the question, as pertinently as he does me, wherein
differs he from them? Has not he himself affirmed, that as to our doctrine of
the Saving Substantial Seed being in all, page 226. neither Arminians nor
Socinians ever spoke of it? what then needs he ask me wherein we differ from
them? But it seems he, that phancyeth men can dream waking (as he sometimes
speaks of the Quakers) has been in that postur, when he wrote this, which helped
him to conclude this chapter with railing.

9. Now I come to his XII. chap entitled by him, Of the Salvation of Heathens
without hearing the Gospel, he should have added, outwardly, that is the thing
in debate; but as in the title, so in the chapter, he beggs the question: and
that he may begin with railing, as he ends it with a flood of it, p. 292. he
faith, to say, men may be saved without the outward preaching must be true with
this Quaker, though the Apostle says the contrary, for this citing Romans 10:
14. Ephesians. 2: 12. 1 Cor. 1: 20, 21, 22. all which say nothing contrary to my
assertion, unless by the hearing there he prove is meaned only outward hearing.
And what though the Apostle say to the Gentiles, that they are aliens to the
commonwealth of Israel, and that by wisdom they knew not God, and that the
preaching of the Gospel was foolishness to them? All this may be faid of some
living in, and esteemed members of, the Visible Church, who have the advantage
of the outward preaching; and therefore it can not prove that the want of this
takes-away the possibility of Salvation. To that of Peter I agree, Act. 4: 12.
that there is not Salvation in any other, etc. but it follows not therefore,
that none can partake of this Salvation, without the outward knowledge: himself
overturns this conclusion, by granting infants and deaf persons may. Page 287.
To my argument, that since the Gospel is preached to every creatur, they may be
saved by it, he says, a [may be] will not evince a [shall be]; but I said only
may be saved, not shall be saved, and if it evince that, it does my business.
That some have been saved without it, himself acknowledges, in the example of
Job. Page 288. To overturn my using of the Gospel's being preached to every
creatur, he refers to his former answer to this place, and so do I to my reply.
Beza's sense to whom he refers me, movs me no more than his does, but when it
is agreeable to Truth Next, he comes to answer my argument, drawn from Tit. 2:
11. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeard to all men, and
for answer, he will have [all] here not to be understood universally, but with
a restriction; alleging it is my part to prove it: but that needs no more
proof, than to prove that John Brown signifies, John Brown, and for all his
pretended skill in the rule of disput, he is under a mistake. To take it
universally, is to take it as the common and proper signification of it; so by
the rule of all Commentators we are to hold the words of Scriptur so, until by
solid reasons we be moved to the contrary; and therefore it is his part that
denies it, to give the reason: that [all] sometimes is taken with a
restriction, I deny not, that therefore its so taken here does not follow. That
the Gospel is said to be preached by men outwardly, I deny not, but that
therefore it is only so, and never preached, but when outwardly, by the
ministry of men, is no conclusion: himself acknowledges, in the examples of
Job, who he says was taught by God, without Scriptur. His other explications
upon this place are his mere assertions, not to the business, he calls it,
upon the credit of his own affirmation, false and childish pedantry, to say,
they take [all] for the lesser part, because they take it indefinitly, while
yet they understand that indefinit number to be the lesser part; but do they
not take the Whole World, 1 Job. 2: 2. for the far lesser part of the world,
which is yet more absurd? To my argument, taken from Romans 5: 18. where it is
said, as something came upon all, to condemnation, so something is come upon
all to justification, which shows the last [all] to be of as large extent as
the first, which they confess is universally taken, he says, this will prove
more, viz, that all men are and shall be saved, because judgment came actually
upon all to condemnation, by Adam's fall; but this is only his own assertion,
the word judgment is not in the text, and Beza's putting in reatus or guilt
proves not it ought to be so, whatever he do, we account not Beza infallible,
and therefore reject his sense, until he prove it agreeable to Scriptur: nor
yet his enlargements afterward upon the place, because alleged without
probation. Page 285. n. 5. He accounts my citing Esai 49: 6. where Christ is
said to be given for a Light to the Gentiles, impertinent, because albeit the
Gentiles are not excluded from the dispensation of the Gospel, it will not
follow that such as hear not of Christ can be saved, as well as such as are
brought within the Church. But this answer is founded upon the supposition,
that I affirm, that any are saved, which are not within the Church Catholic or
universal, which is false. And how men may be of the Church, who want outward
preaching, will after appear. I think no sober man will deny (supposing
Salvation possible to the Gentiles, without outward preaching) that it were
blind charity, to judge some of them have been saved, for upon that
supposition, it were against all charity, to say, none of them were ever saved.
His example of the captives, to whom one, that redeemed them, did not
communicate the conditions, remaining really captives, to answer my argument
from the rule of Contraries, that as men are hurt by Adam's fall, who know not
of it, so they may be benefited by Christ's death, who know not of it, hitteth
not the matter; it is as strange for men to be captives, and not to know how,
nor by whom, as to be redeemed, and not know how, nor by whom, if he suppose
the first, he may do the last: and this example himself overturns in what he
grants of deaf persons and children, as will after appear. To my asking Why men
can not be saved, who never heard of the death and resurrection of Christ, as
well as men are damned who never heard of Adam's sin; he tells me very fairly,
because God has appointed this way of Salvation by faith in Christ, which can
not be without the knowledge of Christ, by which he meaning the outward, as he
needs must, his answer is none at all, but a ridiculous begging of the
question, as he does also, when he mentions that Esai 53: 11. by his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many: for thought that should be understood
of outward knowledge, which yet remains for him to prove, it will not follow
because Christ shall justify many by that knowledge, that therefore he shall
justify none without it.

10. When he comes, page 186. n 7. to answer what I urge from the example of
Deaf persons and Infants, the Reader may observe how much he is pained; so that
he is forced, after so long contending and wearisom wrestling, at last to
give-away his cause, by confessing they except both these from the necessity of
outwardly hearing the Gospel: if so, then Salvation is impossible, without the
hearing of the Gospel, and the outward preaching of the Gospel is not of
absolute necessity to Salvation. But why are they, and they only, excepted? in
which resolvs my question, (which does so vex him, that, in stead of answering,
he tells me, I am a deluded Quaker) of which this is one, Is not one in China or
India as excusable for not knowing that, which they never heard, as a deaf man,
that can not hear, since God, that has permitted the one to be naturally deaf,
has also permitted the other to be necessarily absent? To this I can not find
his answer, save only this, that these deaf persons and infants are members of
the visible Church, but not the other, of which this must be the consequence,
that none can be saved, but such as are members of the visible Church; for his
saying, that none are members of the invisible Church, but such as are of the
visible, clearly imports it. But has not he, or at lest the most eminent of his
way, said, that the Church was many ages invisible, and in the wilderness, and
yet denied that all were damned, during that time? Or will he say, the Church
of Rome was the visible Church of Christ, all that time, of which they were
members? What then becomes of the testimonies of those, who termed her
Antichrist, the mother of abominations, the synagogue of Satan? which albeit
true, yet begins to be eaten up again by the Clergy, yea even the
Presbyterians, who begin by degrees to creep back again to acknowledge their
old father, the Pope, to establish their Succession and Ordination, especially
when pinched by the Quakers, as is at more length shown in G. Keith's book,
called Quakerism no Popery.? But further, it seems the outward hearing is not
necessary to make a man a member of the visible Church, and then what becoms of
all his tedious reasonings from Romans 10. How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard, which he urged before so vehemently, but now has
overturned? He thinks the instance of Cornelius not to the purpose, because he
might have had the knowledge of the Messiah from the Jews: but his bare
supposition is no answer, besides, that he was no Jews proselyte, is manifest,
else Peter should not have been quarrelled for conversing with him; and unless
he had been such, or had received the Gospel, according to him, he must be
esteemed to have been within the Covenant, and yet before any of these, he is
said to have been heard of God, and accepted. Page 289. He confesses Job lived
before Moses, and was taught of God without Scriptur, and then is it not thence
manifest, that some have been saved, to whom the Gospel was not preached by the
ministry of men? This also overturneth his arguments from Romans 10. Because he
knows not how to answer my argument drawn from Romans 2. therefore to amuse his
Reader, he raises a storm of railing, calling me no less, with an exclamation,
than a miserable miscreant, who make the Apostle contradict himself. My
argument lies in the Apostle's positive words, who says, the Gentiles did the
things contained in the Law, and again, in the same chapter, ver. 13. the doers
of the Law are justified; whence in the very words of the Apostle, without any
commentary, I argue, that if the doers of the Law be justified, then the
Gentiles, who did the things contained in the Law, are justified: do I
therefore make the Apostle contradict himself? Yea says he, because the same
Apostle says, that by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified: but
will he say, that these two sentences of this Apostle, the doers of the Law
shall be justified, and by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified,
are contradictory? I say, they are not. If both these sayings be true, his
challenge is in vain, if he will speak-out that which he must, else manifest
his abuse of me, and say they contradict one another, then let the Reader judge
who is the miscreant, and observe how he falls himself into the pit, he had
prepared for another. But, to show how this distinct outward knowledge was not
absolutely needful to Salvation, I instanced how that diverse of the
Patriarchs, yea Mary, and the Apostles themselves, had not so clear a knowledge
of it, but appeared ignorant upon several occasions: to this, p. 289. he would
make the Reader believe, that I conclude the Patriarchs had no saving knowledge
of the Messiah, because the wicked Jews crucified him, which is false; I show
indeed, according to Scriptur, that the Jews, that crucified him, wanted this
distinct knowledge, notwithstanding they had the Scriptur. His further answer
to this confutes himself, saying, the Apostles did understand so much as was
then revealed; and if this was sufficient for them, as he must say, if he speak
sense, the like may be said of the Heathens: for, if the Apostles were not
condemnable for not believing nor understanding more than what was revealed to
them, neither could the Gentiles. But, to make his unwary Reader believe as if
all this said by me brought no relief to my desperate cause, as he terms it, he
concludes this 11 Paragraph, p 200. with one of his sententious sayings,
Quakers can dream waking, I see. He goes-on in answer to my proofs brought from
the ancient Philosophers to confirm this, to which he resumes little but
railing, wherein I will not trouble the Reader to follow him, since without
them the thing in hand is sufficiently proved by Scriptur; yet if he will
affirm the citations to be either false or fictitious, they may be proved by
production of the books themselves. He thinks the impertinency of my citing
Augustin's words is discovered by the bare reading, and little less he says to
those of Buchanan, which I refer to the Readers judgment, as he will find them
in my Apology, toward the latter end of the explanation of the 5 and 6
Propositions; and I will leave him concluding this chapter with railing, and
empty threats, which I neither fear nor value, as being without ground, and the
fruits of no better spirit, than that of Rabshakeh.

Section Eighth, Wherein his thirteenth Chapter Of Justification is considered.
1. I come now to his thirteenth chapter Of Justification, where, after he has
begun by telling this doctrine has been principally questioned by Heretics,
which I deny not, and given us, according to his custom, some large citations
out of their Confession of Faith and Catechism, with the supposed sense of
other Quakers, from some of his formerly mentioned partial Authors; at last he
comes page 296. n. 4. to examine what I say in this matter: where, according to
his custom, he begins with a calumny, upon his own false supposition, as if the
justification, I plead for, were not the true justification of the Saints,
because proceeding from the Light, which (says he) is but the dim light of
nature. This he takes for granted to be true, and thence falsely makes his
inference, page 297, 298. 307, 308. 324. To this he adds another perversion, as
if, because I say from the Light received proceeds an holy birth, therefore
there were no infusion of any gracious Principle or Virtue, etc. which is
false. Men use to say, that where seed is received in the earth, it grows up to
fruit, yet not without the influence of the Sun, and descending of rain; so is
it with this Spiritual Seed, but with this difference, that wherever this
Seed is, God is never wanting to give his Heavenly influences, toward its
growth and advancment. In this chapter also he omits not his railing, calling
us poor deluded Wretches, etc. with the repetition of which I will not trouble
the Reader; if he be pleased, he may observe it, page 227-299. 316. 318, 319.
and in several other places, but especially where he ends the chapter, p.
324, 325. I needed not at all trouble the Reader with his often re-iterared
accusation of my joining with the Papists, since he says I am worse and less
orthodox than they in this matter, p. 301. 309. were it not to show him how his
malice has blinded him, for he confesses p. 300. n. 8. that I condemn their
meritum ex condigno, and placing justification in such works as are rather evil
than good; and yet p. 305. he asks wherein I differ from the worst Papists? So
then such as assert meritum ex condigno and these other things denied by me,
are not in his sense the worst Papists, let him reconcile this with the general
sense of Protestants; yea with great bitterness he quarreleth me for wronging
the Papists, p. 301. calling it a base falsehood, and deceit, in me, to say
Papists do not place justification in any real inward renovation of the soul,
citing the words of the Council of Trent and Bellarmin to the contrary: but he
must know, if he will, I will not be cheated by the fair words of Papists,
contrary to what mine ears have heard, and eyes seen, to be the general
practice of their people and Preachers, and that in a kingdom, where their
superstition less abounds, than any place of their territories. I know they
place more virtue, toward the inward renovation of the Soul, in such things as
are justly condemnable, than in obedience to Christ's precepts: and were it not
that he is even glad to patronize the Papists, that he might get some occasion
to rail against me, he could not but acknowledge this, since he can not be
ignorant (whatever distinctions and fair words they have invented now, to
smooth their doctrine) that all the first Reformers do with one voice affirm,
that before the Reformation, there was a profound silence of any thing, save
their superstitious works, pilgrimages and indulgences, in the point of
justification, not only as to making just, but even as to remission of sins,
which they asserted to be attained by such means. Yet this man's charity can
extend to palliat their hypocrisy, that he may accuse me, while yet in the same
page, as to me, he lays-aside all his charity, alleging most abusivly, that it
is but good words I give them about the satisfaction of Christ, and that I
deceive them with Socinian glosses, and metaphorical senses, which is a gross
calumny: like to which is his calumny, p. 317. where he says, the Quakers talk
of Christ's Sufferings and Death, etc. as all done within man.

2 That the Reader may not be interrupted, in the through examination of this
point, by his calumnies, perversions and malicious insinuations, which he
bestows throughout most of his work to squeeze out of my words, that he may
render me either odious or ridiculous; I will remove them in the first place,
ere I come to the main matter. Of this kind is what he says, p. 297. where he
plays upon me, saying, that justification is not by our work, or works,
considered by themselves; as if this were a mighty absurdity, to say, works
wrought in a man could in any sense not be called his, which he reckons
Phanaticism in folio. But if this be so, he must accuse Christ and the Apostle
Paul of this Phanaticism, and it shall not much trouble me to be accounted
guilty with them, albeit I lie under I. B's censur for it, for Christ says to
his Apostles, Mat. 10: 20. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father that speaks in you. and Mark 13: 11. -- for it is not ye that speak,
but the Holy Ghost, yet they uttered the words. He must either here confess his
shame, albeit he term me a shameless man, for saying that Christ's words
confirm it, or else condemn Christ: was not this speaking a work of the
Apostles? and does not Christ say, it is not they? and dare he call this a
contradiction? So then he may see in what respect good works, considered
otherwise than as merely the works of men, help in justification: see also 1
Cor. 15: 10. -- But I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but
the grace of God which was with me. So here the Apostle's labor is ascribed to
the Grace, so as he says it was not he; and yet this man asks, p. 248. if to
be justified by Christ within be not to be justified by our works? adding, to
render me odious, especially seeing this is Christ formed within, and not Christ
who laid-down his life a ransom for sinners, which Christ, in our account, he
says, can not cleanse, nor do any good, which is a gross calumny. But the evil
he intends here to us returns upon his own head, for, if to assert Christ
formed within be to assert another Christ, than dyed and suffered, Then the
Apostle was guilty of this crime, Gal. 4: 19. -- I travel in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you: yea he calls Christ within the hope of Glory,
Col. 1: 28. Will he thence dare to say the Apostle held another Christ than he
that dyed? And let him prove, if he can, that, in our speaking of Christ formed
within, we say more than the Apostle. Another of his calumnies, is, p. 302.
where, because I say that all have sinned that come to man's age, therefore I
deny that the wicked actions of such as are not come to be men and women are
sin; which is utterly false, as I never said so, so I never intended, as he
maliciously affirms, to insinuat any such thing. Page 303, 304. he would screw
my words speaking of a twofold Redemption, whereof the first is the capacity of
being redeemed, purchased by Christ without, and the receiving of and enjoying
that wrought by Christ in us; to make an absurdity, because I say that as to us
they can not be separated, then all must be redeemed the one way, who are
redeemed the other, and that then every man must be redeemed from the power of
corruption, and saved. But here, according to his custom, he cites not my words
justly, which are, that they are both perfect in their own nature, albeit in
their application to us ward they can not be separated, that is, he, that comes
effectually to enjoy the benefit of the one, must enjoy the other; he, that
receivs the second, partakes of the first also; he, that really receivs the
first, receivs the second also: but that hinders not but many may be offered
the benefit of the first, and by rejecting and resisting it lose the benefit
both of first and second; and he, that rejects it at any time, albeit he
receive it for a season, as by his falling he loses what of the second is
wrought in him, to wit, of purification, so he does also lose the first, which
was remission of sin. His last cavil at this is very impertinent, which is by
way of question, that if this second redemption be necessary to salvation, as
it indeed is, what shall become of the child of God, that has no light? what
shall become of them that have true grace uniting them to Christ, etc. and yet
through darkness can see and acknowledge no such thing? For to pass-by the
absurditys here supposed, that saints can be said to have no light, or have
grace, and be united to Christ, yet neither be able to see it nor acknowledge
it, and that not during their lifetime here; for unless this be also supposed,
he can not conclude what he will, for that a saint may be clouded at a time is
not denied, yet this makes nothing for his purpose. Will it follow, because
they see it not, that it therefore is not needful to their Salvation? His own
words imply a contradiction to this. And thus the man confutes that by which he
would urge another, in the very words by which he expresses it, for is not
grace to unite the heart to Christ necessary to Salvation? He will surely say
Yes: if then the acknowledgment of that, and seeing of it, which is needful to
salvation, be not needful, then the not seeing or not acknowledging of a thing
makes it not a thing unnecessary to Salvation, which is the absurdity he would
insinuat.

3. Thus having removed out of the way his most obvious perversions and abuses,
I come to treat of the main matter, which all depends upon this one question
What is that whereby a man is justified, so as to appear truly just, in the
sight of God? This he supposes to be don by the righteousness and death of
Christ without, even before any work of righteousness be wrought in man, even
as a cautioner, to whom he compares Christ in this case, frees him, whose debt
he pays. I, on the contrary, affirm, that, albeit reconciliation and remission
of sins be by the death of Christ without, and the door opened, so that all may
be at peace, by the offer of grace, made in Christ, if they reject it not, yet
hereby no man can be said to be justified, or appear just, properly, until
Christ be received in his heart, there to renew and purify him, and make him
just, so that, however justification may be distinguished from sanctification,
yet not divided, nor yet so distinguished, that a man can be truly said to be
justified, who is unholy and unsanctified. And therefore upon the examining of
what he urges against this, and for his position, as also what he answers to my
probations for it, depends the whole matter; but before I enter particularly
upon this, and that there may no interruption meet me, when entered in it, I
will first take notice, and remove his mistakes and misapplied proofs
thereupon, both in what he opposes me, and affirms for himself, as also here
take notice of his mere assertions. And first then, page 299. he supposes there
can be no reconciliation by the blood of Christ's cross, etc. unless for such,
in whose room Christ dyed, as a Cautioner and Surety, and so made satisfaction,
that they should be redeemed and delivered. But, albeit upon this notion and
affirmation all depends, yet I miss the proof of it; if his after proofs say
any thing to it, I shall examine them: that which he mentions here written Romans
8: 3, 4. is so far from doing it, that it proves the contrary. For albeit the
Death of Christ was, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, yet it follows not that the righteousness of the Law must be fulfilled in
all, for whom he dyed: yea the following words -- who walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, show this to be the condition requisite on our part, that
we may partake of the benefit of his Death. If, to prove that man should be
reconciled, redeemed and delivered by the Death of Christ, he bring the
instances of the righteousness of the Law to be fulfilled in us; then men can
not be said to be reconciled, redeemed and delivered, until this righteousness
of the Law be fulfilled in them. What he adds to this, that we can not be
said to be accounted righteous, and absolved from Accusation, upon the account
of our works of righteousness, since I say no such thing, freely confessing
that not only pardoning of sin, but removing of the filth, as well as of the
guilt, is the act of God's Mercy, and Grace, as says the Apostle, Tit. 3: 5,
6. and yet we are saved, and consequently justified, according to his Mercy, by
the washing of Regeneration, since this is the fruit of the Grace and Spirit of
God freely given us. And therefore it is not enough for him, page 302. to
affirm that I pervert the Apostle's words, 2 Cor. 5: 19, 20. -- God was in
Christ reconciling the World unto himself, upon this bare supposition, that
this [World] is only understood of the Elect: for, if this reconciliation had
been absolute, and not in part only, that is, a readyness on God's part to be
reconciled with them, if they repent, which I affirm; to what purpose should
the Apostle, as an Ambassador entreat them to be reconciled? there needed no
entreaty to that which was already done; neither are his mere assertions to
this, p. 303. any answer. It is strange, that to prove that all, for whom
Christ dyed, are certainly made alive one time or other, he brings these words
And that he dyed for all, that they which live, should not hence forth live
unto themselves, but unto him, which dyed for them, etc. for he does not say
here, that all he dyed for are made alive, but that they that are made alive
should so live; neither does the saying Christ has born the sins of all in his
own body on the tree import any being actually freed of the guilt of sin,
until they receive the condition as above, be ye therefore reconciled unto
God. But he overturns what he earnestly pleaded for before, p 310. n. 23. where
he says, they own not that reconciliation was so perfected by Christ on
earth, that there is nothing to be done by man, in order to his actual
justification: if so, then no man is actually justified, until something be
done by him, and this doing imports a work, so here a work of man is necessary
for justification; and this is rather more than I say. And if something be to
be don on man's part, ere actual justification be obtained, then that which is
don by Christ before, must be only a potential justification, and what is this
more than a capacity of being justified? which yet he batters against in me,
and yet he must confess this to distinguish himself from the Antinomians, whose
opinions albeit he diverse times disclaims, yet he shows not how he can liberat
himself from it: and therefore in contradiction to what is here observed, both
his assertions and proofs resolve in the Antinomian doctrine, and concludes for
it, as much as for him, which I might therefore pass all, as impertinent. But
for instance, his great example of a Cautioner or Surety, used often, as page
299. 310, 311. for when a Cautioner pays a man's debt for him, so soon as he
lays down the money, which is a sufficient intimation to him, to whom the debt
is due, the person, for whom it is paid, is really acquitted, albeit he have
done no act, yea know not of it; and this, as I observed before, himself
acknowledges, in the application, saying, p. 304. that some, who are united to
Christ by Grace, (and surely such are justified) can neither see it, nor
acknowledge it. So then, if this example of his Surety hold true, men are
justified, before they believe, as say the Antinomians; and therefore all the
Scripturs, brought by him, p. 308. to prove that Christ made a proper, real and
full satisfaction, in the behalf of men, will conclude for the Antinomians as
much as for him: whereas p. 314. he looks upon it as a calumny to say they
speak not of a real justification, for he concludes, p. 312. that imputative
justification is real. He argues for the Antinomians also, since he accounts
this imputation to be only of righteousness wrought without men by Christ in
his own person; for, if by this imputation men be really justified, then they
are as much or at lest as really justified before they believe, as after, since
faith is an act of man's will, and no such thing according to him can have
place in Justification: and yet, to go round, he says, p. 308. that they say
not, that God justifies any remaining in their sins. But do they not say so,
since taking his opinion the safest way, and furthest from Antinomians, he
concludes a man justified in the act of conversion? and such he supposes to
have been great sinners, yea and that they may not be purged from them many
years after; yea and how can they, if they must sin daily, as they say, in
thought, word and deed? (of which more hereafter) are not such then remaining
in their sins according to them justified? Page 306. N. 16. he would infer a
contradiction upon me, from saying, good works are necessary as causa sino qua
non, for this he says contradicts my saying We are justified by the inward
birth, and not by our works, seeing works being but the consequence of that
birth, is but the effect, even a causa sine qua non must be before the effect;
on which he also insists, p. 319. n. 38. But this contradiction is founded upon
the supposition, that this birth is brought forth without good works; which I
deny, seeing regeneration is a work of the Spirit in us, by which we are
justified, that is, really made just, and the works, which proceed therefrom,
are but a consequence of it. And now as to his proofs, and also his examining
of mine, they are inserted, page 204. n. 13. where he says, that the
redemption of Christ is a far other thing, and has far other effects, than to
make men capable of salvation, even remission of sins. But I never denied, but
that it brought remission of sins to such as embrace and receive it, neither do
the Scripturs cited by him prove more, 2 Cor. 5: 19. Dan. 9: 24-26. Col. 1: 19,
20. Ephesians. 1: 11-15. Ioh. 17: 2. Heb. 9: 12, 13. 2 Cor. 1: v. 20. none of which
speak of the reconciliation made by Christ to be in itself more than procuring
a capacity of Salvation, other ways than as received and laid hold-on by
believers; and when it is spoken of, with respect to such, I never denied but
it was more, for the capacity is brought unto action: he adds, the very texts
cited by my self make against me, Ephesians. 2. 15. he dyed to make in himself of
twain one new man, so making peace: ver. 13. but now in Christ Jesus, ye who
sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, asking, was this
only a capacity of coming near? but the Apostle here speaks of those, who had
received, and not resisted, the benefit of that capacity. And whereas he says
1 John 4: 10. the Son of God's being said to be a propitiation for our sins, is
more than a mere possibility of friendship. But does not the same Apostle say,
he is a propitiation for the whole World? yet he did not actually reconcile the
whole world, save in a capacity. Ezech. 16: 6. he gives a question, in stead
of answer, 1 Pet. 2: 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the
tree, that we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness, by whose
stripes ye were healed. noting 1 Pet. 3: 18. Christ has once suffered, that he
might bring us to God, but it says not, that Christ by his sufferings did
bring us to God, which would have more made for his purpose; and though it had
been so, yet neither that nor what is above cited prove any thing, being spoken
to those, who had received the second redemption, as well as the first. Then he
notes these following, Col. 1: 14. Gal. 1: 4. 3: 13, 14. 4: 5. Rev. 5: 9, 10.
and 14: 3, 4. Tit. 2: 13. all which I have looked, but find not that they prove
what he intends: some were spoken not only to those who had already received
the benefit of Christ's death here, but of such as were already glorified in
heaven; if he think they will prove his matter, he must show how, the next time
he writes.

4. Page 309. n. 21. He brings my argument showing that where there is a
perfect reconciliation, there there is no separation. why does God then so
often complain of his People for their sins? from this it would follow that sin
made no separation, or that their good works and worst sins are the same, in
God's account, His answer to this, is, that a man may be in a justified state,
and declared just, because constituted so, albeit unrighteous as to his person,
because of his unrighteous actions, in which sense he is not justified nor
approven of God, that is, in plain Scots, to say, God constituteth and
declares men just, albeit they be wicked men, and really unjust, the first
being understood of their condition, the second of their person: but the misery
is, there wants something to knit this incoherent matter together, and inform
us how a man, as to his condition, is just, while in his person unjust; and
indeed he brings no proof for all this. And albeit I wonder not at this
omission, since he could do no better, yet I desire he may let me know the next
time, why I should receive his answer without proof. That every sin, which may
be committed by a Saint, does not unsaint him, or destroy his condition, I
acknowledge; but they suppose no sin to do it, for when they affirm murder and
adultery and treachery not to have done it, (as they do) if these sins are not
destructive and killing as to man's condition, I know none; and desire to be
informed how by Scriptur it can be made appear that these do not: so my
argument still remains in force, and his charge of Antinomianism against me
falls to the ground. Page 311. He brings my argument showing the absurdity of
their objection from 2 Cor. 5: 21. thus, If we be just, as Christ was a sinner,
by imputation, then as there was not the least sin in Christ, so there is no
necessity for the least righteousness in us. To which he answers, neither is
there to our being justified upon that account. The Reader may judge of this
doctrine, which the man, either forgeting, or being ashamed of, plainly
contradicts in the same page, saying, that sanctification is inseparably joined
with justification; for then sure righteousness must be necessary to be
justified upon whatever account. And yet to go round again, within five lines
he cites Joh. 6: 29. and 9: 35, 36. and 10: 38. and 12: 36. and 14: 1. and 16:
9. to prove that Christ would have people resting upon a righteousness merely
imputative, for justification, for that is the thing denied by me; for, if
sanctification be unseparable from justification, it is impossible to rest upon
that, which is merely imputative. That these Scripturs prove no such thing, the
Reader may see, all of them press believing in Christ, but that to believe in
Christ is to rest upon a righteousness merely imputative, remains yet for him
to prove. But to proceed, with an unparalleled confidence to answer to me
saying, that to my observation that sentence, the imputed righteousness of
Christ, which they so much urge, as the foundation of their faith, is not to be
sound in all the Scriptur, he notes diverse places of Scriptur, in not one of
which there is any such thing; and indeed this controversy, being of matter of
fact, can be easily decided by any that can read, who can easily see whether
that expression be there or not: for the question is of the expression in
terminis, not of what he apprehends may by consequence import the like. What
he says in answer to my proving justifying to be understood of being really
made just, from 1 Cor. 6: 11. he overturneth himself in a few lines, confessing
that the Corinthians were really changed, and if so, we need not doubt where it
is said they were justified, but they were really made just, that is, changed
from unrighteousness, as he confesses they were.

5. Page 312. n. 26. He comes to take notice of what I urge from the word
justification, and from the etymology of it, and having introduced himself with
a scoff he says, I do place this upon the authority of the vulgar Latin
edition; but therein he is mistaken, the Greek word (...) will make as much for
my purpose, as the Latin: he passes from the etymology, p. 313. and says the
words usually import a juridical absolution by by the sentence of a Judge. but
what then? is not that because Judges usually at lest absolve men upon the
account of their innocence. And so his comparison of a Surety will not here
hitt, for when men are accused of murder or adultery, or theft, and that the
case is proven and confessed, what Judges use to declare the person acquitted
upon Surety given by another innocent person? And therefore justifico, I
justify, signifies the declaring of one just, who is so; and though justifico,
as being sometimes taken in a Law sense, does not, in the Indicative, answer to
sanctifico, because it is there active, and has relation to another person; yet
in the Passive, when relating to the person sanctified, it is understood one
way, for justificatus and sanctificatus signify the same. But he overturneth
all his quibbling here, p. 313. n. 27. by asking, whether they say, that a man
is said to be justified, who is not really just? which imports they say not so,
and then we are agreed, only I would ask him how a man is really just, while
committing actual wickedness and unrighteousness as to his person? and yet he
said before, such were justified, and yet in the next, p. 314. he says, I
maliciously calumniat them, to say, they make use of the figurative sense of
the word: let the Reader judge of these consistencies. And whereas I cite some
Scripturs, that justifying is spoken of some, who arrogat righteousness to
themselves, though it do not belong to them, and at these he carpeth, saying,
the very first, Exodus 23: 7. is spoken of God of himself, he should have said,
it is God speaking of the wicked, that he will not justify them: some of them
speak of a not justifying, Job. 9: 20. and 27: 5. and what then? the places
were marked, to show the import of the word justify, and to show that many of
them speak nothing of justifying at all, whence he concludes in these words, So
unhappy is the man in his citations. He notes first Esai 5: 23 but it seems he
has been in have, and therefore to rectify his mistake, let him read the
words, which are, which justify the wicked for reward: and what, though, where
many Scripturs are noted together, by the mistake of the transcriber or Printer
the figurs may be misplaced, and so miss? Truly they must be very happy, that
can secure themselves from this hazard; he has not been so happy, who denied
the words to be in a place, where the knowing of it depended not upon the
diligence of others, but of his own looking to it, as I have just now shown.
Page 315. to prove that justified is not taken in the epistles of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans Corinth. Gal. for making just, as I affirmed in the passages
cited by me, he says, to take it so would make the Apostle contradict himself.
But this he affirms upon the mere supposition that the Apostle with him
excludes all works from Justification, which is but to beg the question, as
will after appear. What he adds here, and in the following page, in answer to
the citations I bring out of diverse Protestant Authors, I need not trouble the
Reader with a reply to it, because he turns by the most material of them, as
not having the Authors by him, to examine them; others he positivly rejects, as
not agreing with them, as Forbes and Baxter, and at last insinuats that the
trial is not to be by humane Testimonies, for such he accounts all the writings
of his Brethren, whereunto I do very well agree: only I brought some of his own
folks, not as if I needed them to confirm me in my opinion, but as having
weight with those among whom they are esteemed Doctors. In this page answering
what I urge from Romans 8: 30. showing how in that golden chain sanctification
must be excluded, or justification must be taken in its proper sense; he says,
that sanctification is comprehended under Vocation. If this be true which he
asserts, then he gives again away his cause, for then no man is sooner called
than he is sanctified; and since he will not say (seeing he disclaims to be an
Antinomian) that any man is justified, before he be called, it follows then
necessarily that no man is justified before he be sanctified, and then to what
purpose has he been fighting and wrestling all this while? Page 316: n. 33. he
accuses me of unparalleled falsehood, impudency and boldness, for saying that I
have sufficiently proven that by [justification] ought to be understood [to be
made really just] whereas I undertook only to prove that the word might be so
understood without absurdity; adding, I wonderfully conclude a must be from a
may be, etc. but the best is, his greatest charges are built either upon forged
calumnies, or his own pittyfull mistakes. I never concluded by [justification]
ought to be understood [to be made really just only] upon that which I said
from the etymology of the word, nor by [justification] there did I understand
merely the word, but I conclude from all my Scriptur arguments of the thing, as
my following words manifest, where I say We know it from sensible experience,
but he may be sure it is not the etymology of the word, we know so. And if
thence he urge that this falls not under the inward sensation of the Soul, he
but fights with his own mistake, for that the real justification of the Saints
falls under the inward sensation of the Soul, I think no man of sense will
deny; for Christ is formed in the mind, where he is said to be revealed
inwardly, and that gives a sense of justification, albeit he seem to wonder at
it, asking, what Scriptur speaks so? he may read Gal. 1: 16. Whether was not
the Apostle here justified, and under the sense of it? He is angry, p. 317.
that I call the life of Christ an inward and spiritual thing, but will he say
it is an outward and carnal thing? But what thinks he of 2 Cor. 4: 10, 11.? He
confesses this Life of Christ supported and carried the persecuted Apostles
through many miseries and deaths, will he say then it was not an inward and
spiritual thing that carried them through these trials? But he adds, But who,
except a Quaker, could say, that the Apostle says, we are justified by this
life? I answer: all, except such absurd men as will deny that where we are said
to be saved by a thing, we are said to be justified by it, Romans 5: 10. Tit. 3:
5. we are said to be saved by regeneration. And whereas he says the Apostle
says not that this is the Formal Objective Cause of Justification; these are
words the Apostle uses not at all, and therefore no wonder there be no word of
it here. He looks upon it as being absurd for me to think that Reprobation is
Non-Iustification, but I would know of him if there be any Reprobats who are
justified. That the marks and evidences are not always taken from the Immediate,
Nearest, and Formal Cause, I confess, but that therefore the not having Christ
revealed in the Soul, is only a sign, and no cause of Reprobation, remains for
him to prove: wickedness is a sign of Reprobation, will he therefore affirm it
is not the Immediate nor Formal Cause of it? After the same manner he denies,
p. 31. 9. that we must lean to that which the Apostle calls (Col. 1: 27, 28.)
Christ within the hope of Glory; his reason is, because the Apostle says,
Phil. 1: 28. And in nothing terrified by your advarsarys, which is -- to you an
evident token of salvation, asking, must we also lean to that in Justification?
But will he say there is no difference betwixt that which is only a token and
Christ within? If there be, his reason concludes nothing.

6. Lastly: he comes to answer what I say of the necessity of good works to
Justification, and what I urge from Isai. 2. he confesses that Good Works are
an Instrumental cause, which concession does prove all I affirm; if they be an
instrumental cause, they must be a cause sine qua non, and necessary, since the
instrumental cause of a thing must be necessary toward its being. What? though
Abraham was justified, before he offered up his son, it will not follow that he
was justified without works. His absurdity, as if it would thence follow, that
no man is justified when he sleeps, or is not actually doing some work, looks
liker the objection of a man sleeping, who knows not what he says, than of one
awake, for by the same way it might be said, that Faith is not necessary, since
men do no more actually believe, than do good works, when they are sleeping. My
argument deduced from Heb. 12: 14. Matthew. 7: 21. John 13: 17. 1 Cor. 7: 19.
Revel. 22: 14. he says, proves the necessity of Works unto final Salvation,
but not to Justification, and if it do so, it does the business, unles he will
say, that full and perfect justification is not sufficient to Salvation. My
answer to their first objection he observes, but replies not: to the second,
answering what they urge from Romans 3: 20. -- by the deeds of the Law, there
shall no flesh be justified, which I show, is to be understood of works don and
not by the Grace of God, he answers, that such are no good works at all. But
may not a man do some of the works, which even the Moral Law commands, such as
not to committ murder, theft, or adultery, without the Grace of God? Has not
he confessed as much of some Heathens, whom he judges not to have had the
Grace of God? and will he say, these works are not materially good, albeit not
formally, with a respect to any advantage, as to Salvation, they receive by
them? And though it should be confessed, that all is not always requisite to be
antecedent to justification, which falls-out to be antecedent to Salvation; yet
the question is Whether there be any thing absolutely requisite to be antecedent
to salvation, which is not also absolutely requisite to be antecedent to
justification? If not, then if works be absolutely necessary, or so far as they
are absolutely necessary to Salvation, they must also be so to justification. If
he say other ways, then (as I observed before) full and perfect justification,
according to him, must not be esteemed sufficient to Salvation. Page 322. n. 42.
He comes to prove the best works, even those wrought by the Spirit in the
Saints, to be impure, which before also he had affirmed, page 307 there he
would infer we say the same of good works, because I affirm that works done by
man's own strength are polluted, but it will not thence follow we believe Works
done by the Grace of God to be such. But for this impurity of good works he
marks Psalm. 143: 2. 130: 3. Job 9: 16. none of which speak one word of good
works thus understood; then he mentions Esai 64: 6 all our righteousness is as
filthy rags, but silently passes over how I show their own Authors, as Calvin
and Musculus, etc. affirm this not to be understood of Evangelical
righteousness, and himself overturns what he urges from this, affirming, that
we ought not to call the work of the Spirit of God in his People, filthy rags,
but if they were so, they might be so called; and yet he overturns it further,
by confessing some works wrought by the Apostles were undefiled, then all the
works wrought by the Spirit in the Saints can not be said to be impure, which
is their assertion. And the instance of clean water passing through an unclean
pipe does not hold, which is their great probation. He will not contend with
what I say about the word Merit, neither has he much against my conclusion in
this matter, yet that he may end this chapter like himself, he concludes it
with a gross lie, and railing, saying, I affirm a man may be regenerated
without the least help of the Grace of God, which as I wholly abhor, so there
can not be a greater falsehood alleged upon me.

Section Ninth, Wherein his Fourteenth Chapter Of PERFECTION is considered.
1. I come now to his XIV. Chapter Of Perfection, where after he has repeated
my eighth Proposition, he reckons it confidence in me, to accuse their answer
in their larger Catechism, of speaking against the power of Divine Grace, which
says, that man is not able by any Grace of God, received in this life, to keep
the commands of God. But in stead of justifying this assertion, he says, they
are not ashamed of it, then he recurreth a little to his Author Hicks,
according to his custom, and falls a railing, where, among other great charges,
he accuses the Quakers of Reproaching, Revileing, Calumnies, Scolding, and the
like. also page 329. speaking of bridling the tongue. But he of all men should
have been silent in this, who is such a Railer in the Superlative degree, that
some of his own faith, who have bad enough thoughts of the Quakers, have said,
that he not only equals them, but exceeds them in railing: of his Railing in
this chapter the Reader may further observe, page 332. 345-349. Here, as in his
former chapter, to enervat the perfection asserted by me, he brings forth his
old and often repeated Calumny, as if I asserted this perfection to proceed
merely from the Light of Nature, affirming the Light pleaded for by me, p. 327.
to be such as never came from the Grace of God, to be flesh, blindness, enmity
to God, natural, sensual, etc. affirming that I say Man is regenerated,
sanctified, justified, though not one ray of Divine Illumination has shined
into his Soul, nor one act of Grace has reached either his intellect, will or
affection, to cause this change: the like p. 331. all which is most abominably
false, and never either believed or asserted by me, and therefore all he
concludes upon this malicious assertion falls to the ground, and needs no
further answer. Next, he bestows much pains p. 328, 329. to show, from the
Hebrew and Greek word, that perfection is sometimes understood of sincerity and
integrity; and Perfection in these respects he thus defines, in regeneration
the whole man is changed, so that he is now born a new creatur, sanctified
wholly in mind, heart, spirit, affections, Conscience, memory and body, though
but in a small measur or degree, and again, yielding impartial obedience,
through the Grace of God, unto all God's precepts, waving none. But if he will
stand by what he here asserts, I will desire no more, albeit he falsely say, in
the following page, that all this will not satisfy us, for I would desire the
next time he would reconcile this with breaking the commands daily in thought,
word, and deed. To prove this he insists, (in contradiction to what he said
before) p. 330. n. 7. and his proofs are (1.) because in Christ's house there
are diverse syzes, and degrees of persons, as babes, or little children, young
men, old men: and this is not denied, but the thing he should have proved is,
that none of those degrees can be without daily breaking God's commands. His
second proof is yet more rare, Christians are exhorted to grow in Grace, to
put-off the old man, which is corrupt, to put-on the New Man, to mortify their
members. Very good: but is to break the commands daily in thought, word and
deed, the way to grow in Grace, to put-off the old man, and on the New? if this
be not to pervert Christianity, what can be said to be so? If men can dream
waking, as he sometimes supposes, he has sure been in this postur, when he
brought this proof. But he adds, that this Perfection renders Gospel commands
useless; but are the Laws useless, if men obey them? This, says he, takes away
the exercise of Repentance, the exercise of Prayer, and makes the petitions of
the Lord's Prayer useless, [forgive us our sins] on this he also insisteth,
page 345, 346-349. That, because all have sinned, they have need to repent, and
pray for forgiveness, and the continuance of it, I have shown in my Apology: but
if this his argument hold true, to prove that men must sin all their lifetime,
and break the commands every day, in thought, word, and deed, then the greatest
sinners and most wicked profligat villains do less make useless Gospel commands
than others, because they afford more matter to exercise Repentance and Prayer,
for forgiveness of sins. But he proceeds, that this tends to foment Pride
and Security, and taketh-away diligent watchfulness, and holy fear, humility,
and the usefulness of the Ordinances of Christ: but where freedom from sin is,
where can pride and security have place, or diligence and humility be wanting?
But with him, to sin is the way not to be proud and secure, but to be watchful
and humble. Let the judicious Reader judge, whether they, that break the
commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, and affirm they must do so all
their lifetime, be more diligent and humble, and less proud and secure, than
such as keep and obey them: for such Ordinances, as must be made useful by
daily breaking God's commands, in thought, word, and deed, I resolve never to
cry-up, but always cry-down, by the Grace of God, however I. B. may rail at me
for it. Some Scripturs here added by him will come hereafter to be examined.

2. Page 332. N 9. When he comes to take notice of my stating this matter, as
not being such a Perfection as can not admit of a daily increase, but only a
being kept from sin, and receiving strength to fulfill the will of God; (for
these are my words) he would upon this, both in this place and elsewhere, page
333. 341, etc urge this absurdity, that, since the least sin is a transgression
of the Law, it follows, that no regenerated man can sin, and that no man, that
sins is regenerated: but we will not wonder at his inference here,
considering his many other perversions. But to show he has no ground to urge
this absurdity, let it be considered, that we are to consider Regeneration as
begun and carrying on, and as perfected and accomplished; -- he which has
begun a good work in you, says the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1: 6. And again, Ye did
run well, Gal. 5: 7. with many other places, which might be mentioned. Whereby
it is clear, that Regeneration is not wrought in an instant, (and if he think
so, he must prove it, ere he conclude any thing from it) and those were already
converted, and regeneration begun in them. Now albeit such may sin, and that
every sin does hinder and impeed the work of Regeneration, yet it does not
destroy it, nor wholly annihilat it: Physik given to a man, in whom there is an
inward and inveterat disease, does not cure instantly; and albeit by some
heedless actions he may hinder the cure from being perfected, so soon, yet
every one of these actions do not render it altogether unsuccessfull. Also as
to the comparison of a child, which he accepts of, albeit he have all the
integral parts of a man, yet he has not that vigor and strength of body, nor
yet that understanding nor exercise of mind, that a man has, and thence can
neither defend himself, nor do either in body or mind, that a man can do. Now
what I speak of such as are born of God, saying, that I dare not affirm but
there may be some that can not sin, I understand of this absolute, complete,
and full regeneration; not that I deny but such as are entered and in part
regenerated may be also said to be born of God, though not in that absolute
sense, and therefore still under the possibility of sinning, and capacity
thereunto. And thus his great absurdity, upon which he insists so much, is
removed. Next he proceeds, p. 334. to show my agreement with the Pelagians, but
the very citation he brings to prove it out of Vossius history bewrays his
weakness, and shows the contrary, where it is manifest, that the thing
condemned in Pelagins was his affirming men might keep the commands, by the
power of Nature, which I never said, but always denied. And whereas he cites
the Fathers saying, that none by the strength of Grace did live all their days
without sin, that the perfection ascribed to some in Scriptur was not from
Nature, but from Grace, etc. this clearly shows they believed men might be free
from sin by Grace, sometime, though none bad been so for all their lifetime,
which shows they were far from believing man must break the commands daily, in
thought, word, and deed, which is his affirmation. What he adds of the Fathers
arguments against the Pelagians, and of the opinions of the Socinians, and
others, in this matter, I judge it not my work, to meddle with it; I heed not
in this what these Sects say, but believe the Truth (without respect to them)
as it is clearly proposed in Scriptur. I could easily recriminate, by showing
things, wherein he agrees with Papists, Socinians, Arminians, Antinomians,
Pelagians, Anabaptists and others, against us, if I judged it pertinent to be
filling-up paper with such stuff, to make a noise, as he does hundreds of
times, to nauseating: but I love to abstain from such superfluitys, and come to
the purpose, and will now consider what he says in answer to my arguments.

3. He begins page 337 n. 18. and to my saying, their doctrine is against the
Wisdom of God, who is of purer eyes, than he can behold iniquity, he asks Is
it against these attributes of God, that sin should be in the world? But my
following words show I spoke of the Godly, neither will it follow what he adds
after that then they must be as free of sin here, as in heaven, and that at
first; for I urge it to be contrary to God's Wisdom, to make this freedom
impossible unto them only, means for their being free being given them, and not
his permitting sin. And whereas he proceeds in answer to my saying, that, if
man be always joined to sin, he should be always disjoined from God, according
to Esai 59: 2. Whereas, on the contrary, they, to wit, the Saints, are said to
be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1: 4. and one Spirit with him, 1 Cor.
6: 17. he answers, All this would plead for a sinlesness, from the very first
instant of Regeneration. In the absolute sense above mentioned it does, as also
for the necessity of pressing after, and for the possibility of obtaining it,
after Regeneration begun, since so far as man is joined to sin, his perfect
regeneration is retarded; yet, as himself, toward the end of this Paragraph
says, it may be begun, where some members may yet be to be mortified: and
albeit some corruption be not wholly purged-out, yet God can have fellowship
with his own work of Grace in the Soul, and with the Soul, so far as it is
sanctified and renewed, but no further. Page 339. n. 19. he says, I wickedly
dispute for God, etc. to say it is against his Wisdom not to have found means,
whereby he might be served, but by such actions by which the Devil is no less,
yea is more, served. But his charge is upon the naked supposition that their
doctrine is the Truth, which is pitifully to beg the question, yea he
indirectly (notwithstanding much winding about, to avoid it) confesses my
charge, saying, there is no formal service performed to the Devil: so he grants
some material service to be performed to him. Is not the Devil served, and that
service justly displeasing to God, unless it be a formal service; for to serve
the Devil formally, is to acknowledge him as their Master, and give him service
as due to him, which many do not, who yet may be said truly enough to serve
him. He adds, that God has seen meet his children be in a spiritual warfare.
What then? can no man be in a warfare, unless he be overcome? Men may be
engaged in war, and may be liable to be assaulted, yea may be oftentimes
narrowed, straightened, and beset by the Enemy, and sometimes wounded, and yet
never overcome: but what he pleads for, is not only a warfare, but a being
worsted, and overcome, and that every day; for so truly are such overcome by
the Devil, who daily break the commandments of God, in thought, word and deed,
as he affirms of all God's children. He goes-on, n. 20. to say, I run my self
blind, in saying, it is against God's justice to require men to abstain from
all sin, and not enable them to do it, because it would prove all the wicked
are perfect, for God requires of them obedience. But it seems himself has been
blind, when he made this answer; I never urged, that, because God gave men
power, therefore they are perfect, as he foolishly throughout this paragraph
imagines, and then battereth against this man of straw of his own making: and
that this proves that wicked men might, if they had not resisted God's Grace,
have forsaken their wickedness, and been perfect, I deny not, neither does he
prove the contrary. He confesses man's imperfection to be of themselves, but he
thinks it can not be accounted unrighteousness in God, to require, and yet not
to give that measur of Grace, whereby men should become perfect, because that
power, which was once given, was sinfully castaway. But all this depends
upon the supposition that man lost his power in Adam, which was before discust,
and is now in him but a begging of the question. And when I show that their
doctrine makes God more unjust than the vilest of men, who will not give to
their children, asking bread, a stone, etc. hereproacheth me, as a blasphemous
tongue. But let us see how he frees their doctrine of this foul consequence: the
Lord forbid, says he, they hope for a full deliverance, but it is in heaven.
This answer confirms the charge, and does not lessen it, and so, for all his
bragg, the stone yet remains, according to them, instead of bread, and is like
to choke him, unless he find some better way to digest it than thus; for God
requires to forsake sin here, and yet (according to them) denies the power
here, for concerning being free from sin in heaven, there is no question. He
adds, page 341. that my saying their doctrine is injurious to the sacrifice of
Christ's Death, which was, to take-away sin, destroys all I said of Universal
Redemption: but he forgets to show how, perhaps we may expect it next, since
his 8 chapter is already answered. His saying they affirm that the stain of sin
is taken-away, and victory obtained, does not answer, because they refer that
to another life, and the question is concerning this. And to my saying, that,
if the children of God sin in thought, word, and deed daily, then there is no
difference betwixt the Holy and Profane, he answers, the difference is great,
because what the Wicked do, is done with full purpose of heart, etc. but the
other mourns over and repents of his sin. This difference is in respect of
Repentance, not of sinning, in their sinning they are both alike. That there is
a difference betwixt him, that continues in sin, and him that repents, I
deny not; but since he supposes the godly to continue in sin, all their
lifetime, yea in daily sinning, the similitude still remains, and such will
do well to take heed, who break God's commands daily in thought, word, and deed,
lest notwithstanding they may be in I. B.'s account the godly, yet in Jesus
Christ's they prove such to whom it shall be said, Depart ye workers of
iniquity, I know you not.

4. Page 343. N. 23. In stead of answering my argument showing their doctrine
makes the work of the Ministry, Preaching and Praying useless, he says,
Hence we see the necessity of a standing Ministry, which I am against: this is
false, as shall appear. He adds, The Ministry is to bring them on toward
perfection; but the question is Whether that Perfection is not attainable here?
For a Perfection, that admits not of a growth, I plead not. If he would have
had this answer understood to be to the purpose, he should have said, that such
as sin not, can not be said to admit of a growth, which he does not so much as
attempt, nor offer to prove. What I affirm to the contrary, in the example of
Christ, who, notwithstanding he was always free of sin, is said to increase
both in favor with God and man. Luke 2: 52. to this mentioned in my Apology
(notwithstanding his prolixity) he is as mute as a fish. How their doctrine
makes Prayers useless, I have shown before. In stead of answering Col. 4: 12.
where Epaphras is said to labor fervently in prayers, that the Colossians
might stand perfect, and complete in all the will of God. and to 1 Thessalonians 3. 12,
13. where Paul prays that the Lord would make them increase and abound in love,
etc. To the end he might establish their hearts unblameable in holiness: I say,
in stead of answering, he makes commentaries upon these places, (which in
themselves are as plain as can be) that this is, they should walk in sincerity,
and always be growing. And what if all this be granted? it will not follow that
it is impossible men should be free of sin here, even by the Grace of God. And
sure where men are perfect and complete in all the will of God, and unblameable
in holiness, they are not sinning daily in thought, word and deed. Thus the
Reader may judge of this man's confidence, who says these Scripturs make
against this imagined Perfection, meaning that which is asserted by me. Page
343. He says, my affirming Men are called justified, or reprobated, in respect
of their being leavened with sin, or righteousness, (fermenting is a piece of
his own pedantry, and none of the Quakers dialect) would prove full Perfection
to be essential to the state of Christianity: therefore I must answer it, as
well as they, who deny that to be common to all the Regenerat. But it seems he
has not well understood his own new-coined English word [fermenting] for one
thing is not said to be leavened with another, but where it has much
prevailed: every touch or taste of a thing does not leaven him with it, that so
touches or tastes it; as all men, that understand common language, know: and
so every sin is not enough to denominat a man leavened with sin; And so with
his own answer, that follows, he loses the knot he imagined I was tied by.
What he adds afterward of fulfilling the Law, urges nothing but upon a
supposition of its being fulfilled by the mere strength of man, which I never
affirmed. That no man is called just, because of inward righteousness, is but
his bare supposition: as for the word inherent, so often repeated by him, it is
none of mine. And to my urging that the subject is denominated from the
accident he says, yet that a wall is called white, though the whiteness be not
perfect. But it is not called white, if it be more black, than white, which was
the pinch I urged, but slily over-slipt by him; and such must be those, that
break the commands daily, for how such can be said to be more just, than
sinful, is more than I can reconcile either with Scriptur or Reason: sure the
answer, which he gives, does it not. To this question, Where are then the
children of God, and of Light? his reply is with a notable piece of
inconsistent Presbyterian canting, Even where these are, who are giving to
Christ much work (to speak so) to wash and make them clean from their daily
pollutions and defilements, and have renounced the works of darkness, etc. I
desire to know of him the next time, how these can be said to have renounced
the works of darkness, who have need to be washed from their daily defilements.
To my argument showing that Christ's command to be perfect proves it possible,
he says, p. 344. that this only proves we should endeavor after it. But for
this he adds no proof, we must rest contented with his mere affirmation, as
we must also do throughout the next N. 26. where he confidently preaches his
own sense of Scriptur, in stead of answer or reason, and then concludes with a
railing saying, I am led by an anti-Evangelical and Diabolical spirit. He says
that Matthew. 7: 21. and some other places cited by me prove nothing, without
supposing that no man shall be saved, who ever sinned, but without giving any
reason: that the unconverted may be by the Grace of God converted, and
consequently made perfect, I deny not. He says Romans 6. speaks only of the
dominion of sin. And what then? Does not every sin bring him, that commits it,
under the power of that sin, in so far? To the instances of Enoch, Noah, and
others, whom the Scripturs call Perfect, he goes about to prove they sometimes
sinned. And what then? the question is not Whether they always were without
sin? but Whether they never were without it? and sinned daily? which is his
affirmation. Which if they had done, they could at no time have been called
perfect. As for his other glosses, it will be time to receive them, when he
proves them; it is not enough to make them authentik with me, though Augustine
had approved, if he will subscribe to all Augustin's glosses of Scriptur, I may
give him a further answer.

5 Page 346. n 28. He comes to take notice of my answers to their arguments,
and first to my answer to their arguing from 1 John 1: v. 8. If we say, we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, etc. that this will not prove the Apostle
included more than James, c. 3: v. 9, 10. he answers, the Apostle is
included, though not for the present time. If it be not for the present time,
then it will not plead for sinning daily in thought, word, and deed, which is
the case in hand. Next, supposing the Apostle were not included, he says, it
is enough that Believers are included. But this he affirms without proof,
troubling himself and the Reader, to prove that those John wrote to were
Believers, which no body will deny; yet though they were included, it will not
prove such a continual and daily sinning, as they plead for. In answer to my
showing the words are have not sin, and not ye sin not, he only proves that
they did or may sin, which I deny not. And then, when I say it may be affirmed
of the Seed of sin, he concludes this to be sinful, so as to affect the man,
but minds not to prove it, and with this manner of begging the question he
concluds this paragraph, page 347. To my showing that in 1 King. 8: 46. and
Eccles. 7: 20. there is nothing said of sinning daily, he answers, It is
express in Ecclesiastes, that there is not a just man upon earth, that does
good and sins not, clearly importing, that even in their doing good, they
sin; but that this is clearly imported he affirms, but proves not, though
there be no man that sins not, it will not follow they sin daily. And for
his alleging that my answer, that it will not thence follow that, though there
was none that did not sin at that time, there are none such now, or that it is
impossible there should be such, will infer there was none then regenerat, no
not Solomon himself; what if I should say so, understanding Regeneration in the
absolute sense? To what I show from the Hebrew word, that it may be
interpreted, not that sins not, but that may not sin, he tells me in sum,
that it is but vanity, and this he says is obvious to every Reader, to whom we
will then leave it. To my affirming that the Apostle is not (Romans 7: 14.)
speaking of himself, but personating others in that state, after he has told me
that Socinians and Arminians say so, he tells me, the circumstances of the Text
evince the contrary, and then gives a kind of a preachment upon the place,
which I shall accept as a declaration of his sense, but must wait the next time
to have him prove it. He says the Apostle does not contradict this, chap. 6:
2. That the Apostle does not contradict himself, is without doubt to me; but he
must endeavor to reconcile the meaning he gives to the Apostle's words when he
has leasur. He says Paul in a respect was a carnal man, but unless he prove
him to have been so, in respect of sinning at that time, he says nothing. To
my urging Romans 8: 35, where the Apostle says Nothing shall separat him,
because, where sin is continued, there is a separation He denies, that, where
sin is striven and wrestled against, it makes a separation; but the matter is
how he proves, that those, who strive and wrestle against sin, do daily commit
sin: and until he do this, he but begs the question. To prove the
impossibility of being free from sining daily, from the examples of Noah's and
David's sins, he uses this argument:

If these men, whom the Spirit of God styles Perfect, and men according to
God's heart, have had their failings, and these failings are registrated for
our use; Then we have no Scriptur warrant for such a Perfection here, as is not
attended with sin:

[he should have said as does not admit a sinning daily, in thought, word, and
deed, if he would have concluded according to the state of the question.]

But the former is true: Therefore, etc.

But I deny the consequence of this Proposition, or the connection of the Major,
besides the argument is defective diverse ways, if he had stated and then proven
it, that, if such, whom the Scripturs call Perfect, did break the commands
daily, in thought, word, and deed, then he had argued to the purpose: and for
their failings being recorded to our use, it can not infer the necessity of our
sinning daily, unless he will be so absurd, as to say, that they are therefore
recorded, that we may imitat their failings, and not avoid them. In fine let
him cause his argument conclude in the term of the question, to wit, that every
man, notwithstanding any Grace received, must sin daily, in thought, word, and
deed, and prove his Propositions, and he shall not want either an
acknowledgment, or an answer. And lastly, to conclude this chapter, he says, I
should rather have cited the old Begardi, than the Fathers, and the old
Alumbrados, who had the same opinion, and practices suitable. But if their
opinion was, that men may be free of sin, and their practices suitable, sure
then they were perfect, and if so, deserve more to be followed, than I. B. or
his Brethren, whose principle and practice (as himself confesses) is for sin,
and daily continuing in it, against any perfection, except such as can admit of
sin, for to be breaking the commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, is
essential to his Christianity.

Section Tenth, Wherein his Fifteenth Chapter, of PERSEVERANCE, is considered.
1. In this chapter of Perseverance it would seem the man fansieth he has got
into the pulpit, for he affirms, as if all, that read him, were bound to
believe without further inquiry; for, after he has introduced himself with his
old accusation of Pelagianism, he concludes this doctrine of the possibility of
falling from Grace to depend upon freewill, and ushereth-in a long invective
against this, as maintained by me, upon the supposition of his old re-iterated
calumny, that I asserted all the regeneration of the Saints to proceed only
from the Light of Nature, without the effectual operation of the Spirit of
Grace, which how false it is has above been shown: he gives us a large
citation out of their Confession of Faith, with an account thence deduced (or
explication thereupon) in what respect they hold Perseverance. Wherein if he
will hold to the first asserted by him, to wit, that they assert not the
perseverance of any that are not truly regenerated, we are agreed, for in that
sense I never did deny it. And then he gives eight considerations for their
doctrine, all which conclude nothing but upon the supposition of the truth of
their former principls, especially of Election and absolute Reprobation, so
that it is but a begging of the question, as his very eighth consideration
shows, page 356. n. 14. to wit, that the affirming this doctrine (to wit, that
there may be a failing-away from beginnings of true and saving Grace) will give
a blow unto many articles of their Faith: but can this have any weight to
convince such as do not believe these articles of their Faith? It seems then it
is nor for me or any Quaker that this is written, so we are the less concerned
to trouble our selves with it.

2. At last he comes, page 357. n. 15. to examine my arguments, and first to
what I urge from Jud. verse. 4. where it is spoken of some, that turned the
Grace of God into wantonness, he says, this is not understood of the true
Grace of God, but external grace, such as is that Tit. 2: 12. which teaches to
deny ungodliness, but for this he gives no proof. Next it seems to him the
Grace of God, that teaches to deny ungodliness, mentioned Tit. 2: v. 12. is
not the true Grace of God. where learned he this, or how proves he it? He
says, to understand the faith, which some are said to have made shipwreck of,
1 Timothy 1: 19. to be true and saving faith, is contrary to 2 Timothy 2: 17. and
other places, where the doctrine of faith is spoken of, thence he concludes it
was only the doctrine of faith they fell from: but this is a conclusion fit only
for credulous persons, and proves nothing, unless he will argue because in
some places the doctrine of faith is spoken of, therefore wherever faith is
spoken of, it must be understood of the doctrine of Faith, and not of true and
saving Faith, which were most absurd. He says to Heb. 6: 4, 5. the words are
not absolute, but conditional, if they fall-away: but such a condition
imports the thing supposed, to be possible, being given for a caution. He
adds, there is nothing there that is necessarily to be understood of true and
saving Grace: but let him inform, according to Scriptur, how any man can come
to taste of the Heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the Life to come, and be
made partaker of the Holy Ghost, without true and saving Grace. For what he
adds to this, being built upon the supposition of Election, I refer it to what
is above said upon this subject. He concludes Vossius's testimony to be false,
in saying, that this was the common opinion of the Ancients. But if so little
credit be to be given him, he did not well that made so much use of him to prove
what was Pelagius's doctrine, as he has done throughout this Treatise. For John
Owen's citations, I have neither accommodation nor time at present to examine
them, it is enough to me that this is contrary to Scriptur, though all these he
mentions had said so. To prove that men may have a good Conscience, and yet
want true faith, he brings Paul's words, Act. 23: v. 1. where, speaking of
himself while a Pharisee, he says, he lived in all good Conscience before God,
etc. but that will not meet this case. Those 1 Timothy 1: 19. who are said to make
shipwreck of a good Conscience, are such who believed the true doctrine of faith
in Christ, as himself before acknowledges. Now albeit a man may be said to
live in good Conscience to other principles, while ignorant of this, yet he
should prove how a man can be said to have a good Conscience, with respect to
the true faith of Christ, held by him, and yet without saving or true grace.
With railing he tells me, page 358. n. 18. that Phil. 1: 6. and 1 Pet. 1: 5.
speak of God's beginning and perfecting the condition. And what then? yet God
does not this against our wills, it is with a respect to our performing the
conditions on our part, which yet we can not do without him. Then he goes about
to prove that Paul could not fall, in answer to my saying from 1 Cor. 9: 27.
that Paul supposes a possibility that he might become a reprobat: but if the
Reader consider how I bring that in my Apology, he will find he had no reason
for this cavil, for I alleged it only to reprove those that are too too
secure, showing, where sin was, there was always a ground of jealousy, since
the Apostle did reckon it needful to keep under his body, to subdue sin, that
he might not become a reprobat, which since the Apostle did, but upon this
supposition, if he did not keep under his body, suppose possible, others had no
reason to presume.

Section Eleventh, Wherein his XVI Chapter Of the Church, his XVII Of the
Ministerial Call, his XVIII, XIX and XXI Of their Qualifications, Office, and
Maintenance, and his XX Of VVomens Preaching, is considered.
1. HIs chapter of the Church is soon dispatched, for it contains scarce any
thing but perversions and railing; for after he has given a large citation out
of their Confession of Faith, and then added some enlargements of his own; and
some little nibling cavils to what I say of no Salvation being without the
Church, page 361. he goes on with his old reiterated calumny, that I suppose
men may be made members of the Catholic Church by the Light of Nature, which is
utterly false. And upon this false supposition is built his n. 5. page 362. as
also what he says, page 364. But n. 4. he screws this to a greater pitch of
falsehood, affirming that what I say of a Particular Church gathered together in
the faith of the true Principles and Doctrins of Christ, by the Spirit of God
and testimony of some of his Ministers, is, that these are persons only taught
by the Light of Nature, and by such Ministers, as preach nothing of the Gospel.
Against a man thus desperately resolved and determined to lie and calumniat,
there can be no guard; but sure all sober Readers will abhor such dealing.
What I speak of a Church, in this respect, is only of such as have the
advantage of the outward knowledge of Christ, as my words afterward show,
where I say, such were the Churches gathered by the Apostles, of which the
Scriptur makes mention. And therefore what he objects that can not be don by
Pagans is wholly impertinent, and does but verify the grossness of his calumny,
which he endeavors to inculcat as a truth to his Reader, page 363. as if what
I say further of the things requisite to be a member of this Particular Church
were a third sort, and not a more particular description of the former, which
the Reader may easily observe, by looking to the place, to be a mere fetch of
his, to afford himself some matter of cavil, which imagining he has got, he
fills-up the paragraph with gross lies and railing, saying, That the Quakers
believe not the holy Truths set down in the Scripturs, because they oppose and
contradict them: That they believe not in, nor make profession of, Jesus Christ
revealed in the New Testament, because they oppose him and all his
Institutions: That faith, according to them, is not wrought by the Spirit of
God, but that Nature can sweetly and naturally incline yea compel thereunto,
All which are gross calumnys. And then he concludes, saying, And thus we have
run round, and are again where we began, which is very true, for he began with
calumnys, and having run round the same way, his work resolvs in them. Page
364. he affirms Men may be Members of the visible Church (and consequently
ought to be reputed such) who are ungodly and without holiness, and offers to
make it good, if I will form a dispute upon it; but I leave him, as to this, to
disput with his learned Dr. Owen, whose works he has applauded in this
Treatise, and whom his Postscript-Brother R. M. has in his preface to this J.
B.'s book highly commended, as a gracious man. As for his silly argument, that
from the Apostle's saying, Act. 2: 39. -- the promise is unto you, and to your
children, and 1 Cor. 7: 14. it follows men become members of the Church by
birth, I leave him to debate it with his great Author Thomas Hicks, who will
tell him (if he be consonant to his own principles) it is a Babylonish
invention. But I. B. has here unawares contradicted himself, for if these
Scripturs prove men become members of the Church by birth, then the sprinkling
them with water sometime after they are born, or their Baby-Baptism, is not
necessary to make them members of the Church, and they are to be accounted such
without it. He says, I am mistaken, when I say, Antichrist built his structure
upon this foundation, (to wit, that men without holiness may be members of the
true Church) because he applies all the privileges of the invisible Church
unto his visible synagogue of Satan: where as this shows that I am not
mistaken, but that my affirmation is true; for if he, to wit, Antichrist, did
believe holiness to be necessary to make a member of the true Church, he could
not apply the privileges of the invisible Church unto his visible members, most
of which he well knows (as oftentimes himself) are not only void of, but
enemies to, holiness. It is false that I agree with him in his not
distinguishing betwixt the Visible and Invisible Church, and yet much more in
unchurching all who are not of his combination; in which albeit I. B. most
impudently insinuats I approach to him, yet himself can not but know it to be a
most manifest falsehood, since I suppose some of all sects of Christians may be
members of the catholic Church, and he knows, and has observed here, how
contrary the Pope is to this doctrine. At last he concludes this chapter with a
fit of Railing, of which the last words must not pass without observation, to
wit, that in stead of true holiness I press upon them a natural, dead, and
anti-Evangelical Morality. Now this Morality, as pressed by me, he himself
confessed before to be such as the Law of Nature taught, (albeit in truth I
pressed none but what is through the Light of Christ, or Grace of God that is
by Christ) which he acknowledged did lead men not to murder, not to steal, not
to commit adultery, which he confessed also was just, holy and good. And so it
seems, according to him, that, which is holy, just and good, not to murder, not
to steal, not to commit adultery, is no part of true holiness, yea is
anti-evangelik and contrary to the Gospel. Now if I would insist after his
method, having much more reason than he, I might at large show what a
Pagan-Gospel to purpose his must be, that is contrary to honesty, chastity, and
innocence; albeit I deny not but the true Gospel teaches more than the height
of mere Morality.

2. He begins his 17 chapter, entitled of a Ministerial Call, after the
repetition of some part of my 10. Thesis, with his old reiterated calumny and
false supposition, that I affirm men to be called and qualified to the
Ministry by the Light of Nature: and to this purpose, to help him to fill up
the paper, he insisteth, page 369, 370, 371. which being false, all that is
built upon it falls to the ground. In this chapter also he is very liberal of
his Railing: Take one instance, page 372. where he says, That the Quakers are
Pagan Preachers, who know not the Gospel, but are sworn enemies to it, and
plain subverters of it, and all the Ordinances thereof. And page 378. he says,
They are a company of the most desperate antichristian opposers of Christ and
all his appointments, that ever the Sun shined on. More of this kind may be
seen, page 374, 375, and 376.

Page 366. n. 3. He says, when I speak of a true call to the Ministry, I must
suppose Ten things, which he after enumerateth, and albeit I judge not my self
obliged to follow him in such excursions, yet, for the Reader's satisfaction,
let it be observed, That I deny not but what I speak here is with a relation to
a visible Church, which is his first supposition. Secondly, That I acknowledge
that in it there must be a standing Ministry, which is necessary, and this is
his second and third. That I acknowledge this to be an Institution of Jesus
Christ, which is his fourth. That None ought to take this upon him, without
being lawfully called thereunto, which is his fifth. That also None may take
upon them that work, but such as are called to the Ministry, so as to exercise
it constantly, as exercised by Ministers; yet a man may, when particularly
called by the Spirit thereunto, do that which is the work of a Minister, which
his doing pro hic and nunc makes him not a Minister properly, and this is his
sixth. That neither the Work nor Office is common to all the Members, so that
they may not do it simply as Members, which is his seventh and eighth. That a
Call differs from Gifts and Qualifications, which is his ninth. And lastly,
That there are some Rules in the Scriptur (if he understand general Rules, as I
suppose he does) which difference a true Call from a false, which is his tenth
supposition. Now wherein I here disagree from other Quakers, or my self, as he
insinuates, he may be pleased next time to inform. I might pass what he says
in the next paragraph, page 368. concerning the several sorts of Calls to the
Ministry, as containing no answer to me, were it not to show that he there but
begs the question, and contradicts himself. (1.) He begs the question, while he
supposes that the approbation and concurrence of men, in a call, hinders the
cail from being immediate, and that there is no immediate call now, which he all
affirms without proof. (2.) Of Mediat Calls he says, some are Rare and
Singular, when a Church is erecting, and another Ordinary, according to the
Rules set down in the Word. So it seems the Rare and Singular Call, which is
usually ascribed to that of the first Reformers, was not according to the Rules
prescribed in the Word. But, if such Rules be set down, by what authority,
without the Word, can he affirm they may be dispensed with, if he contradict
not his own Principles? (3.) He says there must be an In ward Call, which is
the signification of God's mind, of his calling and appointing him to the
Ministry. This is good, and it is false that he says, page 372. that this
will not satisfy us. Yet he can not stand to this, but contradicts it, page
372. speaking of my words thus, What means he by this, must be called by the
Spirit? Is this an inward Inspiration, or Enthusiasme, saying to the man, he
must go preach? We reject all such phancies, etc. But is not an inward call,
signifying God's mind to a man of his calling him to the Ministry, an inward
inspiration, telling him he must go preach? Or can an inward call be without an
inward inspiration? The Reader may judge of these inconsistencys. As to his
question, page 369. Whether to be instructed by the inward Virtue and Power of
God in the heart be so necessary to a Minister, that he can not be without it?
I say it is, and the Reader may observe how he is pinched, while himself is
loath to say otherwise, page 370. yet at last he says, he dare not say it,
referring to his learned Mr Durham, as he calls him, and giving the example of
Judas, of which hereafter. However we see, according to him, that not only one
who wants holiness, but even a Devil may and ought to be esteemed, heard and
obeyed, as a Minister of Christ, and that all they judge needful in the Call
and Qualification of a Gospel Minister may agree to the Devil himself, nor can
they be sure but their Ministers may be all Devils, for ought they know. It is
false that he adds in this page 370. that I agree with Socinians and
Arminians, in affirming that whoever understands the Truth of the Gospel, and
are able to instruct others, may and have right to teach. This I nowhere
affirmed, and do wholly deny whatever knowledge or ability a man have to
instruct, by reason of his gifts either natural or acquired, that he ought to
take upon him to teach, without being particularly called thereunto; and
therefore the Scripturs he brings against such as say so, are not to the
purpose against me. To my first argument he confesses that it proves the
necessity I speak of, to make a man a real, upright, and sincere Minister,
before God, but that any that are not real and upright are to be esteemed
Ministers at all, or heard, as such, I deny, and remains for him to prove. Why
are we so often forbidden to hear false Teachers? And that this is not only
with respect to teaching false doctrine, the Apostle shows, 2 Timothy 3: v. 5.
where he exhorts to turn away from such as have the form of godlyness only,
(which can not consist with false doctrine) To my second Argument, mentioned
page 372. he confesses, what he says further in that paragraph is above
answered. To my argument showing that if the Inward testimony of the Spirit be
not thought needful, the Gospel-Ministery should be postponed to the Legal, he
most ridiculously answers then the Jews needed to doubt of the Priests and
Levits; whereas my argument was, if they were certain, and we should be
uncertain, it would make the Evangelical worse than the Legal: and therefore to
this he returns nothing further but railing. Page 373. n. 10. he asks, how
I will prove that all such as want the call of the Spirit come not in by the
door, but are thievs and robbers, affirming here a man may come in the way
appointed by Christ, though they want this; whereas before, page 369. and in
the end of this page he affirms the necessity of an inward call, saying they
must have an inward call. I run not out, as he alleges, upon a mistake, in
saying, the succession of the Church is objected against this doctrine, albeit
I. B. and his We may not do so, since I write to others than he will perhaps
include in his We. He bestows his n. 12. page 374. in railing, and referring
to what is formerly said by him, page 375. n. 13. To my answer to that
objection, that who pretend to an immediate call, should prove it by miracles,
showing it was the same objected by Papists against the primitive Protestants,
he in a frothy manner desires me to take it thus, and it will be too hot for my
fingers, that they who had immediate calls from God were able to give evidence
of the same by miracles or some other evident testimony of the Spirit, which to
contradict had been iniquity and utterly unreasonable. I grant the whole, and
therefore desire him to show me, and prove it, what way the first Reformers did
thus evidence their call, which is not done by those called Quakers, but his
probation must be somewhat solider than the railing with which he fills up
the rest of this paragraph. Page 376. n. 14. (as it should be marked) he
argues against my saying that such as receive and believe the call of true
Ministers verify it, and become the signs of their Apostleship. 2 Cor. 13: 3.
albeit this was the very answer given by Beza to Claudius Espenseus at the
conference of Poissy, and let him urge this if he can, any way against us,
which may not be as well urged by Protestants against Papists, and if he can
not, he does but work for his great Father the Pope, to whom to their great
shame the Protestant Clergy begin to recurr, to justify their calling.

Having ended this paragraph with railing, he begins the next with a silly
groundless perversion and inference, viz, that because I say that this, to wit,
the inward Life and Virtue, which is in true Ministers, is that, which gives
to the Minister the true and substantial call and title, it follows that the
extraordinary call was no true and substantial title, as if any extraordinary
call wanted this life and virtue, and that, albeit it prove an evidence to such
as receive them, yet some may have it who are rejected of rebellious men. To
prove the necessity of laying-on of hands, he asks Why then were hands laid
upon Paul and Barnabas Act. 13: 3.? citing other places. Answ. Because there
was then a Spiritual virtue communicated by that action, which they ascribe not
to theirs, yea the places cited by him prove it, as Mark 16: 18. Luk 13: 13.
where the laying-on of hands is said to cure the sick. I said not that the
laying-on of hands always was the giving of the Holy Ghost, it is enough if it
was a communicating of some spiritual virtue, which by their own confession
theirs is not. After he has ended this paragraph with railing, he ends this
chapter with observing the infallibility pleaded for in Ministers by some
Quakers: but if he judges them to errin this, he should have applied himself
to them, answering the arguments, by which they vindicat what they say in that
matter.

3. I come now to his 18 chapter of Ministerial Qualifications, where, after he
has begun and repeated some words of mine, he will have the Grace of God to
respect not the esse or being, but been esse or wel-being of a Minister; albeit
elsewhere he would be mincing this and eating it up, yet it appears to be his
belief, to prove which he asks, page 380. what I think of Balaam, who is
called a Prophet, not a false Prophet? But he has not proven that no more is
required in a Gospel Minister, than in a Prophet merely to foretell things to
come. God's speaking to him urges nothing, for God spoke also to Cain, as
himself confesses, chap. 3. yet it will not follow that Cain had all the
qualifications requisite to a Gospel-Minister. To my answer of Judas, that they
had not proved he wanted Grace when called, he refers to what is written of the
possibility of falling from Grace, to which also I refer it, and in this also
resolves what he says, page 380. n. 4. in his very first paragraph he has his
old calumny, that all the power, virtue and life of the Spirit, according to
me, is not to be understood of what is imported by these words in Scriptur, and
this he insinuates again, page 379, 380-384. but as this is false, so what is
built upon it falls to the ground. Because I deny the absolute necessity of
humane learning to the Ministry, therefore he insinuats as if I thought it
utterly useless, page 379. which is false. And so what he says, p. 382, 383,
384. to prove the usefulness of natural Sciences is to no purpose against me,
who deny not their usefulness among men, nor yet say, when well improved, they
are useless to a Minister, or that such things may not be improved by a
Minister, when acted by the Spirit so to do, as Paul did the saying of the
Heathen Poet. The thing then I only deny, is, that they are absolutely needful
qualifications to a Minister. What he mentions to be said by Calvin of the
Philosophy spoken of by Paul, Col. 2: 8. I can very well agree to, without
prejudice to any thing said by me, I do not say, as he falsely affirms p. 383.
that Learning and Grace are contradictory. And whereas he says he is far from
saying that Learning is more necessary than Grace, he does but cheat his
Reader, and contradict himself and his learned Mr. Durham, who makes Grace only
needful to the wel-being, but Learning to the being of a Minister. And their
admitting of Ministers shows this, for they will admit none, till they be sure
he has Learning, but many whom they are not sure have Grace, yea upon the
supposition they want Grace, yet they think they ought to be held and reputed
by the People as true and lawful Ministers. And whereas he insinuates, page
383. that I bring-in a fable, which he says I have ready at hand; if he dare
charge me in this with the asserting of a falsehood, in matter of fact, I will
give evidence for proof, the persons being yet alive, but until he do that, my
knowing the thing to be true gives me ground enough to assert it. To my
argument showing that without Grace a man can not be a member of Christ's Body,
which is the Church, far less a Minister, in stead of answer, after he has
accused me as not understanding the difference betwixt the Visible and
Invisible Church, he tells, Christ is an Head to both, which I deny not: that I
apply Epb. 4: 7. 11. 16. 1 Cor. 12. solely to the Invisible Church, so as to
exclude the Visible, is his mistake, not my ignorance. Then he goes about to
show the difference betwixt Gift and Grace; but that any had the gifts, there
mentioned, who were altogether void of Grace, remains for him to prove. Besides
what is mentioned, he is not sparing of his calumnies in this chapter, as where
he says, page 382. that I deny that about the time of Reformation there was a
Christian World, which is false, in respect of Profession, in which sense I
only here understood it; and page 385. albeit he find me calling the heresy of
Arius horrid, yet upon the trust of his Author Mr. Clapham he affirms the
Quakers to be in this erroneous: but sure I have better reason to be acquainted
with the Quakers doctrins, than any of his lying Authors. Another of his
calumnys is, page 386. that we lay-aside all means in coming to the Saving
knowledge of God's Name: and albeit his railing in this chapter be thick
enough, that the Reader may easily observe it, yet for his more particular
direction, let him observe, 380, 381-385, 386. And whereas, page 386. n. 11. he
enumerateth several particulars, wherein he affirms we agree with Papists, he
may find them refuted and answered in G. K's book, called Quakerism no Popery.
And in the last two sections of that book written by me he may find himself and
his Btethren proved far more guilty of that crime than we, which because the
Professor John Menzies, against whom it is written, found not yet time to
answer, he, as having more leasur, may assume that province. If the increase of
our number be, as he says, a clear verification of 2 Thessalonians. 2: 9, 10, 11, 12.
that we are of the deluded ones there spoken of, then it must be a clearer
verification of it, as to them, that they are of that deluded company, since
they are more numerous than we, and also increased more suddenly. As for his
exhortations and wishes in the end, because I will be so charitable as to
suppose they come from some measur of sincerity, I do not wholly reject them,
only I must tell him, that nothing has more conduced, of an external mean, to
confirm me in the belief of the verity of the principles I hold, than his
treatise, because of the many gross calumnys, manifest perversions, and furious
railing in it; since I know the Truth needed no such method to defend it, and I
can not believe one in the Truth would use it, since lying is contrary to the
Truth, therefore if he will lay-aside all this falsehood and passion, he may
have a more sure ground of hope to see the truth manifested to the dispelling
of Error.

4. He begins his 19 chapter of the Ministerial Office with supposing that
their Order is according to Scriptur, and that what we plead for is quite
contrary; and so ushereth himself into a rant of railing, with which he
concludes this paragraph, saying that the evil Spirit that acts us, is such
an Enemy to all Gospel Order, that it cries up only Paganish and Devilish
Consasion. More of this kind the Reader may observe, page 388. 389. 391,
392-394. His calumnies and perversions are also very frequent in this chapter,
as page 387. where he says, We castaway all Order, and in stead thereof
bring-in the confusion of Babel. and page 388. because we are not for the
shadow without the substance, therefore he says we make a repugnancy betwixt
them, which is also false: and again in the same page N. 4. because I say it
was never the mind of Christ to establish the shadow of Officers, without the
power and efficacy of the Spirit, therefore he concludes that the Quakers think
that men can establish the Spirit, which silly perversion will easily be
manifest to every intelligent Reader. And after the like manner page 389. n. s.
because I say that upon setting. up mere shaddows, where the Substance was
wanting, the work of Antichrist was erected, in the dark night of Apostasy; he
concludes, that then (according to me) Christ and his Apostles wrought the work
of Antichrist, and mystery of iniquity, accusing me thence of blasphemy. But
who can be so blind, as not to see this manifest perversion? And again, page
390 he says, I will that every man, according as his own spirit (falsty called
the Spirit of God) moves him, setting to this work, meaning that of the
Ministry; which is a false calumny, never said by me, who deny all false
motions of man's own spirit, however called. And page 391. he says that malice
prompteth me to charge them with owning the distinction of Clergy and Laity,
though I know they do not: where the man supposes that what I write is only
written against the Presbyterians, while he can not but know that I write
against others, since in his first chapter he charges me with writing against
all the Christian World: so it is his malice to say I charge them with it, if
any of those I write to be guilty of it, it is enough, albeit I doubt whether
the Presbyterians can free themselves of it.

5. Having thus far discovered his perversions, I come to the main business,
page 388. he says they plead not for shaddows, but own the Ordinances, as
Christ has appointed to remain and continue for the perfecting of the Saints,
etc. Ephesians. 4: 11, 12, 13. And page 389. n. 6. he asks whether the primitive
Church was not instituted by Christ, and gathered by God, in whose assemblys he
was Ruler and Governor? asking, were there no distinct Officers, particular
individual Persons, set apart for the work of the Ministry, in the Apostles
days? And p. 391. n. 7. he argues against my saying that these mentioned 1
Cor. 12: 28, 29. and Romans 12: 6. were not distinct Officers, but only different
operations of the same Spirit, and against this also he pleads, p. 393. n.
11. and 394. To all which I answer distinctly and particularly, that they can
plead nothing from Ephesians. 4. unless their Church had all the Officers there
mentioned, which it has not, yea and which themselves affirm are ceased, such as
Prophets, Apostles, which are said to be given for the work of the Ministry
and perfecting of the Saints, nothing less than the other: and by what
authority do they then turn these by, and plead so tenaciously for the other?
Let him give a reason for this next, and by the same we shall answer what he
urges from this, but he must remember it is not enough for him barely to say,
these were extraordinary and are ceased, and the other ordinary and remain; but
he must prove it by plain Scriptur, or else be justly rejected, as but begging
the question, as he does page 394. where he supposes there were only 13
Apostles, or perhaps 14, if Barnabas be accounted one, since he confesses the
word signifies one sent, and therefore whoever is sent is properly an Apostle.
Thus also will his other argument return upon his own head, for since such (as
he says) were settled and ordained in the Church by Christ and his Apostles,
how come they to walk so contrary to Christ's Order, as to want, yea and to
judge such unnecessary, in their Church? And as for all the Scripturs cited by
him, to show the distinction of such Church Officers from other Members, they
are not to the purpose against me, who deny not but Members were to be
distinguished; but yet that proves not that any Member was barred from these
exercises, when called by the Spirit thereto, which is the thing in question.
As for his saying that the Apostle is speaking of the Church, 1 Cor. 12. as an
Organical body, if he means the Apostle is comparing the Church to a Body, to
which it answers in many respects, I deny not, but if he say that it answers in
all, I leave him to prove it: however then if we make application of it, as,
the Apostle illustrateth it, their Church will prove a very lame one, for in
this Body (as I. B. himself observes) the Apostle names Apostles and Prophets,
and if we may suppose that these, as being the most eminent, are the chiefest
Members, as the eyes and ears of the Body, their Church that wants these,
must be blind and deaf. And whereas he would make my saying, that the Apostle
meaned here different operations, ridiculous, he but shows his own folly, for
if the Apostle point at different Offices, they will not only want Apostles,
Prophets and Evangelists, but a great many more, for the Apostle names also
verse 28. miracles, gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversitys of
tongues; etc. these then must all be distinct Offices also: how come they to
want them in their Church? or how can they plead for these they have, more than
for such as are placed nothing less by way of distinct Officers, than they? Yea
all the several titles, enumerated by him, page 390. will prove the same way
distinct Officers, and how came they to cashier all these, and reduce them to
so few a number? By what authority and Scriptur warrant do they this? But I
would enquire at him what an Office is? if it be not an operation of the
Spirit, more particularly working in some persons under such a designation. And
this is proved by the coincidency of these Offices in one person, which he
confesses: that some are thence more particularly called to the work of the
Ministry, I acknowledge, and he observes it. That God will move none to violat
the Order established in his house, I deny not; but that to move some at times
to speak, is a violation of that Order, I deny, since the Apostle says the
contrary, 1 Cor. 14: 31. we may all prophesy. In answer to which he supposes
this is restricted to Prophets, but the Text says all, not all Prophets
(albeit it were no absurdity to suppose all the Lord's People to be Prophets in
this sense, as well as they are said to be Kings and Priests) and the words
following show it that all may learn, and all may be comforted, for it were
nonsense to understand this with a restriction. And therefore his bare
asserting, that this contradicts the plain scop of the place, is no argument
for men of reason, who resolve not to build their faith upon his mere say so.
page 395. he thinks my acknowledging that some are more particularly called
to the work of the Ministry than others, is not enough, because they are not
to exhort but when moved by the Spirit, and others when moved may as well as
they, so there is no difference. That Ministers ought not to preach or exhort
without the Spirit's motion or assistance, will come afterward to be proved,
and to suppose God can not or will not move any but Ministers by his Spirit, to
exhort, were to limit him, which is presumptuous in us to do: but in this
appears the difference, that we confess many may, and know thousands among
us, whom we acknowledge to be good men, and sufficiently endued with the
Spirit, toward the work of regeneration in themselves, and brotherly love and
care to their brethren; who never find themselves moved to speak a word in
public: and there are others, whom God calls, to make teaching and the
oversight of the Church so their constant business, that they are less engaged
in worldly affairs, than the generality of those called Clergymen, even among
I. B's Brethren, and therefore are owned and honored, and so far as need
requires, maintained by the Church. But to say that no man ought, without he be
thus particularly called, at any time speak in a publik assembly, (since we
say, that they ought not, but when moved by the Spirit) is not only to accuse
us, but imperiously bind up God, from moving with his Spirit whom and when he
pleases: and this being applied will answer his querys, page 369. where, n.
14. he affirms, that to suppose Ministers may use an honest trade, is to
account the work of the Ministry a light business: But this is to account it
no more a light business, than the Apostle did, who recommended working with
their hands for a livelihood to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20:
34, 35. giving them his own example in so doing. But they indeed must have
small experience of a true Ministry, who do not know a man may be better
qualified to discharge it, by being inwardly exercised in the Spirit and
instructed thereby, than by all the labor and study they can derive from their
books; and perhaps it may be true, which he after affirms, that such who bring
their preaching always out of books, will find little time to follow another
trade: but it seems such Preachers are incapable to follow the Apostle's
exhortation above mentioned, and therefore we will justly conclude them to be
no true Gospel Ministers.

5. That he may be like himself, he begins his 20 chapter of Woman-Peachers
with railing, saying the Quakers are against all the appointments and
ordinances of Christ; then he goeth-on at a high rate, enveighing against the
liberty of Women's speaking, from Paul's words, 1 Cor. 14: 34. as being against
the Law, as being contrary to modesty and shamefacedness, urging, page 398. the
Apostle's authority in writing that epistle, which we deny not, and then he
urges against us 1 Timothy 2: 11. alleging that its being said Adam was first
formed, and then Eva, and Eva being first in the transgression infers that
Women's preaching is against the Law of Nature, and that this silence is imposed
upon Women as a just judgment for Eva's transgression, for this last inference
we have nothing but his affirmation, to the former I answered in my Apology,
showing that these words of the Apostle can not be taken absolutely, and
without limitation, since the same Apostle gives rules how Women should behave
themselves in their praying and preaching in the Church. But he reckons that
this is for me to make the Apostle contradict himself, while this is his own
case, who takes the Apostle's words without limitation, else there is not the
least contradiction, yea his desiring them to ask their husbands at home shows
that it can not be taken universally, seeing all women have not husbands. And
for his saying that what the Apostle says, chap. 11: v. 5. But every woman,
that prays, or prophesies with her head uncovered, etc. is not to be meant
of their carriage when they are praying themselves, but when they are present at
others doing of it, this is his bare affirmation without proof, contrary to the
express words of the Text, which says every woman that prays, etc. not when
she hears another pray. And by this way it might be as easily affirmed, where
the Apostle in the same place speaks of men's praying with their heads covered,
that it is not when they pray themselves, but when they hear others. And that
there must be a limitation he confesses saying, that the Lord made use of
Prophetesses of old, and that he is free to make use of whom be will. If so
then, if the Lord do so now, who dare plead against it? Yea the practice of 1.
B.'s brethren does contradict this Scriptur, if they will not admit a
limitation; for will he deny but heretofore at Presbyterian meetings, where
sometimes 20 and 30 and more have been together, Women have both spoken and
prayed, yea been invited and urged to do so by eminent preachers there present?
And is not that properly a Church, where Christians are met together to worship
God and edify one another? If he say this was only private, I answer: However
Private it was, it was still a Church, for it is not the greatness of the number
that makes the Church, since the fewer number may more properly sometimes be
esteemed the Church, than the greater. And if he take the Apostle's words
absolutely without limitation, it will exclude Women from speaking in any
assembly met for Religious worship and exercise, unless he will be so
superstitious as to ascribe the Church ship to the old Popish Mass-house walls
(and if so, it will trouble him to prove there were any such in Corinth used by
Christians, when the Apostle wrote to them) so as to think that if women speak
not there, they do not speak in the Church. And yet how comes it that by the
Acts of the General Assembly whoores are not only permitted but constrained to
speak in the most public Assemblys, and that in a place allotted for them, no
less eminent than the Pulpit? Sure if such Women may there speak of their sins,
and tell how they have been tempted of the Devil, good Women moved by the
Spirit of God may tell what God has done for them, in preserving them from such
evils. Neither will it serve to say that it is not authoritative speaking, for
the Apostle's words are, I permit not a Woman to speak, not I permit her not to
speak authoritatively; for the words added, nor to usurp authority over the
man, is a distinct precept. Women may usurp authority over their men, who never
offer to preach in the Church, as also some may speak there, who may be very
subject to their husbands. Besides they permit women to sing publicly, which
is a speaking and actual part of God's worship. Now there is not a word in the
Text of these exceptions, more than the other, and let him prove them, if he
can, from the Scriptur, without making way for Women's preaching. He confesses
page 400. that Women may be instrumental in conversion privately, but not
publicly; and for his saying, he will suspect the conversion that way wrought
rather to be a delusion, he but tells his own conjectur, that so he may
conclude this chapter, according to his custom, with Railing.

7. Page 401. He begins his 21 chapter, of Ministers Maintenance, with a
manifest perversion, insinuating as if I were joining with such who are against
Ministers maintenance, which is utterly false, as by what I say upon that
subject does evidently appear. But indeed the man contendeth here very warmly,
and with might and main, and tooth and nail, as they say, albeit the thing he
pleads for, as to the substantial part of it, be not denied; but it will not
satisfy him to grant, as I do, that the Ministers should receive temporal
things from them to whom they minister Spiritual, or that their necessitys
should be supplied: No, he will have it to be an honorary, as he calls it, and
that a large one too, for so Page 405. he interprets 1 Timothy 5: 17, 18, as if
double honor could not be given without large giving of money. It seems poor
folks with him can not give double honor, nor fulfill this command of the
Apostle; it is only the rich folks honor, who can give largely, that he
regards, yea he reckons this giving liberally to Ministers a sowing to the
Spirit, for so he interprets Gal. 6: 8. By all which it is manifest, that to
give liberally to Ministers goes with him for a great article of Faith: but
the question only lies betwixt us concerning a limited and forced
maintenance, for a sumptuous he can not for shame but seem to disclaim, and a
necessary, yea what in any true sense can be so called I confess; therefore, as
what he says of our denying it, is false, so what he urges to prove it as to
us is superfluous. As for a constrained or forced Maintenance, I desire him
next time to prove it from Scriptur, since he has not yet done it, nor indeed
can he by any thing there written, since what is there said, is only by way of
such exhortation, as liberality and charity is enjoined, which albeit he says
confidently he has convicted of falsehood, but he has said it, and that is all,
for there were then no Christian Magistrates to limit or constrain such as would
not give; the conclusions and determinations, of the Magistrate and People make
it not lawful in it self, as all that has been given, either by Heathen or
Popish Magistrates or People, out of Superstition, may be lawful for Ministers
to receive, and indeed many of them begin to call that the Churches patrimony,
and reckon it sacrilege for others than Churchmen, as they call them, to
meddle with it. He knows not how to turn-by Paul's exhortation to the Elders of
Ephesus, Act. 20: 33. and therefore at last, after some ado, he agrees to it,
but to make it have the less weight, he tells how Paul took from other Churches,
which is not denied, but it is manifest Paul preferred the not taking, but
working with their hands to supply their necessitys, as that which was rather
to be done, else to what purpose desires he them to remember the words of the
Lord Jesus, that it is more blessed to give than to receive? But it seems 1. B.
and his Brethren think it the most blessed thing to be getting large
augmentations. My speaking of their complaining of the hardness of Christians
indefinitly, does not hinder exceptions, and therefore his carping at it, page
409. is frivolous. And albeit Paul did not plead for a carnal Ministry, in
reasoning for Maintenance, as he says page 410. yet it very well follows that
such are but a carnal Ministry, that will not preach without they get money,
yea himself confesses in the former page that true Minister must speak,
whether they get aliment or not, and commends some for so doing. But he has
given in this page 410. a notable example of his sottishness and malice both
together, for in answering what I say, that a carnal Ministry wants the Life
and Power, and therefore needs a fixed maintenance, but a Spiritual Ministry
can confide in God who will provide for them; to this he tells, that the Priests
in the days of Iezabel were richly provided for, and the servants of God put to
great straits, shall we therefore (says he) say, that these Priests of Baal
were the only called of God, sent-forth in his Power and Authority; and that
the Servants of the Lord were but a carnal Ministry? This were to argue
carnally with belly arguments, as our Quakers do. The sober Reader may judge of
the sottishness and malicious perverseness of this answer: sottish it is,
because no ways to the purpose, for I never made the being richly provided a
token of a Spiritual Ministry, as the whole I say of this matter evinceth,
but, on the contrary, with Christ and the Apostle I think they are most blessed
who receive least. And will he say that my saying that Spiritual Ministers can
depend upon God who will provide for them, so as not to need a fixed
maintenance, infers any such thing, it is malicious, because he would insinuat
to the Reader that this gross assertion were mine, affirming we argue with
belly arguments, which is a base, but bare, calumny; how much more his
arguments savor of that, the Reader may judge, and that his extreme keenness
in this matter shows how near of kin he is to those, whose God is their belly,
who preach for hire, and divine for money, and look for their gain from their
quarter. What he says of the Quakers riches is both false and frivolous, for
they are none of the richest People, and their Preachers, especially such as
receive maintenance, are usually the poorest among them; for such as have of
their own, and are called to the Ministry, do not use to receive, but
following the Apostle labor to make the Gospel without charge. He turns-by
what I say in the conclusion of my explication of my 10 These, where I show by
many Scripturs the distinction betwixt a true and false Ministry, showing how
we plead for the true, and deny the false, this he calls false, groundless and
impertinent, but he passed it so hastily, because it was too hot for his
fingers, and having given it this passing sentence, he concludes with his old
calumny of our being Pagan-Preachers, and designing Paganish Antichristianisme.

Section Twelfth, Wherein his 22th Chapter Of the Quakers Silent Worship: his
23th of Preaching: his 24th of Praying: and 25th of Singing Psalms are
considered.
NOw follows his 22th chapter entitled of the Quakers silent worship,
wherein if I should return him no answer, but that of Michael to Lucifer the
father of lies, I should do him no injustice, it being a heap either of
manifest calumnies, gross perversions, or abusive railing; wherein, as if he
were constituted Judge by GOD over the Quakers, he concludes them over and over
again to be acted and deluded by the Devil, and to be such as wholly lay
themselves open to him, to possess them and work in them at his pleasur, with
much more of this stuff, for which I need not particularly note pages, for the
Reader will scarce look seriously unto any one of this chapter from 412. to
419. but he will find it very thick: and for a sufficient refutation of it I
recommend to any sober and unprejudicat Reader, seriously to compare and read
with this chapter that to which it relates, to wit, the explication of the 11th
These in my Apology, which I judge may suffice to give a sufficient disgust of
this chapter. But lest he should think this were too slightly a passingover his
matter, and for the Readers more full direction and satisfaction, I will
propose to him to be considered these things following.

1. And first his calumnies, as page 411. where he says, I would have them
understand Christ's Spiritual Resurrection was never till now: whereas I speak
only with reference to the time since the Apostasy, and not to the primitive
times before. And page 412. he says We acknowledge no Motion or inward
Breathing of the Spirit, but what is Extraordinary and merely Enthusiastik, as
also that we abstract from all means. This is false. But as for his supposing
that studied sermons are a mean appointed of God, and that not to do it is a
sure way of tempting God, and inviteing the Devil to deceive and delude, which
he affirms he has shown; I have not seen it, and will expect that next time he
will make it more manifest. His 413 page contains a mass of calumnies, to
wit, That there is no word in our Assemblys of the Scriptur, That we apply them
not for instruction, reproof, and edification of the People, That the Scriptur
is no Rule to us in our walk, nor has any place in our Worship, That there is
to be found in all our solemn service neither preaching, nor prayer, nor
praise. And page 414. he has his old reiterated calumny, that the power and
life the Quakers speak of proceeds not from the Grace of God, but is the mere
operation of Nature To this purpose he has over and over again page 415, 416,
417, 418. 421, and 422. He supposes, p. 414. that it is affirmed by me, that
at all times the Quakers meet, all of them are truly gathered unto the sense
of the Power, and whatever any says comes from it, and is not to be
questioned: which is wholly false. I show their manner of meeting, and their
duty when met, according to their principles, and the consequence thereof, when
they truly perform it; but it does not thence follow that none of them ever
miss in the performance, no more than if he should relate their manner of
Worship, and the good effects he may suppose it sometimes has, it would follow
that whoever set about it, and got up to the pulpit, and read his Text, could
not preach false doctrine, nor speak impertinently: and therefore what he builds
upon this here, as also page 416. n. 7. page 517 and 429. falls to the ground.
But he seeks to uphold this with another calumny, as if all, that frequent
the Quakers meetings, and are accounted of their number, were supposed by us to
be perfect, asking, how can the power of darkness work, if they be made free
from sinning? which is false. How we affirm this absolute perfection, even of
such as we account our Brethren, I have shown in my section of Perfection. A
sixth calumny is, page 415. which he also has, page 424. where he supposes it
to be our doctrine that there is no setting about Prayer or other dutys without
a previous motion of the Spirit, and upon this he insists as an absurdity. But
we speak not of a previous motion, in order of time, as absolutely necessary,
it is enough if it be in order of nature, which he knows may be without any
priority of time; and so his absurdity upon this, page 424. evanisheth, which I
also answer, speaking of Prayer, in my Apology. A seventh calumny is, p. 426.
where he concludes, because I say Gospel Worship is not to be in outward
observations, gon-about by man, in his own will and proper strength; that I
affirm Gospel worship putteth-away all external actions, which how false it is
and inconsequential, any ordinary Reader may easily judge, and yet upon this
false inference he thinks to bind upon me a contradiction, in owning
afterward external acts of Worship, for to say worship may be performed
without these acts, and that worship can not be performed in these acts, is
very different: the last I deny, but own the first. An eighth calumny is, page
418. where because I say, that it sometimes falls out, that one come into a
meeting upon a sinistrous account may by the Power raised in the Meeting be
reached, if the day of his Visitation be not expired, he concludes, if any such
come in, and be not thus changed, his day is gone, and it is impossible to him
to be saved, which is a gross abuse, for albeit the not expiring of his day
must be presupposed to a capacity of Salvation, yet his not presently, yea
after diverse times, not being converted, does not suppose his day to be over,
since it was never our principle, to say, God affords men no opportunity but
one. Besides these, there are many other perversions scattered up and down,
such as, page 421. his saying that the waiting we plead for, is such as puts
away Prayer, that we plead for it, to shut out the ordinances of Jesus Christ,
and to give God no more, for all his solemn worship, but a dumb mumry, which
word pleases him so well, that he has it several times over.

2. His great and mighty charge in this chapter is indeed great enough, if he
could make it out, and that is, that the Quakers are guilty of Devilry, and are
certainly acted by the Devil in their assemblys. But this he only strongly
affirms without proof, unless one, which, whether it be valid or not, comes now
to be examined, and that is, page 418. from my saying that there will be
sometimes an inward struggling, yea so as the body will be strangely moved: to
this he adds a story of one Gilpin, long ago answered, and describes these
motions of the Quakers to be foam, swell and froath at the mouth, which is
false, and returned upon him as a calumny, however he compares these motions of
the body as asserted by me to the work of the Devil, and the old Phythoniks.
But it seems malice has wonderfully blinded the man here, else he would not
have given his own cause, which he esteems the great Cause of God, so deep a
wound; for in the book called The Fulfilling of the Scripturs, a treatise much
applauded by them, whose author is said to be Robert Fleeming, one of their
nonconforming Brethren, he relates as a convincing proof of the Power of God,
how some were so choked, and taken by the heart, that they were made to fall
over, and so carried out of the Church, and as a convincing appearance of God
and down-pouring of the Spirit, that there was a strange and unusual motion on
the hearers, which by the profane was called [the Stewarton Sickness] from the
name of the Parish. Now what difference is betwixt this and my speaking of men's
being strangely moved by the Power of God? Will not this prove as much that all
this was Devilry and the passions of the old Phythoniks? Since these motions
are made the great argument why the Quakers are said to be acted by the Devil,
let him the next time assign clear reasons, according to Scriptur, why these
motions upon the Presbyterian bodies are a convincing sign of the working of the
Power of God among them, but that the motions on the Quakers bodies are enough
to confirm they are acted by the Devil: and if he do this effectually, he may
be in some hopes of gaining a proselyt. Next to this I come to consider what he
urges as a great absurdity, to wit, that the Quakers turning their minds inward
(which he will needs term introverting, and not interpret the word; that he may
make ignorant folks believe it is a piece of the Quakers Devilry) and
laying-aside all their own thoughts and imaginations were a laying-aside both
Christianity and humanity, a becoming no men, but brutes, and worse, and most
capable to be deluded by the Devil. Upon this he insists, page 414. 422. and
else where, as if for men to abstain from their own thoughts and imaginations
were the way to unman them: yet if he will understand it of the Old Man, the
Man of sin, that is corrupted, we will say with the Apostle, that ought to dye
and be crucified, and are so far from thinking this is against Christianity,
that we believe, according to Scriptur, it is the way to become a Christian,
and to overcome the Devil, not to lay our selves open to him. And therefore his
railing against man's silence from his own thoughts, that God may speak and
work in him, does evidence his great ignorance in the work of a true Christian;
for this is so far from descending from humanity to brutism, that it is rather
an ascending from humanity to Divinity: so that, albeit in one sense we are
said to dye, or be emptied as to our selves, yet we do more truly live and
exist. And if he think this a contradiction, let him consider that of the
Apostle, Gal. 2: 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me: and this if rightly considered will answer his
questions, page 422. by answering of which he would have me clear my way of
Devilry. As for any arguments in this cahpter that have the least show of
solidity or weight, I have looked narrowly, but can find none, only in stead
thereof he has some little nibbling quibbles and questions, which albeit they
be so inconsiderable as scarce deserve the pains to answer, yet left he may
think something of them, if omitted, I will now take notice of them, and answer
them; as first, page 412. he asks whether the appointing of set times and
places be not a limiting of the Spirit? Answ. If it were to exclude other times
and places, when God moves thereunto, it might be so judged, but other ways it
is not; for meeting together is not an immediate act of worship, but a matter of
outward convenience, and therefore needs not always a particular motion. As for
his desiring me in this page to answer what he has said of the Sabbath (the
denying of which in their sense he accounts a great error) I must wait then
till he come to his matter, which he has not done in his first Tome, (which I
have only seen as yet) albeit it be a book about an hundred sheets of paper,
and when he has written all that he can say upon that subject, I doubt whether
it may not be sufficiently refuted by a few lines which Calvin has written
thereon, Inst. lib. 2. cap. 8. 34. from whom, as well as the generality of
Protestants, I know not that I differ in this matter. Page 413. he proposes as
an exception against the manner of Worship expressed by me, that it wants
that preparation requisite, which he accounts to be some impression of that
Divine Majesty, with whom they have to do. But I see no reason why he should
accuse us for want of this, since none can be more fit than such as make
silence and an inward turning of the mind necessary to their entering to
Worship: but if he understand this by outward Prayer, meaning this should be
done first, since it is an actual part of Worship, by which we draw near to
that Majesty, there would be a preparation to that, by the same rule, and
another to that, and so a progressus in infinitum. But a godly frame of Spirit,
and a studying to be found always in the sense of God's holy fear in all
things, is a good general preparation to all acts of Worship. And for his
crying out against Silence as that which can not edify, and thinking it so
strange that Life or Virtue should be transmitted from one to another, when
they do not hear one another speak, as page 415. 420. 426. what will he say to
what is reported by the foresaid Author of the fulfilling of the Scripturs,
page 432. how Robert Bruce his Praying caused unusual motions upon those who
were not in the chamber with him, nor knew the cause how that came upon them,
and yet this is given as an instance of his knocking down the Spirit of God
upon them, as they themselves phrase it,? Page 420. he wondereth and asks, how
one in whom the Life does flow, so that he might speak, yet may forbear, since
that is a sufficient call? and how dare they follow their own choice? But this
is a silly quibble: the flowing of Life may sometimes give ability to speak
justifiably, and yet it may be no sin to forbear, since albeit it gives a
sufficiency of authority, yet not a peremptory command, and this is no
contradiction. The Apostle John could have written more and that no doubt from
the Spirit, and yet did it not, 2 John 12. 3 John 13. and I suppose I. B: will
not dare to say he sinned in this forbearance. He goes about, page 420. n. 12.
to examine the Scriptur proofs I bring for Waiting, and then he shows in what
respect waiting is there understood, which nothing hurts my using them. What
if waiting be understood, as he says, in opposition to freting? may not that
be in silence? But as to this since his brother R. M. in the Postscript has
promised us his answer to G. K's book called The Way cast up, we will wait to
see what he answers to his 15 sect. and to the Scripturs brought by him there,
to this purpose: and that he may more fully consider that matter, I recommend
to him the serious perusal of G. K's book, called the Glory and Advantage of
Silent Meetings. He alleges falsely, page 423. that I say men can not wait
upon God in prayer, I say only that Waiting in it self rather denotes a
passive dependence, and that true Prayer presupposes waiting; and that
therefore their objection is frivolous, that ascribes waiting, of it self, or
simply considered, to such acts: but I never denied that a man in Prayer might
be said also to wait. Another of his silly quibbles is, page 424. n. 17. where,
because I say that the Devil can only work in and by the Natural man, for so he
may be pleased to translate my words, or at lest he must suffer me so to do; he
says, he thought he could also work in a Spiritual man, as in Peter, etc. But
not in and by the Spiritual man: it was in and by the natural part both in
Peter and Paul that he wrought; if he thinks not so, let him say the contrary.
Page 425. in answer to what I say of the excellency of this Worship, as that
which can not be interrupted, to prove that Christ's Kingdom needs outward
power to protect it, he tells of the promise that Kings shall be nursing
fathers. What then? That may be an advantage, yet it will not follow there is
an absolute need for it, else Christ's Kingdom could not be without it: but
indeed such a sure outward Kingdom the Priests always covet, where they may be
upheld by the Magistrate, and supplied with daily augmentations, and have all
others that differ from them severely persecuted; for where this is wanting,
they cry out Alas! like Babylons Merchants, and think it goes not well with
their Zion. The rest of this page he concludes with railing; but for answer to
it, he may know that the Quakers meetings in Scotland, albeit few in number,
have met with more injurys from wicked men, than the Presbyterians, and that
they never defendedh emselvs with force of Arms against any, far less against
the Magistrate, as his Brethren have don, or with sheding of Blood. As for his
other quibble, page 427. that ceasing to do evil is not without all action of
the mind: not to contend with him about it, I shall not plead for a further
cessation, than such a simple forbearance imports; and let him call it an
action, if he will. His chief reply to what I say in answer to what they object
of Silence, besides some scofs, is, that what I alledg is not spoken of an
introverting Silence, for he will needs use this Latin word, and not translate
it, but can there be any true silence, in order or with respect to the worship
of God, where the eye of the mind is not inward, since the Spirit of God, by
which Christians are led and instructed, is said to be within them? But page
424. n. 16. he says that watching is not a turning inward, but a looking
outward also. Indeed they, who look outward, go the way to be tempted, for
outward objects is not that which delivers men from temptations, but often
draws them to them. But it would seem according to him, that men, if their eyes
be shut, or in a dark room, can not watch, in a Spiritual sense, and then what
became of many Saints that have been put into dungeons? As to what he adds out
of Dr Stillingfleet's book of the idolatry of the Church of Rome, and Taulerus
sermons, which takes up about 7 whole pages, (by which the Reader may see how
his book grows so bulky) he misseth his aim, for he will never prove that the
first and most eminent Preachers among the Quakers, who both practiced and
commended this way of Worship, as well as thousands of them yet, did ever know
that there was such a thing spoken of among Papists, or that there ever lived
such a man as Taulerus. So that he but wastes his paper, in seeking to prove
they have borrowed their doctrine thence: and albeit I will not justify many of
the expressions used in the pages cited by him, yet I will not scruple to
affirm that some of them favor more of Christianity, than his lies, calumnys,
and railings.

3. He begins his 23th chapter of Preaching, that he may be like himself, with
a calumny, saying, I have something against Preaching, Praying and Singing,
which is false. I am against none of those dutys, as truly performed according
to the right Gospel method, as by the sequel will appear. And that he may go on
at the same rate, he seems to be glad that I acknowledge the necessity of
Worships being consonant to Scriptur; but then, that he may not want something
to cavil, he entreats me to reconcile this with what I say of the Scripturs:
but he should first have shown me wherein the difference is, for I profess I
see none. He desires also to know from Scriptur the necessity, when men are met
together, of turning their minds inward, which he still will express, to make
it the more frightfull, by the Latin word Introversio; and this he thinks so
hard, that he often insists upon it, as page 446, 447, 448. But is it not
needful to assemble in the Name of Jesus? And can that truly be without
turning the mind inward? unless with superstitious Papists he thinks it is
enough, for meeting in the Name of Jesus, to say, when they begin, In Nomine
Domini, however their minds be abroad. Can there be any true sense of God's
Majesty, as him to whom we draw near, which himself confessed before to be
needful, without a serious turning of the mind inward, that is, an abstracting
from all worldly and vain thoughts, to mind GOD and the operations of his
Spirit in the Soul? Let him read Psalm 46: 14. and 62: 1. Eccles. 5: 2. Zach.
2: 3. It were hard for him to forget his old often reiterated calumny, and
therefore he has it here oftener than once, as page 441, 442-447. alleging
most falsely, that all that, by which the Quakers preach, or require as needful
to preach, is but the dim and darkened and malignant Light of Nature: neither
will he forget here his constant trade of Railing, take one instance, page 447.
where he says, that, before I want revelations, I will go to the Devil to get
them, as Saul did to the Witch of Endor. More of such railing stuff the Reader
may find, and that very plentifully, page 440-442-448. He wants not here also
his malicious insinuations, as page 439. that the Quakers use legerdemaine, to
make People believe they speak all without a previous thought in their
Preaching, and yet have all, to a word, well studied. If he accuse the Quakers
of this, let him prove it, if he can, for we deny it as a gross calumny.
Another is, page 441. That we would have all study, all meditation, all Prayer,
and wrestling with God in Prayer laid aside, which is also false. But to
proceed, he foundeth what he says in this matter upon two great mistakes,
which being removed, the superstructur will fall of it self. The first is, page
438. where, to prove the usefulness of study and premeditation to Preaching, he
tells how Paul made use of what he had read out of a Heathen Poet, his
recommending reading to Timothy, his desiring Titus to hold fast the faithful
Word, as he had been taught, etc. and Apollos being instructed by Aquila and
Priscilla: all which are nothing to his purpose, for we never said it was
unlawful for men to read books, especially the Scriptur, or that by such
reading men may not acquire knowledge, which may prove useful in Preaching or
defending the Truth; but the question is Whether men may make use of these
things in publik Worship, otherwise than as led and acted and influenced by the
Spirit so to do? and Whether any of these places will allow men to preach in
the strength of their natural or acquired parts, without being acted therein by
the Spirit? Let him prove this, if he can, for this is the matter in question;
and remember Robert Bruce his censur of Robert Blair his sermon recorded in the
fulfilling of the Scripturs. His second mistake is, page 443. where he
supposes that to be led by the Spirit excludes, or is inconsistent with,
reading Scriptur, and with all the particular instructions given by Paul to
Timothy and Titus, who might have said, as this man argues, I can not be
stinted unto these doctrins, which you desire me to put the brethren in
remembrance of; for I must speak as the Spirit speaks in me, and the like.
But will he say, that Timothy was not to speak as the Spirit spoke in him? To
suppose this, as inconsistent with such instructions, is to beg the question;
and that these are consistent, I have shown above in my third section of
Immediate Revelation: or let him tell plainly, if Timothy could do those things
acceptably without the Spirit, since all worship is commanded by Christ to be
done now in the Spirit. And yet he seems to agree to the necessity of the
Spirit, else why quarreleth he me, page 448. for insinuating, as he says, that
their Ministers preach not in the demonstration of the Spirit? giving an
enumeration, page 439. of several ways which he says, I know not, but their
Ministers are led to preach by, among which this is one, What know I (says he)
but there may be some, that never digest their preachings so, as not to lie
open to the influences of the Spirit, and to welcome his seasonable and useful
suggestions, and so speak many things, which they had not once premeditated?
But I would ask him Whether it be lawful for any so to digest their matter, as
not to lie thus open to the Spirit's influences? He would seem to say it were,
since it is but some, and a may be some too, with him, that do so. And whereas
he tells of some, that are constrained to change their text, and what they bad
purposed to speak upon it, this shows the case is but rare, and therefore I am
not to be blamed for what I say in general of Preachers among Papists and
Protestants, whose general way is to prepare aforehand what they preach, and
then speak it to the People at a set hour, without waiting for the leading of
the Spirit, or whether they have its influence or not. And for all the weight
that this man would seem to lay sometimes upon the Spirit's influence and
concurrence, yet he gives shrewd presumptions that he does it but pro forma,
else how comes he to urge as an absurdity, page 445. that all that Ministers
preach by the Spirit must be true? And why not? If it be from the Spirit, it
can not be other ways; yet men, whose principle it is to speak from the Spirit,
may through weakness and mistake preach false doctrine; yet the Spirit is not to
be blamed for it, but those who keep not purely to it. I suppose he will not
deny, but all that, which men preach according to the Scriptur, is infallibly
true, it will not thence follow, that all that, which men, whose principle it
is to preach acccording to Scriptur, preach, is true, because that through
weakness they may mistake the true meaning of the Scriptur. Also what he adds,
if the matter be thus, it is all one whether the Preacher be young or old, --
for it is not he that speaks, but the Spirit in him, for this savoureth not
of a Christian Spirit, to seek to draw an absurdity or make a mock of that
which is no other than Christ's express words, Matthew. 10: 20. Mark 13: 3. and
indeed what he says in this page, N. 9. in answer to these Scripturs, seems
rather a mock at Christ and his Apostles, than any answer, asking me if I know
not that Christ gave them their Preaching with them, telling them what they
should say, And as ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of God is at hand. And a
little after he says, they had their sermon taught them before hand. But dare
he say, that Christ's words, before mentioned, were therefore false? This he
must say, or else prove nothing. Or will he say that the Apostles in all that
progress said nothing but these seven words The Kingdom of God is at hand? For,
according to him, this was all they said, which they had learned aforehand, and
not as the Holy Ghost taught them in that hour what to say, albeit it be
Christ's express words Luk 12: 12. Page 447. to my argument that according to
their doctrine the Devil himself ought to be heard, seeing he knows the notion
of Truth, and excels many of them in learning and eloquence; he answers, Why
does the man thus speak untruth? Do we say that every one, though he were the
Devil, if he speak truth, should be heard? Do they not say that men ought to be
heard and accounted as Ministers, albeit void of the true Grace of God, if
having the formality of the outward call? And to prove this, do not they bring
the example of Judas, whom Christ called a Devil? And they suppose him to have
been such, even when sent by Christ, and deserved to be heard as his Apostle.
Let him consider then how he can shun what I have affirmed. And albeit the
Devil may speak without study, yet he can not be said to speak by the Spirit of
God, which is the thing we affirm needful to Gospel preaching. And for his
last argument, page 448. that, since extraordinary gifts ceased, there has
been no ordinary way of Preaching but by ordinary gifts studied and acquired;
it is but a bare begging of the question, and the same upon the matter with his
new enforced objection which I answered toward the beginning of my third
section of Immediate Revelation.

4. I come now to his 24th chapter of Prayer, and as to his first paragraph,
there needs no debate, for (except some railing intermixed) I own what is
asserted in it, as to the necessity of Prayer, and its being through Christ as
Mediator. In the next he alleges I speak untruely in saying that the acts of
their Religion are produced by the strength of the natural will, for they can
pray when they please: but how truly this is affirmed concerning them will
after appear, albeit in opposition to it, after citing a passage out of the
larger Catechism, he says, they own the influences of the Spirit as
absolutely necessary to this duty; which if he would hold to, there needed no
further debate, I should agree to it, for he does untruely state the question,
when he says a little after, that the motions and inspirations I plead for are
extraordinary, which is false, and never said by me: and therefore his building
on it is in vain, as well here, as page 452. 457-459. 461. where he insinuats
that I judge not the gracious and ordinary influences of the Spirit a
sufficient warrant to pray, which is false. What he says, page 451. of the
necessity of Prayer at some times, and of the Scripturs mentioning Prayers
being made three times a day, I deny not, nor is it to the purpose. The
question is Whether any can pray acceptably without the Spirit? We see he has
granted they can not, then the thing to be proved, is, Whether the general
command authorizeth any to set about it, albeit in a manner, which is granted,
will not avail, and is unacceptable. So the matter resolves in examining what
he can say from Scriptur or other ways, to prove this: and that there may be no
mistake, let it be considered, that I deny not the general obligation to pray
upon all, so that they, who do not pray, sin, albeit they be not sensible of
the Spirit's help enabling them to do it; but that the way to avoid this sin is
not to commit another, to pray with out the Spirit, but to wait for the Spirit,
that they may pray acceptably, seeing without it, though they should use words
of Prayer, it would be no fulfilling of the command. And first then to what he
argues page, 452. from the reiterated commands of God to pray, I answer, that
God's command lays upon man an obligation to pray I deny not, but God commands
no man to pray unacceptably, God commands the right performance of Prayer, and
this he has confessed can not be without the Spirit, therefore God commands no
prayer without the Spirit, neither is the command answered or fulfilled by such
as pray without it. To this he objecteth, page 453 and 458. that the same Moral
dutys might be shifted, until the Spirit lead to them, and also natural acts
of sleeping, eating, etc. which are abomination in the wicked: and yet, to go
round, he accuses me, p. 454. albeit falsely, of saying Men may pray without
the Grace of God, which by this objection is his own faith, since he will not
deny but men may sleep and eat without the Grace of God. But to this objection
I answered in my Apology, showing the difference betwixt these acts and acts of
Worship, which he grants, page 461. and albeit I confess, which he urges here,
that these profit not the man at all, as with respect to God's favor, when done
without the Spirit, yet they really fulfill the matter of the thing commanded
in relation to our neighbors and to our selves, in eating, drinking, sleeping,
else it would be self-murder. But in Prayer the matter is not fulfilled without
the Spirit, which relates only to God, to whom every prayer without the Spirit
is an evil favor, and not in any true and proper sense a Prayer; for Prayer,
as to the material part, can not be performed without the Spirit. He
confesses, according to their Catechism, that the Spirit is needful to know
what to pray for, which is the material part, but the necessity of the Spirit
as to these other things is only as to the formal part, or right manner. And
this pleading for Praying from these natural acts shows how he contradicts
himself, in saying, it is untrue that they are for Prayer without the Spirit;
for if they be not, this argument were impertinent, which is, as these ought to
be done without the Spirit, so ought the other. And yet he more manifestly
contradicts this, page 456. saying, that God requires not men to feel the
influences of the Spirit, as a preparation to Prayer, yea that men ought to
pray, even when, and because, they feel they want them; for if it be true that
he said before, that these influences are necessary to the right performance of
Prayer, either men ought to perform prayer wrong, or this must be a manifest
contradiction: but since this manner of Prayer is owned really in their praying
at set times, whether they have the Spirit's influence or not, it shows I spoke
no untruth of them, and that his saying so was untruely said by him. And hence
also the man's impudence may be seen, page 460. in saying, I am alyar in
affirming they profess they may pray without the Spirit, and have their set
times. But the thing I say, is, that they limit themselves so, as to lay a
necessity upon themselves to pray at set times, as before and after Sermon, and
before and after meat, and this he can not deny, or if he should, there
universal practice would declare him a liar. And if they pray at set times, and
that professedly, without waiting for the Spirit's influence, yea when they are
sensible they want it, do not they profess to pray without the Spirit? What he
says here and elsewhere, that this was the opinion of Swenk feldius and the
Familists, is not to the purpose; for what we believ in this, we do it as being
the Truth, and not with respect to such, of whose belief we take no notice, so
as to make it any ground for our faith. And to show how impertinent this
classing us with others is, to render us odious upon every occasion, I may tell
him here once for all, that even as to this very thing of Prayer he agrees
against us with Papists, Socinians, Pelagians, Episcopalians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Lutherans, Arminians, Antinomians, yea and with Pagans, Turks and
Jews; all which affirm with him, that men may and ought to pray at certain
times and upon certain occasions, albeit not having any present motions or
influence of the Spirit of God so to do.

5. What he says here in several places of Introversion, I refer to to what is
said before, to avoid repetition. It might have been thought that in this
chapter of Prayer, and where he urges it so much from the general command, that
he would have minded it would have been more suitable to pray for such, as he
may account his enemies, and even heretics, than rail at them. But the treating
upon this subject has had no such inference with him, and therefore he is sure
to keep here his old style of railing, which the Reader may observe, page
452-456-459, 460, 461. He has diverse little cavils and quibbles in this
chapter, which I willingly omit, as not concerning the weight of the question,
only to give the Reader a taste of them, I shall note one or two. Page 455. upon
these words sub degustationem he fansieth the Quakers hold a state of Prayer
distinct both from publik and private. But if he had not been very critical, and
ready to catch, albeit he omits more weighty things, he had not troubled
himself with this, which is an error either of the Transcriber or Printer, for
it is in my copy, ad cibum, meaning the prayers before and after meat, and that
the other word does also signify. The next is his asking what I mean by
ejaculations emitted to man's self, and this he says looks like a piece of
Quaker -idolatry. This shows the man's eagerness to stretch every thing to make
an accusation, for by this I intended nothing, but to express such prayers as
men make unheard of others. And if this be a piece of Quakers idolatry, it is
such as he must account the Apostle Paul guilty of as well as I, whose words are
1 Cor. 14: v. 28. (...), sibi ipsi loquatur, let him speak to himself, as both
Arias Montanus and Beza translate it, as well as the English: and that this is
understood of Prayer see from verse 24. So the furious man may see whither his
malice has driven him. He forgeteth not also in this chapter his old calumny,
and therefore has it here oftener than once, that as all the rest, so the
prayers of the Quakers as well as preparations there unto come only from that
Light of Nature, as page 455, 456, 457. and hence he accuses me of
Pelagianism, 459. for saying that to command a man to pray without the Spirit
is to command him to see without eyes, and work without hands, because Pelagius
said, that whatever God commanded us to do, he gave us sufficient strength to
do it. But if Pelagius said so, he understood it of an ability without the
Spirit of God, for which the Ancients condemned him: whereas my very assertion
here is in as opposite terms to that, as any thing can be, since I argue that a
man can no more pray without the Spirit, than he can see without eyes. And
indeed all this man's reasoning in this chapter savours strongly of
Pelagianism, where he pleads throughout for men's seting about Spiritual dutys,
without the Spirit; yea page 463. he says, that the Divine indulgence toward
such as have begun to pray without the Spirit, and afterward have found it
assisting them in their prayer, is a strong inducement and encouragement to
them. For this agrees exactly to the Semipelagian principle, facienti quod in
se est Deus non denegat gratiam, i. e. God will not deny Grace to such as do
what they can. And indeed this allowing men to perform Spiritual dutys without
the allowance of the Spirit, as this man does, pleading for it, and reckoning
the contrary absurd, page 453. is complete Pelagianism, and does clearly
import, that man by the working of Nature can acquire the Spirit, and can do
something in order to obtaining the Spirit, of himself, before he have it: and
thence this man pleads so much, page 451. for the general use of Prayer, from
the Light and Law of Nature, let him reconcile this, if he can, with his other
doctrins, and clear himself of Pelagianism. And it is so much the more
considerable, that he has fallen into this pit, of which he so often falsely
accuses me, as also page 461. He asks again, page 460. why we come to their
places of Worship, if our Conscience be hurt in joining with them, and thence
he concludes, it is to do open contempt. This is but his malicious conjectur:
we come not there but in obedience to the Lord, when moved by his Spirit so to
do, to bear a faithful testimony against all superstition and will worship;
for it is not pleasant to us to come there, where for the most part we are
saluted with knocks and stones and other such brutish and Paganish dealings by
their Church Members, which is the fruit of their holy things, and whereunto
the People are often encouraged by their Preachers, who sometimes show an
example of this themselves, and of whose barbarous actions even by the
Presbyterian Preachers there is a book extant, entitled, of Fighting Priests,
giving account how many of them fell upon these innocent servants of the Lord
with their own hands; and I my self have seen of the present Preachers of
Scotland do it. As for his flouting at the Quakers, for laying claim to a
Spirit of discerning, so as to distinguish who pray from the Spirit, and who
not, he does but therein declare himself to be none of Christ's sheep, who are
said to know his voice from that of a stranger. And as for his saying that the
Quakers judge of this by the mimical postur of the body, it is false, and would
agree far rather to his Brethren, whose affected posturs of body, as well as
their nonsensical and absurd expressions in Prayer have disgusted many of their
way, of which I could give some eminent instances, but that I spare them at
present. The example I gave of their excluding some from their Sacrament of the
Supper, so called, does not halt, as he affirms, page 462. as to the main,
for if the command to take it, is with presupposition of examination, so the
command of praying is with the presupposition of its being in the Spirit, in
which all Worship is now to be, Praying always -- in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6: 18. To
my showing, in answer to their objection of Peter his commanding Simon Magus to
pray, that he says repent and pray, after a mere assertion without proof, he
says, he sees, that with our Quaker, a graceless person can repent, but not
pray. To which I answer, if he speak of possibility, I believe a graceless
person may both repent and pray, but as he can not repent without Grace, so not
pray without the Spirit; but Grace works in all, if not resisted, as the
Spirit does in all to Prayer, when they have received the Grace in measur: but
that some measur of repentance must go before prayer, himself I judge will
hardly deny, since the very offering to pray imports, in the person applying
himself thereunto, a sense of his iniquity, and a desire to be delivered from
it, for which end he approaches to God to demand pardon and help to amend.

6. Now I come to his 25th chapter of Singing Psalms, where I shall not need
to be large: I deny not, as he observes, singing, but to justify their custom of
singing David's conditions, by which many are made (as I observed in my
Apology) to speak lies, in the presence of God. He objecteth the practice of
the Jews: But their practice in matters of Worship, without a Gospel precept,
is not a rule to us. Neither does the instance given by him of Psalm. 66: 6.
answer the matter, for the Jews might very well praise the Lord for the
deliverance of their Forefathers out of Egypt, but that will not allow
Drunkards and impenitent persons to say, They water their couch with tears, as
by singing Psalms many do, which is false. As for his saying, they do but
praise God for what he has done for others, why do they not express it so
then? And whereas he asks, whether the Spirit inspireth the meter in the
song, and the tone of the singing? he shows his folly and lightness, while he
ridiculously supposes that Meter is necessar, or any other Tone, than Nature
has given to every one, of which God by his Spirit makes use as an
instrument, as he does of other parts and facultys of the body, to the
performing of Spiritual dutys. And the like folly he shows when he tells what
they do not in Scotland, since he knows it was not particularly or only against
the things practiced in Scotland that I write in that Apology.

Section Thirteenth, Wherein his 26th Chapter Of Baptism is considered.
1. OUr Author, to show how angry and froward he resolvs to be in this chapter,
makes his first paragraph a complete stick of railing; he begins with telling,
that the Paganish Antichristian Spirit, which reigns and rages in the
Quakers, manifests a perfect and complete hatred at all the Institutions of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and he ends with this exclamation, O! what desperate
Runagadoes must these men be? More of this kind may be seen, page 472, 473,
474. 480, 481. As for what he adds from several Scripturs of Baptism, page
466, 467. what of it relates to the weight of the question will be examined
afterward. He gives us here a citation out of their larger Catechism, and then
comes at last, page 468. n. 4. to examine what I say in the matter, where upon
my urging the many contests among Christians concerning these things called
Sacraments, as one reason against them, he concludes, I might as well plead
against all Christianity, because of the many debates about it: and with this
conceit he pleases himself a little, which only evidenceth his malicious
genius, for I should never have used that as an only argument, and did not use
it at all, but as having many other considerable ones against their use of
these things, and therefore I add that these things contended for are mere
shaddows and outward things. Then to cover their making use of the word
Sacrament, which is not to be found in Scriptur, he objecteth my making use of
the word fermentation, and of the Vehicle of God: but I use not to make use of
these words, when I speak Scots or English, but these words, when interpreted
are made use of in Scriptur, for the Latin fermentum, which signifies leaven,
is often used, even as compared to Spiritual things, as Matthew. 13: 31. Luk 13:
21. 1 Cor. 5: 6, 7, 8. yea the word leaven and leavened is to be found in
Scriptur above 30 times, but the word Sacrament never so much as once; and it
is not (as he says) a poor thing to challenge them for expressing the chief
mysteries of their Religion in words that can not be found in all the Scriptur,
while they affirm it to be the only adequat Rule of their faith and manners.
That we deny the thing truly imported by the Trinity is false. As for the word
Vehiculum Dei as having a respect to Christ's Body or Flesh and Blood from
heaven, that it is a Scriptur word, see Cant. 3: 9. King Solomon made unto
himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon. and v. 10. Vehiculum ejus purpureum,
the Hebrew words for Chariot and Vehiculum are (...) appirion and (...) merkabh
or merkaba, both which signify a chariot and vehicle, and that by Solomon is
mystically understood Christ, of whom Solomon was a figur, or type, none who
are spiritually minded can deny, and consequently that this chariot or vehicle
must be mystically and spiritually understood: nor can it be meant of Believers
or the church, because it is said, the midst of it being paved with love for
the Daughters of Jerusalem, i. e. for Believers, so that they are received by
Christ into this chariot or vehicle, and therefore not it, but distinct, as the
contained is distinct from the containing. But for the further understanding of
these Hebrew words, see Buxtorf his Hebrew lexicon, and the book called
Apparatus in lib. Sohar. part. 1. p. 144. and 553. And however he might cavil
upon this mystical meaning, yet the word is Scriptural, which their barbarism
Sacrament is not. And to his saying (in answer to my showing that by laying
aside this unscriptural term, the contest of the number of the Sacraments will
evanish) that it will remain, if instead of Sacrament they use Signs or Seals
of the Covenant, this is but his bare assertion, until he prove by clear
Scriptur that there are only two signs or seals of the Covenant, which he will
find hard, and yet harder that these two are they. Page 469. n. 5. he denies
the Scriptur says, there is one only Baptism, instancing the baptism of
Affliction. But I speak here of the Baptism of Christ, in a true and proper
sense, and Ephesians. 4: 5. will prove as much that there is one only Baptism, as
there is one only God, which is in the next verse. But before I proceed any
further, I must desire the Reader to observe how this man, speaking of the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, understands it only to relate to the extraordinary
gift of speaking with tongues, which the Apostles had, and not as any thing
common to all true and really regenerated Christians: so that he concludes the
Baptism with the Spirit and with Fire now to be ceased. And upon this his
supposition he builds, page 471-473, 474-478. without so much as offering to
prove it. And to this he adds a gross lie upn me, page 472. that I will have
none to be baptized in the Spirit but such as are endued with these
extraordinary gifts, which I never said nor believed; and therefore this his
false supposition I deny, and consequently till next time that he take leasur
to prove it, all that he builds thereupon is merely precarious, and needs no
further answer. John the Baptist speaking of the Baptism of Christ in general,
as contradistinct from his, says, He that comes after me shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost and with fire, which could not have been the mark of
distinction, if this had only been restricted to what the Apostles received the
day of Pentecost, and not of the Baptism wherewith Christ baptizeth all his
Children. But to rectify the mistake he supposes I am in, concerning the One
Baptism, he tells me, the One Baptism comprehends both the outwvrd element
and the thing represented and sealed thereby: but the reasons he gives for this
are so weak, that thereby I am confirmed I am not in a mistake. I might say
(says he) there were two Circumcisions, because Circumcision is called
Circumcision of the heart. And what then? In that sense there were two, so long
as the outward continued, to wit, the outward and the inward, that of the Flesh
and that of the Heart; and if he can answer this no better than by smiling at
it, we must pity the levity of his Spirit, but not be moved by the weight of
such airy arguments. What he adds of the Object of Faith, being called faith
as also the profession, albeit the Apostle say there is one faith, is not to
the purpose, since these are included in the one true faith the Apostle
speaks of; but for him to say that the baptism of water is included in the
One Baptism, spoken of there by the Apostle, is only to beg the question: and
yet all he does is strongly to affirm this, without proof, so that all that he
says in answer to me being built upon this and such like mistakes needed in
strictness no more reply, as his answer to my argument, page 471. shows,
where he supposes two Baptismes, one administered by Men, another administered
by Christ himself by his Spirit, and not by men. But he should have proved
this, ere he had used it as a distinction, and till he do so, my argument, to
wit, That since such as were baptized with Water were not therefore baptized
with the Baptism of Christ, therefore Water-Baptisme can not be the Baptism of
Christ, will stand for all his blowing. I desire the Reader take notice here of
his insinuation, as if I had borrowed this argument from Socinus, which he has
over and over again afterward, as to others, speaking expressly, page 433 of
my stealing arguments from Socinus. But to show him how unhappy he is in being
so apt to speak untruth, he may understand that I never read three lines of
Socinus's writings hitherto, nor knew what arguments he used, till now he
informs me, in case his information be true. In stead of answer to what I urge
from 1 Pet. 3: 21. in my Apology he gives a preaching made up of mere
assertions built on the former mistakes, and railing; his answer is built upon
the supposing that water baptism goes to the making up of Christ's Baptism,
which is now to continue, which yet remains for him to prove; and on the other
hand supposing that I affirm that by the answer of a good Conscience there
mentioned is to be understood the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which is
false. And upon the same two mistakes he grounds his answer, page 473. n. 8. to
what I urge from Gal. 3: 27. and Col. 2: 12. as a supplement, that the
putting-on of Christ, there mentioned by the Apostle, may be understood of
putting-on Christ by profession, though not in truth and reality, which he also
has, page 438. for which exposition I shall expect his proof next time, if he
have any.

Page 474. He proceeds upon the same unproved supposition, that
Water-Baptisme was instituted by Christ, and here he denies that John's
baptism was a figure. But since John's baptism was a washing with water, and
that the Apostle ascribes the putting-on Christ to the baptism of Christ, as
washing with water typifieth or signifies the washing of Regeneration, so does
John's baptism that of Christ. He concludes this paragraph with a silly
quibble, where, in answer to my urging John's words, saying, I must decrease,
and he must encrcase, he adds, as if John and Baptism with Water were all one,
and Christ one and the same with the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. Poor man! he
has been sore pinched, when he betook himself to this silly shift. Will he say
this is to be understood of John's and Christ's Persons, and not of their
Ministry? Then we must suppose John grew less and decrepit as to his person
ever after this, and Christ grew bigger and taler; let him remember to prove
this, when he writes next. He goes on, page 475. upon his old mistake,
supposing that Water Baptism was instituted by Christ, and that he gave command
to his Disciples so to baptize, and that Mat. 28: 19. is to be understood of
water-baptisme, all which is merely to beg the question. He says, that to say
John's baptism is not pure and Spiritual, or that it is a Legal rite, is to
condemn John, Christ and his Apostles, because God gave John an express command
for it. And what then? God commanded the Legal rites also, that did not hinder
them from being such, to say he needed not such a command. If it had of the
nature of the Legal rites, is but a presumptuous quarrelling with God, seeing on
all hands it is granted he commanded it, and a mere affirming it is not such,
in stead of proving of it. As for the Apostle his making honorable mention of
Baptism in his Epistles, and of its ends, which he points in several
Scripturs, all which is granted, but it does not thence follow, that all this
is to be understood of Water-baptisme, and while that still remains the thing
in debate, he can prove nothing from these Scripturs. But it is no wonder he
thus forgets himself here as to me, since in the following words he quareleth
with the Apostle Paul, saying in answer to his words, 1 Cor. 1: v. 17. that he
was not sent to baptize; if Paul had not been sent to baptize, why would he
have done it? I think it needless to me to answer the absurdity he would here
fix upon the Apostle, since it suffices me, and I hope will other good
Christians, that the Apostle says positively, that he was not sent to baptize:
and for his baptizing of some, we will suppose he had a reason, though not from
his commission, which he expressly denies, whatever John Brown may brawle to
the contrary. As for his saying, that it seems then the other Apostles had
another commission than Paul had, it is built upon the supposition that they
had a commission to baptize with water, which remains for him yet to prove. And
not to contend with him for brevity's sake about that of Hosea 6: 6. whether
[not] there be only to be understood of less principally, yet though it were,
it would not follow, it should be so understod here also; I show him by an
example, 1 Cor. 2: 5. what wild work such an interpretation would make, if
ordinarily applied: but he it seems judged it most convenient not to take
notice of it in this his Examen, albeit in reason he should have done it, if he
would give a complete answer, for he must either prove [not] always to be
understood of less principally, or otherwise he must bring particular reasons
why it should be so here, and not that it sometimes is so understood, for such
a Particular will not infer the consequence.

3. The reason he gives of Christ's submitting to water-baptisme to prove it
now to continue, is, his saying, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness. But may not that be applied also to Circumcision, and yet its
continuance will not thence follow? John's receiving a Divine command to
baptize, shows there was a Divine institution for it, under the Law, because
the Law was not as yet abrogated, nor the Legal ministration accomplished, till
Christ was offered up. As for Christ his consecrating it in his own person, the
like may be also said of Circumcision. I come now to see what he says, n. 14.
to prove Matthew. 28: 19. to be understood of Water-baptisme, and first, after a
little railing, he says, This was but an enlargement of their former
Commission, as to the Object, And before this we heard of their baptizing with
Water, with Christ's warrant and authority, etc. Answ. We have heard him say so
indeed, but must wait until he prove, ere we be so forward as to believe it:
And next, what if it were all granted? we heard before of the Disciples
preparing and eating the Passover with Christ's warrant and authority, will it
thence follow that that practice is still to continue in the Church? (2.)
Because it is joined here with Discipling, and baptizing was the way of making
Disciples among the Jews. So was Circumcision and that no less constantly and
necessary, will it therefore follow that circumcision is to continue? (3.) He
says, Their constant after-practice declares this to be the meaning of the
Command. But the Apostle Paul's practice and testimony declares this to be
false. (4.) He says, This is the proper import of the word. But I deny it is
so in Scriptur, since we see no necessity in most of the places of Scriptur to
understand the word of Water-baptisme; and when he shows the necessity, he may
be answered, and the Scripturs so frequently using it, where Water upon all
hands is confessed not to be understood, prove this to be true. And as for his
saying, that it can not be understood here of Baptism with the Spirit, it
falls to the ground, because only built upon the supposition that that is
only understood of extraordinary gifts. He urges Christ's saying, Luk 12: 50.
I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? as if this were to be called Christ's own baptism; and so I
shall grant it, with a respect to his Personal Sufferings: but when I speak of
Christ's own baptism, I speak of that which is his, as being instituted by him
for others, and that contradistinct from John's. Page 479. He says, the words
of baptizing into the Name, (...), is only to be understood of a dedicating to
God, and not a being baptized into the Power and Virtue. But this is his own
assertion, neither does Paul's saying, 1 Cor. 1: 13. were ye baptized in the
Name of Paul make it clear at all, for making it unto Paul will render the
Apostle's argument more forcible, to show the Corinthians their folly, in
saying they were of Paul or other men, into whose power or virtue it was absurd
to say they were baptized, as must be said of all true Christians, being
baptized into the Name of Christ. That I condemn their manner of baptizing is
true, but that I do it because of their doing it in the Name of the Father, is
his false and foolish conjectur; and therefore his troubling himself to prove
that, is to no purpose. For his saying, that, if Matthew. 28: 19. be not
understood of Water-baptisme, it would make a tautology; I answered that (n.
8.) in my Apology of Baptism, and here he only repeats the objection, without
taking notice of my answer: which shows how defective his Examen is. He goes
on, page 480. upon the supposition, that the Apostle's baptizing with Water was
not by mere permission, and yet the Apostle's commanding the Gentiles to
abstain for a time from things strangled and from blood, which was a Jewish
rite, shows their using baptism with Water does not prove it Evangelical. He
confesses here they did not fully at first comply with their commission, and
he must also say they did not understand it, though he would here wave it; and
because he knows not well what to say, he falls to rail, saying, he sees What
Quakers can not do with reason, they must do with confident and bold lies. But
the reason he gives of all this accusation, so strange confidence, is my saying
that the chief of Christ's Disciples had been John's, adding, Will he tell us,
who these Chief were? Yes I will, seeing he is so ignorant, Joh. 1: 35-37. where
he may see two of John's disciples followed Christ, one of which is expressly
mentioned to be Andrew the Apostle, and it is there clearly enough imported
that Peter was another, and such may without absurdity be accounted among the
chief of Christ's Disciples. Page 481. He most falsely says that I condemn
Peter and all the Apostles for resting satisfied with what he had done. His
saying here, that they do not urge their baptism from Peter's baptizing
Cornelius, shows he sees a necessity of not laying great stress upon that: but
for his adding, that Jesus Christ has commanded, he does but say and not prove
it. He says that Gal. 2: 12. will not prove that Peter constrained the
Gentiles to be circumcised: but verse 14. to which my words alluded, says
expressly, -- why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? and sure
that was to be circumcised. For his malicious false asseveration, that we with
the Jews design to destroy Christianity; it needs no proof, that there were
baptisines among the Jews is clear from Heb. 6: 2. albeit Paulus Riccius were
not alleged to prove it, nor any debate used about the antiquity of the Jews
writings; but that some of them wrote before the year 200, Iosephus's history is
an example. He confesses the etymology of the word infers dipping, and
albeit we deny not that, yet this shows with how little reason he urges that
etymology upon us: if the Reader will but seriously read what I have written in
my Apology, of Baptism, he will easily find how slender his answer is, albeit I
had not written this reply.

Section Fourteenth, Wherein his 27th Chapter, entitled, Of the Lord's Supper,
is considered.
1. THe Reader before this time has had so much opportunity to discern the
temper of this man's spirit, that he need not wonder to find him begin this
chapter, of the Lord's Supper, with an heap of Railing, accounting us such as
overturn Christianity, and introduce Paganisiue, yea as are posting toward it.
And then having given a large account, page 48, 484. of their Confession of
Faith and larger Catechism, page 485. he comes to tell of the good experiences
many have had by their use of this Supper, which to make strong in his conceit,
he uses a continued style of railing against us, as men only led by our own
imaginations, and given up to the working of the Prince of darkness: and thus
he goes on. But such experience, albeit granted, will not prove the necessity
of its continuance; for the Assembly of Divines, so called, in their Preface to
the Directory, do speak of the good which was experienced by the Liturgy of the
Church of England, and of the religious intentions of the Compilers of it,
while yet they are rejecting and abolishing it, as that which proved an offense
to the godly, and occasioned much mischief, Therefore that is no Argument. Page
486. n. 5. He comes to examine what I say in the matter, and then, after a
reference to his 10th chapter, he has his old calumny that the Celestial Seed
and Spiritual Substance is nothing but the dimns light of Nature; he falls
into a new fit of Railing, which holds him to the end of this paragraph,
terming us such as are judicially blinded and deluded, acted and driven by the
Devil into a profane and Paganish contradiction to the ways of Grace. And with
the like shame, and upon the same old supposition of our exalting the Light of
Nature, which is most false, he fills his n. 6. and also his 7. page 488. For
what he says there of the absurdity of God's revealing himself to Heathens, or
such as were Idolaters, I have spoken before, writing upon that subject: and
here he concludes that my asserting of a Spiritual body and flesh of Christ, at
one blow, is a denying the Christ of God, and overturning Christianity, but in
stead of proving it he proposes some questions, Had Christ two bodies? Yes: and
let him deny it, if he dare, without contradicting the Scriptur Ioh. 6: 58.
Christ speaks of his flesh which came down from heaven, but this was not the
flesh he took from the Virgin Mary, for that came not down from heaven, but he
had a Spiritual Body, in which his Soul existed long before he took flesh of
the Virgin; and we will see how John Brown proves this to be an error, in the
refutation that is promised in his name of G. K's book. And for the rest of his
conjecturs, such as, We have two such bodies too, is but a fiction of his own
brain, we call no body of Christ carnal, but believe that that body which
Christ took of the Virgin, which was of the Seed of Abraham and David, in which
Christ walked upon the earth, and was crucified, did arise the third day, was
glorified, and remains in heaven, wherein the center of his most glorious
Soul remains for ever: and let him show, if he can, how this is a denying of
the Christ of God, or overturning of Christianity. He proceeds, Page 489. at
a most violent strain of railing, upon the supposition of his old calumny; and
here that it may be complete, he makes a preaching to the Devil, for which
blasphemous abuse I wish heartily the LORD forgive him, that these Devils, to
whom he preaches, be not permitted to give him his reward for his sermon. But
seeing he blusheth not to do this in print, I shall not think the many gross
abuses I have heard to have been uttered by Presbyterian Preachers so
incredible, as I have been apt to do, especially that which I have been
informed of, of late, of one who at a conventicle in the South, near Legerwood,
not far from Lauther, made a digression in his Prayer to the Devil, saying, O
Devil! thou have troubled us much with the Bishops and Curats! We beseech thee,
Devil, take them to thee, and make us quite of them! This prayer suits with
John Brown's preaching, and indeed the Presbyterians will need a new Directory,
for the old one, by which they are instructed to preach to men and pray to God,
will not serve for this new Ministry, by which they begin to preach and pray
to Devils. And of the like strain is his saying, after much railing, page 490.
that if the Quaker write comments on Paul's Epistles, it must be of Paulus
Paganizans, this sort of stuff is enough to give all sober Christians a disgust
of this man's writings. In this page, after some quibbles about Relation, he
comes, page 491. n. 11. to affirm that there may be a Relation which is neither
from the nature of the thing, nor from some Divine precept, such as a Promise
and Divine Institution. But is not a Divine Institution a Divine Precept? And
whereas he boasts here that my whole discourse falls, as being built upon a
mistake, the Reader may see the mistake is his own, and not mine, and then
judge of his discourse, that is built thereon; as also how airy, vain, and
ostentive he is, in saying, What will he now do? His Light has confounded him
so as he knows not what he says. Is this language becoming a Gospel-Minister?
That what Luke says, does not import a perpetual but temporary command, will
after appear. Of what Paul says, 1 Cor. 10. will be spoken hereafter. To my
showing that 1 Cor. 11: 26. Paul expresses the end of this ceremony to be a
declaring of the Lord's Death, which has no necessary relation with partaking
of Christ's body and blood, he answers that a declaration of Christ's Death
is a comprehensive end, etc. And what then? That proves not the necessary
relation, nor yet what he adds in this paragraph; therefore I entreat him next
time to speak to the purpose. Page 492. n. 12. He raileth at me, as perverting
the Apostle's words, but gives no reason, unless his own mere affirmation and
querys be esteemed sufficient: he asks, What signified Christ's blessing of
the Bread, breaking, giving it to his Disciples, desiring them to eat? Answ.
Christ blessed the bread, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples to eat, and
they to others, where themselves confess no such mystery or Sacrament, as they
would have here, is deducible, see Matthew. 14: v. 19. Mark 6: 41. He insinuats I
speak falsely, in saying there is no mention of this ceremony, 1 Cor. 10: 16.
but is not so charitable as to point to me where, if there be any such thing.
As for his mere affirmations and distinctions here, about the bread, I will
wait the next time to have them proved by Scriptur, then will judge them worth
the considering. I have shown in my Apology that the Corinthians being in the
use of this ceremony, and the Apostle's rectifying the abuse they were in, in
the use of it, nor yet its having been done upon a religious account, or in a
general respect to the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ; will not
prove the necessity of its being now to be performed: and therefore what he
says, page 493. n. 14. evanisheth. And as for his adding here, that then it
was an act of Will Worship and Superstition, and that I conclude the Apostle
encouraged such a thing, whence he takes occasion to rail at me, as
blasphemously imputing unfaithfulness to the Apostle, and to the Spirit of God
that acted him. I answer: What is done by permission for a time, is not
will worship and superstition, and he confesses he argues not from the
Corinthians practice; and for his railing, the ground of it being false, it
needs no answer. As for his denying the Jews had such a custom at the time of
their Passover, his mere negation is not sufficient to elide the testimony of
far more credible Authors than he himself in this matter: and as for the words
of Luke, Do this in remembrance of me, it does not infer perpetual obligation
upon the Church in all ages. He raileth at this, but without a reason, page
495. instancing the Apostles, 1 Cor. 24: 25. But I told him before, that the
Apostle gives here an account of matter of fact, which infers not a command;
and in this page the man is miserably pinched to show how the washing of one
another feet, albeit commanded with as great solemnity, does not oblige as
much now: but his conjecturs prove nothing. What? albeit it was a custom in the
hot countries, and that it was a sign of Christ's humility, how does all that
abrogat the express command to do it? Let him show an exemption from this from
plain Scriptur, for his mere assertions have but small weight, and by which I am
not like, nor yet any man of reason, that is not resolved to set up John Brown
as a Pope, to believe all he says, from his bare words, to conclude the
differences. He thinks, page 496. that their not keeping exactly to the method
used by Christ in this thing signifies nothing, but he should prove by
Scriptur how they are safe in practicing one part and not the other, and by
what rule he accounts the one part circumstances, and not the other; for as to
the matter of the thing, he will confess there is nothing in it but by reason
of Christ's command and practice, so that affects all parts alike, and indeed
he gives a very summar answer to what I urge as to this, as the Reader by
comparing his n. 17. with n. 6. of my Apology upon this subject, may observe.
It passes my mean capacity to see any solid reason given by him, page 497. n.
18. why Act. 2: 42. should be understood of other than their common eating,
unless this may be esteemed one, that to say so, is a mere groundless fancy,
like many of the Quakers bold notions. To prove Act. 20: 7. to be understood of
Sacramental eating, he says, it required Paul's preaching: but for this we
wust wait his proof. That Paul preached not upon other occasions, because not
mentioned, is but his mere conjectur; and his inference from this being the
Christian Sabbath, is but a silly begging of the question.

2. Page 498. n. 20. He stateth my words, showing how the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.
says, When ye come together, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, and not
that it was not to eat aright; and I expected his answer to this to follow, but
in vain, for I found not any; perhaps he has forgoten it, and therefore I
desire he may remember it next: also here in stead of giving a reason to prove
the Apostle gives here a command, and not simply a relation of the matter of
fact, he returns railing: I entreat him next to lay-aside his railing, and
give a reason. That the Corinthians were babes in Christ, and some of them even
further advanced, I acknowledge; yet that will not prove that somethings might
be indulged to them, which is not needful to us now: the Christians, that had
been Jews, were also babes in Christ, and even more, such as the Apostle James,
who desired Paul to purify himself in the Temple, and yet we are not thence
obliged to imitat such practices. Whether the Syriak version, mentioned by me,
make not to my purpose, I leav to the Reader's judgment; my using it will not
infer my acknowledging that version in all things to be authentik, more than
his own using it: and albeit I think it might have been sufficient to have
given the words upon the credit of the interpretation in the Poly-glotta, yet
to show him how apt he is to fall into false conjecturs, he may know I did it
not; and if he could hence, as well as from several other occasions heretofore
observed, learn not to lay so much stress upon, and so forwardly vent, his own
conjecturs, he would do himself a courtesy. Page 499. n. 21. He can easily
turn-by the Apostle's express command, Act. 15: 29. as being a part of of the
Ceremonial Law, but I hope he will acknowledge that the obligation upon the
Christians, especially such as had not been Jews, to observe it, was not its
being a part of the ceremonial Law, but its being now a command of the
Apostles, or rather of the Spirit of God, to whom it seemed good so to command,
and he should show next time how this is more abrogated in the Epistles of Paul
than the other, and particularly how that Romans 14: 17. does touch the one more
than the other. And this command, Act. 15: 19 being after the pouring-down of
the Spirit, and universal preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, has as much
of a Gospel institution as any thing commanded before by Christ can have, if
not, let him give us a reason from Scriptur, till then his mere assertions,
page 500. will not do the business. To my showing that this is not to
distinguish the Gospel from the Law, he thinks it enough to say, this is a
Socinian argument formerly spoken to, and he is very careful not to weary the
Reader with repetitions. I wish he had minded this all along. He also refers
the proof of their Authority to administrat this Sacrament to his 17 chapter:
but they must be very clear-sighted that can observe any such thing there. And
to conclude with some show of victory, he in a most oftentive way says that I
have fought until I can stand no longer, and finding my self weak, and unable
to fight any more, I come to something like a parlie, by saying, Such as out of
Conscience will perform this ceremony, as the first Christians did, might be
indulged in it: but he concludes, these things I affirm being proved, none can
be supposed to do it out of Conscience. But some may not have such a clear
sight of it, and thence may stick in these things. He dispatcheth what more I
say as to this, as being a bundle of groundless whimsies, without truth, sense,
or consistency. But indeed I must say, I wonder to see the man so weak upon
this Theme, as well as the former of Baptism, considering they are the great
Sacraments of their Religion: but it seems his rage in these has robbed him of
his reason. I will entreat the Reader seriously to peruse what I have written
upon both these in my Apology, that comparing it with his, he may easily
perceive, albeit this reply had not been written, how weak all is, the man
brings for the proof of these things.

Section Fifteenth, Wherein his 28th Chapter, Of Liberty of Conscience is
considered.
1. AS he ended his last chapter with railing, so he begins this, comparing the
Quakers to Thievs and Robbers, adding, that their being conscious to themselves
of the evil of their ways, which after he has a little amplified in as black a
manner as he can, he concluds that they thought it best for their own safety to
add this to the rest of their errors, that Magistrates have no lawful power
over them: in which (besides his railing) are two gross Lies: First, that the
Quakers are conscious of their own evil ways, and that moves them to assert
Liberty of Conscience, which being a gross falsehood has no bottom but his own
malicious conjectur, where he presumptuously assumes to judge of other men's
hearts. The second is, that the Quakers say, the Magistrate has no lawful
power over them, A most gross lie, the contrary whereof is expressly asserted
in the These in these words, provided always that no man, under the pretense of
Conscience, prejudice his neighbor in his life or estate, or do any thing
destructive of, or inconsistent with, humane society, in which case the Law is
for the transgressor, and justice is to be administered upon all, without
respect of persons. Who will but open their eyes, may see here the man so
desperately resolved to calumniat, that he neither seems to regard his
Conscience toward God, nor his reputation among men, that he may fulfill his
envy in this particular: but such gross abuses will not hurt but help the
Quakers. Yea in the very next page he takes notice, that I grant to the
Magistrate only Liberty to judge in matters touching the life and goods of
others, etc. So here is some lawful Power. As for the malicious insinuation
that follows, it needs no other refutation with men of sobriety, but to repeat
it, to wit, But probably not of Quakers, for they are perfect and so can not do
wrong. Is not this solidly and learnedly and Christianly argued, Reader?
Think thou, that to say that this restriction is destroyed, because men may
pretend Conscience in wronging their neighbors, as some have done, in
committing villainies, says nothing, since the Proposition expressly allows the
Magistrate to punish acts, that are materially injurious to Civil Society,
albeit Conscience be pretended? After, according to his usual manner, he has
given us a large citation out of the Confession of Faith, and some quibbles
about the word Conscience, which, as not directly concerned in this debate, for
brevity's sake, I omit. Secondly, he comes, page 504. n. 5. to say, that I
most perversely state the question, in saying, the Magistrate has not power to
compel men against their Consciences, in matters of Religion. and why? Because
I distinguish not betwixt Elicite and Imperat Acts of Conscience, that is, as
himself explains, Inward and Outward; for as to the first, he confesses the
Magistrate is not to compel men, so as to hinder them to think, judge,
understand and conclude in their mind as they will, but only in speaking,
writing and open profession, which are visible and audible: yea he thinks the
Magistrates power does not only extend on this side to prohibition, but that he
may also force them to hear, and to the use of publik means, that is in plain
terms, to an outward conformity; and yet he says; this is no force upon
Consceince. We I then, Popish Magistrates, according to him, used no force upon
the Consciences of Protestants, in forceing them to hear Mass; nor yet the
Pagans upon the Christians, in forceing them to go to Idol-worships: and to
come near home, the present Magistrates in Scotland use no force upon the
Consciences of his Brethren, the Presbyterians, in the west-countrey, in
constraining them to go to hear the Bishops Curats, as they term them, where
they can not pretend there is any thing of Idolatry. As for his distinction of
the Magistrates having power of outward but not inward acts, it were enough for
me to reject it, as not being proved by him to be founded on Scriptur, as
indeed it is most deceitful. For if the Magistrate restrain me from doing that
outward action, either of confessing to Truth or denying error, abstaining from
idolatry or false worship, and practicing the true, which my inward persuasion
convinces me of, he encroacheth upon, and takes upon him to rule over my
inward persuasion, as well as the outward, which follows naturally from the
inward, and without doing whereof, my inward could and nothing to me save
condemnation, seeing Christ requires an outward confession. And if the
Magistrates power, as to outward acts, even in matters of Religion, be limited,
then he of right may decide and judge of all outward matters relating to
Religion, which John Brown may remember his Brethren have strongly denied,
reserving that only for the Kirk. for to say, as he adds, that the Magistrate
has power to punish Heretics, but not the Orthodox, is (as I observed)
miserably to beg the question, since never any Magistrate was so mad, as to
persecut Truth, as Truth, but still under the notion of Error. The sum of what
he says further upon this matter, page 505-507, 508, 509. in answer to me,
resolves in these two objections,

3. First, That my Arguments do no less take away the Magistrates power in
Civils.

Secondly, That by the same arguments may be denied and taken away all Church
censurs, which I grant, and in so doing contradict my self, or must answer my
own arguments.

For proof of the First he tells that many Magistrates have been or may be
incapable to judge in Civil matters as well as Religion, as also have done
unjustice in their judgment. Answ. True, but all this will no ways infer his
conclusion, because they still had that which was needful to the being of
Magistracy, that is, being duly to constitute (for of usurpers we do not here
speak) however they may want these qualitys which might more accomplish them in
their employment, or that they may err in the administration of it; but
Christianity, and consequently to judge in matters of Religion, does not so
much as pertain to the esse or being of a Magistrate, for if it did, no man
could ever have been, or yet could be, a true Magistrate, or ought to be so
owned, unless a Christian, which I suppose John Brown will not adventur to
affirm, or if he do, he will manifestly contradict the doctrine as well as
practice of Christ and his Apostles, who preached Subjection, and were
themselves subject to such Magistrates as were enemies to Christianity. If then
a Magistrate may be truly a Magistrate, and ought by Christians to be
acknowledged and submitted to, as such, who is not a Christian; to deny to
Magistrates that power of Judgment, which they can only have as being
Christians, will not necessarily take away any of their power as Magistrates:
for Christian Subjects, especially being private persons, may and ought to
submitt and obey their lawful Magistrates, albeit committing errors in the
Government, and commanding things hurtful to the State, and if they do other
ways may be justly punished, where the nature of the Government gives them not
allowance so to do. But if the Magistrate shall command any thing contrary to
the Law of God, or impose in matters of Conscience, contrary to Truth, I. B.
will with me confess (unless he condemn himself) that every private Christian
may, without being justly accused of contempt, refuse to obey, as many of John
Brown's friends do in not going to the parish Kirks, (where the same faith and
doctrine they hold, is preached) contrary to acts of Parliament. For he has not
proved that a Magistrate by being a Christian acquires more power than he had
before, or is more a Magistrate, though he may be a better. For albeit, as he
observes, Fathers be desired to instruct their children, which Pagan fathers can
not do, yet they are not more fathers than before, nor have more authority or
power over their children to force them than before: so a Magistrate being a
Christian may instruct, countenance and advance Christianity, by the advantage
of his place, but acquires no more power thereby to force his people upon that
account. I. B. if he judge so, will do well to prove it by Scriptur.

4. The reason of his second objection is, because a Church may err in their
judgment, being defective, as he supposed the Magistrate in the former
objection, and so may condemn Truth for error. But how weak this is, is very
apparent. For if he can show us a Church having the true being of a Church,
which ought to be acknowledged and submitted to by Christians as such, which
vet is wholly a stranger to, yea an enemy and persecutor of Christianity, (as I
did him in the case of Magistracy) he will say something, but other ways
nothing at all. Next, the censur of a Church (however he seems to judge
otherwise) can not be called forceing of Conscience, in the sense I grant it,
which is only for to deny the persons censured their Spiritual fellowship;
since he himself by his differing from them breaks it off (as in my book,
entitled The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. written concerning Church
Government, I have at large shown) And if the difference be such, as the Church
judges in conscience they can not have spiritual communion with one so
principled, it were in him a forceing of their conscience to urge it upon them:
for since he takes the liberty out of Conscience, as he judges, to differ from
all his Brethren, it were a most unreasonable thing in such a one to deny them
the liberty (being persuaded in their conscience they ought) to withdraw from
him, seeing the band of their unity, which at lest in part was an agreement in
doctrine, is so far by him broken; but as he does not fall upon them, to beat,
imprison, or kill them, neither ought they to do so to him.

As for his answer, that they are not for propagating Christianity by force, or
that the Ministers should use fire and sword, page 508. it is the same
deceitful return, that the Pope and the Jesuits his Janizarys give upon the
like occasion, (with whom the Presbyters in most things of this nature do most
unanimously agree) who it is said after they have judged any one guilty of
heresy, deliver him over to the Magistrate, because alas! merciful and
tenderhearted men! (as is usually spoken by contrarys) they will not meddle
with blood: but how would they thunder the Magistrate, if he did not proceed to
execution? The same way do the Presbyters, for we know what naturally follows
upon the Church censur, or disobedience to their Orders, as by many examples,
during the reign of Presbytery in Scotland might be proved, and which I may
instance, if further provoked thereto, by which it shall appear that they are
no less BLOODY and CRUEL than the Popish Inquisitors, and that both the POPE
and the PRESBYTERS, assuming the power of judgment to themselves, leave nothing
to the Magistrate but the dishonorable office of being their Executioner, or in
plain Scots, Hangman, while both most deceitfully wipe their mouths, as if they
were innocent of the Blood shed procured by them.

5. In stead of giving any direct reply to my answer to their objection drawn
from Deuteronomy. 13. where false Prophets and Idolaters are ordained to be killed, he
seeks maliciously to infer that I deny all Authority of the Old Testament,
which is a horrid calumny: But since there are many things commanded there,
which himself will acknowledge are not binding upon us now, what shall be the
rule whereby we shall judge what we are now tied to, and what not, unless as
the same is ratified or again commanded by Christ in the New? And for clearing
of this, let him tell me, if he can, what is incumbent upon us now from the Old
Testament which has no precept or authority in the New? But further, after he
has manifestly wrested the place, to evite what I urge from Deuteronomy. 5: 9. as the
Reader by comparing it may judge, at last he confesses to it, only alleges
it was a circumstance: but seeing this circumstance was commanded as well as the
rest, he should show where the one is repealed, and not the other, and how it
comes to pass, that it should be duty to obey the one part of the command, and
yet murder to obey the other, or (if he will) the circumstances commanded
conjunctly with it, as I hope he will confess it should be for any now to kill
their brother or sister as an heretik or blasphemer, without bringing them to a
Judge. He has a quick way of answering what I say, page 323, 324. in alleging
that it is not to the purpose, as also what I say, page 328, 329. in answering
it by two or three lines of railing, page 513. But methinks, since he gives his
Reader as a reason of his prolixity, that he left nothing said by the Quaker
unanswered, it is strange he jumpes so quietly over that place, page 324. where
I show that the Presbyterians as well as the Jesuits, notwithstanding their
pretended subjection to Magistrates, and pleadings for the extension of their
Power, and accusing us for denying it, do not spare to tyrannize over the
Magistrates Conscience, when they can, as by the example of the Presbyterians
behavior toward this present King of Britain I did prove: it is enough for
him to this to say, this page is not to the purpose. But the judicious Reader
will rather judge, that he is here so silent, being elsewhere, upon less
occasions, so clamorous, because heknew not well what to answer to the purpose.
With the like hasty and pitiful stuff he would turn-by the many citations of
the ancients, brought by me, against Persecution, because of his deceitful
Popish concession above observed; but he should have shown how these things of
the Ancients are consistent with the Civil Magistrates using any force in
matters of Religion, as being a thing inconststent with Christianity, which the
Reader by reading over these places may easily observe, and thence find why he
made such have, and gave all these citations no other answer.

6. But as he is hasty in passing over what he finds he can not answer, so, to
fill up the pages, he spares not to insist upon triffles, or things of no
moment, or which only serve to show his own folly and impertinency, as in page
503. is manifest, where he says, he doubts whether it be 25 years since I
adjoined my self to the Quakers. But whether it be so or not, it nor adds to,
nor takes from, the controversy: only to solve him of this doubt, he may assure
himself it is not, since I have not yet seen the 30th year of my age. But
because I say, it is about 25 years, since they were a distinct and separated
People, thence he says, he sees it is not an old Sect, and so has less
affinity with true Christianity, because he is sure Christianity is older. But
what Protestant in his wits, if malice did not blind, would use such an
argument, knowing how easily the same may be, and has been, objected by
Papists, that use to ask us, where our Religion was, before Luther and Calvin?
That Christianity is older than 25 years I am sure, as well as he, but it will
not thence follow, but that it may be a short time since God raised up a
separated gathered visible People, to shake-off the corruptions of Babylon, and
restore the pure and old Christianity, as it was before the Apostasy entered:
and if he will not admit of this to the acknowledgment of his own
impertinency, he must needs own the like argument in the mouth of Papists to
have been valid against our great grand Fathers, and consequently give away the
Protestant cause.

7. But the man seems not to have heeded what he wrote in this page, by another
yet more palpable mistake, for while in the calculation of the appearing of the
Quakers, he goes about to find me contradicting another Quaker, he shows his
own senslesness. My account, says he, of 25 years, being numbered from 1676,
will fall in Anno 1651; but another Quaker in Anno 1659 says, it is now about
7 years since the Lord raised us up, in the North of England, etc. Now number 7
back from 1659, my Arithmetik tells me it will 1652, and if I account it 1651,
and the other reckon it about 1652, it comes to one reckoning; but John Brown
will have mine to be 15 years latter, as if 25 years back from 1676 were 15
Years after 7 Years back from 1659, that is, that 1652 is 15 Years before 1651:
so far has the poor man missed of his numeration. He sometimes reproachingly
and scoffingly says, he sees the Quakers can dream waking, but it is a
question, whether he was dreaming or not, when he proclaimed his sottishness
thus to the world; which can not be reputed an error of the press, since he is
at pains to reconcile this imaginary difference, saying, but perhaps I mean of
these in the North of Scotland, the other of the North of England, and
therefore he will not contend about it, he will find he has reason, when he
sees his mistake; yet he must have one observation, that, according to the old
proverb, all evil comes out of the North: but no wonder, the man has been here
benumbed, since he will, ere he want something to reproach the Quakers, make
use of old Proverbs, albeit to contradict Scriptur Prophecys, Jer. 50: 3. where
the Prophet speaking of the judgment of Babylon says, For out of the North
there comes up a Nation against her, which shall make her land desolat. and
verse 9. I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great
Nations out of the North country. But an old proverb with him it seems is of
more weight, which can hitt the Quakers, than the Scripturs, for all the
reverent esteem he pretends to them: yet that an Evil has or may come out of
the North, I shall not deny, for of that the PERSECUTING Spirit of PRESBYTERY
is one example, which as to its rise in Scotland was more Northerly than the
appearance of the People called Quakers.

Section Sixteenth, Wherein his 29th Chapter of Wars, and 30th of Oaths, is
considered.
1. AFter having classed us, according to his custom, with such as he accounts
odious Heretics, for our opinion of Wars, he proceeds with his old trade of
malicious insinuations and railings, questioning whether our intent may not be,
that we may obtain freedom and liberty to rage over all. And whereas he says,
he leaves our selves to judge of this, truly we can sincerely judge, in the
sight of God, that this is a gross calumny, of giving any color for which we
are altogether innocent. And like to this is that malicious insinuation, page
515. 521. wherein he charge us with a bloody design, in seeking to reduce
them to Paganism, and by disarming Christians give up Christendom, as a prey
to Turks and Pagans: to which I shall only answer, that, as it is obviously
enough malicious, so he shall never prove it true, and therefore I wish the
Lord rebuke him, and forgive him for these his evil thoughts. What he says
here, as well as page 517, 518. 522. of the necessity of defensive War, to
defend from those that justly assault, and Thievs, and Robbers, and
cutthroats, etc. he speaks more like an Atheist than a Christian, and like
one, who believes, nothing of a Divine Providence of restraining evil men at
his pleasur, and not suffering them to go further than he sees meet. Does he
think that all the endeavors of the wicked men of the world can do any thing,
but as GOD permits them? and that all the opposition to such by force of Arms
can prevail but by God's blessing? If so, he must not think that such carnal
and atheistical reasons can brangle the faith of those, who, out of pure
obedience to God, and a desire to be conform to the Image of his Son, according
to the measur of the Grace given them, so as to make them think they are less
secure, under the protection of the ALMIGHTY, than by their guns and swords.
But this is consistent with his faith, the most eminent of whose brethren have
learned to preach with sword and pistols, and in stead of the guard of a
Christian boldness and a good Conscience, which the primitive Christians and
Apostles used, will be guarded with men in arms, and that in opposition to the
authority of those they confess to be their lawful Magistrates. And if he say
that we must not lay-aside lawful means, I ask him whether he thinks, not to
defend a man's self from a principle of Conscience, be simply unlawful? Let
him remember the most remarkable deliverances, that God's People met withal,
was, when there appeared least of outward help, and where the arm of flesh had
least hand in it, as the children of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, as also
Judges c 5: from ver. 16 to the end, 2 Kings 6: 17, etc. and chapters 7, 13.
and 19: 35. and in other places. To prove that Christ in the 5th of Matthew.
commands no more than in the Law, he refers to the writings of their
Divines: but he might have done this all to all he has written, if he judge it
sufficient, and so have saved himself a great deal of labor, since he says
elsewhere, all I have written is confuted long ago. How men can love their
enemies, and yet kill and destroy them, is more than I can reach; but if it
were so, such as rather suffer, than do it, do surely more love them, and to do
so is no injury to our selves nor neighbors, when done out of conscience to
God, in answering our duty to whom we must not regard our own or neighbors
profit. And if what I grant of the lawfulness of Fighting to the present
Magistrates and state of Christians be considered, it will render all his
arguments superfluous, since he confesses a time will come, in which the
prophecy of Esaias 2: 4. Mic. 4: 3. will be fulfilled, and thinks fit there
should be a praying for the fulfilling of it: and what if some believe that as
to some there is a beginning already of the fulfilling thereof? We do nothing
doubt but that of Rev. 16: 5, 7. which he mentions, page 522. will in due time
be fulfilled; but we see no necessity of believing that that will be performed
by outward fighting, or that the Saints shall need to draw carnal swords, or
shut cannons, toward the performing of it. When he says that the argument of
fighting is not taken from the corrupt nature of man, page 519. he must have
forgotten himself, since, had not man fallen, and so his nature been corrupted,
he may infer, if he can, where there should have been an occasion for fighting
with carnal weapons. And since he confesses that in nothing more, than in
war, is seen the fruits of man's rebellion against God, he may thence see how
little need Christians have to plead for it: as for the citation out of the
Confession of Faith, wherewith to fill-up he closes his chapter, I know not to
what purpose he did it, since no man doubts their faith in this matter.

2. He begins his 30th chapter, of Oaths, with saying, We deny their
lawfulness, that we may destroy all Policy and Government: But it must only be
the Devil's government, for where the Government of Christ prevails, and men
speak truth, there all must confess there is no need of Oaths; and also where
the like punishment of Perjury is inflicted for speaking falsely, the end of
Oaths is obtained, and that without breaking Christ's command. Thus according
to his own concession, since the verity may be had as well without an oath, none
should be urged to take an oath. But let us see what after a citation out of
their Confession of faith he says to answer Matthew. 5: 34. and James 5: 12.
which says so expressly, Swear not at all, to this he says that Christ is
only interpreting the Law, and not adding any thing to it, and that it only
relates to ordinary discourse: but for proof of this he has nothing but an heap
of words asserting the thing. To all which, till he bring some Scriptur proof,
there needs no answer, but oppose Christ and James words, Swear not at all, it
is not said, except ye be called before a Judge, let him prove this exception
by Scriptur next time, and therefore till he do so, his affirming over and over
again that Christ for bad no more than was forbidden in the Law, page 525. is
to no purpose. The Law forbadidle swearing and oaths in communication, but
Christ's resumption shows throughout that chapter some more to be urged, to any
that understand plain words, and will not shut their eyes. That its being said,
Deuteronomy. 6: 13. Thou shall swear by his Name, is urged as an explication or
comprehensive part of Moral worship I deny, and remains for him to prove, or
that it was more than a command to the Jews to swear by the true God, that they
might not swear by idols; and till he prove this, arguments founded upon it
need no further answer. As for what he adds n 8. to prove Swearing not to be
of the Devil, because commanded of God, and afterward concluding that my
urging against it, as being of the Devil, is pregnant of blasphemy, because it
would infer some of the ceremonial Laws of God to have their rise not from the
will of God, but from the work of the Devil, he shows here more malice than
strength of reason. Was not the command, Deuteronomy. 24: v. 1. Let him write for her
a bill of divorcement, a part of the ceremonial Law? and yet Christ says,
Matthew. 19: 7. that Moses did this because of the hardness of their hearts, and
is not hardness of heart, which gave a rise to this command of the work of the
Devil? Let him then make the application, and then answer the empty bluster he
has made of blasphemy. And does not what Christ says of this matter of
Divorce, Matthew. 5: v. 31, 32. show Christ commanded more there, than was
commanded under the Law? He confesses, page 529. that God can not be said
properly to swear, albeit somethings being ascribed to God makes them not
unlawful to us, yet any things being ascribed to God makes it not lawful to
us, when Christ commands the contrary. That Christ' saying Verily Verily is
more than yea and nay, I deny, and it remains for him to prove it, That the
Apostles asseverations are Oaths he affirms in like manner, but proves it not.
His thinking we, in being willing to do as much as the Apostle did, do strain
at a gnat, and swallow a camel, is but an evidence of his railing genius, as it
does of his malice in catching what follows, that the question is not What Paul
or Peter did? but What their and our Lord? for that is not said by me, as
believing they did swear, or that their words were Oaths. But the giving not
granting it had been so, to show it would not prove this thing now lawful, and
that Peter and Paul both had their failings, though not in that, himself will
not deny, which is enough to show their practice in all things is not to be our
rule. His 531 page needs no answer, being but his own affirmations and
conjecturs in stead of answers, these may be considered, when he proves them.
That Paul swore any way we deny, and neither Abraham's nor Jacob's practice,
nor yet that of Angels will warrant us to imitat them, when Christ has
commanded the contrary: and albeit he acknowledge the testimony of Pythagoras,
Socrates and Plato does shame many Christians for their swearing, yet he can
not omit here his ordinary reflection at our Religion, as Paganish. He
confesses that many of the Fathers were against swearing, and indeed none any
ways versed in Antiquity can deny this to have been the general faith of the
primitive Church.

Section Seventeenth, Wherein his XXXI Chapter of Civil Honor, and XXXII
called A View of the Conclusion is considered.
1. AS he enters upon this chapter of Civil Honor, he accuses me as being
effronted and shameless, for saying All our adversarys plead for the lawfulness
of superfluity of Apparel and Plays; and to make this appear the more probable,
he would seem to be much against these things, and wishes there were less of
them. But all will not do, nor hide him in this matter, for he will not deny
the lawfulness of Laces and Ribbands, the man will not offend the good Ladys,
to whose bountifulness they are so much obliged, so as simply to deny their
superfluitys. And how can he? since it is become a practice of some eminent
Presbyterian Ministers, which they have learned from their friends the Popish
Priests and Iesuitish Emissarys, not only to go up and down with their sword
and pistols, to evidence they are men of Blood, and brethren in Politiks, but
also in their laced bands and cravats, perriwigs and gilded belts, to make them
look like Monsieurs. But if he think that I wrong any of our adversaries in
this, let him tell me which of them dogmatically hold it as a general
principle, that superfluity of Clothes and the use of Plays in general is
unlawful, whatever some particulars may do, whereof I made an exception. As
for any their laying-aside these vanitys out of pride, I do not justify it; for
him to insinuat that as to us, is but his bare malicious assertion. After that
(page 534.) he has told his Reader he comes to treat of that which is peculiar
to the Quakers, he gives him a large list of strange Heretics, as among others,
Heracleonites, Carpocratians, Gnosimachians, enough to fright ignorant folk,
telling, that what the Devil could not effectuat by all these, he thinks now
to accomplish by the miserable Quakers. It seems the man must be one of the
Devil's counselours, that he is so well acquainted with his purposes, but I
shall not covet this his preferment, nor seek to imitat the language he has
learned of that Court, which he bestows in the following page to rage at us, as
rude and uncivil, and such as deny to give the least signification of civil
honor to Equals or Superiors, which is false. And then by a strange figur he
will seem no less known in God's Counsel than he before would appear in the
Devil's, and therefore magisterially concludes that God has given us up to the
unmaning of our selves, who have renounced all Christianity, and every thing
that looks like serious Religion. It seems bowing, and taking-off the hatt,
and complemental rules, is this man's Christianity and serious Religion, which
the Quakers have renounced; I will next examine how he proves it.

2. Page 536. He tells that honor is to be rendered to whom honor is due, but
this we never denied. The question is Whether honor may not be rendered
without bowing or taking-off the hatt? The Scripturs he brings here, to prove
this, are so far from doing it, that most of them are egregiously impertinent,
as will appear; for as to Abraham's and Lot's bowing there mentioned, I show in
my Apology how their practice in that was not to be a Rule to us. But he brings
Act. 14: 15. where Paul and Barnabas are said, in our English translation, to
say Sirs, and Act. 27: v. 10. where Paul says Sirs to the Mariners, to prove
they gave a title of honor, as if Sirs did infer the plural number of what
usually Sir to one imports with us. but if he had looked the Greek, he would
have found in both places (...) which signifies Men. I would willingly know, if
the man will be so void of ingenuity, as not to acknowledge his folly here: for
as for the Jaylour's practice, he will have much ado to prove it a Rule to
Christians. Neither is he less impertinent, when ge brings the instance of Mary
saluting Elizabeth, Paul the Church of Corinth, Christ desiring his Disciples
to salute the house, and Paul in his epistles desiring such as he wrote to, to
salute others in his name; for who will not condemn him of folly, in imagining
that the Apostle by these Christian salutations desired them to take-off their
hats and bow to one another in his name, or that this was the way Christ willed
his Disciples to salute the houses they came to. He must remember to prove this
next time, and know we deny neither Salutations nor Civility, but have not yet
heard him prove that they consist in such practices. He confesses, page 537.
that several of the titles used may be granted not to be lawful to Christians,
but thinks that makes nothing for our blunt and rustik (as he terms it) Thou
and Thee, with which we speak to Magistrates and great Persons, no otherwise
than we would do to our foot-boys. But since he confesses they use this Thou
and Thee, which he thinks so blunt and rude, when speaking to God, I desire he
may acquaint me next time, why they speak to God no other ways than they would
do to their foot-boys, to whom I hope he will say they own greater respect
than to any Magistrates or great Personages whatsoever: and this shows it was
no rudeness in me to address my self thus in my epistle to the King, besides
that what he quarrels being written in Latin shows his folly, since it is usual
for themselves writing in that language to use the Singular number even to
Kings. And forasmuch as he thinks this so absurd, that in a silly scoff he
says, under favor of my Thouship, and Page 540. he accounts this in us
singularity, contempt, pride, yea and to proceed from a more stinking root; I
will desire of him to know how it comes that the Bishop of Canterbury in the
coronation of this present King, in most of his addresses to him during that
solemnity, terms him Thee and Thou, as Philips in his history relates, printed
at London, Anno 1670, page 764, 765. But if he think this of little weight, as
being the practice of a proud Prelat in his esteem, what will he say of his
reverend Brethren the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, who teach us in their
Directory to use this Thee and Thou, as in the form prescribed for Marriage,
in these words, I I. N. dotake thee to be my Wife, etc. He must say, that
either they had a reason for this, or they had none, if none, he must conclude
them to have been an irrational pack, which I think he will hardly do; if they
had, when he gives it, let him free them of pride, contempt and singularity, or
something more stinking, (to use his own phrase) and find us guilty of it. For
his proverb of being as proud as a Quaker, we think he has hardly authority to
make this pass for one, though by coining this it seems he affects to be a
Proverb-monger; but if vulgar proverbs were of any great weight, I could tell
him of more ancient and authentik, long ago ascribed to his brethren. Page 537.
he says, the terms of Grace and Eminenty are not given because of personal
enduements corresponding thereunto, but because of Place and Power. But he
should prove that to do so, where these virtues are absent, is either proper or
lawful, since in addressing our selves to any, in saying Your Grace or Your
Eminency, we suppose them to have these enduements, which if they have not, we
speak a lie, and that is not lawful to Christians. To prove the lawfulness of
the compellation of Majesty, to Kings, he tells that the Lord bestowed upon
Solomon royal Majesty, and Nebuchadnezzar, saying, Dan. 4: 26. that Excellent
Majesty was added unto him, in both which places it imports no more than an
outward glory: but where finds he that any, addressing themselves to Kings, use
the compellation of Excellent Majesty, as is usual now adays? he will read his
Concordance often over, ere he can find this. As for his jeering me about my
Concordance, and saying, I cite Scripturs at random, for that Psalm. 29: 4.
Majesty is ascribed to the Thunder, he but declares his own folly; Majesty is
there ascribed to GOD, for what is ascribed to God's voice is ascribed to him:
he may say also then that Powerful in the same verse is not ascribed to God,
but to the thunder, if he resolve to be ridiculous. What he says, page 540. n.
11. that we salute no man, is false; but the question is, Whether there can not
be salutations without the uncovering of the head, or bowing the body? this he
should have proved. He says, Abraham's bowing was against no Law of the
Creation, but so was Abraham's practice in the matter of Hagar (which I
brought, to show that Abraham's practice was not to be our Rule) But since
Abraham's practice in the matter of Hagar, and the like practice of Jacob and
the Jews, was permitted to them, and yet thence we are not allowed to do the
like, that shows that argument deduced from Abraham's simple practice is of no
weight. He thinks it silly to say that bowing of the body and knee and
uncovering of the head are only external signs of our adoration of God,
because it may as well be inferred that a man must never bow his body to tie his
shoes, or uncover his head to have his hair cut. But this his answer is silly,
since men do not these things as a signification of honor, which is the end of
their bowing to one another, and the thing here in question; and therefore his
repetition of the same in the following page needs no answer. He would make
Mordecai's case singular, because Haman was an Agagite, one come of Agag: but
since he is so good at genealogies, let him prove this next time, for if the
similitude of the name were enough, might we not say with as much reason, that
John Brown is a Brownist? and yet perhaps he would think this a reproach.

3. But the poor man thinks it is like he has hitt the nail on the head to
purpose, when he says, page 542. upon this subject, One thing I would ask,
what he thinks of that honor and worship, that was given to James Naylor, as
he rode into Bristol, Oct. 24. 1656? I answer, I think it was both wicked and
abominable, and so do the people called Quakers, who thereupon disowned him and
all those that had an hand in it, as by several Letters found written to him,
and other papers, if need were, I could at large prove; but it suffices to
inform the Reader of this, that he was denied by that People, and not any ways
afterward owned by them, until several years after, that he testified his
full repentance for that thing, in a public assembly, upon his knees, with
many tears, signifying the same also under his hand, which also was printed.
And thus is swept away his malicious insinuation, page 530. as to this, and
also what his brother R. M. C. says so often in his Postscript, in terming us
Naylorists, as if I. N. had been the first among the Quakers, hence John Brown
in the list he gives of the Quakers Errors of Civil Honor, calls him their
first Father: but to teach him not to be so forward to lie next time, he may
know that years before I. N. joined with the Quakers, there were hundreds went
under that name, and who both preached and practiced their way. This may show
the sober Reader, how apt these men are to print malicious lies, and R. M. C.
so frequently seeking to denominat us from that name, because of this, shows
how frivolous and false it is. I must mind that it were but a just retribution,
and no injury done to them, (as this of theirs to us is a manifest one) if I
should mind them of no less abominable actions, than ever was or could be
proved against I. N. not many years ago done by some eminent among them, who
dyed without any sense of true repentance (whereof I. N. gave singular
evidence.) What would he think then, if I should thence term them ists? But I
spare them at present, in hopes they will see their folly, and amend. After
this thing of I. N. he ends this chapter with railing, but I observe he makes
an entire omission of what I say, n. 16. upon the last These in my Apology,
which I therefore refer to the Reader's serious consideration.

4 I come now to his last section entitled A View of my Conclusion, where
coming to examine the few lines wherewith I conclude my Apology, he bestows upon
me a flood of most unreasonable railing. I did in that conclusion recommend to
the Reader the system I had presented to him, of the True Christian Religion,
which this man here with many bitter words affirms to be other ways, but we
must leave the judgment of this to the Reader, when he has seriously read both
what he says on the one hand, and I on the other. And whereas I in my
Conclusion did show the Reader, how falsely we are charged with denying the
outward appearance of Christ, the real existence of Heaven and Hell as a place
without us, the Last and General Judgment, the Resurrection of the Body, by
telling him seriously, and in the presence of God, that these accusations are
false, and that we really believe these things; he with a most effronted
impudenee reckons it boldness in me, to say so, page 554. and that because of
the testimony of Faldo and some others of our manifest Opposers, as if they
should know what I and my Brethren believe, better than I my self do, or should
be more credited in giving account of our faith, than our selves. Who can secure
themselves from being stigmatized as the Vildest and grossest of Heretics from
the malice of liars, if this method be to be followed? But to proceed to show
his unjustice and unfairness in this matter in the highest degree, contrary to
the rules of fair disputing, and all honest dealing in matters of controversy,
it does manifestly appear, in that notwithstanding in his Title he declares he
intends an Examination of the Quakers Religion, as the same is presented to the
world by me, when he has labored all he can by turning, perverting,
commenting, and divining, to squeeze out of my words all that may seem absurd
and erroneous, or at lest which he will have to be so, and that he can not find
enough there to render the Quakers such horrid monsters and Vild blasphemers,
as he ever and anon proclaims them to be; then away he runs from R. B's.
Apology, which is the theme of his Examination, and comes off with a But is not
the man of this opinion, or May we not conjectur that he is of such and such an
opinion (which to be sure is more absurd) as such ans such a man as Mr Stalham,
Mr Norton, or Mr Hicks and Faldo relate of such and such Quakers, that say so
and so? Is this justice? Is this Christian dealing? Is this honesty, as among
men, in writing against a People not to seek their opinions and faith from
their own mouths and pens, but from those of their manifest enemies and
opposers? Does not this bespeak the height of malice with a witness, and show a
determinat resolution to calumniat at any rate? Is this to walk accordlng to
the Royal Law, to do as he would be done by? Dare I. B. say he would be content
to be done so by? Would he judge it equal dealing, if one writing against
Presbytery should represent them not as they declare themselves to be, but out
of the writing of their manifest opposers, as to give credit to Spotswood's
History, in judging of the rise and growth of Presbytry? Would he judge it fair
reasoning, if one writing against the Calvinistical points of Reprobation
should in stead of making use of their own Authors, or when he could not make
the matter bad enough there, tell the case is so and so, as Arminius or
Episcopius relates it; or one writing against Protestants shoule, in the
representing of their Principles make use of Bellarmin and other Popish
writers? If this then would justly be accounted ridiculous and absurd, let the
judicious Reader judge what character may John Brown so doing deserve. But
above all is singularly to be noticed I. Brown his venerable esteem of his
beloved Author Mr Hicks, as he terms him, of whom he has so high an esteem,
that he has given him more place in his book than any other, there being no
Author, to my observation, so frequently cited by him, who, because this Thomas
Hicks has been the most abusive and grossest liar and calumniator that has
appeared against us, therefore he receivs him with the most kindly
entertainment; for as malice against Christ of old cemented Pilat and Herod to
put up their private quarrels, so at this day it has done these men against his
Truth and followers, else what should it mean that a fierce Presbyter should so
heartily embrace a keen Anabaptist Preacher, since the same man often upbraids
the Quakers with their affinity to the Anabaptists? Certainly the Presbyters
cause must be at a low ebb, and he in mighty fear of the Quakers prevailing,
when he can so cordially shake hands with his beloved Anabaptist brother Hicks,
to help at a dead lift against the Quakers, and take him for his Auxiliary with
his lies and forgerys, to make a noise, when other matters and arguments fail.
But it had been more wisely done in I. Brown, ere he had given the Anabaptist
Hicks his writings so much place in his book, to have considered the answer to
the first dialogue and continuation thereof, written by W. P. entitled Reason
against Railing, Truth against Fiction, and the answer to his third Dialogue,
by the same Author, entitled The counterfeit Christian detected, and the Real
Quaker justified: for I question if I. B. will judge it safe to take implicity
upon trust in matters of controversy of Religion, without examining the word of
an Anabaptist, unless it be against the Quakers, where any witness it is like
with him may be admitted, for if he do but speak evil enough, it will be
acceptable, whether true or not. And I. B. should also have done well to have
informed himself, how this Thomas Hicks, being publikly called to an account
before several thousand witnesses, for his gross abuses in framing answers in
the Quakers name, which was never said by any Quaker, and in other ways
perverting and misapplying sentences of their writings, to questions of his own
framing, so that he might make them as impertinent and ridiculous as he was
willing others should esteem them to be; did pitifully succumb, so that his
best defense to come off, was to plead the infirmity of his lungs, which made
him desert the second meeting held for that purpose, and substitute in his
place a free will Anabaptist (with whom I suppose I. B. will yet have less
fellowship) who made a noise and brawling, to keep off the chief matter: and
yet the grosness of Thomas Hicks dealing was so discovered, that some of his
own way and others who are not Quakers did publikly yea and in print declare
their abhorrency of his forgerys, as appears by a book written at that time,
entitled The twelve Pagan Principles considered, upon which Thomas Hicks
undertakes to unchristian the Quakers, and another, entitled Quakerisme no
Paganism, and another, The Christian a Quaker, the Quaker a Christian, all
written upon that occasion by men that were no Quakers. Yea Th. Hicks's abuses
and lies were so far from doing us hurt, that they were instrumental to bring
among us a young Independent Preacher, of good repute, and well received and
heard among them, who has told my self, that the reading of Hicks Dialogues and
seeing his gross lies and abuses gave the first rise to his searching after and
embracing the Truth; and when Th. Hicks and his accomplices were further pursued
by the answer to their pretended narration of these debates, entitled Forgery
no Christianity, written by Thomas Ellwood, and another paper, entitled A
Fresh Pursuit, by the same hand, wherein he arraigneth the said Hicks and his
compllces of falsehood, lying, forgery, and requires them to make them good, or
else abide under the just condemnation of so manifest guilt, which they were
glad to do, and have not so much as peeped out now these 3 years, since the
last of these transactions, until now this vomit, of which all sober men are
ashamed, and from which the Authors have shamefully shrunk, is licked up by
John Brown, and is become the chief authority of his Tract. Will it savor well
in the mouths of sober Professors, that the chief gun, that I. B. uses against
the Quakers, are the lies, forgerys and abuses of a shameless Anabaptist?
Certainly when I. Brown considers these things, he will, if malice has not
altogether blinded him, find that he has too suddenly laid hands upon his
brother Hicks, ere he well minded the consequence of it, and that so great an
infusion of Hicks his Anabaptistical dirt, which takes the best share of not a
few pages of his book, will make the rest to stink, albeit it were more cleanly
stuff, than it is. And for Faldo's books, out of which he coppyeth not a little
in this chapter, he may find them both answered by W. P. the one called
Quakerism a new Nick name to old Christianity, and the other the Invalidity of
John Faldo's Vindication, in which, page 430, 431, 432, 433. he may find a list
of John Faldo's miscarriages in citing assertions said by Quakers, without
telling the books, and of books without parts, chapters end page, of these
books falsely cited, of passages clipped and maimed, and others perverted by
additions, and which makes up above 70, to which John Faldo has never had face
yet to answer. So that this man may see what kind of authority he has made use
of, and how his proofs are bottomed. And lastly, of our full belief of future
states, and of the Resurrection, he may find a large account in a book called
The Christian Quaker and his Divine Testimony vindicated, by W. Pen and G.
Whitehead, printed in the Year 1674, from page 146 of the second part to the
end.

Section Eighteenth, Wherein Robert Macquare his Postscript is considered.
1. AS to R. M. C. his Postscript, which I come now to in the last place, I
shall not need to be large, it being a compound and heap of most abusive and
unreasonable railing against me and my Friends, on the one hand, and a most
fawning manifest piece of nauseating and shameless Flattery to his brother I.
Brown, on the other. In the very entry he brands our doctrine as the Devil's,
and ourselves as his Ministers and Amanuenses, and a little after he exclaimeth
thus, O what horrid! what hell-hatched, boid blasphemies this black brood
belcheth forth! And for me in particular, page 559, 560. in a few lines he calls
me both a Turk and a Devil, and what more his railing Spirit affords him: To
all which I shall only say, the worst I wish him is heartily to desire the Lord
to forgive him, as by the strength of his Grace I freely do. As to his brother
I. Brown, he accounts him singularly acute, solidly learned and truly
gracious. So that he conceits, if the Devil, who he supposes drew me on to
write, had his dictats again, he would bury or burn them: thence he highly
exalts the great depth of this his little Presbyterian David, as he calls him,
in the shining light and sharpness of his Examen. Sober men will blush to read
such shameless flattery. And truly this Presbyterian Prince looks liker
cursing Shimei, than little David; and he himself looks like the daring
Philistim, who thus commends him, proclaiming a defiance in his name, as if no
solid answer could be given: but such crying of triumph before hand will have
small weight with men of reason. His jeering quibble at my words in my book of
Universal Love, where I speak overly of the felicity of my understanding, shows
he wanted matter, but not malice. Many modest men will be found to have said as
much of themselves, neither did I that, as a thing by which I would have any to
measur now either me or my writings: the greatest natural understanding
(wherein I confess my self freely to be inferior to many) avails but little,
yea often hurts, to the chief thing needful, to wit, regeneration, which by
Grace and not by Nature, and therein I desire to glory. His petty remark upon
Barclaij Argenis is both childish and malicious, he must know that the Quakers
and my self do both abhor and condemn such books, and truly my love to my
name is not so great, that I would have that exempted; and therefore I could
freely give my vote, that all Romances were burnt, and he will find it hard to
prove that such are used by any of us, whileas I know some, who passed, and yet
go for pious and elect Ladys, among them, that bestowed no small share of their
time in reading them, and Preachers may be found eminent enough, whose closets
are well stored with most approved Romances, and some being challenged, even of
note among the Presbyterians, by some serious professors, for their reading of
them, did justify it, as that, whereby they were helped in their pulpits to
give their sermons a better luster. So he may see these books are of more use
to his brethren than us, who can content our selves with such homely language,
as the holy Scriptur teaches. For what he says of James Naylor I need return
no answer, having sufficiently done it in the former section. And whereas he
gives the example of the AntiNomians, to show the Quakers are not singular, in
not being called after a particular person, he does but miss of his aim, for
the Quakers are known by that name as such, being an imbodyed People,
consisting of several hundred gathered Churches, or Congregations; but the
Antinomians are only here either some having these particular notions, and no
such imbodyed people, else let him tell us where we may find these Anti-Nomian
Churches I need say no more to this Postscript, which has nothing in it but
mere railing assertions as to me, and that the rather as I suppose R. M. C.
will, long ere this appear in print, receive a solid and grave Letter from an
old friend and acquaintance of his, which may make him sensible of his iniquity
in this matter, if there be yet any Christian ingenuity abiding with him, and
that by prejudice he is not totally blinded.

As for his railing assertions of George Keith's book, we will see how it is
refuted in the promised answer to it, and then it will be time to answer them,
as to that, as well as to the list of the blasphemous assertions, which they
pretend they have gotten out of it: but all Christians may judge how they are
like to prove it blasphemous, when, as an instance of the blasphemous
assertions, they give G. K's saying, that the Man Christ Jesus is the Mediator.
And to help them to do their work fully, I desire them, when they go about to
prove this assertion to be blasphemy, they may not forget the Apostle's words,
1 Timoth. 2: 5. For there is One GOD, and One Mediator between GOD and men, the
MAN Christ Jesus, and show how G. K's words are more blasphemous than these of
the Apostle, which, to make it more plain to the Reader, I will add thus:

G. K's position, which I. B. and R. M. C. two eminent Presbyterian Preachers,
in the Index at the end of J. B's book, affirm to be one of the abominable
heads of Quakerisme, is,

That the MAN CHRIST JESUS is the MEDIATOR.

The Apostle his assertion (1 Timothy 2: 5.) is,

That there is One MEDIATOR between GOD and men, the MAN CHRIST JESUS.

We desire the sense and censur of the Presbyterian Ministry upon this, or
otherwise we hope they can not in reason be offended, if justly reputed
accusers of the Spirit of God, that taught the Apostles to speak, and thence
condemned, as signal Calumniators and Heretics.

Here follows the Letter of Lillias Skein to R. M. C.
AN Expostulatory EPISTLE, directed to ROBERT MACQVARE.
Friend ROBERT MACQUARE,
MY tender Love and Sympathy was great toward many of the Non-Conformists, who
were suffering for Conscience sake, and not for interest espousing that
opinion, of whom thy self being one, thou was often very near me,
notwithstanding I knew generally the Non-Conformists are more imbittered and
prejudiced against us, called Quakers, than any other men; yet this I often
constructed to flow from misinformations concerning us, being so little
acquainted with and conversant among us, whereunto your being so shy, was but
like the Disciples in a storm seeing him appear in a manner they had not seen
him before, thought he was coming nearer them for deliverance, yet they
cried-out through fear, as if it had been the appearance of some evil Spirit.
Other times I have looked upon the great prejudice many had against us
answerable to Christ's saying, No man having drunk old wine, straightway
desires to drink new, they say the old is better, which hitherto has and yet
does cause me bear with you, and love that which is good amongst you, wherever
it appears. And so because of this love toward thee, I am the more concerned
at this time with what thou have lately published, for, though my acquaintance
and intimacy with thee was not so much as others, yet it being in a very
serious season with both of us, as I very well remember, when thou was shut up
close prisoner, and was daily in expectation of the sentence of death, thy
deliverance from which I retain the fresh sense of, and it was and is with many
such like seasons (wherein the Lord prepared my heart, and bended his ear) a
sweet encouragement to trust him, and a singular engagement on me to wait for
his immediate leadings and the manifestations of his will at all times. But Oh!
since I heard of and read thy Postscripts to John Brown's book, and S. R his
Letters, as is supposed, I am astonished, and much ashamed on thy behalf! O! is
this the best fruits of so many years affliction thou have to publish to the
world? that one called and suffering as a Nonconformist, (to this sinful
time) should have learned no more conformity to meek lowly Jesus (of whom it is
said, he learned obedience, by the things which he suffered.) Surely none who
read thy language, will say, this man has been with Jesus, but rather say,
whosesoevers company thou have been in, thou have learned to be a cunning
Artist at the scolding trade, and art therein vainly puffed-up, that thou even
fleest aloft (though with waxen wings) above the lowly, harmeless, meek Spirit
of Christ. And verily, had I all thy Rhetorik (whether natural, or acquired)
which thou so much misimprov'st, to the gratifying of that which needs more to
be crucified in thy self, and many, who are ready implicitly to follow thee; it
is not in my desire to follow thy example, nor shall I wish that ever thou have
an answer from any of the Lord's People, in thy own terms, which are such as
all sober unprejudiced People, who read them, will see thy Spirit most strongly
imbittered, when thy pen is so dipped in gall, I say, it is not in my desire to
bring forth one railing accusation against thee, neither to answer many things
thou have vented against the Lord's present work and witnesses, whom thou
despisest and abhorrest more than dung under thy feet, and crowest over, yet,
if the Living God (a part of whose host they are) see it meet, he can raise up
the least of them, and make thee feel worm Jacob a threshing instrument with
teeth to deal with thee, and thresh that Iofty malicious spirit of prejudice,
that breaths through thee: the consideration whereof upon thy own Soul's
account is the occasion of this Letter, wherein I desire to lay somethings
before thee, which are with weight upon me, my compassions being kindled
toward thee, that when the Lord comes to visit the earth, thou should be
found among them, who are beating their fellow servants, the hazard of which
state thou know, and many will feel, when the Lord rises up to the prey, for
his eyes are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cries, though
now he be trying the children of men, and permitting some to suffer, and others
to do hard things; yet a hope lives in me, the time approaches, wherein the
Lord will more manifestly appear to the joy and refreshment of the single in
heart, who suffer with him, and patiently wait for him, and for the shame and
utter overthrow of his malicious opposers.

And so One of the Particulars I would lay before thee, is, a desire thou
would yet in the Lord's Light search thy own heart more, till thou findst out
what secret affinity has remained with thee to any of the Lord's enemies in
thy own heart, for if all were brought under the government of the Son of God
inwardly, I am fully persuaded thy outward opposition to the Lord's work could
not long stand. The outward is a true figure of the inward, and I know by true
experience all that despite and disdainful under valuing epithets thou
squeezest up thy engine to coin (which one may feel answers not fully thy own
satisfaction) for bespattering and loading that People and their principles, is
but (alas!) a mirrour-glass set up to represent the low, mean, unworthy esteem
thou bear to the Light of Christ in its inward appearance in thee, as a
reprover, for whosoever turns universally at the reproofs of God's Light in
the Conscience, shall witness the pouring forth of his Spirit in larger
manifestations, according to Prove. 1: 23. But that Spirit speaks in thee, of
which Ifaiah prophesied, Isa. 53: 2, 3, etc. concerning the outward appearance
of the same Christ, our Head, and the Captain of our Salvation (whose
sufferings, death, resurrection and glory we dearly own, and wait from day to
day more to feel the precious virtue thereof) although he then was and now is
rejected and despised of men, who hide, as it were, their faces from him,
because his outward appearance was as a root out of a dry ground, in whom there
was no form, nor comelyness, nor beauty, that he should be desired by that
mind, which was looking after great things, and expecting much outward glory
and advantage, and so Christ's appearance was mistaken by the learned Rabbis
in that day, notwithstanding they had Moses and the Prophets testimonys, and
were not wanting in reading the letter, as others now; for as it was then, it
is now, he was and is mistaken by all, who seek any thing to glory in, save the
Cross of Christ, for the wisdom of the flesh has and does lift fallen man above
the innocent Seed in themselves, only through which they can see the invisible
glory of the Kingdom of God, and find an abundant entrance unto the
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, whereof it consists: wherefore
take heed of being lifted up above the Seed, Light, Life and Spirit of Christ
in thee, and so thou will see matter to work out thy Salvation in fear and
trembling, and wilt not sit down upon former seize or experiences, when
the Life is gone.

Another thing I would put thee in remembrance of, in these present times, is
the great danger of sinning at the waters of strife, whereof Moses his example
may be a standing monument to all generations, of whom it was said, he was the
meekest man upon the earth, yet at the waters of strife he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips, because of which he was debarred from entering into the promised
rest. And are there not some, living at this day, who, with sorrow of heart,
have observed the heat and bitterness of spirit, that has arisen because of
differences and controversy concerning Religion, has eaten out the life of
that love and tenderness; that was with many, and having hurt the green thing
in themselves and one another, has brought on death, darkness, dryness, and
sensible withering, and can not choose but so to do, seeing bitterness of spirit
and prejudice, and such like frames in man or woman separats from God, while
there any one abides? For God is Love, and he that dwells in God dwells in love,
and Christ has said Unless ye abide in me, ye can not bring forth much fruit,
so not abiding in that pure Love to God, and his Image in his Children has
caused many fall short, and has let their progress, and made many lose
sight of their way, and the Guide of their youth, and so they have not followed
the Lord fully, nor followed him in the regeneration, renewing according to the
increase of Light and the measurs of his manifestation, whereby they should
know, even in this life, a being changed from glory to glory, as by the Spirit
of the Lord. Thou mention'st in thy Postscript to J. B. page 557. Many who may
remember with shame and confusion of face their laughing at, and making light
of the apperance of that prodigy, and that it may cause some go groaning to
their grave, being an evidence that ye knew not the signs of the time, and what
they called you to do. To which I answer, Lightness and laughing among people
that lay claim to Religion, is none of the least causes of mourning, but I also
believe if the appearance of Quakerism, so called, had in the beginning been
looked on as the forerunner of the downfall of a mere man-made Ministry in
these Nations; it is like it would have moved those, who laughed most, to have
mourned most even then; and Babylon's merchants would have cried Alas! Alas!
but since now thou acknowledg'st in the space of a score of years at most, thou
see cause to mourn for th^^, which ye then laughed at, I am very willing to
admit of your own aknowledgmem for a ground of hope that the singlehearted
among the Non conformists may outlive all the clamor they are now making
against us, and in less than as many years more, may work through the foggs and
mists, that now darken their understandings concerning the signs of this time,
and look back with shame and confusion on their great darkness that would have
mourned for that which was matter of joy: and this is no far fetched
consequence, for ye had then, and now the same acquaintance with the letter of
the Scripturs, and as much humane learning and sharpness and natural abilitys
for an acute examen, and so it follows by the rule of contrarys; and may it
not be without presumption concluded, ye needed then, and do now, the help of
the Spirit's immediate teachings in your own hearts, without which ye will not
yet understand the signs of this time aright? which if ye did, ye would see the
Lord staining the pride of all flesh, and bringing into contempt all the
honorable in the earth, that the Lord alone may be exalted, and see him coming
out of his Holy habitation to silence all flesh. Has not the Lord removed most
of all those, who were eminently instrumental to serve him in the work of the
ministry? and is he not daily making their skirts bare, who remain, and daily
making them to cease out of the midst of the National Church, who rejoiced in
her pride? Is not his voice sounding aloud unto such of you as yet remain? Ye
shall no more be haughty because of my holy mountain, if to day ye will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts, for I am sure the Teacher, that will tell
you infallibly what ye are called to do, is near, and is not removed into a
corner. But it is the enemies work to veil and cover present dutys and
opportunitys, and represent what is past or lost as very desirable, and even to
prompt a people or person to lament and bewail their bypast failings, and
short-comings, who do little heed or regard the worth of the remaining season,
and so to redeem the time, wherefore my advice, in tender love to thy Soul is,
that thou wait on the Lord, to understand aright the import of such signs, as
are now appearing, when the Lord is proceeding to work mavelous works and
wonders in the earth and is making the wisdom of the wise to perish, and the
understanding of the prudent to be hid; and pouring out his Spirit upon Sons
and Daughters, servants and handmaids, provoking to jealousy and angering the
mighty learned wise men in this generation by the foolish appearance of a
company of illiterat tradesmen, who were never bred up at schools and
universitys, weavers and shoe-makers, and fishers. Yea is not one of the
dreadful signs of this time fulfilling in thee and thy Brethren, Rev. 16: 8,
9. -- the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun, and power was given
unto him to scorch men with fire. And men were scorched with great heat, and
blasphemed the Name of God, which has power over these plagues: and they
repented not, to give him glory? And whether this plague be not poured out upon
your Antichristian Sun, and ye be the persons, that are thus scorched, your
dialect does sufficiently declare unto all those, whose eyes the Lord has
opened. I also desire thee to consider how inconsonant with true Christianity a
spirit of persecution is, and how much more unsuitable, and unequal for a people
or person under the same condemnation. Surely that poor man, who had been but a
little time in Christ's company, was so far influenced by his meek and moderat
Spirit, as not only to forbear railing himself against suffering Christ, but
to rebuke his fellow-companion for so doing, which instance will stand in
judgment against thee, for the contrary practice, neither will thy denying us
to be members of Christ, and not suffering for well-doing, thy accounting us
Demoniaks, will not avail thee, nor cover thee from that woe, (if thou obtain
not mercy to repent) denunced against such as call good evil, and evil good,
and Light darkness, and darkness Light, in that day, when the Lord Jesus shall
declare before men and angels we are his friends and followers. O Robert! thy
hard speeches have manifested thy own sad acknowledgment to be very true, the
Holy fire is gone out with thee indeed, in place of which, that, which never
was, nor is of God's kindling, is brought forth, and this is not now to be
found by secret search in corners by secret surmises: but is by many of you
laid open, and in thy late Postscripts, as on a theater set up, as those, who
run, may read the holy fire, if ever there was any, is quite extinct:
concerning which compound of unjust groundless accusations and malicious
inventions I hope I may say there are many sober serious people, who fear and
serve the Living God, inward Jews whose hearts the Lord has circumcised, to
love him, who desire continually in the integrity of their hearts to serve him,
against whom I know no divination nor enchantment of Devils or men shall
prosper, of which blessed company I do avouch my self one, through the Free
Grace of God, and I hope I, and many with me, have put all thine and thy
Brethrens writings in the Lord's own hand to answer, for the vindication of his
Glory, and the manifestation of his Truth, and I desire to make no worse use of
thy Postscripts than Hezekia made of the writings of Rabshakeh in that day,
unto the Righteous Lord who searches the heart, and tries the reins, do I
appeal, for whose immediate help and seasonable powerful appearance I desire
both to hope, and patiently to wait, until he have performed his whole work in
Zion and Jerusalem both amongst you and us, then shall be brought to pass the
sure promise, the Lord will punish the fruit of the stout heart of his
adversary, and the glory of his high looks, in that day he will inwardly and
outwardly both plead our cause, and execute judgment for us, He will bring
forth our righteousness as the light, and make his judgments for us manifest as
the noonday, although we lie among the black pots of your reproaches. Now, the
Lord will bring us forth unto the Light, and we shall behold his righteousness
fulfilled in you or manifested upon you; my witness is in heaven, I am one, who
desires not the evil day, but am willing to embrace all the sweet opportunitys
of the drawings of my Father's love and the arisings of his Life to stand in
the gapp for the single-hearted among you, and I must declare, for the
exoneration of my own Conscience, I am an experimental witness how grievously
thou violatst the Truth, in misrepresenting the things, which thou call the
bitter root springing up in these sprouts of hell. 1. Men's not receiving the
love of the Truth. 2. Their pleasing themselves with names and notions, while
Christ was not received to dwell in the heart. 3. Their not departing from
iniquity, who seemed to call on his Name, I am a witness, when the Lord called
me out from among the Presbyterians, I was one, who according to my education
and information and inclination from my childhood was a true lover of that
called the Glorious Gospel, and a constant attender upon the declarations
thereof, and the messengers feet, that published it, were beautiful to me, so
long as those Ordinances of man were unto me as the Ordinances of Christ, which
was more than 30 years, I loved them more than all things in this world, I
passed through them hungry, and hardly bestead for many years, feeling after
Life and immortality, but could not find that, somewhat was raised in me, that
words and reports could not feed, names and notions I minded little, but Christ
to dwell in me, was that and is that more and more I press after. And now I
must for the Truth's sake say somewhat, which I humbly mention with a fresh
remembrance of the Love, Power and tender Mercy of God, who enabled me (I know
the Lord will not impute it to be boasting) in that season, wherein the Lord
revealed the true way to life and immortality to me, by his inward appearance
in my Soul, it was a time, wherein he had mercifully turned me from all that
ever his Light inwardly and Law outwardly had condemned me for, my heart also
did bear witness for me that whatsoever I had known would please him, I was
choosing to do that, not that thereby I was seeking justification in my own
righteousness, but a sure evidence of my interest in him, who was made unto us
Righteousness, Justification, etc. This blessed glimpse of my begun freedom was
given me in a seasonable time, that I might thereby be enabled to speak with
mine enemy in the gate, and be encouraged to believe in the Light and wait upon
the Lord, to feel his virtue perfectly to cleanse me from all filthyness of
flesh and Spirit. Neither was I an undervaluer of the Scripturs, they were my
Rule then, and I hope for ever my life shall answer them, I think they honor
the Scripturs most, who live most according to them, and not they, who call
them the only Rule, yet do not make them their pattern. The Scripturs of Truth
were precious to me, and by them was I taught not to walk nor worship in the
way of the People, the Spirit showing me his mind in them, and then I saw in
his Light, that it is not the Scripturs many adore so much as their own corrupt
glosses upon them, neither can my experience go along with what thou affirmest
of the hazard of converse with that People. It is very well known to all that
lived in the place where I sojourned, I was none who conversed with them, I was
never at one of their meetings, I never read one of their books, unless
accidentally I had found them where I came, and looked to them, and laid them by
again. So now it remains with me to tell thee what was the occasion I joined
with them, since it was none of those thou mention'st, which I will very singly
and can very comfortably do; it was that thing ye schoolmen call Immediate
Objective Revelation, (which my desire is ye were more particularly and
feelingly acquainted with) whereby the Lord raising in my Soul his feeling
Life, I could not sit down satisfied with hearing of what the Son of God had
done outwardly, (though I believe thereby he purchased all that Grace and
Mercy, which is inwardly wrought in the hearts of his Children) until I should
be a partaker of the virtue and efficacy thereof, whereby I might possess the
Substance of things hoped for. I saw an historical faith would neither cleanse
me, nor save me: if that could save any, the Devils were not without a door of
hope. I felt I needed the Revelation of the Son of God in me. All that ever I
read or heard, without this, could not give me the Saving knowledge of God.
None knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him,
through the virtue whereof mine eyes were more and more by degrees opened, for
the tenderhearted Samaritan had pity upon my wounded Soul, when both Priest
and Levit passed by, and the watchmen rent my vail, and when there was no eye
to pity, nor hand to help me, he drew near, and poured in wine and oil, as he
saw needful, and fulfilled the promise in measur, wherein he had long caused
me to hope, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life, and that sweet saying, whereby I am confirmed and comforted, if
evil Parents know how to give their children good things, how much more will
the Lord give his holy Spirit to those who ask him? When your children ask
bread, will ye give them a stone? or when they ask a fish, will ye give them a
serpent? These precious Scripturs, and many such like, being opened up and
applied by the Spirit of Truth powerfully and seasonably (in saying, be not
faithless, but believing, times above number before and since has made me set
to my seal to these words of Christ, The words that I speak are Spirit and
Life, and as I walk with him, and abide in him, watching at the posts of
Wisdoms gates, traveling in Spirit more and more to bring forth fruit unto
him, and walk worthy of him, unto all wel-pleasing, daily to dye unto self,
that Christ may live in me, I becoming a passive creatur, and he an active
Christ, in the increase of his Government I feel the increase of my peace

And so, my friend, thou have here, by some touches at things, occasion to see
how far thou art mistaken concerning us, and how far contrary to the Truth, as
it is in Jesus, thou represent'st many things to the world, speaking evil of
things which thou know not, and if thou do, the greater is thy sin, two
Particulars indeed I can not strain charity so far as to believe thou think,
do we deny Jesus Christ, and justification through his Righteousness, because
we make the sufficiency thereof of a more universal extent, than ye, or because
we love whole Christ so much, and his seamless coat that we will not have it
divided? Nay we dare not divide justification and sanctification, neither
confound them, we have felt the Blood and the Spirit distinct things, yet
inseparable: neither can thou think we make void the Scripturs, because we
honor the Spirit that was before the Scripturs were written, and bear
testimony against all, who deny the Spirit's immediate teachings to be the
universal privilege of his People, whereby ye take away the key of knowledge,
and neither enter the Kingdom, nor suffer others, who would, but monopolize
knowledge to your selves, and intrude your meanings upon the Consciences of men,
as the Rule, which meanings indeed I do not own, either as the only, or any
Rule, but as the Spirit of Christ in my Conscience answers it; the testimony of
the Spirit of Truth in thousands with me will stand and rise up against thee,
in the presence of the Lord, when all thy unjust reproaches and malicious
accusations shall melt away before the presence of the Glory of the
heart-searching God, before whose Tribunal I desire daily to stand, that he may
more narrowly search me by his Light, and both discover and destroy what he
finds contrary to his Pure nature and holy will, whether mediatly or immediately
revealed, and before whose Tribunal thou and I will, ere long, more solemnly
appear to give an account of things we have done in the body, which that thou
may do with joy, and not with grief, hereafter when thou commend'st thy
advice to the Readers of thy Epistles, have so much mercy upon thy own and the
Souls of those thou writ'st to, as to desire them to ponder their path, and be
established, and be sure they become to the holy faith, and not to an implicit
believing the Tradition of men, for by so doing indeed thou and as many as thou
can influence may come to farewell, according to Prove. 4: 26. Ponder thy path,
and be established, and turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. I am one,

Newtyle, the 8 of the fourth month, 1678. Who, in my measur, travel for the
redemption of the Seed of God in all Souls, and in thine. LILLIAS SKEIN.

A Catalogue Of some of the many downright Lies and Calumnys, which he asserts,
in the Index before his book, to be the assertions of the Quakers.
All these things he asserts falsely of us.

1. THat we arrogantly style our selves the servants of God.

2. That we glory of the Title Quakers.

3. That we account our selves the only Teachers of Truth, equalizing our selves
to the Apostles.

4. That we say we are perfect, without sin.

5. That we only taste, see and smell the inward Light.

6. That we assert our experiences, in matters, that can not be experienced.

7. That we assert our selves to be equal with God.

8. That we say, all is done without the Spirit, that is not done in our way.

9. That we remain covered, when they pray or praise, really to mock.

10. That we ascribe as much to our own writings, as to the Scripturs.

11. That we speak basely of Learned men.

12. That we condemn the study of Original Languages.

13. That we speak most basely of the Scripturs.

14. That we say they are no Rule to us.

15. That we call them imperfect.

16. That we dissuade from reading and studying them.

17. That we say, God only works a possibility of Salvation.

18. That we say, God ordains nothing from eternity.

19. That we deny Christ's second coming.

20. That we are not clear concerning Jesus of Nazareth his being the Son of
God.

21. That we acknowledge no Christ, but a Christ within us.

22. That we make him nothing but a mere holy man.

23. That a Christ without us is but a carnal Christ with us.

24. That we are unclear touching the sin of Adam, and the fall.

25. That we make Original Sin to be a substance.

26. That we deny that Heathens have any thing of the Law written in their
hearts.

27. That we say, a Pagan can perform all inward worship easily.

28. That we confound Revelations with the gracious operations of the Spirit.

29. That we succeed to the old Enthusiasts.

30. That we turn the history of Christ's Death into allegorys.

31. That we wildly describe it.

32. That we say, there is no more advantage to be had by the history of
Christ's Death, than by the history of other Saints.

33. That we miserably mistake the judgment of the Orthodox about Reprobation.

34. That in exaggerating the matter of Reprobation we miserably belch out
against God.

35. That we deny Faith and Repentance to be the gifts of God.

36. That we vilify the virtue and efficacy of Christ's Satisfaction.

37. That we deny all imputation of Righteousness.

38. That we say, the Patriarchs had no faith of the Messiah to come.

39. That with us all members of the Church are Officers.

40. That we say all Worship must be done by inward Inspirations, as to time,
place, and duration.

41. That we make no use of the Scripturs in our Worship.

42. That in our Worship we unchristian and unman our selves.

43. That we deny Magistrates to be lawful that are not of our way.

44. That we are against giving of all honor and respect to Superiors or
equals.

45. That we assert no Heaven nor Hell, but what is within us.

I could have noted several others, which are direct enough lies, set down in
the Index, besides not a few he has in the book, which are not in his Index,
and which the Reader will in this Vindication observe. There are also several
in the Index which are false, and not owned by us, in the terms he writes
them, of which I shall give the Reader a few examples, that he may judge
thereby of his fallacy in most of the rest, as where he says,

1. That we say, the knowledge of the Fall is not necessary.

Now this is false, for we hold it necessary for all, to be sensible of their
loss and want; only we say, a distinck knowledge of the history of Adam's fall
is not of absolute necessity to such as God never afforded the means of knowing
it.

2. That we deny bodily death to be a punishment for sin.

This is also false, only we say, that it is not a punishment for sin unto all,
but rather a pleasur and satisfaction, according to the Apostle's words, to me
to dye is gain.

3. That with us the preaching of the Gospel is not necessary.

This is a mere fallacy, for we say the preaching of the Gospel is absolutely
necessary, only we do not think the external knowledge of Christ to be only
the preaching of the Gospel, and that the preaching of the Gospel has been or
may be, where this is wanting.

If I should go through the rest of the Index thus, I should find very few
particulars, in which there is not some such perversion or fallacy, so that
very few are set down, as they are truly owned by us; some indeed are, such as

1st. That we deny men to be Christians by birth, for we believe that men by
nature are born children of wrath; and yet this may have exceptions, as in the
case of Jeremiah and John the Baptist, who are said to be sanctified from their
mothers womb.

2. That we would have Ministers learning Trades, whereby to live. We truly
think it were no disparagement for Ministers to work with their hands, as the
honest Apostle Paul did, who commended the same to the Elders of Ephesus, Act.
20: 34. And yet we think a man may be a good Minister, though he have not a
trade, and work none, but yet never the worse, if he have one,

3. That in Worship we think men should be silent in the first place. Yes, for
Silence goes before all solemn actions of speaking.

4. That we think to command men to pray without the Spirit, is to command men
to see without eyes. Yes, because we know not what to pray for as we ought,
without it, Romans 8: 26. and no man should be commanded to pray as he ought not.

But as to these which are indeed owned by us, thou will find them at large
vindicated by Scriptur and Reason, either in my Apology or in this Treatise. I
could have made a further remark in this his Index, to show thee how many of
them, he sets down, as our assertions, are not nor ever were asserted by any of
us, nor by him affirmed to be so, where he has them in his book, but only his
own mere conjecturs and consequences; but I am loath to detain thee any longer
in this, by looking the pages, to which he refers, thou may easily observe
it.

FINIS.

