A SERMON Preached before the University OF CAMBRIDGE On the 9th of September,
Being the Day of Public Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of His MAJESTY'S
Sacred Person, His Royal Brother, and the Government, from the late Hellish
Fanatic Conspiracy.

By MILES BARN, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and Fellow of St
Peter's College.

Published by Authority.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes, Printer to the University; for R. Green,
Bookseller in Cambridge. 1683.

A SERMON Preached before the University OF CAMBRIDGE.
St Luke 19. v. 14. But his Citizens hated him, and sent a message after him,
saying, We will not have this man to Reign over us.


WHich words are part of an eminent Parable spoken by the King of the Jews in
his Triumphant Procession to Jerusalem, which had raised great hopes in the
Disciples, and others his Countrymen who accompanied Him in that Glorious
March, that the Kingdom of God, which they had so long expected, and so
earnestly desired, should now appear, that the Kingdom should even now be
restored unto Israel, i. e. in their carnal conceits, that He would now in a
most solemn manner proclaim Himself a Mighty Monarch, make Jerusalem the Chief
Seat of his Empire, promote them to the Highest Places of Trust and Dignity,
and that they should enjoy all the measures of Softness, Ease, and Plenty under
his most Peaceful, Prosperous and lasting Reign. To correct the Vanity of this
fancy, in his more immediate Approach to this Famous Metropolis, He tells them
of a certain Nobleman, i. e. One born Heir to a Crown, who went into a far
Country to take Possession of a Kingdom, of his returning again to his
Countrymen in an Eminent manner, and in the mean time of his commiting to their
Care a certain Fund of Money, which they were to employ in the way of
Merchandise, that so He might receive an improvement, and they a suitable
Reward. The far Country spoken of sufficiently confuted their Error in thinking
Jerusalem should be the Chief Seat of his Empire, and by making his servants
Factors and Merchants in his absence, and requiring an improvement at his
Return, they had little reason to dream that his Kingdom should privilege
Sloth and Idleness, or secure the enjoyment of carnal Pleasures.

The words of the Text give the reason why He went into a far Country; because
his Citizens hated Him, and manifested their Hatred in that Sullen undutifull
Message, which they sent after, saying, We will not have this man to Reign over
us. Stat pro ratione voluntas. Which well enough became the mouths of such
Turbulent, Rebellious Citizens as the Jews were in General, but is yet better
suited to the rude humor, and ungoverned Zeal of the Pharisees in Particular,
who toward the latter end of the Jewish state, and at the time of our Saviors
Appearance upon Earth, had worked themselves into the Management of all Affairs
both Sacred and Civil: nothing of moment passed, but was directed by their
Councels, nothing of weight but was influenced by their assistance: and what
trusty Managers they were appeared by their involving their miserable Citizens
into the most deplorable Calamities which ever befell a People since the
Creation.

The Jews were always a moody headstrong People, impatient of any kind of
Government. Theocracy it self could not please them; for they murmured against
Moses and Aaron who had wrought such wonders for them in the land of Egypt, led
them through the Red Sea, as upon dry ground, and fed them with food from
Heaven in the Wilderness. They made not suitable returns to Joshua for
conducting them into the promised Land: they were prone upon all Occasions to
impeach their Judges. The Votes and Decrees of the Sanedrim were not always so
dutifully received: at length having forced God by their importunities to give
them a King after the manner of the Nations, they soon repented their Choice*
grew weary of Him, before He was well settled in his Throne, or had exercised
any remarkable Jurisdiction over them. For their frequent Murmurings, Tumults
and Rebellions God often punished them with Wars, Pestilence and Famine; with
inbred Distempers and Foreign Captivity. At the time of the Messia's appearance
these ungrateful Citizens had forfeited all their ancient Charters, all the
Privileges they could challenge in the Right of Abraham the Faithful, and
were become Tributaries to the Insidel Romans.

The Messiah appears as Moses had done before in this great juncture of
Hardships. They adhere to their Oppressors, and shamefully reject their
Savior; by libelling his Government in General, by throwing contempt upon his
Person in Particular, Is not this the Carpenters Son? by traducing his Life and
Conversation, making Him a Winebibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; by
making base Reflections upon his Disciples and Chief Ministers; by undervaluing
his Doctrines, as inconsistent with the Pomp and Grandeur of the Roman Empire;
by making him an Innovator, a Disturber of the Established Religion; and lastly
(as the height of their Malice) by Proclaiming Him a Traitor and Enemy to
Caesar, as having sinister Ends to set up a fifth Monarchy, in Opposition to
the fourth.

But when our Savior by his Exemplary Life, Peaceable Doctrines, and Mighty
Miracles had overcome all these False and Malicious Accusations: When by his
willing submission to Authority, the painful Agonies of the Cross, his patient
Comportment under them, and the terrible Prodigies which accompanied his giving
up the Ghost, He had convinced the Centurion and others that He was a just man
and no other than the Son of God. When their sealing the stone and setting a
Watch could no longer detain Him in the Grave; when their Sham-Plot in giving
out that his Disciples came by night, and stole Him away whilst they slept,
could no longer obscure the Glories of his Resurrection; in short when in the
grief and anguish of their tormented Souls, they perceived that He was gone
into his far Country, there to be Invested with Majesty and Dominion far above
all Principalities and Powers, then to let the world see, that Citizens will be
Citizens, Jews Jews, and Pharisees Pharisees still, when all their Pretenses
were baffled, and they reduced to the last Effort of obstinate Rebels, to own
Rebellion for Rebellions sake, then they Magisteriously resolve themselves into
the Sovereignty of their own Wills, and conclude against all Government in a
direct Nolumus Hunc, We will not have this man to Reign over us.

But was it then in their choice whether He should Reign over them, or not?
Infatuate Rebels! thus to oppose their own impotent Wills against the Councels
and Determination of Heaven, where it stood Recorded in the Books of Eternity,
that his Scepter should be an everlasting Scepter, and his Dominion endure
throughout all Generations. This mad Decree then could only show the folly and
impiety of these Rebellious Citizens: for the King whom they rejected did Reign
over them. 1. In his Mercies, in the Conversion of 3000 of them at one Sermon
of St Peter's their Prime Apostle, and Principal Teacher. 2. In Judgment, at
his second Advent, but first Eminent judicial Return, after his Glorious
Instalment in his far Country; in the Destruction of Jerusalem, when these
Rebellious Citizens, or their Descendents suffered all the Extremities of
temporal Calamities. 3. He shall Reign over them at his third and last terrible
Advent, when He shall come with all the Solemnities of Majesty to judge the
world, pronounce Sentence upon these wicked Citizens, and make them the Vassals
of Eternal Vengeance, the certain Doom of all unrepenting Rebels.

From this short Illustration of the Text I hope it appears how well it suits
with the Business of the Day, a Day of Public Thanksgiving for the Deliverance
of his Majesty, his Royal Brother, and the whole Government from the Hellish
Conspiracy of Fanatical Republican Rage.

I shall therefore, 1. Show the Hatred of these Citizens to Monarchical
Government in General.

2. Insist on the several ways they pursued in the carrying on this damnable
Conspiracy in Particular.

3. Take notice that when these failed, like the desperate Citizens in the
Text, they betook themselves to desperate means, and wickedly resolved that the
King should not Reign over them.

4. And lastly show the folly and impiety of such mad Resolves, for the King
whom they devoted to Destruction does and shall Reign over them.

First, The Hatred of these Citizens to Monarchical Government in General. You
have been already told that the Jews were always a Rebellious Generation, but
never so bad, as when the Pharisees had got so much the ascendent over them. I
am sorry to tell you that the frequent Tumults and Insurrections which have
infested the Reigns of our British Kings, gave occasion to that Sarcastical
saying; Rex Angliae, Rex Diabolo^um; but you may tell your selves that these
Devils never acted more like Devils, than since they were possessed and guided
by the Turbulent Spirit of our Modern Pharisees the Presbyterians; who are the
very Citizens that from their first Institution have shown their Hatred against
Monarchs and Monarchy. And they must be content, which perhaps they Glory in,
to bear a Principal part in most of the unnatural Wars and Commotions, which
have happened in Christendom, since they took upon them to carry on their
Blessed Work of Reformation. The rest of the Schismatics are but their Spawn,
and consequently included in this Denomination, though like a Cadmean Progeny,
they have always fought against one another. And to the eternal honor of
Presbytery be it spoken, that John Calvin confirmed his Discipline the same
year, that Ignatius Loyala the first Founder of the Jesuits, was chosen their
first General in a solemn manner; and that as He founded his Presbytery in
Treason and Rebellion, the Citizens having prepared his way by expelling from
Geneva their Lawful Prince and Governor, which violent Act was encouraged,
approved and confirmed by Calvin; so has it ever since been carried on by
Schism and Sedition. Never was it received into any Church, but it presently
dissolved the Catholic Unity of Faith, and broke the Bond of Peace; never into
any State which it did not embroyl and throw into very dangerous Convulsions;
never into any family which it did not divide, and set at variance; never did
it get possession of any single man, whom it did not strangely transform with
Pride and Moroseness, made him unfit for civil Society and common conversation.
Are not the Writings of the Leaders in this Schism, not only stuff't with
irreverent and reproachful Language against the Sacred Persons of Princes, but
likewise with dethroning Principles, and King-killing Doctrines: witness
several passages in Calvin's Institutions, and other his Works. That pestilent
Pamphlet entitled Junius Brutus or Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, supposed to be
written by Beza, his Successor; and to mention no more, Knox's Appellation to
the Communality, and Buchanans Jus Regni apud Scotos; a Book which for subtlety
and wicked position scorns to give place to the Jesuit, which nevertheless He
had the impudence to dedicate to King James.

In these you may find Dignities evil spoken of, Majesty reviled: that a
Sovereignty is erected either in the People, or the subordinate Magistrate,
that they are the Original of all just Power, that the Supreme Magistrate is
prostituted to their Lusts, that wicked and irreligious Kings, i. e. all whom
they please to call so, may be questioned, and consequently dethroned,
sentenced and put to Death. If it be said that these are but the Doctrines of
private men, and therefore unjustly chargeable upon the whole Order; I answer,
that Calvin and Beza were more than Private men, they were leading Foundation
Apostles, their Authority was as great, and held as Infallible at Geneva, as
ever the Popes was at Rome. Besides this is the very same argument which the
Papists use to clear their Church from the Guilt and Scandal of Bellarmine,
Mariana, Sanctarellus, or any other deposing King-killing Jesuit. For we do not
find that the dethroning Power, which these frontless Flatterers have seated in
the Pope, is either made an additional Article to Pius's Creed, or trick't into
the Canons of the later Editions of the Council of Trent: besides, this
Deposing Principle of the Jesuits, has been publicly censured and condemned
as erroneous and impious in several Foreign Universities, written against by Men
of the Romish Communion, and is most solidly and unanswerably confuted by
Barclay in his excellent Book de Potestate Papae, etc. which Book is dedicated
to Clement the Eighth. But have the Presbyterians in any of their Synods
censured or condemned the pernicious Tenets of Calvin or Beza? has any of them
had the Grace to disown or write against their dethroning Doctrines? if they
have, their Books have proved very ineffectual, for if we pass from their
Principles to their Practices, we shall find that the Presbyterian has always
been a Turbulent Imperious Bloody Religion: that it has embroiled all the
Kingdoms and Estates in Christendom, where it got footing, with Rebellion,
Civil War and Misery, from its first Rise at Geneva, to its remove into France,
from thence into the Netherlands, from thence into Scotland, and from Scotland
to its unfortunate Arrival into this Island. It Is not expected I should
enumerate the several wicked Plots and Designs* of these Hypocrites, during the
Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles. This is the business
of an Historian, and is already faithfully done to our hands, by the Reverend
Dr Heylin and others who have writ the Histories of Presbytery and Calvinism. I
shall only at present lay to their Charge all the Blood that was shed, all the
violence that was acted, during our late unnatural Wars: that they were the
Dethroners and Murderers of their Glorious Sovereign under a cloak of Justice,
and Mock-formalities of Law. A Villainy of so deep a Die* that the Roman Conclave
blushes at it* and was never debated and resolved, but in the Deep Infernal
Councels of a Presbyterian Consistory: and is there not at this day great
reason to charge them home with this Masterpiece of all Iniquity, since they
have taken such great Advantage of the late Popish Plot, that the guilty
Papists had almost made them innocent? and there have not been wanting some
Church-Trimmers, still retaining a fellow-feeling for the Cause, who from the
Pulpit have endeavored to clear them, and lay the Guilt of that Horrid Murder
chiefly upon the Popish Priests; though they cannot find the name of one Papist
in the whole List of true-Protestant Regicides. But supposing the Jesuits did
invent and direct in the Tiring Room, what they acted on the open Stage: This
will be so far from excusing, that it adds to their Crime, and makes them pass
for what they would be loath to be thought, fools as well as something else. For
no man dares say a Presbyterian is the less dangerous for being influenced and
guided by Jesuitical Councels. May we not now expose their Bloody and
Treasonable Practices to the world, since almost five and thirty years have
expired, since the perpetration of that execrable Parricide, and they have not
yet Repented? Since almost four and twenty years have run out, since His
Majesty's Happy Restoration, whom these abandoned Citizens forced into a far
Country, not to receive a Kingdom, but to be exposed to all the Hardships and
Miseries of Exile and Banishment, and they have not yet Repented? Since all
this time they have owed their Lives, too plentiful Fortunes, and dangerous
Liberty to a Gracious Act of Oblivion at first, and repeated Acts of Indulgence
since, and they have not yet Repented? Since all along His Majestics Merciful,
Peaceful and Godlike Reign, these Ungrateful Vipers have been warmed with the
Sunshine of his Favors, some of them received into places of Trust and
Dignity, and they have not yet Repented? An Obstinacy and Ingratitude not to be
met with, but in an apostate Angel who cannot, and a Presbyterian who will not
Repent. Lastly since they were even now Acting the same dire part over again,
and we are (God be Praised) in the very Act of offering up our most solemn
Praises and unfeigned Thanks to God Almighty for the Deliverance of His Sacred
Majesty, His Dearest Brother, and the whole Government, from the Hellish
Conspiracy of these Sons of Perdition: which brings me in the 2d place to
consider the several ways they tried to carry on this Devilish Conspiracy in
particular.

First, Then, as His Majesty observes in His Declaration, this Malevolent Party
for several years last past made it their business to promote Sedition by false
News, Libellous Pamphlets, and other wicked Arts, whereby they endeavored not
only to render His Government odious, His most faithful Subjects suspected to
the people, but even to excite a dislike and hatred of His Royal Person. And
this is the common Engine, which they have always played against the Government.
They have always had Martin-mar-prelats and Marvels to sanctify Lies,
Scurrility and Railing to the service of the good old Cause. But of late we
have been infested with swarms of Pestilent Libels, which like Locusts
overspread the land, poisoned the minds of the people, devoured all the little
remains of Duty, Allegiance, Civility and common Honesty; which swelled their
Breasts with Discontents, Jealousies, Revenge and Cruelties, and fitted them
for the most Desperate and Barbarous undertakings.

Secondly, They took the Advantage of a Popish Plot, and made an Army of
Pilgrims, with black Bills in their hands, as formidable as if Hannibal himself
had been at the Gates. However pernicious that Design was in it self, it was by
them improved into more fatal Consequences, and they soon made no other use of
the Popish Plot, but as of a stale to carry on a Fanatical Conspiracy. For
these Masters in the Trade were not now to learn what has been long since
observed, that the Prerogative never suffered, no great Statesman has ever been
disgraced, nor the Church of England it self (nay the Liberties of the people)
ever wounded, but a dreadful Outcry of Popery has still preceded. And indeed
Hin^ illae Lacrymae. For this Popish Plot, though from its first Discovery
prosecuted with a very severe and rigorous Justice, was nevertheless under
pretense of a partial prosecution thrown upon the King, the Council, all
faithful Ministers of State, Judges of the Land, and Loyal Clergy of the
Church of England, nay at length the Government was brought into the Conspiracy
for its own Dissolution: in short, no man could show his fidelity to the
Monarchy, by opposing their antimonarchical Projects, but He was presently
blasted with the odious Title of a Court or Church-Papist.

Thirdly, By this means they secured to themselves Factious Elections for
succeeding Parliaments; and none were now thought so fit to be entrusted with
our Liberties and Properties, as either Old Commonwealthsmen, who had formerly
been the shameful Betrayers of both, or else such as by their untoward
carriage in later Sessions, had manifested their Discontents and Hatred to the
Government. The unwarrantable proceedings and Seditious Votes of the late
Commons are well enough known to you all, yet you must give me leave upon this
Occasion to bring some of them to your Memories. And I shall begin with their
pragmatical intermedling with the Succession, a thing too Sacred to be touched
by their unhallowed hands, their Saucy, iterated pressing it upon His Majesty,
after He had so often declared it was a point which in His Royal Judgment, so
nearly concerned Him in Honor, Justice and Conscience, that He could never
consent to it. And great Reason was there for His making that Resolution, since
'twas always suspicious, but is now manifest that the Disinherison of His Royal
Highness was carried on with that Violence, to facilitate the Dethroning of the
King. To say nothing to the rude form observed in the penning of this Bill,
that 'twas drawn up by a Person since accused of High Treason; to pass by the
Ingratitude of the Contrivers, against a Prince of such Eminent Virtues; who
has ventured His Royal Blood as frankly for the good of His Country, as the
meanest Subject in it, and who was even then Actually manifesting His
unalterable Loyalty and Affection to His Sovereign in reducing Scotland to
their Obedience; and we have at this hour great reason to be thankful to Him
for His Wise and Prosperous Conduct in that Affair; take the Villainy of this
whole procedure from this one instance; the chiefest arguments which I have
hitherto met with, for the Excluding a Popish Successor on the account of his
Religion, are stolen out of Doleman the Jesuis, which Book was written
designedly to hinder King James a Protestant Successor's coming to the Crown.
Flectere si neque^nt superos. And I do here publicly declare, what was always
my judgment, that I do believe no humane Acts or Power in the world can de
jure hinder the Descent of the Crown upon the next Heir of the Blood, which is
his unalterable Right by Religion, Law, History and Reason.

Next call to your minds their strange Illegal Votes. That if the King should
come to any violent Death, they would Revenge it to the utmost on the Papists.
Whereby they both prompted any bold Enthusiastic Hone to commit the Execrable
Parricide, and irritated the Rabble to the Massacre of innocent Persons. That
whosoever should lend the King any money upon the several Branches of His
Revenue, should be adjudg'd to hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and be
responsible for it in Parliament; whereby they not only took away all hopes of
necessary Supplies, tied up, as much as in them lay, the hands of all Loyal
Subjects, but moreover, as His Majesty complains, would have reduced Him to a
more helpless condition, than the meanest of His Subjects. Their resolving that
the Prosecution of Dissenters upon Penal Laws was grievous to the Subject, an
encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, whereby
they assumed to themselves a Power of suspending Acts of Parliament, of
Licencing Riotous and Seditious Conventicles, and added strength and boldness
to the Leaders of the Faction. If any Loyal Member, though never so Eminent for
his Talent in speaking, and other Abilities, stood up in the Defense of his
King or Country, He was either rudely hiss't at, or run down with a Train of
clamorous Speeches. How that they would have made use of an Impeachment to have
rescued a Profess't Papist, and a notorious Traitor from Punishment. How
importunately they Address't His Majesty for Pardons and Pensions for a pack of
Prosligate Villains, whom they kept in pay to accuse any man that stood in the
way to their wicked Designs. How they Voted several Eminent Persons Enemies to
the Kingdom, without Process of Law, hearing their Defense, or any Proof, so
much as offered against them. Lastly, How that at the same time when they
amused the People with Jealousies, and apprehensions of Tyranny and Oppression,
they assumed to themselves an unpresidented* Arbitrary Power of taking into
Custody their Fellow Subjects, for Matters no way Relating to Privileges of
Parliament. How they had an Intercourse with Traitors, a Correspondency with
the common Agitator for the Conspiracy. A Villain who declares King-killing a
Glorious Act, hopes to see Regicides Rewarded by Parliaments, Statues Erected
to their Memories, and they styled Liberatores Patriae, i. e. in the Blasphemy
of the Modern Style Saviors of the Nation. And all this time we must be born
in hand, and accursed for Tories and Papists if we will not believe them to be
true Patriots, the only Assertors of our Religion, Liberties and Properties,
that they alone provided for the Safety of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and the
Dignities of the Imperial Crown.

Fourthly, These audacious Proceedings having forced His Majesty to an Interval
of Parliaments, They obstruct the ordinary Course and Methods of Justice, by
pack't Ignoramus Juries, whereby Faction and Treason became secure and
frontless, being now above the reach of the Laws, an Impunity was Proclaimed to
the greatest State-Malefactors, the Principal Conspirator was Rescued out of
the Hands of Justice, and Triumphant Medals dispersed for his Deliverance: such
a bare-fac't Affront to Authority as can scarce be Paralleled. To accomplish
this Matchless Violation of Justice, Notorious known Dissenters are brought to
the Communion and Sacraments of the Church of England, to Capacitate them for
Places of Trust, and take Oaths to Conform to the Government which they intend
to Destroy, and so become Perjured in the very Act of swearing. And for this
they have the Resolution of their own Casuists, that an Oath obliges not in
the sense of the Imposer, but the Taker. A more sure and Compendious way of
Ruining our Church and State, than the Jesuit with all his Equivocations, and
Dispensations has hitherto Attempted. For it is now no longer an open Enemy,
but a Familiar Friend that has done us this Dishonor.

Fifthly, By their Republican Clubs, Riotous Rambles, and Descents into the
several Parts of the Nation to number the People, and try the strength of their
Party; whilst their Chief, like another Absolon, takes his Glorious Progresses,
addresseth to the Populace, and receives their Caresses, insinuates himself
into the Minds of the Discontented, and alienates their Affections yet farther
from their Obedience to their Lawful Prince.

Sixthly, By Bandying themselves into an Accursed Association, which was
neither better, nor worse, for worse it could not be, than a transcript of the
old Scotch Covenant, as that was of the Holy League of France, which laid three
Kingdoms in Blood, murdered the King, and dissolved the Monarchy. These were
the Principal Methods which they pursued in the carrying on their Traiterous
Purposes; but these failing, and their Villainies rendering them every day more
and more odious in the sight of all good Men, and the Unanimous Addresses of
all Loyal Subjects from all Parts of the Kingdom, Proclaiming a Detestation and
Abhorrence of their wicked Proceedings, and giving the greatest assurances of
Fidelity and Affection to the King and the Established Government, by a free
and Generous Proffer of their Lives and Fortunes in the Defense of Both, they
became desperate, and resolving to trust no longer to the slow Methods of
Sedition, betook themselves to open force.

Which brings me to my third Particular, that when these means failed, they
resolved with the desperate Citizens in the Text, Nolumus Hunc, We will not
have This King to Reign over us. And this was to be effected either by raising
an Army to master His Guards and seize His Person, or by a Barbarous
Assassination, and both these Designs were carried on by several Interests at
the same time; the Particulars whereof are so Plainly and Methodically set
forth in His Majesty's Declaration, which has now been twice Publicly read,
that it supersedes any further Relation.

I shall therefore very briefly consider the Quality of this Hellish
Conspiracy, and then set before your eyes that Scene of Horror and Desolation
which had overspread and blackned the Land in case it had taken Effect.

If we consider the Quality, it is compounded of so many Malignant Ingredients
that it looks more like a Confederacy against Religion, Morality and the common
Sentiments of Humanity, than a Conspiracy against the Frame, Constitution and
Administration of the Government. Ambition, Avarice, Revenge have often
bewitch't men and led them into Treasonable Associations; but this seems to be
the sole Result of Abstracted Malice, of men abandoned to the Curse of a
Reprobate Mind. For what would they have enjoyed, which they had not, or what
could they have desired, which they might not have had? Was not the Chief of
the Conspiracy in the quiet Possession of all Places of Trust, Profit, and
Honor, which could make him either Happy in himself, serviceable to the
Government, or Grateful to the People? Did not many of the Rest owe their
Forfeited Lives, and raised Fortunes to His Majesty's Grace and Bounty? Were
not all of them even glutted with the Blessings of Peace, Plenty and Liberty?
Here then is an unparalled Ingratitude against a Prince of the Highest
Bounties toward them; whose whole Reign has been so mild and merciful, that
He has even Exceeded our Saviors Precept of Loving His Enemies, and doing
good to those who despitefully use Him. We want not some few Examples in
History of some Enthusiastic Ravilla^, or other Bloody Assassin, who not
regarding the Sacredness of Majesty, has made his way to the Heart of an
Imperial Monarch. But for so many Flagitious Villains to Complot the Murder of
their Lawful Prince, His Dearest Brother, the Hopes of the Succession, to
Design the utter Ruin of the Loyal Interest, to carry this on for so many
Years, in so many deliberate Cabals and Consultations, in defiance of Heaven,
and so many Providential Disappointments, to continue all this while without
any discomposure of mind, or Remorse of Conscience, the Assassination to be
performed after such a Barbarous Butcherly manner; this is such a Villainy and
Obduracy, not to be met with in the Christian world, but in the more obdurate
Hearts of Fanatics, blasted under the Curse of an unconverted Saul, that all
this time they thought they did God good service; but amongst Fanatics whose
Loyalty is Rebellion, whose Religion is Treason, and whose very Gospel is the
Mystery of Iniquity; lastly, but amongst Fanatics and Atheists transformed
into malicious Fiends by the Hellish Divinity of that Monster of a Priest the
Author of Julian the Apostate, whose whole Book is as great an Apostasy from
the Practice of the Primitive Christians, the Precepts of Obedience delivered
by Christ and his Apostles, and Christianity it self, as ever the Apostate
Julia^ was guilty of, and is indeed no other than the very Platform of this
Hellish Conspiracy, and aims as directly at the eternal Ruin of the
Conspirators, as the temporal Death of the King, and the dissolution of the
Monarchy.

Secondly, Set before your eyes that Scene of Horror and Desolation which had
overspread the Land, in case this wicked Treason had succeeded. The King, His
Royal Brother, the Ministers of State, Judges and Principal Magistrates all
slaughtered after a most inhumane, Savage manner; the Government dissolved, our
Altars polluted, our Liberties enslaved, our Properties wrested from us, and
all things laid open to the Violence of implacable Men. And indeed who can say,
had that Tragedy been begun, how far it would have gone, or where it would have
ended? For in case of Opposition it must have been seconded with such a
Devastation of Fire and Sword, as never before had been heard of in this
Nation. Our streets had been filled with the Cries of Widows, and the
Fatherless, with Murders, Rapins, Incests, Adulteries, Sacrilege, Massacres,
and Conflagration. No Cruelties would have been thought Cruel enough to satiate
the Revenge of Fanatic Rage upon I Papists and Tories. A sudden Dispatch had
been the greatest Favor we could have asked, or received from the hand of so
base and merciless an Enemy. For what satisfaction would it have been to any
Loyal Subject to have survived the ruins of the Church and State, to have
lived in a Land polluted and stained with Royal and Noble Blood, to have had
daily before his eyes the dismal Spectacle of his enslaved undone Country, and
to have lived in perpetual fears of being made a Sacrifice himself. But it
pleased that God who allotteth to Atheists and Rebels a portion with the
Hypocrite, to Rescue His Majesty from the Paws of these Bloody Miscreants, and
to lay both Parties of the Conspiracy under the same Fate and Disappointment.

Which brings me to my fourth and last observation, the Folly and Impiety of
Treasonable Attempts. For notwithstanding their Nolumus, He whom they devoted
to Slaughter does and shall Reign over them.

That good Kings should be the more immediate Care of God, seems agreeable to
the Economy of His Providence, and is confirmed by Examples in all Ages. For
They are His anointed, His Vicegerents, set over us by His Appointment, and in
theirs is involved the Fate of particular men. And therefore their public
Sacred Character entitles them to a special Right in the Divine Providence. Of
this truth, our Gracious King has been a very rare Example through the whole
Course of His Life; never did any Righteous King receive more strange and
miraculous Deliverances, nor He himself ever a Greater, than this last, when
Mercy was turned into Judgment, and the Dreadful Fire at Newmarket, became to
Him a Tower of Salvation. Which consideration alone was enough to have deterred
any, but such bold Sons of Anak, who were not afraid to become Fighters against
God, from attempting the Life of a Prince, who had been hitherto so wonderfully
preserved.

But He shall Reign over them, First in Judgment; in a legal Execution of
those Bloody Conspirators who would have murdered Him. They must suffer, or He
cannot be safe: Mercy would here prove Cruelty, Pardon an affront to Justice,
and the highest Ingratitude to Heaven. They are now under the command of those
Laws which they would have destroyed, under the hands of those Judges whom they
had destined to Slaughter; and every Judge must remember that He is the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. That
which seems truly deplorable in their Fate, is the execrable Treason for which
they die, and the Hardness and Impenitence which accompanies them at their
Deaths. And woe be to those wretched Guides, who led them into both; those
Betrayers of Souls, who instead of disposing them to Christian Confession,
Repentance and Resignation, have caused them to Publish such Justifications as
seem written with Design to incite their Accomplices to do the Work of the
Conspiracy here, whilst they are answering for it in the other world: this
consideration makes the Hearts of all good Christians ache. For never did any
Criminals suffer for a more Flagitious Crime, upon clearer Evidence, fuller
Conviction, fairer Trial, juster Condemnation, or fall under a more merciful
Execution, one of them receiving that mitigation of his Sentence, which He had
formerly denied to be in the Power of the King to grant. And therefore we must
believe those men are given over to believe a Lie, who impudently cry up their
Innocence, and boast their Martyrdom. This can only demonstrate the
Incorrigible malignity of the Faction, and awaken the Magistrate into a
vigorous Execution of the Laws against such Boldness, as in the very Discovery
and Prosecution of a Fanatic Conspiracy, dares justify Treason and Canonize
Traitors.

And therefore Secondly, He shall Reign over them, in making a right
improvement of this great Advantage which God has put into His hands. The
wonderful Deliverances He has already received, do plainly say, that He is
still reserved for some extraordinary Work in the world. And from His last
miraculous Escape, we may easily Presage what mighty Acts He shall perform for
these Kingdoms in Particular. Now shall it be in His Power to subdue that
Pestilence of Puritanism, which for above these hundred Years has raged in this
Nation, to crush the Seeds, and destroy the very Principles of Schism. To Him
it is reserved to bring the Church of England up to those Glorious Heights,
that She shall appear the Envy of Rome, and the Terror of Geneva. To settle
the Monarchy upon so firm a Basis, that it shall be no more shaken by
Republican Rage. His Sacred Person shall be no longer liable to Violence, nor
His Subjects to Oppression. No more shall Majesty be affronted by the Saucy
Votes of a Seditious Senate, nor we made Prisoners by our Representatives. But
long and secure shall He Reign in the hearts and Affections of His People, and
when He returns late to Heaven, leave the Blessing of Peace, and a well
Established Crown to His Successor; Posterity shall Praise His Memory, and
Generations to come shall call Him the Father of His Country, and the Mighty
Defender of the Faith.

And it remains that we render unto God Almighty our most Solemn Thanks for the
Comprehensive Mercy we this Day Celebrate, in the Deliverance of His Sacred
Majesty, and the Government from the damnable Conspiracy of Fanatic Rage. And
we must pray that as God in His infinite Goodness has hitherto discovered and
defeated their Hellish Devices, so He would every day more and more confound
their Wicked imaginations. That Justice may overtake those Traiterous
Fugitives, whom Mercy could not Reclaim. And let us never more be so far
transported with the fears of a Popish Plot, as to think our selves secure from
a Fanatic Conspiracy. This one false step had like to have led us into
Destruction. They are both formidable Enemies, and since we are placed between
two Extremes, common Prudence bids us have a watchful Eye over both, and not
to give a palpable Advantage to the One, by applying all our Force against the
Other. At this time the Dissenters appear to me the most Dangerous. For the
Papists are comparatively contemptible as to their numbers, their Interest is
broken, we have severe Penal Laws in force against them, and those Laws in no
danger of a Repeal, since both their Peers and Commons are made incapable of
Sitting in Parliament. But the Dissenters are formidable as to their numbers,
they boast themselves in their strength, they are Restless in their Attempts,
and Implacable in their Dispositions. And it is very memorable that we should
on the same day of the Month observe a Day of Thanksgiving for the Deliverance
of the Church and Defender of our Faith from a Fanatic Conspiracy, on which
the Rebellious Commons in 41 first published their Order in Derogation of the
Common Prayer Book, and for the suspension of the Laws Ecclesiastical, of which
Violation our late Martyred Sovereign of ever Blessed Memory so often and
sensibly complains in His Declaration of Aug. 12. 42. Wonderful art thou in thy
ways O God! and thy Paths are past finding out.

In a word then, as we are thankful to God for the Preservation of His Majesty
hitherto, so let us implore His Protection over Him for the time to come, that
He may daily receive fresh Accessions of strength and Splendor, and be
recompensed for the times, wherein He has suffered Adversity* And let us
evermore pay to so Gracious a King, and so much Beloved, of our utmost
Expressions of Duty, Love and Obedience. Let us Esteem and Honor Him as the
Gift of God, and receive Him as a new Present from Heaven.

O Lord save the King,
And Bless thine Anointed;
Send Him help from thy Holy Hill,
And evermore mightily defend Him.
Let the Enemy have no Advantage over Him.
Nor the Wicked approach to hurt Him.
Which God of His infinite Mercy grant through Jesus Christ our Lord, To whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost three Persons, and one God, be given all
Glory, Praise and Dominion henceforth and for evermore.

Amen.
THE END.

