A SERMON Preached before the KING AT White Hall, October 17. 1675.

By MILES BARN Fellow of St. Peter's College in Cambridge, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

London, Printed by T. Milbeurn for W. Cademan at the Pope's Head in the
New-Exchange in the Strand, 1675.

2 Pet. chap. 3. ver. 16. -- In which are some things hard to be Understood,
which they that are unlearned, and unstable, Wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.


THe clearness of Scripture, in all points necessary to Salvation, to all such
as sincerely endeavor to believe, and find out the True Sense thereof: as it
is a principle which suits very well with the nature and design of a Rule;
with the justice and goodness of God in propounding it as such; and has been
urged with some success against those, who plead a necessity of having One
Supreme infallible Judge, to decide and determine all Controversies, which
shall happen to arise concerning that Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints: Whose Decisions and Determinations, say they, ought to be Received, by
all the Sons of the Church [for as much as the Church is the same in all Ages]
with equal Assent and Veneration with those of the Apostles: And this to be the
only sure way, to keep the Unity of the Faith, in the Bond of Peace.

Whereby on the other hand it is said, New Articles of Faith may be daily
imposed; the Doctrines of men, pass for the Commandments of God; and humane
Inventions, receive the stamp, of Divine Authority; whereby men seem precluded
the genuine methods, of coming to the Knowledge of the Truth, and those
Precepts of of searching the Scriptures, seeking the Kingdom of Heaven, trying
the Spirits, are rendered Ineffectual; whereby men are so far from being able to
give an account of their Faith, that their Understandings are enslaved by a
principle of blind Obedience; so far from being led into the ways of Religion,
by the cords of men, that they seem rather to be driven like Beasts, and acted
like Puppets, as it is phras'd by a late Author.

As this Doctrine of the clearness of Scripture, has proved successful to the
beating down the pretenses to an absolute Infallibility, and uncontrollable
sovereignty over the Consciences of men: so on the other hand has it mightily
emboldened the Patrons of Liberty, not only to despise their Ecclesiastical
Superiors, to throw off all obedience to Christ's Ministers; [Whom He,
notwithstanding, a little before his Return to his Fathers Court, for the
further negotiating, and advancing the affairs of His Church, Anointed and
Ordained to perform the Apostolical Offices, of Preaching the Gospel; Remitting
Sins; Inflicting Censures; Ministerially conferring the Holy Ghost; Deciding
Controversies, and Administering the Sacraments in his stead, here on earth till
his second coming] but likewise to invade their Function, usurp their Sacred
Calling; especially that part of it which consists in Preaching and Expounding
the Word.

For, say they, since it is confessed, the Scriptures are sufficiently clear, to
all unprejudiced minds, such as are free, from the clogs of Passion and
Interest; Why should these pretended Ministers of Christ take so much upon
them? Are not all the Congregation Holy, and Learned, as well as they? Are they
the only Temples of the Holy Ghost? And does the Spirit of Prophecy reside
solely in their Breasts?

During the Dispensation of Moses, it is confessed, there was a necessity of an
Aaron; all along under the legal economy, the Priests Lips did preserve
Knowledge; and likewise during the reign of the Prophets, there was an
appropriate Ministry. But the case is quite different under the Gospel, God
having made clearer discoveries of himself, and poured out more liberally of
his Spirit, upon all Flesh. The sense of the Law that was Doubtful, Typical and
Mysterious; the Prophecies were industriously couched under dark Parables, and
delivered in obscure sayings. But then the light, the glorious light of the
Gospel, as 'twas universal, 'twas likewise so clear, that any one who runs may
read. Why then should we not assert that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free? and since we have a Command, to work out our own Salvation, Why should we
pin our Faith upon other men's sleeves?

Thus these men, under the goodly Pretenses, of Christian Liberty, become
enslaved to spiritual pride and conceitedness; plead the Prerogative of the
Gospel, in prejudice of Christ's own Ambassadors; urge, for their own private
Conceptions, clearness of Scripture, to their own Confusion; and pry so long
into the Doctrines of Theology, till at length they light on those hidden
Mysteries, which they being Unlearned and Unstable, Wrest, unto their own
Destruction. The way thus prepared, my Text yet leads me into these following
Considerations.

1. That the clearness of Scripture does no ways lessen the Authority, or take
away the Necessity of Spiritual Guides.

2. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet private men,
abandoning their Lawful Guides, and following their own Corrupt Fancies, may
deprave and distort them to their own Destruction.

3. That for preventing Mistakes from rising, and suppressing Errors when
risen, it is the duty of Private men to submit their Judgments in matters of
Religion, to the Determinations of those whom God has constituted to be their
Spiritual Guides and Governors; unless it manifestly appear, that such
Determinations are contrary to Gods Word.

I. I begin with the First, That the Clearness of Scripture, etc. For, if the
Scriptures be so Clear, and Self-evident, as is pretended, then may men with
greater security rely on the Directions of their Guides; and they have the less
Reason to suspect their Conduct in those things, wherein they themselves being
Judges, they cannot be mistaken, if they sincerely attend them; the clearness
of the Law is so far from lessening the Authority, that it rather conciliates
reverence to the Judge. The Profession of Physic does not therefore become
useless, because the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, contain the necessary Rules for
Health; and may be understood by those who are capacitated, and will take the
pains to do it.

The Scriptures they do clearly contain the Doctrines of Salvation: And one
way, whereby Christ proved himself the true Messiah, was by answering that
Character, the Prophets had given of Him, that the Poor should have the Gospel
Preached unto them, i. e. Men as of small Capacities, and less Estates so of
humble and teachable Dispositions; men who were Poor in Spirit, as well as in
Fortune: And the perfection of the Christian Law consists in this, that therein
God has prescribed a reasonable service. The Rules of Life, which are therein
laid down, are not so much the product of absolute power, and sovereignty; as
the Result of infinite Mercy and Goodness. And these His Attributes led Him to
consult the wants, and commiserate the Necessities of the meanest of Mankind:
And therefore, as when He took upon Him to deliver Man, He did not abhor the
Virgins Womb; and that He might become a Sacrifice for Sin, was content to be
dis-array'd of His own Eternal Glory, to take upon Him the Form of a Servant,
and to humble Himself to the Death, the shameful Death of the Cross: so
likewise when He took upon Him the Office of a Teacher, by a wonderful
Condescent, He accomodated His Doctrines to the reason, and humane Affections
of His Auditors. His Laws obtained as much by their suitableness to our
natures, as the Authority of the Speaker. When He preached His Divine Sermon to
the Multitude, He did not Amuse them, with Mystical Theology, or torture their
Understandings with profound Subtilties; but as He was the Brightness of His
Fathers Glory, and the express Image of His Person; so He declared the Law of
God, in a most Plain and Perspicuous manner.

Mahomet indeed, that grand Impostor, was well Advised, to Pen his Alcoran in
swelling Words, and mystical Phrases; and as in some things to Restrain, so in
others to Indulge the sensual Appetite: For by this Stratagem, that sottish
People with whom he had to do, were content to part with their natural Right,
to gain an Unlawful Freedom, and to Admire what they were never like to
Understand.

But our new and perfect Law giver Christ Jesus, having no other design but the
Salvation of Souls, and being every way Adorned for so noble a Purpose; though
He made the Gate Narrow, and the Path Strait; yet He has Promised it shall be
Opened to all that Knock; and none, unless Wilfully, need Mistake the Way
which leads to Eternal Life.

But then, because He knew, there was no Rule so plain, but it might be
Mistaken; no Precept so clear, but it might be Perverted; no Doctrine so pure,
but it might be Corrupted: Because He foresaw there would arise false Prophets,
and false Teachers, whose business it would be to Seduce the Ignorant, and
Debauch the Credulous: Because He foresaw a perpetual Succession of Gnostics,
who, in all Ages, would set up the Dagon of their own lascivious Fancies, in
opposition to the Ark of His Covenant; and be so audacious, as even to confront
Divine Revelations, with carnal reasoning: therefore to obviate, and prevent,
the mischiefs of such grievous Wolves; before He took His Journey into his far
Country, out of a tender care of that Flock, which He had purchased with his
Blood, He appointed Overseers, and Pastors of His Flock; committed to them, and
them only, the care of Feeding his Flock; amplified their Commission with the
like Authority, which he had received from his Father; promised to be with them
unto the End of the World; and to assist them with that Spirit, which should
guide them into all Truth.

If then the Scriptures be so Clear, as to be understood even by the Multitude,
then much more by the Disciples in general: If by the Disciples in general,
much more by the College of the Apostles, who were His special Favorites, and
of his Cabinet-Council: If the Nations, to whom these Ministers in Chief, and
Plenepotentiaries for Christ, made known the Will of God, were thoroughly
instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven; then much more both They, and Their
Successors, upon whom they, in obedience to their Masters Command, conferred
the same Pastoral power which they had received from Him.

The Clearness then of Scripture, cannot reasonably be urged, in Prejudice of
Christ's Ministers; for, whatsoever is from hence alleged, in favor of the
People, the advantage will be still greater on their side. Thus has God
promised the Assistance of his Spirit to all private men, who sincerely
endeavor to find out the Truth; then much less will He be wanting to the
Governors of his Church, to whom He has committed the care of the Souls of
those private men, and given power even to confer the Holy Ghost. Are the
Scriptures clear to them, much more to those, whom the Son of God has
signalized, and set apart for the Lights of the World? Two Things are usually
brought to hinder this Procedure: Either, that those Promises of Assistance
were made only to the Apostles; or else that they depend on the conditioned
Righteousness of Men. Where, by the way, it may be Observed, that by the First
of these, the Claim of the People is utterly cut off; and by the Second, they
have as small Advantage.

But they who argue thus, might do well to consider, that this Objection may
strike at the very Foundation of the Faith. For, if those promises of
Assistance, which Christ made to His Church be Hypothecal; if they depend on
the Performance of Men, then may the Foundation Totter, the Gates of Hell
prevail, Christianity decay, and the Gospel it self be lost out of the World,
before the End thereof, notwithstanding all Christ's fair Promises to the
Contrary. If they had been confined only to the Apostles, its Christian
Religion had not long survived the Author; every Martyrdom of an Apostle, had
pulled down a Pillar of the Church, and by consequence, the whole Fabric must
have fallen to the ground in the very first Century of our Lord.

Happy indeed had it been for Christendom, that the Imperiousness of some
Modern Bishops of Rome had not brought an Odium, though unjustly, upon
Episcopacy in general, that their too much Lording it over the Flock, had not
given Advantage to the Enemies of Church Authority, and their Challenging to
themselves at least an indirect Power in Temporals, had not Alarmed the Kings
of the Earth, to stand up, and take Counsel how they might Destroy so dangerous
an Usurpation of the pretended Vicegerent of the Lords Anointed.

Happy had it been, if for the Support of their Secular Greatness, they had not
Wrested the Scriptures to countenance such Doctrines, as have no clear and
solid foundation therein; and that under pretense of making the Church all
Glorious Within, Her Governors all Triumphant Without, they had not defaced
Her Innocent Beauty, and made Her Militant in the worst of Senses.

However, they can no way be Excused, who think they can never be Secure from
Papal Supremacy, but by Demolishing the Evangelical Hierarchy, and introducing
a Presbyterial Parity into the Catholic Church; and to avoid the Necessity of
having an Infallible Judge, leaving every private prepossessed Fancy to the
Perspicuity of Scripture, whereby men are often bewildred in a Labyrinth of
Errors, seduced into those bypath which lead to the Pit of Destruction: For,
notwithstanding that Beam of Divine Light, which shines so Bright in the
Scriptures, it seems some men have Eyes either so weak as to be dazzled at the
sight of it, or else so blind with Pride or Malice, as not to perceive it: For,
St. Peter tells us, there are in the Scriptures, some things hard to be
Understood, which unlearned and unstable men Wrest, unto their own Destruction:
And therefore the Unlearned should do well to consult their Teachers; the
Unstable, those that are sound in the Faith; which brings me to my second
general Consideration. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet
Private men, abandoning their Guides, and following their own corrupt Fancies,
may deprave and distort them to their own destruction.

Who those Wresters were, or what those (...) are, wherewith St. Peter charge
the Epistles of His beloved Brother Paul, I shall not strictly enquire; the
Apostle having passed them over in a profound silence, it will be difficult at
this distance of time exactly to define; yet it is not improbable, that either
the Gnostick, or Cerinthian Heretics, were here chiefly aimed at, who upon a
mistake of some Predictions, became the Founders of a Temporal Dominion of
Christ after His Resurrection; wherein His Followers in their New Jerusalem,
should wallow in sensual Lusts and Pleasures, spend the space of a Thousand
Years, as in a Nuptial Festivity, and enjoy the all that is in the World; the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, in as ample
and exquisite a manner, as the most Epicurean soul could effect or covet: A
fancy, in its first original, merely Jewish; afterward entertained by some
Judaizing Christians; and finally, rather rectified than abandoned, by some of
the Fathers in the Primitive times. And if those sublime Wits, who had all the
Learning which either Jerusalem, Athens, or Rome, could Boast, were never less
Mistaken in their Expositions, of some abstruse Texts of Scripture [whilst they
delivered their Opinions but as private Doctors] what wonder if the unlearned,
and unstable, Wrest, them to their own Destruction?

That they have, de facto, done this, is manifest, since 'twill be hard to
instance in any one Century, which is not either chargeable with new Heresies,
or the reviving and improving of Old. And the most extravagant Opinions, which
ever yet saw the light, have still shrouded themselves under the Patronage of
Holy Writ. What shall we say then, shall we condemn the Scriptures of Sin?
Shall we say, That the Scriptures are of themselves either productive of Error,
or not a sufficient storehouse of Truth? God forbid. The Scriptures are Holy,
Just, and Good, but private men Wrest them to their own Destruction. And this
they do, first, By their Ignorance; Secondly, By their Instability.

I. First, by their Ignorance: where it will be presently Objected, that
Ignorance is so far from being a cause of Error, or impiety, that, in a sober
sense, it is truly the Mother of Devotion. The Wisdom of this World, is given in
by Tertullian, as the prime Cause of Heresy; None were greater Tormentors of
the Scriptures than the Philosophers; for which Reason they are Branded by the
same Author, with the Title of Arch-Hereticks: Particularly the Valentinian
Heresy, concerning the portentous production of the Gods, comes from the
Platonists; Marcious Vnconcern'd, and Lazy God, was first set up by the
Stoics; the mortality of the Soul was the Doctrine of the Epicureans; the
Impossibility of the Resurrection of the Flesh, of the whole stream of
Philosophers.

The Apostles tells us, Not many Mighty, not many Wise, not many Noble, were
Chosen: Cautions his Proselytes against Philosophy and vain Deceit, and
concludes the Wisdom of this World, Foolishness with God. Wherefore, by (...)
Unlearned, in this place, we are not to understand Idiots, and those who never
knew Letters; but we must understand those who will not be Instructed by the
Masters of Divine Wisdom, the Nolentes discere, those who refuse to hear the
Church of the Living God, which alone is the Pillar and Foundation of Truth.
And so their Learning, like Julians, only qualifies them, to deride the
Doctrines of a Crucified God, and by their Wisdom they become the more
formidable Enemies of Christ's Kingdom.

Thus, if Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, fall from his Allegiance, whole
Legions of the Heavenly Host are involved in the Rebellion. That Heresy
spreads like the Contagion of a Leprosy, which has an Arrius for its Founder,
and a Constantius for its Promoter: And the Mahumetan Religion owes as well its
monstrous Birth, as its fatal Increase to the Malice and Munning of an Apostate
Jew, and a Renegado Christian. And to give but one instance more, but of a far
more Modern Da^^ and therefore of more Dangerous consequence; That unhappy man
Socinus, a person otherwise of singular Wit and Learning; but being in this
sense unlearned, i. e. Having entertained so slender a Notion of the Church, as
to date a general Defection from the very Deaths of the Apostles; upon this
Persuasion, thought it not Robbery, to make himself equal to the most
Ecumenical Councils, to contradict the most received Doctrines of the Church;
and from this Contempt of his Mother, to proceed to that daring pitch of
Impiety, as to deny even the Lord that Bought him: so dangerous is it for
private men, to rely solely upon the perspicuity of Scripture, or to measure
the (...) of the Incarnation of the Godhead, his Consubstantiality with the
Father, by the scantling of Humane Reason. Cedat curiosit as fidei, gloria
saluti, was the Advice of as great a Wit as any Age has bred. Our Curiosity
must give place to our Faith; the thirst of Temporal Glory, to the benefits of
Eternal Salvation.

It Is true, by our Reason, we are first disposed to be Christians; for no
Creature, beneath the Rational, is capable of Divine Revelation; but when once
we have given up our Names to Christ, it is by our Faith we are Saved: but if we
Assent to no Doctrines, but such as our Reason fully Comprehends, this is no
longer Faith, but Science; and so we may continue Infidells, whilst we go under
the Notion of Christians.

And, since We live in such a Knowing Age, wherein all captivating the
Understanding, though it be to the Obedience of Faith, is made the subject of
Grievance and Complaint: And that we have to deal with men of such a skeptical
Genius, as that they do not only enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of our
Faith, but moreover deny our very Creed; with whom a Treatise of Humane Reason
is of more Force, than the Revelation of St. John the Divine. To the
Consideration of these Men, I offer Two Things which I judge most proper.

I. First, the Answer which Origin made to Celsus, when 'twas objected by that
Calumniator against the Christians, that their Religion was built on a very
sandy Foundation, which durst not undergo the Test of Reason, but commanded its
Converts not to Examine, but Believe, and their Faith should Save them. In part
he owns the Objection, but wisely Retorts it upon his Adversary, by telling
him, that the Philosophers were the greatest Dictators in the World: Witness
the Ipse dixit of Phythagoras, that their Systems contained some such secret
Dogmata, which their Disciples swallowed solely upon the Credit of their
Masters. And if the Masters of the Wisdom of this World [which is either
Foolishness, or at best, but Science, fasly so called] required so great
submission from their Scholars, how much greater is to be given to those
Doctrines which are contained in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
who were Taught of God, and spoke as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost?

II. Secondly, I urge the Authority of my Lord Bacon, whose, if any, me thinks
should be admitted by these Virtuosi in Religion; The Divine Prerogative, says
he, extends it self to the Whole Man; and requires not only Obedience from our
Wills, but Submission from our Understandings. And therefore, as we are bound
to Obey the Divine Law, though our Wills reluct never so much against it; so
are we obliged to believe whatsoever God has Revealed, though never so
improbable to our understandings: For if we believe no more than what we can
demonstrate to be true, we do not believe the Truth delivered for the Authors
sake, but the Author for the Truths sake; and so we pay no more Respect to the
Oracles of God, than we do to the Writings of Men, though never so much
Suspected by us. The Faith which Justified Abraham, was conversant in a matter
incredible to Reason: And therefore, the higher the Mysteries of Religion are
above our Reason, the greater is the exercise and triumph of our Faith, and the
Honor done unto God in Believing. To conclude this Point, Great is the use of
Reason in Religion, both as to the manner of interpreting the Scriptures, and
the deducing true consequences, and wholesome conclusions from thence; and if
it be wholly suppressed, our Religion will degenerate into Superstition; we
shall be so far from paying God a Reasonable Service, that we shall offer Him
the Sacrifice of Fools. But then it must be kept to a due temper; for, if be
not managed by prudent Guides, it is apt to grow Wild, and Extravagant, to hurry
us on to a Belief of the Fowlest Impostures, to a Practice of the Grossest
Impieties, which either the prevalency of the World, the domineering enmity of
the Flesh, or the implacable malice of Satan, can propound to be Believed or
Practiced.

II. The second Reason of Private Men's falling into Error, is their Instability
in not adhering to their Guides; but forsaking them to go astray in the
intricate paths of Error and Deceit. Heresy being nothing else but an Excision
from, and Disobedience to the Church in points of Faith. And therefore the
Apostle pronounces an Heretic Self-Condemned; one who has Wantonly chosen to
himself those Opinions: for an Obstinate Defense whereof, after full and plain
means of Conviction, he justly falls under the Censures of the Church, is
Excommunicated the Assembly of the Saints; and so without Repentance and
Reconciliation continues in a very dangerous estate, if that of Heathens and
Publicans be acknowledged such.

Not in Vain then are those frequent Cautions against Falling Away, those
repeated Admonitions to Perseverance, those earnest Exhortations to hold fast
the Profession, and contend for the Faith which was once Delivered; those so
much inculcated Commands of Obeying those who are set Over us in the Lord, Heb.
13. v. 7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the Word of God, whose Faith follow. Ver. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves, for they Watch for your Souls. For in Vain may
those men commit themselves to the immediate Assistance of God, who neglect to
hear his Guides; and violate His Commandments, in hopes to procure His help and
favor: For, from that very moment of time, they cease to be Members of the
Holy Catholic Church, they are become Out-lawries in a Gospel-sense, they have
lost the Protection of the Heavenly King, and they lay under the Deprivation of
the benefits belonging to the Subjects of that Jerusalem which is Above.

And what wonder, if being in this forlorn condition the Tempter take his
advantage, lead them into the Wilderness, and there present to their disturbed
fancies false schemes of Religion, suggest unworthy apprehensions of God; and
whatsoever is by him thus suggested, is by them mistaken for new light and holy
inspirations.

And because this spirit of delusion dares put forth, among Christians, no
Doctrines but such as pretend to be founded on the Scriptures: to this purpose
they are wrested and tortured, their scope is mistaken, their sense abused,
their Periods miserably mangled, their whole design perverted to countenance
every Wild Opinion, which either a capricious fancy can imagine, or a Malicious
Wit invent. And from hence it comes to pass, that we have as many several sorts
of Christians as there are different humors or Interests of men; and the
Gospel with St. Paul, though in a quite contrary sense, is become all things
unto all men.

And having made thus bold with the Scriptures, it cannot be expected that they
should deal more modestly with any authority inferior to that; the most ancient
Traditions must now give place to new discoveries. The Consent of the Catholic
Apostolic Church be borne down by the Dictates of a private, I might say,
familiar spirit. Whereas there is all the reason in the World to believe that
the Apostles best knew the mind of their Master, that they faithfully and fully
communicated their knowledge to their successors, and so by certain steps and
degrees we may arrive at this fundamental truth. That as the Church is the most
faithful Keeper, so the most authentic Expositor of Scripture. Which fairly
ushers in my third and last Consideration. That for the preventing Mistakes
from Rising, and suppressing Errors when Risen, It Is the duty of Private Men to
submit their Judgments, in matters of Religion, to the Determinations of those
whom God has Constituted to be their Spiritual Guides and Governors; Unless
it manifestly Appear, that such Determinations are contrary to Gods Word. And
this I shall assert very briefly both from the qualifications of the Persons
who are appointed to Rule in the Church, and the Reason of the thing.

I. And that which first entitles the Governors of the Church to a superiority
over their Subjects, is that special Ordination and Commission, which they have
received from Christ, to instruct the World in all necessary Truths, and that
Charge which he has laid upon others to obey them. If any one lists to see
their Commission, He may find it recorded in any of the four Evangelists. I
shall exhibit it, as it is exemplified 28 Mat. 18, 19, 20. Verses. And Jesus
came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given, to me in Heaven, and
Earth: Go ye therefore, and Teach all Nations, Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have Commanded you: And lo, I am with You always unto to
the end of the World. In the which words there are these Three Things
considerable: 1. That Christ commissioned His Disciples immediately after He
had proclaimed Himself Omnipotent. 2. That this Commission implies it to be
Christ's Will, that all Nations of the World should Obey them. 3. That He
promised to be with Them and their Successors, unto the end of the World. And
there cannot be a fuller instance, of the Perverseness of some Men, who to
evacuate and overthrow the Authority of the present Church, will needs confine
(...) to some period of time, short of the final dissolution of all things,
when time shall be swallowed up of Eternity; if not contrary to the Grammatical
sense of the Word, yet at least to the design of the Promise, and the nature of
the Thing.

Which of the Ambassadors of earthly Potentates ever received so ample a
commission? the Person commissioning was Omnipotent. The Commission was
universal in respect of Persons, time and place; 'twas directed to all the
Nations, and to continue throughout all the Ages of the World, and for the
Execution of it they were empowr'd from Above; wheresoever they came, they
constituted a Spiritual Government, and they had full power to Enact such Laws
as they thought tended to the Advancement of their Masters Kingdom; and they
did with Authority, and not by way of Counsel only, as some would have,
determine such Controversies as arose, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
Us.

All along their Spiritual progress, if any City refused to receive Them, or
their Doctrine, they shook off the Dust of their Feet against it, as a dire
Presage of some ensuing Judgment, as the next words manifestly declare; Verily
I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day
of Judgment, than for that City. Wretched City! how has thy Disobedience
ascertained, and aggrandiz'd thy Ruin. The Lewd Inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomorrah shall find more Favor in the day of Judgment, than thy Citizens.
Most true it is, their Power was purely Spiritual: Christ, the Prince of Peace,
did not Commission Generals to destroy, but sent forth Apostles to Convert the
Nations, by declaring His Laws, and denouncing His Judgments. But then they had
no coercive power of the Sword, which God has given to Magistrates, to inflict
the Judgments which they denounced. But as they, because living under Heathen
Powers, left the Event of their Spiritual Censures solely to Divine Vengeance,
[which they who escaped in this world, were sure to meet with in the next]; so
is it still, unless Kings are graciously pleased to show themselves Nursing
Fathers to the Church, to enforce Spiritual Censures, by Corporal Penalties,
and adjudge those Unworthy the Protection of the Laws of the Realm, who are
justly deprived of the Benefits of the Church. By all which, it appears, that
the Church is something else, than a Christian Commonwealth, since there was a
Church before the Commonwealth became Christian; and neither the Leviathan,
nor any of his Disciples, has yet been able to show, how, or when the Church
forfeited Her antecedent Right: And that though the Governors thereof may
challenge to themselves a Power distinct, yet no ways Opposite to the Civil;
The Shield of Faith, does not Clash with the Sword of Justice. And maugre the
designs of those, who have Evil will at Sion, this is not to erect Imperium in
imperio, much less to set the Mitre above the Crown: Since whatsoever Power, is
here challenged as of Divine Right, is purely Spiritual, exercised to Spiritual
ends and purposes; so far from interfering with the Civil, from Absolving men
from that Obedience, which is indispensably due thereunto; that wheresoever it
takes place, it abates nothing of that natural Right which the Magistrate had
in the Affairs of Religion: Yet herein it will appear, that the Wisdom of the
despised King of the Jews, did far surmount all the Policies of the world; in
that he has so interwoven the concerns of His Church, with the interest of the
State, that at the same time any man shall dare to become an Enemy to his
Kingdom, he must cease to be a Friend to Caesar's.

II. The reasonableness of this Submission, will appear from those promises of
Assistance, which Christ has made to them, but not to others without them;
much less to others against them: And those are Illumination, Direction and
Power. Illumination, in things Obscure; Direction, in things Difficult; Power,
to Encounter, and overcome all Opposition.

And this may be one Reason, why Christ did not Arm his Disciples with a
Temporal Sword; for, certainly He, who had all Power given Him in Heaven, and
on Earth, might have done it if He had pleased, because He furnished them with
such Extraordinary Virtues, as did abundantly supply the Defect of that. Thus
they who could Raise the Dead from the Grave, needed no other Argument to gain
the Living. They who could convince the Consciences, captivate the
Understandings, beat down the Imaginations, and conquer the Affections of their
Adversaries, needed no Sword, nor Spear, nor any of the Bloody Engines of War,
to make themselves Masters of the Field.

Now the same Spirit, though not in the same Measure, does still reside in the
Governors of the Church: though they do not equalize the Apostles in Working of
Miracles, diversities of Languages, extent of Jurisdiction; though they have
not, as they had, the whole World for their Diocese; yet are they still Bishops
of Souls; Pastors, and Doctors for the Consummation of the Saints, for the
Edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Either then let Private men submit to their
Spiritual Governors; exercising their Commission according to Gods Word; or
else let them warrant their Dissent with greater, at least equal Attestations
of the Divine Favor; and then there will be no great fear, of any danger
arising from Dissenting Brethren.

III. The reasonableness of this Submission will appear, from their study and
learning in Divine Matters, and from the far less knowledge, and ordinary
capacity in others. The Apostles, they had their Knowledge of Divine things,
either from a constant and familiar converse with their Master, or else from
that plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost, which He vouchsav'd them,
immediately upon His Restoration to His Heavenly Kingdom.

That which was thus Wonderfully bestowed upon them, their Successors are
forced to acquire, by hard Study, great Industry, frequent and fervent Address
to the Fountain of Wisdom. For, not only the Knowledge of Languages, a calmness
of Mind, neither ruffled with the storms of Passion, nor distracted with the
Cares of the World; but likewise a peircing Judgment, to distinguish between
the Literal and Figurative sense, to weigh the scope and coherence of things,
to compare one place with another, to Illustrate obscure Texts, by those which
are more plain, to consult, and find out the sense of Antiquity, is required to
a right understanding of the Scriptures: For, they do not only contain things
of themselves hard to be understood; but moreover, those very things are
rendered more difficult, by the Malice of Satan, and the Cunning of his Agents.
The Enemy has sown such a prodigious quantity of Tares, that it is very hard
sometimes to find out the Wheat: What wonder then, if such a spawn of Monstrous
Opinions flow from the Scriptures falling either into Profane hands, or being
interpreted by a private, self conceited, and unruly Spirit? If St. Paul, who
was caught up into the third Heavens, and was even oppressed with Revelations;
nevertheless cries out, as well for the Difficulty, as the Dignity of his
Function, Who is sufficient for these things? Then certainly it can be no
Disparagement to the Laity, however quick-sighted they may be in other Affairs,
to suppose them not such competent Judges here, as those of the Clergy are. And
indeed, we hear of very few, though never such Despisers of the dull Clergy in
their lifetime, but are very willing to admit of their advise and assistance
when they come to Dye.

IV. Fourthly and lastly, the necessity of this Submission appears, as it is the
only means to restore Peace and Unity to the Church; Happiness and Tranquillity
to the State, how ineffectual the several Projects of Comprehension,
Toleration, unwarrantable Compliance have proved to effect the Work of
Coalition: I mean to Compose those Differences, and unite those Divisions which
so furiously Rage among us; we either are, or it is to be feared, by sad
Experience, may be Taught.

These Projects can only lay claim to an Imaginary Happiness, and how-ever
Plausible they may seem in the Notion, yet may they prove Dangerous in the
Practice, at least, not attain the ends for which they were designed. For, in
truth, as well may we expect To gather Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from
Thistles, as that a Toleration of Disagreements, should produce the Blessed
Fruits of Peace and Concord. These are Contraries, and destroy each other.

Now, what other Expedient have we left but the Restoring, and Asserting the
Discipline of the Church: That so they, who will neither Hold the Faith, nor
keep a good Conscience, by being delivered up to Satan, may Learn, at least,
not to Blaspheme. Many and grievous are the Guilts, which are charged upon the
Church of Rome; yet, such is the Exactness of Her Discipline, and the Obedience
of Her Sons and Daughters, Consequent upon it, as has hitherto preserved Her
from Ruin. Now, if our Fears of the Increase of Popery, be as real, as they
are pretended, methinks it should be no ill Policy to learn Wisdom from our
Adversaries; for that which preserves a Corrupted Church from Falling, in all
likelihood will make a Pure One to Flourish.

However, We are little the better for being delivered from the Slaveries of an
Implicit Faith, and Foreign Superstition, if we run into Licenciousness,
Infidelity, and Irreligion at Home. For, who is so Blind as not to see that
Irreverence and Disrespect for the Lord's Clergy, has been accompanied with a
Manifest Decay of Piety, and a Notorious Contempt of the most Essential Parts
of Religion? That want of Submission, to the Just and Pious Determinations of
the Church, no less Justly and Piously ratifyed and established by the King and
State, has given Birth to such a Monstrous. Variety of Opinions, as has
scarce left any Fundamental of the Faith unquestioned, if not denied; Atheism
creeping in by Insensible Degrees, from indulging too great a Latitude in
Matters of Religion.

And now in the Close of All, Let every Man seriously consider with himself the
Hainousness and Danger of Schism; and the Blessed Effects of Obedience.

The Danger of Schism, in that it breaks the Precious Unity of the Church,
alienates the Affections of the Members thereof. Who, as they have but one
Faith, so they should have but one Soul. And so instead of Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-Suffering, Forbearance, Meekness, Temperance, those lovely Fruits of the
Spirit, which adorn Private Men, and secure the Public Peace, There arise
Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Evil Surmising, Sedition, Heresies,
Murders; those ugly Works of the Flesh, which dissolve the Bonds of Society,
and exclude Men from the Kingdom of God. How that the Schismatic is arrested
with Fears and Jealousies from without, when he considers his Sin of
Disobedience against those whom the Lord has set over him, and the
Dreadfulness of the Churches Censures, when justly incurred, for his
Disobedience. How that he is tormented with Sad and Uncomfortable Reflections
from within; being Unstable in all his Ways, ever Learning, but never coming to
the Knowledge of the Truth; but being abandoned to the Delusions of a Private
Spirit, He is miserably tost'd to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, till at
length He makes an Eternal Shipwreck of the Faith.

On the contrary, the Blessed Effects of Obedience; how the Humble Christian,
by an happy Resignation of his Judgment, there where our Lord seems to demand
it, enjoys a perpetual Peace, and Freedom from Dispute, together with all his
Fellow Members of the same Mystical Body. As for those great Mysteries of
Godliness, which concern his Salvation, though they are above his Reason, yet
not above his Faith; and he had rather Rely on the Churches Decisions of them,
when he finds no place of Scripture, plainly contrary to such Decisions, than
either give way to his own Curiosity, or heed to the Disputers of this World,
lest He should thereby wrest them to his own Destruction. And this He thinks he
may do with less Trouble to himself, and greater Assurance of the Truth, and so
He continues Sound in the Faith, without being skilled in those unhappy
Controversies, in which the Disputers of this World have involved it.

And this Harmony of Faith and Doctrine is always accompanied with an entire
League, and Union of Charity, [that common Badge by which Christians were once
distinguished from the rest of the World] and a Blessed Uniformity of God's
Public Worship and Service, whereby the Members of the Church Militant, in
some sort Resemble the Saints of the Church Triumphant.

In a Word, in this Obedience, the Humble Christian goes on Securely, and
Cheerfully, in the Ways of God's Commandments; And instead of troubling His
Head with the (...) of Religion, practices those Plain, but most Important
Duties of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety; which will render his Life
happy here, and Crown him with Eternal Felicity, hereafter.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 13. line 2. for Hypothecal read Hypothetical. l. 10. f. its r. the. l.
11. f. the r. its.


