That the BISHOPS IN ENGLAND May and Ought to Vote in Cases of Blood.

Written in the Late Times upon occasion of the Earl of Straffords Case.

By Learned Pen

With some ANSWERS to the OBJECTIONS of the then Bishop of Lincoln, AGAINST
Bishops Voting in PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis, 1680.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THis Discourse was Written by a Learned Gentleman of the Long-Robe, at the
beginning of the late troubles in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, but never
Printed.

The same Question being started afresh, and the consideration of it revived
upon the like Occasion, it is thought fit to be Published now.

If it minister any satisfaction to the Reader in the Case the Publisher has
his end.

That Bishops in England may and ought to Vote in Causa Sanguinis, and that
they were never Inhibited by any Law of this Land, or the Lay-Peers so to do,
before this time, and that their voluntary forbearance heretofore to sentence
in this Case, proceeded from their own Fears of the Canons and Court of Rome,
and some private ends they then had. And by the special leave of the King, and
both Houses in plein Parliament, who were graciously pleased to allow of their
Protestations for their Indemnity, as Churchmen, when they might have rejected
their said Protestations if they had pleased. With some Answers to the
Objections of the Bishop of Lincoln.
1. IT is not Prohibitum quia malum; nor any way evil in it self, no more than
it is an evil thing in it self to do Justice.

2. It was in use before the Law when the eldest of the Family was King,
Priest, and Prophet.

3. It was in use under the Law, and so continued in the Priests and Levites,
down to Annas and Caiphas: Nay after the Death of Christ as appears by the
Scourging of the Apostles, the Stoning of Stephen, the directing of St. Paul to
be smitten on the mouth* etc.

It was in use in the persons of the Apostles themselves, as in that Judgment
given upon Ananias and Saphira, in the first of the Acts; In the Tradition to
Satan, as most of the Ancient Fathers expound that Censure* And generally in
all the Word of God there is no one Text that Inhibits Churchmen, more than
Laymen, to use this kind of Judicature. For that Precept to be no striker, 1 Timothy 3.3. is no more to be appropriated unto a Bishop from the rest of
Christian men, than that, not given to Wine or Roaring which immediately
precedes the same*

In this Island it was in use before the Romans entered the same, when the
Druyds Si caedes factae, poenas constituunt, gave all Sentences in Causes of
Blood. Caes. de bello Gallico lib. 6. see Mr. Selden's Epinomis Cap. 2.

Nor is it like the Romans should forbid it in Churchmen, whose Pontifical
College, after the entertaining of the 12 Tables, meddled in all matters of
this kind Strabo Geograph. lib. 4.

And it is not like, that the Christian Religion excluded Bishops in this
Island from Secular Judicatures, considering that King Lucius is directed by
the advice of his Council, to take out his Laws for the reigling of this
Kingdom, Ex utraque Pagina, that is, out of the Old and New Testament, which
could not be done in that Age, without the help of his Bishops. See Sir Hen.
Spelmans Councils, page 34. ad Annum Domini 185. And how the great Prelates
amongst the Ancient Britains were wholly employed in these kind of Secular
Agitations, you may see by the Ecclesiastical Laws of Howel Dha, set forth by
Sir Henry Spelman in his Councils, page 408. ad Annum Domini. 940.

4. And a little before this Howel Dha, lived King Aethelstan. In the 2 Cap. of
whose Ecclesiastical Laws we have it peremptorily set down, hinc debent
Episcopi cum seculi Judicibus interesse judiciis; and particularly in all
Judgments of the Ordals, which no man that understands the word, can make any
doubt to have been extended to the mutilation of Humane members. Sir Henry
Spelman's Councils, page 405. ad Annum Domini, 928.

5. And that the Bishops joined always with the Secular Lords in all these
Judiciary Laws, and Acts, under the whole Reign of the Saxons and Danes within
this Island, we may see by those Saxon and Danish Laws (or rather Capitularies,
which amongst the French and Germans, do signify a mixture of Laws, made by
the Prince, the Bishops, and the Barons, to reigle both Church and
Commonwealth) set forth by Mr. Lambert, Anno 1568. see particularly the 9th
Chap. of King Edwards Laws, de his qui ad judicium ferri vel aquae judicati
sunt per Justitiam Regis. It is in Mr. Lamberts Laws, fol. 128.

And thus it continued in this Kingdom long after the Conquest, to wit in Henry
Beauclarks time, after whose Reign it began first of all to be a little limited
and restrained. For at Clarindon, Anno Dom. 1164. the 8th of the Calends of
February, in the 11th year of Henry the 2. a general Record is agreed upon, by
that Kings special Command, of all the Customs and Liberties of this Kingdom,
ever sithence Henry the first, that Kings Grandfather, as you may see in
Matthew Paris, page 96. of the first Edition, where amongst other Customs
agreed upon, this is one.

Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Persons of this Kingdom which hold of the
King in Capite, are to enjoy their Possessions of the King as a Baronie, and by
reason thereof are to answer before the Judges and Officers of the King, and to
observe, and perform all the Kings Customs. And just as the rest of the Barons,
ought (for it was a duty the King then required from them, as the King now by
his Summons does from us) to be present in the Judgments of the Kings Courts,
together with the rest of the Barons, until such time as they shall there
proceed, to the mangling of members or Sentence of Death.

And here in the last words is a diversity of reading. For Matthew Paris a
young Monk, that lived long after, reads this Custom thus;

Quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem. Which may be
wrested to the first agitation of any Charge tending that way. But Quadrilogus
(a Book written in that very Age) and the Copy of the Articles of Clarindon
which Becket sent to Rome* extant at this day in the Vatican Library, and out
of the which, Baronius in his Annals ad Annum 1164, transcribes it, reads the
Custom thus; Vsque perveniatur in Judicio ad diminutionem membrorum, etc. which
leaves the Bishops to sit there, until the Judgment come to be pronounced,
amounting to Death, or mutilation of members.

And as this was agreed to be the Custom, so was it the Practice also after the
11th year, to wit in the 15th year of Henry the 2. At what time the Lay-Peers
are so far from requiring the Bishops to withdraw, that they endeavor to force
them alone, to hear and determine a matter of Treason in the Person of Becket.
Stephanides is my Author for this, who was a Chaplain and follower of that
Archbishop. The Barons say (says that Author) you Bishops ought to pronounce
Sentence upon your selves we are Layicks, you are Churchmen, as this fellow
is, being his fellow Priests and fellow Bishops. To whom some one of the
Bishops replied, this belongs rather to you my Lords, than to us; for this is
no Ecclesiastical, but a Secular Judicature. We sit not here as Bishops, but as
Barons. Nos Barons and vos Barons hic pares sumus, We Barons and you Barons,
are all Peers in this place. And in vain it is, that you should labor to find
any difference at all in our Order or Calling, etc. see this M. S. cited by Mr.
Seldens. Titles of honor, the 2d Edition, page 705. And thus the Custom
continued until the 21 year of the same King Henry 2, at what time that
Provincial Synod was kept at Westminster by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
some few of his Suffragans, which Roger Haveden mentions in his History, page
543. And (it seems) Gervasius Dorobernensis which is a M. S. I have not seen.
The quoting of this Monk in the Margen of that Collection of Privileges which
Mr. Seldom by Command had made for the upper House of Parliament, is the only
ground of stirring up this question against the Bishops, at this present
intended by Mr. Seldom for a Privilege for Bishops, not for a Privilege for
the Lay-Peers, to be pressed against Bishops. The Canon runs thus.

It is not Lawful for such as are Constituted in Holy Orders, Indicium
Sanguinis agitare, to put in Execution Judgments of Blood; And therefore we
forbid, that they shall either in their own Persons, Execute any such
mutilation of Members, or Sentence them to be so acted by others. And if any
such Person, shall do any such thing, he shall be deprived of the Office and
Place of his Order and Function. We do likewise forbid under the peril of
Excommunication, that no Priest be a Secular Sherif or Provost.

Now this is no Canon made in England, much less Confirmed by Common Law, or
assented unto by all the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, or by any one
of the Province of York, but Transcribed (as appears by Hovedens Margen) out of
a Council of Toledo; which in the time That Council is supposed to be held (to
wit the year of our Lord 660) was the least Kingdom in Spain, and not so big as
Yorkshire, and consequently improper to reigle all the World, and especially
this remote Kingdom of England. Besides, that as this poor Monk sets it down,
it does Inhibit Churchmen from being Hang-men, rather than from being Judges,
or at the most, from being Judges to Condemn men, to be thus mutilated and
mangled in their Members. An ordinary punishment of the Goths and Vandals, who
then lived in Spain; but never heard of here with us, of many years before the
Reign of Henry 2d. And therefore not fitly pressed to drive Bishops from
sitting as Peers in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, who was not to be
Sentenced to any mutilation of Members. True it is, that in the Council it
self, being the 11th Council of Toledo, and the 6th Canon, they are forbidden,
quod morte plectendum est, Sententia propria judicare, to Sentence in any
Cause, that is to be punished by Death. Whereas in the 4th Council of Toledo
under Sisinandus, held not long before, Anno Dom. 633. Canon, 31* It is said,
that the Kings do oftentimes commit to Priests and Bishops their Judicature,
contra quoslibet Majestatis obnoxios, against all Traitors, howbeit from that
time forward they are directed not to obey their King in this particular,
unless they have him bound by Oath to Pardon the party, in Case they shall find
Reason to mediate for him. And thus the Canon Law went in Spain, but nowhere
else in Christendom, in that Age.

But these Bishops at Westminster travailed not so far as Toledo, to fetch in
this Canon into their Synod, but took it out of Gratian, then in vogue: for he
lived in the time of Henry Beauclark, Grandfather to this Henry the 2d* who in
the 2d part of his Decrees Cap. Clericis, says thus, Clericis in Sacris
ordinibus constitutis, ex Concilio Toletano, judicium sanguinis agitare non
licet. And so this Canon was fetched from Spain, into these other parts of
Europe, five hundred years after the first making thereof upon this occasion.

Pope Gregory the 7th, otherwise called Hildebrand, who lived in the time of
William the Conqueror, having so many deadly quarrels against Henry the 4th,
Emperor of Germany, to make his party good and strong, laid the first ground
(which his Successors in their Canons closely pursued) to draw the Bishops, and
other great Prelates of Germany, France, England and Spain, from their
Lay-Soveraignes, and Lay-Lords, to depend wholly upon him, and so by Color and
Pretense of Ecclesiastical Immunities, withdrew them from the Services of their
Princes, in War, and Peace, and particularly from Exercising all places of
Judicature in the Civil Court of Princes: To the which Offices they were by
their breeding and Education more enabled, than the Martial Lay-Lords of that
rough Age, and by their Fiefes and Baronies, which they held from Kings and
Emperors, particularly Bound and Obliged. And therefore shall you find, that
whereas the Bishops of this Island before the Conquest, did still join with the
Kings and Elder-men and Lay-Lords, in the making and executing of all Laws
whatsoever, touching deprivation of Life, or mutilation of Members; yet soon
after, when the Norman and English Prelates, Lanfranc, Anselm, Becket and the
rest, began to Trade with Rome, and as Legati nati, to Wed the Laws and Canons
cried up in Rome, and to plant them here in England, they withdrew by little
and little the English Prelates from those employments by, and dependances
upon, the Kings of England: And under the Color of Exemptions, and Church
Immunities, erected in this Land an Ecclesiastical Estate and Monarchy,
depending wholly upon the Pope; inhibiting them to exercise Secular
Employments, or to sit with the rest of the Peers, in Judicatures of Life and
Member, otherwise than as they list themselves. And hence (principally) did
arise those great heats, between our Rufus and Anselm, which Edmerus speaks of,
and those Ancient Customs of this Kingdom which Henry the 2d pressed upon
Becket, in the Articles of Clarindon, that the Prelates ought to be present in
the Kings Courts, etc. Which Pope Alexander, a notable Boutefeu of those times
in the Church of God, did tolerate though not approve of, as he apostyles that
Article with his own hand, to be showed to this day in the M. S. extant in the
Vatican Library. And although I shall not deny, but the Popes did pretend
Scripture for this Inhibition (as they did for all things else) and allude unto
that place, 2 Timothy 3.4. which they backed with one of the Canons of the
Apostles (as they call them) the 7th in Number; yet is it clear their main
Authority is fetched from this obscure Synod of Toledo; where 18 Bishops only
were convened under Bamba the Goth, who of a Plowman was made a King, and of a
King a cloistred Monk, as you may see in the History of Rodericus Santius, par.
2. cap. 32. This is all the goodly ground, that either Gratian in his Decrees,
or Innocentius the 3d in the Decretals, or Roger Hoveden in his History,
allege against the Ecclesiastical Peers, and their sitting as Judges in Causes
of Blood; to wit this famous Gothish Council of Toledo.

The first that openly planted this Canon here in England, was Stephen Langton,
a Cardinal, the Popes Creature (as his Holiness was pleased to style him in his
Bull) and thrust upon the Sea of Canterbury by a Papal Provision, where he
continued in Rebellion against his Sovereign, as long as King John lived. This
Archbishop under Color of Ecclesiastical Immunity (as this Canon is
Marshalled by Lindwood) at Osney near Oxford, did Ordain, Ne quis Clericus
beneficiatus, vel in sacris ordinibus constitutus, that no Clergyman having a
Benefice or otherwise in Holy Orders, should presume to be present in that
place, Vbi judicium sanguinis tractatur, vel exerceatur. And this is the first
Canon Broached in this Kingdom, to this Effect: That of Othobon being
subsequent in time, and a mere Foreign or Legatine Constitution. See it at
large in Lyndwoods Constitu. lib. 3. at the end of the Book.

And by Virtue of a branch of this very Constitution, the now Archbishop 2
years sithence, Fined the Bishop of Gloucester in the High Commission, because
he had given way (in time of Pestilence only) that a Sessions (or Judgment of
Blood) might be kept in a Sacred place, which was likewise Inhibited in this
Canon. But this admits of a Multitude of Answers.

1. Quod haec Dictio, Clericus, ex vi verbi, non comprehendit Episcopum. This
word Clerk in the Canon Law, reaches not to a Bishop or a Peer of the Realm,
says Lyndwood in his third Book, cap. de Locatis and Conductis.

2. The Irregularity incurred by Judicature in Causes of Blood, is only Jure
positivo, and therefore dispensable by the Pope, says Covarruvias in Clem. Si
furiosus. Par. 2.. 5. no 1. And here in England it is Dispensed with in Bishops
by the King, who in his Writs or Summons to the Parliament, Commands the Lords
Spiritual, without any exception of Causes of Blood, to join in all Matters and
Consultations whatsoever, with the Temporal Peers of the Kingdom, these Summons
being unto them a sufficient Dispensation so to do.

And Othobon himself, Inhibiting other Clerks to use these Secular Judicatures,
has a Salvo to preserve the Privileges of our Lord the King, whereby he may
use any of their Services, in that kind; when he shall see Cause; in the Title
called Ne Clerici jurisdictionem saecularem exerceant. A* Lyndwood in his Gloss
upon that Text does instance, in the Clerks of the Chancery, and others. Nor
are these Writs of the Bishops Dispensations only, but Mandates also and
Bishops have been Fined at the King's Bench, and elsewhere, for Absenting
themselves from Counsels in Parliament (as now they are required to do) without
the Kings special leave and License first Obtained.

3. When they are forbidden Interesse to be present, the meaning is, not (in
the very Canons themselves) that they should go out of the Room, but only that
they should not be present, to add Authority, Help, or Advice, to any Sentence
Pronounced against a particular individual Person, in a Cause of Blood, or
mutilation of Members. If he be present Authorizando, consilium, opem, vel
operam dando, then he Contracts an Irregularity, and not otherwise says our
Lyndwood out of Innocentius. And the Canon reaches no further, than to him
that shall Pronounce Sentence of Death, or mutilation upon a particular Person.
For Prelates that are of Council with the King, in Parliament or otherwise,
being demanded the Law in such, and such a Case (without naming any individual
Person) may Answer; generaliter loquendo; as, that Treason is to be punished
with Death; and a Counterfeiter of the Kings Coin is to be Burned, etc.
Cardinal Hostiensis, lib. 2. cap. de falls. monet. Allowed by John Montague, de
Collatione Parliamentorum in Tractat. Docto^. vol. 10. page 121.

4. These Canons are not in Force in England to bind the Subjects of this
Kingdom, for several reasons.

1. Because they are against his Majesty's Prerogative, as you may see it
clearly in the Articles of Clarendon, and the Writ of Summons; and therefore
abolished by the Statute of 25o of Henry the 8 th. It is his Majesty's
Prerogative declared at Claredon, that all such Ecclesiastical Peers, as hold
of him by Barony, should Assist in the Kings Judicatures, until the very actual
pronouncing of a Sentence of Blood. And this holds all along from Henry the
first, down to the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, who employed Archbishop
Whitguift as a Commissioner upon the Life of a Personage, not to be named
without Horror; and as the first keeper and examiner, of Robert, the most Noble
Earl of Essex, after that Commotion in London. And to say, that this Canon is
Confirmed by Common Law in this Kingdom, is a very Tale; there being nothing in
all the Common Law that tends that way.

2. It has been Voted in the House of Commons this very Sessions of
Parliament, that no Canons sithence the Conquest, either Introduced from Rome,
by Legatine Power, or made in our Synods, never had, in any Age, nor yet have
at this Instant, any Power to bind the Subjects of this Realm, unless they be
Confirmed by Act of Parliament. Now these Canons which Inhibit the presence of
Churchmen, in Causes that concern Life, and Member, were never Confirmed by
any, but seem to be Impeached by diverse, and sundry Acts of Parliament.

3. The whole House of Peers have this very Session despised, and set aside
this Canon Law, which some of the young Lords cry up again, in the same
Session, and in the very same Cause, to take away the Votes of the Bishops, in
the Case of the Earl of Strafford. For by the same Canon Law, that forbids
Clergymen to Sentence, they of that Coat are more strictly Inhibited, to give
Testimony in Causes of Blood. Nec etiam potest esse Testis, vel Tabellio, in
Causa Sanguinis, says my Lyndwood, fol. 146. page 2. For no man co-operates
more to a Sentence of Death, than the Witness, upon whose attestation the
Sentence is principally Founded, says Lopez, in his Practica Criminalis, Cap.
98. Did. 21. And yet have these Lords admitted as Witnesses, produced by the
Commons against the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishops of Canterbury and
Armache, together with the Bishop of London; the which Lords now Command all
Bishops to withdraw, in the Agitation of the self-same Cause. Bishops it seems
may be Witnesses to kill outright; but may not sit in the Discussion of the
Cause, to help (in Case of Innocence) a distressed Noble man, whereas the very
Gothish Bishops (who first invented this exclusion of Prelates from such
Judicatures) allow them to Vote, as long as there is any hope left of clearing
the party, or gaining of Pardon, Council. Tolet. 4. can. 31. And by the
beginning of that Canon, observe the use in Spain in that Age ( Anno Dom. 633)
as touching this Doctrine. Saepe Principes contra quoslibet Majestatis
obnoxios, sacerdotibus negotia sua committunt. You shall find it in the fourth
Tome of Binius his last Edition of the Councils, page 592. Lastly in the Case
of Archbishop Abbots, all the great Civilians, and Judges of this Kingdom, as
Dr. Steward, Sir Henry Martin, the Lord Chief Justice Ho^bar^, and Judge
Doderidge (which two last were well versed in the Canon Law) delivered
positively, that all Irregularities introduced by Canons upon Ecclesiastical
Persons concerning matters of Blood, were taken away by the Reformation of the
Church of England: And were repugnant to the Statute of 25 of Henry 8. as
restraining the Kings most just Prerogative, to employ his own Subjects in such
functions, and Offices, as his Predecessors had done; and to allow them those
Privileges and Recreations, as by the Laws and Customs of this Realm they had
formerly enjoyed: Notwithstanding the Decree, de Clerico venatore, or the
Constitution, Ne Clerici saecularem jurisdictionem exerceant, or any other in
that kind.

The only Objection, which appears upon any Learning or Record, against
Church-mens Voting in this Kingdom in Causes of Blood, are two, or three
Protestations entered by the Bishops amongst the Records of the upper House of
Parliament, and some few passages in the Law Books relating thereunto. The
Protestation the Lords now principally stood upon, is that of William Courtney
Archbishop of Canterbury, 11o Ric. 2. inserted in the Book of Privileges,
which Mr. Seldom Collected for the Lords of the upper House. In the Margen
whereof, that passage out of Roger Hoveden whereof we spoke before, about
Clergy-mens agitation of Judgments of Blood, is unluckily inserted, and for
want of due Consideration of this point, and some suspicion of partial carriage
in the Bishops in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, has been eagerly pressed
upon the Bishops, by some of the Lords, in such an unusual, and unaccustomed
manner; that if the Bishop of Lincoln (who offered to speak unto this
Objection) had not voluntarily withdrawn himself, he* and the rest of the
Bishops had been (without hearing) Voted out of the House, in the Agitation of
a Splinter of that Cause, of the Earl of Strafford, which came not near any
matter of Blood. An Act never done before in that Honorable House, and now
Executed suddenly, without the least Consideration of the merit of the Cause.
The only words insisted upon in this Protestation in question, are these:
Because in this present Parliament certain matters are agitated, whereat it is
not Lawful for us, according to the Prescript of Holy Canons to be present* And
by, and by after they say, these matters are such, in the which nec possumus,
nec debemus interesse, we neither can nor may be present.

This is the Protestation most stood upon; for that of Archbishop Arundel, 21
Rich. 2. (at what time the Bishops going forth, left their Proxies
notwithstanding with the Lay-Lords, and consequently continued present in
Judicature, in the eye and Construction of the Law) it is not so full, and
ample as this of Courtney's. And therefore I must apply my Answers to this
Protestation principally, which are diverse and fit to be weighed and
understood.

First, I do observe, that Bishops never Protested or withdrew, in Cases of
Blood, but under the unsteddy Reign of Richard the Second only. Never before,
never after the time, of that unfortunate King, from the Conquest to this
present Parliament, for ought appears in Record or History. And that one
Swallow should make us such a Spring, and one Omission should create a Law or
Custom, against so many Actions of the English Prelates, under so many Kings
before, so many Kings and Queens after that young Prince, seems unto me a
strange Doctrine. Especially when I consider that by the Rules of the Civil and
Canon Law, a Protestation dies with the Death of him that makes it; and is
Regularly vacuated, and disannulled, Per contrarium actum subsequentem
protestationem, by any one subsequent Act, varying from the tenor of the said
Protestation. Reg. juris. Jo. Baptist. Nicolai. par. 2. Now that you may know,
how the Prelates carried themselves in this Point, and actually voted in Causes
of Treason, and sometimes to Blood, before Richard the 2 d* I refer me to what
I cited before out of Mr. Seldom (and he out of Stephanides) concerning Thomas
a Becket, Condemned by his Peers Ecclesiastical and Temporal, about 15 of Henry
the 2 d: Archbishop Stratford acquitted of high Treason in Parliament, by four
Prelates, four Earls, and four Barons, under Edward the 3 d. Antiquitates
Britanniae, page 223. 4 Edward 3* Roger de Mortimer, Berisford, Travers, and
others, adjudged Traitors by the Earls, Barons and Peers, 16o Edward 3. Thomas
de Berkley was acquitted of Treason, in pleno Parliamento, etc. And especially
I refer me to that Roll of 21 Rich. 2, no. 10. and 50: Which avers that
Judgments and Ordinances, in the time of that Kings Progenitors, had been
avoided by the absence of the Clergy; which makes the Commons thereto pray,
that the Prelates would make a Procurator, by whom they might in all Judgments
of Blood, be at the least legally, if they durst not be bodily present in such
Judgments. And then for the practice sithence the Reign of Rich. the 2 d* In
the first of Henry the 4 th, the Commons thank the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
for their good and rightful Judgment in freeing the Earl of Northumberland from
Treason. 3 of Henry the 5 th. the Commons pray a Confirmation of the Judgment,
given upon the Earl of Cambridge, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. 5 of
Henry the 5 th, Sir John Oldcastle is Attainted of Treason and Heresy, by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal. 28 of Henry the 6 th. the Duke of Suffolk charged
with Treason, before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; 31 Henry the 6 th. the
Earl of Devon* and so down to the Earl of Bristols Case, wherein 22o Maij.
1626. ten Bishops are joined, with ten Earls, and ten Barons, in the
disquisition and agitation of that supposed Treason. I leave it therefore to
the Judgment of any indifferent man, whether these Protestations made all under
one Kings Reign, and dying with the Parties that made them, can void a Right
and Custom, grounded by a continual Practice to the contrary, in all other
Trials that have been sithence the Conquest, to this present Parliament.

Secondly, it is fitting we know, the Nature of a Protestation, which some
peradventure may mistake, Protestatio est animi nostri declaratio, juris
acquirendi, vel conservandi, vel damnum depellendi causa facta, says
Spigelius, Calvin, and all the Civilians. No Protestation is made by any man
(in his Wits) to destroy his own Right (and much less another man's) but to
acquire or preserve some Right, or to avoid and put off some Wrong, that was
like to happen to the party or Parties that make the Protestation. As here in
Courtneys Protestation, the Prelates in the first place, conceive a Right and
Power they had, voluntarily to absent themselves whilst some matters were
treated of, at that time in that House of Lords; which by the Canon Law (the
breach whereof the Popes of Rome did in those times vindicate with far more
severity, than they did the transgressions of the Laws of God) they were not
permitted to be present at; and all this, not for want of Right to be there in
all Causes, but for honesty, and preservation of their Estates, as it is in the
Act of Parliament, 11 Rich. 2.

In the second place they did preserve their former Right as Peers, which they
still had, (though voluntarily absenting of themselves) More solito
interessendi, considerandi, tractandi, ordinandi and definiendi, all things
without exception, Acted and Executed in that Parliament.

And in the Last place, they protest, against any loss of Right, of being or
Voting in Parliament, that could befall them, for this voluntary absenting of
themselves at this time.

And where, in this Protestation, is there one word to prejudice their
Successors, or to authorize any Peer, to Command his fellow Peer, called
thither by more Ancient prescription of time, and by the same Writs of Summons,
that himself is, to withdraw and go out from this Common Council of the Kingdom?

Thirdly, we do not certainly know, what these matters were, whereat
Archbishop Courtney conceived the Prelates neither could, nor ought to be
present. These matters are left in loose, and general words in that
Protestation. Some conceive indeed, it was at the Condemnation of Tressilian,
Brambre, the Lord Beauchamp and others. See Antiquit. Brit. page 286. But the
notes of Privileges belonging to the Lords (collected by Mr. Seldom) do with
more reason a great deal, assign this going forth of the Prelates, to be
occasioned, by certain Appeals of Treason, advanced in that Parliament, by the
Duke of Gloucester, against Alexander Archbishop of York; whom the Popish
Canons of those times (as you know) exempted, as a Sacred Person, from the
cognizance of King or Parliament; and therefore the rest of the Bishops as the
squares went then, neither could, nor ought to be present, and parties, to
break upon the Exemptions, Immunities, and Privileges of that great Prelate.
But the Earl of Strafford is not the Archbishop, but the President of York;
and to challenge any such Exemptions, and Immunities from the cognizance of the
King or Parliament, amounts at this time to little less than Treason* and
therefore is th^^ Protestation very unseasonably urged, to thrust out any
Protestant Prelate from Voting in Parliament.

Lastly, a Protestation in the Civil or Canon Law (for the Law of this Land
knows it not) is but a Testation or Witnessing beforehand of a man's own mind
or Opinion, whereby we that Protest, provide to save, and preserve our own
Right for the time to come. It concludes no man besides our selves, no Stranger
to this Act, no Heir, no Successor; but (if it be admitted) sticks, as inherent
in the Singular, and individual Person, until either the Party dies, or the
Protestation be withdrawn, and revoked. And therefore what is a Protestation
made by William Courtney, to William Laud* or by Thomas Arundel, to bind Thomas
Morton? And what one Rule in the Common Law of the Land, in the journal Book,
or in the Records of the Town, can be produced to exclude the Lords Spiritual
from sitting and Voting in Causes of Blood? They were sometimes (by the great
favor of the King, the Lords, and the Commons, not otherwise) permitted to
absent themselves; never, before this time, Commanded by the Lay-Lords, to
forbear their Votes, in any Cause whatsoever, that was agitated in Parliament.
So our Law Books say, that the Prelates by the Canon Law may make a Procurator
in Parliament when a Peer is to be Tried, which is enough to show their Right
thereunto* 10 Edward the 4 th, fol. 6. B. placit. 17. And that, it is only the
Canon Law, that inhibits them to Vote in Sanguinary Causes. Stamford pleas of
the Crown, fol. 59. The Canon Law, says Stamford, in a distinct and separated
Notion; and therefore not grown in his Age, to any such Usance or Custom, as
made it Common Law, or the Law of this Land.

Objection. But the Bishop of Lincoln (and Bishop Andrews before him) did
always forbear to Vote in Causes of Blood, and did voluntarily retire out of
the House when this Cause of the Earl of Strafford came to any serious
Agitation. Neither putting this withdrawing of the Prelates to any Vote, nor
offering to enter any Protestation.

Answer. That Bishop had no opportunity to enter Protestations, which you shall
never find to have been offered by the Prelates, but in Plein Parliaments, when
the three Bodies are together. And his voluntary withdrawing of himself, he may
live to Repent him of, if he shall hereafter be questioned for the same, at the
King's Bench or elsewhere. He was called thither by his Writ (which he did not
so easily Obtain) to sit, and not to withdraw himself from Parliament, when he
pleased. Besides his extraordinary Obligations to the Lords, at this time whom
he could not offend without great suspicion of high Ingratitude. He is the
first Prelate that ever was fetched out of the Tower, and brought to sit in
Parliament by the Black-Rod. And therefore we are not so much to consider that
Prelates Opinions, or Actions in this kind; as the reasons he gave for the
same, which (as I have heard them Rehearsed) are, to speak modestly of them, no
Demonstrations. His first and main Reason, was that of the Record and Statute
of 11 Rich. the 2 d. That it is the Honesty of that Calling, not to intermeddle
in matters of Blood. The French word Honestete, signifies decency and
Comeliness; as though it were a Butcherly and loathsome matter to be a Judge, or
to do Right upon a Malefactor, to Death or loss of Members. But this is an
Imaginary decency, never known in Nature or Scripture, (as I said before) but
begotten by Ignorance in the dark Fog and Mists of Popery. Such an Honesty of
the Clergy it was, to have a Shaven Crown, to depend upon their Holy Father the
Pope, to Plead Exemptions, and to refuse to Answer for Felonies, in the Kings
Courts, etc. All these Particulars were esteemed in those days, the Honestete
of the Clergy; and such an Honesty it was in the Prelates of England in the
loose Reign of Rich. the 2 d. to absent themselves when they listed, from this
Assembly of the Estate, contrary to the Kings Commands in the Writs of Summons,
and to the duties of their places, as Peers of Parliament. Howbeit they showed
more Courtesy (or more Wit at the least) than our present Prelates; for they
never offered to retire themselves in those days, before their Protestation
was benignly received, and suffered to be entered upon the Parliament Roll, by
the King, and the Lords, and the House of Commons. The Second Reason of this
Prelate, is of the same Nature, and built upon a Medium of Sands which is soon
undermined and washed away. That although he doubted not of the Legality or
Comeliness, of an Ecclesiastical Peer of the Kingdom of England, to Vote in a
Judgment of Blood (as they do continually in the passing of all Appeals and
Attainders in Parliament* yet because it is not the practice of Prelates in
other parts of the Christian World so to do; he thought it better to avoid
Scandal and the talk of other Nations: That there being in the High Courts of
Parliament and Star Chamber, Judges enough besides the Prelates, they might
without any prejudice to King or Country, forbear Voting in these Judicatures.
Somewhat the rather, because all our Bishops in England are Divines, and
Preachers of the Gospel, and consequently of mercy rather than of Judgment: Who
never touch upon the sharpness of the Law, unless it be to prepare men's hearts
to receive the Comfort of the Gospel.

But this Prelate cannot but know, that these Canons that Oppose the Kings
Prerogative, are taken away in the Kingdom of England by the Statute of 25
Henry the 8 th, which they are not elsewhere. And this Bishop (if he have not
forgot it) was taught all this in the Case of Irregularity pursued against
Archbishop Abbots, when this Bishop fearing the Censure of the Sorbonists in
Paris, refused to be Consecrated by Abbots; unless he the said Abbots would
procure himself absolved from that Irregularity, which he had Contracted, in
killing a man by Chance-medly, which he was enforced at the last to do, this
other Prelate (being then in his rising and warm Blood, and liking better of
many good Benefices, than of one mean Bishopric) refusing stiffly to be made
Bishop of Lincoln upon any other Condition.

For Bishops making of Procurators in Causes of Blood.
IT does not appear that Bishops ever made Protestations, or withdrew in Cases
of this Nature, before the 11th, nor after the 21 st of Rich. the 2 d.

And yet the Attainders in the 11 th year, are afterward ratified by the
Consent of the Lords Spiritual, 11 Rich. 2. as you see by their Act of consent,
Rott. 11 Rich. 2. no. 38. And the Printed Statutes.

And in his twenty first year they made Procurators, first, Thomas Percy in
Writing, 21 Rich. 2. no. 9. where you have his Proxy set down in Latin; and
then Scrop Earl of Worcester, by word of mouth. As the Roll is 21 Rich. 2. no.
50. where Scrop gives Sentence in the like Causes by virtue of that Procuration
as the Roll says.

And that this Proxy of the Prelates was not left with a Layman, for the
dispatch of other Civil Causes only, but for Judgments of Blood also, it is
appealed to all Histories and Law Books, that have been Written from that time
to this present day.

Thomas of Walsingham Lived under Henry the 6 th, and he says, that it was
exacted of the Prelates (for it was not their own seeking,) as you may see upon
the Rolls, that because they could not be present in Judgments of Blood, their
Procurator (upon the like occasion) might assent unto such a Business, Walsing.
in Rich. 2. page 354. So likewise in his Hypodigma Neustria, page 550.

Littleton Lived under Edward the 4 th, and he pronounces for himself, and all
his fellow Judges; That the Lords Spiritual who cannot consent to the Death of
a man, shall make a Procurator in the Parliament, before the Steward is to
proceed to gather Votes, etc. The Year-Book, 10 Ed. the 4 th, no. 17.

Stamford Lived under Henry the 8th, Edward the 6 th, Queen Mary. And he says
clearly, That when a Peer is Indicted of Treason, or Felony in Parliament, the
Lords Spiritual shall make a Procurator for them. Stam. Pleas of the Crown,
lib. 3. page 153.

Mr. John Seldom Lives still, than whom (peradventure) there Lived not an abler
Lawyer in both the Laws, from the 21 st of Richard the 2 d, to this day. And he
says that the Clergy by reason of the Canon Laws (not the Common Laws)
absented themselves sometimes from such Judgments, and committed their whole
Interest for the time to a Lay-Proxie. Tit. of Honor 2 d part page 704.

Lastly, for the Canon Law in this point, it is not only dispensed withal by
the Kings Summons to his Prelates, but by the Lords themselves in this very
Cause of the Earl of Strafford; by their examining of the two Archbishops, and
a Bishop for Witnesses in the said Cause; which is no less forbidden in the
Canon Law, than to Judge in Causes of Blood, Lyndwood. Fol. 146. page 2.

When the effect of this Paper was opened, and the Records, and all the Books
produced by the Bishop of Lincoln, who had been in the Tower to search the said
Records, the Lords declared and ordered, that they would use no Proxies of
their own in this Trial; with a Salvo of their Right against any other time.
And thereupon the said Bishop (finding the Inclination of the House, and
Timidity of his Brethren) offered the like Declaration, with the like Salvo, in
point of Right, for the Lords the Bishops, which was accepted of, and entered
into the Book, the Bishop of Lincoln dictating the same.

THE Bishop of Lincoln's ARGUMENTS, That Bishops ought not to Vote in
Parliament, With the Answers thereunto.
Arg. I. BEcause it is a very great hindrance to the Exercise of their
Ministerial Function.

Answer, 1. It is not so much hindrance, as their conveneing in General
Councils, Synods, Convocations, Assemblies, Classes, and the like in all the
Churches Reformed or otherwise.

2. It is propter majus bonum Ecclesiae.

3. The Apostles unnecessarily put themselves to more hindrances, to work for
their livelihood, Acts 20.24. 1 These. 2.9. 2 These. 3.8.

Arg. II. Because they do vow and undertake at their Ordination, when they
enter into Holy Orders, that they will give themselves wholly to that Vocation.

Answer, 1. This Vow and undertaking in Ministers Ordination is quite mistaken;
the words are in the Bishops exhortation, not in the Ministers Answer.

2. The Bishop hopes they will give themselves wholly to that, and not to any
other Trade or Vocation.

3. Wholly, in a Moral, and not in a Mathematical sense that will admit of no
Latitude.

Arg. III. Because Councils and Canons in several Ages do forbid them to meddle
in Secular Affairs.

Answer. 1. Councils and Canons against Bishops Votes in Parliament were never
in use in this Kingdom, and therefore they are abolished by the Statute of 25
Henry the 8 th.

2. So are they by the same Statute, because the Lords have declared, That the
Bishops Vote here by the Laws and Statute of this Realm; And all Canons that
Cross with these are there abolished.

3. So are they by the same Statute, as thwarting the Kings Prerogative, to
call Bishops by Summons to Vote in Parliament.

4. So are they by the Vote in the House of Commons, 21 Maij. 1641, Because
they are not Confirmed by Act of Parliament.

5. This Argument was deserted by Mr. Perpoint, and confessed to be but an
Argumentum ad hominem.

Arg. IIII. Because the twenty four Bishops have a dependancy upon the
Archbishops, and because of their Oath of Canonical obedience to them.

Answer. 1. They have no dependancy upon the Archbishops, but in points of
Appeal and Visitation only, and owe them no Obedience but in these two points;
None at all in Parliament, where they are Pares, they are equals, and as
Bracton tells us, Par in Parem non habet imperium. What has Canonical Obedience
to do with a Vote in Parliament, declared in this Bill to be no Ecclesiastical
but a Secular Affair?

2. This Argument reaches not the two Archbishops, discharged in the Rubric
from this Oath, and therefore is no Reason for the passing of this Bill.

Arg. V. Because they are but for their Lives, and therefore are not fit to
have Legislative Power over the Honors, Inheritances, Persons and Liberties of
others.

Ans. 1. Bishops are not for their Lives only, but for their Successors also,
in their Land and Honor: As the Earls and Barons also are for their Successors
in their Lands and Honors, and holding their Lands in Fee-Simple, may with as
good reason Vote in the Honor, Inheritance, Persons and Liberties of others,
as others may and do in theirs.

2. Many Peers have been Created for their Lives only, and the Earl of Surrey
for the Life of his Father, who yet Voted in this House.

3. The Knights Citizens and Burgesses are chosen for one Parliament only, and
yet use their Legislative Power, nor will their being Elected difference their
Case; for the Lords use that Power in a greater eminency, who are not Elected.

4. A Burgess that has a freehold but for term of Life only, may Vote and
assent to a Law in Parliament.

5. No such exception ever heard of in the Diets of Germany, the Corteses of
Spain, or the three Estates in France, where the Prelates Vote in all these
points with the Nobility and the Commons.

Arg. VI. Because of Bishops dependancy and expectancy of Translations to
places of greater profit.

Answ. 1. This Argument supposes all Kings and all Bishops to be very faulty,
if they take the time of their Votes in Parliament from these dependancies and
expectancies.

2. This may be said of all the Kings great Officers, of all the Noble Members
of both Houses, who may be conceived as well as Bishops to have their
Expectancies, and consequently to be deprived by this Reason of Voting in
Parliament.

3. This Argument reaches not at the two Archbishops, and so falls short of
the Votes which are to be taken away by this Bill.

Arg. VII. That several Bishops have of late much encroached upon the
Consciences and properties of the Subjects, and they and their Successors will
be much encouraged still to encroach, and the Subjects will be much discouraged
from Complaining against such encroachments, if 26 of that Order be to be
Judges upon these Complaints. The same Reason extends to their Legislative
Power in any Bill, to pass for the regulation of their Power, upon any emergent
inconveniency by it.

Answ. 1. This Argument fights not against Bishops Votes in Parliament, but
against their Votes in Convocation, where (if any where) they have encroached
upon the Consciences and Properties of the Subject. Nor yet at the Votes of
such Bishops there as are not guilty of this Offense. Nor need the Subject to
be discouraged in Complaining against the like Grievance, though 26 of that
Order continue Judges; for they shall not Vote as Judges in their own Cause,
when they are Legally Charged: And if they should Vote, what were that to the
purpose, when the Lay-Peers are still four to one? The Bishops (Assisted with a
double Number of Mitred Abbots and Priors) could not hinder the Laws made
against the Court of Rome, the Alien Cardinals and Prelates, the Provisors, the
Suitors to the Popes Consistory under Edw. 3 d, Rich. 2 d, and Hen. 4 th, Much
more may those emergent exhorbitances of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction be
soon curbed and redressed in this inequality of Votes between the Temporal and
Spiritual Lords. So as this Argument does not so much hurt the Votes, as it
quails the Courage of the Bishops, who may justly fear, by this and by the next
Argument, that the taking away of their Votes is but a kind of forerunner to
the abolishing of their Jurisdiction.

Arg. VIII. Because the whole Number of them is interessed to maintain the
Jurisdiction of Bishops, which has been found so grievous to the three
Kingdoms, that Scotland has utterly abolished it, and Multitudes in England
and Ireland have Petitioned against it.

Answ. 1. This Argument is not against the Vote of Bishops, but against
Episcopacy it self, which must be removed because Scotland has done so, and
some in England and Ireland would have it so, and yet peradventure ten times as
great a Number as these desire the contrary.

2. There will be found Peers enough in the Upper-House, to reform any thing
that is amiss in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, although the twenty six
Prelates should be so wicked as to oppose it; as there were found Peers enough
in that Noble House to curb the Court of Rome, and the Revenues of the
Cardinals under Edw. 3 d, to meet with the Provisors under Ric. 2 d, to put all
the Clergy into a Praemunire under Hen. 8, and to Reform the Religion 1o
Elizabeth, notwithstanding the Opposition of all the Bishops.

Arg. IX. Because the Bishops being Lords of Parliament, it sets too great a
distance betwe^^ them and the rest of their Brethren in the Ministry which
occasioneth pride in them, discontent in others, and disquiet in the Church.

Answ. This is an Argument from Moral Philosophy which affords no
Demonstrations. All are not proud that vote in Parliament, nor discontented
that are not so employed. This Argument fights only against their title of
being Lords, which is not the Question at this time.

FINIS.

