Sudorificum Regale; OR, The Royal Sudorifick.



LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Sir Richard Barker, 1676.

CHARLES R.

WHEREAS the Law made for the Encouragement of the Industry or Ingenuity or
those who produce, or Invent any New Thing, for the common benefit of this
Kingdom, does seldom take effect, by reason of the difficulty of bringing New
Inventions into notice and use; His Majesty being willing, as much as in Him
lies, to promote such Inventions, according to their worth and usefulness; And
having also an especial respect and zeal for the Health of his Subjects, does
hereby of his mere Motion and free Grace, give and grant unto Roger Brettridge
and Richard Kingsmill, Esquires, To have the whole and sole making, publishing,
uttering and selling of a certain Sudorifick, by them, or one of them, invented
and made in his Royal Elaboratory; of whose Efficacy and excellent Virtue, for
the curing sundry Diseases, as well chronical as others, safely, sweetly,
speedily and effectually, He has had assured Proof, Demonstration and
Testimony, as well from the Persons, who have taken many doses thereof, as from
those who have administered the same. And He does hereby also further Authorize
them to sell and utter into all, or any His Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions the
same, by the name of His Majesty of Great Britain's Sudorifick; and to seal the
several Parcels, or Doses thereof with his Majesty's Badg, or device of the
Rose and Crown, and C. II. R. cut in Silver.

And to the intent the said INVENTORS may have the Benefit intended them by the
Law, of the sole making and utterance of the said Sudorifick, and his good
Subjects the more speedy notice and benefit thereof, He does hereby reco^mend
the same to all Persons of Honor, Physicians, Chirurgians, and especially
those of his Fleet, Drugsters, Apothecaries, and others, to be by them promoted.

And does will and require all Persons, as they will answer the contrary at
their peril, not to counterfeit his said Seal, or Impression of his said Badge,
nor to undervalue, abuse, sophisticate or counterfeit the said Sudorifick, nor
in any-wise to oppose, or hinder the utterance, sale, or use of the said
Sudorifick, to the frustration, or hinderance of his Majesty's gracious Intent
of benefiting his Subjects in general in the concerns of their Health, and by
the INVENTORS in particular, for a Reward of their Ingenuity.

The Royal Sudorifick, with the Publication whereof I am entrusted, who so
takes, must fast three or four hours after every Dose.

In page 30. line 14. last word, Week is mistaken for Month.

Sudorificum Regale: OR, The King's Sudorifick.
CHymiatry, for so with the light change of one Letter it is more truly named
than Chemistry, is a very Ancient Art, and came, as other Learning, from the
East by Egypt to Greece, and so to the Roman Empire, and saluting Africa, as
Philosophy and Physic also did, it found kind Entertainment, and some
Improvement in those Countries, especially in the times of some more Generous
Princes; Of which Progress in those parts the Arabic Articles prefixed to
several Greek Terms of this Art, as Alambick, Alchymy, are a sufficient
Testimony. And it at all times, and in all places friendly served, and nowhere
opposed the received Principles of Physic and Philosophy. For neither indeed
belongs it any more to the Office of a Chemist, than of an Apothecary, to
dispute or take cognizance of those to them superior, and more comprehensive
Faculties. But the Study of it has been much more cultivated in later times,
by reason of the opposition that Paracelsus, and some of his followers of like
Fanatic strain, made unto the established Practice of Physic, by color of
his pretended Chemical Principles. Followers, I say, of a Fanatic strain; for
in their Contest against their Adversaries, they were not ashamed to practice
their Master's Maxim, Si Dei deficit auxilium, Diaboli succedat: and sought to
build themselves a name by raising a Babel of confused words, instead of a
reformed Art of Physic, on the ruins of all true Christian Divinity, as well
as Physic and Philosophy. Indignation as it should seem against this
Innovator, who partly concealed his Tenets in the Smoke, as I may say, and
partly endeavored to illustrate them by the Fire of this noble Art, provoked
many to follow him through both, and to attack him there whence his chiefest
Strength and Confidence seemed to arise. So it came to pass, that whereas
formerly the Generality of Physicians hardly knew what a Retort or Alambick did
mean, There are few at this day who are altogether strangers unto the more
useful Operations of this Art. And our Age seemed prone to receive with less
opposition his Maxim, who was so bold as long since to say, Medicum non posse
esse magnum, cui Chymia non sit magna. And not only in Germany, where this
Contest first began, but with us Chymiatry has of late got some Reputation,
notwithstanding the fierce oppositions of its obstinate Enemies, and is in far
greater Esteem, and flourishes more than formerly, so that now its Contemners
are forced, by reason of its fame, to pretend to know and understand something
of it; and very many of its common Inventions, and Preparations heretofore
accounted dangerous, and cried down for Poisons, are now everywhere frequent
in the Shops of Apothecaries, as well as Closets of Physicians. That excellent
Purging Extract which is in truth the Catholicon Purgans Paracelsi, now
universally used and commended, durst not appear in Italy under its Author's
name, and keeps still the disguised Title of Extractum Rudii, from the first
Publisher of it in those parts. What more suspected than Antimony, what more
frequently used at this day? If Vomiting, Purging, and Sweating could cure all
Diseases of more frequent incursion, it would bid as fair as any yet produced,
to merit the name of an Universal Medicine. For Purging, perhaps not many,
besides that already named, excel the Pulvis Comitis, wherein it is a principal
Ingredient: And there is extant a Preparation of it, that purges in an almost
unperceptible dose, sweetly and very effectually. Crocus Metallorum may perhaps
vye with all other commonly known Vomits for use and efficacy; yet are not our
Chemical Closets without more safe, gentle and effectual. There is another
Vomit known unto us no less powerful and effectual, though not yet in common
use, which being more safe and familiar, may be administered both to Children
and Ancient People, without danger or forcible straining. The Diaphoretick of
Antimony needs not my Commendations, having commended it self to all men.
Physic has advanced very little or nothing till its worthy Professors were
either awakened or assisted by this Art; and considering, the great change it
has made in Medicine since Paracelsus's time, we can hardly hope it will make
any further or more considerable progress in our days, or attain its perfection
to the cure of those formerly held incurable Diseases, Gout, Stone, etc. at any
time, without the assistance of some choice Chymical-Preparations. If the Works
of Paracelsus and his Followers (all of which may perhaps not unjustly deserve
the name of Vexations, which he gave to one of his Treatises) have, according
to the true Proverb, Vexatio dat intellectum, made so great Innovations in the
Art and Practice of Physic it self, as well as in the Materia Medica, and
produced some flashes of Light, like those that result from the Collision of
Flint and Steel, in the Contest betwixt Galenists and Paracelsians (as they
loved to mis-call them, I mean our Chemists) what might not be hoped from a
true Chymiatry, a friendly Association of Chemists in their true subserviency
to Physicians.

This Book, though it brings news of a very great Increment to the Chemical
Dispensatory, and hopes to furnish the Chymiater with another Pillar of his
Practice, nothing inferior to Antimony it self, is contented for the present
only briefly to declare the occasion, and encouragements that have been given
to its publication at this time, and to point at its force and use, reserving
the further discovery of its Nature, till public Testimony of its worth may
embolden it to put off its disguise, and like that excellent Purgative Extract
forementioned, own its true Name and Author. In the interim it is hoped, that
the Ingenuous and Candid will neither impute it to Insolence nor Presumption in
the Publishers, that they have appealed to his Majesty's Candor and Experience,
and sought Protection against the Obloquy and Detraction of the Ignorant and
Envious from his Sovereign Testimony.

And this is another Glory justly to be ascribed to Chymiatry, and here
seasonably to be remembered to the Honor of its Preparations: That whereas
Physicians of later times have withdrawn themselves from the happy and laudable
practice of the Ancients, in Preparing and Administering their own Medicines;
and laid not only the Charge and Trouble, but which is worse, the Care and
Trust, wholly upon their Servants, or Apothecaries, as a Work below and
unbecoming their Profession: Kings and Princes have not been ashamed to
inspect, but have also sometimes for their recreation put their hands to the
Preparation of the more neat, noble, and precious Chemical Medicines, and not
disdained to give them their names; and have thereby for the Honors done this
Art in their own Times, and Dominions, propagated and perpetuated their Renown
throughout the whole World, and to all succeeding Ages. Hermes, supposed the
first Author of this Art, whence it has been styled the Hermetick, was not
only a King, but, by consent of all Ages, has been acknowledged for, and
advanced to the Title of Trismegistus: which needs the favor of a candid
interpretation to keep its signification below the pride of Blasphemy, and has
left no higher for the peculiar style of God, then Optimus Maximus. And now I
have instanced in him, I will not descend to any inferior Names, having more
than sufficient cause to glory, and congratulate with this ancient, noble, and
excellent Art, and its Favorers and worthy Professors, that his Majesty has
so far owned them and it; who, as he has been very bountiful to all Ingenious
Artists, has nowhere appeared more munificent, than in the reward he has
given to those who have presented him with any worthy Chymiatrical
Preparations; and in the splendid Provision he has made for the Entertainment
of worthy Operators in this Art.

I shall not therefore need much Apology for my boldness in taking Sanctuary
under the sacred Name of his Majesty, and entitling him to our Sudorifick,
according to his gracious Concessions made in the behalf thereof.

And I am assured that unto all loyal and ingenuous Spirits, his Majesty's
Pleasure in this particular to them declared, which we have therefore caused to
be printed, and prefixed unto this Paper, will be abundant Satisfaction, as
well as sufficient Authority for this our Practice. And if it would not seem a
derogation from His, to seek Ornament or Protection from other names, We might
allege the Care of the wise Venetian, not disdaining after this manner to
provide for the true Preparation of some Chymiatrical-Medicines, and that
dangerous one in particular of Mercury sublimate, as well as that excellent
Antidote we call the Venice Treacle: By which they provide Wealth to
themselves, with Health to their Subjects. Nor does the Grand Seignior think it
below his care to make Provision of the Natural Balsam, nor of his Government,
to prevent deceit in those that gather the Medicinal Earths in his Dominions,
to appropriate a stamp unto them, which have thence the names of Terrae
Sigillatae. And it were to be wished, that for the better obviating the
frequent Mischiefs that arise from the use of pernicious, dangerous, or at best
dubious Medicines, daily published without License, Direction, or Approbation
of the Learned, by Ignorant and obscure persons, that there were some Public
Test, whereby the true Arcana of the Sons of Art might be tried, and upon proof
of their worth, might receive just Testimony and Encouragement; and the
Spurious Preparations and Sophistications of Impostors be decryed and damned,
as they deserve. Nor are we without Presidents of this Care in the most
Illustrious Persons: Galen was appointed to prepare Treacle, as he had been
instructed by Demetrius the Physician, by the Emperor Antoninus. And to
Tiberius Caesar after-ages were obliged for that excellent Composition called
Hiera Pacchii, which the Author composed with his own hands, and kept secret
all his life, and bequeathed, with a Book of Directions for its use, by his
last Will and Testament, as a most precious Legacy to that mighty Emperor;
Propter crebros fuccessus in vitiis difficillimis, as I find it commended in
the words of Scrib. Largus.

These Examples being above all Exception, may help in some part, as I hope, to
justify our Chymiater against that too well received Maxim, Medici est
praescribere, non operari. And if my Authority be not sufficient to bring this
Axiom into Reputation, That they who will not work in Physic, ought not to
live by it; I will appeal to the uncontestable Reason and Authority of that
Princely and Heroic Physician and Philosopher, thus expressed by him; Rerum
ipsarum cognitio vera e rebus ipsis est: ex Libris (solis discere)
periculosissimum: And if I may have leave to interpose my Judgment in a thing
wherein the Health and Lives of Men are so highly concerned, as well as Credit
of Physic, nothing seems more necessary and conducible thereunto, than for the
College of Physicians to imitate that practice, on far less weighty grounds
introduced into other Corporations, to make none free of their Body, but who
have served seven years Apprentiship to some learned Physician, and who have
been well versed in Botanicks, Drugs, and all Medicinal Materials, and
Chirurgical and Chemical Operations. Methinks it should not be remembered
without blushing by some, with what Confidence the young Druggist, armed and
provided with no other Ammunition than of the most common, frequently used and
prescribed Drugs, which he drew out of his Hawking-Bag, encountered them in the
face of a Parliament, presuming more on their Ignorance than his own Skill:
Nocumenta Documenta. Sure I am the operating Chymiater has much more advantage
by his commendable Industry over the unpractised Prescriber, by the knowledge
he thereby necessarily acquires of the natures of Herbs, Drugs, etc. anatomized
by the Fire, and of his Medicines extracted out of them, or compounded of them,
and thence of Diseases, and their Cures. The Instance lately given by Tachenius
of common Water, commended by a great Physician for a Cordial, will for ever
silence what can be pretended to the contrary. For want of this Skill it was
that the excellent Heurnius durst not use Oil of Aniseed in the Colic, which
he cured with its Decoction. He that will take the pains to read Tachenius his
Hippocrates Chymicus, shall thence learn the reason, with many other forcible
Arguments, proving the necessity of Practick Chymiatry. I am persuaded that at
this day after so long Practice and Experience, I shall not need to make any
long defense of our Chemical Medicines against those obsolete and antiquated
objections, or scandals rather, with which the ignorant Vulgar are deterred
from their use, to the great damage of their own health, and of Physic it
self, as well as the Experienced Physician. The Ingenious and Learned, who are
well versed in both Practices, will, I am confident, not only allow willingly
that some Ornament and Assistance may accrue unto the noble Profession of
Physic by the Chemist, but readily subscribe to his Impartial Judgment, who
having faithfully examined, and judiciously weighed what could be said on both
sides, concluded that the right Practice of Chymiatry was the highest
Perfection of Physic, and the noblest way of practicing Physic was by
Chemical Medicines.

And whereas the virtues of many Simple Medicines lie not in their whole forms,
or substances, but in many are diverse in diverse parts, and those not separable
by other than Chemical Instruments and Operations, as their Spagyrick Anatomy
does manifest: The care of the skilful Chemist is to separate what is contrary,
and retain only what is proper to effect his curative intentions without
danger, and with the least offense to his Patients. And to make use of the
Words, and therein of the Testimony of an Impartial Author; He separates the
unprofitable, improper, gross, and terrestrial, that he may make his Medicines
efficacious, acceptable, and durable. It is mere Ignorance, or Malice, which is
worse, and both wilfully affected, if any at this day pretend that Chemical
Medicines are violent or dangerous. For first, as to the intent of the Chemist,
it is plain, his purpose, endeavor, and labor is not to prepare violent and
dangerous Medicines, but to render those crude and violent ones, which are
administered by others, less hurtful, dangerous, violent, and offensive. And
there is no reason to imagine that he who studies and attains to make the
malignant, hurtful, dangerous, violent Medicines, used by others, benign,
profitable, safe, acceptable, and prides himself so much therein, should
administer them of contrary qualities. Neither in those cases, wherein the
urgency or obstinacy of the Disease requires strong Medicines, are the Chemical
prepared, more dangerous than crude and unprepared, which are prescribed by
others of necessity, who have no better, unless borrowed from the Chemists.

In the next place, As there is no ground either from the intention or operation
of the Chemist, to asperse his Medicines with the odious Epithete of dangerous
or violent, but thence it is manifest that they deserve rather the quite
contrary commendations: so neither can this be attributed to them from the
consideration of the matter of their Medicines: for crude Hellibore,
Colloquintida, Scamony, Euphorbium, etc. used by the Ancients, were rather more
dangerous and violent, and not more effectual than their Extracts and other
Preparations now in use with our Chymiaters. Witness the Purgatives above
commended, wherein the most forcible Medicines are daily used, without any bad
accidents, but what may more justly be imputed to the Physician, or Physic it
self, than to the Chemical Preparation, Medicine, or Operator.

If we proceed further, and examine the Principles according to which the
Chymiaters compose and dispense their Medicines, we may appeal to that decisive
Judgment, long since made by one, who was thoroughly experienced in both ways,
and who cannot not be justly excepted against by either, in these words;
Principia Chymica Galenicis, qui elementa tantum cognoscunt incognita, magis ad
Medicinam attinent quam elementaria.

Hither I might transcribe many things to this purpose, discussed by that
Renowned Chymiater Otto Tachenius in his late Contests with Zwelfer and others,
Correctors of the Augustan Dispensatory, wherein it does manifestly appear, how
necessary the right knowledge of those two Chemical Principles of Acid and
Alchaly is unto the right Preparation and Dispensation of Medicines; which
cannot be attained without Chemical Experiments and Operations. For want of
which Skill, Learned Men, not altogether ignorant neither of Chemistry, may run
into very great mistakes. But I refer my self in this particular to that
worthily above-commended Chymiater, whose Works now (the Jewels of private
Cabinets) will I hope shortly be as common and familiar in the Learned
Chymiatrick World, and as useful to the cure of some yet formidable Diseases,
by the skilful application of those Principles to their Remedies, as the Fire
and Water, whereunto he well resembles them. But I cannot dismiss this Learned
Witness of the usefulness of Chemical Principles and Learning, without
producing his Testimony given to the Antiquity of them, which he asserts to
have been the same with the Family of Aesculapius, for his skill in Physic
accounted a God amongst the Greeks, derived into public notice by the Works of
Hippocrates, who for his profound Learning has obtained the Title of the
Divine. And to the Apostasy made by the Galenists from his Principles, to the
more narrow and gross of the Elements, we may justly ascribe the
non-proficiency of Physic and Philosophy it self from those times until ours,
wherein some Learned Men as it were against the prescription of the Galenists,
have again endeavored to introduce his Acid, Alchaly, bitter, sour, (...);
and instead of their Fire, Air, Water and Earth, Hot, Cold, etc.

But neither may we allow ignorant or envious persons to decry strong and
vehement Medicines, or Chymiatry which produces, or Chymiaters who apply them
in such cases wherein they are necessary, And the Galenists with one consent
acknowledge those of the Shops not to be effectual: for as this cannot be
denied, that some Chemical Medicines or Preparations are the only ones, from
which it can be hoped that some stubborn and otherwise incurable Diseases can
be removed and subdued, being sufficiently testified of hundreds of Persons by
such means relieved, though not always violent, who had been given over after
Consultation; So that Axiom of the ancient, eloquent and learned Celsus, must
in all Ages stand and justifie^ ^he Learned Galenist or Chemist in the use of
violent Remedies in desperate cases; Nil refert an satis tutum praesidium sit,
quod unicum.

And here give me leave by the way, candid Reader, to assure thee, that not
only Sir Walter Rawleighs Diaphoretick of Mercury, the Treasure of some private
Closets, but other Preparations of that Metalline Spirit, may be made without
any addition of Salts or other Corrosives (for he is benign, and good with the
good, as bad with the bad) which will powerfully sweeten the Blood, and cast
off the impurities of the Body by Sweat, and other Operations. And of the truth
of this, if need were, we might produce irrefragable Testimony; and leave it to
thy own judgment to estimate what excellent Effects may be hoped from so
powerful a Medicine. I need not tell thee what Paracelsus boasted of his
Aquila, nor what others have sought and hoped to effect by it, in most
desperate malignant Diseases. The frequent use, and too frequent abuses of the
known and common Preparations of it, show how useful and grateful a Medicine it
would be when made truly benign by the Preparation of a happy Operator, who
knows to bind this hitherto incorrigible and ungovernable Fugitive to the Laws
of true Medicinal Operation. If what we now bring thee be accepted, we will not
long detain thee from a fuller discovery of this, and some other choice Jewels
of our Chymiatrical Dispensatory, which we have long sought, and now hope, if
we meet with favorable acceptance in these our first Fruits, to have occasion
and encouragement to make public, for the common good and honor of Physic
and Physicians.

But here the candid Reader will be pleased to observe with me, that Chymiatry
has introduced many gentle and familiar Medicines, by a right use whereof,
those Diseases have been and may be cured, which have been vainly attempted
with the more forcible Remedies. And it is ignorance of the ancient
Hippocratick Physic and Chymiatry is the cause, that unto this day in some
Diseases, as the Pox, etc. not only violent, but dangerous, yea horrid
Remedies, are yet in use, and poor Patients have recourse in Corners unto such
Practitioners, whose Medicines torment them more than their Diseases, and yet
delude their Expectations of perfect Cures with deceitful Palliations. To the
Hippocratick (and not Galenick Elementary Principles of Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist,
etc.) we are beholden for the Advancements our Age has made in Cure of some
Diseases, to which the most violent and destructive Remedies have been formerly
applied; because how desperate soever, they were then the only known Means
supposed to be effectual. He that desires an Infiance of this needs only call
to mind what Disease it was for which crude Mercury has been prescribed to be
taken in great quantity by the Mouth, and compare that desperate one, and other
violent Medicines prescribed in printed Books in that, and such miserable
cases, with the late familiar, easy, and almost contemptible Remedies of our
studious and ingenious Countryman. Tho Envy has deprived the World of many of
these, and is the cause that noble above-commended Chymiater has not yet
published his Viperine Antidote, appropriated by him to the cure of Venerial,
and the like Diseases, in the most choice and tender Bodies, yet are there
Instances enough of such powerful, and yet benign Remedies, as are sufficient
Testimonies to vindicate Chymiatry from being guilty of the use of violent
Remedies to desperate Diseases. And we hope this Royal Sudorifick we now
commend unto thee, will, when gotten into knowledge and esteem, tend very much
to the Reputation of this Art, quite take away the use of dangerous Mercurial
Preparations, and equalize the best Antimonial, the choice Treasures of some
Chymiatrical Closets; for which hope I have, besides Experience, good Reason
and Authority of the most Learned Chymiaters.

To these desperate Remedies in many cases, as of Gravel in the Reins in
ancient Bodies, etc. the Mineral Waters may be accounted, but none can with any
great certainty prescribe them, who are not able to judge of the Diseases and
Waters appropriate to them by true Chymiatrical Principles, and such know so
well to prepare Mineral Waters at home, that they shall not need to go so far,
or pay so dear for them, who may properly expect relief from them; of this we
have many witnesses, for whom we many years since prepared such as were not
inferior to the German Spaw. And we are assured there are amongst our Worthy
Chymiaters at Home, who know to prepare and accomodate such Remedies to the
Age, Temperature and Distempers of their Patients, that their Charge, and
Travel, and other hazards of Life and Health, weak and diseased Persons must
needs incur in such Journeys, being considered, I hope I shall be excused for
this reflection upon them as dangerous, and in some sense desperate Remedies,
to which Patients are often condemned for want of knowledge in Chymiatry.

I conclude this Discourse with that Passage which I find in a Learned and
Indifferent Physician, treating of the Subject we have now in hand, who casting
the Errors (made on both sides) off from the Noble and Excellent Art, on to
the base and ignorant Intruders on both Parties, as he justly adorneth the
learned Practisers with that glorious Eulogie, given them by the Ancients
(...), so he excludes not the Chemist from the honor of being some finger in
that hand of God, but ingenuously acknowledges, and almost unto sense
demonstrates the necessity of Chemical Preparations, saying, the Chemist is
that to Physic, which the Cook is to food. Neither would I be understood to
reflect on the Learned Galenist or Chemist; but hope it will be no blasphemy to
say of those, who trust to those Practisers, ignorant in Chymiatry, they had
need to take heed that when God sends them Physic, the Devil send them not an
ignorant, as well as unlicensed Physician: But for the sake of such to condemn
and endeavor to exclude the Chymiater, were as absurd as for the slovenliness
of some ignorant Cooks to pretend a jealousy of all, and turning them out of
the Kitchen, to reduce us to a necessity of eating raw Meats like Salvage
Beasts, or more Salvage Men.

Thus far, Courteous Reader, I have thought fit and necessary to advise thee
concerning the nature of Chemical Medicines in general, and to prevent as much
as I can, all prejudicate Opinions, that might deter thee from the use of our
Royal Sudorifick on that account.

Now, give me leave to inform thee of the Virtues and use of it in Physic; and
the manner of its Application and Operation. I need not tell thee of what great
force and esteem other Sudorificks are, especially that of Antimony; how that,
and some others have been prescribed as great Andidotes not only against simple
Agues and Fevers, but against Pestilential ones and the Plague it self, for
Cleansers and Sweetners of the Blood, for Resisters of Poison, Resolvers of
Noxious Humors, Openers of Obstructions; in which Faculties and Virtues it is
not behind, but equal, if not superior to the most and best Sudorificks, such
as are Aurum fulminans, potable Gold, made thence, Powder and Magistery of
Pearls, which may better appear by the Cures that have been done by it in the
Diseases which require Sudorificks, and others which are here set down for thy
instruction, and the manner how in every Disease in particular it is to be used
and applied.

This Sudorifick has been by experience found to be more particularly
appropriated to some Diseases, and namely for the prevention of Madness,
Smallpox, Rickets, Scurvy, Gravel, Stone, Gout, Rheumatism, by some taken for
a running Gout; Apoplexy, Palsy, Worms: in all which cases it is to be taken
at the full and new of the Moon. It prevails also very much to the cure of
those Diseases, and of many, if not all kinds of Agues, all Surfeits,
especially on Fruit, Paralitick trembling, weakness thence proceeding, Black
and yellow Jaundice, Fluxes of the Womb. There is hardly a better Remedy for
Worms, French Pox, etc. Epilepsies or Falling Sickness, Cancers and Ulcers are
helped by it; but in ^^^se last it will be needful for the Patients to have
recourse to the Publisher hereof for special Directions, according to the
several conditions of the Diseased, and their Distempers.

Some may object and say, What is one Sudorifick better than another? which if
they do, it matters not, since every knowing man will easily discern, that such
understand not the difference of well and truly prepared Medicines, from those
that are basely sophisticated, nor the great variety of different Humors and
Distempers requiring very different Resolvers and Correcters, upon whose
Operation many times Sweat succeeds by the power of Nature helped by proper
digestives, Correctives or Resolvents, much different in themselves though
generally known by the names of Diaphoreticks or Sudorificks or Cordials.
Witness that renowned modern Chymiater in his Hippocrates Chymicus, Page 132.
It is one sort of Acid which a vacuous and Alcalizate Antimony does imbibe;
Another which Pearls in the Palpitation of the Heart; Another that Crabs eyes
in Wounds and Bruises; Another that Goats blood in Pleurisies; Another that
Iron in Obstructions and Loofness; Another that the Volatile Alcalies of
Vegetables in Hecticks; Another that the Bezoar-stone in Faintings of rich men;
I say of rich men: for if the proportion of the Stone to the Acid be small, in
regard of the price of the Stone, it is prescribed in vain: For the common
opinion is, and they do say, that it expells Sweat, which yet happens not,
unless it have first consumed the morbous Acid; for they consider this Stone to
act in the Body as a Wedge driven by a Beetle, not observing, that the Foreign
Sapor being consumed by the Stone, or the like, the contraction of the Pores is
released, and then the whole Body is transpirable of it self, as Hippocrates
has taught --. I say also, there is another Acid which the Lilium of
Paracelsus does imbibe in the Dropsy; Another which the Spiritual Salt of
Tartar in the Hypochondriack Melancholy, and all other Diseases of the Spleen;
and another the Osteocolla in the fractures of the Bones. And lastly, it is
another Acid which Corals with their Specific Alcali do imbibe in the
Gonorrhea, etc.

A learned Physician in his Treatise of the Gout lately printed, discoursing of
the powerful Operations of a certain Mercury rightly applied in that Disease,
and particularly of the knotted sort deemed incureable, according to the Verse
of the Poet Ovid, generally vouched to the dishonor of Physic, Tollere
nodosam nescit Medicina Podagram; And instancing in a person quickly and
perfectly cured thereby, of a knotted Gout; gives us one Experiment accidently
made on his own body, whereby not only the difference of the Mercurial
Diaphoretick from all others in its working, but somewhat of its transcendent
power when rightly prepared, is fully made out; which I hope will not seem too
tedious, if I transcribe it hither, for the Readers better satisfaction about
the different powers of Sudorificks: He relates there, that some years before
he published that Book, whilst he viewed the Mines of Cinaber in Transylvania,
and observed the way the Miners there used, for extracting the living Mercury
from the Oar, by pounding and mixing it with Coals grossly beaten, standing
there in Earthen Vessels, his whole body from the heat of that place, and fumes
of the Mercury, did break out into sweat, whereby a swelling, which the
Physicians call a Ganglion, supposed to come from the straining of a sinew,
which had risen on his left hand some years before, and was then grown up to a
great body, and had almost deprived that part of its motion, and to which he
had in vain applied the most commended Remedies, was taken away, the matter of
it being first diffused over all the back of his hand during his sweat, and a
little after, within the space of two days quite dissipated into the Air, and
utterly disappeared; and that he was in that manner perfectly cured of that
swelling.

If any Person of Honor, Learning, Physician, or other, desire further
satisfaction in the Nature, Preparation, or Ground of the Virtues ascribed to
this Medicine, he may be attended, and further informed upon request.

Advice of the Publisher to the Reader.
Courteous Reader.
NExt after that blessed Glory and Immortality, which is the prerogative of the
Inhabitants of Heaven, there is nothing so much to be valued and labored
after, as the felicity of a long and healthful life in this World. I have
therefore greatly lamented with my self, whilst I have observed on the one
hand, many Diseases to radicate and fix themselves deep and close in the bodies
of Men and Women, and their dear Children and Relations, before they are
discovered by the Persons affected or concerned, or the Physician to whom they
repair for advice; and on the other hand so many errors committed, and sad
inconveniences thereby brought upon multitudes of People of all sorts, by
sudden and rash Attempts of intentional Cures, upon supposed curative
Indications.

These oftentimes are the causes, whereby many Distempers become incurable, and
miserably vexatious during life, which, thereby of the greatest blessing,
becomes the heaviest curse, and was in such case, as truly, as ingeniously
compared to the span of a Gouty hand, the longer it is extended, the more
painful and tormenting: so that Death it self has by some been preferred,
before such a diseased Life, and its continued Agonies. The reasons of this,
besides those abovementioned, delay and length of time running on to a
confirmation of Diseases, before their true Natures and Causes are discovered,
and sudden and rash Judgments made in those cases, are the administration of
improper Medicines, which do not only give the Disease time to grow on, and fix
it self on the Patients body, and weaken it, but many times conspire with, and
advance or confirm the Disease, and suddenly draw on Death it self. And lastly,
the pernicious effects, and cruel accidents, inseparable Consequents of
poisonous crude and untruly prepared Medicines.

For the Remedy hereunto, and thereby as much as possible to take away the
shame and reproach which lies on the Art, and discouragements which oftentimes
fall on the studious learned and ingenious Physician: It seems to me that it
would be very expedient to publish, promote, and bring into light and use some
more noble, safe, gentle, effectual and certain Remedies, which might by their
excellency and power, discountenance and exclude the dangerous, uncertain and
ineffectual Medicines now in frequent use, and sometimes necessarily retained
in practice by able Physicians, as being the only known Remedies for some
Distempers.

From these considerations of Love and Pity to my Country, and respect to the
honor of the Profession, and of the Learned and Experienced Professors of
Physic, I have oftentimes been pressed to emit something out of my many years
very chargeable and laborious Experience and Practice, which might worthily
aspire to their real Acceptance and unfeigned Approbation, as tending to the
preservation of Mankind from many miserable and deplorable grievances of
Diseases; and thereby to evince and demonstrate, that all the productions of
our Elaboratory, are not mere new nothings, as many so creperously noised about
the World, but which deservedly expect a just preference before the obsolete
and Vulgar Preparations.

Of which sort this now commended unto thee, by the Royal Name and Signature,
is not only so efficacious and powerful, as has been spoken; but also so safe
and innocent from any opposite or indirect quality to Nature, that Infants
have, and may take it with great success in most Distempers they are incident
to, without the least manifest operation, more than a moderate breathing Sweat,
which happens not neither, unless the party be required to keep a little more
warm than ordinary, but if so ordered, then its operation is, as aforesaid,
Sudorifick or Sweating moderately, and by that quality, with all its true and
noble effects, well known to the truly Learned, it roots out and cures most
Diseases, of which I here will particularly mention some, ( viz.) these
following; having not now opportunity or leisure to treat of the Causes Natural
and Accidental of each known particular Distemper, to which it is helpful.

DIRECTIONS.
Generally this Sudorifick may be taken in Conserve of Roses, or Juice of
Liquoris: for Stone, French Pox, and Scurvy, in Juice of Liquoris; for
Rhumatism in Marmolet of Quinces, or Conserve of red Roses; for the Gout in
Syrup of Elder-Berries, or Decoction of Pelitory of the Wall sweetened. Common
Dose: for a Child of one year, one grain, and so increasing to seven for one of
seven years; For a Man, 15 grains, in extraordinary cases, rising to 20, or
half a dram, in the quantity of a Hazel-Nut of Conserve, or half a spoonful or
more of Syrup, or like matter.

For those that are subject or inclinable to have the Stone or Gravel, let them
take this Medicine every night, with three or four spoonfuls of warm white Wine
after it, and the next Morning drink, after they have made water, a draught of
Wine and Water, viz. two spoonfuls of white Wine to four of Water, and so
proportionably for a draught, sweeten, or otherwise as they like it, and it
will prevent the gathering and Coagulation of the Stone, by bringing away the
Gravel. Now for those that have already the Stone, it may be taken likewise
every night with a little warm white Wine after it, and the next morning drink
a draught of white Wine and Ale proportionably, as abovesaid, of the Wine and
Water, wherein has been boiled Parsley and Mercury-roots, of each a handful,
Grumel-seeds a quarter of an ounce; and in either of these Directions to keep a
moderate diet, both as to food and drink, refraining any thing of Milk, sharp,
sour or salt things; but if extremely afflicted in this case let them repair to
us, for a farther and more particular Order and Rule, by which, and the
Blessing of God, if Nature be not too far spent, and the Parts too deeply
ulcerated, they may find certain relief as several have done.

For those that are troubled with Rheumatisms or Destructions, let them take it
a week together, every night and morning, and go about their occasions,
avoiding sharp, salt, or sour things, as aforesaid; but such as French-Wine
will agree with, in this case may drink sometimes a glass or two, but not to
exceed.

For the French Pox, those that have newly got it, and would again in a little
time be quit of it: Let them take a Dose of this Medicine every Night going to
bed, drinking only a little Mace-Ale, and be covered in a gentle breathing
Sweat for 3 or 4 Hours, and the next Morning eat a Mess of thin Broth or Water
grewel without Salt, keeping moderate Diet and Drinking, and to repair once or
twice in a Week to some able Physician for a gentle and proper Purge in that
Case: But those that are much troubled with this Distemper, and have been
already under Flux, Salivation, purging with Mercurial Medicines prepared with
Corrosives, Dyet-drinks, etc. the common long and tedious ways of curing, and
seldom perfectly cured; Such, I say, that neither are cured, nor ever like to
be cured by that way, let them take a Dose of this Medicine every Night going
to bed, with a little Mace-Ale after it, and keep in a gentle Sweat or
indifferent warm, and the next Morning take another Dose with a Mess of thin
Broth or Water-grewel after it, walking about your occasions, and observing the
same rule and a Moderate diet as aforesaid, for a Month, now and then taking a
proper and gentle Purge, and by this order you may free your self from this sad
Distemper and its dangerous Effects: If this Medicine be laid upon Shanker,
Buboes, Pustules, or any Venereal or other Ulcer that is not too deep, it
cleanses them from their Poison, defends them from their Humors coming to
them, and takes away all putrified Flesh that is in them; Wherefore it is
deservedly commended to all Chyrurgeons as one of the most Effectual Medicines
to lay a foundation for the cure of the aforesaid sores, or any other if
curable, whose Symptoms are various.

As for the Scurvy, much treated of in this our age, and many Medicines
prescribed for it, yet too often are other Distempers taken for it, by reason
of the similiariness of their Symptoms, though the Causes are quite contrary,
by which both Physician and Patient are deceived, the one in Judgment, and the
other for want of Cure: Now for those that have the real and true Scurvy, this
Medicine most certainly helps, if duly taken every Night for a time, with a
draught of warm drink and an Orange squeezed in it, going to Bed, and lying in
a breathing Sweat for two or three Hours, and for those that find only some
small Symptoms of this Distemper, and suppose it to be growing upon them; Let
them likewise take this Medicine every Night as aforesaid for a time, and it
will prevent the Scurvy for ever coming to its strength and vigor, as
sufficiently has been proved.

For the Gout, those that would be preserved from it, let them take this
Medicine two or three times a Week at Nights, with any warm thing after it, and
they shall never be troubled with it; but those that are already much afflicted
with it, may please to repair to us for further Directions and more particular
Order in this Medicine, and they may find certain Cure as many have done;
though it be a Cure difficult, and in this Nation not fully known.

FINIS.

