A REMEMBRANCER OF Excellent Men.

I. Dr. John Reynolds. II. Mr. Richard Hooker. III. Dr. William Whitaker. IV.
Dr. Andrew Willet. V. Dr. Daniel Featley. VI. Walter Norban, Esquire VII. Mr. John
Gregory. VIII. Bishop Duppa. IX. Archbishop Bramhall. X. Bishop Tailor.
Ecclus. 44. 1. Let us now praise Famous Men.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, at the Bell without Temple Bar, 1670.

TO THE Noble and Ingenious Gentleman-Scholar J. H. In hopes he will live to
increase the Number of Excellent Men. THIS REMEMBRANCER Is Dedicate by C. B.

A REMEMBRANCER OF Excellent Men.
I. Dr. John Reynolds.
[From Sir Isaac Wake's Latin Oration.]

1. HOW Frail and uncertain is the Life of Man, I wish, if it had pleased God,
we might have learned some other way, than by this present spectacle. Yet must
we not lament overmuch the death of this excellent Person, whose happiness we
cannot doubt of, being well assured of his Piety and Virtue; one, to whom no
part of felicity is wanting, but that of Virginius Rufus, to have another
Tacitus to give him a Funeral Commendation. As for me, whilst I behold this
concourse of Scholars at other times pleasant to me, now upon this occasion
sad, and call to mind the Royal tears of Xerxes poured forth at the view of his
numerous Army, I cannot choose but mourn and sigh, having before my eyes, as in
a glass, the image of your Mortality also.

2. For, who is there that in confidence of Learning, Wisdom, and Virtue, can
far extend the hope of Life, when the inexorable power above has not pleased
to spare this great propugnator of the Orthodox Religion, notwithstanding the
tears of our Mother the University, and the importunate Prayers of the grieved
Church? Certainly, if those inestimable riches of the mind, and unperishable
Graces, could impart their efficacy to the Body, and give strength and vigor
to it, Reynolds had still lived here; not according to his own desire, who
preferred Heaven, but ours, who would enjoy him: he had lived so as never to
dye, to grow old, or to be sick.

3. But to the great loss of Mankind, it falls out contrary, that the more any
man has enriched his mind with those Divine Ornaments of Learning and Wisdom,
so much the more hastily does the Soul it self, weary of her earthly
Tabernacle, aspire to a higher dwelling, and the Body having spent all the
spirits in those noble, but laboursome studies, fail and decay. This was the
Reason why this Learned Man, after so many Scholastic Victories and triumphs,
his strength of Body being wasted, breathed forth his glorious Soul, and left
us to lament his departure. Indeed he has lived long enough for himself, long
enough for Fame, (which yet he could not have outlived:) but not long enough
for the Commonwealth, which has need of so perfect a pattern of all Virtue;
not for the University, which wants that Light of Learning now extinguished;
not for the Common Interest of Religion, which being deprived of such a Patron
is liable to danger.

4. For although he has pulled off the disguise from the Roman Idolatry, and
exposed it to the hatred of God and Man; although he has almost cut the throat
of the Antichristian Monster; though he has transfixed the very heart of
Popery through the sides of Heart, yet Sanders is still untouched: but he has
felt the hand of God in the Irish Mountains, where he wandered; Bellarmine is
not quite broken; Baronius his frauds are not all discovered (not to speak of
our growing Adversaries:) In the midst of so much work, how could such a man
find the leisure to dye, the Harvest being so great, and the Laborers so few,
scarce any at all like unto him?

5. This is matter of Lamentation to the Church, whereof she is so sensible, as
if she seemed ready to faint at the Death of Reynolds. But our Mother the
University has a countenance more sorrowful (if more may be) and all bedewed
with her tears. She thinks upon nothing but her Reynolds, seems still to see
her Reynolds, to hear Reynolds, and to embrace his shadow. I cannot deny, that
our happy Mother has, in this Age, so numerous an offspring of Learned Sons,
that she may rather rejoice in her fruitfulness, than complain of her loss, and
(if ever) now take up that speech of Brasidas his Mother: Brasidas indeed was a
Worthy and Valiant man, but Sparta has many more such: Nevertheless I cannot
choose but favor and excuse her pious tears and just grief, when I consider
she has lost a person, who (let not Envy hear) so far outshined the rest of
her Sons,

8. Now let that foul impudent Railer Weston Duacens. Praef. ad Lib. de
triplici Hom. officio.
go vomit forth what scurrilities he will, and accuse our Doctor of slowness,
and of pretending Sickness. He thinks us all very dull, who held such a person
in so high Veneration, and believed him to be sick, whom (alas!) we see dead.
And yet, Weston himself, when he so inveighed against the Heads of our
University, that, even for being Married, some of them he by name accusing of
wickedness, could not find so much as one act to be reprehended in the whole
life of this most Holy man.

9. But he was far off: what did they that stood at nearer distance? They all
dearly loved the man, they loved his manners and integrity. And if perhaps his
resolute severity and stiffness of mind, without favor and partiality, might
be blamed in him; or if any thing else (but what could?) Verily that fault
would sooner become a Virtue, than our Saint be made Vicious. No question, but
he is in a blessed condition among the Holy Angels. As for us, who reverence
the Memory of this best and wisest man, we shall not doubt to pronounce, Oxford
will then be happy, when any equal and like to him shall succeed into his
place. For we may have, whom their great Eloquence, infinite Reading, sublimity
of Wit, gravity of Judgment, Virtue, Humanity, Candor, and all these showed in
excellent Monuments and Writings, may very much commend; Reynolds certainly, we
shall not have.

In B. Mariae, Ox. Maii 25. 1607.

Concerning Doctor Reynolds out of Dr. Crackanthorps Defensio Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, c. 69. p. 491. An. 1625.
DOctor Crackanthorp there tells the Archbishop of Spalato, that Dr. Reynolds
was no Puritan, (as he called him) but he himself a great Calumniator: For
first, he professed that he appeared unwillingly in the Cause at Hampton Court,
and merely in obedience to the Kings Command. And then, he spoke not one word
there against the Hierarchy: Nay, he acknowledged it to be consonant to the
Word of God, in his Conference with Heart. And in Answer to Sanders his Book of
the Schism of England, (which is in the Archbishops Library) he professes that
he approves of the Book of Consecrating and Ordering Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. He was a strict observer also of all the Orders of the Church, and
University, both in public and his own College, wearing the square Cap, and
Surplice, kneeling at the Sacrament, and he himself commemorating their
Benefactors at the times their Statutes appointed, and reading that Chapt. out
of Ecclesiasticus, which is on such occasions used. In a Letter also of his to
Archbishop Bancroft (then in Dr. Crackanthorp's hands) he professes himself
conformable to the Church of England willingly, and from his heart, his
Conscience admonishing him so to be. And thus he remained persuaded to his last
breath, desiring to receive Absolution according to the manner prescribed in
our Liturgy, when he lay on his Deathbed. Which he did from Dr. Holland the
Kings Professor in Oxford, kissing his hand in token of his love and joy, and
within a few hours after resigned up his Soul to God.

II. Mr. Richard Hooker.
[From Mr. Isaac Walton.]

1. HIS Schoolmaster persuaded his Parents (who intended him for a Prentice) to
continue him at School till he could find out some means, by persuading his
rich Uncle, or some other charitable person, to ease them of a part of their
care and charge; assuring them that their Son was so enriched with the
Blessings of Nature and Grace, that God seemed to single him out as a special
Instrument of his Glory. And the Good man (whose name I am sorry I am not able
to recover) told them also, that he would double his diligence in instructing
him, and would neither expect nor receive any other reward, than the content of
so happy an employment.

2. His Parents and his Master laid a Foundation for his future happiness, by
instilling into his Soul the Seeds of Piety, those conscientious Principles of
loving and fearing God, a Belief that he knows the very secrets of our Souls,
that he punishes our Vices, and rewards our Innocence; that we should be free
from Hypocrisy, and appear to man what we are to God, because first or last
the crafty man is caught in his own snare. These seeds of Piety were so
seasonably planted, and so continually watered with the dew of Gods blessed
Spirit, as has made Richard Hooker honored in this, and will continue him to
be so to succeeding Generations.

An. 3. Eliz. John Hooker gave Bishop Jewel a Visit at Salisbury, and besought
him for Charity sake to look favorably upon a poor Nephew of his, whom Nature
had fitted for a Scholar, but the estate of his Parents was so narrow, that
they were unable to give him the advantage of Learning; and that the Bishop
would therefore become his Patron, and prevent him from being a Tradesman; for
he was a Boy of remarkable hopes. The Bishop appointed, the Boy and his
Schoolmaster should attend him about Easter next following; and then after some
questions and observations of the Boy's Gravity and Behavior, gave his
Schoolmaster a reward, and an annual Pension to his Parents, promising also to
take him into his Care.

4. An. 1567. About the 14th. year of his Age the Bishop commended Hooker to
Dr. Cole President of C. C. College, who provided for him both a Tutor (which
was said to be John Reynolds) and a Clerks place; which though not a full
maintenance, yet with the Contribution of his Uncle, and the continued Pension
of his Patron the good Bishop, it gave him a comfortable subsistence. And in
this condition he continued unto the 18th. year of his Age, still increasing in
Learning, and Prudence, in Humility and Piety.

5. About this time of his Age he fell into a dangerous Sickness, which lasted
two months; all which time his Mother having notice of it, did in her hourly
Prayers as earnestly beg his life of God, as the Mother of St. Augustine did
that he might become a true Christian; and their Prayers were both so heard as
to be granted. Which Mr. Hooker would often mention with much joy, and as often
pray, That he might never live to occasion any sorrow to his good Mother, whom
he loved so dearly, that he would endeavor to be good, even as much for hers
as for his own sake.

6. As soon as he was perfectly recovered from this Sickness, he took a Journey
from Oxford to Exeter to satisfy and see his good Mother, and by the way
visited the good Bishop. See a former Vol.
After his return to his College, came sad news of the death of his Learned
and Charitable Patron. But Dr. Cole raised his Spirits, and bad him go
cheerfully to his Studies, and assured him he should not want.

7. A little before his death Bishop Jewel meeting with Bishop Sandys (who had
been his companion in exile) began a story of his Hooker, and in it gave such a
Character of his Learning and manners, that though Bishop Sandys was educated
in Cambridge, where he had obliged and had many Friends; yet his Resolution
was, that his Son Edwin should be sent to Corpus Christi College in Oxford,
and by all means be Pupil to Mr. Hooker, though his Son Edwin was then almost
of the same Age. For, said the Bishop, I will have a Tutor for my Son, that
shall teach him Learning by Instruction, and Virtue by example. And doubtless,
as to these two, a better choice could not be made. For by great industry added
to his great Reason, He did not only know more, but what he knew, he knew
better than other men. And such was his pious behavior, that in four years he
was but twice absent from the ChappelPrayers: and there he showed an awful
Reverence of that God which he worshipped. He was never known to be angry, or
passionate, or extreme in any of his desires; never heard to repine or dispute
with Providence, but by a quiet gentle submission bore the burden of the day
with patience. And when he took any liberty to be pleasant, his wit was never
blemished with Scoffing, or the utterance of any conceit that bordered upon, or
might beget a thought of looseness in his hearers.

8. In the 19th. year of his Age, December, 24. 1573. he was chosen to be one of
the 20 Scholars of the Foundation. And Feb. 23. 1576. his Grace was given him
for Inceptor of Arts, Dr. Herbert Westphaling, a man of note for Learning,
being then Vicechancellor. The Act following he was completed Master, his
Patron Doctor Cole being Vicechancellor that year, and his dear Friend Mr.
Henry Savil of Merton College, being then one of the Proctors: That Savil,
which afterward founded two famous Lectures in the Mathematics, and enriched
the world with that laborious and chargeable Edition of St. Chrysostomes Works
in Greek.

9. And in this year 1577. Mr. Hooker was chosen Fellow of the College, happy
also in being the Contemporary and Friend of Dr. John Reynolds, and of Dr.
Spencer: both which were after successively made Presidents of that College,
men of great Learning and Merit, and famous in their Generations. Happy he was
also in the Pupillage and Friendship of his Edwin Sandys (after, Sir Edwin
Sandys, known by his Speculum Europae) and of George Cranmer (the Great
Archbishop and Martyr's grand Nephew, a Gentleman of Singular hopes:) both
whom, a desire to know the Affairs, and Manners, and Learning of other Nations,
that they might thereby become the more serviceable unto their own, made to put
off their Gowns, and leave Mr. Hooker to his College and private Studies.

10. Thus he continued his Studies in all quietness for the space of three or
more years; about which time he entered into Sacred Orders, and was made Deacon
and Priest, and not long after in obedience to the College Statutes being to
Preach at St. Paul's Cross, London, to London he came to the Shunamites house (a
house so called, for that beside the Stipend paid the Preacher, there is
provision made for his Lodging and Diet two days before and one day after his
Sermon:) but to this house Mr. Hooker came so wet, so weary, and
weather-beaten, that hardly with much diligent attendance was he enabled to
perform the office of the day, which was in or about the year 1581.

11. An. 1584. December. 9. he was presented by John Cheney Esquire, to a Country
Parsonage, which was Draiton-Beauchamp in Buckinghamshire, not far from
Alesbury, and in the Diocese of Lincoln, where he continued about a year; in
which time his two Pupils, Edwin Sandys, and George Cranmer, were returned from
Travel, and took a Journey to see their Tutor; where they found him with a Book
in his hand, (it was the Odes of Horace) being then tending his small allotment
of Sheep in a common field: which he told his Pupils he was forced to do, for
that his Servant was gone home to dine, and assist his Wife to do some
necessary household business. When his Servant returned and released him, his
two Pupils attended him to his house, where their best entertainment was his
Company; and having stayed till next morning (which was time enough to discover
and pity their Tutors condition) and having given him as much present comfort
as they were able, they return to London. Then Edwin Sandys acquaints his
Father of his Tutors sad case, and solicits for his removal to some Benefice
that might give him a more comfortable subsistence.

12. Not long after Mr. Alvie, Master of the Temple died (a man of strict Life,
of great Learning, and of so venerable behavior, as to gain such a degree of
Love and Reverence from all men, that he was generally known by the name of
Father Alvie) into whose place Bishop Sandys commended Hooker with such
effectual earnestness, and so many testimonies of his worth, that he was sent
for to London, and there the place was proposed to him by the Bishop, as a
greater freedom from cares, and the advantage of a better Society, a more
liberal Pension than his Country Parsonage did afford him: and at last
notwithstanding his averseness he was persuaded to accept of the Bishops
proposal, being by Patent for life made Master of the Temple, March, An. 1585.

13. Mr. Walter Travers was Lecturer at the Temple for the Evening Sermons, a
man of competent Learning, of a winning Behavior, and a blameless Life, but
ordained by the Presbytery in Antwerp. He had hope to set up the Geneva
Government in the Temple, and to that end used his endeavors to be Master of
it; and his being disappointed by Mr. Hookers admittance, proved some occasion
of opposition betwixt them in their Sermons. Many of which were concerning the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Ceremonies of this Church; insomuch that, as one has
pleasantly expressed it, The Forenoon Sermon spoke Canterbury, and the
Afternoon Geneva.

14. The oppositions became so visible, and the Consequences so dangerous
(especially in that place) that the prudent Archbishop put a stop to Mr.
Travers his Preaching, by a positive Prohibition. Mr. Travers appeals, and
Petitions her Majesty and the Privy Council to have it recalled, but in vain:
For the Queen had entrusted the Archbishop with all Church Power. Hereupon the
party, intending the Archbishop's and Mr. Hooker's disgrace, privately printed
the Petition, and scattered it abroad. Now is Mr. Hooker forced to appear
publicly, and print an Answer to it: which he did, and it proved a full
Answer, writ with such clear Reason, and so much Meekness, and Majesty of
Style, that the Bishop began to wonder at the man, to rejoice that he had
appeared in his cause, and disdained not earnestly to beg his friendship, even
a familiar friendship with a man of so much quiet Learning and Humility.

15. The Foundation of his eight Books of Ecclesiastical Polity was laid in
the Temple, but he found it no fit place to finish what he had there designed,
and therefore solicited the Archbishop for a remove, saying, When I lost the
freedom of my Cell, which was my College, yet I found some degree of it in my
quiet Country Parsonage. But I am weary of the noise and oppositions of this
place. And indeed God and Nature did not intend me for Contentions, but for
Study and Quietness. I have begun a work in which I intend the Justification of
our Laws of Church Government, and I shall never be able to finish it, but
where I may study and pray for Gods Blessings upon my Endeavors, and keep my
self in peace and privacy, and behold Gods Blessing spring out of my Mother
Earth, and eat my own Bread without oppositions; and therefore, if your Grace
can judge me worthy such a favor, let me beg it, that I may perfect what I
have begun.

16. About this time the Rectory of Boscum in the Diocese of Sarum, and six
miles from that City became void: to which Mr. Hooker was presented (in the
vacancy of that Bishopric) by the Archbishop of Canterbury in the year 1591.
And in the same year, July 17. was he made a minor Prebend of Salisbury, the
Corpse to it being Nether Havin, about ten miles from that City; which Prebend
being of no great value, was intended chiefly to make him capable of a better
preserment in that Church. In this Boscum he continued till he had finished
four of his eight proposed Books, and these were published with that large and
affectionate Preface, An. 1594.

17. The Parsonage of Bishops-Borne in Kent three miles from Canterbury, is
that Archbishops Gift. In the latter end of the year 1594. Dr. William Redman,
the Rector of it, was made Bishop of Norwich, by which means the power of
presenting to it was pro ea vice in the Queen. And she presented Hooker, whom
she loved well, to this good living of Borne, July 7.1595. In which Living he
continued till his death, without any addition of dignity or profit. His fifth
Book of Eccl. Polity was Printed first by it self (being larger than his first
four) and dedicated to his Patron Archbishop Whitgift, An. 1597.

18. These Books were read with an admiration of their excellency in this, and
their just same spread it self into Foreign Nations. Dr. Stapleton having read
the first four, boasted to Pope Clement VIII. That a poor obscure English
Priest had writ four such Books of Laws and Church Polity, and in a style that
expressed so grave and such humble Majesty, with clear demonstration of reason,
that in all his reading he had not met with any that exceeded him. And the Pope
having heard the Doctor interpret to him a part in Latin, said, There is no
Learning this man has not searched into; nothing too hard for his
understanding: this man indeed deserves the name of an Author: Books will get
reverence by Age; for there is in them such seeds of eternity, that if the rest
be like this, they shall last till the last fire shall consume all Books.

19. King James also, at his first coming into this Kingdom, enquiring of the
Archbishop Whitgift for his friend Mr. Hooker, and being answered that he died
a year before Queen Elizabeth, who received the sad news of his death with very
much sorrow, replied, And I receive it with no less, that I shall want the
desired happiness of seeing and discoursing with that man, from whose Books I
have had so much satisfaction: Adding, Though many other write well, yet in the
next Age they will be forgotten: but doubtless there is in every page of
Hooker's Book the Picture of a Divine Soul; such Pictures of Truth and Reason,
and drawn in so sacred colors, that they shall never Fade, but give an
immortal memory to the Author. Nor did that learned King use to mention him
without the title of Learned, or Judicious Hooker: nor his Son, our late King
Charles the First, without the same reverence; enjoining his Son our present
Sovereign to be studious in Mr. Hookers Books. What the Learned Cambden, (where
he notes the death of Hooker, and Commends his Modesty and other Virtues)
wished, That for the honor of this, and benefit of other Nations, those Books
were turned into the Universal Language, is now accomplished by the happy Pen
of Dr. John Earl Lord Bishop of Salisbury, a man like unto Hooker, for his
innocent Wisdom, sanctified Learning, and Pious, Peaceable, Primitive Temper.

20. Mr. Hooker's Parsonage of Borne being near the common Road that leads from
Canterbury to Dover, many moved by the Fame of his Learning and Holiness turned
out of their way, and others (Scholars especially) came purposely to see the
man: A man in poor Clothes, his Loins usually girt in a course Gown or
Canonical Coat, of a mean Stature, and Stooping; and yet more lowly in the
thoughts of his Soul (so mild and humble that his poor Parish-Clerk and he did
never talk, but with both their Hats on, or both off at the same time)
short-sighted; his Body worn out, not with Age, but Study and Mortification:
his Face full of Heat-Pimples, begot by his unactive and Sedentary Life. Here
he gave a Holy Valediction to all the pleasures and allurements of Earth,
possessing his Soul in a Virtuous Quietness, in Constant Study, Devout Prayers,
and heavenly Meditations.

21. His use was to Preach once every Sunday, and hear his Curate to Catechize
after the second Lesson in the Evening Prayer: his Sermons were neither long
nor earnest, but uttered with a Grave Zeal, and an Humble Voice: his eyes
always fixed on one place to prevent his imagination from wandering; insomuch
that he seemed to study as he spoke. The design of his Sermons, (as indeed of
all his Discourses) was to show reasons of what he spoke; and with these
Reasons such a kind of Rhetoric, as did rather convince and persuade, than
frighten men into Piety; studying not so much for matter (which he never
wanted) as for apt illustrations to inform and teach his unlearned hearers by
familiar Examples, and then make them better by convincing Applications.

22. He never failed, the Sunday before every Ember-week to give notice of it
to his Parishioners, persuading them both to Fast, and then to double their
Devotions for a Learned and Pious Clergy; but especially the last: saying
often, That the Life of a Pious Clergyman was Visible Rhetoric, and so
convincing, the most Godless men (though they would not deny themselves the
enjoyment of their present Lusts) did yet secretly with themselves like those
of the strictest Lives. He did usually every Ember-week take from the
Parish-Clerk the Key of the Church-Door, and lock himself up there many hours,
and the like, most Fridays and other days of Fasting.

23. He would by no means omit the customary time of Procession, persuading all
both Rich and Poor, (if they desired the preservation of Love, and their
Parish-Rights and Liberties, to accompany him in his perambulation: and most
did so. In which he would usually express more pleasant discourse than at other
times, and drop some good Sentences and Observations to be remembered by the
Young people; still enclining all his Parishioners to mutual Love and Kindness.

24. He would often Visit the Sick unsent for, supposing that the fittest time
to discover those errors, to which health and prosperity had blinded them: and
having by pious Reasons and Prayers molded them into holy Resolutions for the
time to come, he would incline them to Confession, and bewailing of their Sins,
with purpose to forsake them, and then to receive the Communion, both as a
strengthening of those Holy Resolutions, and as a Seal betwixt God and them of
his Mercies to their Souls, in case that present Sickness did put a period to
their lives.

25. He was diligent to prevent Lawsuits, still urging his Neighbors to bear
with each others infirmities, and live in love, Because he that lives in Love
lives in God, for God is Love. And to maintain this holy fire of Love
constantly burning on the Altar of a pure heart, his advice was to watch and
pray, and always keep themselves fit to receive the Communion, and then to
receive it often; for it was both a confirming and increasing of their Graces.
This was his advice: And at his entrance or departure out of any house, he
would usually speak to the whole Family and bless them. And though in this
declining Age such examples are almost incredible, yet let his memory be blessed
with this true Recordation: Because he that praises Mr. Hooker, praises God,
who has given such gifts unto men. And let this invite posterity to imitate
his Virtues.

26. In the year 1600. and of his age 46. he fell into a sickness, occasioned
by a cold taken in his passage betwixt London and Gravesend. But a submission
to his will that makes the Sick man's bed easy by giving rest to his soul, made
his very Languishment comfortable. And yet all this time he was solicitous in
his Study, and said often to Dr. Saravia, Prebend of Canterbury (with whom he
entered into a sacred Friendship at his coming to Borne, who saw him daily, and
was the chief comfort of his life;) That he did not beg a long life of God for
any other reason, but to live to finish his three remaining Books of Polity;
and then, Lord let thy Servant depart in Peace, said he. And God heard his
Prayers, although he denied the Church the benefit of them, as Completed by
himself: and it is thought he hastened his own death, by hastening to give life to
his Books. But this is certain, that the nearer he was to his Death, the more
he grew in Humility, in holy Thoughts, and Resolutions.

27. In this time of his Sickness, and not many days before his death, his
house was robbed; of which he having notice, his question was, Are my Books and
written Papers safe? And being answered that they were, his reply was, Then it
matters not, for no other loss can trouble me.

28. About one day or two before his death, Dr. Saravia, who knew the very
secrets of his soul (for they were supposed to be Confessors to each other)
came to him, and after a Conference of the benefit of the Churches Absolution,
it was resolved that the Doctor should give him both that, and the Sacrament
the day following. Which being performed, he returned early the next morning,
and found Mr. Hooker deep in Contemplation, and not inclinable to discourse;
which gave the Doctor occasion to require his present thoughts; to which he
replied, That he was meditating of the number and nature of Angels, and their
blessed Obedience and Order, without which peace could not be in Heaven. And
oh! that it might be so on earth. And a little afterward, Lord show Mercy to
me, and let not death be terrible, and then take thine own time, I submit to
it: let thy will be done. And after a little slumber, Good Doctor (said he) God
has heard my daily Petitions, for I am at peace with all men, and he is at
peace with me: And from that blessed assurance, I feel that inward joy, which
this world can neither give, nor take from me. Then after a short conflict
betwixt Nature and Death, a quiet sigh put a period to his last breath, and he
fell asleep.

29. He died in the 46. or 47. year of his Age, Mr. Cambden who has the year
1599. and the Author of that Inscription on his Monument at Borne, who has
1603. are both mistaken. For it is attested under the hand of Mr. Somner,
Canterbury-Register, that Richard Hooker's Will bears date October. 26. 1600. and
that it was proved December. 3. following. He left four Daughters, and to each of
them 100. l. his Wife Jone his sole Executrix, and by his Inventory his Estate
(a great part of it being in Books) came to 1092 l. 9 s. 2 d. His youngest
Daughter Margaret was Married unto Ezekiel Clark a Minister near Cant. who left
a Son Ezekiel, at this time Rector of Waldron in Sussex.

30. [ Dr. Henry King Bishop of Chichester in a Letter to Mr. Walton.] My
Father's knowledge of Mr. Hooker was occasioned by the Learned Dr. John
Spencer, who after the Death of Mr. Hooker, was so careful to preserve his
three last Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, and other Writings, that he
procured Henry Juckson then of C. C. College to transcribe for him all Mr.
Hookers remaining written Papers, many of which were imperfect; for his Study
had been rifled or worse used by Mr. Clark, and another of Principles too like
his. These Papers were endeavored to be completed by his dear Friend Dr.
Spencer, who bequeathed them as a precious Legacy to my Father, then Bishop of
London. After whose death they rested in my hand, till Doctor Abbot then
Archbishop of Canterbury Commanded them out of my Custody. They remained, as I
have heard, in the Bishops Library till the Martyrdom of Archbishop Laud, and
were then by the Brethren of that Faction given with the Library to Hugh
Peter's: and although they could hardly fall into a fouler hand, yet there
wanted not other endeavors to corrupt them and make them speak that Language
for which the Faction then fought: which was, to subject the Sovereign power to
the people. Thus for Bishop King.

31. Soon after Mr. Hooker's death, Archbishop Whitgift sent for Mrs. Hooker to
Lambeth, and examined her concerning those three last Books: to whom she
confessed, That Mr. Clark, and another Minister near Canterbury came to her,
and desired that they might go into her Husbands Study, and

III. Dr. Will. Whitaker.
[From the Latin Life before his Works.]

1. NAzianzen says, Let a Minister teach by his Conversation also, or not
teach at all: Herein showing his Zeal, rather than his Judgment: for Christ
would have the Doctrine even of the impure Pharisees, sitting in Moses Chair,
to be heard, and his Apostle rejoices that Christ is preached howsoever,
though out of Envy and Contention. Nevertheless, it is true, the Doctrine is
more accepted, when it is delivered by a Clean hand; and when the Will of God
is declared to us by one that does it. The more worthy is the holy and learned
Whitaker to be set forth, whose great care was, Vertere verba in opera, as St.
Jerome speaks, to be an example of what he taught; and who deserved a better Pen
(an Homer to describe this Achilles) than mine: yet shall I endeavor to
recompense the want of Oratory, by my diligence and Fidelity in the Narration.

2. He was born in Lancashire at Holme, in the Parish of Burnbey, a mountainous
place, in such an Air as is fittest to cherish a purer Wit: his Parents both of
good Families and noble Alliance. Having passed his Childhood under their
Tuition, and learned the first Rudiments of Grammar under his Master Hartgrave
(to whom afterward he was a good Benefactor:) at 13 years of age, his Uncle Dr.
Nowell, the famous Dean of Paul's, for his better Education, sent for his Nephew
into his house, and kept him in Pauls-School till he was fit for the University.

3. At the age of 18. the good Dean sent him to Cambridge, and placed him in
Trinity-Colledge under the care of Mr West; where for his proficiency in
Manners, and Learning, he was chosen first Scholar, then Fellow of the House,
and performed both his private and public Exercises with such commendation,
that in due time he was honored with his Degrees in the Arts; and having with
much applause attained them, gave not himself to ease, as many do, but followed
his Studies with greater vehemence.

4. His first fruits he gratefully paid to his Reverend Uncle, in the
Translation of his Elegant Latin Catechism into as Elegant Greek. And further
to show his Affection to the Church of England, he rendered the Liturgy, or
Divine Service into pure Latin. Lastly he adventured upon a greater work, and
excellently translated into the Latin Tongue that learned Defense of Bishop
Jewel against Harding, wherein 27 Theses are maintained out of the Monuments
of Fathers and Councils within the first 600 years after Christ: A work of
great use to the Church, and promising that the Translator would in time be
Author of the like.

5. After he had performed a solemn exercise at the Commencement, being upon a
dissension between the Proctors chosen to be Father of the Artists (whose
office is to praise, encourage, and exhort the proceeders, and to handle some
Questions in Philosophy) and had thereby filled the University with admiration
of his Learning and Eloquence, he applied himself mainly to the study of
Divinity, and to the reading of Holy Scripture; to which he ever attributed all
Authority in matters of Faith, and Controversies of Religion. Yet he dilihently
turned over the Writings of Modern Divines: and such was his indefatigable
pains, within few years he read over all the sound and most useful Books of the
Fathers, both Greek and Latin; setting himself a daily task, which if he were
interrupted, and lost any time in his daily business by visit of friends, his
manner was to make it up by his night watchings. But by this custom, though he
gained knowledge, he impaired his health; neither the firm constitution of his
Body, nor his temperate diet, nor the Recreation he sometimes used, by
Shooting, by Angling, and (when the season of the year would not suffer these)
by the Philosophical Game at Chess: I say, none of these could make amends for
the injuries his health received from his immoderate Studies.

6. However, he pleased himself in the daily increase of his large stock of
Learning, and thereby was most dear to the Learned Master of his College,
Doctor Whitgift; not only intimate with him, whilst he continued Master, but
after he was advanced to the highest place of the Church, still accounted as a
most beloved Son. Together with daily and nightly reading of good Authors, he
was much and frequent in all exercises, Commonplacing in the Chapel,
CountryPreaching, and Domestic Catechizing in the same College: to which add
his three solemn Lectures for his degree of Bachelor in Divinity. In all which
I know not whether he showed himself a more learned Divine, or more pious
Christian.

7. Those were but Specimens and Documents of his future excellencies. For at
the public Commencement, An. 1578. at St. Mary's he preached the Latin-Sermon,
Learned, Pious, Eloquent. Then he handled two Theological Questions, and
answered in the Schools solidly and subtly; to the satisfaction of all. And
yet they were not satisfied, for our Whitaker was called again into the Battle,
to defend certain Theses (which he did with great sufficiency) against the
opposition and assault of the Heads of Colleges, and other the most able
Doctors of the University.

8. This Victory being obtained, he rested himself a while in his College;
yet, so as to prepare himself for more work. And that was cut out for him, when
by the remove of Doctor Chaderton, from the Doctoral to the Episcopal Chair,
our Whitaker was chosen Regius Professor in his room; the Electors passing by
his Seniors, and preferring him, for his great reading and judgment surpassing
his years and standing. Although this high dignity was conferred on him, not by
his own ambitious suit, but for his merit and worth, and the good trial the
University had of him; yet his friends were a little doubtful how he would bear
the Envy and burden of the place: comforting themselves nevertheless, and
hoping good success, as being assured by his Sobriety and Prudence, in such
years, together with his industry in Studies, and his unfeigned Piety and
Devotion.

9. Nor were they deceived in their hopes; for no sooner had he settled him to
his Lectures, but they found all things in him, requisite in an excellent
Divine, and a most exercised Professor; various Reading, sharp Judgment, easy
and pure Expression, sound and solid Doctrine: all these (which indeed are all
commendable) shined forth in his first prelections. Whereupon, his Fame is
spread through the University, and the Students flock unto him in greater
Numbers, and attend with greater earnestness, and write his Dictates. His first
endeavors were in the interpretation of the three first Chapters of St. Luke:
next he ran over all the Epistle to the Galatians: then he attempted St. Paul's
First to Timothy: whence he proposed many useful observations for young
Divines: Lastly, he explained the Song of Solomon. And so laying aside the
Interpretations of Scriptures, An. 1585. Feb. 17. he began to bend his Forces
to the Controversies of Religion between us and the Papists.

10. But before this An. 1581. in his answer to Campians 10 Reasons, he
disarmed that vaunting Adversary; and after him, replied to Duraeus (who
engaged in the quarrel on Campians behalf) and stopped the mouth of that
railer, using such civility and wit, and evidence in these two Books, that
himself was thereby much honored, and the Cause of our Church very much
advantaged. His next opposite was Saunders, a notable English Papist, against
whose demonstrations of Antichrist, our Whitaker published an Answer, with an
Appendix, his Thesis de Antichristo, when he commenced Doctor. This Answer to
Saunders gave him another Adversary, Reynolds, whose aspersions he vouchsafed
to wipe off, and then set upon a more noble Champion Bellarmine.

11. And first he began with the Controversy de Scripturis, which he proposed
Methodically, and treated on accurately in six questions, published by himself,
An. 1588. So proceeding orderly, he went through the Controversies. De
Ecclesia, De conciliis, De Romano pontifice, De Ministris, De Mortuis, De
Ecclesia Triumphante, De Sacramentis, De Baptismo, De Eucharistia. All which as
he had handled with the Admiration and Applause of his Auditors, so they wished
he had time to revise them, and set them forth in Print. But the Professor
being carried on with a desire of confuting Bellarmine throughout, laid by his
former Lectures, expecting at length some convenient time to publish them:
which God was not pleased to afford him, but took him away (too soon for us)
from fighting his Battles in defense of truth, to receive the Crown he had
ready for him. In all those Controversies, his assiduity and diligence was very
great, reading twice or thrice every week in Term time, except hindered by some
weighty business, which seldom happened, and was carefully avoided: He dealt
with his Adversary civily, and ingenuously, not disparaging, but making the
best of his Arguments, finding out and showing the Knot, and then dexterously
untying it: such was his Candor, that Bellarmine himself is said to have
gratefully acknowledged it.

12. Nevertheless, Stapleton (Bellarmine being silent) finding a sore place of
his ( lib. 9. Princip. Doct.) gently touched by Whitaker, kicks at him, and
casts upon him whole loads of Reproaches and Slanders, without wit or modesty,
in a Book written (as he pretends) at his spare hours, in answer to the third
Question of the second Controversy. To which Whitaker speedily prepares a
Reply, somewhat more sharp than his manner was (for some Diseases must have
strong Medicines) and so fully and clearly refutes all his Reasons and
Reproaches, that the Lovain Doctor had no more spare hours, not play days, to
write any more against Whitaker: neither are those mad and unsavory words, (
Doctor indocte, disputator absurd, professor asinine, Magister mendax, etc)
any more heard, touching the most perfect and most Modest Divine of our Age.

13. It is to be wished, that the rest of Dr. Whitakers Writings may come to
light: namely, several Sermons ad clerum, preached in the beginning of every
year: Brief determinations of Theological Questions in the Schools, very many,
and written with his own hand: Fuller and more exact determinations of
questions at the Commencement, of the same number with his Latin Sermons: a
Book against Stapleton, De originali peccato, written fair and prepared for the
Press: The loss of these we may impute to his Immature Death. For by a winter
Journey to London, and immoderate watching, he contracted a Disease, whereof he
died peaceably, breathing out his Spirit sweetly as an infant, and saying, He
desired to live no longer, unless for Gods Honor and the Churches service. He
was honorably buried in his College, (having been Regius Professor An. 16.
Head of St. John's, An. 9.) December. 1595. AEt. 47.

IV. Dr. Andrew Willet.
[ From Dr. Peter Smith.]

1. THere is no way more expedite of instruction to good life (as Polybius
wisely observes) than by the knowledge of things past, and of the noble acts
of famous Worthies: their Histories are our Documents, and their honors our
incitements; whereas Fame contemned brings contempt of Virtue. We are not
easily moved with Precepts; Examples are more powerful. Wherefore I have
adventured briefly to sum up a few remarkable passages of the Life and Death of
the Laborious and Learned Dr. Willet, whose worth in the full Latitude cannot
easily be expressed, and my guide herein shall be either certain knowledge or
most credible relation.

2. It was ever esteemed no mean blessing to be well descended; and though thy
Fathers goodness shall avail thee little, if thou be not good, yet it
avails much to make thee good. Such a good Father had this worthy man, by
name Mr. Thomas Willet a grave Divine, who in his younger time was Sub-Almoner
unto that Reverend Prelate Dr. Cox Eleemosynary and Schoolmaster unto Edward
VI. our Englands young Josiah of most blessed memory: After whose death, Dr.
Cox being in Exile during the Reign of Queen Mary, this Mr. Willet was not only
deprived of his Service, but enforced for his Conscience to forsake his first
Promotion in the Church of Windsor, and to betake himself to the House of a
truly noble Gentleman, who was a faithful Obadiah, and hid him in those days of
persecution. But when Dr. Cox, by Queen Elizabeth, was advanced to the
Bishopric of Ely, his ancient Chaplain then repairs unto him, is lovingly
embraced and preferred to a Prebend in his Church: And afterward, when a
Messenger told the good Bishop the Parson of Barley in Hartfordshire was dead,
the Bishop replied He is not dead. And when the party avowed he was dead, the
Bishop again replies, I tell you the Parson of Barley is not dead, for there he
sits, pointing at Mr. Willet, who was then sitting at the Table.

3. The Rectory being thus added to his other means, did now enable him to do
works of Charity: and as he had freely received, so he freely gave. He
remembered that he had been the Dispenser of a Princes Alms, and still retained
a magnificent mind that way. His Wife was as nobly minded, and as free. In her
elder years, when her Children were disposed of in the world, her manner was to
call her poor Neighbors in, and feeding them to say, Now again have I my
Children about me. Thus they laid up blessings for their seed, were preserved
(...) upon an unexpected accident befalling a Proctor of their College,
undertook his Office at the Commencement, and being (as Thucydides says of
Themistocles)(...) very dexterous and ready to perform any thing well upon the
sudden, his Orations were such as gained the approbation and applause, if not
the admiration of all his Auditors, both their own and strangers, who knew the
straits of time wherein he was confined.

7. After he had spent 13 years in that University, his Father now grown old
resigned his Prebend in the Church of Ely, which by the Favor of Queen
Elizabeth (sede vacant) was conferred upon him. Hereupon he left his
Fellowship, and betook himself to the Society of a Wife, of the Kindred of old
Doctor Goad, Provost of Kings College. In this estate God blessed him with a
numerous Issue.

8. His manner was to arise early in the morning, and to get half way on his
Journey before others could get out; he came down at the hour of Prayer, taking
his Family with him to Church (after he was preferred to the Rectory of Barley,
upon the death of his Father) there Service was publicly read, either by
himself or his Curate, to the great comfort of his Parishioners, before they
went out to their daily Labors. Prayers being ended, he returns unto his task
again until near dinner time: then he would recreate himself a while, either
playing upon a little Organ, or sporting with his young Children; and sometimes
he would use cleaving of Wood for exercise of his Body: At his Table he was
always pleasant to his Company, telling some pretty Apothegme or Facete Tale,
and seasoning it with some profitable Application. After dinner his custom was
to refresh himself a little, sometime sitting in Discourse, sometime walking
abroad, and now and then taking some view of his Husbandry: after which
straightway to his better employments again till supper time: so that commonly
(without extraordinary avocations) he spent no less than eight hours a day in
his Study.

9. By which long continued course he had read the Fathers, Councils,
Ecclesiastical Histories, etc. and published Books to the number of 33 (besides
nine more unprinted:) He has much variety of matter in his larger sixfold
Commentaries, where he has collected, and judicially disposed those things
which you have(...) scatteringly, in many several Books, and saving the Readers
cost and pains, has molded up together the choicest flour of Commentaries old
and new, that appear upon those parts of the Scripture: but his Synopsis
Papismi carries away the prize before all other Writings, wherewith Dr. Willet
has adorned our Church; being now the fifth time (and that by special
Commendation from his Royal Majesty) published. Justly is he numbered by Bishop
Hall (sometime his Colleague in the Service of Prince Henry) among those
Worthies of the Church of England, to whom he gives this Elogy. Stupor mundi
clerus Britannicus.

10. Amidst all his pains of Writing and his other Studies, he never omitted
his usual exercise of Preaching, In his younger time he read the Lecture for
three years together in the Cathedral Church of Ely; for one year in St. Paul's:
in both with singular Approbation of a most frequent Auditory. Sometimes he
preached in Cambridge (both Ad Clerum, and Ad Populum) discovering himself to
be the only man, Quem rus non infuscavit, whom the Country had not stained: and
therefore at his last Degree was chosen to answer in the Divinity Act.

11. This being over, he returns to his people again, daily teaching them and
instructing them in a plain Familiar way; applying himself to their capacity:
and though he knew how to turn his tongue to a Courtiers ear, yet he more
affected the simplicity of plain Preaching. And always in denuntiation of
Judgments he would put on the Bowels of Compassion, and the spirit of Meekness;
sugaring every bitter Pill (like a wise Physician) that it might go down the
more pleasantly: neither were his labors in vain, enjoying such a people as
received his Instructions with delight. For there was a sweet harmony between
the Life and Doctrine of this Reverend man, whether we look upon him as at
home, or as abroad with others.

12. It was my happiness to make abode under his roof: his House was a little
model of a Church, and House of God: here morning and evening Sacrifices were
offered unto God daily: his Children after supper read some part of Holy
Scripture, and he required of every one present, that they should remember some
one Sentence or other; and afterward he himself, as he thought convenient,
would rehearse the same again; adding some exposition, and now and then some
Application to them. Together with these private exercises of Piety, no man
more religiously observed the Public Congregations than he did, continually
calling upon his household to follow him to Gods Holy House, where especially he
is to be worshipped. Besides his endeavor was, to order his Family like a
little Commonwealth: He had his Laws and Ordinances set up in Tables,
directing his Family in their several Offices, and Duties both Oeconomical and
Moral; and in all these things, so much as might become his place, he made
himself an exact pattern and example to them all.

13. It may be some searching eye may hap to spy out one trained up under his
good Discipline, who yet peradventure grows not after the seed first sown in
him. It is a blessed gift of God to have all good Children, but every man, nay
every good man cannot enjoy it. St. Austin says well, Though I keep a watchful
Discipline over my house, yet am I but a man, and they are men that live under
me; neiter dare I arrogate to my self, that my House should be better than the
Ark of Noah, where yet amongst but eight persons, there was one Reprobate
found; or better than the house of Abraham, or Isaac, or Jacob; or better than
the Family of Christ our Lord, where was one Judas; or lastly, better than
Heaven, when the Angels fell. Truly when I call to mind his many blessings of
his Children I may use the words spoken to the Mother of St. Austin, a little
varied, Fieri non potest, ut Filius istarum benedictionum pereat.

14. As for his Charity to others, he entertained two of his nearest allies,
being fallen into some want, at his own Table many years, and maintained for
the most part a Son of either of them at the University. It was usnal and
annual with him, to give a dole of Bread unto the poor on the Coronation day,
and on the Powder Treason. At Christmas he gave Corn to some of the poor of his
Parish, to others money, to others, yea to all the rest of his Neighbors
liberal and loving entertainment. In the time of Harvest, when the Fields were
crowned with Gods Blessings, he would scatter of his heaps with a full hand,
and a cheerful heart among the Gleaners, who rejoiced at his coming into the
Field. If he set any one to work, no Master paid more freely; nor more speedily
than he: if the poor bought Corn of him (as they did often) they were sure to
gain both in price and Measure: if he bought any thing of them, he would give
them more than they demanded; and his substance increased with his bounty.

15. Had any of his Neighbors suits and troubles abroad, he was their
Counselor, whom they always, even the meanest found easy of access ((...))
and as friendly to be spoken with: Had they need of the assistance of some
great persons, he would intercede for them, either personally, or by Letters:
Had they Jars and janglings among themselves, he would call both parties, and
handle them so with mild and courteous speeches, that he would soon compose
their differences. And such was his Humility, that he would condescend to any
office for their good: himself would sometimes write their Bills amd Bonds, and
other instruments, to save them expenses. And such things being ended, he would
return with great alacrity to his higher Contemplations. Lastly for the Town of
Barley, where he lived, being not able to do what his heart desired, he gave
out of a little Tenement, which he bought, twenty shillings per an. to the poor
for ever; and persuaded some other his richer Friends to a greater liberality
to this same Town. He was indeed a powerful perswader to works of Piety, but in
none more than in soliciting that old Gentleman Mr. Sutton to that Heroic work
of his in the erecting of his Hospital; whom he earnestly desired, not to be
like that Antigonus, surnamed ((...)) the future giver, but to do something in
his life. And doubtless, he during life projected that, which after death was
honorably effected.

16. He studied chiefly to do good unto poor Ministers, not only by his private
bounty, but he prevailed with the Dean and his fellow Prebendaries of Ely to
grant considerable Augmentations for three poor Vicars out of the
Impropriations belonging to that Church: and he induced old Mr. Castle to
yield out of his Impropriation of Tadlow ten pounds per an. to the better
maintenance of the Vicar of that Town. Never may they want their due honor
with men, and reward with God, who religiously take care to cherish and
continue these good works so happily begun.

17. The exercise of Hospitality was even hereditary to him from his Parents.
This Abraham so loved, nay he loved still, says Chrysologus, That he would
scarce think himself happy in Heaven if he were deprived of the use of it, if
he may not have Lazarus lie in his bosom: And Synesius says, By being
harborous he entertained God himself. So this liberal and godly man (whose
doors were open to any worthy of entertainment) enjoyed the comfort of many
happy Guests, some of them strangers, men of other Nations, who having heard
the Fame of him in their own Countries, Traveling to see this Land, have in
their way resorted to his house, as ambitious of his Acquaintance: But
sometimes his goodness was abused; as once by a Jew entertained in his house,
and seemingly converted, calling him Father, and pretending to desire Baptism;
but when the time of Solemnity was at hand, the Jew vanished, and ran away
without returning thanks to the Doctor for all the courtesies received. Another
Impostor, a Roman Catholic, begged his Prayers and Instructions, and humbly
desired upon Repentance to be admitted to the Holy Communion; but when the time
came, this Guest appeared not, and was seen there no more. A third Intruder was
a Separatist, who seemed a long time inclining, but at last sequestered himself
from every exercise of Piety used in the Family; and, though he must be present
at Grace for fear of losing his Dinner, would not so much as uncover his head:
Which being observed by the Doctor, Grace being ended, he snatched his Hat from
his head, and thrust him out, saying, He shall not lodge, or eat, or drink with
me, that will not give God thanks with me.

18. It happened about the end of Michaelmas Term, An. 1621. some occasions
having called him up to London, in the midst of his way homeward, his Horse
stumbling, both Horse and Rider fell to the ground; in which fall his right Leg
was broken: being lifted up and set upon his Horse again, he rode on a little
to a Town called Hodsdon, where he turned into an Inn, and sent for a
Bone-setter, by whom after his Leg was set, he was directed to keep his Bed ten
days: unto which direction he willingly submitted, resolving to make that place
his Study for the time: and I had almost said his Pulpit too, etc. Thus he
continued all the ten days, when ( December 4.) after the singing of Psalm. 146.
having occasion for some ease to stir himself a little, he suddenly fetched a
deep groan, and fell into a Trance. His Wife presently cried out for help, and
presently some came in, and upon means used he began to rouse himself a little,
and to look about: and then uttered these his ((...)) last words, wherein he
breathed out his soul, Let me alone, I shall be well, Lord Jesu, -- Next day
his Body was conveyed by Coach to his Town of Barley, and on the third day
there honorably interred. After the Funeral was over, I remember well, how the
several Lecturers of Royston in their Courses, for a long time after, making
some worthy Commemoration of their friend departed, bewailed the loss of him,
and besprinkled his Ashes with their Tears before the People. Vixit annos 59.

III. Dr. Daniel Featley.
[ From Mr. John Featley.]

1. HIS right name was Fairclough, and by that name he was ordained, as his
Letters of Orders witnessed. All the ancient Deeds of the Family ran in the
name of Fairclough, and his elder Brother so wrote his name; but evenin his
days by the mistakes of people the word varied from Fairclough to Faircley,
then to Fateley, and at length to Featley: which name he first owned in print
of all our Family. He was extracted originally out of Lancashire, where many of
the same House do to this day retain the Primitive name, and give the same Coat
of Arms with us. The name at first rose from that Fair cliff where his
Ancestors long since were seated: for in the Dialect of that Country a Cliff
was anciently written Clough.

2. The Family of the Faircloughs in former times growing numerous, their
Estate lessened by increase of their Issue; for the Land was given by parcels
to their Children, and among those many slips from the first root, some were
transplanted into other Countries. The good old Father of Dr. Featley was one
whom providence removed, and placed in Oxfordshire. Daniel his second Son was
born at Oatmoor, and being a studious and ingenious Child, he profited at
School beyond expectation; insomuch as when he was but twelve years old, he
gained no small credit and applause by the Latin and Greek Verses which he
frequently, wittily, and elegantly composed.

3. His Father, entertaining an employment in Oxford, gained an opportunity to
prefer his forward Son to be (...) also gratified Dr. Featley with a Fellowship
or Brothers place in the Savoy, whereof he was then Master. After this, the
Archbishop gave him the Rectory of Alhallows Broadstreet; but by reason of the
thickness of London Air, and the many inconveniences which he daily met with,
his Grace yielded to an exchange of Broad-street for Acton, six miles from
London, and in a pleasant healthful situation.

6. To pretermit his many Disputes with Fisher, and other Jesuits, his Cygnea
Cantio, his handmaid to Devotion, and many more passages of his former life,
and to hasten to his last times, in the year 1642. the soft and wanton Peace of
our Nation, was soon turned into rough and bloody Wars, Jusque datum sceleri:
at which time some Parliament Soldiers having first spoiled Acton Church, and
the Doctors House, pursued him to Lambeth, where he then resided, and on the
Lords Day ( Feb. 19.) five of them rushed into the Church, where he was then to
preach, even in the time of Divine Service, with Pistols and drawn Swords to
murder him. But missing the Doctor (who had been advertised of the danger) in
their fury they mortally wounded one of the Parish, and shot another dead,
breathing out malice against this Reverend Person, and threatening to chop him
as small as Herbs to the Pot, for suffering the Common Prayer (which in high
contempt they called Porrage) to be read in his Church.

7. In Lambeth Church he so scourged the Times (according to his Custom) that
in July, 1643. three Mechanic Brownists there present exhibited against him no
less than Seven Articles to the Committee of plundered Ministers. The Articles
are extant in a Book entitled, The gentle Lash, together with the Doctors
Answer. He began his Answer with this heavy complaint, Hoc uno die plus vixi
quam oportuit. But he comforted himself with the example of Christ, the Prince
of our Salvation, who was consecrated through Afflictions: And with that
Apology of St. Cyprian, Nec mihi ignominiosum est pati a meis, quod passus est
Christus; nec illis gloriosum facere, quod fecit Judas. In brief, the Articles
were so false, scandalous and indigested, that the Doctor was acquitted, and
the Compiler of them dismissed with sufficient disgrace.

8. When the Solemn League and Covenant, hatched in Scotland, was sent to the
Assembly of Divines in England, for their concurrence, and proposed in the
Synod, our Doctor (being one of the Members) in a grave and learned Speech, and
with solid and judicious Arguments so strongly opposed it, that those who
wanted Learning to Answer him, wanted not malice to ruin him. The Reader may
peruse a Book entitled Sacra Nemesis, or, The Levit's Scourge, and there find
not only this Speech printed at large, but others of great concernment; as also
his sixteen Reasons for Episcopal Government, and many other things well worthy
of his notice.

9. About the middle of September 1643. one of the Sectaries made Application
to the Doctor under pretense of friendship, and privately informed him, as from
the Lord Primate of Armagh at Oxford (from whence he pretended he was newly
come) That the King was very much offended at his complying with the Assembly,
etc. This pretended Messenger seemed to be grieved for the Doctor, and advised
him to write a Letter back to his Grace and acquaint him with some passages of
the Assembly, with his desire of his Majesty's leave to continue his attendance
there. Something of a Letter was written, committed to this trusty Messenger,
intercepted, the Doctor charged for holding intelligence, and presently Voted
both out of the Assembly, and out of his Estate and Liberty.

10. On September 30. a Warrant (mentioning no Crime) was brought from the
Committee, to commit the poor Doctor, whom they so plundered that he had no more
money left him than one poor five shillings piece of Gold, which he bestowed on
the Officer that conducted him to Prison: There skipped hastily into his
Livings (those who had long gaped for them) While into Lambeth and Nigh into
Acton. Many sad months did our Doctor spend in Prison wanting his sweet Air,
and the comfortable society of his Books and Friends, and indeed all things
except a good Conscience, which might qualify the bitterness of a tedious life.

11. In the height of these his sufferings, it happened, that a Papist sent a
bold Challenge abroad, throwing dirt in the face of the Protestant Church. The
Parliament recommended the answering of it to our Doctor, whom they knew to be
well versed in the matters in question. Had they first restored him to his
Liberty and Estate, this had been a just and noble encouragement. But he was a
poor Israelite under the Egyptian Yoke, and must be content to abate the straw,
yet make the brick: only they voted him the use of his Books, three of them at
one time; and by this Vote, his Library was a while preserved, and himself
diverted the irksomness of his sad Imprisonment. To work he went, and at length
he finished and published his Answer to the Challenge, Aug. 1. 1644. in a Book
entitled Roma Ruens.

12. Nor may I forget another Book, which he had perfected and published the
same year against the Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, called, The Dipper
Dipped. Whereat the Sectaries being enraged, and some others, threw upon him a
foul and odious aspersion, That Dr. Featley was turned Papist. To vindicate
himself, he published his Manifesto, and therein says, I have thought fit to
make known to you all whom it may concern, that being chosen Provost of
ChelseyColledge, I have under the Broad Seal of England, a Warrant to buy,
have, and keep all manner of Popish Books; and that I never bought and kept any
of them, but to the end and purpose, the betttr to inform my self to refute
them, etc.

13. To which Vindication, in the same Manifesto, he adds this Challenge:
whereas I am certainly informed that aivers Lecturers and Preachers in London
and the Suburbs (who have entered upon the Labors of many worthy Divines, and
reaped their Harvests) do in their Pulpits after a most insolent manner insult
upon them, demanding, Where are they now that dare stand up in defense of
Church-Hierarchy, or Book of Common Prayer; or any way oppose or impugn the new
intended Reformation, both in Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England?
I do here protest, that I do and will maintain by Disputation, or Writing,
against any of them, these three Conclusions, viz.

1. That the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in the year of our Lord, 1562.
by both Houses of Convocation, and ratified by Queen Elizabeth, need no
alteration at all, but only an Orthodox explication in some ambiguous phrases,
and a Vindication against false aspersions.

2. That the Discipline of the Church of England, established by many Laws and
Acts of Parliament, that is, the Government by Bishops (removing all
Innovations and Abuses in the execution thereof) is agreeable to Gods Word, and
a truly ancient and Apostolical Institution.

3. That there ought to be a set Form of Public Prayer, and that the Book of
Common Prayer (the Ralendar being reformed in point of Apocryphal Saints and
Chapters, some Rubricks explained, and some expressions revised, and the whole
correctedly Printed; with all the Psalms, Chapters, and Allegations out of the
Old and new Testament, according to the last Translation) is the most complete,
perfect, and exact Liturgy now extant in the Christian World.

14. Notwithstanding the great Service, which the Doctor had done for the
Church of England, at the request of the Parliament, by his Answer to that
Popish Challenge in his Roma Ruens, yet they suffered him to continue in Limbo,
in his old Prison. But when, through bad Air, and bad Diet, and ill Lodging,
and other inconveniences, he fell into a Dropsy, and other Diseases (upon his
humble Petition, and his Physicians Certificate) after sixteen weeks attendance
of his Friends, the House granted him an Order to remove to the fresh Air of
Chelsey-Colledge for six weeks. Thither he came about the beginning of March
1644. but neither Physic, nor Air, nor Diet, nor better Lodging, nor Company,
nor Cordials, nor any thing else could remove his Diseases, or give him hope of
Recovery.

15. There he spun out a short time in much Piety and Holy Exercises, although
wearied with pains, and worn out with afflictions; whereof none were so
grievous to him, as the presenr Distractions in the Church and State, April 14.
1645. he set his House in order, and made his Will, beginning thus: First, for
my soul, I commend it to him, whose due it is by a threefold right: My
Creator, who infused it into me: my Redeemer, who freely ransomed it with his
dearest Blood: my Sanctifier, who assisteth me now in my greatest and latest
assaults of temptations, etc. The next day he made a Confession of his Faith to
Dr. Lo, and others, April 17. (which was the last day of those six weeks his
Enemies had allotted him) his spirit waxed faint, and drawing near to death he
prayed thus: Lord, strike through the reins of them that rise against the
Church and King, and let them be as chaff before the wind, etc. But upon our
gracious Sovereign and his posterity, let the Crown flourish. This (said he) is
the hearty and earnest prayer of a poor sick Creature.

16. With which words, and many heavenly Ejaculations, commending his Soul into
the hands of his faithful Creator, he fell asleep. But his Nephew coming in,
caused a small dose of Cordial Spirits to be administered to him: which made him
once more to open his eyes, and seeing the tears of his mourning Kinsman, said,
Ah Cousin, the poor Church of God is torn in pieces. More he said not, but
sweetly and gently groaned out his wearied and fainting Spirit, and resigned
his Soul into the extended Arms of his merciful Redeemer.

17. In Lambeth-Chappel (according to his desire) he was solemnly buried: (Dr.
Lo preached the Sermon, afterward Printed.) To add a short Character of his
Person and Graces: He was low of stature, yet of a lovely graceful Countenance,
and of a convenient strength and health of Body: of a most sweet disposition,
being affable, and courteous to all, without the least commixture of that
sullen morosity which some men mistake for gravity. He was generally free from
all shows both of pride and anger: only when he disputed with Heretics and
Schismatics in defense of the Sacred Truth, his Zeal and dexterity made them
unjustly suspect, that he had been choleric. He was a Compendium of the
learned Tongues, and all the liberal Arts and Sciences, most seriously and
soundly pious and devout: freely charitable, both in giving and forgiving, and
a faithful and true Son of the Church of England. Ob. An. AEt. 65.

VI. Walt. Norbane Esquire
[From Dr. Haywood.]

1, HIS natural parts were so eminent by Gods great blessing, as to outstrip
many of his rank at School, when he was a Child; and being quickly removed from
School to the University, from the University to the Inns of Court, he there
grew so eminent, as to be called to the Bar betimes with much honor, daily
increasing in repute, and renown, till he performed his public Reading with
great applause: nor could he have missed the degree of a Sergeant, had times
been as favorable, as his Worth was great.

2. Though one of the youngest Sons of his Father, and by a second Wife; yet so
highly he gained his Fathers good opinion by his constant dutifulfulness and
his known ability and worth, that long after the Death of his Mother, his
Father at his decease ordained him sole Executor, left him all his personal
Estate, besides his proportion of Land, suitable to the rest of his Children.
Which overplus bequeathed to him alone, he yet with such Charity and Tenderness
imparted to his Brothers again, that of his mere voluntary goodness, he gave
them (as I am informed) to the value of two thousand pound.

3. In his honest industry, God so blessed him, that he grew to a fortune, such
as scant any of his Family had the like: yet not to be charged (for ought I
could ever hear) of ruining any Person or Family, or rising by the fall and
impoverishing of others: but eminent for his faithful diligence, and honest
trustiness, and wise secrecy, and abundant sufficiency in his profession: so
that great and eminent ones in the same profession, and some elder than he,
have repaired to him for his opinion, and to be assisted with his Advice.

4. In all the time of his life and practice, never heard I of any, that could
tax him of the least breach of trust, of any extortion, bribery, or injustice,
or of being feed on both sides, or for deserting any cause, which he thought
just, for want of his poor Clients purse-ability. Well might he say with
Samuel, Whose Ox, or whose Ass have I taken; or of whose hand have I received
any bribe to blind mine eyes withal? Notable late instances might be given of
this, if particulars of this nature were fit here to be mentioned.

5. His integrity so great, and his abilities so eminent, could not fail to
have preferred him to a Seat of Judicature among the highest, had not the
tempest of the Wars covered him with a cloud. Wherein yet he preferred his
Conscience before all worldly ends; nor followed any side, because he thought
it would prosper, nor forsake that side, when he saw it prospered not; but
persevered as he had first engaged, and engaged not weakly, but fervently,
actively, and courageously. And yet so prudently, that though he suffered
imprisonment, and paid large Compositions, yet he escaped easier than some that
were less active. So great was his Wisdom, and in such esteem was his worth had
by the adverse party. I will not say, he was courted by some of them, to accept
of preferment among them; but such things have been averred in my hearing; and
to my knowledge his constancy was such, the world could not have wrought him to
accept of promotion against his Conscience, for all that was offered to our
Savior upon the Mountain.

6. During the time of Wars and troubles, though he were far in years, yet he
made no haste to marry: no, nor in times more quiet before the (...) to fail
him, and newer customs to creep in, which he fansied not: a devout receiver of
the Blessed Sacrament, and a frequent Communicant in public, when he might
receive it in the beauty of Holiness, as he desired to see it. Seldom failed
he, at three Solemn times of the year especially, to make one at the
Commumunion, if he were in the Country.

10. To the suffering party of the Clergy, to those of his own persuasion, very
loving, kind, respectful and bountiful. To none, of any sort as I know,
uncivil, though in more special manner, he favored and countenanced Divines of
known Learning, Gravity, and Experience; not much respecting other, whom he
thought time-serving, hypocritical, ignorant, raw, or scandalous.

11. A friend to peace he was, though his Profession rather thrived by strife:
a willing reconciler and taker up of differences, where both parties would hear
reason, rather than a prolonger of suits. A man, such as Moses would have
chosen for a Judge, fearing God and hating covetousness: hating it not only in
himself, but in others: yea, not caring, to my knowledge, to displease some of
his very good friends, where he thought them too worldly inclined: Very
bountiful he was to the poor himself, and would fain have had all of ability
like him. Far from flattering, lying, and soothing up: Loving Truth, and
delighted in them that loved it, as one rightly sensible of the great
calamities, this Kingdom has been involved in, through the licentious and
unconscionable liberty of lying tongues.

12. Therefore was he honored and respected far and near: scant a Nobleman or
Gentleman in these parts, that made not much use of him, and frequently, as
their occasions required, resorted to him: So that he was the eminent Beauty,
Ornament, and shelter of this poor place wherein he lived, a staff to the poor,
a Counselor to the rich, a sanctuary to the oppressed, a terror to the
unconscionable, deceitful, and worldly minded; a comfort to those in need, and
to such as for need desired his help.

13. Our hearts sorrow it was, that so soon in his bodily health he began to
decline, having yet scant added three years to threescore; but to his joy in
the end it proved, I doubt not. Near upon two years I have perceived him
declining; when, as his outward man perished, so his inward man seemed to renew
day by day. During which time he exercised his Piety, addressing himself to
read Books of Religion; his justice paying every one his own. And the four
Virtues of the Cross, Humility, Charity, Patience, and Constancy, appeared more
and more to manifest themselves in him, the nearer he drew to his end.

14. Humility, for he was courteous to the meanest, ready to put off, and yield
reverence to any as fast as any to him; nay, to prevent in courtesy, and to
give place to some his inferiors. Charity, for he exceeded in bounty to the
poor, witness his last charitable gift to this Parish, and diverse pious
Legacies in his Will to the value well nigh of a thousand pound: Witness his
loving invitation of his poor Neighbors in his weakness at Christmas last;
even when himself could not eat, yet it joyed him to walk by and see others eat
and drink at his cost. And for an eminent proof of his Charity, but a little
before he took his bed in his last sickness, he lent freely to one that had
dealt falsely enough with him (and was likely for so doing to be utterly ruined
by the fraud of another;) he lent I say to him notwithstanding a considerable
sum of money to preserve him from perishing. So notable was his Charity in
returning good for evil.

15. It pleased God to enlarge his Patience by the manner of his last sickness,
which, seizing at length on his Lungs, deprived him of the use of his Speech,
for any length or continuance of speaking: during which time I never observed
in him the least impatient carriage in word or deed, or any repining at the
heavy hand of God upon him: but silently he submitted himself under the
scourge, like him that said, I became dumb and opened not my mouth, for it was
thy doing.

16. And lastly, for his Constancy, as he approved it in the course of his
Life, so to the Death constant he was to the Religion he had been born and bred
up in: an obedient Son of the Church of England, as he had ever professed
himself to be, and suffered for it. Heartily he answered to all questions that
were asked him about the profession of his Faith, willingly and readily
submitted himself to Gods will for leaving the world, gladly forgave all that
had offended him; and wherein he had offended any, professed himself willing to
ask forgiveness, and to make restitution.

17. Being put in mind of the Sacrament, he would not for Reverence sake
receive it in the Evening, but deferred it till the next morning, and then most
piously and devoutly, like one that bowed the knees of his heart, when those of
his body failed him, with eyes lifted up and hands bent to Heaven, he received
it: and when he heard after both kinds taken, Lord grant it may nourish you to
eternal life, cheerfully and audibly he said, Amen. After which, he dismissed
us from longer praying by him, being desirous to be left for the present to his
own private Devotions, and requested us to pray by him again in the afternoon,
as if he had foreseen the certain time of his departure: and in the afternoon,
according to his own appointment, at Prayer we continued by him till toward
five in the evening. At which time, most meekly and silently, and like a Lamb
he departed, and quietly slept in the Lord.

Ob. Apr. 1659.

VII. Mr. John Gregory.
[ From Mr. John Gurgany.]

1. A Mersham in the County of Buckingham, ennobled hitherto only by the
Honorable Family of the Russels, may now boast in the birth of this Learned
man. Which happened on the tenth of November, 1603. And though his Parents were
but of mean Extraction and Estate, yet of such noted Piety, and Honesty, as
gained them love and respect from the best of that place.

2. Whence this their eldest Son, about the 15th. year of their pious Education
of him, was chosen by the worthy Dr. Crook to wait upon Sir William Drake, (and
soon after on Sir Robert Crook) at Christ-Church in Oxford; where they had the
happiness to be under the tuition of the most ingenious and learned Dr. George
Morley.

3. This young Scholar for diverse years studied 16 of every 24 hours, and that
with so much appetite and delight, as that he needed not the cure of
Aristotle's drowsiness to awake him AEnea Pila. Diog. Laert.
. In his first Academical exercises, his worth like the rising of the Sun,
began to discover it self, darting forth such fair hopes and glimmerings of
future perfection, as were quickly espied by the then vigilant Dean of
Christ-Church, Dr. Duppa, since Lord Bishop of Sarum; who immediately received
him into favor, and soon after made him Chaplain of Christ-Church, and after
that his own Domestic and Prebendary of Chichester and Sarum.

4. For which favors, he now began (about 26 years old) to publish to the
world his worth and gratitude in the dedication of his Notes on Learned Ridleys
civil Law, to his honored Patron, the Bishop of Sarum. In which Notes he made
an early discovery of his Civil, Historical, Ecclesiastical, Ritual, and
Oriental Learning; together with the Saxon, French, Italian, Spanish, and all
Eastern Languages; through which he miraculously traveled, without any guide,
except Mr. Dod the Decalogist; whose society and directions for the Hebrew
Tongue he enjoyed one Vacation near Banburie. For which courtesy, he ever
gratefully remembered him, as a man of great Piety and Learning, Gravity and
Modesty. Of which Graces also this person was as great a Possessor, as Admirer.

5. Hence these many tracts, both in English and Latin, were bashfully laid by,
in his youth, as Abortives: Some whereof are now published, and entitled
Posthume, as so many Testimonies and monuments of his general Learning. For
which he was much honored by the acquaintance and favor of men of the
greatest honor and eminence Archbish Laud, B Mentague, B. Lindsey, Mr. John
Seldom, etc.
that this Age has produced: besides the Correspondence (in points of Learning)
which he held with diverse famous men abroad, as well Jesuits and Jews as others.

6. And now, being like the Sun in his Zenith, ready to shine in his greatest
luster, behold the whole Kingdom began to be clouded. Yet the hope of a clear
day preserved this Learned man a while sufficiently spirited for study; whereby
he composed and published (a little before his death) those his excellent Notes
upon some passages of Scripture: in which kind of holy study he intended to
spend the rest of his life.

7. But after 20 years trouble with an hereditary gout, improved by immoderate
study, and now invading his stomach, the thread of his life being laboriously
spun out but 39 years, foreseeing the Glory was now departing from our Israel,
his spirits began to fail in an extraordinary manner.

8. For recovery and supportation whereof (his first noble Patron, the Bishop
of Sarum, being disabled by sequestration etc) the liberal hand of a second
Mecaenas was presently extended. ( Ed. Bishop Esquire) Of whose Charity I may say,
as our Savior of that Unguent, Was it not to bury him? Yes and to raise him
too with Fame, being very active and free toward the publication, not only of
his posthumous Tracts but also of some other of greater expectatation Jo.
Antioch hist. tran. out of Greek into Latin with Annot.
.

9. And here is to be lamented the loss of that, his excellent piece, entitled
by himself Alkibla. In which with very great Judgment and Learning he
vindicated the Antiquity of Eastward Adoration.

10. Some suspected him a favourer of the Roman way: but their jealousy, to my
certain knowledge, was unjust and groundless, he having often declared and
protested, not only to me, but also to many of his familiar friends, his
Abhorrence of Popery, and his sincere Affection and constancy to the Protestant
Religion, as it was established in England by Acts of Parliament.

11. And as he lived, so he dyed also, a most obedient and affectionate Son to
his distressed Mother, the Church of England, for whose sufferings he sorrowed
unto death. Those, and the foresight of that barbarity, (wherein Learning and
Learned men were to be the objects of scorn and cruelty) broke his heart.

12. Time was (even amongst the Heathen) that Learning was a sufficient
protection against Tyranny; witness Antonius Triumvir, who, when Varro (his
Enemy and of a contrary part) was listed for death, He thus gallantly
superscribed his Name, Vivat Varro Vir doctissimus.

13. This our Learned Friend deceased at Kidlington, Mar. 13.1646. And was
buried in Christ-Church in Oxford. Where lives the memory of his Virtues,
especially of Courtesy and Humility, not disdaining the meanest Scholar, nor
proud of his Victorious discourses with the most learned. And all that knew
him, will testify, how free and liberal he was of his treasury, to the full
satisfaction of all Inquisitors.

Epitaphium Joannis Gregorii.
NE premas Cineres hosce, Viator:
Nescis quot sub hoc jacent lapillo;
Graeculus, Hebraeus, Syrus,
Et qui te quovis vincet idiomate.
At ne molestus sis,
Ausculta, and caussam auribus tuis imbibe.
Templo exclusus,
Et avita Religione
Jam senescente, ne dicam sublata,
Mutavit Chorum, altiorem ut capesseret.
Vade nunc, si libet, and imitare.
R. W.
VIII. Dr. Brian Duppa Ld. Bp of Winchester.
[From D. Jasper Maine.]

1. WHen I look back upon our late suffering times (the saddest which I think
any History has recorded) where oppression backed with power made the Ruin of
our Church the horrid step and ladder to the Usurpation of the Crown, and where
the very name of Bishop was criminal and odious: And when withal I do consider,
by what unlookt for way of providence the Order and Religion, like a Treasure
snatched from Shipwreck, was stupendiously restored after many years confusion:
Methinks that bush, which Moses saw, was the Emblem of our Church, kept safe by
miracle in the midst of hungry fire; and the ship in the Gospel was presented
to my eyes, where Christ and his Apostles were lost in a hideous storm: but he
awaked and stilled the winds, and put a calmness to the Sea.

2. In those days of public calamity, I saw some take for their Pattern the
Prophet Jonas, and sleep securely in the storm: Other to preserve their
wretched fortunes compounded with the Tempest, and made a League and friendship
with the winds: others of a nobler and more Christian temper (whose just reward
is now to shine like stars of honor in the Church) immoveably resolute to
maintain their Loyalty and Conscience with the loss of their lives, as they had
already with their fortunes.

3. Yet I hope it will be no diminution of their Virtues, if I say, that the
Bishop of Salisburies Carriage in those times of persecution was to me most
remarkable: who by this happy restitution and addition of more honor, was made
a greater Bishop but not a greater person, than he had been in his lowest ebb
of Fortune.

4. The payment of his vow in building of an Almshouse on the place (at
Richmond) where himself so often sat, weeping ore the prospect not then
pleasant to his eye; His large bounty to the College, of which I am a member
(which if I should name the Sum would make the world believe he meant to found
a new College, and not complete an old:) His dying liberalities bequeathed to
others in his Will, even to his meanest Servants, who were his Servants in
distress, are things, which do proclaim him a great and noble Benefactor.

5. But these are but the good deeds of his Fortune done by the Bishop of
Winchester, the Charities of one possessed with plenty and abundance; his Rents
and Manors share with him as Co-founders; and his new Almshouse might have it
written on the Walls, A poor Bishop vowed this house, but a great and mighty
built it.

6. That which made him truly great and Reverend in my eyes, was to look into
his Noble heart, his large and bounteous mind, where his good deeds now, were
then but wishes and designs. He was truly great to me, when I saw him in his
poverty anticipate his Almshouse, and liberal at his door; and the poor people
in his house now, had then places at his gate: when being reduced to his last
cruse of oil, he made the drops run to others; and when there was but a handful
of meal left in the little barrel, he then dealt his loaf to them that wanted
daily bread. In short, when he had but two Coats left, to give one to the
Naked; when he had hardly more than one dish, to make the poor his guests; to
see him walk on the Hill with not much money in his purse, and return back with
none: But then to think of laying up treasures in Heaven, when he had so little
left on earth, was a Charity which raised in me a Religious admiration, and
looked something like the Miracle wrought by our Savior in the Gospel, where
Multitudes were sed with two fishes, and five loaves.

7. Nor may I, without some injustice to his Virtues, forbear to let the world
know, That I never saw Afflictions born with a more serene and even temper,
than he did his: who in the worst of times stood like a firm unshaken Rock in
the midst of angry waves; his Courage still the same, unbroken or undisturbed
with any sad Disasters, not more public than his own.

8. The Old Church of England still kept up in his house, with all its Forms
and Rites, though publicly forbidden: Prayers constantly, and twice a day,
read by him for the King; at a time when such Devotions were made Treason by
the Tyrant: and weekly Sermons preached before him, filled with so much loyalty
and truth, as would any where else have cast the preacher into bonds, if not
sent him from the Pulpit to the place of Execution.

9. To all this, his Lordships continued kindness to me, his encouragement of
my younger studies, which grew up under his example, his Rescue of me from a
shipwreck in the late undoing times, when being tossed and stripped of all, he was
a plank to save me, and threw me out a line which drew me safe to shore, are
Reasons sufficient to let the world receive this public Testimony of my
Gratitude.

Ob. An. Dom. 1663.

IX. Dr. John Bramhall Ld. Archb. of Armagh.
[From Bishop Taylor]

1. THe Death of our late most Reverend Primate the Church of Ireland has very
great reason to deplore, and we have great obligation to remember his very many
worthy deeds done for this poor afflicted and despised Church. S. Paul that
excellent Preacher ( Heb. 11.) made a Sermon in Commemoration of the Saints.
For since good men, while they are alive, have their Conversation in Heaven;
when they are in Heaven, it is also fit that they should in their good names
live upon Earth. Their great examples are an excellent Sermon to the Living:
and in praising them when envy and flattery can have no interest to interpose,
as it is the best incentive to great things, so to conceal what good God has
wrought by them is great unthankfulness to God and good men.

2. This great man, whom God has lately taken from our eyes, was bred in
Cambridge, in Sidney College, under Mr, Hulet, a grave and a worthy man: and
he showed himself not only a fruitful plant by his great progress in his
studies, but made him another return of gratitude by taking care to provide a
good employment for him in Ireland, where he then began to be greatly
interested. Augustus Caesar gave his Tutor an honorable Funeral; Marcus
Antonius erected a Statue to his: Gratian the Emperor made his Master Ausonius
to be Consul, and our worthy Primate suffered not the industry of his teacher
to pass unrewarded.

3. Having passed the course of his studies in the University, and done his
Exercise with that Applause which is usually the reward of pregnant wits and
hard study, he was removed into Yorkshire: where first in the City of York he
was an assiduous Preacher, but by the Disposition of Divine providence he
happened to be engaged at Northalerton in disputation with three pragmatical
Romish Priests of the Jesuits order: whom he so much worsted in the Conference,
and so shamefully disadvantaged by the evidence of Truth, represented Wisely
and Learnedly, that the famous Primate of York, Archb. Matthews, a learned and
most excellent Prelate, and a most worthy Preacher, hearing of that Triumph,
sent for him and made him his Chaplain. In whose service he continued till the
Death of the Primate, but in that time had given so much testimony of his great
dexterity in the Conduct of Ecclesiastical and Civil Assairs, that he grew dear
to his Master, and in that employment was made Prebendary of York, and then of
Rippon. The Dean of which Church having made him his Sub-dean, he managed the
affairs of that Church so well, that he soon acquired a greater fame, and
entered into the possession of many hearts, and admiration to those many more
that knew him.

4. There and at his Parsonage, he continued long to do the duty of a Learned
and good Preacher; and by his wisdom, eloquence, and deportment, so gained
the Affections of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of that County, that as at
his return thither upon the blessed Restoration of his most Sacred Majesty, he
knew himself obliged enough and was so kind as to give them a Visit: so they by
their coming in great numbers to meet him, their joyful reception of him, their
great caressing of him when he was there, their forward hopes to enjoy him as
their Bishop, their trouble at his departure, their unwillingness to let him go
away, gave signal testimonies that they were wise and kind enough to understand
and value his great worth.

5. But while he lived there, he may seem like a Diamond in the dust; his low
fortune covered a most valuable person, till he became observed by Sir Tho.
Wentworth, Lord President of York, whom we all knew for his great excellencies,
and his great but glorious misfortunes. This great person espied the great
abilities of Doctor Bramhall, and made him his Chaplain, and brought him into
Ireland, as one whom he believed would prove the most fit instrument to serve
in that design, which for two years before his arrival here, he had greatly
meditated and resolved: the Reformation of Religion, and the Reparation of the
broken Fortunes of the Church.

6. The complaints were many, the abuses great, the Causes of the Church vastly
numerous: but as fast as they were brought in, so fast they were by the Lord
Deputy referred back to Doctor Bramhall: Who by his indefatigable pains, great
sagacity, perpetual watchfulness, daily and hourly consultations, reduced
things to a more tolerable condition than they had been left in, by the
Schismatical principles of some, and the unjust prepossessions of others, for
many years before. For the Bishops were easy to be oppressed by those that
would, and they complained, but for a long time had no helper; till God raised
up that glorious instrument the Earl of Strafford, who brought over with him as
great affections to the Church, and to all public interests, and as admirable
abilities, as ever before his time did invest and adorn any of the Kings
Vicegerents.

7. And God fitted his hand with an instrument as good, as his skill was great.
For the first Specimen of his Abilities and diligence, in recovery of some lost
Tithes, being represented to his late Majesty of blessed and glorious Memory,
it pleased his Majesty, upon the Death of Bishop Downham to advance the Doctor
to the Bishopric of Derry. Which he not only adorned with an excellent spirit,
and a wise Government, but did more than double tht Revenue; not by taking any
thing from them to whom it was due, but by resuming some of the Churches
Patrimony, which by undue means was detained in unfitting hands.

8. But his care was beyond his Diocese, and his zeal broke out to warm all his
Brethren: for by the favor of the Lord Lieutenant, and his own incessant and
assiduous labor and wise conduct, he bought in diverse Impropriations,
cancelled many unjust alienations, and did restore them to a condition much
more tolerable; I say much more tolerable: for though he raised them above
contempt, yet they were not near to envy. But he knew there could not in all
times be wanting too many, that envied to the Church every degree of
prosperity. And for ever, since the Church by Gods blessing, and the favor of
Religious Kings and Princes, and pious Nobility, has been endowed with fair
Revenues, the enemy has not been wanting, by pretenses of Religion, to take
away Gods portion from the Church, etc. I have heard from a most worthy hand,
that at his going into England, he gave account to the Archbishop of Canterbury
of 30000 l. a year, in the recovery of which he was greatly and principally
instrumental.

9. But his care was not determined in the exterior part only, and accessories
of Religion: he was careful, and he was prosperous in it, to reduce that Divine
and Excellent Service of our Church to public and constant Exercise, to Unity
and Devotion: and to cause the Articles of the Church of England to be accepted
as the rule of public confessions and persuasions here, that they and we might
be populus unius labii, of one heart and one lip, building up our hopes of
heaven on a most holy Faith, and taking away that Shibboleth, which made this
Church lisp too undecently. And the excellent and wise pains he took in this
particular, no man can dehonestate or reproach, but he that is not willing to
confess, That the Church of England is the best Reformed Church in the World.
God, by the prosperity of his labors and a blessed effect, gave testimony, not
only of the piety and wisdom of his purposes, but that he loves to bless a wise
instructor, when he is vigorously employed in a wise and Religious Lahour.

10. These were great things, and matter of great envy. At first the product
was nothing but great admiration at his stupendous parts, and wonder at his
mighty diligence, and observation of his unusual zeal: but this quickly past
into the natural daughters of envy, obloquy and slander. His zeal for recovery
of the Church Revenues was called oppression and rapine: his care of reducing
Religion to wise and justifiable Principles was called Popery and Arminianism,
and I know not what names, which signify what the Authors are pleased to mean,
and the people to construe and to hate. This made him to walk more warily, and
do justly, and act prudently, and conduct his Affairs by the measure of Laws,
as far as he understood; and indeed that was a very great way. And though every
slanderer could tell a story, yet none could prove that ever he received a
bribe to blind his eyes, to the value of a pair of Gloves. It was his own
expression, when he gave Glory to God, who had preserved him innocent.

11. See the greatness of truth and prudence, and how greatly God stood with
him. When the numerous Armies of vexed people heaped up Catalogues of
Accusations; when the Parliament of Ireland imitated the violent procedures of
the then disordered English; when his glorious Patron was taken from his head,
and he was disrobed of his great defenses; when Petitions were invited, and
Accusations furnished, and Calumny was rewarded and managed with Art and Power;
when there was above 200 Petitions put in against him, and himself denied leave
to answer by word of mouth; when he was long imprisoned, and treated so, that a
guilty man would have been broken into affrightment, and pitiful and low
considerations: yet then, he himself standing almost alone (like Callimachus at
Marathon, invested with Enemies, and covered with Arrows) defended himself
beyond all the powers of guiltiness, even with the defenses of Truth, and the
bravery of Innocence, and answered the Petitions in Writing, sometimes 20 in a
day, with so much clearness, evidence of truth, reality of fact, and testimony
of Law, that his very enemies were ashamed and convinced: they found they had
done like AEsop's Viper, they licked the File till their tongues bled, but
himself was wholly invulnerable.

12. They were therefore to leave their Muster rolls and decline the
particulars, and fall to their(...), to accuse him for going about to subvert
the Fundamental Laws: the way by which great Stafford and Canterbury fell.
Which was a device, when all reasons failed, to oppress the Enemy, by the bold
affirmation of a conclusion they could not prove. But the Martyr-King, Charles
the first, of most glorious and eternal memory, seeing so great a Champion
likely to be oppressed with numbers and despair, sent what rescue he could, his
Royal Letter for his Bail, which was hardly granted to him; and when it was, it
was upon such hard terms, that his very delivery was a persecution. He that
does great things cannot avoid the tongues and teeth of Envy: but if Calumnies
must pass for Evidences, the bravest Heroes must always be the most reproached
persons in the world. But God, who takes care of Reputations as he does of
Lives, by the orders of his Providence confutes the slanderer, that the memory
of the righteous man might be embalmed with Honor. And so it happened to this
great man. For by a public warrantry, by the concurrent consent of both Houses
of Parliament, the Libellous Petitions against him, the false Records and
public Monuments of injurious shame were cancelled, and he was restored in
integrum to that fame, where his great Labors and just Procedures had first
instated him. Which though it was but justice, yet it was also such an honor,
that it is greater than the virulence of tongues, which (...) Stratagem, they
did in part by open Force: they turned the Bishop out of the Town, and upon
trifling and unjust pretenses searched his Carriages, and took what they
pleased, till they were ashamed to take more. However though the usage was sad,
yet it was recompensed to him by his taking Sanctuary in Oxford; where he was
graciously received by that most incomparable and divine Prince: But having
served the King in Yorkshire by his Pen, and by his Counsels, and by his
Interest, he returned back to Ireland; where under the excellent conduct of his
Grace, the now Lord Lieutenant, he ran the risque and fortune of oppressed
Virtue.

15. But God having still resolved to afflict us, the good man was forced into
the fortune of the Patriarchs, to leave his Country, and his Charges, and seek
for safety and bread in a strange Land. He was not ashamed to suffer, where the
Cause was honorable and glorious. Thus God provided for the needs of his
banished, and sent a man, who could minister comfort to the afflicted, and
courage to the persecuted, and resolution to the tempted, and strength to that
Religion, for which they all suffered.

16. And here this great man was indeed triumphant, for so it was, that he
stood in public and brave defense for the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England. There wanted not diligent Tempters in the Church of Rome,
who taking advantage of the Afflictions of his Sacred Majesty, (in which state
men commonly suspect every thing, and like men in sickness are willing to
change from side to side, hoping for ease and finding none) flew at Royal Game,
and hoped to draw away the King from that Religion, which his most Royal
Father, the best Man and the wisest Prince in the world, had sealed with the
best Blood in Christendom; and which himself sucked in with his Education, and
had confirmed by choice and reason, and confessed publicly and bravely, and
has since restored prosperously. Millitier was the man, witty and bold enough
to attempt a zealous and a foolish undertaking; and addressed himself with
ignoble indeed, but witty Arts, to persuade the King to leave what was dearer
to him than his eyes. It is true, it was a Wave dashed against a Rock, and an
Arrow shot against the Sun, it could not reach him: but the Bishop of Derry
turned it also, and made it fall upon the Shooters head. For he made so
ingenious, so learned, and so acute Reply to that Book, he so discovered the
Errors of the Roman Church, retorted the Arguments, stated the Questions,
demonstrated the Truth, and shamed their Procedures, that nothing could be a
greater Argument of the Bishops Learning, great Parts, deep Judgment, quickness
of Apprehension, and sincerity in the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, or of the
Follies and Prevarications of the Church of Rome.

17. But this most Reverend Prelate found a nobler adversary, and a braver
Scene for his Contention. He found that the Roman Priests, being wearied and
baffled by the wise Discourses, and pungent Arguments of the English Divines,
studiously declined any more to dispute the particular questions against us,
but fell at last upon a general charge, imputing to the Church of England the
great crime of Schism; and by this they thought they might with most
probability deceive unwary and unskilful Readers: for they saw the Schism, and
they saw we had left them; and because they considered not the Causes, they
resolved to outface us in the Charge. The Bishop now, having an Argument fit
to employ his great abilities, undertakes the question, and in a full Discourse
proves the Church of Rome not only to be guilty of the Schism, by making it
necessary to depart from them; but they did actuate the Schism, and themselves
made the first separations in the great point of the Pope's Supremacy; which
was the palladium for which they principally contended. He made it appear, that
the Popes of Rome were Usurpers of the Rights of Kings and Bishops, that they
brought in new Doctrines in every Age, that they imposed their own devices upon
Christendom as Articles of Faith; that they prevaricated the Doctrines of the
Apostles; that the Church of England only returned to her Primitive purity,
that she joined with Christ and his Apostles, that she agreed in all the
sentiments of the Primitive Church.

18. The old Bishop of Chalcedon, known to many of us, replied to this
excellent Book, but was soon answered by a Rejoinder made by the Lord Bishop of
Derry; in which he so pressed the former Arguments, refuted the Cavils, brought
in so many imimpregnable Authorities and probations, and added so many moments
and weights to his Discourse, that the pleasures of reading the Book would be
the greatest, if the profit to the Church of God were not greater. Whenever men
will desire to be satisfied in those great questions, the Bishop of Derry's
Book shall be their Oracle.

19. I will not insist upon his other excellent Writings; but it is known every
where, with what Piety and acumen he wrote against the Manichaean Doctrine of
fatal necessity, which a late witty man had pretended to adorn with a new
Vizor: but this excellent person washed off the ceruss and the meretricious
paintings, rarely well asserted the Economy of the Divine Providence; and,
having once more triumphed over his Adversary, betook himself to the more
agreeable attendance upon Sacred Offices; and having usefully and wisely
discoursed of the Sacred Rite of Confirmation, imposed hands upon the most
illustrious Princes the Dukes of York and Gloucester, and the Princess Royal,
and ministered to them the promise of the Holy Spirit, and ministerially
established them in the Religion and Service of the Holy Jesus.

20. And one thing more I shall remark, that at his leaving those parts upon
the Kings Return, some of the Remonstrant Ministers of the Low Countries coming
to take their leaves of his great man, and desiring that by his means the
Church of England would be kind to them: He had reason to grant it, because
they were learned men, and in many things of a most excellett Belief; yet he
reproved them, and gave them caution against it, that they approached too near,
and gave too much countenance to the great and dangerous errors of the
Socinians.

21. He thus having served God and the King abroad, God was pleased to return
to the King and to us all, as in the days of old, and we sung the Song of
David, In convertendo captivitatem Sion. When King David and all his Servants
returned to Jerusalem, this great person, having trod in the Wine Press, was
called to drink of the Wine; and as an honorary Reward of his great Services
and Abilities was chosen Primate of this National Church. He had this Remark in
all his Government, that as he was a great hater of Sacrilege, so he professed
himself a public enemy to non-residence, and religiously against it, allowing
it in no case but of necessity or the greater good of the Church.

22. There are great things spoken of his Predecessor St. Patrick, that he
founded 700 Churches and Religious Covents, that he ordained 5000 Priests, and
with his own hands Consecrated 350 Bishops. How true the story is I know not,
but we are all witnesses that the late Primate, whose memory we now Celebrate,
did by an extraordinary contingency of Providence in one day, consecrate two
Archbishops and ten Bishops, and did benefit to almost all the Churches in
Ireland, and was greatly instrumental to the endowments of the whole Clergy,
and in the greatest abilities and incompararable industry was inferior to none
of his most glorious Antecessors.

23. The Character which was given of that Learned Primate Richard of Armagh by
Trithemius does exactly fit this our Father: Vir in divinis, etc. He was
learned in the Scriptures, skilled in secular Philosophy, and not unknowing in
the Civil and Canon Laws (in which studies I wish the Clergy were with some
carefulness and diligence still more conversant:) He was of an excellent
Spirit, a Scholar in his Discourses, an early and industrious Preacher to the
People. And, as if there were a more particular sympathy between their souls,
our Primate had so great a veneration to his Memory, that he purposed, if he
had lived, to have restored his Monument in Dundalk, which time or impiety or
unthankfulness had either omitted or destroyed. So great a lover he was of all
true and inherent worth, that he loved it in the very memory of the Dead, and
to have such great examples transmitted to the intuition and imitation of
Posterity.

24. At his coming to the Primacy, he knew he should at first espy little
besides the ruins of Discipline, a Harvest of Thorns and Heresies, prevailing
in the hearts of the people, the Churches possessed by Wolves and Intruders,
men's hearts greatly estranged from true Religion: and therefore he set himself
to weed the Fields of the Church. He treated the Adversaries sometimes sweetly,
sometimes he confuted them learnedly, sometimes he rebuked them sharply. He
visited his Charges diligently, and in his own person, not only by proxies and
instrumental deputations: he designed nothing, that we know of, but the
Redintegration of Religion, the Honor of God and the King, the restoring of
collapsed Discipline, and the renovation of the Faith, and the Service of God
in the Churches: and still he was indefatigable, and, even in the last Scene of
his life, not willing that God should take him unemployed.

25. The last of January God sent him a brisk alarm of Death, whereupon he made
his Will; in which beside the prudence and presence of Spirit manifested in
making a just and wise settlement of his Estate, and provisions for his
descendants, at midnight and in the trouble of his sickness, and circumstances
of addressing death, he kept still a special sentiment, and made confession of
Gods admirable mercies, and gave thanks, that God had permitted him to live to
see the blessed Restoration of his Majesty and the Church of England;
confessed his Faith to be the same as ever, gave praises to God that he was
born and bred up in this Religion, and prayed to God, and hoped he should die
in the Communion of this Church, which he declared to be the most pure and
Apostolical Church in the whole world. He prayed to God to pardon his frailties
and infirmities, relied upon the Mercies of God, and the Merits of Jesus
Christ; and with a singular sweetness resigned up his soul into the hands of
his Redeemer.

26. But God, who is the great Choragus and Master of the Scenes of Life and
Death, was not pleased to draw the Curtains: There was an Epilogue to his life,
yet to be acted and spoken. He returned to Actions of Life, and went on in the
methods of the same procedure as before, was desirous still to establish the
Affairs of the Church, complained of some disorders which he purposed to
redress, girt himself to the work: but though his Spirit was willing, yet his
Flesh was weak, and he was heavy unto death, and looked for the last warning,
which seized on him in the midst of business; and though it was sudden, yet it
could not be unexpected or unprovided by surprise; and therefore could be no
other than that (...)which Augustus used to wish unto himself, a civil and well
natured death, without the amazement of troublesome circumstances. His passive
fortitude had been abundantly tried before, and therefore there was the less
need of it now; his active Graces had been abundantly demonstrated by the great
and good things he did; and therefore his last Scene was not so laborious: but
God called him away, something after the manner of Moses, which the Jews
express by osculum oris Dei, the kiss of Gods mouth, that is, a death indeed
foresignified, but gentle and serene, and without temptation.

27. To sum up all, he was a wise Prelate, a learned Doctor, a just Man, a true
Friend, a great Benefactor to others, a thankful Beneficiary where he was
obliged himself. He was a faithful Servant to his Masters, a loyal Subject to
the King, a zealous Assertor of his Religion against Popery on the one side,
and Fanaticism on the other. The practice of his Religion was not so much in
form and exterior Ministeries (though he was a great observer of all the
public Rites and Ministeries of the Church) as it was in doing good for
others. He had the sat of the Apostle St. Paul, he passed through evil report
and good report, as a deceiver, and yet true. He was a man of great business
and great resort: he divided his life into Labor, and his Book: he took care
of his Churches when he was alive, and even after his death, having left 500 l.
for the repair of his Cathedral of Armagh, and St. Peter's Church in Drogheda.
He was an excellent Scholar, and rarely well accomplished: first instructed to
great excellency by natural parts, and then consummated by study and
experience. Melancthon was used to say, that himself was a Logician, Pomeranus
a Grammarian, Justus Jonas an Orator, but that Luther was all these. It was
greatly true of him, that the single perfections, which make many men eminent,
were united in this Primate, and made him illustrious. It will be hard to find
his equal in all things: for in him were visible the great lines of Hookers
Judiciousness, of Jewels Learning, and of the Acuteness of Bishop Andrews. He
wrote many things fit to be read, and did very many things worthy to be
written; which if we wisely imitate, we may hope to meet him in the
Resurrection of the Just.

Ob. 1663.

X. Dr. Jeremy Tailor Ld Bishop of Down.
[ From Dr. George Rust.]

1. HE was born at Cambridge, and brought up in the Free School there, and was
ripe for the University, before Custom would allow of his admittance: but by
that time he was thirteen years old, he was entered into Caius College, and as
soon as he was Graduate, he was chosen Fellow.

2. He was a Man long before he was of Age, and knew little more of the state of
Childhood, than its Innocence and pleasantness. From the University, by that
time he was Master of Arts, he removed to London, and became public Lecturer
in the Church of St. Paul's, where he preached to the admiration and
astonishment of his Auditory: and by his florid and youthful Beauty, and sweet
and pleasant Air, and sublime and raised Discourses, he made his Hearers take
him for some young Angel, newly descended from the visions of Glory.

3. The Fame of this new Star, that out-shone all the rest of the Firmament,
quickly came to the notice of the great Archbishop of Canterbury, who would
needs have him Preach before him; which he performed not less to his wonder
than satisfaction. His Discourse was beyond exception, and beyond imitation.
Yet the wise Prelate thought him too young: But the great youth humbly begged
his Grace to pardon that fault, and promised, if he lived, he would mend it.

4. However the grand Patron of Learning and ingenuity, thought it for the
advantage of the world, that such mighty parts should be afforded better
opportunities of study and improvement, than a course of constant Preaching
would allow of. And to that purpose he placed him in the College of All Souls
in Oxford; where love and admiration still waited upon him: which so long as
there is any spark of Ingenuity in the breasts of men, must needs be the
inseparable attendants of so extraordinary a worth and sweetness.

5. He had not been long here before my Lord of Canterbury bestowed upon him the
Rectory of Upingham in Rutland-shire, and soon after preferred him to be
Chaplain to King Charles the Martyr of Blessed and immortal Memory. Thus were
Preferments heaped upon him, but still less than his deserts: and that not
through the fault of his great Masters, but because the amplest Honors and
Rewards were poor, and inconsiderable, compared with the greatness of his worth
and merit.

6. This great man had no sooner launched out into the world, but a fearful
tempest arose, and a barbarous and unnatural War disturbed a long and
uninterrupted Peace and Tranquillity, and brought all things into disorder and
confusion. But his Religion taught him to be Loyal, and engaged him on his
Princes side: whose cause and quarrel he always owned, and maintained with a
great courage and constancy: till at last, he and his little Fortune were
shipwrack'd in that great Hurricane, that over-turn'd both Church and State.
This fatal storm cast him ashore in a private corner of the world, and a tender
Providence shrouded him under her wings; and the Prophet was fed in the
Wilderness, and his great worthiness procured him friends that supplied him
with bread and necessaries.

7. In this solitude he began to write those excellent Discourses, which are
enough of themselves to furnish a Library, and will be famous to all succeeding
Generations for their greatness of Wit, and profoundness of Judgment, and
richness of Fancy, and clearness of Expression, and copiousness of Invention,
and general usefulness to all the purposes of a Christian. And by these he soon
got a great Reputation among all persons of judgment and indifferency; and his
Name will grow greater still, as the world grows better and wiser.

8. When he had spent some years in this retirement, it pleased God to visit
his Family with Sickness, and to take to himself the dear pledges of his
favor, three Sons of great hopes and expectations, within the space of two or
three months. And though he had learned a quiet submission unto the Divine
will, yet the Affliction touched him so sensibly, that it made him desirous to
leave the Country: And going to London, he there met my Lord Conway, a person
of great Honor and Generosity, who making a kind profer, the good man embraced
it, and that brought him over into Ireland, and settled him at Portmore, a
place made for study and contemplation, which he therefore dearly loved. And
here he wrote his Cases of Conscience; a Book that is able alone to give its
Author Immortality.

9. By this time the wheel of Providence brought about the Kings happy
Restoration, and there began a new world, and the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the Waters, and out of a confused Chaos brought forth Beauty and Order,
and all the three Nations were inspired with a new Life, and became Drunk with
an excess of Joy. Among the rest, this Loyal Subject went over to Congratulate
the Prince and Peoples Happiness, and bear a part in the Universal Triumph.

10. It was not long after his Sacred Majesty began the settlement of the
Church, and the Great Doctor Jeremey Tailor was resolved upon, for the
Bishopric of Down and Conor, and not long after Dromore was added to it. And
it was but reasonable that the King and Church should consider their Champion,
and reward the pains and sufferings he underwent in the defense of their Cause
and Honor.

11. With what care and faithfulness he discharged his Office, we are all his
witnesses; what good Rules and Directions he gave his Clergy, and how he taught
us the practice of them by his own Example. Upon his coming over Bishop, he was
made a Privy Counselor, and the University of Dublin gave him their Testimony,
by recommending him for their Vice Chancellor; which honorable Office he kept
to his dying day.

12. During his being in this See, he wrote several excellent Discourses,
particularly his Disswasive from Popery (which was received by a general
Approbation) and a Vindication of it from some impertinent Cavillers, that
pretend to answer Books, when there is nothing toward it, more than the very
Title Page.

13. This great Prelate improved his Talent with a mighty industry, and managed
his Stewardship rarely well: and his Master, when he called for his Accounts,
found him busy, and at his work, and employed upon an excellent Subject, A
Discourse upon the Beatitudes: Which if finished, would have been of great use
to the world, and solved most of the Cases of Conscience that occur to a
Christian, in all the varieties of states and conditions. But the All-wise God
has ordained it otherwise, and has called home his good Servant, to give him
a portion in that blessedness that Jesus Christ has promised to all his
faithful Disciples and Followers.

14. Thus having given you a brief account of his Life, I will add a Character
of his person; although the Subject can hardly be reached by any expressions;
for he was none of Gods ordinary works, but his Endowments were so many and so
great, as really made him a Miracle.

15. Nature had befriended him much in his constitution, for he was a person of
a most sweet and obliging Humor, of great Candor and ingenuity; and there was
so much of Salt, and fineness of Wit, and prettiness of address in his familiar
Discourses, as made his Conversation have all the pleasantness of a Comedy, and
all the usefulness of a Sermon. His Soul was made up of Harmony. and he never
spoke, but he charmed his Hearer not only with the clearness of his Reason, but
all his words, and his very Tone and Cadencies were strangely Musical.

16. But that which did most of all captivate and enrich, was the gaiety and
richness of his Fancy. For he had much in him of that natural Enthusiasm, that
inspires all great Poets and Orators; and there was a generous ferment in his
Blood and Spirits that set his Fancy bravely a work, and made it swell, and
teem, and become pregnant to such degrees of Luxuriancy, as nothing, but the
greatness of his Wit and Judgment, could have kept it within due bounds and
measures.

17. And indeed it was a rare mixture, and a single instance, hardly to be
found in any Age. For the great Tryer of Wits has told us, That there is a
peculiar and several Complexion required for Wit, and Judgment, and Fancy: and
yet you might have found all these in this great Personage, in their eminency
and perfection.

18. But that which made his Wit and Judgment so considerable, was the
largeness and freedom of his Spirit. For Truth is plain and easy to a mind
disintangled from Superstition and prejudice. He was one of the (...), a sort
of brave Philosophers that Laertius speaks of, that did not addict themselves
to any particular Sect, but ingenuously sought for Truth among all the
wrangling Schools. And they found her miserably torn and rent to pieces, and
parcell'd into rags, by the several contending parties, and so dis-figur'd and
misshapen, that it was hard to know her; but they made a shift to gather up her
scattered Limbs, which as soon as they came together, by a strange sympathy and
connaturalness, presently united into a lovely and beautiful Body.

19. This was the Spirit of this great man, he weighed men's Reasons, and not
their Names, and was not scared with the ugly Vizars, men usually put upon
persons they hate, and opinions they dislike; nor affrighted with the
Anathema's and Execrations of an Infallible Chair; which he looked upon only as
Bugbears to terrify weak and childish minds. He considered, that it is not
likely any one party should wholly engross Truth to themselves, that Obedience
is the only way to true knowledge (which is an Argument that he has managed
rarely well, in that excellent Sermon of his which he calls Via
intelligentiae:) that God always and only teaches docible and ingenuous minds,
that are willing to hear, and ready to obey according to their Light: that it
is impossible, a pure, humble, resigned, God-like Seul should be kept out of
Heaven, whatever mistakes it might be subject to in this state of Mortality;
that the design of Heaven is not to fill men's Heads, and feed their
Curiosities, but to better their Hearts and mend their Lives. Such
considerations as these made him impartial in his disquisitions, and give a due
allowance to the Reasons of his Adversary, and contend for Truth and not for
Victory.

20. To these advantages of Nature, and excellency of his Spirit, he added an
indefatigable Industry, and God gave a plentiful Benediction: for there were
very few kinds of Learning but he was a Mystes, and a great Master in them.

21. He was a rare Humanist, and hugely verst in all the polite parts of
Learning, and had thoroughly concocted all the ancient Moralists, Greek, and
Roman, Poets, and Orators; and was not unacquainted with the refined Wits of
the later Ages, whether French, or Italian.

22. But he had not only the Accomplishments of a Gentleman, but so universal
were his parts, that they were proportioned to every thing. And though his
Spirit and Humor were made up of smoothness and gentleness, yet he could bear
with the harshness and roughness of the Schools, and was not unseen in their
subtilties and spinosities, and upon occasion could make them serve his
purpose: And yet, I believe, he thought many of them very near a kin to the
Famous Knight of the Muncha, and would make sport sometimes with the Romantic
Sophistry, and fantastic Adventures of School-Errantry.

23. His skill was great, both in the Civil and Canon Law, and Casuistical
Divinity: And he was a rare conductor of Souls, and knew how to counsel, and to
advise; to solve difficulties and determine Cases, and quiet Consciences. And
he was no Novice in Mr. J. S.'s new Science of Controversy: but could manage
an Argument, and make reparties with a strange dexterity. He understood what
the several Parties in Christendom have to say for themselves; and could plead
their cause to better advantage than any Advocate of their Tribe; and when he
had done, he could confute them too, and show, that better Arguments than ever
they could produce for themselves, would afford no sufficient ground for their
fond Opinions.

24. I shall add only his great acquaintance with the Fathers and
Ecclesiastical Writers, and the Doctors of the first and purest Ages both of
the Greek and Latin Church; which he has made use of against the Romanists, to
vindicate the Church of England from the Challenge of Innovation, and prove her
to be truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical.

25. But Religion and Virtue is the Crown of all other Accomplishments: and it
was the Glory of this great man, to be thought a Christian, and whatever you
added to it, he looked upon as a term of diminution. And yet he was a zealous
Son of the Church of England; but that was, because he judged her, (and with
great reason) a Church the most purely Christian of any in the world.

26. In his younger years he met with some assaults from Popery, and the high
pretensions of their Religious Orders were very accommodate to his devotional
Temper. But he was always so much Master of himself, that he would never be
governed by any thing but Reason, and the evidence of Truth: which engaged him
in the study of those Controversies; and to how good purpose, the world by this
time a sufficient witness. But the longer, and the more he considered, the
worse he liked the Roman Cause, and became at last to censure them with some
severity: but I confess, I have so great an opinion of his Judgment, and the
Charitableness of his Spirit, that I am afraid he did not think worse of them
than they deserve.

27. But Religion is not matter of Theory and Orthodox Notions, and it is not
enough to believe aright, but we must practice accordingly: and to Master our
Passions, and to make a right use of that(...)and power that God has given us
over our own actions, is a greater glory than all other Accomplishments that
can adorn the mind of man. And therefore I shall close my Character of this
great Personage with a touch upon some of those Virtues, for which his Memory
will be precious to all Posterity.

28. He was a person of great Humility, and, notwithstanding his stupendous
Parts, and Learning, and eminency of place, he had nothing in him of Pride and
Humor, but was courteous and affable, and of easy access, and would lend a
ready ear to the Complaints, yea to the impertinences of the meanest persons.

29. His Humility was coupled with an extraordinary Piety, and I believe he
spent the greatest part of his time in Heaven. His solemn hours of Prayer took
up a considerable portion of his life; and we are not to doubt but he had
learned of St. Paul to pray continually; and that occasional ejaculations, and
frequent aspirations and emigrations of his Soul after God, made up the best
part of his Devotions.

30. But he was not only a good man Godward, but he was come to the top of St.
Peter's Gradation, and to all his other Virtues added a large and diffusive
Charity. And whoever compares his plentiful Incomes with the inconsiderable
estate he left at his Death, will be easily convinced, that Charity was steward
for a great proportion of his Revenue. But the Hungry that he fed, and the
Naked that he clothed, and the distressed that he supplied, and the fatherless
that he provided for; the poor Children that he put to Apprentice, and brought
up at school, and maintained at the University, will not sound a Trumpet to
that Charity, which he dispersed with his right hand, but wouldnot suffer his
left hand to have any knowledge of it.

31. To sum up all in a few words, This Great Prelate, had the Good Humor of a
Gentleman, the Eloquence of an Orator, the Fancy of a Poet, the acuteness of a
Schoolman, The profoundness of a Philosopher, the Wisdom of a Chancellor, the
Sagacity of a Prophet, the Reason of an Angel, and the Piety of a Saint. He had
Devotion enough for a Cloister, Learning enough for an University, and Wit
enough for a College of Virtuosi: And, had his Parts and Endowments been
parcell'd out among his poor Clergy that he left behind him; it would perhaps
have made one of the best Diocese in the world.

32. But alas! Our Father, Our Father! The Horses of our Israel, and the
Chariot thereof! He is gone, and has carried his Mantle, and his Spirit along
with him up to Heaven; and the Sons, of the Prophets have lost all their beauty
and luster, which they enjoyed only from the reflection of his Excellencies,
which were bright and radiant enough, to cast a glory upon a whole order of
Men. But the Sun of this our world, after many attempts to break through the
crust of an earthly Body, is at last swallowed up in the great Vortex of
Eternity; and there all his Maculae are scattered and dissolved, and he is
fixed in an Orb of Glory, and shines among his Brethren-stars, that in their
several Ages gave Light to the world, and turned many Souls unto Righteousness.

33. And we that are left behind, though we can never reach his perfections,
must study to imitate his Virtues, that we may at last come to sit at his feet
in the Mansions of Glory, which God grant for his infinite Mercies in Jesus
Christ.

Ob. Aug. 13. 1667.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

