A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature OF CHRIST'S KINGDOM, With Relation to the
Kingdoms of this WORLD; IN Two Sermons Preached at St MARY'S* BEFORE THE
University OF CAMBRIDGE.

By MILES BARN Fellow of St Peter's College.

Published by Authority.

The Second Edition.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes, Printer to the University; for R. Green*
Bookseller in Cambridge. 1682.

Imprimatur,

Nath. Coga, Academiae Cantabrigiensis Procancellarius. Jsph. Beaumont, Reg.
Theol. Professor. R. Widdrington, Dnae Margaretae Professor. Geo. Chamberlain,
Sen. Theol. Doctor.


TO THE Reverend and Right Worshipful Dr Nathaniel Coga VICE CHANCELLOR And
Master of Pem. Hall; Dr Joseph Beaumont Regius Professor of DIVINITY And Master
of St Pet. College; And Other the Worthy HEADS of the University of CAMBRIDGE.
I Should not presume to prefix Your Great Names to this mean Discourse, were I
not encouraged thereto, by the Kind Reception it found from you, when I had the
Honor to Preach it before You. Your Attention then, made me believe it not
altogether Impertinent; And Your Approbation since, makes me think it not
altogether unfit for the Public. It sets forth Guarded by Your Authority, And
therefore defies the Censure of the Factious, and Schismatical. For them to
Cavil where you have given Judgment, will only betray their wonted Prejudice.
Neither will Ye be ashamed of the Dedication, when it shall appear, That the
Discourse represents You, in Your Principles and Practices, in Relation to the
Government both of Church and State. You are Undoubtedly, in Your Capacities,
the Stable Supports and Ornaments of Both. For though Ye are fixed to
particular Spheres, yet Ye Influence the Nation by Your Learning, Prudence and
Loyalty. His Majesty did lately, of His own Accord, vouchsafe to Honor You,
with His Royal Presence, which Gracious Act does sufficiently Testify to the
world, How well Ye have behaved Your Selves, in the Government of this His
University, and How worthy He thinks You of Greater Dignity. May Ye always
enjoy His Royal Protection, increase in the Esteem of all Virtuous and
Judicious Men, and never lose the Reputation Ye have already Gained as in Your
several Colleges, so in the University in General, which is at this Day by Your
wise Conduct so well managed, as to be Dreaded by the Factious, Loved and
Respected by all Good Subjects. That Ye would reckon me in the number of these
is the Great Ambition of

Your most Devoted and Obedient Servant M. Barn.

A SERMON Preached before the University OF CAMBRIDGE.
St John 18. 36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this world. --

WHich answer was occasioned by Pilat's Question, Joh. 18. 35.
What have thou done? For Pilate urging Christ to confess, whether He were
guilty of the Crimes laid to his charge by his goodly Accusers the Chief
Priests, which were no less than High Treason and Blasphemy, gave Him an
opportunity to discourse of the Nature of His Kingdom; And from thence to show
the Malice and Falsity of their Accusation. He did not deny Himself to be a
King, but from the Quality of his Kingdom, gave sufficient Proof, that He was
falsely accused as a Traitor and Enemy to Caesar. As much as if He had said, I
confess my self to be a King, yet by renouncing all earthly Sovereignty, I make
it plainly appear to you Pilate, whom I own to be my Lawful Judge, for as much
as you are commissioned by Caesar, as He is by God; That my Accusers the Chief
Priests and their Accomplices are a Pack of Profligate Villains, resolved to
take away my Life, either through Malice, Revenge, or what is worse, the
Unnatural Pleasure they take in shedding of Innocent Blood. And to effect this
their Hellish Design, they have no surer method, no more plausible Pretense,
than to lay to my charge Crimes which I never was guilty of, and such as my
very soul abhors. They would persuade you, That I am a dangerous Person, an
Enemy to Caesar, and a Conspiratour against the Government. That I would
subvert the established, and introduce a false Religion of my own. Whereas, had
I any such Design, I should not have appeared in such mean circumstances, as
hitherto I have done, attended only with a few poor Disciples, and They too
unarmed; and moreover, by me strictly commanded not to draw the sword against
Public Authority upon any provocation whatsoever: But like your Emperors I
had marched with my Guards about me, and appeared at the Head of twelve Legions
of Armed Angels, who should have fought my B^ttels, confounded mine Enemies,
and not have suffered me to have been delivered into their Hands. And therefore
believe me Pilate, Caesar's Kingdom is in no danger of being overthrown by mine;
which is no other, than what the Jewish Prophets have foretold should be set up
in these Days. A Kingdom which would Legitimate the Jews, and make them what
they falsely pretend to be, Children of the Faithful Abraham. A Kingdom which
would make Caesar Great and Happy, by making His Subjects Obedient and Loyal to
Him, whilst he approves Himself so to the King of Heaven. This seems to be
truly the Reason of Christ's Declaration* My Kingdom is not of this world. From
which Explication of the words, and the several Circumstances of our Saviors
Trial we may observe: Under what vizard Calumny commonly wreaks its malice upon
Innocent Persons.

The steadfast mien, and undaunted carriage of Innocence under the most extreme
violence of its Oppressors.

The salvage Fury of the Multitude, who when stirred up by the Rulers, nothing
can appease, but their louder cries, Crucify, Crucify, must prevail.

The Frailty of Judges, sometimes through Fear, but oft'ner through secular
Interest, corrupted to go against their Judgments. But because these
observations seem rather to arise from the previous and subsequent
Circumstances of our Savior's Trial, than any immediate foundation in the Text
it self, I shall be very brief in their Illustration.

Under what vizard Calumny commonly wreaks its malice upon Innocent persons.
Humane Nature notwithstanding all the Affronts and Indignities which Mr Hobs
has thrown upon it, is of it self very civil, obliging and compassionate. In
common speech, Humanity and Civility signify the same thing. Nothing makes a
deeper impression upon our minds, than to see Virtue oppressed, nothing is more
grating than to see Villainy prosper: As the wisest men have not been free from
Resentments of this Kind; so the Best have not always been able to abstain from
making some undue Reflections upon Providence upon this account. The Heroic
Patience of Job as 'twas admirable, so 'twas singular, He being the only
Example of a mere man, who ran through all the Dolorous Stages of Affliction,
with an unwearied and unblameable Constancy, He alone deserved tha^ great
Character, Job. 1. 22.
In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. This being truly the
State of Humane Nature. Whenever it has or shall be the Fate of Innocent
persons to suffer in this Life, to accomplish their Triumphs in the other, it
must be by making them Guilty of the blackest Crimes. I shall keep my self to
the Instance of my Text, our blessed Savior; who though Isa. 53. 9.
He had done no violence, neither was deceit found in his mouth, yet He was
accused by a Band of Priests; His Accusation was Blasphemy and High Treason.
And so the Son of God was found Guilty of Blasphemy against God. The Great
Exemplar of Loyalty and Obedience was Sentenced to die, and executed as the
worst of Malefactors, a Traitor against Caesar.

The Steadfast mien, and Undaunted Behavior of Innocence under all the Injuries
of its Oppressors. And indeed who but an Innocent Person could have sustained,
with so much Bravery and Greatness of Mind, all those undeserved Indignities
which were thrown upon Our Savior? For He was Judas-like betrayed, by That
which should be a Token of the Dearest Friendship, a Kiss. Rudely apprehended
by Ruffians. Cowardly deserted by his Disciples. Inhumanely Buffeted and
Scourged by the Rude Soldiers. Mockingly Arrayed in a Purple Robe. Falsely
Sentenced to Death by Cowardly Pilate. And all along His tedious and painful
Crucifixion, mocked and reviled by His unrelenting Executioners. Now as that
Heroic Patience, which shined forth in our Savior, under and above all these
Cruelties, convinced All but the Contrivers of them, of His Innocence, and
extorted that Noble Confession from the Centurion; Luke 23. 47.
Certainly this was a Righteous man. So if the like Patience, does not produce
the like Effect in us toward all His Followers, whom He out of His mighty Love
has enabled to Drink of that bitter Cup, which He Blessed and Sweetn'd with His
Sacred Lips, it is not a Sign of their Guilt, but of a Jewish Obdurateness in
our Hearts.

Fury of the Multitude, who if once stirred up by the Rulers, nothing can
afterward appease, but their Louder Cries, Crucify, Crucify, must prevail.
Pilate, ye know, was willing to have released Jesus. For He pronounced Him
Innocent once and again. But being frighted, He was at length overcome by the
Outrageous Glamors of the People; And then against Law and His own Conscience,
He delivered Him to the Will of His Adversaries. Against Law, for the Witnesses
did not agree; against His own Conscience, for He took water and washed His
Hands, and Foolishly thought by that water to wash away the Guilt of shedding
that Innocent Blood, not to be washed away but by the Virtue of that Blood
which He caused to be shed.

The Frailty of Judges sometimes through Fear, but oft'ner through Secular
Interest corrupted to Act against their Consciences. I do not find in the whole
Tragical story of our Saviors Trial, but that Pilate was of Himself a very
Good Judge. That He carried a fair mixture of Justice and Mercy. For though He
understood not the Great Worth of the Prisoner brought before Him, yet out of
the Gentility of His Nature, he treated Him respectfully. He seemed rather to
pity, than upbraid His Calamities. He forbore all Bitter Sarcasms, and used no
Reproachful Language toward His Person; so far was He from encouraging the
Furious Proceedings of His Malicious Accusers, by any Incentive Harangues, That
he endeavored, what he could, to mollify and assuage them, by Grave and Sober
Speeches. He was as willing to hear the Defense of the Prisoner, as the
Indictment which was alleged against Him. But notwithstanding all these
promising Signs of Justice, and an Impartial Trial; when He perceived that the
Chief Priests and Elders, had got the Cry on their side, and that there was
Danger of loosing His Judges Place, if he did not comply with the unruly
Multitude; when the bloudy-minded implacable Priests began to Brave him on the
Bench, and tell him to his face, that if he let the Prisoner go he was not
Caesar's Friend; he delivered Him up to the Will of his Crucifiers. And neither
his pretended Clemency, the Intercession of his Beloved Wife, the apparent, and
by him confessed, Innocence of the Prisoner could save Him from the Cross. And
thus the Great Sacrifice of the World, was Sacrificed to Interest, and Popular
Fury. O Let all the Judges of the Earth take warning from Pilat's Frailty, and
learn to do Justice, in spite of the Threats, and Allurements of the world.

But to come yet closer to the Text; Jesus answered my Kingdom is not of this
world. Because Jesus declared His Kingdom not to be of this world, therefore
had He not a Kingdom in this world? did not all the Titles to Dominion meet and
concenter in him? For had not He the Right of Primogeniture, whom the Father
appointed Heir of all things? Had not He the Right of Creation, Heb. 1. 23.
by whom He made the worlds? The Right of similitude; for was He not the
Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person? The Right of
conservation, for does He not uphold all things by the word of His Power? The
Right of Redemption, for has He not purged our sins?

And does He not now enjoy the Right of Exaltation, and Possession, for is He
not set down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High? Which of the Potentates
of the earth can show more Glorious, or just Titles to the Sceptres which they
sway?

Expositor has observed, these words cannot be understood so, as to exclude
Christ's Right to a Kingdom in this world, for in the next verse it follows
expressly, for this end; viz. That I might be a Joh. 18. 37.
King, came I into the world.

Secondly, These words cannot be understood, as if there were Kingdoms of this
world, which were originally of this world, though Christ's Kingdom should not
prove to be one of these. This Exposition will suit with their Frantic Humor,
who place the Origin of Dominion in the People. But what Jesus replied to the
Roman President, in the 11th v. of the next Chapter, does sufficiently confute
that wild, and dangerous Position; (...) which comes from (...) John 19. 11.
Thou could have no Power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. Now let but the People produce Jehovah's special Donation, or immediate
Conveyance of Power to them; And then we will be content to submit to their
Government; But if they can produce no such Instrument, how Impious and
Sacrilegious are they, in challenging to themselves the Origin of Dominion,
which belongs solely to Jehovah.

Thirdly, it follows the words themselves cannot bear this Construction, That
any just Power should be Originally of this world. Force and Might may, But
(...) the word used in the New Testament to signify Power is Originally in
God, and Derivatively in Kings, as Gods Vicegerents.

The Question then seems not fully resolved in what sense Jesus said -- My
Kingdom is not of this world. St Chrysostom thinks He spoke of the Kingdom of
Heaven, for He does not say my Kingdom is not of this world, as though He had
not a Right to possess the Kingdoms of this world, But because He had a
Greater, and more Glorious Kingdom in Heaven. St Aug. And ll'e trouble you with
no more Expositors, thinks He spoke of His Church, which is His Kingdom, and
not so properly of this world, because it is here only in Pilgrimage, and a
state of Probation, and shall not be Perfect and Triumphant until it be seated
in Heaven. But as I told you before, the meaning is plain enough, My Kingdom is
not of this world; i. e. It Is not of the same Nature, and Quality with the
Kingdoms of this world. It consists not, as they do, in Outward Pomp, and
Grandeur, but is of a Spiritual, and Heavenly Temper. That this is the true
meaning of the words will appear;

From the manner of its Institution; which was not like that of the Kingdoms of
this world; in the servile Submission of men, or any Bloody Conquest over them.
He arrived at Sovereignty without Raising of Armies, or Fighting of Battles;
neither did He measure the Greatness of His Kingdom, from the Bodily Strength,
the Numbers of His Subjects, or the Largeness of his Territories. But
contrariwise His Kingdom was founded in the submission of the soul; He set up
His Standard in the Inward Man; And His Power was chiefly manifested in the
Noble Conquests which He wrought over the Rebellious Wills, and unruly
Affections of men. And this mighty work He effected after a spiritual manner.
By the Reasonableness of His Doctrine, and the Exemplariness of His Life. By
the Majesty of His Miracles, and the Energie of His Spirit. By strict Fastings,
and fervent Prayers; and all other severities of an Holy Life. Lastly, by
Attesting the Truth, and Dignity of His Kingdom by His Blood. And thus the
Kingdom of Christ, in a short time, spread its Triumphant Arms throughout the
world. It took Possession, in all the Kingdoms of the world; But dispossessed
none of the Kings of the earth of their Dominions. It committed an holy
violence upon men's minds, but left their Bodies, and Estates free. It conquered
Kings, and subdued their Subjects, and yet at the same time established the
Crown upon the Head of the one, by making Obedience an indispensable Duty in
the other.

This will appear from the manner of its Administration. As His Kingdom was at
first founded, so was it Governed in a manner different from the Kingdoms of
this world. The Obedience of His Subjects proceeds from a Principle of Filial
Love, not of Servile Fear. He secures them in their Allegiance by His Invisible
Power, but never constrains them by any Visible Force. He Raised no Taxes for
the support of His Government, but Religiously paid them, where they were due.
He Enacted no Penal Statutes, Leading to Pecuniary* Mulcts, or Corporal
Punishments, but yet He submitted to those Laws, and enjoined His Followers to
do the same. His Court was so far from being crowded with Ministers of State;
that sometimes He had no Attendants at all; And when He had any, they were of
no higher rank than poor Fishermen. He was so far from being Ministered unto,
that He became the Servant of All, so far from being served upon the Knee, that
He Kneeled down, and washed His servants feet; so far from sending forth
Ambassadors to negotiate the Affairs of this world, that He strictly commanded
His Disciples to leave them All, whenever they Hinder, or stand in Competition
with the Concerns of His Kingdom. Lastly, so far from Constituting Judges with
the Power of Life, that He Himself was sentenced to the most Ignominious Death*
Briefly, as His Kingdom was Spiritual, so were all His Affairs transacted after
a Spiritual manner. I speak not this with the least reflection upon the
Greatness of the Kings of the earth, or the Laws, and Proceedings of their
Courts of Judicature, whose unhappy Circumstances are often times such, that
they cannot assume to themselves too much of outward state to retain the
Obedience of their good, nor enact too severe Laws to reclaim the
Licentiousness of their bad Subjects. But only to show the difference of the
Kingdoms of this world, and that of the Gospel, in the Administration of their
Affairs.

This will appear from the manner of subduing His Enemies. As He Governs His
Subjects, so he Conquers His Enemies after a Spiritual, and Heavenly manner,
not by the material, but the sword of the spirit. His weapons are not carnal,
but mighty to the pulling down of the strong holds of Satan. 2 Cor. 10. 4.
As the Enemies of His Kingdom are chiefly the Invisible Powers of Darkness,
Legions of Devils, and Armed Fiends, so He conquers them by the Light of His
Word, and the mighty Power of His Spirit. By the Ministry of Angels, He
countermines the devices of Satan. The Captain of our Salvation trusted not in
His sword, or spear. In His Armoury are found none of the bloody Engines of
War. His Victories consisted not of Ephesians. 6. 12.
slaughtered bodies, but vanquished spirits. For He wrestled not against Flesh,
and Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses in High Places.
Which sometimes He Exorciz'd by the Power of his Word; sometimes He cast out by
Fasting and Prayer, always subdued by Proportioning His weapons to the strength
and cunning of His Adversaries. And thus Briefly we have seen in what Respects
Christ's Kingdom is said not to be of this world. In Respect of its Institution,
Administration, and the manner of conquering its enemies.

And now upon a review, let us consider, First, whose Kingdom they belong to,
who*propagate Christ's after another manner, than 'twas at first founded by
Him. Who under pretense of Zeal for the Kingdom of Heaven, disturb the Kingdoms
of the earth; who to Proselyte Souls exercise unheard of Cruelties and
Injustice over the Bodies and Estates of men; who found Christ's Kingdom in
Blood; and make the Prince of Peace, the Author of unnatural War. Who out of
needless Fears, and self-created Jealousies of losing their Religion, are
guilty of such Practices, as not only the Christian, but even Natural Religion
Detests and Abhors. I hope all men will grant, that the Peace of the Government
is of far greater concern, than the Toleration of this, or that private Opinion
in matters of Religion. For by disturbing that, the Innocent are often involved
in Temporal miseries, the Disturbers themselves, if they perish in the
Rebellion, are in danger of eternal damnation. But sure I am, no man shall be
called to an Account hereafter, for not publicly exercising his own Private
Opinions, in opposition to the established Religion of the Land; and which is
by Him confessed to hold all the Fundamentals of Salvation, and to be free from
any damnable error. Briefly the Christian Religion as it is Instituted by
Christ, is the greatest security to Temporal Governors; And if it be made use
of to the prejudice of the present Possessor, or his Lawful Successor, it is
then abused, the Author of it betrayed, and the Great Design of it perverted.

Whose Kingdom do they belong to, who negotiate the affairs of Souls, after
another manner than Christ did. Who aim at Superiority in the Church, with a
Design to Lord It over Christ's Flock, and exercise Tyranny over the Consciences
of men. Who take upon them the Ministerial Function, to gratify their Avarice
and Ambition, and make the Patrimony of the Church subservient to base Secular
ends. Who if once arrived to a pretended unappealable degree of Hierarchy,
presently exalt themselves above all that is called God. These are so far from
being Faithful Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, that they are the very enemies of
Christ. For if the Governors of the Church, of Good Shepherds become Ravenous
Wolves; And instead of Reducing the Strays to the Flock in the Spirit of
meekness, they shall by their Pride, and Haughtiness Drive the Sheep from
thence; what a sad account will they have to make hereafter to the Great
Shepherd of Souls. How guilty the Pope and his Ecclesiastics have been of this
Charge, I shall not need declare. But so long as the Governors of the Church
execute their High Calling, according to Christ's Prescript, the Practice of the
Apostles, and Primitive Bishops, with Humility, Sobriety, Hospitality, Gravity
and Moderation; there is yet great hopes, that the Governed, the People, may
yet bring forth the blessed Fruits of Love, Peace, Joy, Obedience,
Long-suffering, Goodness, Faith, Meekness and Temperance.

Thirdly, Let us enquire whose Kingdom they belong to, who would destroy all
those whom they account the Enemies of Christ's Kingdom, with other weapons,
than He has allowed of. Of all Feuds, those about Religion are the fiercest.
And therefore it is well the Captain of our Salvation has told us what kind of
Arms we are to use in its Defense; otherwise the Christian Camp, through the
Perverseness of the Commanders, had made but one common Field of Blood.
Lukewarmness in Religion, or an Indifferency to All Religions, is as bad as if
we professed none at all. To maintain our Religion by Cruelty, or Injustice, is
worse, than if we professed none at all. He who denies a God, only proclaims
himself a Fool; But we want a name to distinguish him by, who makes God the
Author of Impieties; or his Religion a Countenancer of Injustice. He who out of
Zeal to God, robs Caesar of his Dues, were it in his power, would de-throne
God, and set himself up in His Room. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this
world. What then shall we think of His pretended Vicar, who impudently claims
a Right to all the Kingdoms of this world? Who whilst he hypocritically styles
himself a servant of the meanest of the servants of Jesus Christ, Usurps the
Power of deposing Kings, and disposing of their Kingdoms. To deal sincerely
with you, I think this Impious Practice to be one of the most Irrefragable
Arguments, to prove him to be The Antichrist. That whereas some have taken a
great deal of Pains, to prove Him so, from the obscure Prophecies of Daniel;
And others with great Labor, and Difficulties have applied all the Phenomenon,
and Characters of the Apocalyptical False Prophet to the Pope; This is a more
sure, and compendious way of stamping upon him the Mark of the Beast. Christ
was both a King, and a Priest. His Priestly Office, in the most solemn manner,
He conferred upon the Apostles; His Kingly He left where He founded It,
Delegated by His Father, upon the Emperors of the world, and confirmed that
Delegation to us, by His own Obedience to Them. Now then if the Pope, out of
Great solicitude for the Churches committed to His charge, makes any unjust
Attempts, upon their Regalities, He strikes at the 1 John 4. 3.
Kingly Office of Christ, and endeavors -- Solvere Jesum, the Dissolution of
Jesus, as the Vulgar Translation, and those Greek Copies it follows, have it.
Now since He dares not pretend to this Power immediately from Christ, for He
cannot find any such Donation, amongst all the Rights, He pretends to as St
Peter's Successor; His Indirect Power, and in Order to Spirituals will not serve
his Turn. For to suppose the worst; That the Kings of the earth should stand
up, and take Council together to destroy Christ's Kingdom, shall therefore his
Holiness add Impiety to their madness, by Deposing them, and absolving their
Subjects from their Obedience? If he does, he is so far from being Christ's
Vicar, That he is a Barabbas, and though he may escape, as Barabbas did,
Punishment in this Life; yet that eternal Vengeance which pursues Robbers, and
Murderers, will overtake him in the other. All that the Governors of the
Church can do in this Extremity, is to Advise, Admonish, Rebuke with all
Gravity and Humility; to set before them the Folly and Danger of such Councils,
and the certain Destruction, which always attends them. And if such, with all
other Christian means prove ineffectual, they having discharged their Duty,
must commit Themselves, and Their Cause to God, in Tears, Fasting and Prayers;
And in those very Prayers they must remember more especially their Persecutors.
Lastly, if God so wills, in a Patient suffering the Loss of Life. These are
the only justifiable weapons, by which the Church of Christ opposes Her
Enemies.

And now give me leave in a few words, to bring all home to our selves. None of
us have been so closely Immured in our Studies, but we must have observed
something of the present State of Affairs. How that our Church has two Potent,
and Restless Enemies to Encounter, the Romanists, and the Presbyterians, with
all the Inferior Sects, that fight under their Banner. We have been
sufficiently Alarmed by the Hellish Plots of the one; And we have by sad
Experience felt the unsupportable Tyranny of the other. Yet God forbid, that we
should serve Them, as they would do Us; Defend Our Religion by the same
unwarrantable Practices, by which they would Destroy It. The Reformed Religion
of the Church of England, as it has the most of Primitive Purity in worship,
Doctrine, and Discipline; so has it of Christian Loyalty, of any other
Religion in the world. And it is our Happiness to live under as Gracious a
Prince, as ever Swayed the English Scepter, since the Conquest; Who has through
his whole Reign been more Tender of the Liberty and Property of the Subject,
than of his own Prerogative. Whence then these Hideous Murmurings and
Complainings in our Streets? Whence these Daily Outcries, and Fears of being
led into Captivity? Are they not from hence, that there are a sort of restless
ungrateful people amongst us, who under pretense of Securing the Protestant
Religion, would ruin the Church of England, the best and surest Guard against
Popery? Who by wheadling the People, with the specious Names of Liberty and
Property, would undermine Monarchy, the strongest bullwark against Tyranny, and
Arbitrary Power? But is it possible, that the same cheats, should pass twice
upon a Nation, in the same Age? Have we so soon forgot the Miseries, and
Desolations of the late Usurpation? or being surfited with Plenty, do we
nauseat the Blessings of his Majesty's happy Restoration? We have indeed had
our Portion in this Life. And our Kingdom, seems to have been too much of this
world. Our present Distemper proceeds from a Fullness of Humors, and Rankness
of Blood. Now if we would take the Gentlest way of Cure, we are not to let out,
but correct and sweeten the Blood. And this in a Moral sense cannot be done,
but by Mortification, by strict Fastings, Watchings and Prayers. Our Kingdom is
not of this world, and all that we have to do in it, is to promote the Peace
and Prosperity of it, so long as we continue in it, and to secure our own
eternal welfare, when we go out of it. The Founder of this our Kingdom spent
much of his time in solitude, prayer, and abstaining from the common converse
of the world. When He was fullest of business, He often went into solitude for
Prayer. And when He was on the last Stage of His Life, even at Jerusalem, He
retired to the Mount of Olives to betake Himself to Private Prayer, and was
apprehended performing the Duty of solitary Prayer. Let us in Imitation of Him,
and in Conformity to the Laws of His Kingdom, Betake our selves frequently to
solitary Prayers. And in our Devout Recesses, and Holy Retreats from the Noise,
and Impertinent business of this world, Let us commend our Souls to God. And in
our prayers bewail more especially our sins of Murmuring and Ingratitude, the
Cause of our present Distractions, and which will, if not repented of, Involve
us in a more Terrible Destruction, than the utmost Rage of our Enemies is able
to effect: But most especially let us pray for the safety of His Majesty's
Sacred Person, and the Long continuance of His Life; for the Peace of
Jerusalem, and the Prosperity of Sion. That He would confound His Enemies, and
make all His Royal Friends to Rejoice. That He would deliver the Innocent from
the Oppressor, and bring the perjured man to condign punishment. That He would
preserve the purity of the Religion established amongst us, from Superstition
and Enthusiasm. In a word, That He would infuse Grace into all our Hearts, that
we may in all things walk worthy of our High calling, and show our selves Loyal
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, by our steadfast Obedience to our Supreme Governor
the King, and to all Subordinate Magistrates, as sent and Commissioned by Him.
That so with St Luke, whose Praise is in the Gospel, and all the Glorious Army
of Saints and Martyrs, we may at length Arrive at the Kingdom of Heaven.

Amen.
The End.
A SERMON Preached before the University OF CAMBRIDGE.
St John 18. 36. -- If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants
fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews.


IN the former part of the verse Christ declares his Kingdom not to be of this
world; which Declaration is here confirmed by a reason drawn from the Nature
and Practice of the Kingdoms of this world; which should be to defend their
Kings, as to the immunity and safety of their Sacred Persons; so likewise in
the free exercise of their just Rights and Prerogatives; whenever one, or the
other shall happen to be invaded, either by Faction from their own Subjects, or
Violence from foreign Enemies. Kings by their Coronation Oaths, have made
themselves Accountable to God Almighty, and Him alone, if they fail in their
Duty of defending the Liberties and Properties of their People: for which
reason they ought to be the more circumspect in their ways, for as much as the
Divine vengeance is more to be dreaded, than any which the strongest arm of
flesh can inflict. And the People have indispensably obliged themselves by
Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity, to afford them such Assistance both from
their Persons and Estates, as shall be judged convenient and necessary for the
maintaining their Crowns and Dignities. In this mutual Assistance and
Confidence of each other consists the Beauty, Strength and Safety of
Government; Without which a King would be no better than a piece of Gaudy
Pageantry, set up to be gazed on, and pulled down by every Caprice of the
Multitude: And the People would be deprived of the Benefits which they might
reasonably expect to enjoy under the Government. Our Savior then infers by a
Logic very proper and concluding. -- If my Kingdom were of this world, then
would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews -- If the
Kingdom, which I have been promoting ever since I was born into the world, but
more especially these three last years of my Reign, were of the same nature
with the Kingdoms of this world; then would my Subjects draw their swords in my
just defense, and not suffer me to be thus basely betrayed, and delivered into
the hands of my insulting Enemies the Jews.

The words then of my Text, without force or wresting, afford these three
following Positions.

1. That it is Lawful and the Duty of Christians to draw their swords in
defense of their Sovereign. 2. That it is not Lawful but highly impious in
Christians to Rebel against their Sovereign, or disturb the Government, under
the specious pretense of defending their Religion. 3. That it is the Duty of
Christians patiently to suffer for their Religion, if it be their Lot to fall
into persecuting times, and this in most cases the best, and in some the only
Remedy left them.
1. I begin with the First Position. That it is Lawful and the Duty of
Christians to draw their swords in Defense of their Sovereign -- If my Kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered
to the Jews -- Whereby the King of Heaven, and Prince of Peace approves of the
Practices of the Kings of the earth, who have their Guards to defend their
Sacred Persons; Their Armies to oppose and subdue their Enemies. Whereby He
gives a Commission to all Christians to fight for their Lawful Sovereigns, and
to lay their Enemies prostrate at their triumphant feet. It was therefore a
rash Determination in Tertullian, from our Saviors command to St Peter to
sheath his sword, to infer it unlawful for Christians at any time to draw
theirs. And it is highly culpable in his followers* from this one instance to
conclude all warfare Criminal, as if Christ had hereby disbanded all Christian
Soldiers. What is this but to make Christianity a prey to the Unsatiable, a
laughing stock to the Insolent, to prostitute the Lives and Fortunes of
Christians to the pleasure of the Outrageous, and to make Christian* Kings of
all men most despicable; if it were not Lawful for them to repel Injuries by
open Force, when all other means prove ineffectual. This were to deprive
Subjects of the opportunities of showing their Loyalty; of the Rewards due to
those who bravely venture their Lives to relieve Widows, Orphans, or any that
are unjustly oppressed; to defend Churches and the Sacred Revenue from avaricious
and sacrilegious Hands. This were to blast the Laurels of so many Christian
Kings, as got Renown in their glorious Attempts against the Barbarians.

But that the Equity of Christian Arms is established upon the Gospel; appears
in that St John Baptist, though under the most rigorous exercise of a Spiritual
Life, did not command the Soldiers, when they enquired of Him Luke 3. 14.
of the means of salvation, to lay down their Arms, or desert their Colors;
But only to be contented with their pay, to abstain from Violence and
Unjustice, i. e. That they should not abuse their power into Tyranny, and make
their strength the Rule of their Actions. Because also the Apostle says, the
Magistrate Romans 13. 4.
Bears not the sword in vain; which He must do if it were not Lawful for him
sometimes to draw it. Because Christ commanded St Peter to put up his sword,
thereby to give a check to private Revenge, shall it not therefore be Lawful
for Magistrates to draw theirs, to retaliate Public Injuries? Therefore as to
those Sayings of some ancient Fathers, which are urged by some to oppose the
Lawfullness of Christians going to War,

1. It Is answered, First, They only show the Opinions of some Private Doctors,
and not the sense of the Catholic Church; That they were such Doctors as
affected an harmless kind of singularity, and loved to be reputed the Founders
of some more Sublime and Magnificent Opinions; as Origin, Tertullian, etc.
Lastly, That they were not always consistent with themselves, as will appear to
any one who shall compare their Writings on this subject.

2. Secondly, The Primitive Christians did often times refuse, at least
decline, Listing themselves in the Wars, by reason that the circumstances of
the times wherein they lived, did oblige them to such conditions as were not so
well consistent with their holy Profession: so Josephus tells us the Jews
desired an exemption from Military Expeditions, least by their being in
conjunction with Aliens, they should not be able punctually to observe the
Rites of their Law, for they might be compelled to bear Arms on the Sabbath, or
in their marches exceed the journey of that day. The like Dangers Tertullian
might object to the Christians against the Wars of his time. Tert. De Ido. Cap.
XIX.
Non convenit sacramento divino and humano, signo crucis and Diaboli, castris
lucis, and castris tenebrarum: in my Opinion, says he, your Baptismal Vow and
the Military Oath are not consistent, neither can ye fairly bear the sign of
the Cross and the Roman Ensigns, alluding to the Oaths which the Soldiers were
enjoined to take by the false Gods; whose Images probably they wore in the
Banners.

3. Thirdly, Let it be considered that the Primitive Christians were inflamed
with so much Zeal to all Holy and Sublime performances; that with them
Evangelical Counsels had the force of Precepts. They esteemed nothing difficult
which tended to perfection. In which persuasion they exhorted to coelibacy,
forbid second Marriages, refused all places of Dignity and public Trust; some
of them understood that place, Swear not at all* in a Literal sense; they
oftentimes chose rather to loose their right, than go to Law, and thought it
praise worthy in Christians to abstain as well from sharing in the Triumphs of
War, as the pleasures and profits of Merchandise. Not that they looked upon
these as forbidden by the Law of Christ, but because in their exalted Judgments
and pious Raptures they thought the contrary more rewardable and highly
acceptable to God. As for those places of Scripture which seemingly forbid all
kind of Revenge or Resistance; which recommend the suffering of injuries and
indispensably enjoin Beneficence, Love and mutual Friendship. When they are
well considered, they imply no more, than a prohibition of private Revenge* of
Inferiors resisting their Superiors, of one Christians going to Law with
another upon frivolous matters, especially when there may be danger of giving
offense to an unbeliever: or else they are to be looked upon as extraordinary
counsels to some men, who by reason of the Dignity of their Function are
obliged to higher and more exemplary Acts of Piety. Lastly, as to that famous
Prophecy of Isaiah which without doubt relates to Christ's Kingdom, and is thus
recorded; Isa. 2. 4. Micah 4. 3.
They shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
they any more learn war. It must either be understood conditionally, that such
indeed should be the happy State of the world, would all men embrace and
practice the Christian Religion. For then there should be no more Wars, or
rumors of Wars; Janus's Temple should be for ever locked up, and an universal
Jubilee should overspread the face of the earth: or else if you will have it
understood in a Literal sense, we are yet to expect and pray for the joyful
accomplishment of it, as we are for the general conversion of the Jews, and the
coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles. To conclude this point, all Ages do
agree in the Lawfullness of a War, where there is the Authority of the Prince,
a just cause, a good intention, and where only warrantable means are used for
the obtaining the End.

But I think I might have saved my self the trouble of proving my first
Position, for though some of the ancient Fathers might be so nice and
scrupulous in this matter, that they could not upon any terms be persuaded to
go to War, least they should be forced to shed the blood of others, though they
were most generously prodigal of their own; our latter Ages have produced
Christians of a more sanguine complexion, and warlike principles: our modern
Gospellers [following the steps of their Captain Ignatius Loyala, who
instituted a Religious Order according to the Discipline which he had learnt in
the Camp] having it seems received clearer Illuminations, and larger
Commissions, than the prime and immediate Apostles of Christ, have thought it
expedient to propagate their Religion Vi and Armis, and to trust more to the
material than the sword of the Spirit; for why should not Knox enter the List,
who was a Ringleader of those commotions in which he had miserably involved his
Country? or why should Calvin or Beza be excused, who have left behind them
Positions to justify the Proceedings? For their tumultuous and inormous
Practices are no more akin to the regular, peaceable and autorative
Reformation of the Church of England, than Babel is to Jerusalem. Now as
Quarrels about Religion are of the highest and nearest concern, so if once they
come to be decided by the Sword, we shall find them attended with the most dire
and hellish outrages. If Judge. 5. 23. Psalm. 105. 15.
Curse ye Meroz be the word of Command, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, will be found but a weak defense, for Crowned Heads, and
Pastoral hands. And we have by sad experience learned that those peaceful
Ministers of the Gospel, [as they hypocritically styled themselves] whom the
Sacred Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy could not oblige to take up Arms in
the Defense of a most Gracious afflicted Prince, did nevertheless Preach
Sedition, and sound Rebellion so loud from their Pulpits, till at last they
were able to form their deluded Disciples into a Religious Army, who under the
holy cheat of fighting the Lords Battles, setting King Jesus on his Throne,
establishing the Purity of the Gospel, and purging away all Superstition and
Profaneness; barbarously murdered his Anointed, spilt the blood of his
Prophets, laid waste his Vineyard, polluted his holy Altars, and turned his
House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves; who robbed God of his worship, the right
Heir of his Kingdoms, and the Church of Her Revenues. And because we have such
manifest Proofs, that the restless Enemies of our King and Church, are ready to
act the same Tragedy over again, it cannot be unseasonable to consider my
Second Position -- That it is not Lawful but highly impious in Christians, to
Rebel against their Sovereign, or disturb the Government, under the specious
pretense of defending their Religion.

And this Position is usually proved from the truth of another more general,
viz. That it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatever to resist the supreme
Power; and This commonly proved from the Law of Nature, from the Law given to
the Jews; but more especially from the Evangelical Law, and the Practice of the
Primitive Christians; which will be found the best interpreter of those places
of Scripture, which command absolute Obedience, and which, though there were no
other argument, does sufficiently confute all those pernicious Proviso's,
audacious Limitations, all those Pretenses in Ordine ad spiritualia, that
Subordination or Coordination of Power, the resolving it finally into the
People, at least making it accountable to the Inferior Magistrate; in short all
those monstrous Schemes and Deformities of Government, which either Rome,
Geneva, Scotland, or the Republicans of England have sent forth into the world,
to the scandal of the Authors and the Christianity they profess. For if the
Precepts of Obedience are made Sacred by the forementioned indispensable Ties,
then are they least of all to be violated upon the score of Religion. Because,
it is impossible for any Power upon earth either to force his upon, or take my
Religion from me. Consider then with your self how you will ever be able to
expiate the impiety of resisting the Magistrate, under pretense of defending
that, which is not in his power to take from you. Is the command of Subjection
which St Paul has made Sacred upon a twofold account, Romans 13. 5.
Wrath and Conscience, to be trifled withal? will you stop your ears against
the charms of Conscience, and provoke the Wrath of him, who bears not the
sword in vain, for nothing at all? Or rather is not the Religion, about which
you make such a clamor, only some outward hypocritical Profession, some
Politic Disguise to advance your self, by pulling down those who are set over
you by the Lord? Is not the Liberty you contend for, Licentiousness, a freedom
to do what you list? The Yoke you would throw off, that of Order and Obedience?
Would you not exchange Decent, significant Ceremonies, for rude unseemly
Gestures? Would you not turn Godly and Primitive Discipline, into Anarchy, or
Tyrannical impositions? Sound and ancient Doctrine, in all points agreeable to
the written word of God; into novel, enthusiastic Divinity? Inspired stated
Prayers; into vain Repetitions, extemporary and yet laborious effusions? And
instead of a Reverential and awful Administration of the Holy Sacraments;
would you not introduce obscene Dippings; and take the Cup of Salvation with
less Ceremony, than if you were only drinking in Piam Memoriam of some Deceased
Friend? If this be the Religion for which you express so sensible a Tenderness;
it were better suppress't, than tolerated. James 1. 27.
But pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, which is to visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep your self unspotted
from the world. Which is to relieve the oppressed, feed the hungry, clothe the
naked, visit those that are sick, and in prison; which is to live Godly,
Righteously and soberly in this present world; which is to honor the King, to
fear and love God, above all things, and your Neighbor as your self; which is
that of the heart and not of the tongue only, is such a Religion as no Power
upon earth can take from you. I will suppose the worst that can be supposed,
That the Civil Magistrate should be so impious, as to forbid the worship of the
true God, and command the Adoration of an Idol; make a Decree against the
Bible, and establish the Alcoran. His Impiety does not cancel your Obedience,
or Legitimate Rebellion. Here it is that the derided Doctrine of passive
Obedience takes place; neither will the Leviathans wicked Evasions stand you in
any stead. The Retaining God in your heart, whilst you deny him with your
mouth, will not serve your turn; neither can you excuse your self, by resolving
the Guilt of your Apostasy, into the Authority of the Commander; you must obey
God, rather than man, by sustaining the utmost that man can inflict, for Gods
sake. This must be acknowledged a very sharp, and grievous Trial, yet no more
than has been born by others before you; for we have read of Daniel in the
Lions Den, Dan. 6. 16.
Because he would not obey the Idolatrous Decree of Darius; Dan. 3. 20.
of his three companions in a burning fiery Furnace, because they would not
worship the Golden Image Nebucad-nezzar had set up: And we solemnly commemorate
in our daily Office, the Goodly Company of the Apostles, and the Noble Army of
Martyrs. We have heard that the mouths of Lions were stopped, the Flames of fire
quenched for the wonderful Deliverance of the former, and what is yet more to
be had in Admiration, two impious Idolatrous Kings converted by their Heroic
Constancy; And that the later glorified God by their Deaths, and for a
recompense received a Crown of immortality. And to be sure the precious Blood,
of those Martyrs of the first Magnitude, became the fruitful seed of the
Church. In short, Religion is an inward Principle, and keeps its chief
Residence in the Minds of Men; and they may as well have their Understandings
ravished, their Wills forced, as be deprived of it. The Professors may, but the
Faith it self cannot suffer violence from men. Rational Motives may persuade; a
Vision from above may enlighten; a Voice convert; the cooler Breathings of
Heaven, the Gentle and Kindly Inspirations of the Spirit may captivate those
understandings, Subdue those refractory Wills, which are Proof against all
external Force, and defy the utmost Rage of Men. It Is as much beyond the Power
of any Tyrant upon earth, to impose any One single Article of Faith, or make me
embrace his Religion in the Gross, as it is for him to impart an Identity of
Thoughts, or an Individuation of Souls. Let no man then dare to Rebel under the
specious pretense of defending Religion, for that cannot be taken from Him. And
after all let it be added for our comfort, If our Religion be that of the One,
Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church; If it be that which our Forefathers
learned from the Apostles, which the Apostles learned from Christ, which Christ
learned from God, as I am firmly assured Ours of the Church of England is;
Matthew. 16. 18.
Then it is founded upon a Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail; it is Christ's own promise, and He has hitherto made it good in all
Ages of the world, and will do unto the Consummation thereof; when the Spouse
shall meet her glorious Bridegroom and be presented to him without spot or
wrinkle.

2. It Is not Lawful, but highly impious in Christians to Rebel against their
Sovereign, under the specious pretense of defending their Religion, because
thereby some of the most Fundamental Points of Christianity are overthrown.
There is nothing more contrary to the Laws of Christ, nothing forbidden under
severer Penalties than Rebellion; Romans 132.
He that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. There is nothing more agreeable
to the Laws of Christ, nothing encouraged with more glorious Rewards, than
suffering for Righteousness sake. Matthew. 5. 10.
Blessed are they, who are presecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. If then we resist the Higher Powers, under pretense of
securing Religion, we fall under the Damnation of the worst of Rebels, and lose
the Reward of the most Noble Martyrs. He that raises Parties to promote
Sedition, and disturb the Peace of the Civil Government, is a Traitor to
Christ, a Deserter of the Cross, a Subverter of His Kingdom, and were it of
this world, would endanger its final Overthrow. If any crime of this nature had
been proved against St Paul when He stood before the judgment seat, not Felix,
but He himself must have trembled at the sight of his Accusers. And how would
the rest of the Apostles have been confounded, when they were brought before
Matthew. 10. 18.
Governors and Kings for his Name, had they been found guilty of Plots against
the State, or putting the world into an Uproar, as was falsely laid to their
charge? For might not the Judges before whom they stood, have given them this,
or the like Reproof? You who call your selves the Disciples of that Master, who
taught Matthew. 5. 9.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, do you disturb the Government? You that pretend
to be the Subjects of that King, who renounced all earthly Sovereignty, do you
Tumultuously affect Dominion? Your Master commanded you to Mark 12. 17.
Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and do you withhold from Him
the just Tribute of your Obedience? Next the Miracles which He wrought, his
peaceable conversation, his exemplary Patience, his Precepts of Obedience had
almost persuaded us to turn Christians; But hearing of his unexampled Charity
and humility, in praying for his very Crucifiers, when He hung on the Cross, we
could not but altogether confess that He was a very just and Holy Person. But
what perverse followers are ye of so good a Master? What a scandal to his
Cross? and contradiction to your Profession? And were He now upon earth He must
either disown his own Doctrine, or you for his Disciples? Your turbulent
Behavior has justly provoked Caesar to unsheath his Sword of Justice, to
deliver you over to the Executioners. His Consuls have Rods for the Backs, and
Axes for the Necks of you the vilest of Impostors. And you deserve to be
treated with greater severity, than any other sort of Enemy. The rude Scythians
seem more capable of the Emperors Clemency, for they profess cruelty; Outrage
and Barbarity by long custom are become natural to them. But for you who
profess Gentleness, Civility and Condescension; who pretend to know nothing
save 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Jesus Christ and him crucified; who to assure the Empire of your Loyalty and
Fidelity have enforced Obedience upon a Principle of Conscience, as well as
Wrath, and entailed eternal Damnation upon the violation of it; who to assure
us, that you had no sinister Designs upon the Estates of other men, have
forsaken your own Possessions; for you at last to be found guilty of
Insurrection, Tumult and Violence, makes you fall more unlamented than
Catiline, or the most cursed Conspirators ever did. In short, you have done
what in you lay to make good the Treasons which were falsely laid to your
Masters charge; much more than the Scribes, Pharisees, chief Priests and
Lawyers, those Crafty Managers of his Trial, were able to do. I know not what
Evasions may have been found out since by the Theologo-Politico's of our Age;
but sure I am the Apostles could never have avoided this just Reprimand, for
they had every one of them fallen under that worst of Condemnations, Luke 19.
22.
ex ore tuo serve nequam, out of thy own mouth thou wicked servant thou art
condemned.

Thirdly, It Is not Lawful, but highly impious for Christians to Rebel against
their Sovereign, disturb the Government, or use violence under the specious
pretenses of securing their Religion, Because It ought to be preserved and
continued in the world, by the same methods it was at first propagated. Now
setting aside those mighty Works which our Savior wrought to convince the
Jews, that He was the true Messiah, whom their Prophets had foretold should
come into the world; and the Heathens, that He was a Person of greater worth,
acted by a more Divine Principle, than any of their most celebrated Masters of
Wisdom: Setting aside this his Divine Power; What was there that did more
recommend his Religion to the world, than the kind Aspect It had toward the
Peace and Prosperity of the Empire? Than the security It gave to the Civil
Magistrate by the Obedience it taught; and the Protection it might reasonably
hope for under them, by a Practice conformable to that Doctrine? This
consideration makes it a greater wonder to me, that the Roman Emperors held
out so long before they yielded Obedience to Christ's Scepter, than that
Constantine the Great came in so early to make good that Prophecy, Isa. 49. 23.
Kings shall be nursing Fathers, etc. Among all the Arguments which the Noble
Apologists used to persuade the Emperors, and their Ministers of State to
forbear persecuting the Innocent Christians, produce me one which carries the
least show of menace or force along with it; when they had both Numbers and
Arms to have disputed their cause. O let not the Example of the noble Thebean
Legion ever be forgotten. They persuaded them that it was for their safety to
cherish and protect such Subjects, as gave such daily Instances of their valor
by suffering joyfully the most cruel Deaths, that it was for their Interest, as
well as their Glory to embrace that Religion, which bred such courageous and
yet such Obedient Loyal Professors, who could endure the most exquisite
Torments rather than deny their Religion, because they knew if ever they
rebelled, their Master would deny them. Among all the Antidotes which they
prescribed against the Contagion of Heretics, show me one that has the least
composition of Force or Violence in it. They endeavored to convince them, [the
Hereticks] from the Authority of Christ, the Apostles, and the Deference paid to
the Apostolical Churches; the Novelty of the Heretics Doctrines; their
palpable Corruption and interpolation of Scripture; their irregular Lives, and
Scandalous Dissentions; the Unanimity of Catholics, the consent and Harmony of
their Doctrines, and the sufficient knowledge they had of the Apostles, and
first promulgators of the Christian Religion, and the sufficient Instruction
which the Apostles received from Christ. These were some of those wholesome
Remedies which they thought fit to prescribe against the Heretics of their
times. And happy had it been for Christendom, if none of a different nature had
been made use of since, only those enforced by Civil Sanction: for what has
Rome got by her modern bloody Inquisition? Or Geneva by her Tyrannical
Usurpations over the Consciences and Common Liberties of mankind? What did the
Council of Constance get by their uncanonical, treacherous, cruel proceedings
against those poor men, Jerome of Prague and John Huss. Their putting the later
to death contrary to promise and the public Faith, widened the Schism, brought
an odium upon the Council, and they will never be able to wash away the stain
of so Barbarous an Act. They seemed indeed sensible of it when 'twas too late,
for in the Ample-safe-Conduct granted in the XVIII Session of Trent, under
Pious IV, they recede from the Practice and Decree of Constance, or of any
other Council prejudicial to safe Conducts. But then they mince the matter in
these words, In hac part, and pro hac vice derogamus, etc. So that even this
Recession was rather extorted from them, by the necessity they lay under, than
any willingness in those pretended Infallible Doctors to retract, or own that
they had done amiss. It Is true, He who renounced all Sovereignty here on earth,
that so the Princes and Emperors of the world might have no suspicion of Him
or his followers, did nevertheless keep his Religion under his own Cognizance,
and exempt It from their Jurisdiction; for he did not only teach, promulge and
practice it in opposition to the Laws and Customs then received, in the very
face of the Magistrate; but moreover encouraged his Disciples to the like
confidence and Resolution. He foretold them that they should be Matthew. 10. 18.
brought before Kings, and Governors for his name; before the Jewish Sanedrim,
and Roman Tribunals to bear Testimony to the Truth; but bids them not be
dismayed, for He would be their Advocate, and defend both them and It against
all Opposition. Not that hereby He grants them a License to Rebel, to violate
their Duty to the Public, in defiance of the Magistrate, but only Instructs
and encourages them in their Duty to God, in despite of sufferings. Luke 12. 4,
5.
He bids them not fear them, who can only destroy the Body, but rather Him who
can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. Thus they learned Christ, and thus they
taught others Christianity. Thus Christianity at first set out, and accordingly
found Reception in the world; thus it made a glorious Progress, and thus it
shall finally Triumph over all the Powers of Darkness. Which ushers in my Third
and last Position, That it is the Duty of Christians patiently to suffer for
their Religion, when it is their Lot to fall into Perfecuting times, and this in
most Cases the best, in some the only Remedy left them. For hereby we give the
Dearest Pledges of an unfeigned Love to our Master; that we have not only
followed Him for the Loaves, for any secular Ends or Advantages. Hereby we make
a Public Declaration of the Sincerity of our Hearts. Hereby we give the
Noblest Proof of the Truth of our Religion. Hereby it appears we are true
Disciples, when we can take up the Cross and follow Christ, in the most
difficult, but most heroic Act of the Christian Warfare. Hereby we show that
we have escaped the Pollutions of the world, and that the Glory of God, and our
own Salvation has been our Chiefest Aim. Yet this Position however true in it
self, seems of very hard Digestion to our corrupt Natures. And this is the true
Reason why our Dissenters of late have made such Dismal Outcries, such Dire
Presages, and still continue to Alarm the Nation with Fears, I hope, of their
own Creation. And therefore I shall be very short with them. The Religion for
which they express so great Concern, and about which they make such a stir,
that Heaven and earth have been disturbed with their Outcries, is either from
God, or from Men. If it be from God, He will either defend it from Persecution,
or else by His mighty Power enable the Professors patiently to suffer for it.
And which way soever shall seem best to his just Providence, is fittest and
most profitable for us. And so we are safe. If it be from men, 'twill come to
naught; it is mutable as all other humane Institutions are; and will rather veer
to the Religion of the State, than undergo the least Trial of Persecution. And
it is to me a manifest sign that those men who cry out so much of Persecution
before hand (And amidst the full Enjoyment of a dangerous Liberty) as if they
had a Faggot already Flaming in their Breasts, never intend to resist unto
Blood, or undergo the fiery Trial, if they should be really brought to it.
Their Religion is too Voluptuous, and the Professors of it too Effeminate to
court Martyrdom. Let them choose which Part of the Dilemma they please, and
they are for ever silenced. If then sober Advice might take place, I would
entreat them in their Zeal to Religion, not to disturb the Peace of the State.
In their Fears of Persecution; not to betray and desert the Cross of Christ. In
their just Exclamations against the Superstitions, and Idolatries of the Church
of Rome; not to make Shipwreck of the Catholic Faith, in a wilful Separation
from their Mother the Church of England. Let them not out of a commendable
Indignation against the wicked and Hellish Practices of the Romish Emissaries
to establish the Popish Religion, become Guilty of the same in an Obstinate,
Illegal, Unchristian Defense of their Own. And if any one think I injure them
by this Advice, for I confess it implies a Guilt of the mischiefs cautioned
against; I recommend to his serious and impartial Perusal several late
Collections published from their Originals. And there He will find that the
most pernicious Doctrines laid down by the Jesuits in their Morals, are to be
matched, if not outdone. For there He will find a Dispensation for Oaths
taken; Licenses to take contrary Oaths; Equivocation, Lying, Perjury,
recommended. There He will find that the Saints alone had a Right to inherit
the Earth; that the wicked might be Slandered, Plundered, Murdered; and all
this under pretense of doing God good service. There He will find Persecution,
Rapine, Sacrilege Preached and practiced. There He will find speaking evil of
Dignities the Holy Idiom, and priviledg'd Language of the Godly. There He will
find, the Murder of Kings encouraged, effected, justified; in short, for I
delight not to dwell on so ungrateful a Subject; there He will find all the
most consummated Villainies consecrated, which were in the power of the Sons of
Perdition to Act, since the shedding of the Blood of Righteous Abel, unto the
Murder of Righteous King Charles, and so down to this very day. But thou, O
Holy Christian, who art so indeed, and not in outward show only, as thy heart
bleeds within thy Breast, to think that there should be such Miscreants; that
all that name the Name of Jesus should not depart from such horrid Impieties;
so thou know it to be thy Duty to follow thy Master in the several steps of
his Life; to Fast with him in the Wilderness, as well as Feast with Him at the
Marriage in Cana; to watch and pray with Him in his Agonies in the Garden, as
well as dwell with Him in his Glorification on the Mount; to act a part with
Him in his Tragedy in the High Priests Hall, as well as attend Him in his
Triumphs to Jerusalem. Thou know it to be thy Duty not Only to accompany Him
to the Judgment Hall, but moreover, to Mount Calvery, and there to die for Him,
who suffered the most dolorous Death for thee. And thou art invited hereunto by
the Example, and Precept of Jesus the Captain of thy Salvation, and Finisher of
the Faith; His Glorious Company of Apostles, His Noble Army of Martyrs, who in
all Ages have finished their Course, fought the good Fight, and received a
Crown of Righteousness. Thou can pity those who laugh at the Doctrine of
passive Obedience, and conclude their Religion false, which will not sustain
suffering for Christ's sake. In a word, thou art resolved in the whole course
of thy Life to maintain the Matthew. 10. 16.
Wisdom of the Serpent and the Innocence of the Dove. Jesus answered, my
Kingdom is not of this world, if my Kingdom were of this world then would my
servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews. Upon the whole
matter, give me leave to make these following Observations and conclude.

1. That we do not sin against the Rules of Christian Patience, if we Defend
our selves when brought before Magistrates; for though Christ willingly
submitted to the Sentence, yet He carefully acquitted Himself of the Treason
laid to his charge. This is confirmed to us by the Practice of the Prophets
Elias, Jeremias; the Example of the Apostles, particularly Saint Paul's, who
appeals to the Roman Laws; Flies to their Guards for Protection against his
Conspirators; and did not disdain even Humane Policy, for He divided the
Multitude, made the Major Part of his side, by Crying out, Act. 23. 6.
Men and Brethren I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee, of the hope, and
Resurrection of the Dead, I am called in question.

2. That since Christ's Kingdom, is not of this world, that therefore we should
not immoderately thirst after Riches, or affect Glories and worldly Greatness.

3. We must not take it heinously, if in perilous circumstances we should be
betrayed by our friends, or deserted by those from whom we expected Protection;
for this was our Masters case, betrayed by one Disciple, forsook or denied by
the Rest; by Pilate deprived of the common privilege of the Law. He who before
had furnished his Enemies with a Band of Ruffians to apprehend Him, denies Him
common Justice from the Bench for fear of displeasing the Jews.

4. This place gives us comfort in our greatest and most public Calamities,
for since Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, It shall never be overcome or
destroyed, by all the united Forces thereof. Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but Christ's Throne is established for ever, Psalm. 145. 13.
His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion.

5. Lastly, This place manifestly reproves those who have so long boasted
themselves Christ's Vicars, for He whom they pretend to represent declares His
Kingdom not to be of this world. But they usurp to themselves the Kingdoms of
this world, dispose of them at pleasure; as if Psalm. 149. 8.
that prophecy -- They shall Bind their Kings in chains, did literally
appertain to them to fulfill. By this their wicked and Audacious Practice, how
ill do they prove their Title to Christ's Vicarage? Do they not rather show
whose servants they are, viz. Matthew. 4. 9.
His who proudly said, All these thingswill I give thee, If thou will fall down
and worship me? for by the Vanity and Pageantry of a Pompous Religion, adorned
with the false Glories of this world, they have bewitch't too Great a Part of
the Nations of the earth; for I dare boldly say, that the Doctrines of
Image Worship, Invocation and Adoration of Saints, Indulgences, Purgatory,
Prayer for the dead, as they are practiced in the Church of Rome,
Transubstantiation, Participation in one Kind, Papal Supremacy; the making
which necessary Conditions of Communion, justifies us, and lays the Schism at
the Imposers Door; I dare boldly affirm that they are fond Things, vainly
feigned, that they are contrary to the Simplicity and Truth of the Gospel, that
they have no better support, than Credulity, Force, Falsification of Antiquity,
humane Romantic Tradition, or the Pride and Coveteousness of the
Ecclesiastics. Indeed, I never thought those the most Eloquent Preachers, who
can call Whore, and Antichrist loudest; and perhaps it is not necessary that all
our Sermons should be turned into invective Harangues against the Idolatries of
the Church of Rome; but it has often grieved me to think that St Peter's
Successor, has made that Title so much his own, as to endanger Mahomets
Claim; that a Mother Church should be so leudly fallen from that Gravity,
Purity and Chastity which in St Paul's time, and some Centuries after, she so
eminently possess't. I have always thought I might discharge this part of the
Ministerial Function, as much to the benefit of Souls, in pressing upon them
the Duties of Love and Obedience, in Defending the Doctrine, Government, Solemn
and Public Prayers of the Church of England, in whose holy Communion I do
believe Salvation may be had with greater Certainty, than in any other Church
of any Denomination whatsoever. To conclude, Psalm. 2. 2.
The Kings of the earth shall stand up, and take counsel together against the
Lord, and against His Anointed. Which Prophecy implies that Christ shall be a
King, and that the Kings of the earth would conspire the Ruin of His Kingdom.
And this is the true ground of all those dire strifes and contentions which
have filled the world about the Christian Faith. Luke 19. 14.
Because they will not have this Man to Reign over them. For this reason the
Jews conspired the Death of Christ; they pretended indeed to the Romans, that
He intended to set up a Fifth Monarchy; but the true reason was because He did
not answer the fond Character which they had framed of their Messiah; therefore
they would not submit their Stubborn Necks to his easy Yoke; the Romans
afterward thought to have ruined His Kingdom, by a total Massacre of his
Subjects, and they also pretended reasons of State. But the true reason was,
they could not comply with the Doctrine of the Cross; which they thought would
interrupt their pleasures, and Eclipse their Greatness. And at this day how is
the world divided about the great Business of Salvation. The Turks would
ascribe this glorious work to their false Prophet Mahomet, and the Jews expect
Salvation from an imaginary Messiah yet to come, and Christians are too much
divided amongst themselves. But after all, Christ will accomplish the End of
His coming into the world, which John 18. 37.
was to bear Testimony to the truth; He will distinguish between the true and
the false Believers; And His Kingdom shall at last shine forth in an utter
Abolition of the Kingdom of Darkness. I have only this to add further: Be the
times never so perilous, our dangers never so great, next the Protection of the
Almighty, a Christian Holy Life, our steadfast Obedience to the King, Conformity
to the Church, will be found our surest Refuge. For the King cannot, will not
forsake that Faith of which He is the glorious Defender; nor those Subjects,
who by the Tenure of their Religion think themselves obliged to defend Him with
their Lives and Fortunes. And of this we, as well as the rest of the Nation,
have had a very late confirmation in His Majesty's Gracious Reply to that
Eloquent and truly Loyal Speech made in behalf of the University. To which His
Majesty was pleased to answer, That He was fully satisfied of the Loyalty of
the University, and that He did not at all doubt but we would always act
according to what we there declared. His Majesty likewise told us, That He
would constantly Own and Defend the Church of England, as by Law established.
This He bid us be assured of, for He would be as good as His word, whatever
Representation, either had, or should be made of Him to the contrary. Being
farther pleased to add, That there was no other Church in the world that Taught
and Practiced Loyalty so conscientiously as that did. O Let us and all that
hear me this Day make good this gracious Opinion which His Majesty has
conceived of Us and Our Church. That so both King and People supporting each
other, and Both uniting in an Holy Conspiracy for the good of the Church, We
may yet Emerge a Glorious Flourishing Kingdom, to the utter Disappointment and
Confusion of all our Enemies, whether Papists or Fanatics, whom God in his
infinite Mercy either convert, or in His Infinite Power bring to Condign
Punishment; that so Justice may be no Longer Obstructed, but that Righteousness
and Peace may join in an Holy Kiss.

Amen.
The End.

