A DISCOURSE OF THE Peerage and Jurisdiction OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL IN
PARLIAMENT.

Proving from the Fundamental Laws of the Land, the Testimony of the most
Renowned Authors, and the Practice of all Ages. THAT They have no right in
claiming any Jurisdiction IN Capital Matters.

Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which
are Gods, Matthew. 22. ver. 21. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

TO THE READER.
IN this licentious Age, and especially at this Juncture of Time, when every
impertinent Scribler, and seditious Pamphleter, has free access to the Press,
it may be thought neither Prudent nor Honorable, for a Man of Sober and
Serious Thoughts, to come into the Field and list himself among the Unlearned
Multitude of Writers that are in these days. That Popular Applause which is
generally expected from this Method, is a thing which I (more ambitious of
being publicly useful then publicly known) never designed to purchase at that
rate; and therefore is not the Motive that induced me to this Undertaking. I
would have been glad, if any other of greater Learning and Parts, had done the
World so much Favor, as to have made a Perfect Disquisition into this Matter,
and to have discussed the Point according to the Merits of the Cause; for then
I doubt not but the Reasonableness of the House of Commons Dissension from the
House of Lords, would have appeared to all Impartial and Dis-interested Minds.
As for my own part, I confess that partly through the Consciousness of my own
Inability, and partly through my Unwillingness to be concerned in a Thing of
this Weight, I should never have engaged my self in it, if I judged it not
necessary to vindicate those Persons that are abused with several undecent and
unjust Calumnies, in a late Book entitled. The Honors of the Lords Spiritual
asserted, etc. together with its Preface.

This, together with a Desire of Informing the World in a Thing which is much
talked of, but little understood, prevailed with me to omit nothing which might
be Serviceable to my Country, and Conducive to the Unity and Peace of this
divided Kingdom; especially when it is to be feared, there are too many such as
the Author of the abovementioned Book, who under the specious pretense of
Loyalty and Affection to the Church, do what in them lies to make the Gap
wider, and Distemper more Incurable. That I may not seem to injure him, you may
consider the Design of his Discourse; The Persons against whom he directs his
Preface, are those who withstood the Pretensions of the Bishops to Jurisdiction
in Matters of Blood: those are no other than that Honorable Assembly, those
Champions of the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of the People of
England, the House of Commons in the last Parliament. To Revile the
Representatives of the Commons of England, and in them Virtually the Persons
themselves that are Represented, with such Scandalous Aspersions, and
Opprobrious Reflections; Being Favorers of the Rebellious Commotions in
Scotland, Ill-natured, Censorious, Covetous, Self-seekers; and which is worse
than all this, as being of the same Principles with those that threw down
Eplscopacy, took up Arms against their Native Sovereign, Plundered and Divested
His Majesty's most faithful Subjects of their Goods, Estates, and Lands, and
embrewed their Violent, Wicked, and Rebellious Hands in his most Sacred Blood,
etc. I say, such Scurrilcus and Satirical Language thrown upon the very Face of
Authority, does ill-become the Religion of a Christian, and the Honesty of a
true Englishman. It is a known Maxim among Men of bonest and sober
Principles, and Lovers of the English Nation, That Nothing can make us Happy or
Miserable, but an Union or Division amongst our Selves: If there be a good
Understanding betwixt Prince and People, nothing can make England miserable;
but if there be Jealousies and Divisions, nothing can make it Happy. Therefore,
whoever they are, that by reciprocal Accusations, and raising of mutual
Jealousies of the One's good Will and Affection, and the Others Loyalty,
especially in things that are false in themselves; deserve to be looked upon as
inveterate Enemies to the Peace and Happiness of this Kingdom: And yet you may
observe, that whosoever can give the Court, the most Satirical Language,
expects to be reckoned the most Zealous Patriot, etc. And those, forsooth, who
can with the greatest Scurrility, and the most reproachful Epithets, asperse
the House of Commons, would be thought the most Loyal Subjects: But if
Integrity and Religion it self be not quite banished from the Conversation of
Mortals, both these sorts of People will fail of their Expectation. I have read
of two great Favorites of Alexander the Great, Hephestion and Craterus; one of
them (says my Author.) Alexandrum dilexit, but the other dilexit Regem: It may
be a Question which of these was the better Subject, I shall not undertake to
determine it, but shall leave it with an Observation of that Noble and truly
Loyal Courtier Sir Thomas Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal to His late
Majesty, in a Case of the like nature: Some (said he to the House of Lords)
would have the Kings Prerogative rather Tall than Great, others e contra; some
do love the King, rather than Charles Stuart; others e contra: (but what his
Sentiments were of those Matters, you must gather from what he said a little
after) None can be truly Loyal, but he that is a good Patriot; and none can be
a good Patriot, but he that is truly Loyal. The Interest of the King and People
are so interwoven and linked together, that none can be truly said to be a
Lover of One, but he must be a Lover of Both.

But to return to our Author, I Protest I have perused the whole Volume with
the greatest Impartiality that can be; and except his Sawciness and Ill Nature
against the House of Commons, and Gentlemen of the Long Robe, I find nothing in
the whole Book that deserves any Animadversion: It is evident from his Method
of Arguing, and the Medium's he makes use of to prove his Assertion, that he
is altogether a Stranger to the very State of the Controversy; and that
notwithstanding his Confidence in Asserting, his Book discovers more Ignorance,
than his Preface does Petulancy: And it is no wonder, for Ignorance and
Impudence are generally Concomitant: And this is all that I think fit to say in
Answer to him. The Reason why I subjoyn the following Discourse, is, because
although I cannot persuade my self that he deserves a Refutation, yet that
Truth which he labors to darken with an Impertinent Harangue, deserves to be
cleared and demonstrated: If any shall go about to Attacque this Discourse with
Drollery, or Satirical Invectives, I decleare beforehand, I do not reckon my
self obliged to Reply; I do not think it a Reputation for Men of Sense to
Combat at these Weapons; But if Occasion be, I shall send his Answer to the
Dung-Carts, or Oyster-Boats, from whence I doubt not, but he shall receive due
Correction for his Folly and Impudence; but if he Assault it with Reason and
Sobriety, he shall find a Defense agreeable. I must confess I am heartily sorry
at the Occasion of this Dispute, it has unhappily fallen out at that Moment of
Time, when above all things it was necessary for the Church and State to
Confederate, and join Hand in Hand, to the Ruin and Confusion of the Common
Enemy, and the Extirpation of that Poisonous Plant, whose growth will quickly
become fatal to both: but however, as it is hard on the one side, that any
should be compelled to lay down that which they suppose is their Right; so on
the other side, it is a thing unreasonable and of dangerous Consequence, to
admit of any Innovation, though it were in a Matter of far less Moment than
this is: so that there is great Reason for both sides to insist upon it. If
this Enterprise of mine be so successful, as to convince those that are in the
mistake, then I compass my End, and am Satisfied; which that it may do, I refer
you to the Consideration of the following Discourse.

Farewell.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual.
AS the granting of large Immunities, Privileges, and Possessions to the
Church, does well become the Piety and Religion of a Christian Prince, or any
other Supreme Power; And as the robbing of the Church of any of its Just
Rights, lawfully granted, is Sacrilege of the Highest Nature: So it is the
Duty of all the Sons of the Church, upon all Occasions, thankfully to
acknowledge the Bounty and Munificence of their Pious Benefactors, and to
forbear all unjust Claims and ambitious Pretensions to things which were never
granted: A failure in this is almost as great an Immorality (considering the
Quality and Profession of the Offenders) as the former. And it is doubtless not
only lawful, but commendable, for the persons whose Right and Property is
invaded in either case, to defend themselves with all their power against the
Invaders; otherwise we must condemn our Ancestors, who defended the Kings
Prerogative, and the Subjects Right, when it was encroached upon by Procurers
of Citations and Process of Provisions and Reservations of Benefices,
Dispensations for Pluralities, etc. from the Court of Rome; and withstood those
unreasonable Demands of Absolute Exemption from Secular Power made by the
Clergy; and several other things about Marriages, Legitimation, etc. which they
claimed by virtue of several Decretals of their Popes and Councils: I confess
if there were either Statute Law or Common Law for the Bishops Voting in
Capital Cases, I would be very far from arguing against it, for that were to
call in question their undoubted Right. But if there be any reason to make me
believe they have no Right at all in that case, I hope it will be excusable in
me to make an Impartial Enquiry into the Thing.

If the Spiritual Lords have any right of Judicature in Capital Cases, it must
be either Jure Divino, or Jure Humano; if the former, it must be proved out of
the New Testament, for there is no consequence from the Authority and
Jurisdiction of the High Priest under the Law to the Authority of Bishops under
the Gospel, and that is the most generally received Opinion among the
Protestant Divines, those at least who have lifted themselves under the Banner
of the Protestant Religion, in its defense against the exorbitant power and
usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, who makes use of the same Argument for the
Authority of his Holiness in Cathedra: Because whatsoever is alleged out of
the Old Testament, is either part of the Mosaical method of administering
Justice, proper only to the Judaical Economy; or else belonging to the
Temporal Constitution of the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, which are no more
binding to us, than those Laws of theirs whereby each man recovered his right
and property: or than the Laws of the Syrians, or any other Nation were binding
to the Jews.

Those Instances that are given of so great trust reposed in, and Honors
conferred upon, Spiritual persons by Christian Princes, after the first three
Centuries, can prove no more, but that so was the Constitution of the
Government of those Kingdoms; and it does not follow that therefore it must be
so in all other Kingdoms: for which cause it is evident, that the first Four
Chapters of the Gentleman's Book, are altogether impertinent.

If the Spiritual Lords ground not their Claim upon Divine Right, then if they
have any at all, it must be by Humane Institution: My business is not to
examine whether such an Institution were good and reasonable, or not? That I
leave to the Consideration of the Parliament, in whose Determination every true
Subject ought heartily to acquiess: but all that I have to do, is to examine
whether or no there be such an Institution, and that is the point Which I
intend to insist upon.

No Humane institution can do their Lordships any kindness in this, except the
Laws of England, and those are of two sorts, either Statute Law, or Common Law:
The former is not pretended to; the only question is about the latter: for
that same Law which gives them power to sit in the House of Lords in any case,
gives them power also to sit in Capital Cases, if they have any such power; and
that they have no such power by the Common Law of England, is the Probindum.

Those in whose power Originally it was at the first reduction of this Nation
under Rules of Government to Invest Religious Persons with Honors,
Jurisdictions and Privileges; might by the same power have made them greater
or lesser than they did; and consequently might at the first Institution have
limited the same Jurisdiction, etc. to such and such matters as they themselves
thought fit to entrust them with, and not to others. If those persons that
first conferred upon some of our Clergymen that Jurisdiction which they now
enjoy of Voting in the High Court of Pariament, had given it indefinitely in
all Matters, and over all Causes, and they had exercised their Jurisdiction
accordingly from time to time, then their right had been indubitable; but if
this limitation had been made, that their Jurisdiction shall extend to all
Causes, except such as are Capital, and they never exercised any Jurisdiction
in such; then there cannot be any color or ground of Claim. Now the Common Law
is a general Custom or Usage in this Realm in all Ages practiced and allowed
beyond the memory of man; and because there is no Record, nor any other
undeniable Evidence of its commencement, it is therefore presumed to have been
a Law ever since there has been any Government in this Nation: Seeing
therefore that the Jurisdiction of the Bishops in Parliament, is supposed to be
as ancient as the Government it self; If it can be proved that by the Common
Law ( i. e.) the continued practice of all Ages, the Transactions whereof are
Recorded, the Clergy never did exercise Jurisdiction in Cases of Blood: then
inasmuch as no Record makes appear what time this Custom did begin, we must of
necessity presume that their not Voting in Capital Cases, is as ancient as
their Voting in any Case; and consequently that those who first conferred upon
them their Jurisdiction in Parliament, gave it with this limitation, that it
should not extend to Capital Cases.

This being premised, I shall proceed to prove that by the Common Law of
England, (if not by an Act of Parliament) the Lords Spiritual have no right to
Vote in Capital Cases: That will be done if I demonstrate these two things; 1.
That their Voting in Capital Cases is contrary to the intent and meaning of
Magna Charta. 2. That it is contrary to the known practice of all Ages until
this day. The first I shall prove from the Reason and Nature of the thing, and
from Precedents.


By the 29th of Magna Charta it is ordained, that, Nullus liber homo capiatur
vel imprisonetur, etc. aut ut. lagetur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo
destruatur, nec super cum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus nisiper legale
judicium parium suorum, etc. And accordingly the Precept of the Lord High
Steward to a Sergeant at Arms, is to summon, Tot and tales Dominos Magnates,
and proceres hujus Regni Angliae praedicti R. Comitis pares, etc. Co. 3. Inst.
28. Whence it is evident that every Judge must be a Peer ( par) to the
Prisoner; and I do think it a very easy matter to prove that no Spiritual Lord
as such, is Invested with that Parity which is requisite within the intent of
Magha Charta, to constitute him a sufficient Judge upon the life and death of a
Temporal Lord: Before I enter upon the proof of this, it will be necessary to
say something of the Nature of their Peerage.

Their Peerage does accrue either by the Investitute of their Bishoprics, ipso
facto, or by their Summons to Parliament; it is agreed by all Authors of
greatest Authority, that they are Parliamentary Lords immediately by their
Investiture and Induction into the Temporalities, which are held of the King
per Baroniam, and are therefore Lords of Parliament only ratione tenurae; so is
Coke, Stamford, Seldom, and others: But they are not entitled to any more
Honor or Jurisdiction by their Writs, for these, two Reasons: 1. Because a
Summons to Parliament cannot of its self create a Baron, for then all the Kings
Judges, Serieants and Council had been ennobled in diverse Parliaments in the
time of Edw. 1. in all of Edw. 2. and most of Edw. 3. for they had then the
self-same Writ that Earls and Barons had, yea and the Kings two Escheators had
the same Writ, Annu 12. and 14 of Edw. 2. The first Summons extant upon Record
is that of 49 H. 3. which is one joint Summons to all the Lords and Judges, and
is the same in substance with the Writ of Summons at this day, which is given
to the Lords, and differs only in matter of Form. Anno 23. Edw. 1. Jan. 23.
The Writs are several, the only difference is in the Style, and the words
following, ( viz.) Super ar duis negotiis quibusdam nos and Regnum nostrum and
vos caterosque de eodem Regno tangentibus, etc. To the Bishops and other
Clergy. To the Temporal Lords after the style the Writ runs. Nos, etc. and vos
caeterosq^^ (...) and magnates, etc. taugentibus, etc. To the Judges it was,
Vos caterosque de consilio nostros, etc. tangentibus. But in all these, the
Mandamus, which is the most essential part of the Writ, is the very same; viz.
Vobis Mandamis ut, etc. personaliter inter sitis super dictis negotiis cum
Rege, and caeteris magnatibus and proceribus, etc. trataturi vestrumque
consilium impensuri, etc. The same is the 27 of Ed. 1. and almost in all the
time of Edw. 2. and from the 20th to the 49th year of Edw. 3. That which I
infer from this is, that either a Writ of its self without the performance of
other Ceremonies, as Investiture of Robes, etc. cannot make a man Noble; or
else the Judges in those Four Kings Reigns having the same Mandamus in their
Writs which the Earls and Barons had verbatim, and the same in substance with
the Mandamus to Peers at this day, were all ennobled.

And further, There does frequently occur in ancient Records and Writings a
difference between Barons majores, and Barons minores; the first are called
sometimes Barons, and the other Barons Peers. That they both received their
Writs and sat in Parliament, is undeniable: The Nobility of the first was
without doubt inheritable, but so was not the last, but were called Barons
Peers, because of the parity of their Reyenue. Thus says the Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, (always allowed for Authentic before Mr. Prynne.) summoneri and
venire debent omnes and singuli Comites Barons and little pares scilicet illi
qui habent terras ad valentiam ^^ius Comitatus integri, viz. Vig^ti feoda, etc.
vel ad valentiam unius Baroniae, etc. and nulli minores Laici summoneri debent,
sed si eorum praesentia necessaria velutilis fuerit Rex solebit talibus brevia
mitte^. So that these Baronum pares, or Barons minores, because of the Parity
of their Revenue, were called or omitted ad libitum, though the majores ought
to be summoned de jure; which proves a Writ of Summons to Parliament, does not
ennoble the Party, otherwise this Difference must fall to the ground. The Roll
of 18 Ed. 3. N. 35. Is that the Cause of Summons was declared in the presence
of the King and diverse Lords there named, and autres Barons, and Bannerettes.
Chevaliers de Comites, Citizens and Burgeiis, etc. So 46 of Ed. 3. N 7. the
Roll is, Dukes, Earls, Barons and Bannerets: And in many of the Parliament
Rolls of Ed. 3. it occurs by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Grandees;
by which it is evident, that anciently there sat in the House of Lords
sometimes some that were under the Degree of a Baron, and they could not be
Lords by Inheritance, because a Barony is the lowest Degree of Inheritable
Nobility; but they could not be there present without their Writs; It does
therefore follow, that a Writ, together with an Appearance in obedience to it,
does not Ennoble the Party. Note, That anciently the King by his Letters could
have discharged any Banneret from serving in the Lower House; because, if he
pleased, he might upon occasions have summoned him to serve in the House of
Lords; and that is apparent from a Record in the 7th of Rich. 2. R. 42. dorso.
Sir Tho. Camoys was chosen one of the Knights of the Shire for Surrey, and his
Father and Grandfather had been summoned to several Parliaments before: the
King discharged this Gentleman from serving in the House of Commons, because
Ipse (says the Record) and quam plures Antecessores sui Banneretri fuerint:
Nos animadvertentes quod hujusmodi Banneretti ante haec tempora in Milites
Comitatus eligi minime consueverunt, etc. If this Camoys had been reputed a
Baron, the Country would never have chose him; and if he had been really a
Baron, the King would never have discharged him because he was a Banneret, but
because he was a Baron.

Another Reason for this may be gathered out of the Patent of John Beauchamp of
Holt, the words of which are these: -- Sciatis quod pro bonis and gratuitis
servitiis, quae dilectus and fidelis Miles noster Johannes de Beauchamp, de
Holt, seneschallus hospitii nostri, nobis impendit, ac loco per ipsum tempore
corenationis nostrae hucusque impensis, and quempro Nobis tenere poterit in
futurum in nostris consiliis and parliamentis, nec non, etc. ipsum Johannem in
unum Parium and Baronum Regni nostri Angliae praesecimus, volentes quod idem
Johannes and haeredes masculi de corpore suo exeuntes statum Baronis obtineant,
ac Domini de Beauchamp and Barons de Kiderminster nuncupentur, in cujus, etc.
T. Rege apud Wodestock, 10. Oct. It is probable that he was created Baron
before he received this Patent, because the Patent wants the words of Creation;
Ipsum Johannem praefecimus: but it is not said, per praesentes praeficimus; and
therefore the Patent running in the preterperfect tense could have no other
operation but only to Record a thing which was past: but he was not Created by
Writ before the Patent, because it is dated Oct. 10. and he received no Writ
till the December. following: Wherefore seeing that undoubtedly he was a Baron
before he received either Patent or Writ; for the Patent, which is Matter of
Record, says, Ipsum praefecimus; it follows, that before this time a Baron
has been created without a Writ, which could be no otherwise then by the
performance of a Ceremony, as Investiture of Robes, etc. and this Patent was
only an entering of the Creation, being a transitory thing upon Record.

2. Admitting that Barons have been created by Writs, yet Prelates are not
created Barons by their Writs, because there is a difference between a Writ
sent to a person that has no right ex debito justitiae to demand it; and a
Writ sent to one that was a Lord of Parliament before, and ought de jure to
have been summoned. The former, together with the persons obedience, may
perhaps make him a Baron: but the latter I conceive does not make any addition
to, or enlargement of, their precedent Honor, but only summons them to
exercise their Jurisdiction, and put that power* which they have in execution,
and that is only reducere potentiam in actum, otherwise every Lord would be
newly created at every Parliament; every one to whom the Honor is entailed,
would have a Fee-simple, for a Writ will make a man a Peer in Fee without the
word (Heirs) and every Lord Bishop, L. Keeper, L. Treasurer, L. Privy Seal,
would be as such Inheritable Peers, or at least for life, which are both false;
for after Regradation their Peerage is ended: Wherefore it being certain that
all the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal ought to be summoned to every
Parliament, the Summons must of necessity have respect to that Right which does
entitle them to demand them.

The Inference which I draw from all this, is, That the Lords Spiritual having
no Peerage upon the account of their Writs, cannot claim any at all, except it
be Jure Episcopatus, (that is) ratione terrarum quas tenent per Baroniam. So
that now I come to the next point; viz. Whether such whose Peerage is ratione
tenure, and dies either with the determination of his Estate in the Land, or
the dissolution of the Tenure, be a competent Judge of one whose blood is
ennobled in case of life and death, within the meaning and intent of Magna
Charta, which enacts that every one shall be tried per legale judicium parium
suorum. The Negative I hope effectually to prove from these following Reasons:

1. Every ones Peerage ought to be measured and proportioned according to the
limits and extent of that ratione cujus he is a Peer; he that is a Peer, not
only upon the account of his Possessions, but also upon the account of the
quality and nobility of his Blood, has a right of Judicature and Legislation
both in those things that regulate Men's Estates and Properties, and also in
those things that concern Life and Death; buthe that has no Peerage but what
is praedial or feudal, and not personal a Peerage accruing by virtue of his
Tenure and Possessions, and not the Nobility of his Blood, can have no
Jurisdiction but such as is agreeable to the nature of his Peerage; that is,
such as shall extend to matters of Property and Possession, but not to matters
of Blood; for as to this he is no more a Peer ( i. e. Par) to a Temporal Lord,
than any private Gentleman, and therefore has no more Jurisdiction; for it is
Parity that makes a man capable of Jurisdiction within the Statute: This is
confirmed by the Authority of that Learned Antiquary, Mr. John Seldom, in the
first Edition, of his Titles of Honor, a Volume in Quorto, 347, (which I the
rather cite, because it was Printed in King James his time, and therefore not
liable to exception) his words are these; A Bishop shall not be tried by Peers
in Capital Crimes, because these are personal, and his being a Baron, is
Ratione Tenurae, and not of personal Nobility. So it is in Br. Abr. Tit.
Enquest 99. Although in an Action for Land, etc. a Bishop shall have Knights in
his Jury, as other Lords, yet when he is tried for his life (it is said) he
shall not have Knights in his Jury: By Which Book it is evident, that a Bishop
is a Peer not in respect of his Person, but of his Possessions.

2. The whole Statute of Magna Charta is a Grant or rather a Confirmation of
the Privileges and Liberties of the Subjects of England; and it is to be
supposed that the enjoyment of every of those Privileges that are there
granted, is a great advantage and happiness to the Subject: but wherein the
advantage of a man's being tried per Pares does lie, is a Point worth the
Consideration: I conceive it to be this, When those are to be Judges, who may
be under the same Circumstances with the Prisoner, and when by their Judgment
the Prisoner can lose nothing but what his Judges; if they be under his
Circumstances may lose also; he may expect that they will not give Judgment but
upon Mature Deliberation, and that the Consideration that it may be their own
case will deter them from giving a rash judgment against a man that is
innocent, or not apparently guilty: Whereas if a man's Life and Fortune, his
Honor, the Inheritable Quality of his Blood, his Name and Reputation, and
whatsoever may be comfortable in this World, were disposable at the will and
pleasure of inferior persons, who have not every of these themselves, and
consequently know not the true value and worth of them, nor the importance of
the matter that is judicially before them; it may be presumed that they will
not be so careful and concerned in the Cause; and it is to be feared they will
be too ready to give an inconsiderate and rash judgment. This I take to be the
only benefit of a man's being tried by his Peers, which is very significantly
expressed in the Statute De Proditoribus, 25 Ed. 3. cap. 2. in these words; Et
de ceo soit provablement attaint de^overt fait per gents de lour condition,
etc. But to apply this to our present design, let us consider what a Temporal
Lord loses by an Attainder; In the first place he loses his Life, his Estate
real and personal: If that were all, a Gentleman might be his Peer; but there
is something more, he forefeits his Nobility, which is irrecoverable, being
quite extinguished; the inheritable quality of his Blood is thereby corrupted,
the House of Lords themselves suffer with him, for they lose a Member for ever:
But a Bishop forfeits nothing but what he has in his Natural Capacity, and if
he be considered as such, he is no Peer; if he be considered as a Bishop, i. e.
As holding Lands of such a Value in the Right of his Bishopric of the King, he
is a Peer, but his Peerage is in no danger through his Attainder; the
succession (which he is supposed to be as tender of as a Natural person is of
his Posterity) is not thereby tainted; for his Peerage, together with all his
Posterity and Land, Ratione cujus he is a Peer, go to the Successor without any
restoration; (see Stamford 187. 6.) and so the House of Lords lose never a
Member: How then can Bishops, having no Nobility which they can lose, and
consequently not being Gents de lour condition, be fit Judges upon the Life and
Death of Noble men? And upon what grounds can more Justice be expected from
such than from honest substantial Freeholders?

If this do not please, let any of the most violent Maintainers of this
pretended Temporally-spiritual Jurisdiction give a rational account, wherein
the advantage of a man's being tried by his Peers, does consist; and let him
make appear that the Lords Temporal are any Sharers of this Privilege when
they are tried by Bishops, and I am satisfied; but till then; he must give me
leave to conclude, that this Jurisdiction which is pretended to, is an abuse of
the Satute of Magna Charta, and therefore a violence offered to the Liberties
of the Subjects of England.

3. The Bishops are not Peers in that sense the Question is above stated in,
because they shall not themselves be tried by Peers in Parliament: If their
Parity be not sufficient to Entitle them to demand a Trial by Temporal Lords,
then they cannot be Peers, so as to be Judges upon the Trial of Temporal Lords:
but if they be really Peers to all intents and purposes, then we charge all our
Ancestors with a gross Violation of the Subjects Privileges granted by Magna
Charta; for every Bishop is Liber homo, a Subject of this Realm, and ought of
Right to have the benefit of a Subjects Privilege of being tried by his Peers:
But seeing by the constant practice in former Ages, even in those times when
the Tyranny of ambitious Prelates, and the Insolence of Popish Usurpers, did
swell to so great a height; when the poor credulous affrightned Laity, were
glad for fear of being delivered Prisoners In manus and custodiam Diaboli, and
secluded from the Society and Conversation of Mankind, to truckle at the Feet
of the domineering Clergy, and condescend to almost all their Demands, however
unreasonable or unjust they were; insomuch, that Innovations in favor of them
were easily allowed, and new acquisitions of Honor and Power easily obtained.
I say, if in those times the Honor of being Tried by Peers has been denied to
them, it may well be inferred that they had no Right; for if it were a thing
which they had any color of pretension to, is it reasonable to suppose that
they quietly without reluctance would resign it? when we have Records and
Histories full of their Clamours for breach of Magna Charta, of their
Contentions with their Liege Lord and Sovereign in things that were against the
known and established Laws of the Kingdom, tending to the diminution of the
Kings Prerogative, the hindering of the Execution of Justice upon Malefactors,
and the dispossessing and injurious Expulsion of the Subject from his just and
hereditary Right, where they had no reason in the world for it, only that they
were inflamed with indignation, that the Native Courage and inbred Generosity
of Mind that was in our Ancestors, not enduring themselves to be trod upon, nor
their Necks to be laid under a Yoke of Tyranny and Usurpation; did obstruct the
unsufferable growth of that Power and Dominion which their own Pride and
Ambition, together with the example and success of their Brethren in other
Countries, had spurred them on to. These things are well enough known to all
people, whose Eyes are opened, and therefore I shall not insist upon them; but
shall prove that Bishops ought not to be tried by Temporal Lords: and for that
I have the Suffrage of all Learned men, My Lord Coke in the Third Institutes,
Fol. 30. is express in the Point, Spiritual Lords shall not be tried by Peers.
Stamford in his Pleas of the Crown, Lib. 3. cap. 1. De Trial per les Peers,
says, That the Statute of Magna Charta, and 20 H. 6. cap. 9. Which gives
Dutchesses, Countesses, and Baronnesses the same Privilege that their Husbands
have; And este mise in (...) dextender a un Evesque on Abbe coment que ils
injoient le nosme des Seignior de Parliament, car ils nont cel nosme d' Evesque
ou Abbe ratione Nobilitatis sed ratione (...) ne ont lieu in Parliament in
respect de lour Nobility, ejus in respect de lour possession, Sc. l'auncient
Baronies annexes a lour Dignities and accordant a ceo il ^ad diverse Presidents
don't l'un fuit in temps le Roy H. 8. etc. Of the same Opinion, and for the same
Reason is Seldom, ubi supra; We find the same agreed by Justice Dodderidge,
page 59, 112. and Elsynge in his ancient Method of holding Parliaments, page
41. And the Book which I above cited, Br. Tit. Enquest 99. 27 H. 8. in the
Bishop of Rochester's Case, it is resolved, That when a Bishop is to be tried
for Treason, it is not necessary that he have Knights in his Jury, although he
shall have that Privilege in a Trial for his Land; which proves that his
Peerage is more for the Privilege of the Lands and Possessions of the
Bishopric, then the Person of the Bishop: as you may further see if you
compare this Book with Plowd. 117. Br. Tit. Trial 142. and Fitz. Cor. 115. And
I dare affirm there is not any one Lawyer or Antiquary of Note that disagrees
from this: But before I go from this, I shall strengthen these Authorities by
Precedents.

I shall begin with Adam de Orleton, or Tarleton Bishop of Hereford, who in the
17 of Ed. 2. was accused while he was sitting in Parliament, of Conspiring with
Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and aiding him with Horse and Arms in open
Rebellion; whereupon he was ordered to the Bar of the House of Lords; he made
no Answer to those Crimes that were laid to his charge, only that he was
Suffragan to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who was his direct Judge under the
Pope, and without his leave and the consent of his Fellow-Bishops he would not
answer: Now although the Statute of Articuli Cleri restraining the benefit of
Clergy to Felony, was made but eight years before this, yet the rest of the
Clergy in that disorderly time (observe the Humility, Obedience, and Loyalty of
our Spiritual Fathers in those days) had the impudence in the presence of the
King, to pull him violently from the Bar and deliver him to the Archbishop:
Baker 124. Co. 2. Inst. 654.
The King was enraged at this Insolence, and gave special Order to apprehend
him again, which was done, and was arraigned upon an Indictment at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, and upon the Question, How he will be tried? He said, Quod
ipse est Episcopus Herefordensis ad voluntatem Dei and Sammi Pontificis, and
quod materia praedict Articulor' sibi imposi^ adeo ardua est quod ipse non
debet in Curia hac super praedictis Articul' imposii respondere nec inde
respondere potest absque offensu Divino and Sanctae Ecclesiae. Hereupon Day is
given over, and after some Contiuances, the Record goes on thus; Et praeceptum
est Vic' Comit' Hereford quod venire faciat coram Domino Rege, etc. tot and
tales, etc. ad inquirendum prout mores est, etc. And a Common Jury is returned,
which find him Guilty, and his Goods and Lands are seized into the Kings Hands,
and after Conviction, he is delivered unto the Archbishop, to the end (I
suppose) that he should be Degraded; for in this Case being High Treason there
could be no Purgation. See the Record of his Attainder, Hill. 17 E. 2. Coram
Rege, Rot. 87. Dors' Co^ 3. Inst. 30. Fuller's Chapter Hist. fol. 107. Tho.
Walsingham, fol. 199. It appears by the Record it self, and all the Histories
of those times, what Artifices were used, and with what Industry every Stone
was turned by the Clergy, to keep the Bishop from the Justice of the Nation;
and is it to be supposed, that they would wave their Jus Paritatis, if they had
it? We have a world of Complaints in Walsingham; and other old Monks, against
the whole Proceeding, but not one word of any Injury done to their Peerage.

The next Precedent is in Trin. 30. E. 3. Rot. 11. John de Isle Brother to
Thomas Hen Bishop of Ely, was Indicted in Huntington, that he with diverse
others, per assensum and procurationem Episcopi praedict 28 E. 3. Diae Lunae
post Testum Sancti Jacobi, burnt the House of the Lady Wake, at (...) by
Sommersham in Comitat. praedict, and quod praedict Tho. Episcopus sciens
praedict combustionem per praedict servientes suos esse factam, dictos
servientes apud Sommersham praedict postea receptavit, etc. And also it was
found before the Justices and Coroners, that 29 E. 3. the said Bishop was
guilty de assensu of the Murder of one William Holme, slain by Ralph Careless
and Walter Ripton, called little Watt, upon Malice conceived against Holme,
because he followed the Suit of the Lady Wake; the Principals were attainted by
Owtlawry, the Bishop was Arraigned, and upon question, how he would be tried?
He answered, Quod ipse est membrum Domini Papae, and quod ipse ab ordinario suo
viz. venerabili Patre Domino Simone Archiepiscopo Cant. Angliae Primat
respondere non potest, and super haec Dominus Archiepiscopus praesons hic in
Curia petit quod dictus Episcopus Eliensis, de feloniis praedictis sibi
impositis hic coram Laico Judice non cogatur respondere; and ut sciatur inde
rei veritas per inquisitionem Patriae praecept' est Vicecom etc. Ad quens diem,
etc. Jurat' trial, etc. dicunt super Sacramentum suum quod idem Episcopus est
in nullo culpabilis; sed dicunt quod idem Episcopus post feloniam factam ipsos
servientes receptavit sciens ipsos feloniam fecisse, etc. Et super haec p^^ict'
Archiepiscopus praese^s in Cur' petit ipsum tanquam Membrum Ecclesiae sibi
lib^^^^, and ei liberatur custodiend' prout decet. Here is a Bishop Indicted,
Arraigned, Tried by a Common Jury, and Convicted as accessory to several
Felonies, as burning of a House, and killing a Man, both before and after the
Felonies committed: And it is observable, the Jurors were tried as appears by
this Record, and that proves the Bishop had his Challenges to them at his
Trial: And is it not very strange that they should proceed at this Rate against
a Peer of the Realm, over whom they had no Jurisdiction, and a Bishop too, at
such a time when the Clergy were the only men about Court; Baker 141.
as Simon Langham, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor; William Wickham
Archdeacon of Lincoln, Keeper of the Privy Seal; David Willer Parson of
Somersham, Master of the Rolls; ten beneficed Priests, Masters of the Chancery;
William Mulse Dean of S. Martins le grand, Chief Chamberlain of the Exchequer,
Receiver and Keeper of the Kings Treasure and Jewels; William Aksby Archdeacon
of Northampton, Chancellor of the Exchequer; William Dighton Prebendary of S.
Martins, Clerk of the Privy Seal; Richard Chesterfield Prebend of S. Stephens,
Treasurer of the Kings House; Henry Snatch Parson of Oundell, Master of the
Kings Wardrobe; John Newnham Parson of Fenny-stanton, one of the Chamberlains
of the Exchequer; John Rowseby Parson of Harwich, Surveyor and Controller of
the Kings Works; Thomas Brittingham Parson of Asby, Treasurer to the King for
the part of Guisnes, and the Marches of Calice; John Troys a Priest, Treasurer
of Ireland. These I have specified here, because when any Examples are put of
Justice had against Ecclesiastical Malefactors, there are a sort of people who
presently cry out, Their wings were clipped: They were under contempt and hated
by the Laity, etc. But what Credit is to be given to them, may be gathered from
what has been said.

Thomas Merkes Bishop of Carlisle, was in the 2 H. 4. Indicted of Conspiring
with Holland Earl of Kent, and the Dukes of Exceter and Surrey, and the Duke of
Aumerle, Montacute Earl of Salisbury, Spencer Earl of Gloucester, and others, to
kill the King: he was thereupon Arraigned before Thomas Earl of Warwick, and
other Justices of Oyer and Terminer, in Middlesex, and Tried by a Common Jury,
and found Guilty; afterward the Record was removed to the Kings Bench, and the
Bishop put into the Marshalsea, and afterward he is brought to the Bar, and
being asked, if he had any thing to show why Judgment should not be given on
him, he pleads his Pardon, and it is allowed: See the Record of his Attainder,
Hill. 2. H. 4. Coram Rege, Rot. 6. Co. 2. Inst. 636. 3. Inst. 30.

But to come somewhat nearer our times; Fisher Bishop of Rochester is Indicted,
Arraigned, and Tried by a Common Jury, for speaking Treasonable Words against
an Act of Parliament made the 26 of H. 8. making the King Head of the Church,
and abolishing the Authority of the Pope of Rome; and was Condemned at the
Kings Bench, and Executed, Br. Tit. Trial 142. Inquest 99. 27 H. 8.

The last that I shall name, is that Holy and Renowned Martyr, Archbishop
Cranmer, who was Tried with Lady Jane Gray, and her Husband Lord Guilford, and
two younger Sons of the Duke of Northumberland, Ambrose and Henry, at
Guild Hall, before the Lord Mayor and Judges, the Third Day of Nov. in the
First Year of Queen Mary's Reign, 1553. Where they were all found Guilty, and
Condemed of High Treason. None of these were Executed upon this Judgment,
except Lady Jane Gray and her Husband, who upon a Second Miscarriage of her
Father the Duke of Suffolk, in joining with Sir Thomas Wyat to oppose King
Philip's Landing, were Executed in the Tower the 12th of Febr. following: On
the 20th of April following, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, were adjudged
Heretics at Oxford, and Degraded by Commission from the Pope, and a little
after Cardinal Poole succeeded Cranmer, who was burnt as a Heretic 14th of
Febr. 1556. All this is known to those that are acquainted with the
Transactions of those times; and therefore it is evident both from the
Authority of Learned Men, and the Practice of all Ages in all times, that
Bishops have been Tried by Common Juries: And sure it was not without ground
that so Grave and Judicious an Author as Camden, should say, That the Spiritual
Lords enjoy all the Privileges that Temporal Lords do, saving only the
business of Trial by Peers.

Having thus proved what I before asserted concerning the Trial of Lords
Spiritual; I shall in the next place consider the Answers that are generally
made to these Arguments and Authorities. Those I observe to be principally two:
1. They will very well agree with those Authors that say; Bishops are not to be
Tried by Peers; but then (say they) it was not for want of Peerage, but because
they would not be put to answer for any Capital Crime before Lay-Judges. 2.
They say, that if it happened that at any time a Bishop was Tried by Laymen
and by Common Juries, then they were first Degraded.


If there were no more to be said for this, the very reading of the
forementioned Precedents would easily make appear the weakness of these
Objections; for it appears by the very Records, that their Privilege of Clergy
was insisted upon, and that with a great deal of Zeal and Fervency; insomuch
that the Passage of the Bishop of Hereford, is a thing taken notice of in a
special manner by all the most Famous Historians of this Nation; and it is
generally agreed, that about Fourteen Bishops came with their Crosses erected
to the place of Judgment, threatening all people with Excommunication that
offered to oppose them in that which they intended; and yet we find that he was
not delivered till after he was found Guilty: And it is manifest from all the
other Precedents, that they were found Guilty, and most of them Condemned to
die upon the Verdict of Twelve Laymen. But as to the business* of Deprivation,
you may observe, that throughout the whole Records they are named Bishops, as
Episcopus Herefordensis, Eliensis and Roffensis, which could not be if they
were Degraded; for then these Titles were not rightful additions in Law. And
although it being evident that so it was de facto, is a sufficient Answer to
the Objections; yet for more abundant satisfaction, I shall be somewhat more
large in this, and shall show that so it ought to be de jure.

In handling this Point, I shall consider these following Particulars: 1. To
whom this Privilegium Clericale, or Exemption from Temporal Jurisdiction, ought
to have been allowed? 2. I shall consider somewhat of the Nature of this
Exemption and Immunity, and how far they were exempted from Secular Power. 3. I
shall examine in what Cases it was allowed, and in what, not. 4. At what time.
5. Upon what account it was that Clergymen were delivered to their Ordinaries
in those Cases where the benefit of Clergy was not allowed.


And lastly, I shall show at what time regularly they were Degraded.

I. As for the first, It was generally allowed to all within Holy Orders,
whether Secular, or Regular, and in an equal Degree to all such, not respecting
Superiority, or Inferiority: The poor Country-Parson had as good and as large a
Right to it, as my Lord Bishop. This is proved, first, From the Canons that
gave this Immunity; the first (I think) were made by Pope Gaius, and those run;
Clericus coram Judice Seculari Judicari non debet nec aliquid contra ipsum
fieri, per quod ad periculum mortis vel ad mutilationem membrorum valeat
perveniri, etc. See Linwood Tit. de foro compet. c. contingit. Polichro. lib.
4. c. 24. of Pope Gaius, and Onuphrius in his Comment upon Platina, in the life
of that Pope. Therefore seeing he cannot take any advantage of these Canons,
except as Clericus, and must claim it by the same Name that inferior Priests
do, he must have it in the same Degree. But that which is a great deal stronger
than the Construction of Canons, is the Confirmation that is made by our Acts
of Parliament; this Privilege is granted to all that are Clerici, or Clerks in
French, and Clergymen in English; and to all such indefinitely without
distinction, or respect of the several Ranks and Degrees of men within Holy
Orders: So you will find it in Marlebridge c. 28. West. 1. c. 2. Art. Cler. c.
15. 25 E. 3. c. 4, and 5. 4 H. 4. c. 3. and the rest. So that without all
question, a Bishop can pretend to no more Privilege than any other Clerk causa
qua supra. This I thought fit to observe first, because that every Authority
and Precedent that I shall bring of an inferior Priest, is as strong for my
purpose, as if it were of a Bishop.

II. As for the second Point, I shall not need to be very large upon it, but
shall observe one thing which will be serviceable to my present purpose, and
that is this: That every Temporal Magistrate and Judge of this Kingdom, has,
and in all times ever had, by the Common Law, Jurisdiction over every Subject
in the same Degree of Nobility that was resident within the Verge and local
extent of his Jurisdiction: This Power and Authority of his being Universal, he
was never bound to take notice of the Privileges and Immunities of any
particular Orders and Societies of Men, if they themselves would not take
advantage of it; so that this same Previlegium Clericale was no absolute
exemption from Secular Authority, so as to make all Proceedings before a
Secular Judge, to be Coram non Judice: but the end and design of it was, that
when any Clergyman was Arraigned as a Malefactor before a Secular Judge, then
in some Cases, before he suffered the punishment that was due by Law, he was
delivered to his Ordinary to make his Purgation; if he could, then his Ordinary
discharged him; but if he could not, then he was Degraded and sent back to the
Temporal Magistrate to suffer punishment according to his Demerits. That the
Proceedings of a Secular Judge upon one within Holy Orders, are not Coram non
Judice, might be proved both out of Civilians and Canonists; but that would not
be much to the purpose if I should, and therefore I shall forbear; only shall
take notice of a Passage in Dr. Ridley's View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Law, page 86. If a Clerk (says he) be first Arrested by his Spiritual Judge,
and found guilty, he shall be Degraded and delivered over to the Temporal
power; but if he be first Arrested by the Secular Magistrate, and Tried, and
found Guilty, he shall be delivered to the Bishop to be deprived, and then
delivered back to punishment. The same in effect he says p. 158. whereby he
does allow, that according to the Ecclesiastical Law, the Temporal Judges were
allowed to have Jurisdiction over men within Holy Orders: But let him or any of
the Civilians or Canonists say what they will, it is no great matter; we must
consider what the Law of England says in this case: for the Canons never were
in force in England any further than they were voluntarily received, and so
transmitted as a common Usage or Custom to Posterity by Tradition, and so
became part of the Common Law; or else were confirmed by Act of Parliament, and
so became part of our Statute Law, of which more hereafter. And that by the Law
of England the Proceedings against Ecclesiastical Persons before a Secular
Judge, are not coram non Judice, I prove by these Cases: An Appeal of Robbery
was brought against a Monk, who was tried and acquitted; upon this the Abbot
and the Monk brought a Writ of Conspiracy against diverse who procured and
abetted the said Appeal: whereupon the Defendants appear, and go to Trial; but
the Abbot and Monk get a Verdict and Judgment to recover 1000 Marks damages,
Co. 2. Inst. 638. But it is certain, that a Writ of Conspiracy cannot lie
except the Plaintiff had been Legitimo modo acquietatus, and that he could not
be, if the whole Proceedings upon the Appeal had been Coram non Judice. So if
at the Common Law a Clergyman had been Indicted of Felony, and had confessed
the Fact in Court, he could not have had the benefit of his Clergy, because the
end of granting it, was, that he might make his Purgation before the Spiritual
Judge, but that he could not after he had confessed the Fact in Court. Co. ubi
supra, Stamford 124. And yet no Confession coram non Judice is conclusive. All
which does evidently prove, That the allowance of those Canons which gave the
first birth to this Immunity, did not trench to the prejudice of Temporal
Judges, so as to bar them of that Jurisdiction which they have over every
Subject by the Common Law: And the Nature of it will further appear, if we take
into consideration the Third Particular, which is this:

III. In what Cases the benefit of Clergy was allowable, and in what not; This
Immunity was allowed in England long before any Statute was made for its
confirmation; it was allowed only in such cases as were judged reasonable, but
never in full satisfaction to the demands of the Clergy: Kellaway. 7 H. 8. 181.
b. But the Clergy (as their Custom then was) were willing to improve any
Concession to their best advantage, according to the common Proverb, When they
had got an Inch, they would take an Ell. And to that end did with a great deal
of fervency and zeal (no doubt) insist upon their Privilege as an absolute
Exemption from all Temporal Jurisdiction, to all intents and purposes,
extending to all Crimes and Offenses whatsoever, and thundering out
Excommunications, and such like Maledictions, forced some people for quietness
sake to comply with them, (as appears by Bracton, lib. fol. 123.) to the great
encouragement of all sorts of Villainies and Outrages, and consequently to the
grievous oppression and vexation of the Subject: for this assurance, or at
least hopes of Impunity, let loose the Reigns of Rapine and Violence, and was
the most effectual course that could be taken for the dissolution of any
Government, and the utter desolation and ruin of any Country whatsoever. Vide
Parliam. held at Clarendon. 11. H. 2.
To give a check to this exorbitant Licentiousness, strict care is taken by the
Judges and Magistrates, that Justice be duly executed, and Offenders legally
punished; and therefore the Privilegium Clericale not to be allowed in any Case
otherwise then according to the ancient Custom: Hence were the seeds of Envy
and of a very lasting Discord between Church and State sown; nothing but
Animosities, Rancour, Revenge and Hatred, is the Subject of the History of
those times, especially the time of Thomas Beckett: Bulls, Citations,
Excommunications, on the one side, and seizing of Temporalities, Imprisonment
and Banishment, on the other side, were the Complements that people were
entertained with in those days: These Differences grew to such a height, that
although through a formal Reconciliation, both Parties seemed to be pacified;
yet the Root of the Matter remaining untouched, the Fewds break forth, and the
Matter must be decided by Act of Parliament: And so I shall by the construction
of these old Statutes, and other Precedents, give a direct Answer to the
Question.

1. It is undeniable, that Privilegium Clericale was never allowed to any that
were Guilty of Crimen laesae Majestatis: The first Statute that we find among
the Printed Statutes, which does directly speak of it, is Westminster. 1. c. 2. which
is declarative of the Common Law by the express words of the Statute, Solonque
le Custom avaunt ces heures use, but faith not one word of Treason, only allows
the Privilege in Cases of Felony, Si Clearke soit prise pur rette de Felony.
Wherefore this Statute being in the Affirmative, determines nothing concerning
Treason, but leaves that as it was before at the Common Law. Not long after the
Clergy renewed their Complaints, and among the rest, complain that Secular
Judges have passed Judgment of Death upon men within Holy Orders, and claim
their Privilege absolutely and generally in Articles several, which they
presented to the King in Parliament. To this they receive Answer by the Statute
commonly called Articuli Cleri, in these words: Clericus ad Ecclesiam
confugiens pro Felonia pro Immunitate Ecclesiastica obtinenda, etc. gaudebit
Liberate Ecclesiastica, juxta laudabilem consuetudinem Regni hactenus
usitatam. This being an Answer much like the former, did not sufficiently
answer their Desires, expressing only Felony; nor on the other side did it
hinder the Temporal Judges from proceeding against them, as against Laymen in
Cases of High Treason, as they had done always before: Wherefore they do
afterward, viz. in the 25th of E. 3. make a grievous Complaint, that the Kings
Judges had given Judgment of High Treason against Houby and Cibthorp, Priests,
and several other Religious Persons, whereby they were Hanged, Drawn and
Quartered, to the great Dishononr of the Church, etc. To this they have a
direct Answer by the Statutes of 25 E. 3. c. 4, and 5. Whereby (reciting their
Complaint) it is Enacted and Declared, that all Clergymen Convicted for
Treason or Felony against any other Person than the Kings Majesty, shall enjoy
the Liberties of the Holy Church, etc. and from henceforward (but never before)
the benefit of Clergy was allowed in Petit Treason, till by 23, and 25, and 32
H. 8. it was taken away; but High Treason is excepted out of that Statute of E.
3. and therefore was ever since punished without the allowance of Clergy as it
was before: And accordingly the Abbot of Missenden was Condemned to be Hanged,
Drawn and Quartered, Pro contra factione and resectione legalis monetae
Angliae, Mich. coram Rege 31 E. 3. Rot. 55. And it is taken for a General Rule,
Trin. 21 E. 3. coram Rege, Rot. 173. Quod privilegium Clericale non competit
seditioso equitanti cum Armis, etc. Thus I have shown that in the Cases of
Orleton, Merkes, Fisher, and Cranmer, the benefit of Clergy could not be
allowed by the Law of England, they being Cases of High Treason.

But in Cases of Felony, the benefit of Clergy was always allowed, till it was
taken away in Cases of Murder ex malitia praecegitata, Poisoning, Burglary,
Robbery, etc. by the 1 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 12. and cap. 10. This is sufficient
for this Point.

IV. The Fourth Question, At what time the benefit of Clergy ought to be
pleaded or demanded? comes to be examined. I conceive, that the common practice
both before and after the Statute of Westminster. 1. was to deliver them to the
Ordinary after Conviction, and therefore they would not suffer them to demand
it before: My Reason is, because the Statute of Westminster. says thus; Si Clearke
soit prise pur rette de felony, and si il soit per l' Ordinary demand, il luy
soit livere solonque la privilege de Saint Eccl' etc. solonque le custom avaunt
ses lieures use. This Statute grants no new Privilege, but confirms only that
which they had before: And as for the time of allowing the Privilege, the
words of the Statute are so ambiguous, that it is very hard to determine the
Question from thence; only the Statute refers it to the Custom of the former
Ages: for the Privilege of the Holy Church is to be allowed solonque le
custom, etc. Now all the Judges of England did after this Statute determine,
that they would not deliver any Prisoner to the Ordinary till he was first
Indicted, and also thereupon Arraigned, and till it was Inquired by an Inquest
upon his Arraignment, whether he were Guilty or not Guilty; if not Guilty, then
he was discharged without any more ado; but if Guilty, his Goods and Chattels,
Lands and Tenements were forfeited, and his Body delivered to the Ordinary: So
says Britton, cap. 4. f. 11. Si Clearke encoupe de felony allegga Clergy, and
soit per l' Ordinary demand, donque serra enquise comment il est miscrue ( i.
culpable) and sil est trovenient miscrue donque il aleraquite. Et sil soit and
trove miscrue, ses Chateux serroient taxes, and ses terres prises in maine le
Roy, and sen corpse deliver al Ordinary. The same you will find in the Mirr. c.
3. Co. 2. Inst. 164. in his Exposition upon that Statute; and Stamford 131. And
this we must suppose to have been the practice before the Statute; because the
Statute appoints the ancient Custom to be observed, and there were none that
knew the ancient Custom so well as the Judges of those times; and therefore
this determination of the Judges was either according to the Custom avaunt ses
heures use (as the Statute speaks) or else it was not according to Law: but
that is absurd, especially seeing it was not only one resolution, but the
constant practice ever since; for in the Record of all Indictments of
Clergymen, if they refused to answer, but pleaded their Privilegium Clericale,
and were demanded by their Ordinary; the Record is entered -- Sed ut sciatur
qualis ei liberari deberat, (i. whether Guilty or not Guilty) inquiratur inde
rei veritas per patriam. And in the Year-Books we have multitudes of Cases that
do prove it, as you may see in the Margent; Fitz. Tit. Cor. pl. 417. 8 E. 2. 17
E. 2. 386. 19 E. 2. 233.
the same is proved by the forementioned Record of the Bishop of Ely, 30 E. 3.
And there is a like Case, 40 E. 3. Fitz. Tit. Cor. 91. And the Statute of 25 E.
3. c. 4. says expressly, That all Clergymen Convict of Treason and Felony,
etc. Which intimates that Clergy was not to be allowed till after Conviction.
And so I have answered what ever they can object against the above cited
Authorities and Precedents from the benefit of Clergy; and therefore shall now
briefly consider the two last Particulars.

V. In the fifth place I am to consider, Upon what account it was that
Clergymen were delivered to their Ordinaries, in those Cases where the benefit
of Clergy was not allowed: The delivering of a Clerk Convict to his Ordinary,
could be only for these ends, either that he might make his Purgation before
his Spiritual Judge, or that the Ordinary might Degrade him, and then deliver
him over to the Secular Power, to be punished according to Law as a Layman,
lest Scandal and Indignity should be put upon the Church: The former is only
in Cases where Clergy is allowed; for where there is no Clergy, there can be no
Purgation: The latter is, where no Clergy can be allowed: The former is de
Jure, and cannot be denied. I do not mean Jure Canonico, but is a Custom which
has been allowed time out of mind, and confirmed by several Acts of
Parliament; and for that reason only, I say, it is de Jure. Vide Co. ^. Inst.
636.
The latter is, de Gratia, and Arbitrary; for our Judges have had such an
Honor and Esteem for the Dignity of a Priest, that they usually did deliver
them to the Bishop to be Degraded, before the Sentence of Law was executed upon
them. So it is in all Cases of High Treason, for there being no room for
Purgation, the Judges are not at all obliged to deliver him, but out of favor
they were wont to do it, to the end he might be Degraded; and if that Custom
were still observed, there were no great harm in it: yet in Trin. 24. H. 8. in
Spilmans Reports we have a Case of one George Nobles a Priest, who was
Convicted at the Gaol delivery of Newgate, of Clipping the Kings Coin; and by
the Resolution of all the Judges, they passed Sentence of Death upon him before
any Degradation, and he was accordingly Executed in his Canonical Vestments. In
a Record upon the Parliament, Roll 21 E. 1. Rot. 9. it is to be found, that one
Walter, de Berton was Convicted of Counterfeiting the great Seal; but the
Record says, Qui convictus tradatur Episcopo Sarum qui eum petiit ut Clericum
suum sed sub pena, etc. and sub forma qua decet quia videtur Concilio quod in
tali casu non admittenda est purgatio. Here it appears a person Convicted was
delivered to his Ordinary in case where there could be no Purgation; and so no
benefit of Clergy; and therefore it is evident that it was to the end he should
be Degraded, and upon that the Delivery is with a Subpoena, which can be
understood no otherwise but that he should re-deliver him.

VI. As to the last point, at what time they ought to be Degraded, may be
determined partly from what has been said already; for the end of Degradation,
is only to prevent that Scandal and Irreverence which would otherwise be thrown
upon that honorable Profession, which all sober and true Christians are very
tender of: And certainly there cannot regularly be any Deprivation or
Degradation before Conviction; for no Clerk can be Deprived or Degraded of any
Benefice or Dignity, except upon full Evidence he be found such and such a
person as is incapable of enjoying it. And as a Bishop cannot refuse a Clerk
presented, except there be special cause for it, as criminosus, etc. so neither
can he deprive one that is already Inducted without special cause; and in any
Court of Record the Cause must be specially pleaded, because it is Traversable,
Co. lib. 5. 2. part. fol. 58. Specots Case. Suppose then that any
Ecclesiastical Person is Arrested for Treason, the Ordinary cannot deprive him,
except he first pass Sentence upon him, that he is criminosus; but he cannot
pass Sentence of Deprivation upon him, while he is under the Custody of the
Temporal Magistrate, and before he is delivered to him; for it is the greatest
piece of Injustice in the World, to Condemn a man before he be heard: indeed
our Law allows that in case of Outlawry, but that is when he may appear, and
yet after Five solemn Proclamations, will not; but it is against the Law of
Reason, and the Laws of all Nations, to Condemn a man that is absent, when at
the same time they know he cannot appear; and therefore no Clerk can be
deprived till he be delivered by the Temporal Judge: and I have already proved
that there can be no Delivery till after Conviction; so that it does
necessarily follow, that there can be no Deprivation till after Conviction; and
for further confirmation, see Ridley, ubi supra, Bracton. lib. 3. fol. 123.
Clericus, Ordinario traditus si in purgatione defecerit, degradari debet; Fle^^
lib. 6. c. 36. Degradare potest Episcopus criminum convictos. Whereby it
appears, first, That before Degradation, they must be allowed the benefit of
making their Purgation, if they can, and that they have not except they be
present when they are Condemned. 2ly, That they must be Traditi or Convicti
before Deprivation.

The Case of a Bishop seems parallel to the Case of any other Clerk; for the
King is Patron of all the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics of England, they
being all of his and his Progenitors Foundation: They must either therefore be
Donative or Eligible; before King John's time they were Donative; per
traditionem Annuli and Pastoralis baculi: But he by his Charter 15. Jan. Anno
Regni 17. granted that they should be Eligible, and therefore were made to be
in the nature of Advowsons presentable: when therefore the King did nominate or
present such a person to the Bishopric, that person could not be refused
without some special cause of refusal; but if it did appear that he was either
Infamous, Irreligious, Schismatic, Heretic, Miscreant, Infidel, mere laicus,
etc. I conceive he might well be refused; or else to what purpose issued forth
the Conge d'eslier? What signified King John's making them Eligible? And
therefore there being the same Reason and Law of Degradation or Deprivation
after actual Investiture, that there is of refusal before: I infer there can be
no Deprivation of a Bishop without Cause, and that Cause cannot be adjudged to
be in him before he be heard, and have the Justice to defend himself as well as
he can, allowed him; and consequently no Deprivation till after delivery out of
the hands of the Secular Power, which is in no case till after Conviction.
These Particulars explained and proved, will satisfy all those whose
Sentiments are regulated according to the Standard of Reason, that there is no
strength in any of those Objections which some ignorant people do so much
insist upon.

Having thus by the Rules of Law, the Authority of the most Renowned Authors,
and Variety of Precedents, proved, That a Bishop is no Peer, in respect to a
Temporal Lord, within the intent and meaning of the 29th of Magna Charta: It
does naturally follow, that he has no Right to claim any Jurisdiction or Right
of Judicature upon the Life and Death of a Temporal Lord; for otherwise he
might suffer Death or Banishment, or Imprisonment, by the Judgment of those who
are not his Peers, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of England, and the
Liberties of every Subject. And thus I conclude the first Point.

The second Point that I offered to demonstrate, is, That the Bishops Votings
in Capital Cases, is contrary to the practice of all Ages until this day.

In the first place, Let us examine how it was before the Reign of Henry the
Second: It must not be expected that this should be proved from the Records and
Journals upon the Parliament Rolls, for their Antiquity will not reach so high
as to do any considerable Service in this matter; but I shall give the same
proof for this, that any man can give for Trials by Juries before Magna Charta;
that is, an Act of Parliament making Recognition of several ancient Customs
practiced beyond the Memory of those that then lived; and that I hope will be
sufficient Evidence: The Statute that I mean, was made at that Great Parliament
which was held at Clarendon, the 10, and 11 of H. 2. Anno Dom. 1164. In the
Preamble it is, Recognizantur Advice consuetudines, which proves it is
declarative of the Common Law. The Eleventh Article runs in this manner,
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and universa persona (holding any Ecclesiastical
Dignity) qui de Rege tenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege sicut
Baroniam, and inde respondeant Justiciariis and Ministris Regis, and sequantur
and faciant omnes consuetudines Regias, and sicut caeteri Barons debeant
interesse judiciis curiae Regis cum Baronibus quousque perveniatur ad
diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem. Here is their Jurisdiction expressly
limited, that it shall not extend ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem. And
this Act of Parliament is declarative of the Common Law, as appears by the
Preamble, and the construction of most Authors that mention it. In this (says
Doderidge) certain Recapitulations are made of the Kings Prerogative and his
Peoples Right, then sought to be infringed by the Pope and his Clergy. So says
my Lord Cook, 2. Inst. 631. and Seldom, Titles of Honor, 582. Seeing therefore
there can be no time assigned when this ancient Custom which is here
recapitulated, was not, consequently this limitation must be supposed* to be as
ancient as their sitting in the House of Lords: But to prove that this
Constitution of Clarendon (as some call it) is an Act of Parliament; Matthew
Paris says, Praesentibus etiam Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus and Proceribus Regni. Roger of Hoveden says
expressly, that Clerus and Populus Regni were then assembled, and so mentions it
as a full Parliament. Goldastus Constit. Imper. Tom. 3. 347. says, There were
added to the Clergy, Nobiliores and Antiquiores Regni. Fitz Stephens calls it,
Generale Concilium. And lastly, our Common Lawyers do take it for granted and
undisputable. My Lord Cook in 2. Inst. 631, and 638. calls it, The great
Parliament that was held at Clarendon: So Bracton, lib. 3. f. 136. And this
very Article abovementioned is in all the said Authors; and likewise in Roger
of Wendover: but that which is most considerable, is, that we have Gervasius
Doroberniensis, an Author that lived in that Age, and a Person within Holy
Orders too, reckoning this very Article among the Laws that were made at that
Parliament, in the 68. Page of his Book. But admitting it were no Parliament,
but only a great Council of Peers; yet that is as well for my purpose, because
that the Proceedings of such a Council are Matters of Record, and therefore a
Recognition or Declaration of ancient Customs, and of the Common Law made in
such a Council, is as undeniable proof, as if it were a Declaratory Act of
Parliament; for the force of such an Act is only in point of Evidence, and does
not Enact or Constitute any new Law. But as there is no question but that it is
an Act of Parliament, the Assembly being a Generale, or Commune Concilium,
which is always understood of the Parliament, Co. Inst. 110. a. So except it
can be proved this Statute was repealed, I have made good my Assertion, without
saying any more; for admitting that it had not been so frequently practiced, as
I in his proper place shall make appear it was; yet still it is valid and a
standing Law: for no Statute loses its force by Non-user, Co. 1. Inst. 114.
although Common Law, or particular Customs, may.

But this Statute we find was afterward confirmed: for says Roger de Hoveden a
Monk, p. 30. It was Ordained in a Council at Westminster. That no Clergyman should
Agitare Judicium, etc. and he that did, was to be deprived of his Dignity and
Orders.

That these Constitutions were punctually observed in after Ages, is the next
thing to be proved: And the first that I shall mention, is the Judgment against
the Spencers, 15 E. 2. The Lords Spiritual did withdraw, as in right they
ought. These Spencers were men that were great Favorites of that King; for
they had succeeded Peter Gaveston both in the Kings Favor, and in Places of
Profit and Trust about Court: and although the Lords had then prevailed with
the King to consent to an Act of Parliament for their Banishment, yet afterward
the Tide turned, the Spencers were called again to Court, and their Enemies
severally prosecuted; whereupon the greatest part of them departed from Court,
and through the Interests which the Spencers had with the remaining Lords, the
Judgment which stood upon Record against them was reversed for several Errors;
one of which was, The absence of the Prelates: but notwithstanding this, the
Judgment is afterward Affirmed by an Act of Parliament, in the first year of
the succeeding King: Vide 1 E. 3. c. 1, and 2.

And that the Absence of the Prelates is no cause of Reversing a Judgment, see
the Case of the Earl of Salisbury; who in the 2 of H. 5. petitioned the House
of Lords to Reverse a Judgment that was given against the Earl his Father, An.
2. H. 4. and Assigns for Error, That the Lords Spiritual were absent: The Case
was very much Debated, and at last it was adjudged no Error; and accordingly
the Judgment was Affirmed. But of this I shall have occasion to treat more at
large by and by: See Cotton, 539.

Anno 4 E. 3. In the Parliament at Winchester, Die Lunepost Festum Sancti
Gregorii, The Earl of Kent was brought before the Counts, Barons and autres
Grandees and Nobles, in mesme le Parliament, etc. for Treason, ders. claus. n.
38.

Anno eodem, in the Parliament at Westminster. post Festum Sanctae Katherinae; The
Articles of Treason being read against Montimer Earl of March, That he had
procured the Death of the late King, and had under-hand-dealing with the Scots
at Stanhope Park, and had been too familiar with the Queen Mother, by whom she
was thought to have been with Child, etc. The King charged Les Counts, and
Barons, les Peers de son Royaume, to give Judgment: And then it follows, that
Judgment was given Per les dits Counts and Barons les Peers de Royaume, come
Judges du Parliament.

Ibid. The King commanded Les dits Counts and Barons, Peers, etc. to give
Judgment on Simon de Bereford.

Ibid. The King commanded the same against several others, and accordingly John
Matravers was judged Per les Peers, Counts, and Barons, assembles in
Parliament. And so were Four others in the same Parliament, all for Treason;
and not one word of the Prelates, either when the Articles were read, or when
Judgment was given: For it is certain, they are never spoken of in any Record,
but either by the Name of Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, etc. or Prelati, or some
such Name which does distinguish them from the Laity; and if they be spoken of,
they are always first named and put before Les Counts and Barons; as at this
day, the Records are Entered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, etc. And for
these two Reasons they could not be comprehended under the General words, Et
autres Grandees and Nobles.

Anno 6 E. 3. Post Festum Sancti Gregorii; The Parliament were commanded to
consult of the keeping of the Peace, and punishments for the Breakers thereof;
and the Prelates departed Pur ceo que il ne attinet pass a eux Consailer du
guard de la Paix ne de chastement de tiels Malefactors: Yet afterward they came
and gave their Assent to an Act of Parliament for this purpose: The reason of
which shall be considered in another place, where we shall discourse of their
Voting in Bills of Attainder. By this Record it is evident, That the Prelates
have no Judicial Power over any Personal Crimes, which are not Parliamentary;
which does very much Fortify the Foundation and Ground of my whole Discourse.

Anno 1 R. 2. The Commons prayed that such as gave up Forth, etc. puissent
estre a respondre a cest Parliament and solonque lour desert fortment punis per
agard des Seigniors and Barons. And thereupon several were brought before the
Lords in Parliament, which must be understood of the Temporal Lords only,
because the Spiritual Lords are never intended in any Case to be mentioned,
except they be specially named.

Anno 11 R. 2. Diverse Matters of Treason were to be Treated of, and several
Lords to be Tried; and therefore the Spirituality did absent themselves from
the whole Parliament: but before their departure, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
in the Name of Himself, and all the Clergy of his Province, made this following
Protestation:

Quod Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fuit, nec non caeteros suos
Suffraganeos Confratres, Co-episcopos, Abbates and Priores aliosque Prelatos
quoscunque Baronium de Domino Rege tenentes, in Parliamento Regis ut Pares
personaliter interesse pertinet, ibidemque de Regni negotiis and aliis ibi
tractari consuetis cum caeteris dicti Regni Paribus and aliis consulere,
ordinare, statuere, definire ac caetera facere, quae Parliamenti tempore ibid.
intenditur facien'. Quia in praesenti Parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis
in quibus non licet nobis juxta Sacrorum Canonum instituta quomodolibet
interesse: Non intendimus nec volumus, sicuti de jure non possumus nec debemus:
Ad haec insuper protestamur and nostrum quilibet protestatur, quod propter
hujusmodi absentiam non intendimus nec volumus, nec nostrum aliquis intendit
nec vult quod processus habiti and habendi in praedict' Parliamento super
materiis aut edictis in quibus non possumus, nec debemus (ut praemittitur)
interesse quantum ad nos and nostrum quemlibet attinet futuris temporibus
quomodolibet impagnentur, infirmentur, seu etiam renoventur. This was read in
full Parliament, and enrolled at the Request of the Prelates: And the like was
made by the Bishops of Durham and Carlisle: Cotton 322. Co. 2. Inst. 586.

From this Record you may observe: 1. That the Lords Spiritual do acknowledge
that they have no Right to be present in Cases of Blood, Nec possumus, nec de
jure debemus. 2. You may observe that they did accordingly absent themselves,
and did thereby yield Obedience to the Parliament at Clarendon, and the
Constitution at Westminster. mentioned in Roger Hoveden, H. 2. That Clergymen should
not Agitare judicium Sanguinis; though they pretended it was in Obedience to
the Canons of the Church. 3. You may observe that they did not stay in the
House till they came to the final Question Guilty or Not guilty, but departed
at the first beginning of the Business, Quia agitur de quibusdam rebus in
quibus non licet nobis interesse. These short Remarks I leave upon it at
present, but shall take it more narrowly into consideration, when I come to
answer their Objections, and shall go on with Precedents.


In the Reign of H. 4. The Earl of Northumberland was suspected to have been
privy to the Rebellion of his Son Hotspur, who joined with Mortimer Earl of
March, and Owen Glendour of Wales, in open Rebellion. In the 5 of H. 4. he came
and presented himself to the King and Parliament, and Protested his Innocence,
and challenged his Jus Parietatis, and Right of Trial by his Peers: Whereupon
the Lords (says the Record) made Protestation, that the Judgment belonged unto
them only, etc. The Petition being read before the King and the said Lords, as
Peers of Parliament, unto whom such Judgments do of Right belong, considering,
etc. Adjudged that it was neither Treason, nor Felony, etc. This was the first
Process that was made against the Earl; but it does not evidently appear
whether they were present or absent, the Roll being Lords indefinitely; yet it
is most probable that it is meant Temporal Lords only. 1. If the Spiritual
Lords had been present, they would have been named by a special Name, as they
are in all other Rolls. 2. We find the Lords Temporal in other Cases of Life*
and Death, claiming the same Jurisdiction as belonging to them only
exclusively of the Clergy. Anno 4 E. 3. Judgment was given Per les Countes and
Barons, les Peers de la Royaume, come Judges du Parliament.

But I shall leave this, and come to the Process which Issued forth against him
afterward, for the Earl being acquitted, returns home, and within a very little
time has a considerable Army in the Field, together with the Archbishop of
York, Lord Bardolfe, and others; but their Army soon Disbanding, the Earl of
Westmerland comes with a considerable Strength for the King, and takes all the
Lords Prisoners, except Northumberland and Bardolfe, who fled into Scotland:
Whereupon 7 Hen. 4. Rot. Processus coram Domino Rege in Parliamento, etc. The
King commanded the Lords Temporal Peers of his Realm to advise what Process to
make, and what Judgment to render against the Earl of Northumberland, and the
Lord Bardosse; and then the Record goes on thus: And then the said Lords
Advised thereon, and Reported their Opinion to the King. -- The said Lords
Peers of the Realm, by the Assent of the King, Ordained that Proclamations
should be made for the said Earl of Northumberland, and Lord Bardolfe to
appear, or else to stand Convicted of High Treason by the Award of the Peers in
Parliament.

The King did further demand the Opinion of the said Lords Temporal, touching
the Archbishop of York. -- Unto which the Lords Temporal said, etc.

By Advice of the said Lords Temporal, the Returns of the former Proclamations
were made at the Parliament-Door, for the said Earl and Lord to appear.

By Advice of the said Lords Temporal, with Assent of the King, the former
Proclamations were examined. -- The said Lords Temporal considered of the
Errors therein, etc.

By the said Lords Temporal, with Assent of the King, by their Authority new
Proclamations were granted. -- Whereupon the said Lords Temporal then being in
the same Parliament, by Advice and Consent of our Lord the King, and by their
Authority in Pa^^^^^^* Awarded the said Earl of Northumbeland, and the Lord
Bardolfe, not appearing upon their Summons, to stand Convicted of High Treason,
etc.

Here we see all was done by the Temporal Lords, from the first beginning of
the Process until the Judgment, and yet it is said to be Awarded by the Peers
in Parliament, although the Spiritual Lords are not so much as once mentioned,
and consequently were not present, at any time whilst that Matter of Treason
was handling.

To Enumerate all the Instances of this Nature, and to Transcribe all the
Records of Attainders in Parliament, where the Names of the Lords Spiritual are
left out, which infers of necessity that they were absent; would swell out this
Treatise into a greater Bulk than either I intend, or then is in its self
convenient. These are sufficient to prove that Obedience was yielded to those
Laws and Constitutions of this Land, which were made for this purpose. I will
mention one Precedent more, and that is the Earl of Strafford's Case, 16
Caroli: The Bishops declined their Suffrages on the Trial of the Earl of
Strafford, according to the provision of the Canon Law, and the constant
practice to this day: (says Baker, 478) and therefore withdrew: But they
desired a Protestation that their Absence should not prejudice them of that,
nor of any other Privilege competent to them, as the Lords Spiritual in
Parliament, might be entered; which was done accordingly.

It may be objected, That this is not to be made use of as a Precedent: That (I
answer) is true as to the Matter of the Charge, and the Nature of the Crime
that he was Impeached for; no man must by color of that Act be Adjudged a
Traitor, that does those things which the Earl of Strafford did: but as to the
course of Proceedings, and all other Circumstances of the Method, it is well
enough; for nothing was done in that but what was warranted by Precedents and
constant practice in Parliament: And this Difference does appear from the
Proviso in the Bill of Attainder, for that is no more but this: That no Judge
or Judges shall hereafter interpret any Act or Acts to be Treason, in any other
manner, than he or they should or ought to have done before the making of this
Act; and any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. So
that the Proviso extends only to the Crimes, but not at all to their manner of
proceeding.

From the consideration of these things, That Allegation which is made by some,
that they were wont to sit till the final Question, Guilty or Not-guilty; were
put, will plainly appear to be altogether groundless: Because

First, If they have not Parity sufficient to Entitle them to any Jurisdiction
in Cases of Life and Death, as I have endeavored to show that they have not,
in the former part of my Discourse; then it is evident, that they cannot
exercise any Judicial Power at all, neither in things praeliminary to the
Judgment, the Judgment it self, nor in things subsequent to the Judgment: all
which do fall within the Conusance of Judicial Power, and do belong to the
Office, Power, and Jurisdiction of a Judge. For so says Magna Charta, Nemo
imprisonetur, etc. Nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, and yet Imprisonment
is a thing praeliminary to Judgment: The Office of a Judge is to hear first,
and then determine, Oyer and Terminer; but if any man be not duly qualified to
be a Judge, then he has as little power to hear the Cause, or Act any thing in
it, as to determine it.

Secondly, The Constitution of Clarendon, says, Debent interesse Judiciis
Curiae Domini Regis quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum vel ad
mortem. This must either be understood to comprehend all precedent and
praeliminary things, which do relate or tend ad diminutionem Membrorum, etc. Or
else if we take the words strictly and literally, we must understand the
meaning of that great Assembly to be only for the Exemption of Prelates from
doing the Office of Executioners; which is Nonsense: By Diminutio, etc.
therefore, or Mors, we must understand things conducing and tending ad
diminutionem, etc. or ad mortem. The Constitution at Westminster is much
plainer, Non debent agitare judicium sanguinis; the meaning is plainly this,
That they ought not to exercise any Judicial Power in Cases of Blood: But a man
may exercise Judicial Power agitare Judicium; or do the Office of a Judge in a
great many things that are both precedent and subsequent to the Judgment; as
Awarding of Process, receiving the Charge, etc. Therefore the Bishops ought not
to have any praeliminary Vote which has any tendency or relation to a Judgment
of Death.

Thirdly, When ever the Clergy, in Obedience to these Constitutions, did
withdraw, they left the whole Management of the Business from the beginning to
the end to the Lords Temporal, as appears from the Entry of the Records: so it
is 4 E. 3. in the Earl of Kents Case; he was brought before the Counts and
Barons, etc. for Treason: In the same year the Articles were read against
Mortimer, and the King charged Les Counts and Barons, to give Judgment upon the
said Articles. The same was in the Case of Simon de Bereford, Matravers, and
others in that year: 11 R. 2. the Prelates departed from the House at the first
Motion about the Appeals, and did not stay so much as till the Articles were
read. In the Earl of Northumberlands Case, it appears, they had not so much as
one Vote from the beginning to the end of the whole Proceedings, and the sole
Management of the Case was by the Award and Judgment of the Lords Temporal. In
the 21 of R. 2. the Prelates gave their Opinions generally, that Pardons were
revocable, but after they had done, they departed the House, and would not
consent so far to the Death of a man, as to give a particular Vote, when the
Question was put, Whether the Pardons of the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls
of Arundel and Warwick were revokable: Baker 161.

And indeed if they should have been permitted to Vote about their Answers,
etc. it would quite frustrate and elude the Design of the Prohibition; for
somewhat or other might happen to be put to the Vote in their presence,
concerning the Answer, Replication, etc. or concerning the Form and Method of
Judicature, upon which the whole Business would depend; and by the Voices of
the Spiritual Lords that Vote it, might pass against the major part of the
Temporal Lords, and so the whole Business lost, and the Expectation of Justice
frustrated; so that it is highly reasonable, that if they be absent at all,
they should be absent, Dum de hujusmodi materiis agitur.

Having thus by Reason and Authority established the Truth of those
Propositions which I at first laid down, I shall now examine the Strength of
those Arguments, whereby my Adversaries do support themselves, and maintain the
Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual in Capital Cases.

And 1. Their Grand Objection is, That they never absented themselves when
Capital Cases were Debated, upon any other account, then because they were
prohibited by the Laws of the Holy Church, to consent to the Death of any man:
And accordingly they made their Protestation, 11 R. 2. when they departed the
House, Juxta Sacrorum Canonum instituta non licet nobis interesse, etc. And
such a voluntary Departure for Conscience Sake (say they) lest they should
concern themselves in the Effusion of Innocent Blood, could neither conclude
themselves nor their Successors from claiming their Right to be present by the
Fundamental Law of the Land, as Peers of Parliament. Here lies their Strength,
and therefore a solid Refutation of this will remove all manner of Scruple, and
discover the vanity of their pretensions to any Jurisdiction of this kind:
Therefore in answer to this, I shall offer these following Considerations:

1. Whatever was the Reason that induced them to absent themselves when such
Matters came to be Debated; yet it is manifest from what has been said, that
there was an Act of Parliament (to which they were obliged to give Obedience,
as well as the Canons of the Church) that did expressly prohibit them to
exercise Jurisdiction in those Cases: and although they did say that their
Departure was in Obedience to the Canons of the Church, yet without doubt we
ought to construe their Departure to be also in Obedience to the Laws of the
Land: For the Case at the most favorable Representation, is no more than this;
The same thing is both prohibited by the Law of God, and the Law of Man; those
who forbear from the thing prohibited, do say they do it, because they are so
commanded by the Law of God, and say no more: In this Case we cannot construe,
that either the Law of Man does lose its force and obligatory Power, or that
those persons who said they forbore from the thing prohibited in Obedience to
the Law of God, did either not obey, or disobey the Law of Man; I mean, In foro
hum ano. If then the Prelates in former times did give Obedience to the Laws
and Constitutions of this Nation in this particular; much more ought their
Successors, whose Principle is strict Obedience to the Government of the
Kingdom and perfect submission to the Higher Powers. The truth is, it was a
happy thing that in the days of their Predecessors, the Law of the Church, and
the Law of the Land did so well agree in this particular* and if you would
consider the Humors and Principles of the Men, you would not wonder so much at
their Non-acknowledgment of the Laws of the Nation, when they could secure
themselves against the Compulsion of them and Punishment inflicted by them,
without making any such acknowledgment. It is not strange that those men, whose
Zeal for Religion was seen most in their Contentions and Wranglings with the
Civil Power; and who thought that Obstinacy and Disobedience to Regal
Authority, and the Laws and Constitution of the Government, where they thwarted
the Ambition and Grandeur of the Pope and his Clergy, was the most certain way
to merit Canonization; and that Beckett and Stratford, and the rest of that
Rebellious and Disobedient Tribe, were the mightiest Saints that ever lived
upon Earth. It is not strange that those Men that would trample all Humane Laws
under their Feet, if dissonant to the Canons of the Church, should pretend,
that when the Canons of the Church did agree with the Laws of the Land, they
yielded Obedience to the Canons of the Church, without taking notice of the
Laws of the Land. And indeed it was an extraordinary Specimen of Candor and
Modesty, that they did with so fair a pretense save themselves from the
inconvenience of acknowledging the Temporal Power in the limitation of their
Honor and Jurisdiction, which they were never known to be very forward to do:
But God be thanked the times are turned, we have reason to expect more Humility
and Loyalty from our now Spiritual Fathers, whose Principles do not allow them
in the least Opposition to lawful Authority, and who it is to be hoped will
never insist upon any thing, except they think that by the Law of the Land it
is their Right.

Secondly, Although they pretended that their departure from the House during
the Debates of Capital Matters, was in Obedience to the Canons of the Church;
yet it is more than probable, that the consideration of the Law of England by
which they were compellable to depart, whether there had been any such Canons
in force, or not, was the strongest Reason why they did withdraw, and that for
these two Reasons:

1. Because it is observable, That if those in whose power it was to dispense
with their Disobedience to the Laws of the Land, did at any time give way to
their Presence or Consent, that they should exercise Judicial Power in those
Cases, then the Lords Spiritual used generally to make bold with the Canons of
the Church, at least (...) vice: How then can it be supposed, that at other
times when there was no such License or Dispensation, their Departure was only
because of the Canons of the Church? That Record of 21. R. 2. where they did
consent to Constitute a Proxy, who should in their Name agree, or disagree to
any Judgments of Death that should be given in that Parliament, is very
considerable for this Point; for in that Case they gave Authroity to another to
do a thing which was unlawful for them to do themselves, and it was done,
because the King and Parliament being the Fountain of Law, and having power
unica vice, or more, to dispense with any Law, at least such as come not within
the Conusance of any other Court beside themselves, did give them leave so to
do: whereas without doubt, the passing Sentence of Death upon a man by Proxy,
was as great a Violation of the Canons of the Church, as if they had been
personally present, and had passed Judgment themselves: For can any man
rationally suppose, that the Clergy were so tender Conscienced, that they
should not agree to the Effusion of any man's Blood themselves, and yet that
their Consciences would allow them to Authorize another in their Name and
Place, and by their Authority to consent to it? As if it were not the same
thing in point of Conscience for me to kill a man, as it is to procure another
to do it: And so in point of Law, that which I am prohibited to do my self, I
am also prohibited to empower another to do; because that which a man's Servant,
Procurator, or Attorney, does by the Command, and by virtue of the Authority of
the Master, is in Judgment of Law and Conscience interpretatively the Act of
the Master himself: And the Constituting a Proxy in their Names to give
Judgment of Death by virtue of an Instrument under their Hands and Seals, will
further appear to be a breach of the Canons, if you consider the Letter of the
Canon made, Anno 1222. in the Reign of H. 3. which you may find among the
Constitutiones Archiepiscopi Stephani in Linwood, f. 146. -- Authoritate quoque
Concilii districtius inhibemus ne quis Clericus beneficiatus aut in Sacris
Ordinibus constitutus litteras pro poena sanguinis infligenda scribere vel
dictare presumant, vel ubi Judicium sanguinis tractatur, vel exercetur
intersit. From this Canon I conclude, That Clergymen ought neither to be
present themselves, nor depute others per litteras, to be present pro poena
sanguinis infligenda. We have likewise a very pertinent Observation upon this
Matter in an ancient MS. Chronicl. in libro Mailrosso, which has written very
largely of this Parliament that was held 21 R. 2. wherein the Prelates are
blamed for that Opinion which they gave generally about the Revocation of
Pardons, because the consequence thereof was the Death of those whose Pardons
were Revoked: Dederunt ergo locum (says the Book) Prelati judicio sanguinis in
hoc facto. Ita quod debitatur a pluribus si non incurrerent irregularitatem pro
negotio memorato, unde contigit quod propter istud minus peccatum inciderent in
aliud Majus peccatum consequenter, ut laicam personam constituerint
Procuratorem pro eisdem, qui illorum vice consentiret adjudicium sanguinis
dandum in dicto Parliamento si necess^ foret and occasio emersisset, etc. So
that upon the whole Matter, it is irrational to think that their departure from
the House ever before this, was merely in respect of the Canons* when we see
that the first offer of the King and Parliament to admit them to the exercise
of Jurisdiction for that time, was by them kindly accepted with a Non obstante
to the Canons of the Church. It is true, the giving Judgment of Death by Proxy,
was as great a violation of the Laws of England, as of the Canons of the
Church: yet inasmuch as Consensus tollit errorem, it was for that time well
enough.

2. This is further illustrated, If you observe that in those Cases to which
the Prohibition of the Law did not extend, they made no scruple of Sitting and
Voting, although their Voting in those Cases was against the Canons of the
Church. This may be instanced in the Cases of Bills of Attainder: for although
the Canons do prohibit them from Voting in such Cases, as much as any Case
whatsoever; inasmuch as in passing the Bill, they Vote, That the Person is
Guilty, and shall stand actually Attainted of High Treason, and shall be deemed
and adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer as in Cases of High Treason, etc. yet
they do generally Vote, because that the Prohibition of the Law does not extend
to Voting in Bills of Attainder, seeing that is not Agitare judicium, but only
Legis lationem, what they do in that Case is not Judicially, but only the
exercise of their Legislative Power; otherwise the House of Commons would make
themselves Judges, and would challenge a Judicial Power in the Trial of any
Lord, seeing in passing Bills of Attainder they do every whit as much as the
Bishops; for they Vote that he is Guilty, etc. and that he shall be adjudged a
Traitor, etc. And the Act of Parliament runs, Be it Enacted by the King, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled. For these
two Reasons I think it very improbable, that the Canons was the only cause why
the Prelates did depart the House when Capital Cases were Debated: But that the
weakness of their Objection may further appear; I answer,

Thirdly, Although we should admit that the Canons of the Church were the first
occasion of the beginning of this Custom among us, and that those Histories and
Chronicles which inform us after this manner, do say true, yet this is no
Argument against the validity of a standing Custom, the Commencemant of which
is not upon Record: for Histories and Chronicles are not Matters of Record,
neither are they in Law such strong and undeniable proof of the beginning of
any usage, as to make it no Custom; neither are the Canons of the Church
Matters of Record; and therefore cannot prove that there was no such Custom
before the making of those Canons. Seeing then it is without doubt that there
was a Custom that the Prelates should not exercise Jurisdiction in Capital
Cases, and there is no Record that does mention the time when it did begin, nor
any time when it could be said, There never was such an Usage; it must of
necessity be supposed that it is as ancient as the Government it self, and part
of the Fundamental Contract of the Nation, whereby their Jurisdiction was
originally limited that it should not extend to such and such Cases. So that I
do not argue from the validity or invalidity of those Canons, nor from any
Construction that may be made upon the Letter of the Canons, but insist upon it
as part of the Common Law of England, and do absolutely deny that it had its
Original and Force from any Authority that the Pope of Rome with or without his
Council, or a Convocation of the Clergy in England had, to impose Laws upon us;
but affirm, that its force and obligatory Power did solely arise from the
voluntary reception, approbation, and usage allowed by the People of England,
which being by them transmitted to Posterity, is a thing reputed to have been
used and practiced time out of mind, and is thereupon ranked among the Common
Laws of this Kingdom; which are no more but general Usages or Customs of
general Concernment to the whole Nation in things of Temporal Conisance, first
upon reasonable Considerations by consent allowed, and then transmitted as a
Tradition to Posterity, by whom they are supposed to have been in ure ever
since it was a Nation: But this matter of Judicature in Capital Cases is a
point of Temporal Jurisdiction in a Temporal Court; viz. The High Court of
Parliament, and therefore of Temporal Conisance: the departure of the Clergy
when such Cases came to be Debated, has also been an interrupted practice for
many Ages together; yea and most strictly observed in the first Ages, whose
Transactions are Recorded (as has been already proved) and it is impossible by
Record to trace it to its first Original: Therefore it agreeing with every part
of the definition of Common Law, is part of the Common Law it self, and does
consequently bind all subjects to its Observation as a standing Law, not
alterable any way, but the same way it at first took its force, that is, by
general consent, according to the Maxim laid down by my Lord Cook, in his 1.
Inst. 115. b. Whatsoever was at the Common Law, and is not ousted or taken away
by any Statute, remains still.

And although this Practice that was enjoined by these Canons, was here allowed
and observed, yet that observation was not out of respect to the Canons as
such; but as they did command such things as were judged rational: and it had
been the same case if the Custom had begun in England in imitation of other
Countries, as it is upon the account of the Canons: For though the Bishops of
Rome claiming an universal and absolute Power of Legislation, in ordine ad
Spiritualia, over all Christendom, took advantage of every Opportunity that
offered it self for the obtaining of this Right, which they pretended was Jure
divino, and in Right of their Vicarship due; yet knowing that Princes would not
so easily part with the Jewels of their Crowns, in suffering their People to be
in Subjection to the Laws and Constitutions of any foreign Prince, in things
which either directly or indirectly did affect their Temporal Possessions, they
thought it necessary to manage their Business with all imaginable artifice and
cunning, by bringing the Laity to the humor by degrees; and accordingly did at
first collect certain Rules and Directions for the Government of the Clergy
only, which were called Decreta, first published in England during King
Stephens Reign (as some do think, though others reckon it was long before) but
never thoroughly observed in England, Kellaway. 7 H. 8. 184. But having got a
small encouragement by the reception of these Rules in many Countries, they
thought they might venture a little further, and then would have the Laity as
well as the Clergy, to give Obedience to their Edicts: but that must be first
in some inconsiderable indifferent things; as Abstinence from Meats, etc. and
did not style them with the Lordly Name of Leges, but with a great deal of
Meekness and Humility, and the Complement of Servus servorum Dei, did offer to
their Consideration certain Rogationes; whence the Abstinence-week before
Whitesunday was called Rogation-week, as M^^silius Pat. lib. Defensor. pacis, 2
part. 23. observes; Christians having out of Piety and Honor for his Holiness,
yielded Obedience to these same Rogations, they made bold to proceed one step
further; that is, They together with their Councils made certain Orders or
Decretals about Temporal Matters, (but in ordine ad Spiritualia too) when these
came first into England: See Matthew Paris, 403. To these Decretals Obedience
was required from Prince and People, and all Contumacious and Obstinate
Delinquents were most severely Anathematized: The Decretals were such as these,
That any Clergyman that was grieved by a Judgment or Sentence in the
Court-Christian, or any other Court Ecclesiastical within this Realm, might be
relieved by an Appeal from Rome; That no Layman should have the Disposition of
any Ecclesiastical Preferment, nor the Presentation to a Church; That he shall
not Marry within such and such Degrees; That Children born before Espousals* be
legitimate; That the Clergy should be absolutely exempted from Secular Power,
etc. Yet these Decretals met with very little respect in England, France, or
any other part of Christendom, except Peter's Patrimony in Demesne, the Popes
own Territories, called by the Canonists Patria Obedientiae. For in England (to
wave any discourse of the Laws and Customs of other Countries) in stead of
being received and observed according to Expectation, they were stoutly opposed
by the Judges and Magistrates, as derogating from the Sovereignty and
Prerogative of the King, and tending to the detriment of the Rights and
Properties of his Subjects: And in Confirmation of this, several Acts of
Parliament were made to curb the Insolence of those usurping Popes, and to
punish the audacious Enterprises of those factious and disloyal Subjects, who
did presume to attempt to control the Judgments that were given in the Kings
Courts by Process from the Pope; or to procure Provisions and Reservations of
Benefices by Bulls or Breve's from Rome: See 27 E. 3. c. 1. 48 E. 3. c. 1. 25
E. 3. c. 22. 16 R. 2. c. 5. whereby such Suers of Appeals, and Procurers of
Bulls and Process from Rome, for the purposes aforesaid, are made liable to the
Penalties of a Praemunire, whereby the Body of the Offender is to be Imprisoned
during the Kings Pleasure, his Goods forfeited, and his Lands seized into the
Kings Hands, so long as the Offender lives. How far the Benefit of Clergy was
allowed, I have already shown; And as for the Matter of Legitimation, you may
see the Statute of Merton, c. 9. Et rogaverunt omnes Episcopi Magnates ut
consentirent, quod nati ante matrimonium essent legitimi, sicut illi qui nati
sunt post matrimonium quantum ad successionem haereditariam, quia Ecclesia
tales habet pro legitimis. Et omnes Comites and Barons responderunt quod
nolunt Angliae leges mutare, quae hucusque usitatae and approbatae sunt: Vide
18 E. 4. 30. a. All which Statutes are Declarative of the Common Law, and
therefore do prove that the People of England were never obliged to allow of
any Decrees of Councils or Canons of the Church, further than they judged it
fit and convenient so to do; which Arbitrary Reception, together with a
Transmission to Posterity, did of it self make it one of the Laws of England,
which continues in force (though the Councils or Convocations should afterward
repeal their Decrees) till they be altered by Act of Parliament, Co. 5.
Cawdries Case 9. Davies Reports 70, 71. the case of Commendam: And the Preamble
to the Statute of Dispensations and Faculties, made 25 Hen. 8. c. 21. which
runs in this manner: Whereas this his Majesty's Realm, recognizing no Superior
under God, but only his Majesty, has been and is free from subjection to any
man's Laws, but only such as have been devised, made, and ordained within this
Realm, for the wealth of the same, or to such other as by sufferance of the
King and his Progenitors, the People of this Realm have taken at their free
liberty by their own consent to be used among them, and have bound themselves
by long Use and Custom to the observance of the same, not as to the observance
of the Laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the
customed and ancient Laws of this Realm, originally established as Laws of the
same, by the said Sufferance, Consents and Customs, and none otherwise. And so
it is in Co. Rep. 5. ^. part. fol. 31. All Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances,
Synods, Provincials, etc. are enforce that have been by general Consent and
Custom within the Realm allowed, and so may be general consent be corrected,
enlarged, explained or abrogated. Seeing therefore it is evident from what has
been already said, that those Canons and Constitutions of the Church concerning
Judicature in Matters of Blood, have not only been practiced and allowed in
this Nation successively for several Ages together, beyond all time of Memory,
but also ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament; it follows, that they
have the force of Laws of England, and are not alterable without an Act of
Parliament; as the twelve Tables of Athens did really become, and were properly
called Jus civil Romanum, after they were voluntarily received and allowed at
Rome: And as the same may be instanced in some parallel Cases among our selves,
as the Privilege of Clergy, Pluralities, and Dispensations, etc. which were
parts of the Common Law of England, although they became such no otherwise then
by the Nations reception and observation of the Canons of the Church.

Lastly, I am not apt to believe that this Custom was taken up upon the account
of the Canons of the Church, but rather because it was a thing agreeable to the
Constitution of the Government, the Reason and Rules of the Common Law, and the
Nature of their Jurisdiction and Honor, being merely praedial or feudal; and
that because upon a strict search it will be found of ancienter date than any
of the Canons of the Church; for the first Canon that I find in Linwood is that
which was made An. 1222. and is among the rest of the Constitutions of
Archbishop Stephen in these words; Presenti decreto statuimus ne Clerici
beneficiati aut in Sacru Ordinibus constituti villarum Procuratores
admittantur, videlicet ut sint Seneschalli, aut Ballive talium
administrationum, occasion quarum laicis in reddendis ratiociniis obligentur,
nec Jurisdictiones exerceant seculares praesertim illas quibus Judicium
Sanguinis est annexum Authoritate quoque Concilii districtius inhibemus ne quis
Clericus beneficiatus vel in Sacris Ordinibus constitutus litteras pro poena
Sanguinis infligenda scribere vel dictare presumat, vel ubi Judicium Sanguinis
exercetur intersit: Linwood, 146. Which Constitution was made above fifty years
after the Parliament at Clarendon, which confirms this Custom, and calls it one
of the Avitae consuetudines. These Particulars well considered, will give a
very satisfactory Answer to their Objection, and therefore I need not say any
more.

But it is further objected, That the Clergy in their Protestation which they
made 11 R. 2. do declare, Quod ipsos personaliter interesse pertinet, (and so
they did in some Protestations which were made afterward) and after all they do
insert this Clause, Non volumus nec intendimus quod processus habiti and
habendi, etc. futuris temporibus quomodolibet impugnentur, infirmentur, seu
renoventur. From this they argue, otherwise all the Proceedings of the House of
Lords in the absence of the Clergy, are invalid and reversable, or else to what
purpose is this Clause: And the Lords Temporal giving leave that this
Protestation should be entered upon Record, did implicitly assent to what the
Clergy alleged therein.

To this I answer, That a Protestation in its self is no argument of any Right
neither does the permission and allowance of any Protestation, yield that right
which the Protester is desirous to save, but only saves the right which the
party had before, if he had any; and if none, then the making that Salvo could
give him none; for the outmost that a Protestation can do, is to anticipate a
Conclusion, or Estoppel; i. e. to provide that the doing of any such Act as is
Contained in the Protestation, shall not be constructed to the Prejudice of the
Party; so as to Bar or Conclude him from Clayming afterward that which in rei
veritate is his right. So that this Protestation of the Clergy is no Argument
of their Right to be present and to Vote in Capital Matters; and that chiefly
for these two Reasons: 1. By the Roll we find that the Clergy did not only
depart when Capital Cases were to be debated, but also in all other Cases that
were done that Session; because there were many Matters of Treason to be
handled, therefore they absented from the Parliament altogether: so it is in
Sir. Rob. Cotton's Abr. 322. So that this Protestation may very well be
supposed to have been made with respect to those other Matters which were not
Capital, where they had an undoubted Right to be present, and therefore such a
Protestation might be very Proper; and not to have any respect to those Cases
which were Capital, especially seeing they did always in such Cases Absent
themselves in former times without making any Protestation. 2. Admitting that
the Clergy did intend that Capital Cases, as well as others which were not
Capital, should be within the Salvo of their Protestation; yet nothing can be
inferred from thence, but that they themselves said they had Right to be
present, and what then? Must it of necessity follow that they had Right because
they Claimed it? If that Consequence had been allowed to be good, I am afraid
the Crown of England had been Incorporated long ago into the Triple Crown.

As for that Clause of the Protestation for the Validity of all such
Transactions as should happen to pass in their Absence, I must confess I do not
think it was to very much purpose. 1. Because that without any Proviso the
Proceedings of the House of Lords in their Absence, had certainly been valid
enough, as I shall prove anon. 2. If they had not been good, this Clause could
not have helped them; because wherever the Assent and agreement of any person
or persons is Requisite for the perfection of a thing, it is necessary that
that thing to which the Assent is Requisite, be in esse at the time of the
Assent made; for otherwise it is an Assent to nothing, and that is as much as
no Assent at all: If therefore the Assent of the Prelates be indispensably
necessary to the perfection of every Judgment and Bill that passes the House
of Lords; Such a precedent Assent to all that shall Pass, during their Absence
in General, which is an Assent to they do not know what themselves, will not
amount to a sufficient agreement; The Reason is, because the Law of England
does presume that in all private Transactions between Party and Party, and much
more in things of Public concernment and of so great moment, as Making of Laws
and Giving Judgment of Death upon Peers of the Realm, whatsoever a Man does is
upon Rational Inducements, and that the Convenience and Advantage which he
expects will Accrue thereby, is the Motive that prevails with him to agree^^
the thing; and therefore all such Agreements as are made at aventure, when the
party agreeing knows not what it is he agreed to, (as when a man agrees to a
thing before it be in esse) are rejected in Law as Irrational and (...): So if
a Tenant comes and say to his Lord, I agree to all Grants which you shall
hereafter make of the Manor, or any part of it; Surely this without a
Subsequent Agreement to every particular Grant, will not (...) Attornement. And
at the Common Law, Licenses for Alienation, granted to Tenants, were always
special; and a general License to (...) which the Tenant should afterward make,
was void. And if such an agreement of the Lords Spiritual, as is before
described, be sufficient (...) Judgment or Bill which shall pass the House of
Lords; then they may (...) say that the whole House of Lords may depart from
Parliament, and agree before hand in the same manner to every Bill which shall
(...) House of Commons, and these with the Royal Assent shall be good Laws;
especially if it be, as they say, that the Clergy is one of the Three Estates
of Parliament.

But then you will demand, Why should the House of Lords* suffer these things
to be entered upon the Roll, if they did not think that their Claims were legal?
etc. To this it may be answered: (...) is only a Register or Narrative of all
the Matters of Fact that passed in the House of Lords, and although the entering
of a Passage upon the Roll makes is so Authentic, that the Matter of Fact (
viz. that there was certainly such, a passage) (...) undeniable; yet it does
not follow that every thing that is entered upon the Roll, is good Authority for
Matter of Law, except it appear by the Roll that it was taken for Law by the
Vote and Resolution of the House; and therefore although the House of Lords did
suffer this Protestation to be entered upon the Roll, yet it does not follow
that they did allow that every thing that the (...) said was (...) but only
allowed it to be true, that the Protestors did say so. And besides the ^^tring
of a Protestation is a thing which is always reckoned the best Expedient for
reconciling of Differences when begun, or preventing of them before they are
begun* or at least for diverting them till a more seasonable time, when the
putting of the Matter to a Trial, would either prove dangerous, or expensive of
more time, than the urgency of other more important Affairs, then to be managed
would allow and therefore the Request of Entering their Protestation, is never
upon any account whatsoever, denied to those who have not a mind to be
concluded by the then Proceedings; and if there be any thing contained in the
Protestation that is of an ill Complexion in the Judgment of the House, either
as tending to the Diminution of the Kings Prerogative, the Authority of
Parliament, or otherwise ^^^^ying the Constitution of the Government; the
Pr^^^^^^ion is allowed to be Entered first, and the Protestors punished for it
when they have alone. We find in the Reign of Rich. 2; two Bills passed the
House of Commons, the one against Provisors, the other against Procurers of
Process from the Court of Rome; these Bills were violently opposed by the
Clergy in the House of Lords, but notwithstanding the Bills passed the House,
the Clergy in a great Rage depart the House, and Protest against the Bills, as
abridging the Authority and Privileges of the Holy Church; which the Lords
suffered to be entered, and yet did not agree to those Allegations of the
Clergy; for the Royal Assent was given, and they were always accounted good and
firm Laws, 13 R. 2. c. 2, and c. 3. We find also that in the time of his late
Majesty, Twelve Bishops departed the House, and Protected against (...) Orders,
(...) etc. that should be made in their Absence, which Protestati^^ at their
Request was entered upon the Journal, and (...) was so far against the Sense of
the House, that they Voted it prejudicial to the Government, and destructive of
the very Being of Parliaments; for which some of them were put into the T^^er:
This I mention, to show that although the Matter of Protestation do (...)
thwart the Genius and Disposition of the whole House, yet the Request of having
^ntred, is never denied.

In the next, place, I shall consider the Roll of 21 Rich. 2. where the first
Petition that the Commons made that Parliament to the King, was; For that
diverse Judgments were heretofore undone, for that the Clergy were not present,
the Commons prayed the King, that the Clergy would appoint some to be their
Common Proctor, with sufficient Authority thereunto. -- The Prelates therefore
being severally examined, appointed Sir Thomas de la Percie their Proctor to
Assent, as by their Instrument appears. Thus was the Practice of Constituting
Proxies begun.

It is apparent to all men of Common Sense, That if the Clergy were forbidden
to give Judgment of Death by any Law or Rules whatsoever, that Law was violated
by their Constituting a Proxy, as much as if they had been personally present:
Whether or no their Personal Presence was prohibited by the Law of England at
this time, I leave to the Judicious Reader to determine from what has been
said before: If they were prohibited, then certainly this Petition of the
Commons was unwarrantable, and contrary to Law. It is not impossible that the
House of Commons being but fallible, men spurred on by too precipitant a Zeal
and Eagerness for the accomplishment of a Business, should be endeavoring to
make sure work, fall inconsiderately into another extreme, and through the want
of due Examination of Precedents, become guilty of a mistake. I shall not
trouble my self much in discoursing about the possibility of the thing, for I
shall make appear, that it was actually so in our Case: For, 1. That which was
the ground of the Petition of the Commons; viz. That diverse Judgments have been
heretofore undone, etc. was a palpable mistake de facto: It is true, the two
Judgments that were given against the two Spencers, 15 E. 2. were reversed for
this cause, through the great favor and interest that they then had at Court:
And there is no question, but these two Judgments were the ground of the
Commons Petition made. 21 R. 2. for there are no other Judgments to be found
that were ever reversed for this cause; but how well their Petition was
grounded you may learn from (...) E. 3. c. 1. Where this same Judgment is
declared in Parliament to be good, and that the aforesaid reversal was null and
void; and the two Spencers upon this Affirmance of the Judgment were Executed.
I suppose if the forwardness and Zeal of the Commons had given them time to
search the Records with so much diligence that they might have found this, they
had not said; For that diverse Judgments have been heretofore undone, etc. 2.
That in point of Law the absence of the Prelates makes not a Judgment
erroneous, besides the Authority of that Record, 1 E. 3. is further proved: 1.
From the Earl of Salisbury's Case, 2. H. 5. who petitioned that the Judgment
that was given against his Father might be Reversed, and Assigns for Error,
that it was not with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual, who are Peers of the
Realm: the House of Lords upon Debate resolved, that it was not Error, and
therefore the Judgment was good. 2ly, If the Consent of the Clergy be
absolutely necessary to every Judgment that passes the House of Lords, then
consequently it must be necessary to every Act of Parliament: There can no
manner of Difference be Assigned between the two Cases as to this Matter, for
their Power and Jurisdiction in Legislation, is every whit as ample as their
Power of Judicature; and therefore their Concurrence is equally necessary in
both Cases. But it is a thing of dangerous Consequence to Assert, that an Act
of Parliament cannot be made without the Consent of the Clergy, for it will
make some of the best Laws that ever were made in England before the
Reformation, and which have ever been to this day accounted firm and
established Laws, of no force at all. Most of the Statutes of Mortmain were
made against the will of the Clergy, and their Dissent is recorded. The Statute
De A^^rtatis Religiosorum, is Enacted by the King, De Concilio, Comitum,
Baronum, Magnatum, Procerum, and Regni sui Constatuum in Parliament^, etc. and
yet proved by my Lord Cook in his Exposition of this Statute to be a good Law,
from the Testimony of many Records and Acts of Parliament that recite this
Statute. The Statute of 3 Rich. 2. c. 3. was made against the Clergy, for the
ill disposition of Dignities, Offices, Canonries, Prebends, and Parsonages, and
other Ecclesiastical Preferments, upon lewd and licencious persons, to the
Scandal of Religion, and the neglect of Divine Service, etc. The Clergy being
somewhat displeased that any should undertake to reform them, at the first
reading of the Bill departed, but notwithstanding the Bill past, and is said to
be Enacted by the King, Nobles of the Land, and the Commons, leaving out the
Clergy: And yet this has been allowed for an established Law by all the
Judges. See Roll 3 R. 2. n. 38. -- 40. The Statute of 7 R. 2. c. 12. was made
to empower Justices of Peace to enquire of several grievous Extortions
committed by the Bishops and their Officers, to the great grievance and
oppression of the Kings Liege People, etc. The bringing in of this Bill
offended the Clergy more than the former, insomuch that they left the House in
a great Huff, Protesting against the Bill as injurious to the Franchises and
Jurisdiction of the Church, yet notwithstanding it passed into a Law.

The Clergy were absent all the Parliament that was held 11 R. 2. and yet
diverse good and profitable Laws were made that Parliament never questioned for
their Validity, but always put in use, as 11 R. 2. c. 7. about Merchants, c. 8.
concerning the granting of Annuities, c. 9. concerning new Impositions, c. 11.
of Assizes; and several others made in the absence of the Clergy. I might for
this enumerate all the Statutes of Provisors and the Statutes of Praemunire, for
Suers of Appeals, and other Process from Rome, as 25 E. 3. c. 1. and 22. where
the Names of the Clergy are left out: and 13 Rich. 2. c. 2. and c. 3. where
they were so far from Assenting, that they entered Protestations against them,
because they abridged the Popes Authority, as is before observed: And the 16 R.
2. c. 5. passed against the will of the whole Clergy. And so the Statute that
was made in the same year about the Queens Marriage, without the Kings Consent,
was made without the Concurrence of the Clergy; for their Assent to it was
special in this manner: So far as it is agreeable to the Law of God and the
Holy Church. Which being conditional and under a Restraint, was according to
the Course of Parliaments accounted as no Assent at all, and so it was
specially Entered; and yet none did ever question the Strength and Force of this
Act.

These Statutes being allowed by the Judges of England as Good and Authentic
Laws, although they were not agreed to by the Lords Spiritual, do prove that
the Concurrence of the Lords Spiritual is no more necessary to the Essence and
Perfection of an Act of Parliament, than the Concurrence of as many Temporal
Lords.

Upon the whole Matter, it appears to have been a very strange and
unaccountable oversight in the House of Commons at that time, that they should
be the first Introducers of an Innovation upon so false a Ground as theirs was.
But however this Practice being built upon so sandy a Foundation, it seems had,
no long continuance; for there does not occur in any Author, nor in the
Abridgments of the Records, any mention of more than Two Proxies; the first was
Sir Thomas de la Percie, the second was Sir William de la Scroope, who
immediately succeeded him in this his New Office: But seeing it is rash to
Assert a Negative in a Matter of Fact, it will be very satisfactory if any will
inform us of any more, and that may easily be done, if there were any; because
none can act as a Proxy, except his Procuratorship be Entered upon the Roll.

Most of those Records that are Cited in the behalf of the Spiritual Lords, are
either such as were in those times when the Clergy put in Proxies, as all those
that are upon or after the 21 Rich. 2. and about the beginning of Hen. 4. Such
is the Case of the Earl of Arundel; for it appears by the Record, that the
Constitution of the Proxy was in N. 9. and the Arraignment of the Earl was not
till N. 15, or 16. and therefore after the Proxy; so that there was reason that
the Records should be Entered by the King, Bishops, and Lords, seeing the
Bishops Deputy was present; but it is no Argument of their personal presence:
Or else they are Cases of Bills of Attainder, and that is not much to our
purpose; for those will as well prove that the House of Commons have sat
Judicially upon Matters of Life and Death. A Bill of Attainder is reckoned the
strongest way, because there is a Concurrence of all the Three Estates, of both
the Judicial and Legislative Power; and that is necessary for making a
Forfeiture of all manner of Rights, Titles, and Interests, which otherwise are
not Forfeitable: And if at any time there was an opportunity for the Clergy to
transgress the Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil. (I mean the Statutes and
Customs of this Realm) which was connived at by the rest of the Lords and
Commons, I hope that will not be accounted a Precedent to overthrow a Custom of
so Ancient a Date, and so agreeable to the Fundamental Constitution of the
Government, and the Grounds and Reasons of the Common Law, and also Confirmed
by an Act of Parliament: So by degrees the whole Method and Course of
Parliamentary Proceedings may be altered, and the very Being and Foundation of
Parliaments shaken. So we should have had the Lords refusal to Sequester the
Earl of Danby from Parliament, a Precedent; if they had not afterward
acknowledged it to have been an Error. We may find in many Cases the Lords
Dispensing with Magna Charta: 4 E. 3. n. 6. They passed Judgment of Death upon
several Commoners: 15 E. 3. We find several Particulars enumerated, wherein the
Commons complained of Breaches of Magna Charta, and we are not sure that all
these particular Cases were remedied, and therefore must these stand all for
Precedents? At this Rate there are few Points of Law perhaps that will escape
Doubt and Controversy: for we shall have some of the Lords pretend they can
transfer their Honors, and so are able to make the Kings Enemies his
Counselors, because in Daincourts Case, 4. Inst. 126. one Branch of the Family
sat in the House by virtue of a Grant from the other Branch of the Family,
from the Reign of E. 2. to H. 6. And the Earldom of Chester was first granted
17 H. 3. and transferred 39 H. 3. And upon these Precedents there was an
Attempt in the Lord Fitz-Walter's Case to make a Baron by Translation of
interest. Admitting therefore that Once or Twice, or such a matter, the Bishops
have Voted in Capital Cases, yet they cannot Control an Ancient and well
established Custom, though I am not apt to believe there are many such Cases:
However it was a very pleasant humor of a Gentleman that wrote lately of this
matter and cited a Precedent in the Reign of R. 2. Of the Earl of Arundel and
Wardor, whereas there was no such Lord as Arundel and Wardor Created till King
James his time, Vide pa. ult. so p. 30. He cites the Case of the Earl of
Salisbury, who in his Petition says the Prelates are Peers in Parliament, and
assigns for Error that they were Absent when Judgment was given against his
Father; and this is a good Precedent to prove the Prelates right to Vote in
Capital Cases as Peers in Parliament: Whereas the Petition was disallowed, and
the Judgment affirmed by the resolution of the whole House. Such a way of
arguing deserves some special animadversion. But I shall supersede any further
Consideration of the matter, and shall conclude that without an Act of
Parliament the Bishops can have no right to Vote in Capital Cases, which if
this present Parliament shall think fit to make, it behooves all true Subjects
to agree thereto.

FINIS.

