TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE High Court of Parliament, SITTING AT WESTMINSTER:
The Illegal and Immodest Petition of Praise-God Barbone, Anabaptist and
Leather-seller of LONDON;
Most impudently shows,
THat your Petitioner has lived a great while, and indeed long enough to have
had more wit, and more honesty; That Satan finding his head empty of all
goodness, did one day stuff it with Heretical Notions and Whimsies, even as
full as men are wont to stuff Fillets of Veal with sweet Herbs, that the
Protector called him to be a Parliament man, which so fatten'd his meagre
Ambition, that he has had ever since a very itching desire to be meddling with
State Affairs. That he finds as long as ENGLAND is governed by sober and good
Magistrates, he is like to get nothing more then his Shop will afford him: That
the two largest pooles of troubled waters for Self-seeking men to fish in, are
Distraction in the State, and Unsettlement in the Church. That your Petitioner
likes no Government of a single Person, unless it be that which was set up in
Munster, and to such a one he prays a longer continuance. That Religion,
Conscience, and Morality have bin now used long enough in the world, and that
it is fit there should be some new Innovation invented to succeed them. That it
is time now, since he has got nothing all this while, but only an Order to be
Comptroller of Haberdashers-Hall, to be stirring and looking out for Portions
for his Children with hard Names. That as he is a Leather-seller, he ought to
see all the Adversaries of his Lunatic devotion, flead and soaked in the
Tan-fat of Oppression, that he may have their skins to sell to all those
Drummers that shall have occasion to march before the saints to the Valley of
Jehosaphat. That if Truth and Righteousness do ever kiss each other in England,
he hopes, and it is his earnest desire that it may only be a parting kiss.
Your Petitioner also further shows, That it is not, norever was the custom of
the Anabaptist, to give an account of their Faith, or to know what they
profess, And therefore he he further shows, That he holds that Feake is a very
able Divine because he is mad, and has a Demoniack faculty of always raving
against the Powers in being; So that when you see him in the Church, you would
think him to be the mad man among the tombs. Here is only the difference
between that man and your Petitioners Patriarch, that Christ dispossessed the
former, but if he should offer the other such a courtesy, he would think
himself wiser and more sanctified than his Savior, and scorn the motion. And
from his Example your Petitioner further shows, That if there be a factious,
unsanctified, illiterate Heretic in the world, he is one, and will so continue
as long as he lives; unless your Honors will give him a thousand pound a year
to turn Christian.

In Consideration of which Premises, your Petitioner humbly prays, That the
Mystery of Jesuitism, and the Works of Ignatius Loyola may be read in Churches,
in stead of what is now more commonly used, whereby the People may be
instructed in all sorts of Knavery one toward another, and in all sorts of
Rebellion and Disobedience to their Superiors.

That the Commandments may be taken down from the end of the Chancel in every
Church, and the Heads of the Cracovian Catechism placed in the room thereof,
till the said Churches shall be pulled down.

That as soon as may be all Churches in England may be pulled down, and the
Materials thereof given to your Petitioner toward the Repair of his Windows,
and setting up a New Sign; And that your Petitioner may be forced to give no
further Account of the Sums so gathered; Neither can this destruction be
unlawful for that St. Paul being a leading Apostle, and his Church being
fallen, all other Churches ought to be made to follow the Example of his.

That all Schools and Universities be demolished, and their Revenues given to
buy us more Arms, in stead of those which were lately taken away, that we may
be in a readiness when we shall be called forth to Butcher our Enemies.

That all Divines and Learned men in England may be massacred, and thrown to
the fowls of the Air, that we may be no more troubled with their Syllogisms, to
the utter hinderance of all out important Designs; And that all Books may be
burnt, except Nailors, Feaks, and Rogers's Works, and Larner's Hymns, wherein
the Unity of Christ and his Church is most sweetly chanted forth, to the Tune
of Jookies-march.

That there may be a Free Toleration of Bawdy-houses, because your Petitioners
house looks now so like one, the Windows being all broken; And that none but
Anabaptists may go to them, for the Propogation of our weak Faction.

That general Supplications may be made, for the Continuance of Satan's Reign a
thousand years longes then is set down in the Revelation.

And lastly, That you would confer upon your Petitioner Six hundred pound per
Annum, in stead of his Comptrollership which he has now lost, to the great
impoverishment of him and his family.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
London, Printed by Hen, Mason, in the year of Restoration. 1660.


