Mephibosheth and Ziba: OR, THE APPEAL OF THE Protestants of Ireland TO THE
KING, CONCERNING The Settlement of that KINGDOM.

-- (...). Plat. in Sympos. ex Hesiod. By the Author of the Mantle Thrown off:
Or, The Irishman Dissected.

LICENSED,

August the 30 th. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IF we compare our present, with all the Circumstances of our late unhappy
condition, by descending to a considerate recollection of those desperate
Attempts of Arbitrary Government, to violate our Religion, and the Laws, and to
enslave these Kingdoms, by a Despotick Invasion upon our just Rights and
Properties: we must either account it the signal effects of a wonderful
Providence, or else make our Ingratitude as great a Miracle, as was that of our
Deliverance: And as we chiefly owe all to that Divine hand, who by his
overruling influence disposes of Sublunary Affairs, by turning them which way
soever he pleases; so must we subordinately to him, ascribe the present
Settlement to his Instrument, and the Restorer of our Peace, his now Sacred
Majesty. Now as all good men here must needs express the happiness and
Tranquillity they enjoy, by acknowledgments of this nature; so it may be
presumed, that his Protestant Subjects of Ireland, are not wanting in a right
sense of that affectionate tenderness, and regard for their interest and
present condition, which his Majesty has graciously vouchsafed such evincing
Demonstrations of. For if the greatness of any danger, does justly require a
proportionable estimate upon the Means conducing to a Deliverance from it; then
consequently the British Protestants of Ireland are by so much their more
obliged unto higher Testimonies of Gratitude, for his Majesty's Princely
Endeavors to reinstate them in their Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Possessions, than were those of England, by how much all these were in a
greater measure infringed and now actually and totally violated. But as this is
a truth, which (by more than bare Arguments of presumption) I fully persuade my
self, that no Protestant of that Kingdom, is so insensible of, as to dispute,
whatever some unreasonable Male Contents, and Factious Ill-spirited men, fondly
attempt to do, that are Inhabitants of this; yet seeing His Majesty has
expressed so much condescension, as to vouchsafe liberty to such of them as are
in London, to offer their Reasons in the framing up of a Proclamation of Pardon
to the Irish Rebels, it might justly be accounted a betraying as well of their
Majesty's, as of their own interest, not to endeavor by lawful methods, a just
preservation of both.

I know it will be difficult for them to avoid a censorious imputation of
partiality and prejudice, especially by such as are in the bottom disaffected
to them; or rather in the main to the Protestant Cause, how zealously soever
they assume the outward shape of it. To this sort of men, the most Candid, and
Indifferent representation of the present Insurrection of Ireland, will be
looked upon with an evil Eye, and under stood as an effect of Self-Interest.
Others there are that may misinterpret their Proceedings, not out of a General
Disaffection to the British Protestants, but because at this distance it is
impossible for them (how intelligent soever in matters of State and Government)
to be thoroughly acquainted with the Humor and Genius of the Native Irish, of
which none (I presume) can be such Competent Judges as those, who have been
long conversant in the Country, and have had the Opportunities of inspecting
into all their Affairs, and to observe how their begotted Zeal, their
insuperable Cruelty, and aversion to the English, their Natural Inconstancy,
and Perfidiousness in the breach of Faith, and the most Sacred and solemn
Obligations, which they can possibly lie under, or be engaged in, raised and
fomented partly by the vileness of their Tempers, but chiefly by the
instigation of their Priests, who are the public Incendiaries of that Kingdom;
and whilst the people are governed by their Arbitrary influence over them, it
must happen of course, that such implacable Enemies to the Reformed Religion,
will possess their blind and slavish Votaries with a like antipathy, both
against it, and its Professors: By which it is plain, that if they were well
inclined, yet lies it not in their power to be true to the English, the
Infallible Dictates of their Priests superseding all other Considerations with
them. Not to enumerate their other Qualities, I shall only add their Dexterous
Obsequiousness under the Protestant (which has been no small Delusion, and
mischief to the too Credulous English) and their insupportable Tyranny and
Insolence under their own Government. We usually say, that Experience is the
best Schoolmaster; and that an Ocular, and Practical, is preferrable to a
remote and speculative knowledge, which being a Maxim, Non solum dato, sed
concesso, as well granted as allowed on all hands, it must needs follow, that
the Protestant Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, are most capable of
understanding its proper constitution, and of proposing such Expedients, as my
produce the most durable, as well as equal settlement of that Kingdom.

I say, equal settlement, because though their Sufferings have been such, as
may in Justice demand a Retribution from the Invaders of their lawful
Possessions; yet on the other hand, do the Principles of their Religion, as
well as natural Clemency and Compassion (which their Enemies even in the late
Reign, could not but acknowledge, how far soever they were from imitating them)
restrain them from thoughts of Blood, and from a mutual exercise, and return of
the like measures of Severity, which have been shown to them, their Profession
not allowing them any such Latitude, as to do evil that good may come of it;
seeing that the Apostle has thought fit to pass Sentence upon that unlawful
Practice, so common in, and peculiar to the Church of Rome, by that plain
Asseveration, that their Damnation is just.

But though both their Religion, and, their Natures, carry a powerful
propension in them to acts of Mercy; yet neither (I suppose) will debar them
from recovering of their own, by having justice done upon such, as have
violently rent it from them; nor will yet hinder them from taking such
justifiable, but effectual courses, as may incapacitate their Adversaries to
commit the like for the future: And besides the common equity, we may draw the
reasonableness of the first of these, from the pungent necessity, which the
English are reduced to through the Rapin, and Outrages of the Irish, especially
such whose substance consisted chiefly in Personal Estates, for which if they
should have no compensation from their injurers, such, by consequence, must
(notwithstanding the reduction of that Kingdom) remain in a miserable, and
distressed, who lived formerly in a very opulent, and comfortable condition:
And then as to others who have real Estates to return to, (though they have
likewise incurred great losses in their Stock, etc.) yet I persuade my self,
that there are hardly any of them, but would desire to be divested of both, and
to continue in their present Exile, under all the hardships of an indigent and
mean Estate, rather than return to their own with the conditions of a General
Pardon, and Indemnity to the Irish; who are so naturally, I had almost said
essentially prone to Rebellion, as to grasp at the next opportunity, which must
needs end in the inevitable ruin, and final Extirpation of the British.

A serious Consideration upon all which, has by a natural Sympathy to my
distressed Contrymen, as well as out of an hearty Zeal to Religion, and a
due regard to the preservation of the Protestant Interest, incited me to commit
the following Sheets to public view: for which boldness, I could expect no
pardon, if a matter of so universal a nature, as is the settlement of a Nation,
did not with all Candid and Judicious men, give a great allowance to the
infirmities of so honest a design. And though I heartily wish, that some more
accurate Pen would undertake the Subject, the neglect whereof seems to be an
unpardonable omission in those, whose Learning and Parts entitle them to an
ingenious defense both of themselves, and others in that Kingdom; yet their
silence in a juncture, and upon an occasion, which so nearly concerns them, if
they have a due regard to their Religion, and to a firm and lasting settlement
of their Country, made me choose rather to say something, though impertinently,
than to be wanting altogether to the maintenance of so good a Cause, wherein
men of Learned Education, and of a great interest in that Kingdom, are
unaccountably defective; excepting that Ingenious Gentleman Colonel Phillips,
to whose Character and Vindication of Ireland, that Nation stands infinitely
indebted. Another reason to the former, is, in pursuance to a Letter dated from
Tunbridge, and writ to a Friend in London upon this occasion, wherein I
promised a larger Discourse; and to make my word good, have adventured upon the
following Tract; in which the Reader will find the substance of that Letter,
together with many other ample, and additional Improvements, the design whereof
(to represent it in a word) is to show how improper it is to vouchsafe a Pardon
to the Nobility and Gentry of the Irish Papists, in order to reduce the
Populace to Obedience; but that the quite contrary, is the best method, as well
for a safe and durable, as for a ready and expeditious Conquest of that
Kingdom, etc. But I will detain you no longer in the Porch, but send yon to the
Main Work in the ensuing Relation.

MEPHIBOSHETH and ZIBA, OR, THE APPEAL of the Protestants of IRELAND TO THE
KING, etc.
OF such dismal and amazing consequence, to the British Protestants, have been
those frequent Revolutions in the Government of Ireland, occasioned by the
constant Rebellions and vile Perfidiousness of the Natives; but more especially
the two last Scenes, of Forty One, and the present deplorable juncture, have
offered to the World so black and odious a Representation of their unparalled
Barbarity and Insolence, as gives occasion of wonder at the present
proceedings, as to the framing of a Proclamation for their Pardon. It is
difficult indeed to imagine that those men who have committed so public a
Devastation in that lamentable Kingdom, been so inhumanly injurious to their
kind and too indulgent Neighbors, t^^ English; as to divest those of their
Substance a^^ Estates, who were formerly the chief Instru^^^^^ of their
Support; nay more, which are immersed in Protestant Blood, should (after all
their repeated Violences and horrid Outrages) be kindly and amicably treated by
those whom they bear an utter abhorrence and detestation to. This (though
designed as an effect of transcendent Mercy) is a most insuperable Grievance to
the Protestants of that Kingdom, and not to them peculiarly, but to England
also, if rightly and duly reflected upon.

But that this is not gratis dictum, I shall endeavor to evince by the sequel
of this Discourse, by asserting, That so unaccountable has the Antipathy of the
Irish ever been toward the English, that those commonly inviolable Bonds both
of Religion and Interest, (which we find so operative in other Nations) and
with which they were linked together, were not able to overcome it.

That even when the English were earnestly supplicated by their own Kings, to
vouchsafe their assistance, and presented them with Victory over their Enemies
and Competitors; yet at the same time, by such a monstrous Ingratitude, (as
it is hard to conceive humane Nature to be guilty of) were barbarously
assassinated by those Savages, to whom they had procured Deliverance.

But a better instance cannot be given of that radicared and unalterable
Prejudice, which they bear toward the English, than its continuance by an
uninterrupted hereditary Succession or lineal Descent from Father to Son, ever
since the first footing of the British in that Kingdom; and therefore, as a
terror to their Children, when they would frighten them, they are wont to use
this Irish expression, Hoot-a-Sasonought; the meaning whereof is, That the
English are coming; by which means their Children suck in, together with their
Milk, a natural aversion to them. So essentially true is that expression,
Odiunt quos metuunt: Those whom Men fear, such they hate; humane Nature being
impatient under Superiors, and by a powerful instinct of self-love, apt to
convert their esteem of, into hatred against such persons whom they are not
able to govern and control; but rather whose high Power and Interest they look
upon as dangerous to the repose both of themselves and others. And as this
Principle is true in it self, so has it been carefully instilled by the Irish
Parents, into their Children, industriously cherishing and improving all the
outward symptoms of their dislike to the Interest and Government of the
English; against which, as they use their utmost endeavors to embitter and
prepossess them, so are their Priests as active to sour and corrupt their
Judgments, with wild and terrifying notions of the Falsehood and Heresy of the
Protestant Religion; pronouncing the severest Anathemaes of eternal
Condemnation to all that profess it, and representing to them, That they are
without the Pale of the Church, and to be treated as common Enemies to the
Faith; That they are no otherwise to be accounted of than as Dogs and
Castaways, or a sort of infernal Spirits, which are sent into their Country, to
inflict a punishment upon their Bodies, and for a trial of their Constancy in
the Religion of the Holy Church: But that God will in his due time give them
the victory over them, and that then they will do God good Service that are
most instrumental in their destruction. These daily and repeated suggestions of
the Priests, which operate upon their Votaries by a lasting and deep
Impression, have (together with the leavened Principles of a biased and
partial Education derived from their Parents) established such a fundamental
hatred in their minds against any thing that bears the Stamp of English, that
whenever by their Rebellion they wrested the Reins of Government from them,
their implacable rage did not only extend to their innocent persons, but to
every Vegetative and Inanimate Substance that bore but the Characters of their
Improvement. And to me it seems an unparalled instance of an irreconcilable
inveteracy, thus to destroy the flourishing effects of the English Industry,
when no other way remained of executing their inhumane fury, though at the same
time they thereby defaced the beauty and ornaments of their Country, and
consequently acted diametrically contrary to their own true Interest.

But, alas! this aversion was so deeply rooted by the aforesaid Artifices,
consisting in the Education of their Parents, and Instructions of their
Priests, that no acts of Clemency or Indulgence were ever found capable to
prevail with them to adhere faithfully to the Government and Crown of England;
no, not the highest Titles of Honor or Dignity; not their Matrimonial
Alliances with the English; not the largest Privileges or Immunities from the
Crown; not the greatest places of Trust, or most weighty Employments in the
State; not the highest opportunities of Advantage, or of secular profit: and in
fine, not any Encouragements which were either in the power of the English to
bestow, or of them to accept, could induce them to extinguish that Hatred in
their Breasts, which upon all inviting occasions they executed upon the
Protestants, trampling upon all their Obligations and Civilities by a most
horrid Ingratitude and an insolent Contempt; and that Humanity, which in the
very Breast of a Cannibal would claim some Power, seemed so quite eras'd out of
their Hearts in all their outrages toward the English, as if their Cruelties
had quite unmann'd them, and (as it were) sunk their erect into a savage Shape
of Wolves and Tigers.

Indeed, the gratifying of their Lusts was oftentimes of that prevalence with
their Grandees, that to answer their importunity they were necessitated to
enter into Marriage with English Families, in whose beauty and humor, though
'twas impossible for them not to manifest very great Complacency; yet were not
their Amors to the Children sufficient to restrain their Barbarity from the
Parents: an instance as unnatural to others, as peculiar to these Monsters; and
should I undertake to enumerate the Tragedies committed by them, upon such
whose near Relations they had taken to their own Beds, all Mankind must needs
consider their unequaled inhumanity with horror and amazement. But I refer the
Reader to the History of Ireland, where he may meet with an abundant variety of
places to this purpose, together with those various Tragic Scenes of such
bloody Massacres and impious Assassinations, as no Story can parallel for the
matter, nor Satan himself contrive more Butcherly Arts in the manner of their
execution. But I shall not insist longer upon these things, which are but too
lively imprinted in the Memories of the Irish Protestant Sufferers; but rather
proceed to my present design, which is to show,

That Pardon and Lenity to them, however it carries the face of Mercy, is yet
in reality the contrary.

And in the second place, That it will not attain the end designed, the more
easy reduction of that Kingdom.

In relation to the first of these, it is to be considered, That Mercy, in its
true and genuine importance, is a Work of Deliverance and Preservation, and
wheresoever it is vouchsafed, a chief regard is to be had to the Security of
Men's Rights and Interests. Now it is plain, That pardoning of the Irish cannot
be capable of any such Interpretation, unless it be granted, That the British
of Ireland have been Usurpers of their Rights.

It Is but too apparent, That the present Insurrection of Ireland has wasted and
destroyed the whole Kingdom; That thousands of the English have either become
Sacrifices to the Rage and Cruelty of the Natives, or else have perished by
Famine or other Disasters. If then it be demanded, Who were the Agents of this
public Mischief and Calamity? Was not all of it transacted by the Irish? That
is a Truth which admits of no dispute. But if it be again asked, Were not the
Natives irritated thereunto by provocations received from the English? This
indeed may be controverted by some who are Foreigners to the State of that
Kingdom; and therefore I think it fit to return an Answer to that Objection, by
taking a short Survey of the late Condition of Ireland, immediately before this
universal Devastation committed by the Papists.

Tyrconnel was seated at the Helm, a bitter and implacable Enemy to the British
Protestants.

The Militia, all composed of English, had for a considerable time before been
disarmed.

The standing Army, made up of English Soldiery, disbanded; and Irish, both
Officers and private Soldiers, preferred to their places.

The Corporations divested of their old Charters, and then new modeled by
turning out the Protestants, and placing Natives of the Kingdom in the
Magistracy and Government of them.

Papists made Judges, put into the Commission of the Peace, constituted
Sheriffs, Coroners, Constables, etc. throughout the whole Kingdom.

The Protestant Clergy disturbed in their Ministry, and the discharge of their
sacred Function.

Many of the poorer sort of Protestants practiced upon by various Arts of the
Popish Priests, and thereby seduced from their Religion, and turned Papists.

The Houses of the Sick invaded both by Seculars and Regulars, who would
violently shut the Protestants doors against their own Ministers, and by a
Thousand impious contrivances and unheard of Machinations, so menace and
terrify them with the thoughts of Damnation to those of their Religion, as
forced them in the agonies of Death to renounce the Principles of their Faith;
or at least the Priests pretended that they did so, and that they came off
Conquerors, the known and apparent refusal of many notwi^hstanding.

This transient Prospect of Affairs does sufficiently discover to us, That the
Irish were under no hard or severe circumstances from the Protestants, and far
from standing in awe of them, who (now that the course of things was so
manifestly inverted) were become their Masters, instead of that of their Slaves
and Vassals.

But perhaps it may be urged, That the Protestants were for espousing the
Interest of King William, then Prince of Orange: And indeed, 'twas reasonably
to be supposed, that all persons who had any valuable regard for their
Religion, or to the retrieving of the Laws and Constitutions of the Land, were
strongly inclined to favor and assist in so good and advantageous a Design.
But then, alas! the English were in no capacity of putting their good Wishes in
execution: They had been disarmed, and thereby divested of all ability whereby
to make any considerable defense, or to provide for their Security: Besides,
they were under a strict Guard from their Enemies, who had all the power and
strength of the Kingdom in their hands, and kept a vigilant and an attentive
eye upon all their actions: which kept the English so much in subjection, and
was so great a discouragement unto them, that hardly any attempted to declare
for the Prince, till February; whereas most of the Rapin and Devastation was
committed before.

This compendious description of Affairs will (I presume) be deemed sufficient
to satisfy all judicious and impartial men, that without the least provocation
or plausible pretense of Right, the Irish Papists have acted the late
Massacres, Burnings, and other public Mischiefs and Calamities upon the
Protestants of Ireland: which if they had been mutual and reciprocal injuries,
though they that were in a good Cause, would have been Sufferers for their
Loyalty and Service to the King; yet on the other hand, there might have been
room for the King's Mercy. But where the inveteracy of a malicious Antagonist
discharged it self in whole Vollies upon a quiet and inoffensive People,
without any other inducement than that of a bare Surmise, that they were
inwardly affected to King William; seems as irrational and unjustifiable an
Argument for those violent Outrages committed thereupon; as it is happily, without
Precedent (if duly reflected upon in all its circumstances and respects) that
men so habituated to Rebellion, and professed Enemies to the Protestant
Interest and Religion, should have a Pardon vouchsafed unto them.

I now proceed to show, That a Pardon to the Irish cannot properly be
interpreted an effect of Mercy, but in reality the contrary.

To illustrate this to you, I think it reasonable to affirm, That that cannot
be accounted an effect of Mercy, which is extended to such Criminals as have
invaded and usurped the Rights and Properties of others; which is consequent to
my first Position, That Mercy is to be confined within the Boundaries of common
Right: and if this were not so, such as live most obedient to the Government,
could expect no Security from it; which would be a Practice as disagreeable to
the first Institution of Government in the World, as it is contrary to Nature
and the common Reason of Mankind. Besides, by this means no Government could
long subsist, because it must necessarily encourage such men as openly violate
and contemn its Injunctions; and by consequence, such as most trample upon,
must possess the places of Judicature, and the greatest Offenders become prime
Ministers of State.

But to encounter this Argument more closely, It Is a Maxim received among
Princes, To manage with a steady and equal hand in Affairs of State, and in
consequence hereunto a general Pardon is reckoned to be a mutual Good. But in
pursuance to this (I presume) it will be granted, that such as have adhered to
the Interest of King William, and consequently have, upon all occasions,
demonstrated their Zeal and Sincerity for the Protestant Cause and Religion,
may reasonably put in as just a claim to his Mercy, as such who have declared
their Enmity to both.

The Justice and Equality of this matter being thus considered, it is not to be
supposed, that he who came to rescue our selves and the Reformed Religion from
the violent Intrusion of Romish Idolatry and Slavery, would transfer our
Possessions to those whose Injustice he came to punish and suppress. This seems
to be an Act of greater severity than was that precipitate and hasty judgment
of David to Mephibosheth, Let Ziba and thou divide: for in this case the Irish
are in possession of the whole, and are so far from making any Overtures, or
showing any Indication of their Submission, that they have not so much as the
Argument of that unworthy Sycophant on their sides, meeting the King on the
way. Nay, so far have they deviated from the least of that Respect which is
even owing to a Christian, that in their common Discourses they cursed the very
name of the Prince of Orange, as the Offspring of that man who was so fatal to
the Romish Church in the Netherlands, which they feared, was an ominous presage
of his Posterity's being so to the^. And if their inveterate malice against the
British Protestants in Ireland was capable of any addition, they augmented it;
for the Affection which was visibly discernable in them, to his now Sacred
Majesty, whose Person and Government the Irish Papists have in so great an
Abhorrence, and do, with the most impious Anathemaes, so inhumanly execrate and
revile, that we may justly account their malice not inferior to that of the
Jews to our Savior, in scourging his Effigies, as a meritorious Act in their
Devotion.

But I would not be understood in this place, as if the Tenor of th^s
Discourse were designed to restrain the Fountain of the KING'S Mercy; but if
the Current be diverted from its proper Channel, by turning it from his
Enclosures into the Common, methinks there is a reasonable subject of Complaint
against those, whose Avarice and too-interested a Regard to their private
advantage (in prejudice to the public welfare, not perhaps of one, but of
three Nations) carry them beyond the bounds both of Reason and common Equity.
We have had the most cogent and evincing demonstrations, That the Royal
Affections of His Majesty are graciously inclined to us, by that wonderful
Condescension shown to his Irish Protestant Subjects, in that he permits, nay,
commands them to speak; and since he is thus mercifully pleased to hear them
represent their Grievances (the effects of their faithful adherence to the
Cause he owns) they presume to request no more than this, Not to be debarred
from the benefits of His Grace and Favor to them: They claim nothing of what
in Justice belongs to their Adversaries; but desire their own, not the
Possessions of others, but a Restitution of their proper Right, and this not to
extend to Losses in War, (which those who outwardly seem to espouse, but
secretly endeavor to undermine our true Interest, would insinuate) but for
Robberies and other outrageous Acts of Violence, committed in time of Peace:
and these of so notorious a nature, that had even their own Popish Government,
and King, been in any capacity of asserting but part of the Laws, the Offenders
would (at least in some degree) have been constrained to make Restitution.

Nor do the Protestants of Ireland desire the Blood of any, the Principles of
whose Religion, as well as natural Clemency, being such as permits them not to
repay their Adversaries in their own Coin; but to choose rather to leave them to
God, and the King's Justice.

That which they would pray and entreat for, is only that which might be a
means of preserving those, who have escaped the Irish Cruelty, as to their
Lives, though not in their Estates: Namely (...) Reparation for their substance
taken from them, without which, they must inevitably perish, being in a worse
condition than were the Egyptians, when they told Joseph, that they had nothing
left but their Bodies and Lands: whereas these poor Protestants, who are now
most humble Supplicants to His Majesty, were never invested in the latter,
their whole substance consisting in Personal Estates, which they were totally
stripped and dispossessed of.

Some have urged His Majesty's Proclamation of Pardon in Scotland, as an
Argument to infer the reasonableness and necessity of the like to be extended
to the Rebels in Ireland; but it is plain to me, that an Instance of so great
disparity, insisted upon by men of understanding, serves but to confirm the
Apprehensions and Opinions of many in that, which it is not my business here to
mention: Only this I will affirm, That it seems not to be chargeable upon our
Prime Ministers of State, but upon a small Fry that hope to fat themselves in
the Troubled Waters of Ireland.

They are not unacquainted with the Humor and Disposition of the Irish, and
how subject they are to bribe, when reduced to any Exigency: For which reason
they are very unwilling at present to dispossess them of that Wealth, which by
Rapin and Spoil they have gained from the English; to the intent that it may be
left to be offered at their Altars, to make an Atonement for them.

But to return, It seems easy to answer that Objection of the Proceedings of
Scotland, which in no Circumstances or Respects, run parallel with the present
Rebellion of Ireland.

Those of Scotland were guilty of no Murders or Robberies, upon their first
Excursion, but acted only in their own defense; whereas those of Ireland, began
both, without any opposition, or the le^st disturbance given them by the
British.

They of Scotland had a pretense (though weak and insufficient) of being
induced to what they did, at the Instigation of their Lords, and Grandees, who
were for the late King James, and acted under his Commission.

But they of Ireland had not so much as this color, when they committed their
Outrages in that Kingdom.

Nay, to come nearer to them, even their own Government issued out
Proclamations for restraining their inhumane violence: Though 'twas plain, that
this was only a pretense of Justice, there being no effectual course taken to
bring notorious Offenders to the least, not to say, condign Punishment, but
were rather secretly animated, and encouraged in their Villainies by their
Gentlemen, and Grandees.

But to come to a period, as to this Affair of Scotland, they are a People of
the same Nation, united in one common interest; nay, and in Religion too, as to
the main and essential part of it: and his Majesty's Pardon, when graciously
vouchsafed to such, may be interpreted to be of an universal influence, and
extent, because it comprehends as well Friends as Enemies, by reaching to those
Relations which are general among them, and so in a manner including all;
besides, what these Rebels did, was by virtue of a pretended Commission, and so
their opposition, and acts of Hostility, may come under the Construction of a
War, and in that respect more proper for pardon.

Whereas the Irish (not to enumerate Particulars, or to aggravate matters,
which are notorious enough in themselves) can lay claim to none of these
Reasons, in all which they are utterly Foreign, and bear no relation to the
British Protestants.

I will now descend to a recital of those Reasons, which seem of force to
persuade any unprejudiced and impartial man, That a General and Free Pardon
will not attain the end designed, the speedy Reduction of Ireland.

We that by sad and lamentable experience are fully acquainted with the Humor
and Genius of the Natives of that Kingdom, are none of us ignorant that Arts of
Mildness and Indulgence, are not proper means to dispose them to obedience; the
more that they are caressed, or favored, the more rough, and intractable they
appear to be: and all the Civilities, or acts of kindness, which have, or can
be shown to them, do but serve to heighten their Insolence, and Ingratitude,
instead of begetting in them any hearty Affection, or esteem. That this is an
Impartial, as well as Practical, and not a Malicious, or Speculative Notion of
the evil temper, and vile Disposition of this people, as well their former, as
their late unworthy carriage toward those of the English, who had been most
obliging to them, is a demonstrative, and an infallible proof; by which the
Protestants are now (though too late) convinced, that in this, they nearly
resemble their Bogs, which are never to be trusted to by going gently over, but
the only safety is by cutting your way to the bottom.

If any Proposals be made to them either in War, or Peace, they immediately
draw this favorable Inference from it to themselves, That they are looked upon
as very formidable, and considerable; That they are of the stronger side, and
upon that account will never resolve to submit: I want not Instances which I
could recount of this present Rebellion, of diverse Gentlemen, who applied to
some of the Irish Grandees, for their protection, upon assurance of former
Friendship, (which the Irish are as profuse in the Expressions, as they are
perfidious in the discharge of) and to that, they added promises of making
suitable Retribution, to whatsoever acts of favor should be shown to them; but
instead of meeting with a return of kindness from the Irish, (as the former
Civilities done to them, and their repeated acknowledgments of them, with most
vehement Protestations of a sincere Friendship, might have made it reasonable
for them to expect) were entertained with Insultings, and vile Expressions of
Reproach, and Contempt.

Again, I cannot see, how a General Pardon will affect them to a suitable
submission, or to a laying down of their Arms, it will rather make them more
obstinate in their Rebellion, which I gather from the following Reasons.

First, If it be an Argument on our side, to hasten the Conquest, for fear of
assistance from the French, or of our other Embroils; this seems to give equal
encouragement to the Irish, to hold out, in expectation of those Advantages so
favorable to their interest. The Irish Understanding and Courage is observed
to be by themselves understood, and depended upon by Negatives: The Enemy, say
they, are afraid of us; therefore they know, we are wise in Council, and strong
in Arms; if not, they would never offer such terms to us. It Is a Maxim received
amongst them, Never bid first; and they deduce this Consequence from it, That
he is on the weaker side who does.

The Commonalty of the Irish are born up in this Rebellion by the assurances
they have from their Priests, of being relieved by Catholic Princes: That the
common Interest of their Holy Church and Religion, will oblige them to it: That
the present Differences betwixt them and the French will be composed by the
next Pope; there being nothing more common than for every Infallible Vicar of
Christ, to act Diametrically contrary to his Predecessor; as being generally of
another Interest, swayed by different Principles, and governed by new Maxims
and Policies of State.

To this they add, That it is impossible for Catholic Princes to join with
Heretics to maintain the Interest of an Usurper, who is such an open and
professed Enemy to their Church, in opposition to Saint James, whom they style,
the Confessor, and doubt not to see him triumphant over the Heretics of
Europe: These and the like, are the usual Arguments of the Priests, which they
artfully instill into the Common People.

Now what can more effectually confirm them in the belief of this opinion, than
to offer them more than they can ask, ( viz.) a Pardon for Life and Estate,
together with the enjoyment of all they had before the Rebellion; and not only
that, but what they have violently got since by Robbing and Pillageing of the
English.

The Irish have not been shie in their frequent Discourses, That if they
miscarried in this attempt, the Requital must be such as to put them beyond all
expectation of another Opportunity: For they confessed, that what they did,
proceeded not from any provocation given them by the English; nor could they
have any pretense (the Government being wholly vested in themselves) whereas in
the former Rebellion they wanted not matter of Complaint, for which Reasons
they owned, That they could not think of Mercy, if that proved an Abortive,
which they were laboring with all their might to bring forth to such
perfection as to secure, and perpetuate to themselves the Catholic Interest,
and Religion, all which is agreeable to their Motto, Now, or never; now, and
for ever. And to confirm them in their Opinions in this matter, take the
following brief account of their Actions.

Their Lords, and Clergy, put the Populace upon the most Violent and Irregular
Courses, telling them, That they must now trust to their Musket and Skene; for
their Actions have been such, as left no room for a Pardon from the English;
and pursuant to this, there is scarce a Private Soldier, but will tell the
Protestants that they expect no mercy, as being conscious to themselves, that
they have left nothing undone that could provoke, or disoblige the Protestants.

Now if after all this, they be Courted and Addressed to, before a Blow is
struck by the King's Army, which is sent over; they will be so far from making
a right use of this Indulgence, that it will only raise their Scorn, and puff
them up with Insolence and Ambition, equal to that of their obtaining a
Victory: For however his Majesty in great mercy and tenderness of Christian
Blood, may make Proposals to them; yet their Earthy, and Slavish Nature, is
such, as will induce them to believe, that nothing but fear of them, begets
those tenders of Pardon and Mercy, and whilst they are prepossessed with
Apprehensions of so base a a Composition, and Alloy, offers of Indemnity to
their Grandees, is to them Huzza's of Victory.

The next Reason in maintenance of my opinion, is, that giving Pardon to all
that lay down Arms, etc. will be a means to enlarge the War: For no doubt the
Generality of Men of Estates will make their submission to the English
Government, but this outward compliance will only render them the more useful
to their own Party, both in respect of giving them Intelligence, and Advice,
and of supplying them with Money, which they may receive out of their Estates
in the English Quarters, and their Friends out of that in the Irish.

It seems a vulgar, and dangerous error to believe, that taking away the Men
of Estates from the Irish, will be a means of obliging the rest to submit,
whereas it rather portends the quite contrary, and I Am really of opinion, that
the Irish Ambition is nothing beyond having them in their Quarters.

This renders them formidable in the opinion of their own Party, that they
should be so courted, and sortifies the Commonalty with an Assurance, that when
matters are come to the worst, they can have recourse to a Pardon.

This may be deemed a Maxim of War calculated for the World of the Moon, that
upon a Rebellion, the men of Estates, and Leaders into it, as soon as they have
formed an Army and headed them, till they had seized upon all the English
Estates, should then be invited to Pardon, and thereby be capacitated to
attend, not only the present success of this, but of another Rebellion: which
as it has been a practice too frequently pursued in the English Conquests of
Ireland, as its fatal Consequences have but too fully evinced; so is it matter
of Astonishment, and Admiration to see the same measures reassumed in the
present juncture

This seems an Invitation to them to Rebel, to vouchsafe a pardon to such, by
whose influence and example the inferior sort have been prompted, and
instigated to it: For the Rabble are not capable of making an head, but by the
Government, and direction of their Superiors; but when once they are gathered
into a body, they are then more easily managed, and commanded without them: And
it is doubtless a signal advancement to their common interest and design, to
protect, and preserve them 'till the next opportunity presents, of making
another attempt.

On the contrary, it appears to be much more reasonable, to believe, that the
pardoning the Populace, and excluding their Commanders, would be a more
expeditious Expedient whereby to obtain the Kingdom: For though the Irish Heads
of their Clans influence the Common People, whilst the Lands, and Herds follow
them, yet that homage, and Dependence, cease of course, when they are
divested of both. This common experience evinceth to be true, by showing how
careless and unnatural the vulgar Irish are to their Grandees, when they find
it their interest not to adhere to them.

This would quickly receive a Demonstration, if a Proclamation were issued
forth, extending only to Private, and Inferior men, or at least to none
exceeding the degree of a Captain.

Before the late King James's Accession to the Crown, men rarely heard the
poorer sort speak of their Old Lords, but with sad Complaints, that they had
ever been the occasion of their ruin; and whatever they now do, proceeded more
from a dependence upon Foreign aid, than any Confidence they placed either in
their Chieftians, or themselves

And if now an Experiment were made, which they would adhere to, whether their
English, or Irish Landlords? This would no longer remain a Question, for they
are by so much the more sensible of the great advantages derived to them from
the English Government, by how much they are possessed with a deep sense and
apprehension of their present Sufferings, under their own, or rather French
Tyranny, when the English Farthing is become their Sixpence.

It is not rational for Men to adhere to such as are in no capacity, either of
securing themselves, or their Dependants: Separate them from the opinion of
Foreign Assistance, and they will soon despair of their own Strength, and
forsake their Grandees; but to reduce them by pardoning their Lords, is (if it
should take) the only way to fix them perpetually to them, and suggest to them
an opinion, that they are very considerable abroad in their Foreign Alliance;
or else, That the English would not make court to them at home, when they are
at their Devotion, and lie at their mercy, as now they must be owned to do.

Besides, the bringing in the common People by their Lords, is to make them own
their Deliverance to them, and consequently to be under a stricter and more
indispensable obligation of homage and subjection to them, than formerly; which
(I presume) would be a thing neither honorable nor safe.

The ordinary People have no inclination to travailing, no, not so much as
removing from one Province to another. Let them but enjoy the convenience of
returning to their Cabins, and of living quietly under the protection and
security of the English Laws and Government, and they will account to have made
a very good and advantageous exchange.

Thus having, in general terms, described the present constitution and
circumstances of the Irish, I shall now descend to particulars, and first look
back into their ancient forms and modes of Government, before the arrival of
the English in that Kingdom, which nearly resembled that of the Arabs, though
not so regular: for their chief regard was to the Power and Force of him that
governed, not to the Right of Succession; it was enough, if he were of the same
Family, whether Brother or Son. Elder or Younger, and in proportion to these
wild Maxims, they enjoyed their Estates. He that was accounted the most
Warlike, or more truly speaking most barbarous, the rest of the Family
submitted to him.

This Savage Custom prevailed upon them till the coming of the English, whose
presence among them gave some check to it; yet could never be extirpated, till
the English Laws and Government were established in their Country, which to
this day (notwithstanding their present Usurpation) they cannot but acknowledge
to be an Happy Conquest; but though the advantages of it be great to
themselves, yet there are many of them so unreasonably prepossest in favor of
their former Confusion, or rather in prejudice to their present Change, because
done by the English, as to wish again for their Onions and Garlic of Egypt,
and to anathematize the best Reformed amongst them, for introducing the English
Customs and Restraints upon a Free People, as they accounted themselves, when
indeed they were but Slaves to their own Brutality and Lust.

I shall not stuff Paper with what our Chronicles and Histories of Ireland
relate, as to the Title and Interest of England to that Kingdom, nor repeat the
Treasure of Blood and Coin it has cost, to preserve it under the English
Government; but shall only observe to the Reader, that it never continued so
long without a Deluge of Blood, as in the late Calm and peaceable Interval,
since the War of Forty One, which was not ended till Fifty Three, nor the
Kingdom settled till Sixty Three. So that by a proper computation, it was not
perfectly quiet in the possession of the British Protestants above Twenty Two
years; for we must commence the date of our Troubles in that Kingdom from the
Late King's ascending the Throne. This is then but a short Rest of Twenty two
years for that desolate Kingdom, (tired with the long fatigues of a constant
War, and almost all its British Veins quite emptied of Protestant Blood) and
yet the longest and most profitable that ever the English enjoyed there, much
of which is attributed to the Conquest of Cromwell, who thought it a diminution
to his Honor, to condescend to any terms with so base an Enemy; and had not
the Interest of their Patron, the late King, prevailed in the Settlement of
that Nation, but lest them in the same condition they were found in at the
Restoration of King CHARLES the Second, Ireland had been in the greatest
Tranquillity of any of the three Kingdoms, and consequently an entire Interest
for our Deliverer, His present Majesty.

It is now a matter deserving our consideration, Whether that Kingdom, as it
remains in the Irish and French hands (whether by both or either united) it can
be reasonably supposed to with* stand His Majesty's Forces and Subjects in that
Kingdom.

In order to which, first reflect upon the Irish, as to their Commanders; and
secondly, as to their Troops.

First, As to their Commanders; Notwithstanding that they boast of some few
Colonels, and inferior Officers, yet they cannot nominate one Man that ever
actually did or can Command a Field. Their great Captain Justin Mac Carthy
might be as good in a Cellar as any General in Europe; but in a Field (as the
King of Denmark said of him, when he was sent to him) his Army must not be
commanded by Glass-Eyes.

Their Offi^ers being thus mean, their Troops are next to be considered, and
they perchance in the general, are the most abject wretches in the world* taken
by force from the Spade and Cabin, who by Blows and continual Instruction, were
brought to handle their Arms, but not one in ten can fire a Musket without
shut eyes and a trembling hand. I speak not this at random, or by hearsay,
but upon good grounds. It Is true, their Horse are better, but yet we have had a
demonstration of their behavior and all their actions in the North.

This being a true Character of their own Force, their dependence must be upon
the French Auxiliaries, to supply these Defects; but how that suits with the
Irish Interest and Design is not difficult to imagine.

The Irish Gentry (for I must say that the common People desire not War with
the English) put themselves upon this Rebellion, not so much out of a Loyal
Adherence to their King, as to be free Lords of the Soil, and are now under no
predominancy, if they are capable by their own strength to continue their
Deliverance, otherwise they had better be under the English mild Government
than the French Arbitrary Power, whose cruel Tyranny to his native Subjects
affords no Invitation or Encouragement to others, to put themselves under it.

By this short Enquiry, it seems plain, That the present posture of Affairs in
Ireland, are not in so good a disposition, as to entitle those wretched People
to demand terms, but rather to throw themselves upon and acquiesce in the
King's Mercy; and that to descend to Capitulations with them, much more to give
their Leaders Pardon, is to encourage and revive a running Enemy.

If then it be granted, That they are not in a capacity to oppose the Arms of
England, and that one Fourth of the Kingdom is already in the actual possession
of the Protestants, the best of the Irish Forces lost, and that many of them
living have laid down their Arms. This being premised, the next thing to be
considered, is, What Motives there are for giving Pardon to their Chief
Commanders, and those which are insisted upon are two.

The first is, That by giving a General Pardon, the Kingdom will be the sooner
gained.

The second, That a Pardon will preserve the Towns and Cities, which the Irish
will burn, if made desperate.

To the first of these I shall return a two sold Answer.

First, That a Pardon to the Chief Lords and Men of Estates, will not affect
the Army, for that few of them are considered there as Soldiers, in regard
that other men, subordinate to them, are the Commanders and Leaders in the
Army; so that pardoning them secures not the men of action, who lie under such
circumstances as a general Pardon will not free them from.

Secondly, A Pardon for all Crimes and Misdemeanors relating to the Crown,
will be no Security to the private Soldiers, Captains, Lieutenants, etc. my
Reason is, For that all the Robberies and Spoils done to the English, were
committed by such, though at the secret instigation and encouragement of their
Great ones. Now the English cannot prefer an Action at Law against any but
these private men; and if thereby they become obliged (as in Justice they
ought) to make restitution of what they have made a violent Seizure from the
other, that must certainly bring on their inevitable Ruin, which will make it
as equal to them to die in the Field as in a Gaol.

And now, as to the second Motive, That a General Pardon will prevent Burning
and other Devastations, I answer, That it will have the quite contrary effect,
and consequently be an occasion of more Mischief; which I undertake to
demonstrate from the following reasons.

First, It is an unalterable Maxim, rivetted amongst ^em, as well by the
Principles of their Religion as natural genius and common Custom, to do as much
Mischief as they possibly can to the Protestants; and as soon as they receive
an account of this Pardon, will be very industrious to leave what marks they
can of their inveterate Fury; and it is possible for them to effect this in a
days time throughout the Kingdom, and yet keep within the compass of their
Pardon.

Secondly, This General Pardon will not prevent Burning and other destructive
Arts of the English Plantations, but rather promote them; for that their Lords
being reinvested in their Estates, will consider, That if the English Houses
and Improvements be destroyed, their Estates will be the sooner inhabited, for
that the English coming in poor, will have nothing to build or improve their
Estates: so that in course, the Irish Lands must be first Peopled.

For these reasons it seems evident, That a General Pardon will not have the
effect proposed, neither as to the more expeditious reduction of that Kingdom,
nor for the preventing of the Ruin and Devastation feared from the Irish.

The next consideration, in order to the former, is, What Mischiefs will attend
a General Pardon, and how it will affect the English or British Interest; which
shall be laid down in these seven following particulars.

First, It will be an encouragement to the Irish, to commit the same Outrages
again, and will animate them to an embracing of the first opportunity, which
they have now more reason to expect to prove favorable to them, than formerly,
since that the French are engaged with them in one bottom, and are linked
together in a general Interest, as being (as it is said) by virtue of the late
Compact, entitled to a share in the Kingdom. Now, if at any time the French
should be at leisure, by concluding of a Peace with his Enemies abroad, he may,
at pleasure, pour an Army into Ireland, where the Natives there will be in a
readiness to give them a kind reception, and that without hardly exposing
themselves to any hazard, in regard that they will suppose that they will be no
Losers by it. Since a Pardon attends their greatest Outrages, the worst that
can ensue, will be only to bring them in, and to secure them from committing
more.

Secondly, It will enrich the Irish, and impoverish the English, who, at a
moderate computation, may be deemed to have lost in Personal Estates, Money,
Goods, and Cattle, to a greater value than the Land of the whole Kingdom
amounts to, all which is in the possession of the Irish, which as it renders
the Protestants of little use in defense of the Kingdom, so on the other side,
it strengthens the hands of the Irish, and makes them formidable and very
capable of raising disturbances in it. Money commands Men, and Men command
Kingdoms, and the Irish were never since the Conquest, Masters of more, if they
pass unquestioned, with the Personal Estates of the British Protestants.

Thirdly, It will be the irresistible Ruin of the Protestants of that Kingdom,
seeing that all the Tenants are despoiled of their Stocks; so that a Tenant
having no Cattle to put upon his Land, can consequently pay no Rent, nor be
capable of living in the Kingdom. A Calamity better indeed expressed with Tears
than Ink; and it is no small addition to so lamentable a subject, to see some
Thousands, that twelve months ago, and less, lived perhaps as plentifully as
any People of Europe, at this day Wandering Beggars, and some perishing in the
Fields for want of Sustenance, as they must inevitably do, if Ireland were in
the English hands tomorrow, upon the Conditions of a General Pardon to the
Natives. Great (I had almost said, infinite) numbers there are, that in
November last lost personal Estates, to the value of Thousands, not having now
Clothes to their Backs, nor Bread to eat.

They are now scattered through this Kingdom, some relieved by the Benevolence
of their Relations, others by the public Charity of the Kingdom, and by reason
of the distance of their abode, are the less remarkable; but when once they
meet together in the same place, from whence they were expelled by Irish
Robberies and the like acts of an inhumane violence, it may reasonably be said
of them, as of the Prophet's dry Bones, Can these live? and his return will be
the proper answer, Thou Lord, know. For, should they have no Reprize on the
Irish Estates, they must inevitably perish at the very doors of their Enemies.

Fourthly, As this will ruin all men of Personal Estates, so will it also have
the same effect upon those of Real: For, their Tenants being lost, their Lands
must of Course lie waste, and even quite depopulated: For, the Landlords of
Ireland were as well stripped of their Personal Estates, as their Tenants, and
generally came for England, with as small a Provision for their Subsistence in
it; so that in their return, they will not have a Penny to buy Stock, nor a Bed
to lie upon.

Fifthly, As it destroys all the Protestants that have, or had, an Interest in
the Kingdom; so it for ever deterrs any new Planters. It can never be
forgotten, That in the midst of Peace a Nation was destroyed in a day, and the
Authors indemnified that did it.

Who will adventure themselves in such a Country, or, at least, attempt to go
to a place that lies at the mercy and devotion of Savages, and is not protected
by its Friends.

Sixthly, A General Pardon will make it a perpetual Charge to England, as well
as place it beyond a possibility of its reimbursing the expense its reduction
will now contract upon this Nation; besides the apparent hazard of multiplying
the like charge and trouble, by being exposed to the same Work in a few years
again; for, as long as their Grandees enjoy their Estates, they will influence
the populace, so as to have them at their beck, for any design, which they will
not be wanting to promote, against the Government.

Seventhly, A General Pardon will be the only Instrument of preserving all the
Irish in the Kingdom, and for the reasons already mentioned, of diminishing the
English, which will make it a perfect Irish Colony, who are wonderfully
productive of their Breed, and must therefore necessarily be kept in Obedience,
by a powerful Army, which will be very expensive to the CROWN, for that it is
the English Trade and Consumption, that made the Revenue of Ireland, which
sinking to a low ebb, must be supplied out of England.

These Reasons, being allowed to be of force, against granting of a General
Pardon to the Irish; I will in the next place offer what seems an Expedient in
this Affair, whereby the Irish may not be made desperate, nor yet the losing
Protestants irrecoverably ruined: but that both the one and the other, may be
rendered useful to the King and Kingdom, and yet even the Irish not excluded
from his Majesty's mercy.

I cannot undertake so much as a regular computation of the Numbers of the
Irish, but know in one County where the Protestants were numbered 700, the
Papists amounted to 7000. And though other Counties of that Kingdom are better
planted with British, yet at the lowest, and most moderate reckoning, there is
above five Irish for one British.

Now if of so many Millions (for it is not to be supposed that one Irish Papist
in that Kingdom is, or indeed can be free, both as a Native, and as of that
Communion, as not being admitted to Mass, or Confession, a prohibition from
either of which they believe to be Damnable, that joins not in the Extirpation
of Heretics) an Hundred should be excepted from Pardon, could this reasonably
be interpreted an Act of Severity, or a design to extirpate a People: Do we
find in any Story such a Decimation? Pardon me, that I use the word so
improperly, for here is not one of Twenty Thousand taken off: if such moderate
Justice can be excused to the Protestants, it can deserve no less then
Adoration from the Papists, nor could such a Miraculous Mercy proceed from any
Monarch, or Religion, but ours.

Notwithstanding all which, it is matter of admiration to see the Shimeis of our
Age (the Family of Saul) throw up the Dust of their Cloven Feet, and
scurrilously call our David a Man of Blood; though to this day, he has not
suffered one drop to be spilt: but in his Royal Will carefully imitates the
exemplary goodness of his Blessed Master, who in the discharge of his Embassy
into this lower World, affirms, That the design of his Negotiation, was not, to
destroy, but to preserve the Lives of Men: And even in the Pardon proposed, the
Exception is under Eighty, and though all of them so notoriously immersed in
Blood and Rapin, that the very Cannibals would deem them quite divested of
Humanity; yet His Majesty leaves a Door of Mercy, wherein for them to enter, if
they will but testify by their Actions, that they strive to merit an Admission.

But when this does justly silence the Enemies of God, and the King, as it
reasonably ought to do, yet they will still impertinently object, That though
the Lives of these men, may be so wrapped up by their own behavior, as to render
them capable of meriting their preservation, yet their Estates must be
sacrificed to the Resentments of the present Government: and to make their
Seditious noise, carry some sound of truth, they sum up their Estates by
Multiplication, and that to thrice as much as they really amount to.

But why do not these Iusticiaries who express so great a care, and solicitude
for the Irish, give us an account of what the British have been deprived of,
which is so great, that all the Irish Papists Estates of that Kingdom, were
they to be sold, could not make satisfaction for one Moiety, which they have
robbed the Protestants of, in their Personal Substance.

But I hear some of them say, by an equal Parity of Reason, that the British
desire satisfaction out of Irish-mens Estates; Merchants may expect reparation
for their losses at Sea out of Prizes taken by the King's Ships. This Argument
may well be thought to proceed from men of Abdicated sense, as well as
Interest: For pray, wherein consists the Parallel? Merchants venture themselves
with the expectation of diverse Accidents, and Contingencies, and accordingly
lay their designs of profit in a form proportionable to their hazards.

And to show the Consideration, the Government has for them, and what relief
they are to expect upon a loss at Sea, the Parliament provided in the Statute
for Subsidies of Tunnage, and Poundage, that in such Cases, they should receive
back the Customs they paid.

Now though it be impossible to run the Comparison, yet the Gentlemen of
Ireland, I durst be Guarantee for, will thankfully acknowledge the like
satisfaction: Give them but as much as they have paid in Quit rent, Taxes,
Harth-money, Customs, and Excise, since they were put into a Legal Possession
of that Kingdom by King Charles the Second, and they will desire no more.

I confess these Pot-guns of the Jacobites are not worth answering, yet I
cannot forbear mentioning one thing more:

Who are they that commit Robberies at Sea? if Pirates, and especially of the
King's Subjects, are they treated like Enemies of War? And will they be
established in a quiet, and peaceable possession of what they have robbed from
their Fellow Subjects? The case is the same in Ireland: Our Fellow Subjects,
for so they were entitled, before this Rebellion; set upon their quiet and
innocent Neighbors, and seized violently upon their whole substance. How equal
the Parallel then is, of losing Ships at Sea by a Foreign Enemy, and such
Robbers at home, a Child may judge.

But to come to that I propose as an Expedient to answer the thing designed, (
viz.) a quick and easy Conquest of Ireland.

In the pursuit of this Topic, the Question that will arise from it, will be,
whether pardoning the Commonalty in general, and excepting some few of the
Grandees, or pardoning the chief men with the Commonalty, under the same
Qualifications, will most contribute to the safe and effectual reduction of
that Kingdom.

I shall espouse the first of these, by asserting, That pardoning the
Commonalty, and excepting some of their greatest men, will soonest prevail, and
that for these three Reasons

First, Pardoning the Commonalty, and excepting some of their chiefest men,
will encourage the Populace to submit upon that very assurance, and
consequently upon their own bottom, without any dependence upon the Heads of
their Clans; which of how contemptible a consideration soever it may appear to
some, is certainly a matter of the greatest moment in the Reduction of that
Kingdom. For it is as well the assiduous contrivance, as common interest of the
Irish Grandees, to keep the Commonalty under the Circumstances of a constant
dependence upon them, endeavoring to possess them with an opinion, that it is
by their means, and upon their account only, that the others obtain terms and
security, by which politic influence upon the ordinary sort, in the closing of
one Rebellion, they lay a foundation for, and so not only give Birth, but add
Fuel to another: For the Heads of Clans, as well by themselves, as by the
co*operating instigation of their Priests, carefully instill into the Ignorant
Multitude, that let them make an insurrection when they please, they can incur
no danger; for at the utmost extremity of things they are, and must ever be the
Grand Instruments of their Preservation: Let them be never so deeply involved
in Blood and Rapin, yet that their power and interest is such, as must
necessarily bring them off: They are the Tall Cedars, that can at any time
defend the lower Shrubs, and what need they fear, since they are under so
strong a Guard, and Protection, whose Persons are so formidable, as well as
inviolable to the English, as always to shield them from harm.

But if this deluded Mobile see, that the King has no regard to their Leaders,
but on the contrary excludes the greatest of them from Pardon; this will
demonstrate to them, that it is his Royal Mercy, not the interest of their
Lords, that must preserve them: This will remove the opinion of their
dependence upon their Lords, and consequently oblige them to suitable
apprehensions of His Majesty's Clemency to them; by which means deriving their
preservation from the Crown, they will wholly depend upon it: whereas they
never were yet separated from the interest of their Clans, but in those few
years of Cromwell's Government, the good effect whereof those who were
Eyewitnesses of it in Ireland, and now living, can give a description; when
most of the Commonalty went to Church, and Doors with a Wooden Latch were as
secure, as an Iron Grate in the Reign of King Charles the Second.

Secondly, Pardoning the Commonalty, without any dependence upon their
Commanders, being extended as a matter of mere Grace and Princely favor to
them, will possess those poor people with apprehensions of the good
Inclinations of the English toward them, which will induce them to a ready
submission.

They (as most barbarous People) are generally of Diffident, and Timorous
Natures, and it is with some difficulty, that they can be prevailed upon to
believe, that their Crimes shall be forgiven. This, I suppose, may proceed from
the fierceness, and cruelty of their own Dispositions, as not looking for those
unexpected returns of kindness from such, whom they have testified so
Implacable an Aversion, and Prejudice against.

Now whilst they crowd under their Leaders, they are fostered up in that
Opinion, which the way prescribed of reducing them, will take them off, and
make them sensible that the Protestants look not on them as the Authors, but
the forced Instruments of this Rebellion; which, when they are made
apprehensive of, will soon divert the stream from its former Current, and their
private Soldiers will fly from their marked out Commanders, as from a Plague,
or public Contagion. Now that this is no Novel Notion, their very practice in
former Rebellions does fully evince, when the Father to save his own, would
betray his Sons Life, which was the usual method throughout the whole Kingdom:
Neither is it in the power of their Priests (how Arbitrary soever in the
exercise of their Function) to govern, or restrain them longer, than whilst
their own Party can protect them; their Secular, carrying so great a
Predominancy over their Spiritual Interest, as makes them inseparable Slaves to
their Cow, and Pottato-Garden; and he only commands them that is Lord of the
Soil, without any regard to Proximity of Blood, or Ancient Property.

But to proceed to my Third Reason, That pardoning the Commons, is the ready
way to put a period to the Rebellion: Our Laws, as well as Reason acquaint us,
That the King's General Pardon is no security to any private man for personal
actions, for any Robberies, or Mischiefs done to the Protestants. Now all the
waste, and havoc committed in Ireland, was done by the Commonalty, though by
private orders, and instructions of their Leaders, and to their greatest profit.

These men will be told by their Lawyers, That this Pardon is but a snare to
bring them in, and that private Actions which will be commenced against them,
will rot them in Gaol.

But the General Pardon excepting so many men of Estates, and in express words
declaring that they shall be converted to a restitution of what the Protestants
have lost, this will quiet, and allay the fears of the Commonalty, that they
shall be free from Actions and Suits at Law, by the satisfaction the Estates of
their Commanders will make.

If these Reasons be allowed sufficient for the confirmation of what they are
alleged, the next thing that falls under our present Consideration, is, What
Settlement will most effectually conduce for the speedy planting of that
Kingdom: for that there is too apparent Reasons to fear, that the greatest part
of the Farmers, and Traders are now incapacitated, and consequently can be of
little use, or benefit, till something be raised to put them in stock; so that
it must necessarily be a new People that must bring that upon the Wheel, for it
is not visible how the late English, or British Interest can make it more.

Now to invite both His Majesty's Subjects, as well as Foreigners of the
Reformed Religion, into that Kingdom, these things offer to their encouragement.

First, To take off the Umbrage and Fears of new Rebellions.

And to give a rational prospect and assurance of advantage to such as shall
come there, for the future.

For the First, to remove the fears, which men are generally possessed with of
Insurrections in that Kingdom, there needs a retrospection into that
Government, since its first Conquest by the British, and then see the success
it had: which useful Animadversion will naturally lead men to a consideration
of what misfortunes and miscarriages it has since been incident to; and to what
in a more especial manner it has been of late obnoxious; it being a received
Maxim, as well in the Body Politic, as Natural, that the most secure way of
applying a wholesome Remedy, is first to make a right discovery of the Disease.

The Deportment of the English in their first Government of Ireland was managed
with abundance of Candor, and Generosity of Temper, by all means and ways
imaginable, indulging a Savage People overrun with rudeness and barbarity: and
seeing that they were then united in the Principles of one Religion, it might
be conjectured no artful undertaking, or task of extreme difficulty, to reduce
them to an entire obedience to the Civil Government, who stood so unanimously
well affected to that of the Ecclesiastical.

But it was afterward found a Work of a far different nature, and much harder
to effect, to reform the Errors and Innovations introduced into their Church,
than to propagate Christianity, where it was never established before: the
Irish hating, in religious matters, what came from the English Clergy; and so
inveterate they were against their Reformers, that they would anathematize all
such as seemed inclined to favor them, giving it in strict Charge to their
Children, never to imitate the Customs and Manners of the English; which, to
create the greater abhorrence against, as well as to demonstrate their
implacable rancour, would (agreeably to their more early nurture and education
of their Offspring) put the first Food into their Mouths with the point of a
Sword; a true Hieroglyphick of their savage Cruelty, as well as their
expressions were a denotation of their great Barbarity, which they used upon
that occasion, Wishing that they might never die, but with a Sword in their
hands, in the midst of their enemies.

This Barbarism the English Government thought to eradicate, by reducing them
to the more easy Discipline of Civility, and that to be done by the gentle
methods of Kindness, and a favorable Indulgence to their Lords and the Heads
of Clans, making them Presents, and giving them a legal power over their
Followers and Tenants, thereby to wean and alienate them from that Arbitrary
Violence which they had usurped before; all which, like Honey in a vitiated
Stomach, turned to Choler, and they became the greater Enemies to good Laws and
Constitutions, by having the opportunity put into their hands of converting
them from a regular administration to vile and enormous Abuses.

To this the English Government superadded that powerful Tie of Marriage, that
so uniting in Blood might be an Introduction to English Humanity and Civility;
but all this was like Corn sown upon Thorns, choked up by the natural
brutality of that ungrateful People, insomuch, that they could not be brought
to any part of conformity (no, not in their Garments) to English Fashions,
until by Statute-Laws they were compelled to decency: Such an invincible
detestation they bore to the Manners and Customs of the British, which recalls
to my mind a passage I was in part an eyewitness of: A Gentleman of the Irish
marrying one of Lynster, whose Education there being something refined by
conversing with the English, and coming to his own House, according to the
Custom of the Country, all his Tenants and Clans, brought in Beefs, Muttons,
etc. in a great abundance, and the Lady finding more than could be spent while
'twas fresh, ordered to have some of it powdered up; which these People hearing
of, renounced their Lord and Lady, as invaders of their ancient Privileges and
Liberties, which (as they affirmed) were never violated before in that House,
where 'twas never known that Flesh was salted, but on the Trencher.

I must entreat the Reader's Pardon for this digression, and return to the
still-mistaken tenderness of the English Government, which was so very
indulgent, that though the Irish were never twenty years quiet, and scarce half
so long, till King James the First, yet did the Kings and Queens of England not
only vouchsafe Pardon, but likewise heapt Creations of great Honor and Dignity
upon those who, in the general acceptance, were irreconcilable Enemies both
to It and Them. I will not stand to enumerate particulars, but rather referr
the Reader to the several Authors that have writ of that Kingdom, and shall
only give a succinct account of some passages of the Rebellion of Forty One,
too deeply imprinted in the Memories of Men, ever to be eras'd or forgotten,
which, if Sir John Davis, that writ so excellently of the Defects of the Kings
of England in the Civil Policy, in the Government of Ireland, had lived to be a
Spectator of, he would have enlarged that admirable Discourse, in which he
prophetically lamented what we have by two Rebellions since fatally found true:
In the Rebellion of Forty One, their barbarous and inhumane Massacres
demonstrated to the World the cruel design of the Irish, quite to extirpate and
destroy the whole Race and Progeny of the British, which in their former
Insurrections they had in some measure spared, but were resolved to correct
that Error in this, which they looked upon themselves to have been guilty of
in former Rebellions, and as a demonstration of their carefulness in the
execution of so damnable a Design, there was not found Five of the Roman
Catholics innocent, though they cannot but acknowledge, but that even in the
time of Cromwell's Government they had fair Trials, and no Articles entered into
with them, but were most inviolably and punctually observed, even to the
Privileges of a little Town called Featherd, where, until the Restoration of
King Charles the Second, the Irish not only enjoyed their Estates, but had the
keeping of their Town, chose their own Officers, etc.

But in all the Promises or Articles made with the Irish, Cromwell observed one
standing. Rule, never to give a Pardon for Estate to any of their Grandees, nor
grant terms for Priests to remain in the Kingdom. Had the Monarchs of England
acted by the same measures before that, I mean, since the Reformation, there
had been no such National Revolution in that Kingdom; as the vast multitudes of
the Protestant Exiles in this give but too lamentable a proof of, and
consequently there had been no occasion for this Discourse: for by that means
the Irish could never have been capable of making an Insurrection, and so could
not have come under such Circumstances, as to require a Pardon for their
Security, not to relate the wonderful good effect which Seven years continuance
of that Government met with in that Kingdom, which was, That most of the Common
People went to Church, and some of the discreetest of their men of Estates
began to hearken with great attention to Discourses made upon the Fopperies and
absurd Innovations of Popery. The Country flourished to a vast degree, grew
rich and populous to a Miracle, and had the same Settlement been confirmed, in
which it lay under at the Restoration of King Charles the Second, there had
been no possibility left for the effecting of those fatal Mischiefs which have
prevailed with so irresistible a force in that poor Kingdom. But his Mercy to
this perfidious People was, upon its first vouchsafing, feared to be an ominous
presage of Cruelty to the British Protestants: And we have now but too fatal
experience of the truth of what even at that time it portended. By what has
been insisted upon, it seems sufficiently plain, That the Success attending the
Indulgence of the English Government to the Irish, has always been to enable
and animate them to fresh Rebellions, in which their inveterate Genius has
fully shown, That they were never wanting upon the least inviting opportunity,
always with open Arms and as ready Hearts embracing the Enemies of England, as
their Patrons, in imitation of the vile and ungrateful Carriage of the
Samaritans to the Jews, whom they owned as Brethren, when they were in
Prosperity, and stood in need of their assistance and protection; but
disclaimed all kind of relation or affinity to them, when they were distressed by
other Nations, and so either called for their Relief, or else supposing that
the Enemies of the Jews would proceed against them as their Friends and
Confederates, resolved to untwist all the Bonds of their Alliance, and to side
with the common Adversary, when it appeared to be for their Interest so to do.

And something parallel to this, is also the demeanor of the Irish toward the
Spaniard, who in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth* were their Catholic Guardians,
from whom they boastingly derived their original Extraction and Descent: Now
the Spaniards are their Paltroons, and the French their Deity, and so as
Catholic as they pretend, would not stick to make court to the Turk, were he
in a capacity to invade England, and to offer them assistance.

The premises of this Discourse seem very copious as to the asserting a
necessity of extraordinary acts to take off the fears that, by the experience
of former Precedents, may reasonably be judged to attend that Kingdom, and to
give encouragement for new, as well as for old Inhabitants.

Now there seems nothing possible to secure that Kingdom, but the extirpation
of two Setts of Men among them, such as are invested in the greatest Command
and Authority over their Bodies; and the Priests and Clergy, who have so
absolute a Government over their Souls. For these are the men that have been
the great Instruments and Incendiaries of all their Rebellions, that have as
well forwarded as headed the easy Multitude, and without whose Instigation the
Populace would have submissively acquiesced under, and never appeared against
the British. And if our long experience of former Times and Revolutions be
deemed a competent Testimony in this case, With what greater show of Reason
have we now cause to be afraid of the time to come, especially if we consider
the present juncture and Constitution of Affairs? For now the French have found
the way into that Kingdom* and are thoroughly acquainted with the Interest,
Situation, Strength, or rather Weakness of it; are entitled to a proportion in
it by virtue of the pretended Right of the late King James, and in order to
that, have Livery and Seisin given them. This ministers just occasion of fear,
that they will give frequent Alarums to that Kingdom, which never had before a
foreign Enemy in the bowels of it; the Spaniards seeing but the edges and
out-skirts of it, whereas the French industriously pry into every corner, upon
the favor of him that delights in the destruction of these Kingdoms, which to
facilitate, or rather to the utmost of his power complete, gives up the
distressed innocent Protestants of Ireland into the barbarous hands of the
French King, whose Success and Dexterity, though not Inclination, is greater in
the Butchering Heretics, as the good and great King James calls the
Protestants of these Kingdoms.

Now, if the common Herd of the Irish be separated from their prime Leaders,
and from their Wolves in Sheeps clothing, there will be none left to blow up
the Coal of Treason or Sedition among them, or any to head or animate them in
it: And the progress of a few years of careful Instruction from our Protestant
Clergy, in the Rudiments and first Draughts of our Profession, will initiate
them into the more safe Religion and easy Government of the British. Besides,
if the French have no Confederates left in that Kingdom, to give them a
favorable reception, (as in this case they would not) there would be no great
reason to fear them, neither would they dare to attempt the Country without
that dependence.

If it should be thought hard usage to dispossess the Irish-men; it may be
answered, that there are Fields of Mercy for the King to extend: and this
desired for the preservation of the Protestant Interest, is but a small
Enclosure; not one, as I said before, of Twenty: Thousand; nor was there ever
greater Criminals up to the Elbows in Protestant Blood in the Rebellion of
Forty One: the very same individual men that are engaged in this, found guilty,
and once Condemned for that, and how their Estates after forfeiture were torn
from the British Protestants, is no secret to the World. Nor is it unknown,
that upon their Restoration, in the year One Thousand Six Hundred and Sixty
two, above Sixty Thousand Protestants were drove out to seek their Bread, and
scattered through the World: This was nothing. But to banish less than an
Hundred must be great Cruelty, though men twice guilty of Blood and Treason,
and those whose Estates they are in present possession of, stained with neither.

This is a Compendious, as well as an easy way to remove the fears of future
Rebellions, and gives good assurance for the time to come, that the Commonalty
will be united as one people with the British, when they have neither Lord, nor
Priest to follow* And when they have no Instructers to bear up the credit of
their old Superstition, they will of course become Proselytes to the Protestant
Communion; for the people are naturally zealous of their erroneous Traditions,
instilled into them by their Priests, and are of a Credulous Disposition; which
shows, that the Authors of these being once removed, the effects will soon
cease, and the people for want of their own, will naturally resolve themselves
into the Reformed Religion: We know that it is a common principle of Mankind, to
have some Religion or other; and then most ignorant, and barbarous parts of the
Universe, adore the most Contemptible Beings, rather than be divested of a
Deity: which mis-application of their Worship, cannot be thought an Argument,
that there is no God, as some Atheistically dispute; but on the contrary,
presupposes his* Existence to be engraven in such legible Characters, in the
minds of men, which so powerfully inclines them to so firm an assent to that
infallible truth, as to believe every thing to be a God, rather than that there
is none at all: They can easily from a continued Chain, and Concatenation of
Subordinate Causes, collect one prime and Metaphysical one; and though they do
not understand its Nature, they question not its Existence: Thus the
Academicks, and Peripateticks, Epicureans, and Stoics in Cicero, ransacked the
great variety of Nature, some making Fire, some water, some the Four Elements,
some Nature it self to be a God; but notwithstanding these mis-apprehensions
concerning the true Object of Divine Worship, few, or none questioned a Supreme
and Independent Being, the great Creator of that admirable Fabric of the
World, of so orderly an Harmony, and Contexture in all its parts, as
sufficiently denotes the infinite Wisdom, and Sovereign Power of that Grand
Architect, who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is. This
being then a perpetual, and unalterable Instinct in Humane Nature, to embrace
some kind of Religion, or other; it must needs follow, that the Irish, when
they are debarred from their false, must in consequence adhere to the true, and
Reformed Worship of God: From which, as the Priests by all the Impious Arts of
Romish Policy, endeavor to frighten, and discourage them, by loading it with
Ignominious Reproaches of Novelty and Falsehood, and of certain Damnation
attending the Profession of it; so on the other hand, if these Vermin were once
removed, who poison and corrupt the minds of the people, tincturing them with
strong prejudices, against what can be offered, for their confutation by the
Protestant Clergy; a more easy access would be obtained for wholesome
instruction and advice to enter, and their own reason, together with that of
their interest, would beget in them a sober, and more impartial attention, to
the excellent frame, and constitution of our Religion, than their present
implicit belief of the dictates of their pretended Infallible Church suffer
them to be capable of. All Protestants know, that it is not possible for Humane
Nature to resist those invincible Arguments, which may be urged to them in
vindication of our Church, and Religion, if they will but lay aside their
Prejudices, and be so just to their own reason, as to give it its true Empire,
and Praedominancy in a right judgment, and discriminative determination of
truth from error: This (as I have hinted already) the removal of their
Priests, (who delude their Votaries like the Indian Bramins, or such as waited
upon the Oracles of old) and a sensible apprehension of the great advantages
derived upon themselves, by this strong endearment of their persons unto the
English, would abundantly facilitate their Conversion: add to this, a true and
lively Character of the Horrid Corruptions, and abuses of their Church, of its
notorious degeneracy from its Original Institution, of the distinct times, and
periods, of its declension from its former purity, into error and
superstition, upon what occasions, through what Interests, and by what indirect
Principles, sinister Maxims, and secular Policies, they were first formed, and
introduced; of the strange Artifices, and subtle inventions, and impious
Machinations of their Priests, to retain them either in absolute ignorance, or
erroneous apprehensions of Religion; locking up from them the Divine Oracles,
lest they should these behold the things that belong unto their Peace, and
which are able to make them wise unto Salvation; and consequently would fully
discover to them, the great Deformities, and absurd Falsehoods, the piae
frauds, Romish Intriegues, and Unwarrantable Equivocations, so universally
practiced by that pretended Catholic Church: As well as representing how their
common Argument of the Novelty of our Religion, may by turning the point to
them, be justly retorted upon themselves, in as much that it is not we, but they
who are the Novelists; not we who relinquished their Communion, but they who
forsook that of the Ancient Church: not we, by our separation from their
Corruptions, but they by their erroneous Additions to that Faith, which was
first delivered unto the Saints: Not we, who reduce all things to the Primitive
Standard, but they who have debauched the Principles of Christianity, by their
Adulterating Innovations: Not we who (like that of the Jews) were first an
independent National Church established in purity of Doctrine, and a wholesome
Discipline; but by the Tyranny and Encroachment of this Usurper of an Universal
Title, and Jurisdiction, became envassalaged to her heavy Yoke, as the Jews did
to that of the Gentiles, and afterward broke the Brazen Serpent of their
Idolatry, pulled down the Images, and cut down the Groves, and took away the
high places of their Superstitious Devotion, and reduced our selves to our
ancient Platform: but they parallel to these heathenish Violations of the
Jewish Economy, had introduced such notorious Errors and Corruptions into the
Church, as had almost eaten into the Heart and Life of Christianity, and
vertually, if not formally, undermined, its very foundation; and then they
impertinently demand that irrational Query, Where was your Religion before
Luther? With how much advantage may men return the Argument by demanding where
their's was before the Council of Trent? Inasmuch, as ours received its
Establishment from our first Conversion to the Faith, from Joseph of Arimathea,
Simon Zelotes, or whoever was the first Preacher of Christianity in Britain;
but theirs, as it now stands, with its new Articles embodied into the Ancient
Creed, which they have made equally necessary to Salvation with the prime
Principles of Religion, is of no longer date, than that Council, as the
Decisions of it do abundantly evince.

Next to an Impartial unfolding to them the apparent weakness of this pretended
Argument of the Novelty of our Religion, the removing of another popular
objection, of our granting a possibility of Salvation to men of their Church,
and their denying it to those of ours, will be of great use to bring them to
our Communion: and how easy is it, to represent to them, the Fallacy of this
plain and absolute Sophism? for, do we grant a possibility of Salvation to all
in their Church equally, and without any restriction, as the Priests contend
for; and would make their rude, and ignorant Votaries believe? Or, is it only
in cases of invincible ignorance, and that but a bare possibility; whereas we
affirm a certainty of Salvation in our own Church; and can any rational man be
supposed to be encouraged by this Concession (if it be any) either to persevere
in a Religion which under the most favorable Qualifications that can be
imagined, has but a bare possibility of Salvation, attending it, and that to
very few persons; or to espouse that, in preference to another, that has all
the warrantable grounds of a firm certainty, and the most convincing assurance
that Religion can be capable of? Were not this to forsake a secure Ship, and in
a Storm to put to Sea upon a Plank? or like an unskilful Pilot, that upon his
approach to an Haven, should be told, that there are two different ways that
lead to the Port; the one direct, and safe, the other circular, and full of
dangerous Rocks and Shelves, and yet should make choice of the latter, because
there is a bare possibility of escaping from Shipwreck. Again, granting a bare
possibility of Salvation under the aforesaid limitations, is only an effect of
Charity in us, and not of the least approbation of their Religion; and herein
we imitate the Holy Apostle St. Paul, who as he gave an higher Encomium to
this, than to any other Divine Grace: so also acknowledged, that such as built
Hay and Stubble upon the Foundation of Christianity, should be saved so as by
fire, that is, with difficulty; whereas such as did so, denied the possibility
of St. Paul's Salvation, as the Church of Rome does to us. To this we may add
the practice of the Orthodox toward the Donatists, who were so favorable in
their Constructions of them, although Heretics, as not to exclude them from
the aforesaid possibility; but on the contrary, the Donatists like the Church
of Rome, confined Salvation to themselves, and denied it to the Orthodox. But I
shall not insist longer upon these Points, referring the Inquisitive Reader,
for his more ample satisfaction, to Archbishop Laud's Book against Fisher the
Jesuit, and to the Learned Dean of St. Paul's his Vindication of the said Book:
But though the brevity designed, hinders me from protracting this Discourse
upon this Subject, yet not from making a necessary Apology for what I have said
already. Some may perhaps be so Censorious, as to suppose the foregoing
Arguments to be designed by the Author, as a Model, or Platform for others to
imitate, or transcribe in the reduction of the Irish Papists to our Church; and
therefore to take off that imputation, I think fit in my own defense to make
the following Asseveration, That my sole intention in it, proceeded from a pure
Zeal to the Reformed Religion, and a desire to show how easy it might be to
work upon the Vulgar Romanists, by these or the like Motives, if their Priests
were once removed from them: This, as it would certainly be a very great
happiness to the Nation in general, by making it of one interest by being of
one Religion; so would it be an act of Transcendent Charity to the Souls of
these poor Wretches, who are miserably seduced by the Impious Delusions of
their Priests, and with all good men ought to be the principal inducement of
prohibiting them a free exercise of their innovated and depraved Superstition,
which cannot be effectually accomplished without expelling their Priests out of
the Kingdom: And if the British could be so happy as to live, to reap the
benefit of the reduction of the Irish to their Church, it might reasonably be
hoped, that this present would put a period to all future Rebellions in that
Kingdom. To which I may add a Passage of a Country Fellow, who passing through
the Rubbidge of London, after the Fire; and seeing a Crowd of people, came up
to them, and enquired what was the matter? some answered, that they were
waiting for the Committee to settle the Foundations; and one said, they had
resolved the Buildings should be on the old Foundation; to which the Country
Fellow with an Oath replied, It had been as good then, that London had never
been burnt. I leave others to make the Application, and shall only say with
Lamentation, that what that poor Fellow spoke ignorantly, is verified of the
Protestants of Ireland, who have no other Expectations to bear up their Spirits
in this Deluge of misery, now violently descended upon them; but, that as the
Blood of the Martyrs in the Primitive Church increased their Numbers; so this
may lay a Foundation, by showing the indispensable necessity of putting the
Irish past the hopes of repeating the like Tragedy, and that nothing but such a
method can possibly repair the Ruins of that Kingdom.

I have hitherto been showing the Miseries and Calamities that have attended
the British Plantations, by the frequent Rebellions of the Irish.

And then the Justice of making some Reparation at this time to the
Protestants, out of the Estates of some of the most notorious Leaders of this
Rebellion.

And have also shown the great advantage such Justice would derive upon that
Kingdom at this time, in new planting it.

I am in the next Remarks to observe, how much it imports England to improve
this opportunity, which the Enemies of their public Peace and Tranquillity
have put into their hands: and this is a subject of so copious a nature, as
might claim a Treatise by it self; but my design being to awaken, not direct
the Wisdom and Conduct of England, I shall only remind them of the Charge and
Expense of English Blood that poor distressed Kingdom has already cost, and
then lay before them the Advantage that would accrue to England, if Ireland was
once reinstated and settled in Protestant hands. That the loss of Men is the
greatest misfortune and severest punishment that can arrive to, and be
inflicted upon a Nation, is confirmed by the Judgment of an infallible Author.
For when the Prophet was sent to David, to offer three things to his choice;
not one of them consisted in depriving him of Treasure, Herds, or Possessions,
but every punishment was, the loss of Men.

It is not possible to give an exact account of the numbers, that Caldron of
England, as Ireland may be truly called, has swallowed up in five hundred
years; but according to the best computation that can be made, there has been
by War, Famine, and Murders, of the British, more than Twenty Hundred Thousand
Souls. By the several accounts in History, of the Supplies sent from England in
the Rebellions there, the computation is made too large here to mention the
particulars, but may reasonably be believed, if we recount the several
Rebellions in Five hundred years, when there was never Twenty years free; and
in the last, where some account was taken, it was found to exceed Two Hundred
Thousand, and that after not Twenty years of perfect Peace; for although the
Kingdom was for the greatest part quiet, during the Reign of King James, and
some of that of King Charles the First, yet some places of it were constantly
involved in Trouble.

It would hardly be believed in Story, since there is no precedent, That a
Kingdom so frequently conquered, and so horribly outrageous in their Rebellions
and inhumane Massacres, should still be put into the hands of the Rebels, that
are implacable in their hatred to their Conquerors; but it has rather been an
Infatuation than Mercy in the English, to retain such Serpents in their Bosoms,
which nothing can excuse, but that it is a Judgment of God to blind the Eyes of
his People in this matter, that so these Philistines may be left to punish the
Sins of these Nations, who have reason to repent for their past Omissions, and
to pray that they may never more be incident to the same Error and
Miscarriage, lest the Message of the Prophet Ahab be ours, Because thou have
let go out of thy hand, etc.

After the loss of that which comprehends it, 'twill appear vain to mention the
Treasure this Kingdom has buried there, but it is an additional aggravation to
our other Misfortunes, and had half of it been expended in other Adventures, it
might have been returned with greater advantage than the whole Kingdom of
Ireland has hitherto been worth: Not but that it is obvious to every eye, that
Europe cannot show such a spot of Ground, that may deserve the Motto Trajan
gave to his Money in reference to Dacia, which applying to this fertile Island,
we may thus express, Hiberniae Abundantia.

Having thus hinted at the Losses which England has sustained by Indulgence
given to the Irish, I now come to discuss those Advantages which would accrue
to this Kingdom, if regard were had in the next Settlement to the British
Protestants, that have their Dependence in that Country.

And not to trouble the Reader with what he may see put forth, by a more
accurate Pen, in that ingenious Discourse of the Interest of England in the
preservation of Ireland: I shall only name some few things by him omitted, and
first show, That Ireland might be made a Nursery for Seamen to England; which
upon too frequent experience is found to be so much wanting, that upon every
Marine War, the Merchants Ships are forced to stay at home, for want of Men to
supply them; so that it may be said, (though a Paradox) that by employing the
hands of War, we destroy the Sinews of it, Money, by our Embargoes upon Trade.

Now, since England justly challenges the Priority in Trade, and will by no
means admit Ireland to touch the forbidden Fruit, their Navigation, this is the
way not only to keep them from transgressing, but also at the same time to
employ them in being Fosterers (to use their own Language) to your Navigation,
and that is, by keeping them employed in Fishings. That Island seeming to be
set in the Sea, as a Bait for the Inhabitants of the Deep, and might very well
employ Twenty thousand in that Service, which, besides the immense Treasure the
product of their Labors would bring to England, this other signal advantage
would accrue from it, ( viz.) The having so many men at a call, and in actual
readiness for the Service of England, since they will never be engaged in
Voyages abroad.

And as Ireland may be a Nursery for Seamen, so is it a Forest, out of which
the wooden, yet invincible, Walls of England may be repaired, the Timber of
Ireland being in some respects, and for diverse uses, more proper for building
Ships, than the freer and clean Oak of England. Nor must we end here, but as we
have begun with the Timber for Shipping and brought them on the Stocks, so must
not leave them until flown from their Nests, with their Wings spread at Sea; it
being practicable to build, rigg, and even from the Vane at the Topmast-head to
the Bolt in the Keel, to set out a Ship to Sea from Ireland. I have seen one of
two hundred Tunn so fitted, excepting the Sails, which might easily be had, if
encouragement were given.

Iron is not wanting in that Kingdom; Flax for white Occum there is in great
abundance; as also Hemp for Cordage, which is made there. And as before I
mentioned the increase of Seamen, so in this I might urge the addition of
Ship-Carpenters.

I might enumerate, even to a Volume, the particular instances wherein Ireland
may be of use to England, but I shall name for all but two more, that of Iron
and the Linen Manufactory, both of which drain out of England more than all
the foreign Commodities imported into it besides: This, without a serious
consideration of the Assertion, seems an extravagant Notion; I must therefore,
before I pass from it, give some Reasons for my opinion, which be pleased to
take in the following particulars.

First, The Consumption of Linen is of greater value than Silks, or any
foreign Manufactory; for, not the poorest Beggar at the Door, but bears a
proportion in that Commodity.

Secondly, The Importation of Linen admits of no Improvement nor Exportation
to any part of the World, but our own Plantations; but Silks, I mean raw
Grogreen, Yarn, Cypress, Cotton, and many foreign Commodities are in England
improved and manufactured; so that upon Exportation they fetch into the Kingdom
a great part of what was taken out, by the Importation; as is found by
experience. The East India Trade does, notwithstanding the Gold and Silver
carried thither, for purchasing Commodities, that after brought home by
Exportation, bring in more ready Money than was sent out for their purchase.

Linen and Iron are the Commodities, I mean those of Swedeland and the East
Sea, which take from us the least of our Native Commodities, and by that means
draw away so much Money, that the Computation being made, has been found to be
the loss of England in some Millions by that Trade, of Linen, etc. of France.

I presume, by these few Instances already named, it will be allowed, That
Linen and Iron carry away the greatest part of the Coin and Treasure of the
Kingdom; for Bills of Exchange are the same thing, and allowed so by men of
Commerce.

Now, if Ireland, be capable of such a management, as to furnish the same
Commodities, this will save the loss of so much Treasure, as yearly goes out of
England into foreign parts to purchase them.

Experience is an undeniable Evidence in this case, and that which may be done
in part, is not difficult to effect in the whole.

There was in the year before Tyrconnel's accession to the Government of
Ireland, transported out of that Kingdom of Iron-pots, Bar-Iron, etc. to the
value of more then Twenty Thousand pounds, and the Linen Manufactory was in so
hopeful a Progress, that of it a very considerable value was shipped into
England, and afforded cheaper than it can possibly be brought from any parts of
the World.

Now, if all that has been discoursed upon this Subject be apparently
practicable, and that so vast an improvement may be made of Ireland, for the
advantage of England, and that nothing has been such an insuperable Obstacle
and Impediment unto it, as the great Indulgence given to the Irish, and
consequently the fresh instances of Rebellion in that Kingdom, as derived from
the former: It seems then extremely rational to remove those public
Discouragements, by laying a Foundation of future Safety, and of a firm and
lasting Peace in that Kingdom, which would invite Inhabitants thither, that
might secure that Nation to the CROWN of ENGLAND, with less Cost and greater
Returns for that Charge now expended upon it.

I shall close this Discourse with a succinct account of what advantage such a
Settlement would bring to His present Majesty, and his Successors; which I
shall endeavor to show in the following particulars.

First, As to the increase of Subjects, We find that King David, (who was a man
after God's own Heart) ambition'd nothing beyond the numbers of his People; and
it had not been his Sin, but Glory, to have increased them; but his fault
consisted in this, ( viz.) The numbering of them, of which God had made a solemn
Promise to the Patriarch Abraham, That they should be as the Stars in Heaven,
that cannot be numbered. So said the Angel, Look and see if thou can count
them. This may be inverted in the Story of Ireland, where the numbers slain are
harder to be reckoned than are those of the living.

But if there was thought to be near Two millions of Souls in Ireland, at the
beginning of this last Ravage, we may reasonably account it possible, for there
to have been five times that number, if Acts of Violence had not put a period
to more men's Lives, than that of natural Death: And in proportion to this, With
what vast incredible multitudes of men (may we reasonably compute) would these
Kingdoms have abounded, and consequently how rich and invincible?

Secondly, How would it contribute to the eternal Fame, and immortalize the
Memory of our Gracious and Victorious King, to all Posterity, that under his
most Auspicious Reign such an happy Model, and frame of Government should be
established, as none of his Predecessors could ever attain unto? Which would
verify that of our great and miraculous Deliverer, which was said of David,
And he shall be as the light of the morning when the Sun arises.

Thirdly, This would infinitely augment their Majesty's Revenue; as to which,
that Ireland may be made considerable, is apparent from the several Gradations
already made in that Kingdom.

In all the Kings and Queens Reigns precedent to Queen Elizabeth, we hear of
nothing, but of sending Money into that Kingdom.

In her Reign there was something raised in the Kingdom, conducing to its
support, which was in proportion to the Forfeitures and Abatements of the Irish
Interest, for that nothing improved the Receipts but the lessening of them,
which made room for more industrious people.

In the Reign of King James the First, there was a farther Enlargement and
Encouragement given to the British Protestants, and accordingly the Revenue
increased from thirty five thousand pounds to fifty.

King Charles the First made some addition to the British Settlement, and by
the encouragement of Grants, to strengthen defective Titles, advanced the
Revenue to eighty thousand pounds, and so incredibly did that Country grow and
improve under the hands and industrious management of the British, that where
Money was formerly, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, debased twenty pound per
Cent, beyond the intrinsic value of Sterling, it came to that pass, that Gold
became a Burden to the Kingdom, and men in their Bargains made exceptions of
it in Payment, but the bloody Massacre in Forty One soon put an end to that
Flood of Prosperity.

In the Reign of King Charles the Second, upon his Restoration, the
Protestants lay under some discouragements, occasioned from their Fears of a
Rising from the indulgence given to the Natives, procured by the Interest of
the late King James, then Duke of York, whose Darlings and especial Favorites
they were, by means of whose interessed regard for them, many (by his powerful
solicitations to his Brother) were restored to their Estates, that were
Capital in their Crimes. This gave just occasion of Jealousy to the British
Protestants, that most of their Enemies would meet with the like success; and
during this Inundation, the Revenue of Customs and Inland Excise, dwindled to
less than 70000 pounds per Annum: But upon the King's better information of the
settlement of Ireland, great Encouragements were revived to the Protestants,
and then in one year commencing in 1664, the Customs, and import Excise, that
upon an exact account made the precedent year but 34000 pounds clear, made
86000: So great an alteration did the promised security of the Protestant
Interest, effect in that Kingdom: And in the same proportion did the Inland
Excise advance from 36000 to 80000 pounds, and from that time forward, until
the Accession of the late King to the Throne, did the Revenue rise, and amount
to 140000 in the Import Duty, and above 100000 pounds, in the Inland Excise:
But from the Reign of the late King, it daily declined; a plain Demonstration
that the Revenue of Ireland, like the Army of the Israelites, prevailed no
longer than the hand of Moses was lift up in favor of them.

Now by the same rule of proportion, that the Intradoe of Ireland flourishes
with the growth and increase of the Protestants, may his present Majesty expect
the Augmentation of his Revenue, as that Kingdom shall be established in the
hands of the British; and were it proper in this Discourse to descend to
Particulars, it would be no difficult province to evince, how possible it is
for that Kingdom to be improved to double the value it ever yet made to the
Crown.

I have now come to a period of my design, and having given a true, and (I
hope) Impartial Account of the Nature, Temper, and Constitution of that
hitherto unhappy Kingdom, together with a description of the proper Causes of
those dismal Revolutions, and Vicissitudes, which have attended the fortune of
its English Inhabitants: I shall in few words Apologize for this Narrative,
which I do believe to be the sense of the British Protestants, whose lot is
fallen in that Akeldama.

We do not then presume, to anticipate the King's unlimited Clemency to all his
Subjects, or desire that it should be wholly engrossed by such as are
Protestants, much less to offer Reasons for the utter extirpation of the
Natives; but rather wish their Reformation than Confusion; and to the end that
they may become our Brethren, as well in Religion, as Temporal Interest, do
humbly offer these Remarks, by which (we presume) it does evidently appear,
that without the total remove of their Pestilent Deluders, the Priests, and
extirpating the most considerable of their Leaders, and men of Estates, that
Kingdom can never be established upon the firm basis of a durable and lasting
peace: but on the contrary be exposed to greater danger and distress, than it
has ever been subject to, since the Conquest: For, besides the Foreign
pretensions that were never so plausible, as now, the English will not be
encouraged to plant so readily there, as they have formerly done, by which the
Irish will soon fill the Kingdom; and by their Prodigious increase in their
numbers, will improve proportionably in their strength, which with assistance
from the French, will render them as well invincible in their own thoughts, as
really more formidable than ever to the British, and so bring this rising
Phoenix to ashes, out of which it can never be expected to revive.

But all our hopes (under the Divine disposer of all things here below) are
wrapped up in His present Majesty's great Wisdom and Conduct, in which, without
the least reluctance we cheerfully, and most humbly, acquiesce; and agreeably
to the Title, and patient submission of our Mephivosheth, make our devout and
hearty Prayers, for the Long and Happy Reign of their Majesty's.

For we were all but Dead Men, when the Lord our King came for our Deliverance;
and if it be his Will, let the Ziba's of that Kingdom take all, so that we may
live in Peace, under the benign influence of his Government, who has saved us
from the Jaws of that Roman Beast, which was open to devour not only us, but
these Nations, and has so seasonably preserved us from sinking into an Abyss
of Destruction, at a time, when there seemed none to help, or to deliver.

And now that powerful, and all wise Providence, which has so eminently
appeared in the preservation of this great Instrument and Protector of the
Reformed Religion, give him a wise, and understanding Heart to govern this
People, whom he has sent to save, in such a Miraculous, and extraordinary
manner: And bless their Majesty's with a Long, Peaceable, and Prosperous Reign
in this World, and Crown them with Eternal Glory, and Immortality in the next.
Amen.

FINIS.

