A Petition presented by Praise-God Barebone, etc. To the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
The Representation and Address of the Well-affected Persons, Inhabitants of
the Cities of London and Westminster, and places adjacent, being faithful and
Constant Adherers to this Parliament, who are resolved (by the assistance of
Almighty God) to stand by, assert and maintain their Authority, against all
opposers, notwithstanding the present confidence and bold attempts of the
Promoters of Regal Interest, by the declared Enemies of their Cause and
Authority.

Whereas the good Old Cause was for Civ^l and Christian Liberty, against
oppression and persecution; The Oppressors an^ Persecutours, were chiefly the
King, his Lords and Clergy, and their Adherents; who to effect their designs,
raised War against the Parliament.

Whereupon the Parliament, in defense of Civil and Christian Liberty, call the
oppressed and persecuted to their aid, by whose assistance the Oppressors and
Persecutours have been subdued, Kingship and Peerage abolished, and persecution
checked; by which the number of conscientious friends to the Parliament, have
been so exceedingly increased, that they are now (by Gods assistance) in a far
more able capacity of keeping down their enemies, then they were in those times
when they subdued them.

Nevertheless, so watchful has the restless enemy been, to make advantage,
that what (time after time) he has lost in the Field, he has endeavored to
regain, even in the Parliaments Council, where because they had not the Face
openly to bring in the King, with the former oppressions and persecutions, they
shrouded and veiled themselves, one while under a Personal Treaty, another
while, under a Cloak of zeal, against blasphemy and Heresy, their endeavors
being to bring in the King upon any terms; to cherish the persecuting party,
and to brow-beat their most conscientious Opposers.

Upon which pretenses, nevertheless, they have, through tract of time and the
unsetlednesse of Government, prevailed so far, as under the notion of a
moderate party, to get the subtilest of their Friends, into many places of
Trust and Command, both Civil and Military, through whose countenance and
encouragement, albeit the Parliament, upon good grounds, Voted the Government
by Kings and Lords useless, burdensome and dangerous; and declare very
largely for liberty of conscience, yet of late a general boldness has been
taken, to plead a necessity of returning to the Government of King and Lords, a
taking in of the Kings Son, or which is all one, for a return; of the justly
secluded Members, or a free Parliament, without due Qualifications, whereby the
Good Old Cause of Liberty and Freedom (so long contended for against Regal
Interest, with the expense of much Blood and Treasure) and the Assertors
thereof, will be prostituted to satisfy the lusts of the Enemies of the
Commonwealth, wherein they have prevailed so far, that unless all
conscientious persons in Parliament, Army, Navy and Commonwealth, do speedily
unite, and watchfully look about them, as the Sword will certainly (though
secretly and silently) be stolen out of their hands: so also will they find
all Civil Authority fall suddenly into the hands of their enraged enemies, and
a return of all those violences, oppressions and persecutions which have cost
so much Blood and Treasure to extirpate.

The Serious apprehensions whereof, has stirred up your cordial friends to
desire you to use all possible endeavors to prevent the Commonwealths
adversaries in this their most dangerous Stratagem; And as the most effectual
means thereunto. We pray,

1. That you will admit no person or persons to sit, or Vote in this, or any
f^ture Parliament, or Council of State, or to be in any Office or Iudicatory,
or any public Trust in the Commonwealth, or Command in the Army, Navy, or
Garrisons, or to be a public Preacher to the people at Sea or Land, or any
instructor of youth, except such only as shall abjure, or by Solemn Engagement
renounce the pretended Title, or Titles of Charles Stewart, and the whole Line
of the late King James; and of every other person as a single person,
pretending, or which shall pretend to the Crown, or Government of these Nations
of England, Scotland and Ireland, or any of them, and the Dominions and
Territories belonging to them, or any of them, or any other single person,
Kingship, Peerage, or any power coordinate with the peoples Representatives in
Parliament; And all coercive power in matter of Religion, according to a Vote
of a Grand Committee of this Parliament of the 11 of Sept. 1659.

2. We further pray, That it may be enacted, that whosoever shall move, offer,
or propound in Parliament, Council, or any other Court, or public meeting, any
matter or thing, in order to the introducing of Charles Stewart, or any of that
Family as aforesaid or any other single Person, House of Lords, Coercive power
in matters of Religion, or any power coordinate with the peoples
Representatives in Parliament, may be deemed and adjudged guilty of High
Treason, and may suffer the pains and penalties thereof. And that whosoever
shall in Parliament, Council, or any other pablick Court, or meeting, move for,
or propose the revocation of this Law (when by you Enacted) may be deemed and
judged guilty of High Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties thereof.

In the prosecution whereof, we shall stand by you, with our Estates and Lives,
to assert and maintain your Authority, against all oppositions whatsoever:
Notwithstanding the present Confidence, and bold Attempts of Yours and our
Enemies.

Signed by etc.

