A Seasonable warning, and serious Exhortation to, and Expostulation with the
Inhabitants of Aberdene: concerning this present Dispensation and day of Gods
living Visitation toward them.
GReat, unutterably great, O ye Inhabitants, is the Love of God which flows in
my heart toward you, and in bowels of unspeakable compassion, am I opened, am
I enlarged unto you, in the sight and sense of your conditions, which the Lord
has discovered and revealed unto Me. O that your eyes were opened, that ye
might see, and behold, this Day of the Lord, and that your ears were unstoped
to hear His voice, that cries aloud, and calls One and All of you to
Repentance; and that your hearts were softened, and enclyned to discern and
perceive this blessed hour of His present Visitation, which is come unto you.
He has lifted up a Standard in the midst of you, and among your Brethren; He
has called already a Remnant, and enrolled them under His Banner, and he is
calling All to come, he has not left one without a witness: Blessed are they
that receave Him, and hear him in this day of his appearance. He has sent
forth, and is daily sending forth his Servants and Messengers, to invite you to
come and partake with Him of the Supper, of the Feast which he has prepared;
and among many others, whom at sundry times he has caused to sound sorth His
Testimony: I also have in the Name and Power and Authority of God, proclaimed
his everlasting Gospel among you, and preached, and held forth the glade
tidings of this glorious dispensation, which is Christ manifesting and
revealing himself in and by his Light and Spirit in the hearts of all men, to
lead them out of all unrighteousness, and filtheness, both of Flesh and Spirit;
unto all righteousness, truth, holiness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. But
because many of you have dispysed this Day, and as ye have made mirry over Gods
witness in your hearts, not liking there to entertain Him in his meek, lowly,
yet lovely appearance; so have ye despised, mocked and rejected, that which
testifies to this witness without you. Therefore was I commanded of the Lord
God, to pass through your streets covered with Sackcloth and Ashes, calling
you to repentance, that ye might yet more be awakned, and alarumed to take
notice of the Lords Voice unto you, and not to despise these things which
belong to your peace, while your day lasts, least hereafter they be hid from
your eyes. And the command of the Lord concerning this thing, came unto me that
very morning, as I awakened, and the burden thereof was very great; Yea, seemed
almost insupportible unto me, (for such a thing until that very moment, had
never entered me before, not in the most remote consideration) And some whom I
called to declare to them this thing, can bear witness, how great was the
agony of my Spirit, how I besought the Lord with tears, that this Cup might
pass away from me: Yea, how the pillars of my Tabernacle were shaken, and how
exceedingly my bones trembled, until I freely gave up unto the Lords will. And
this was the end and tendency of my testimony, to call you to Repentance, by
this signal and singular step, which I as to my own will and inclination, was
as unwilling to be found in, as the worst and wickedest of you, can be averse
from receiving, or laying it to heart. Let all and every one of you in whom
there is yet alive the least regard to God, or his fear, consider and weigh
this matter in the presence of God* and by the Spirit of Jesus Christ in your
hearts, which makes all things manifest, search and examine every one his own
Soul, how far this warning and voice of the Lord is aplicable unto them, and
how great need they have to be truly humbled in their Spirits? Returning to
the Lord in their inward parts, with such true and unfeinged Repentance as
answers to the outward clothing of Sack cloth, and being covered with Ashes.
And in the Fear and Name of the Lord, I charge all upon this occasion, to
bewarr of a slight, froathie, jearing, mocking spirit, for though such may be
permitted to insult for a season, yet God will turn their laughter into
howling, and will laugh when their calamity comes; and such are seen to be in
one spirit with those who spat in the face of the LORD JESUS, and buffeting
him, bid him prophecy who smote him. Therefore consider, O Ye Inhabitants, and
be serious, standing in fear; Where are ye who are called Christians? Among
whom it is become a wonder, A stone of stumbling, or matter of mockrie, or a
ground of reproach, for one in the Name of the LORD, to invite you to
Repentance in Sackcloath and Ashes: Would not the Heathen condemn you in this
thing? And will not Niniveh stand up in judgment against you? How is it that
ye that are called Christians, can willingly give room to every idle
Mountebank, and can suffer your minds to be drawn out to behold these sinful
divertisments, which indeed divert the mind from the serious sense of Gods
fear? The people can be gathered there, and neither the Magistrates complain of
tumult, nor yet Preachers nor Professors cry out against it as delusion, or
madness. O my Friends consider, can there be any more strongly deluded, then
for people daily to acknowledge and confess they are sinners, and sinning, in
words; and to startle at that which did so lively represent unto them, what
they own to be their condition* Were it in good earnest, or were it from a
true sense of your sins, that ye so frequently seem to acknowledge them, ye
would not dispyse, nor overlook that which calls you to repentance for it.
How is it that you can so confidently array your selves in all manner of gaudy,
and superflous Apparel, and exceed in lustful pouderings and perfumes, and yet
are ashamed and amazed at Sackcloath and Ashes; which according to your own
acknowledgement, is so suitable to your states? Is not this to glory in your
shame, and to be ashamed of that which ought to be, and would be your greatest
glory, to wit, true and unfeinged Repentance. I shall add that which upon this
occasion I declared unto you; I was for a Sign from the Lord unto you, I desire
ye may not be among those that wonder and perish, but rather repent and be
saved. And this is my Testimony unto you, whither you will hear or forbear, I
have peace with my God in what I have done, and am satisfied that his
requirings I have answered in this thing. I have not sought yours but you, I
have not coveted your gold or silver, or any thing else; nor do I retain, or
entertain the least hatered, grude, or evil-will toward any within or without
your gates, but continue in pure and unfeinged love toward all and every one
of you, even those who do most despise or reject me, and my Testimony, being
ready to bless those that curse, and to do good to those that dispitfully use
me, and to be spent in the will of the Lord for your sakes, that your souls may
be saved, and God over all may be glorified; for which I travel, and cry before
the Throne of Grace, as becomes

This came before Me to signify unto you by writting, at Urie the 12. of the
first Month. 1672. A Servant of the Lord Ies^s Christ, ROBERT BARCLAY.

After this Paper was committed to the Press, some Queries concerning this
mattrr were sent (to a Friend in Aberdene) by One who in the inscription styles
himself a sober Inquirer, which mask he quickly pulled off, either for want of
wit, or from too much malice against the truth, by spreading these queries, at
the same time among several hands, which no truly, sober Inquirer would have
done, until he had first received, or been refused satisfaction from him, to
whom he particularly directed them. In order therefore to dispell such cloudie
Mists, as the Enemy seeks to raise for darkning the day of Gods appearance,
through his Children: These Answers are judged fit to be here anexed.
THe Premises, and Queries following upon them, being all one on the matter,
the first being positions in general, and the other the particular application
of them hereto, they need not different answers, both of them are herein
comprehended and employed, as any that will be at the pains to look after the
Queries, and compare them, may observe.

To the first is therefore answered.

1. R. B. Denies his Message to have proceeded from any Light or Illumination
in him as a man, but from the immediate Testimony of the Spirit of God, in his
heart a manifestation of which Spirit is given to every man to profit withal,
accordnig to the plain testimony of the Scriptures, 1. Cor. 12, 7. 1. John 2.
20. 27. Heb 8 10. 11. 12. The which Spirit, and Anointing teaches all the
Saints under the New Covenant, whereunto an audible voice is not required for
this is said to be within them, and not without them, nor can it be proven that
God spoke always to the Prophets by an audible voice, or that such a thing is
requisite to every true Revelation, received from the Spirit, else none could be
truly certain that the Scriptures came from the Spirit of God, until they
received an audible voice by the outward ear, confirming them of it, nor could
any have the assurance of Salvation without the same, both which the
generality of Protestants hold needful to Believers, and Call. Inst. lib. 1.
cap. 7 sect. 4. cap. 8, Sect 1. lib. 3. cap, 1, sect. 4. cap. 3. sect. 39. that
by the inward, secret testimony of the Spirit, without an audible voice. Nor
was John Hus his prophecy of Luther, or George Wisharts of the Cardinals death
alleged to have proceeded from an outward audible voice, and yet proved both
true. As likewise several others of latter years, which might be mentioned.

2. A Message thus delivered from the Testimony of the Spirit of God in the
heart, reaches to the manifestation of the same Spirit. in the hearts of those
to whom it is delivered, if they wilfully do not resist and shut it out. Thus
the Ninivits were reached at the call of Jonah, and those who heard Peter, were
pricked in their hearts; yet neither the one or the other had such an immediate
particular call as Jonah and Peter had, but the testimony of the Spirit
through these two, touched, reached, and raised that of God in their hearts,
and made it applicable unto them. Yet those that despise this Light, and
manifestation of God in themselves, may come to jeer, and mock at a message
proceeding from it, through another, even as the Scribs and Pharisees did at
Christ; and therefore were worthy of condemnation, and judged by the Heathen,
such as Tire and Sidon, and Ninivie, even as it is with those of the same
spirit at this day, who while they cry up the writtings of the Prophets, and
other Scripturs, (as did the Pharisees) are dispysing Prophesying, or the
teaching, or leadings of the Spirit, which the Apostle declared to be the
nature of the New Covenant dispensation; and therefore no wonder if according
to the Scripture Pro. 28. 18. where there is no Vision the people perish.

3. The Assisters to this Action, having had the thing declaired unto them,
retiering to the inward Testimony of the same Spirit in themselves, did feell
union therewith, and such as went along, did not only find a true liberty
(which might have sufficed) but some of them a necessity to concur with it.
And as for the carrying of the Hat and Cloak, it was altogether extrinsick,
being neither essential nor circumstantial to the thing, nor so looked upon by
these who did it: Yet the carping thereat shows in the proposer, a critical
mind, very void of seriousness, which the Lord, as of purpose to starve, has
permitted him to build that part of the Querie in relation to A. H. wife upon a
false report, the thing being a manifest untruth.

And in answer to the second proposition of the premises, its the alone
immediate testimony of the Spirit of God, that can truly discover all false
pretenders and delusions, which if any can, let them deny, without overturning
the Basis of all Christian Religion, and rendering the faith of the Saints in
all ages uncertain.

R. B.


