A LETTER FROM Colonel Barkestead, Colonel Okey, AND Miles Corbet, TO Their
Friends in the Congregated Churches in LONDON.

WITH The manner of their Apprehension.



London, printed in the year 1662.

A LETTER FROM Collonell John Berkstead, Collonell Okey and Miles Corbet to the
Congregations at London.
Dear Friends,
HAving now sad occasion to renew those former Relations which we enjoyed in
our Native Country, to whom we became no strangers for several Reasons inducing
us thereunto, not unknown we suppose to all the world, and from any account
whereof, our Condition does excuse us, We do intimate to you, that having
passed diverse dangers both of Travel and Examination through all the Countries
where Providence directed us, in great fear and suspicion of being secured,
both People and Magistracy following the streams of the Affairs and Government
of England, we came at last to Delfe in Holland, where sitting in an Herberg,
that is, an Alehouse, we were apprehended, being betrayed by a Revolter from
our Cause, and so committed.

We are nevertheless willing to own this dispensation and acquiesce under it
whatever it shall determine of us; nor have we reason to think our selves now
in a worser and harder condition; for when we had the liberty of the world we
had not the freedom of our selves? nor could the more courteous and incurious
entertainment from Forraigners have indulged us any satisfaction or Content,
while our homebred passions and distrusts in our selves and relations to our
Families gave us no rest in our most retired obscurities.

Indeed we have sustained a double banishment first from our Country then from
our selves; Exiles by Law find protection and have a ^asse for their
peregrination by their Sentence* but we have thrust our selves out of all those
privileges, and have endured the most bitter insultings and exprobrations of
our guilt, even in Sanctuaries for all other Crimes. Our Diet, our Lodging, our
(though seldom) Converse, nay our very Devotion which these
unspeakable-miseries quickened in us, filled, nay even laden with the
exaggerations of those ills with which we stand charged: Nay so heavy has this
afliction been upon us, that we have been constrained to comply and to say
after those men those dire Anathema's which their rage and passion transported
by the Odium and revenge against the late State and Commonwealth has proved us
with as with another Shiboleth.

The Triumphs of these men over a poor, despised and ruined party is so much
the more insupportable to us, for that it proceeds not from any affection to
the Government with you, but out of insolence and impotent malice stretched to
the utmost for their defeat and near approaching ruin in the late war. They
trample upon the ruins and rubbish of that structure to which they bowed their
knees and uncovered their heads, while they besought Preservation with prayers
from those whom they have now put in their Ballads and infamous Libels.

Whatever shall be our Fate, or whatever impends over us, we can with les fear
or regret think of then whatwe have already passed. As to y^ body we are
ashamed to think with what revulsions we have started at the sight of any
person whom we have fancied either to know or to be known by us; nor could the
Rack distort a man more then our suden turnings have endangerd us. There was no
mischief done in any place where we were, but we feared the punishment might
fall upon us as persons not able to give an account of themselves without a
worse condemnation. The world was our prison, our bed our dungeon, and our
going abroad the way to Execution, which we could not promise our selves to
escape if once we came to be discovered to the Multitude, who no doubt would
have executed that Sentence which we heard our accomplices suffered, by
quartering and pulling us in pieces.

But alas the troubles of our mind, the distress, anguish and perplexity of
our souls we cannot express; and ill it is for us that it is not communicable
that so we might vent that grief which sinks and deads our spirits, Should we
recount our dreams our visions, our formerly too adored revelations, we might
pourtrait such a hideous Landscape, as that of Cain and his Wanderings! should we
tell you what our Thoughts are, we are afraid of them our selves, nor dare we
use our rationality on them to bring them into discourse, to frame them into
any order or method, lest they militate against us: nay were it not misery to
tell it, we could show you such diversions of them as would promote Bedlam to a
grave and serious residence of Sages. As for our talk it was wholly about the
time, not the Times, what a clock, not what news, Our miserable concerns,
(measured by the day whose free and open light offended our bloodshot eyes)
spun out themselves in scraps and Tobacco, while we presumed not to venture
into Ordinaries, or other public places for fear of public danger.

Should we add those to us terrible sights, of paintings and sculptures with
which we have bin so continually frighted, the manner of the Execution of the
Regicides, etc. affixed in most of the Towns of these Provinces, where, or no
where in safety (such as it is) we have sojourned, it were beyond all the
strength of incompassion in the most provoked people of the world not to
deplore our Condition.

But to abandon those forlorn thoughts, we are now, brought to a Resolution
(and happy had it been if we had in time taken it of our selves) of submitting
to our Fate: We have found worse abroad then what we fled from, and our
Condition would have increased it. [A Peace throughout Christendom and King
Charles in England, where should we hope to live?] That therefore which is left
us of all that honor either militarily gained or vainly conferred on us we
will bestow in this last Engagement of our Life. But we do not see the
necessity of persisting in the mode of our Predecessors; for we have the
opinion of the Churches abroad, that they died desperately either through
infatuation or combination; we are not privy to those matters as then thinking
our selves safer, and therefore desire liberty of conscience in this great
Affair which we recommend to your Consideration.

And now Dear Friends we are coming to you again, and have saved you the labor
of coming to us; we shall also save the Prisoners of the Tower going out of
Town, for we shall come by Water. We could wish we had saved the Custom also
and not have been craned up at the Tower but sent directly for our last Home.
In short, Dear Friends, we are as weary of our lives as you will be ere long of
your Principles, and therefore we request you to meet us at the aforesaid
place, where we will make such a Confession together as shall vindicate our
Vocations.

We desire to be recommended to all our Sisters, whose groans and sighs if you
can raise to a strom (with which the Fiend Conjured for us) that may drown us
by the way, we shall take it for an everlasting wellwishing to

Your distressed Brethren, John Berkstead, J. Okey, Miles Corbet.

From Delfe in Holland 7/17, March, 1661.
THough I suppose (...) this in England by another hand, yet because I have
very passionately all along concerned my self in your affairs which for 20
years have been the discourse of Christendom, I shall give you a brief account
of what happened in this place i^ relation thereunto. Which is this; some of
your English (...) ^^^ing nere this place some while ago, whose shyness and
retiredness not usual to your Nation beg^t some suspicion in the Burgers that
took notice of them, so that it began to be a whisper (...) us, which soon
after ^^^roved it self into discourse, where^^^ a strong conceit there was
among the English that pass this way to the Hague that some of those persons,
(...) of the King might possibly (...) (though it seems they came (...) more
(...) Aurange, who lie here (...) such neighbors.) Upon a nearer observation
(...) Here reported well known is the (...) of their (...) made a Discovery of
them, and presently acquainted Sir George Downing, the Kings Resident at the
Hague (...) who as it seems procured an Order from the Lord of Holland for
their Apprehension, this was delivered to our upper (...) by Sir George
himself, who came in person to (...) sent him to the under ^cout, that is to
(...) having his men ready first scrupled it, understanding Sir George had
strength enough with him, he came to the place where those persons, viz, Coll.
Berkstead, Coll. Okey and Miles Corbet were together in the H^^^^ str^et, it
being Berksteads Lodging, where they were conferring Notes of the affairs in
England over a pot of Beer and a pipe of Tobacco. The Scout knoking at door
which the Maid opened, entered (...) presently seized them, they would have
shuffled away, but the room was instantly filled; First they fell to excuses,
then to enquiries by what Authority they were seized, which being told them,
they were all three led to the Common prison in Delf that very night and kept
asunder, much tumult being in the streets to gaze upon them, and the next day
delivered by Order to the Resident, Sir G. Downing who we hear has disposed
them in order to their speedy conveyance to (...) land by a Frig^t of England
riding hereabouts. This is all my present (...) assure you the people of these
Provinces are no less eager and incensed (...) this sort of men then your
selves, I remain

Your Friend and Serv^^^ Adrian Van (...)


