A SERMON PREACHED Upon the Fifth of November, 1679.

In the Cathedral Church at Gloucester.

By CL. BARKSDALE.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. OXFORD. Printed for John Barksdale
Bookseller in Cicester, 1680.

Psalm. CXXII. VI. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that Love
thee.
TO observe the coherence and meaning of the Text, you may be pleased to look
back to the 3 verse, Jerusalem is builded as a City, that is Compact together:
i. e. Jerusalem is a Lovely place; the very buildings, being so uniform and
orderly joined together, are very beautiful; an Emblem of that unity of minds,
that should be in the Church of God. Then at the 4 verse, Thither the Tribes go
up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel (or rather as our
Critical Paraphrast has it, according to the Commandment unto Israel) to give
thanks unto the Name of the Lord. It was the place to which all the Inhabitants
of the Land were obliged to go up thrice every year, to commemorate the mercies
of God, afforded to his people Then at the 5 verse, For there are set Thrones
of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David: i. e. Besides the Service of
God, there also is the Sanhedrim, or supreme Judicatory of the Nation, that
great Court, where the highest matters are decided. And there also is the
Palace of David, where the King resides and his Posterity shall sit upon his
Throne. All these Considerations infer the Duty of the Text, Pray for the (...)
the City of God, we^l compacted and (...) in it self ^erusalem is the place
where the House of God is, and his solemn service: ^erusalem is the sea^e of
the King, and the seat of ^^stice: Therefore P^ay, ^ pray (...) the peace of
Jerusalem, It is the du^y of ^ll Good men, to pray for this place, and to love
it most affectionatly, and to beseech God to bestow a quiet enjoyment of all
these Advantages, and all manner of prosperity upon it. They shall prosper that
love thee: They that love, and pray, and contribute their utmost to Jerusalem,
shall not loose their reward, they shall gain to themselves prosperity.

The Text you see, being thus explained, falls into two parts, A Duty, and a
Reason: The Duty in the former words, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: The
Reason in the later, They shall prosper that love thee: a reason which is the
great Reason, and Common Motive to duty, taken from their own intere^t and
benefit: They shall prosper that love thee, o Jerusalem.

So that, we have these two Observations:

I. It is our duty to pray for the peace of the Church and State wherein we live.

II. They that well perform this duty, procure prosperity and happiness for
themselves.

I. It is our duty to love and pray for the peace of the Church and State
wherein we live. I join the Church and the State together: for, as I said, at
Jerusalem was the House of God, the Temple; and there also was the House of the
King, and the Court of Justice. Religion and Justice are the great pillars of a
Nation: when these stand f^rm and inviolate, then is a Nation happy. That the
Church may flourish in true Religion, and the State flourish in the due Execution
of Justice: this must be the desire of our hearts, this we must endeavor every
one in his place, and this must every one pray for: Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem.

It is to this purpose that the Apostle Paul so earnestly exhorts, that
supplications and prayers be made for Kings, and for all that are in Authority,
that under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and
Honesty. The Kings and Emperors and Magistrates in those times were Heathens
and persecutors of Christian Religion yet the Apostle requires, that prayers
and supplications be made for them. How much more ought we to pray for
Christian Kings and Princes, that under the Gracious Government of these
Nursing Fathers, Godliness and Honesty, Religion and Justice may be nourished
and maintained: Good Reason to pray for Magistrates in the State, under whose
protection we live, and by whom we enjoy peace and quietness.

And we have good reason too, to pray for Ministers in the Church. This the
same Apostle requires: Pray for us. I desire your prayers for me and my fellow
labourors in the Gospel: those he means that are described there, that watch
for your souls, and must give account for them; namely the Bishops and
Ministers under the Bishops. They that have such a great charge as the charge
of Souls, that labor amongst you in the word and doctrine, that exhort and
admonish you in the Lord; they certainly may well exspect the benefit and help
of your prayers. Pray for us Ministers in the Church, says the Apostle, as
well as for Magistrates in the State, that it may go well both with the Church
and with the State.

What the Apostle en^oyns, that prayers should be made for Magistrates and
Ministers, was duly remembered in composing and framing the Liturgy and public
prayers of the Church of England; as you may easily acknowledge, who are such
obedient sons of the Church, as daily to attend (which I do heartily wish, all,
having no lawful hindrance, would do,) daily attend the public divine Service.
For example: O Lord save the King, And, endue thy Ministers with righteousness.
Again for the King: O God, Behold our gracious Sovereign Lord the King, and
so replenish him with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that he may always incline
to thy will and walk in thy ways. And for the Ministers: Send down upon our
Bishops and Curats the healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly
please thee, pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Again for the
King: (By the way remember a Note of King Charles I of blessed memory; That sure
some of his Enemies were the more offended against the Common prayer book,
because it taught us to pray so much and so often for the King: a reason which
may make those who are loyal Subjects the more in love with it:) I say, Again
for the King, So rule the heart of thy Chosen Servant, that he may above all
things seek thy Honor and Glory: So rule his heart, that he may study to
preserve thy People committed to his charge in wealth, peace, and godliness.
And yet again, Save and defend our King, that under him we may be Godly and
quietly governed. Grant unto his whole Counsel, and to all that are put in
Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently minister Justice to
the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of true Religion
and Virtue. Where also you may remember, it follows for the Church; Give grace
O Heavenly Father, to all Bishops and Curates, that they may both by their life
and Doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly
administer thy Holy Sacraments. Thus Beloved are we taught, in our divine
Offices, to pray according to the Apostolical Ordinance, for the King and
subordinate Magistrates, for the Bishops and subordinate Ministers.

Surely, Brethren, did we daily and duly join, as we ought to do upon many
Accounts, in our excellent Common prayers, humbly and heartily: heartily I say
(for we are many times, I fear, but cold and faint,) we should, I doubt not in
Gods good time, find the success of these united forces and assaults upon
heaven (as Tertullian calls them) in the prosperity both of Church and State, as
well as in the peace and comfort of our own Souls. But here is our misery: some
(whether through infirmity of mind, or obstinacy, God knows,) will not come
to Common prayers: (they account them common in the worst sense, that is,
Common and unclean:) some of us, when we are at Church, in the House of God,
mind not the Work of God, about which we come; behave not our selves as it
becomes men that pray to the God of all Glory and Power; bring not with us that
humility, that love, that faith, that zeal and fervor, that should accompany,
and quicken and season our prayers. Ask and you shall receive, says our
Savior: but then we must ask aright with faith, and zeal, and love, and
humility, and (which is to be remembered, not only love to God, but Charity,
sweet and amiable Charity, toward our neighbors, even to our enemies also.

Ye ask and receive not, says S. James, because ye ask amiss. It is a common
fault of People to murmur and complain that Magistra^s are not so good,
Ministers are not so good, as they should be. But, may not we rather complain
of our selves and confess, We do not pray for Magistrates, we do not not pray
for Ministers, as we should pray. Verily, it were a course more becoming
Christians and Godly men to turn our murmurings against Governors, into
prayers and supplications for them. For we may well believe that by our
continual prayers, our earnest and sincere p^ayers, prayers proceeding from an
humble and lowly, penitent and obedient Heart, that which is supposed to need
amendment, would be redressed, our Grievances eased; or at least (which is a
blessed fruit of true devotion,) our own souls would be better composed and
fitted to bear all things without us, patiently and contentedly.

Give me leave to call to remembrance that which was known to some of us here
present, how in the late times of trouble and confusion, before the miraculous
Return of his Majesty now Reigning (whom God Almighty long preserve to reign
in Truth and peace) in the time of the late troubles, how zealous, how
constant, (notwithstanding the danger of Assembling) were the prayers of
Ministers and People (faithful even then to our afflicted Mother the Church of
England;) as if the fire of persecution (as indeed it uses to do) had enflamed
our devotions. We had a comfortable hope then; that should we live to see the
King again in his Throne, the Bishops in their Sees again, and the Clergy
protected, and the good laws and liberty restored to the languishing Church and
people of God; we hoped and expected, that England would really become a Nation
of Saints, an holy Nation, Christians not in name only, but in deed and in
truth. But alas! What happened? After our Kings Return, and with him the
Return of our Laws, and our Liberty, and our Religion, after the
reestablishment of our Church and State, to the wonder and admiration of all
the World, was not our ingratitude, our unthankfulness no less wonderful? Did
not the Devotions of many slacken and cool? Yea, did not Covetousness and
Ambition, did not licentiousness and profanation, did not intemperance and
excess, strife and contention and faction, quickly spread themselves over the
Nation, and usurp a new Dominion and reign over us? But to speak most gently,
did not even the better sort fall much short of that zeal for Gods honor and
service, that care of reformation and amendment of Manners, both in our selves
and others, which perhaps we once vowed, and certainly the Mercies, the
unexspected and undeserved Mercies of God exacted at our hands?

Surely, surely we were more strongly obliged to be an holy People, a thankful
People, a praying People; a People loving and Charitable, peaceable and
obedient; united in obedience to the State, and united in obedience to the
Church: if not agreeing in all points of Doctrine and opinion (for there may be
a mutual Toleration in that respect,) yet however united in the common Faith of
Christians, and in the common Devotions and public prayers, formed with great
Wisdom and moderation, agreeable to the common Faith. Where the fault of our
Divisions lies, God will Judge.

But among our late Omissions since the Return, in Point of Solemn Assembling
for Prayer and Thanksgiving, I cannot this Day forget to note the neglect
formerly (I say not in this great City) generally in the lesser Parishes of the
Country; the neglect of observing this great Day. A great Day, justly so
styled, but greatly neglected in the greatest part of the Nation. Was not this
Neglect one sin among many other, to provoke God to permit new Plots, more
Popish Plots and conspiracies, to be contrived, and fetched out of the old
Magazine of Hell 'against our merciful King and his loving People, against our
Church and State, and all that is dear unto us. To these Traitors we shall say
more anon: let us now go forward and speak to our Text.

This, this I fear, may be matter of just complaint that we were not thankful
for our Peace and prosperity that returned with our King (whom God preserve,)
but we murmured at the management both of Church and State. For remedy whereof
I shall mention but two places of Holy Writ, which, as I conceive, being well
considered may serve to abate and calm our murmuring. As to the affairs of
State, is the burden of Taxes and Tribute a Grievance? For this, take the
Sentence of our Lord: Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars. As to the
Church, are Ornaments of our Mother, and her Ceremonies an eye sore? For this
Grief, take the good Aphorism of the Apostle, Let all things be don decently
and in Order. Ceremonies in some measure (and you may see the measure, if you
please to read the Prefaces before the Liturgy,) some Ceremonies are necessary
for the preserving of that decency, which the Word of God and our own reason
and common sense requires: what Ceremonies are such, our Governors must judge,
not we. Tribute is necessary for the Defense of the King and Kingdom: what
Tribute is such, our Governors must judge, not we. They have the Power of
Commanding: to us is left the praise of Obeying.

These few words spoken of Tribute in the State and Ceremonies in the Church,
cannot seem impertinent or improper to my Text: For it may be observed, that
the peace of our Jerusalem has been much impaired and is still endangered, by
such as are apt, too apt to murmur at One or Both. The Seditious in the State,
use to disturb the Civil Government, under pretense of heavy Impositions and
taxes: The Sectaries in Religion love to untie the bonds of Ecclesiastical
Polity under color of superstitious Rites and Ceremonies: both sorts are to
be looked upon, and looked to, as enemies to the peace of our Jerusalem. And you
will excuse your Teachers, and Spiritual Guids if they do Hoc agere, bestow
much care and pains in this behalf, that in this Noble City may be found no
such Sectaries, no such seditious Persons.

Beloved, it is our hearts Desire, and our prayer to God for you, that you may
approve your selves, both obedient Subjects to the King (whom God preserve)
and dutiful Sons of the church. And in so doing you will help to keep, help
much (such a City) to keep and preserve and advance that which we pray for, the
peace of our Jerusalem. Our Obedience must under God, and the King, I say our
Obedience must both procure and advance our peace. And without obedience unto
Governors, our prayers for them signify nothing, avail nothing. Pray for
Governors; that is good: but then, we must obey them too. God is much pleased
with the Obedience of his people; obedience to his own Laws and obedience to
the Laws of his Vicegerents. Indeed the Laws of his Vicegerents are in a sort
Gods own Laws; ratified and established by God. For by him Kings Reign, and
Princes decree Ju^tice. Obedience to our Governors is obedience to God Almighty
and to Christ our Lord. What Saint Paul faith of servants may be fi^ly applied
and accommodated to Subjects: Subjects, be obedient to your King, doing the
will of God from the heart (not in outward show only, but from the heart) with
good will showing your obedience, as to the Lord and not unto men: knowing,
that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall be receive of the Lord.
Or, as it is elsewhere expressed by the same hand, Knowing, that of the Lord ye
shall receive the Reward: the reward of your true and faithful Obedience.

And this brings me to the Great Reason, or effectual Motive of our good
Affection and good wishes to Jerusalem in the latter part of the Text: They
shall prosper that love thee; that love and pray for thee O Jerusalem.

II. They that perform the Duty, that love the Church and State, and pray for
the peace of them, procure prosperity and happiness for themselves. For the
declaration and proof of this, let us consider first in general: That our
prayers for others are always profitable to our selves. The Reason is, because
our praying is the performance of a Duty pleasing unto God. It is pleasing unto
God, because it is commanded by him. Pray one for another, says Saint James.
And omission of this duty is a sin, as appears by the Words of Samuel: God
forbid, that I should sin in ceasing to pray for you. Now, if it be a sin to
deny another our prayers, if to pray for others be to perform a duty pleasing
to God and commanded by Him: hence it clearly follows, that it will be
Profitable and advantageous to us. For this is an infallible Truth: No man ever
obeyed God in vain.

Another Reason is, because in our praying for others, we exercise and increase
our brotherly kindness and Charity: And you know brotherly kindness and Charity
is the great grace, the prince of Graces, commended unto us in the Gospel of
Christ: who has taught it, by his example and precept, and has set it down as
the proper mark and character of his Disciples. This love and charity, as it
makes us prone to do other good Offices for our Neighbors, so especially does
it incline us to pray for them. This is a Charitable office, which the poorest
may perform for the richest: an Office which we can perfome for our worst
enemies. When they stand at such a distance from us, that we can do them no
other good, we can, and must pray for them, according to the Command of our
Lord and Master. And by the exercise of this Charity, we increase it, and
procure no small benefit to our selves, as well as to them for whom we pray.
Thus in general.

Now let us in particular speak of our love to Jerusalem, and our praying for
Jerusalem; that is, for our Church and State: and first for the State, or civil
Government. What is the end and effect of our prayers for the State, for the
King (whom God preserve) and all that are in Authority under him, no man can
better tell us than Saint Paul: That we may lead a quiet and peacible life, in
all Godliness and Honesty.

I. A quiet and and peacible life. Do you know what a blessing it is to lead a
quiet and peacible life? If you do not value this blessing, look back upon the
time, that is within our memory, the time of our late domestic Wars and
tumults; when the late King, a just and merciful and religious Prince, was put
beside his Government first, weakened and divested of his Royal power and
prerogative first; and then deprived of his life and all. Look upon the time of
our present Sovereigns exile in foreign parts, what factions, what changes and
uncertainties of Government, what oppression and cruelties, before his
Majesty's happy Return. There are but few among us so old, that can look back
to the 5 of November 1605. Not to speak of the terrible Invasion in 88, in the
time of the famous Queen Elizabeth: when the Spanish Armada (that Invincible
Armada, as it was proudly named,) threatened utter ruin to this Kingdom, but
was it self by Gods Assistance ruined and defeated: when that of Claudian was
hansomly applied to the Queen; Onimium dilecta Deo, cui militat ether, Et
conjurati veniunt ad classica venti! But the year 1605, some few among Old men
may remember, and most men are acquainted with the history of the gunpowder
Treason: a Treason ploted by pretended Ca^holicks, and for the pretended
promotion of Christian Religion: whereas, indeed and in truth, it was a plot
most opposite to the doctrine of Christ, and tending to the destruction of a
Church, (of all other Churches we know,) whose Doctrine and Constitutions are
most agreeing with the primitive Church of Christ, truly Catholic and
Apostolic. It was a plot for the destruction (as the Records testify to all
posterity,) for the destruction of the King, (that King of such admirable
learning and piety King James) the Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal
branches, with the whole Clergy and Commons of this Realm, then assembled in
Parliament; by popish treachery, appointed as sheep to the slaughter, in a most
barbarous and savage manner, beyond the examples of former Ages. An unnatural
Conspiracy (I speak the words of Authority) an unnatural Conspiracy: An
horrible and wicked enterprise, plotted and intended this day (a dismal day,
if it had taken affect) against the King and the whole State; for the
subversion of the Government and the Religion established amongst us.

But it pleased God, in a strange manner to disclose the plot and lay open the
secret design, (as he has given a strange discovery of the late so much
noised design, no less dangerous to our present King, than Church and State,
yet in being and long to be by Gods goodness:) the Powder Plot I say was
marvellously discovered: God gave the King to understand a dark and obscure
Letter, and by that the black design came to light; the conspirators some
taken, some slain in the pursuit, some Judged according to Law, condemned and
Executed, as was fit for Traitors. The lamentable and horrid effects and
consequences of which Treason, had not the hand of God been against them and
for us, are beyond my ability to comprehend, much more beyond my expression.
It Is sufficient, if you imagine and fancy so much of that confusion and
desolation, which would have followed, as to make us have a more lively sense
of the greatness of our deliverance, and the blessing of a quiet and a
peaceable life, whereof I was speaking: and withal make us to solemnize this
Day of our deliverance with due Thankfulness, and with a sober and Religious
joy, together with bountiful Alms to the poor. I say again, and would have it
marked, with a sober and Religious joy, least in a sinful and profane
celebration (as the manner of some is) we provoke God to deliver us to some new
Plotters and Conspirators. And that there is a new plot of the papists in great
part discovered, and in some part punished already, I need not tell you. I do
but touch this thereby to urge you not only to a Religious thankfulness this
Day, but to a sincere Amendment of life, and uniforme Obedience every Day, that
the Sword of God hanging over our heads as it were by a slender thread, may be
prevented and escaped. Which I pray God, in mercy grant.

In one of the prayers for this day, we desire of God to strengthen the hands
of our gracious King, and of all that are in Authority under Him, with
judgment and justice to cut of all such workers of iniquity, as turn Religion
into Rebellion, and Faith into faction. I remember we read it in the old Book
for the Fifth of November about Forty years agon, thus: Cut of all such workers
of iniquity, whose Religion is Rebellion, and their Faith is Faction. I doubt
not, the alteration was made upon some reason, then. But more, since our
Intelligence of the New Plot, (does it not still proceed?) we may restore the
Ancient reading, and if ever it might be justly said, it may now most
deservedly be pronounced of the Jesuitical Papists; Their Faith is Faction:
Their Religion is Rebellion. If any man does yet de^y or doubt of This, he may
satisfy himself abundantly in the late Book published by the most learned
Bishop of Lincoln, to omit many other.

Since this new-old plot of the Jesuits, the King the State and the Church have
been judged to lie under so eminent danger, that doubts and fears have run
through the whole Kingdom, but dwelt principally in London, the famous London,
the Epi^ome or Compendium of the Kingdom. Before which time (I think I may say)
in most of the space since the glorious Return, Every man, that loved quiet,
might sit quietly and safely under his own vine and his own figtree (as the
Hebrews speak,) that is, every man enjoyed his own, and eat the labor of his
hands securely, Religion was safe, and the people without fear did or might
pray and hear as their forefathers prayed and heard in the peaceable reigns of
Queen Elizabeth and King James, and in the beginning of King Charles the first;
namely, hear the saving word read and preached by lawfully ordained priests;
and pray the good old prayers; only with a new Revise since the happy Return,
for our better satisfaction and edification. Many more benefits I might
mention, but our liberty and our daily bread, and our true Religion, (would it
might shine in the Uniformity of our lives and actions,) these may suffice to
show the great reason we have to pray for our Jerusalem, for our Civil
Government particularly, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, free from
plots and conspiracies of our irreconcilable Enemies, free from discords, and
dissentions, of our own Brethren.

But peace and quietness is then most valuable, when it is attended with that
which follows, Godliness and Honesty: The end and benefit of Government is,
that we may lead a quiet and peacible life in all Godliness and honesty.
Godliness and honesty are well joined with peace and quietness: For public
tranquillity and safety is ^ot given us, that we should abuse it to rioting and
drunkenness, to chambering and wantonness, to strife and envying: but that
being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, and being without fear of
them, we might fear God, and serve him in holiness and righteousness all our
days: that is, behave our selves justly and mercifully toward our neighbors,
devoutly and reverently toward God: and this, with perseverance to the end.
Righteousness and Holiness must go hand in hand together: Godliness and Honesty
must not be parted.

The good Laws of the Land are made as well to promote religion as Justice; and
the commands of the King are to make his subjects Gods subjects, his people
Gods people. We have laws, wholesome laws, as on the one hand to keep us from
offending God by swearing and profanation, so on the other to restrain us from
offending the neighbor by railing, evil speaking, and diffamation. Which
particular I mention, because we live in an Age wherein evil speaking, and evil
writing too, is brought into a fashion by busy-bodies, (or rather idle-bodies,)
and made an exercise of Wit: which was given them, by the favor of God, for
better uses. Grave and learned men are sometimes exposed in their Lampoons,
begotten (as they say) by Copulation of male and female Wits: but these brats
are not fit to be nursed up, or sent abroad into the world by the hand of any
sober or civil person. Among the diseases of our time, such Scrible^ may be
called the scab and itch of the Age: and unless those irregular and intemperate
Wits be curbed by Authority, they may prove the very bane of humane society and
all good fellowship. In the mean time, for your Lampoons, Contempt is the best
reveng, and we may say with Tacitus Spreta exolescunt. When good men are
reviled either by unruly Tongues, or sharper pens, they will think upon the
words of Christ, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you: and think upon the
example of Christ their Master; who when he was reviled, reviled not again.
Good laws I said, we have to keep us from dishonoring God by swearing and
profanation, and to restrain us from offending the neighbor by slander and
diffamation: Good Laws, if well executed. Therefore must we pray also, that the
same God, who has given us laws established by Acts of Parliament, and
commanded by royal proclamation, for the maintenance of Godliness and honesty,
would also be pleased, by his effectual Grace, to raise up the hearts and
courage of Magistrates, both in this city and all other places, to maintain the
laws, and see to their due execution.

This is the way to have our peace and quietness renewed and continued to us by
maintaining Godliness and honesty. Godliness (which you must remember is always
to be joined with honesty: The Godly man is always an honest man:) Godliness, I
say has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come: so Saint Paul.
Temporal promises, and spiritual promises: prosperity of all sorts. For the
soul also is said to prosper: And the prosperity of the soul is, when it
proceeds from grace to grace, and is prepared more and more for Glory. This
is the chiefest part of the prosperity of those that love Jerusalem, and pray
for Jerusalem. The prosperity of the outward or temporal estate is, when you
follow your wordly business in your honest vocations with safety and good
success: and this is the reward of those that love the State and Government. In
seeking the happiness and welfare of the King, they seek the good of Gods
kingdom: for, The King reigns for God: and they that seek Gods Kingdom, shall
have all necessaries of this life added to them. We have our Saviors word for
it. They shall be prospered and blessed in their outward concerns, and all
their temporal affairs.

The mention of Gods kingdom, puts me in mind of the other part proposed
concerning the Church. I have showed, how they procure a blessing for
themselves, that love and pray for the public State or common wealth, or civil
government; now let me briefly show you the same in respect of the Church, or
Eclesiastical government: They that love the Church of God, and pray for the
Churchmen, do thereby procure prosperity and happiness for themselves.

The Christian Church at large, that is, the Catholic Church, is the
Congregation of Christian people all the world over; but here we understand the
ruling and unruling part of the Church, that is, the Bishops and Ministers
under them; those particularly of the Church of England, placed under his
Majesty's supreme authority and government. And they that love the Church, are
discerned by these two characters: They pray for the Bishops and Ministers, and
obey their discipline and instruction. For this Obedience ^^ the bent testimony
of their love.

Now, they that pray for the Bishops and Minist^^s, procure to themselves
prosperity. It Is a great h^ppiness to the people of God, to have good Bishops
and Ministers: and the way to have such, is to pray for them. These are called
Laborers in Gods harvest: a^^ our Savior has said, Pray the Lord of the
harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his h^rvest. The true
laborers are of God's sending: they do not intrude themselves without a call,
but are sent by God in an orderly way. That you may have ^^ch, you must pray
for them; and when you have them, you must pray for the continuance of them,
and for God's blessing on them in their labors. So shall that gracious promise
of God be fulfilled among us, which i^ recorded by the prophet Jeremy: I will
give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding: learned and godly Bishops and Ministers; such as
the Church of England (Dicam adstante invidia) such as our Church is blessed
with in our Time, and has been blessed with in the former Age. These are a
great happiness to the people (if they would be pleased to know their own
happiness,) a great happiness to the people of God. And this happiness will be
the better known, if you have the leisure sometimes to weigh the several parts
of their office. They are to feed you (as the prophet said) to feed you with
knowledge and understanding: brighter and clearer knowledge, than that in the
prophet's time: The knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified: The knowledge
of him, and the power of his Resurrection: They are to guide you in your
doubts, to comfort you in your sorrows: They are to call you off from the way
of error, and the path that leads to destruction: and to show you the right
and good way^ and to show you what God would have you do, and what God will do
for you, if you believe in him and serve him; even bring you safe to
everlasting Glory. You may be glad to pray for such persons, and to love them,
by whose ministry you obtain such inestimable benefi^s and blessings.

And we must not only pray for them, but obey them too, that our obedience may
secure our prosperity. Obedience I say, is the best testimony of love, and it
is the fruit of love. The Apostle presses the duty of obedience to Bishops and
Ministers, by the great benefit of the Souls committed to their charge. They
that obey their spiritual Rulers, shall be improved in their souls, advantaged
in their whole conversation. So that a comfortable Account shall be given of
them to Almighty God the lover of souls. For what greater comfort and joy can
be both to Ministers and people, than to live together in the fear of God, and
in mutual love here; and when God shall call them hence, to meet again in
heaven, and be with Christ in perfect joy for ever and ever.

Thus much may serve for the prosperity of those that pray for and love the
State, and likewise of their prosperity that pray for and love the Church.

And now to draw to a Conclusion, if you please to reflect upon the plain
discourse you have had the patience to hear, you may thence make a discovery of
the friends and enemies either of Church or State.

1. We discern who are friends, and who enemies to the State. They that pray
heartily for the State, for the King and all that are in Authority under the
King: they that second their prayers with a loving, a peaceable, humble and
obedient behavior, contributing to the public what service they can in their
several stations. These are the friends of the King, these are friends of the
State, these the best Commonwealth-men, these the most loyal Subjects.

The Ancient Christians, in the primitive Times, the times of persecution, were
accused as enemies of the Roman Empire, and causes of all public mischeifs and
calamities. To refute this slander, and defend the innocent professors of
Christianity, Tertullian a man of a strong wit and sharp Eloquence, pleads
thus: Oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribus etc. We pray for all Princes, that it
may please God to grant them long life, secure Government, a safe Family,
valiant Armies, a faithful Counsel, a good people, quiet times, and whatsoever
good things they themselves can desire, either as men or Princes. Thus the
primitive Christians were wont to pray for the Princes and Magistrates, and by
these prayers proved they were friends to the present State.

On the contrary, that man that takes himself to be a royallist, a friend of
the King, and a faithful subject, and only talks, or drinks a health; and does
not, both in public and private, pray for the welfare of the King and Kingdom,
is very much mistaken. Can he truly love the King, that does not heartily pray
for the King? The loving Subject, is the praying Subject; and he will not fail
in any other act or duty of obedience.

2. For the discovery of the Churches friends and enemies, you have heard, that
by the Church is chiefly meant the Ruling part, the Bishops and Ministers. So
the word seems to be understood in that precept of Christ, Die Ecclesiae,
Tell it to the Church, i. e. to the Rulers of the Assemblies, as our learned
Paraphrast has it out of Chrysostom. These Rulers spiritual, if we do not
pray for, we are no friends, but enemies of the Church. For these are given by
the special favor and providence of God; for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, as Saint Paul
says. They are given, as the same Apostle adds, that being instructed and
guided by them, we be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine. So then, if our settlement in the true Religion,
and our preservation from dangerous Errors; if our edification and growth and
perfection depend under God upon the sacred Ministry; certainly he, can be no
friend to Religion and the Gospel, who does not not love and pray for the
Bishops and Ministers of the Gospel.

Nevertheless it is true, and often found by sad experience, that Churchmen
have many Enemies. And no wonder: For the Prophets of old, and after them the
Apostles, yea Christ himself our Lord and Master, had their Enemies,
slanderers, revilers. Elias the Prophet was accused as a troubler of Israel:
Paul the Apostle was accounted for a seditious fellow, and his own Galatians
seem to have been his Enemies for his telling them the truth. And is not this
that, which raises up enmity against our preachers sometimes, even the telling
them the Truth. The truth is, we love our sins, and favor our own lusts and
vanities, and would not be vehemently urged to part with any thing which is in
deliciis, a delight to us, and dear as the right hand or eye. We care not to be
taught, how to be grave, and yet withal kind; strict and yet courteous,
temperate and yet sociable; as our Religion, our Christianity exacteth. We can
hear the Doctrine, but endure not to come under the Discipline of the church.

And here among the Churches Enemies, I might fall again upon the Popish
Traitors, both old and new, the grand Adversaries of our Jerusalem, both of our
Church and State. But it is time to ease you, and I had rather pray, then
inveigh. Wherefore I entreat you to join with me in your most ardent desires,
that God would be pleased, still to discover, and defeat, and blast his and our
enemies: that our Sovereign Lord the King may still be protected by the Divine
power, and directed by the Divine Wisdom: that the Parliament now summoned, may
in due time meet together, and sit f^st, with such unanimity and concord in
their Counsels, such order and prudence and success in their Affairs, that
they may be a joy to the King, and to all his faithful subjects, and may rise
with the honor, the lasting honor, of having been the reestablishers of truth
and peace for us and our posterity.

I must not end, till I have in a word admonished you of some other Traitors,
and these the worst of all. For those Traitors aforementioned, could only
destroy the Body, but these destroy the Soul, the immortal Soul: I mean these
privy Conspirators in our own bosoms, our carnal lusts, and unruly passions,
and our presumptuous Sins proceeding thence. I need not name them. These must
be searched out, mortified, extinguished, and totally destroyed. A great Work,
but possible by the Grace of Almighty God, and by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus
Christ: which we shall receive, if we pray for it, as we ought to do, with
humility and fervency and constancy.

And therefore in the close of all, let me earnestly request of the Worthy
Citizens here, that this magnificent and beautiful Basilica, the House of God
(the Glory of your ancient Corporation,) and the solemn service daily ministered
in this College, may be more frequented and attended by you. And withal, let
me petition, that the daily Divine Service (at least in the mornings) may be
procured and maintained according to the Injunction of our good Mother the
Church of England, in every Parish Church in this City. Consider of it (if you
please) Right Worshipful and beloved Brethren. Bear with my zeal in this
proposal: If ever you will be zealous for public and Common Prayer, Now is the
time. Extraordinary occasions call for our extraordinary care and diligence.
Verbum sapienti. My last words shall be taken out of a Prayer appointed for
this Day.

O Lord! Let the Consideration of thy Goodness work in us true Repentance, that
Iniquity may not be our ruin: And increase in us more and more a lively faith,
and fruitful Love in all holy Obedience; that thou may continue thy favor,
with the Light of the Gospel to us and our posterity for evermore. And that for
thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen. (...).

