Jesus Christ THE Great VVonder. DISCOVERED FOR THE Amazement of SAINTS. IN A
SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Major of London, and the
Honorable Court of Aldermen, at Paul's.

By MATTHEW BARKER, Preacher of the Gospel at Leonards East-Cheap. LONDON.

O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33.
Quando men's se ad deum cum am^re integre convertit, incomprehensibili luce in
sundum ejus effulgente, rationis and intellectus oculus, reverberatus caligat.
Isagog. Corderii ad mist. Theol cap. 7. (...). Dionys. Areop. de divin. nomin.
Cap. 7. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Rapha Harford, at the Bible and
States-Arms in Little Britain. 1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Thomas Andrews, LORD MAYOR, AND The HONORABLE COURT of
ALDERMEN.
YOu were pleased to Order this Sermon to the Press; but I hope it has already
had one Impression upon your hearts, and I intended it for no other, and is the
most noble and excellent kind of Printing; when the heart comes to be (...) as
a Book engraven with the ingravings of God, and the Epistle of Jesus Christ,
written not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God. What I before 2. Cor.
3. 3.
presented to your ears, I now again present to your eyes ((...)) and if by
either or both it shall reach your hearts, I have my reward; You should have
had it sooner, but some troubles in my spirit, and some affairs in my hand have
retarded it: But now you have it, and neither in matter or form much different
from what it was. And the blessing of heaven attend it, that it may either make
or renew some heavenly impressions upon your souls; for though it is true what
the Apostle says, Romans 10. That Faith comes by hearing, yet it is also as
true what the Church says, Lam. 3. 51. Mine eye affects my heart. Then are
the senses of the body in their highest and properest operations, when they let
in upon the soul those Idea's which will indeed raise, refresh, and nourish it.

My great plot was, in this Discourse, (pardon this plot) to make you all
Captives; not to my self, but to TRVTH and JESUS CHRIST; and I knew not how to
do it by a more probable stratagem, then to set up this Jesus in his
WONDERFVLNES before you, as conceiving, that to men truly rational he cannot be
presented under a more powerful and persuasive Notion. And so I thought it
might be very suitable to men in Power and place; for the heart that is most
effectually caught and captivated of Jesus Christ, is best accomplished for the
sincere and vigorous prosecution of public affairs: Never does the soul move
aright in any service, if it be not originally drawn of him, and ultimately
carried forth unto him. And O that your choicest affections might center in his
person, and your chiefest endeavors in his glory: We read in Rev. 19. 1. of a
great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Allelujah, salvation and glory,
and honor, and power to the Lord our God. What salvation, what glory, what
honor, and power the Lord has given to his people in these days, he expects
they should give them back again to him; that as they are his by their coming
from him, so they may again be made his by returning them back unto him; and
then shall we approve our selves to be of those people in heaven. Apelles when
he had drawn some curious piece, would set it in public view, and place
himself behind the curtain to hearken what would be said of it by the people
passing by: Jesus Christ has set before us in his great works among us a fair
draught, a lively representation of his glorious power, wisdom, justice, and
mercy; and does he not now stand still, and listen what the hearts, tongues,
and actings of his people speak concerning it?

Our great transactions were lately in our Wars abroad; they are now likely to
be in our Counsels at home: Much of God has been seen in those; and O that
nothing of self might be seen in these: I hope at last God will direct us to
find out one Common Center of Truth and Righteousness wherein all honest hearts
will meet.

The Lord give your Lordship, and all others that sit with you at the Stern of
this City, wisdom to sail between the two rocks of ANARCHY and TYRANNY, and
then I hope you will arrive safe at the much longed for Haven of common
righteousness, and peace. It is not for me to prescribe any thing in this
nature. Only I shall pray, that the two Staves of BANDS and BEAUTY, may always
stand at the gates of this City, by our sweet enjoyment of Jesus Christ in his
Ordinances, and of one another in unity and love.

Our first degree of happiness would be, not to differ; but the second is, to
manage our differences with humility and wisdom, and to take them up before
they prove like a breach of the Sea.

We ought to mark those that cause divisions, much more those that delight in
them. I shall no longer detain you from the perusal of those poor and broken
meditations that follow; though they came from me in weakness, yet I hope, they
will rise up in you with power, which will be a CROWN of Glory, and rejoicing
to him, who desires to his utmost to be serviceable to the great Interest of
your spiritual Estate,

Matthew Barker.

Isaiah Chap. 9. part of the 6. ver. And his name shall be called Wonderful,
etc.
OF all the Prophets, this Prophet Isaiah is the most Evangelical: what Paul
was among the Apostles in the New Testament, that is Isaiah among the Prophets
in the Old: as the One had the highest Revelation, the Other had the clearest
Vision; of which you read Isaiah 6. and is expressly said to be of Christ in his
glory, John 12. 41. speaking more distinctly of Christ in his birth, natures,
life, sufferings, death, his kingdom and glorious administrations in the world,
then the rest of the Prophets, Qui Isaiam legerit, versari se putet in
Evangelio. Hier.
so that he is oftener quoted in the New Testament, then all the rest of the
Prophets.

In the beginning of this Chapter, he speaks pure Gospel: having in the
preceding Chapters been foretelling and threatening a gloomy night of Captivity
and desolation coming upon Judah and Jerusalem, as you read Chap. 7. 17, 18.
and Chap. 8. 7, 8. in this Chapter to keep their heads above water, that they
might not sink under the fear or feeling of those heavy afflictions, does
present to their thoughts the near approach of the Messiah, and that glorious
restitution, salvation and deliverance which come along with him, upon the
world; that they might be able to look through the darkness of the night, to
the beauty and glory of that day that was erst-while to shine forth upon the
Earth: And this day is represented by the day of their deliverance from the
Babylonish Captivity, as the shadow of it, in the beginning of this Chapter,
that their joy might be the more enlarged, and this deliverance more welcome,
when they should receive it, not alone as a temporal deliverance, but as a type
and pledge of that spiritual salvation which the Lord Jesus was to administer
at his coming.

This day of Christ is presented by the Prophet, as approaching, in this
Chapter, with these several goodly attendants.

Light. Joy. Victory.
1. First is Light: as in ver. 2. The people that walked in darkness, have seen
a great light: All light, has its pleasure; the lowest light, that which is
sensible and visible, is pleasant, Eccles. 11. 7. but the higher the light is,
the more suitable to man, and so the more pleasant: This light that shines from
Christ, is intellectual, spiritual, breaking out from the highest sphere, and
the first fountain of light.

2. Second is Joy: as in ver. 3. They joy before thee; Which is expressed by two
of the highest joys in nature; the one is of harvest, when the Husbandman reaps
the fruit of his long toil and travels: The other is, of dividing the spoils;
when after the enemy is routed, the battle won, the danger and difficulty of
the service over, the Soldiour makes his triumph, and divides the spoil.

3. Third is Victory: which you read in ver. 4. which is described in the

Parts of it. Manner of it. Author of it.
1. The several parts of it, ver. 4. Thou have broken the yoke of his burden,
and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor.

First, The yoke of his burden, or burthensom yoke, which is the Law, which
Christ has broken off from the necks of Saints.

Second is, The staff of his shoulder, which is the tyranny and guilt of sin,
wherewith the Conscience is afflicted, and beaten, and the spirit in man
enslaved.

Third is, The rod, or the (...)
Scepter of his oppressor, which is the dominion and reign of the devil.

2. Next we have the manner of it, expressed by a twofold parallel: First is,
that Victory of Gideon over the Midianites: As in the day of Midian, ver. 4.
recorded Judge. 7. and an eminent type of this: First, in the Conqueror Gideon
(...) a Exscidit.
, which signifies one that does cut off, or destroy; as he did, cut off the
enemies of Israel, and bring in their deliverance; so does Jesus Christ for his
people.

Secondly, in the person Conquered, the Midianites; (...) Causam egi^.
Midian signifies Contention, or pleading in Judgment against another: This
Midian CHRIST does overthrow and silence: whatever Sin, the Law, Satan, or
Conscience could plead against us; Christ has put to silence, and overcome, as
the Apostle asserts by a word very significant to this purpose, Romans 8. 33. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, (...), or who shall call them
into judgment?

Thirdly, in the assistance he used in the Conquest; which was from Abiezer,
signifying the help of my father: Judge. 6. 34.
so Christ prevailed in the power and assistance of his Father.

Fourthly, in the paucity of his men, whereby he conquered; his Army of thirty
two thousand, being reduced to three hundred: none of those that were fearful,
or bowed down upon their knees to drink, engaging with him in the battle: So
fares it with Jesus Christ in those spiritual battles he is fighting in the
world: some desponding by carnal fear, others bowed down by earthly
engagements, and interests, do basely fall off, going back to self, and the
world.

But lastly, and especially in the strangeness of it: Gideon prevailed not by
might nor strength; not by wonted policy, or warlike stratagems, but by Lamps
and Pitchers, and the sound of Trumpets: So our Lord Jesus by Lamps and
Pitchers, by the light of Truth in Earthen vessels, and by the sounding of the
Gospel, does destroy the powers of darkness, the Kingdom of Satan, confounds
and scatters all the enemies of our salvation.

This is the first Parallel.

Next, it is paralleld with other ordinary battles and victories, ver. 5. Every
battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and with garments rolled in
blood, but this shall be (or as we may better read it) and it is, or will be
with burning (...)
the fuel of fire.

So in Christ's spiritual battles, you have all these Concomitants: here is a
confused noise, when he comes and sets up his standard within us, and is
subduing us to himself; how do carnal reason, the wisdom and lusts of the
flesh, make a noise within us, contradicting and opposing Christ in his word,
works, and ways within us: Two irreconcilable parties clashing and fighting
against each other, do bring forth this confused noise, and tumult in the soul.

And in other victories we may see garments rolled in blood; so neither is this
spiritual victory without blood; Christ overcame by his blood; so do Saints
overcome, by the blood of the Lamb: and their garments are made white, being
dipped and rolled in this blood. Rev. 7. 14.


Lastly, other victories are attended with burnings; firing of Gates, Houses,
Cities, and other fuel of fire: So this spiritual battle and victory is not
without fire: the fire of the Spirit is burning within us, whatever is fleshly
and carnal; whatever is hay and stubble, is the fuel of this fire: and the day
of the Lord, when he comes to conquer, will consume and devour it.

Thus we have seen this Victory in the manner of it.

3. Lastly, it is set forth in the Author of it: who is now the warrior that
fights these battles, the Conqueror that subdues these enemies: here are great
Victories achieved, brave exploits acted, strong and puissant adversaries
broken: do you not long to see the person brought forth in view, whose
achievements ye have heard the high reports of, and before you see him, are
speaking within your selves, as they in the Gospel, What manner of man is this!
Lo, the verse I have read presents him to you: It is no other then a Child* For
unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, etc. The Child is the same
which was spoken of Chap. 7. 14. that was to be born of a Virgin, and whose
name is called Immanuel: The same with that child born of the Prophetess,
called Maher-Shalal-hash baz, not Hezekiah, as the Jews would fain understand
the Text, but our Lord Jesus himself: who is presented in this 6. verse under
such a description as cannot agree to any creature.

1. He is described in his twofold nature, a child born, a son given: the child
of the Virgin in respect of his humanity, the Son of God in respect of his
Divinity.

2. In his Dedication to his people in both natures; he is a child born to us,
a son given to us.

3. In the sovereign power and authority wherewith he is invested; The
government shall be upon his shoulder.

4. In the names wherewith he is styled, which are these five: First is
Wonderful: The second Counselor: The third the Mighty God: The fourth the
Everlasting Father, or the Father of Eternity: The last the Prince of Peace.

Bernard applies these names thus, Admirabilis nativitate, Consiliarius
praedicatione, fortis Deus in operatione, Pater seculi in resurrectione,
Princeps pacis in perpe^ua beatitudine. Ber. Sermon. 10.
Wonderful, in his birth: Counselor in his Doctrine: The Mighty God in his
working: Father of Eternity in his resurrection: Prince of Peace in our eternal
happiness. Others conceive these names relate to the several parts of man's
salvation: First, Wonderful, in the new birth, so strangely changing the course
of corrupt nature. Secondly, Counselor, in making man wise in his choice, and
to discern of things that differ. Thirdly, A strong God, in throwing down the
strong holds of sin. Fourthly, Father of Eternity, by infusing an Everlasting
life. Lastly, Prince of Peace, in reconciling us to the Father, and quieting
and satisfying the soul of man.

There is nothing in the verse but what is of singular concernment; every word
has its distinct Emphasis: each of these names has a treasure of truth within
it: but I have singled out the first of the names by which he is set forth, to
spend my present strength and time upon, viz. his name Wonderful: And that
which invited my thoughts to this subject in this place, was, because Christ
has made himself eminently known by this name in our days, and we are cast
upon those Ages of the world wherein he will yet further merit and magnify it.

Wonderful. The word is (...) derived from (...) which Vid. Avenar. Lex.
signifies, to be veiled or hidden from the eyes and understanding of men;
because things wonderful are things that lie hid, whose depth cannot be
sounded, nor cause discovered: This name applied to Christ, signifies, as A
Lapide speaks, Rerum mirabilium the sauros inaestimabiles in Christo esse
absconditos, that the inestimable treasures of wonderful things are hidden in
Jesus Christ.

Simmachus translates the word (...), which signifies a Paradox, or Paradoxnes
it self: and indeed he is not so much admirable as admirability: Among all
those pompous titles which the Princes of the earth have assumed, none ever
have assumed this, it being reserved as peculiar to Jesus Christ: Some conceive
that the Prophet here alludes to the Angel that conversed with Manoah, Judge.
13. 18. who being asked his name, replied, his name was Peli, or Wonderful. And
Jacob asked the Angel his name he contended with, Genesis 32. He answers,
Wherefore do thou ask my name? In denying to tell him it, he does in a manner
confess it, that it is wonderful. Moses asked the same thing of God, to know
his Name; He answers him, I am that I am; As if he Exodus 3. 13.
should say, no name can fully express me; but what I am that I am; His Essence
is so wonderful, that no name, unless it be the name Wonderful, can well agree
to him. The first use of names was to describe the nature of things; but the
nature of God being every way incomprehensible, it cannot be possibly confined
within the limit of any name; or if it could, yet that name neither man, nor
Angels could comprehend; and therefore the Jews esteemed the name Jehovah
(...), an unspeakable name: Divines say that no definition can be given of God,
because his Being is transcendent; infinitely differing from all things visible
or conceiveable; And therefore in the most comprehensive definition, semper
maneret aliquid extra, something which it could not possibly reach; And so we
may say also, that no name can positively and fully express the transcendent
excellency of his Being, but it must needs fall infinitely short of
comprehending him.

So that one of the Ancients speaking of God, says, That he is both (...);
without name, and yet of many names, because by whatever name we call any
excellency or good in the creature, it may eminently be praedicated of him; for
he is both (...), all things that the Creature is, and yet nothing that the
Creature is; all things may be both affirmed and denied of him; for seeing he
is infinitely above all that excellency that is in the creature, therefore as
much above every name whereby that excellency is called:

As when he is called life, light, beauty, sweetness, yet he is none of these
things as they are in the creature, or apprehended by us, but in such a
transcendent way as is unconceiveable to all created understanding. He is
(...), as one elegantly speaks.

Some names attributed to God speak him forth in his absolute Essence and
Being, as Jehovah, El-shaddai;

Others in his essential properties, as Almighty, Just, Vid. Zanch. de natura
dei lib. 1. cap. 4.
True, God.

Others in his relation to his creatures, as Lord, King, etc.

Others in those effects that he brings forth upon them; as when he puts forth
his Essence in a way of illumination we call him light, of quickening we call
him life, of supporting we call him a rock; of defense, we call him a refuge,
or high Tower: though these operations of God descend upon us, yet his Essence
(as one speaks) abides invisible; God in favor to us, and condescent to our
understanding, expresses himself by these names, that we might be able a
little to apprehend him.

But there is no name that does so fully express him in the
incomprehensibleness, and infiniteness of his Being as the name Wonderful. In
his other names we conceive of him under some finite notion; but this name
Wonderful speaks him forth as one that surpasses all the knowledge of the
creature, the flight of man's highest thoughts: for that which is within the
compass of his reason, that he never wonders at; but when he meets with some
thing that transcends his reach, that swallows up his understanding, that he
calls Wonderful, and stands amazed at; therefore the Schoolmen say, that the
proper object of admiration is res incognita, a thing unknown and undiscerned;
and therefore God cannot properly be said to wonder, to whom nothing lies hid.

Divines distinguish between Mirandum and Miraculum. That is wonderful which is
unusual or unknown, proceeding from some unwonted or und scovered cause in
Nature: That is a miracle which is above Nature, transcends the utmost power
and compass of Nature, in which we see the Godhead putting forth it self in its
abstracted and immediate vigor. Now both these may be seen eminently, in Jesus
Christ; here are wonders, here are miracles, here are mysteries, and all the
deep things of God are treasured up in him, and shine forth from him upon the
world.

Before we look upon him directly in this name of his, and the reasons of it,
we shall present him under some of those types and shadows, whereby he was
represented before his actual coming into the world.

We find him typed forth by wonderful persons, and wonderful things under the
Law, and yet himself more wonderful then all.

For Persons.

1. Adam, a wonderful person, formed by the immediate hand of God without the
concurrence of those natural causes by which men are ordinarily brought forth;
so was Jesus Christ.

Adam had all knowledge, both of God, and the creature by immediate
illumination, and infusion; so had Jesus Christ.

Adam had mankind in his loins, a world within him so had Jesus Christ.

Adam had an universal Lordship and superintendency over the whole Creation; so
had Jesus Christ.

So also Noah, a wonderful person; a man that lived in two worlds, was the term
or period of the Old world, as it is called 2 Pet. 2. 5. and was the beginning
and foundation of the New world after the Flood, which was repaired and built
up again by him, as you read, Genesis 9. Even so Jesus Christ lived first in the
old natural state of man, being under the Law; as the old man, or Adam is, and
was the end or period of that; and then raised up and founded the new spiritual
world, making the old state of things to pass away upon his Cross, and bringing
all things into a new state at his Resurrection.

The next wonderful man we shall speak of, is Melchisedek, whom the Apostle
gives a strange description of, Heb. 7. Without father, without mother, without
beginning, or end of days, and abiding a Priest continually. Some conceived him
to be Sem the son of Noah, as the Samaritans, Vid. Cunaeum lib. 2. cap. 3.
express.
and Hebrews: Others an Angel, as Origin. Others the Holy Ghost, or a certain
divine power of God greater then Christ, as the Melchisedecians. Others Christ
himself appearing in humane form, as Cunaeus, and others. And some conceive him
one of the Kings of Canaan, as A Lapide, whom you may read upon the place: who
ever he was, he was a wonderful person: Said to be without father or mother;
meant, either because his Genealogy is not spoken of; (...): or in reference to
his Priesthood, not descending upon him by Father, Mother, or any natural
succession, as it did upon the Levitical Priests, which is the more probable.

Said also to be without beginning or end of days. viz. as a Priest, his
Priesthood not being after the Order of Aaron, which was to expire, but vested
in him upon such an account as was eminently to be held up, established, and
perpetuated in the Priesthood of Jesus Christ.

And to this man Abraham, and the Levitical Priesthood in his loins that was to
receive Tithes, pays Tithes of all. A wonderful person indeed; and yet in all
this but a shadow of him that is far more wonderful; Jesus Christ: who is
indeed without Father and mother, without beginning and end of days, and
abides a Priest for ever: to whom we all spiritually are to pay tithes, by
acknowledging that we hold all of him, and by resigning all back again unto him.

Another wonderful man was Isaac, issuing out of the dry, and as it were, dead
bodies of Abraham and Sarah; when the vigor and virtue of nature was even
expired; that Sarah laughed at the Promise, saying, How can this be?

So Jesus Christ springs as a root out of a dry ground, as the Prophet speaks,
Isai. 53. 2. When his Glory and Kingdom rises in the world, it is usually out
of causes that seem barren and improbable; and when he rises, and grows up
within us, it is out of a dry and barren spirit, making the Wilderness to bud
and blossom as the Rose, Isai. 35. 1.

And Isaac one in whom all Nations were to be blessed; which is only true of
Jesus Christ, in whom we are blessed with all blessings in heavenly things.

And so Joseph, another person to be wondered at, filled with heavenly wisdom
to interpret secrets, and declare the hidden things of darkness, and therefore
was called Zaphnath Paaneah, Genesis 41. 45. But Christ in this respect more
wonderful, declaring the deep Counsels of God, and opening the Treasuries of
the highest wisdom to the world.

Again, a wonderful person, saving all Egypt alive in the midst of famine; and
his father and brethren from death by that provision which he stored up, and
dispensed to them; so Jesus Christ has all heavenly provisions stored up in
himself, whereby he does feed and nourish the souls of men in the midst of that
spiritual famine that sin has brought upon them.

And yet again wonderful; to whom his Brethrens sheafes, and the Sun, Moon, and
eleven Stars did obeisance, Genesis 37. 7, 9.
in a Dream or Vision: So all power in Heaven and Earth is in the hand of
Christ; and to him every knee shall bow.

To mention but one person more of many: Sampson a Judge. 14, 16.
wonderful man; who slew a Lion with his hand, and tare him in pieces like a
Kid: So does Jesus Christ slay and conquer Satan, break his power and kingdom
in pieces.

Again, Sampson with the jawbone of an Ass, a simple creature, slew above a
thousand men: So Christ by the Word of his mouth, which the world accounts
foolishness, slays the wicked with a destructive, and his people with a wholesome
and saving slaughter.

Again, Sampson took the gates of the City Gaza; and carries them away with the
bars and posts thereof: So our Lord Jesus carries away the gates and bars of
death and sin. And so the withs, and green cords wherewith he was bound, he
brake them in pieces like Tow: Even so Jesus Christ breaks asunder those bands
of the Law, and sin that were upon him; delivered himself from them, and his
people by his presence in them. We might instance in Moses, Joshua, David, and
many others, of whom such wonderful things are reported: but time would fail.

Thus much for the wonderful persons.

We shall next set before you some Wonderful things, that have been from the
beginning of the world, which were all as shadows to represent, and harbingers
to usher in this person in the Text, whose name is Wonderful, into the world.
To speak briefly,

First, the Tree of life in Paradise, a strange thing, that the man that eat
thereof should live for ever: This tree of life is Jesus Christ.

And so Jacobs Ladder, though seen but in a vision, yet was wonderful to Jacob,
whose bottom was upon the Earth, and the top reached Heaven: Jesus Christ is
this Ladder, uniting God and Man, Heaven and Earth together.

Also the burning bush that Moses saw, a strange thing: Exodus 3. 3.
a great sight, as Moses called it, for a little bush, and a devouring flame to
meet together, and yet the bush not consumed of it: So in Jesus Christ, for the
brightness and glory of the divinity to dwell and shine forth in the humanity,
and the humanity not to be extinguished or overwhelmed by it, is very wonderful.

And so Noah's Ark, a strange thing: That being without Rudder, Anchor, Ballast,
etc. should yet preserve Noah, his house, and all the creatures with him upon
the raging waters for an hundred and fifty days: So Genesis 7. 24.
Jesus Christ in a more wonderful manner does preserve his people from that
deluge of divine wrath wherewith others are overwhelmed.

Again, Moses rod turned into a Serpent, devoured the Serpents of the
Egyptians: a very strange thing. So Jesus Christ that brazen Serpent, in the
likeness of serpentine, sinful flesh, does devour the Serpent of sin, and the
flesh within us.

So also the red Sea divided, a wonderful thing: To see a vast raging Sea to
divide it self, being at the place of its division at least 36. English miles
over: and the waters to stand as a solid wall on each side: and so to continue
for several days together, as is probable, that so many thousand Israelites,
with their wives and children, with their beasts and cattle might pass over:
whereas nothing is so fluid, and more hardly contained within its bounds, as
water is.

And then for the waters to move, and take their course upon the Egyptians,
that not one of them was saved: and to keep still divided for the Israelites to
pass over, that not one of them was drowned, and that at one and the same time
also, as may be conceived, is not this wonderful?

Yet this great wonder is but the shadow of a far greater in our Lord Jesus: He
is this red Sea, into whose death, and grave believers spiritually enter, by
dying to sin, and retiring from the world, and by this (as the Israelites) they
pass into life, salvation, victory, and the Rest of God: leaving the lusts of
the flesh, as the Egyptians, behind them, to be both covered, and destroyed for
ever.

And so water out of the rock, a wondrous thing, for a dry rock to give forth
water: and this water to go along 1 Cor. 10. 4.
with the people (as the Apostle speaks) and administer refreshment to them in
their march through the Wilderness: This water and rock are Jesus Christ.

So the brazen Serpent, a strange thing, to heal by looking upon it, and that
which otherwise might seem incurable: This healing Serpent is Jesus Christ.

And so Aarons rod, a mavelous thing, for a dry rod to bud, blossom, and
bring forth Almonds, is very strange. This dry rod is Jesus Christ, who, though
a root out of a dry ground, yet does daily bud, blossom, and bring forth: as he
puts forth several degrees of life, holiness and glory in the spirits of Saints.

But I pass this: And come next to look upon this wonderful person in a more
direct, and immediate aspect. And so we shall present him as three ways
Wonderful.

In his Person. In his Offices. In his Works.
1. First in his Person: which is really (as it was hyperbolically affirmed of
Dionysius the Areopagite) (...), a Treasury of mysteries: He is wonderful as
God, as Man, and as God-Man.

1. As God: And I hope I have not to deal either with Arrians, or Socinians
that deny it.

In God there is nothing but what is infinite, incomprehensible, and
inconceivable, and therefore wonderful: When we turn our eyes upon Divinity, we
are presently swallowed up. As those waters of the Sanctuary we read of Ezekiel.
47. were first to the Ancles, and then to the Knees, and then to the Loins, and
then became waters that could not be passed over, waters to swim in: So as we
ascend from inferior beings, to those that are superior, we find the waters
rising higher and higher upon us, as we meet with perfections of a greater
height and depth, till we arrive at the being of the ever blessed God, and
there we are swallowed up.

Touching the Almighty, says Job, We cannot find him out, Job 37. 23. And in
ver. 19. We cannot order our speech by reason of darkness: And ver. 20. If a
man speak, surely he shall be (...)
swallowed up.

Of that which is called God (says a Learned Ancient) Penitus absorbebitur.
Nec est sensus, nec ratio, nec judicium, nec phantasia, nec Dionys. Areopa.
opinio: Neither sense, reason, judgment, fancy, or opinion can comprehend
him.

And the same Author in an Epistle to Caius the Monk has this divine passage,
Quo propius ad deum ascendimus, eo clarius cognoscimus eum esse supra omnem
cognitionem.
By how much the nearer we come to God, the more clearly we know him to be
above all knowledge.

Bradwardine brings in several Philosophers, giving several descriptions of God.

One this, Deus est qui sola ignoranti^ mente concipitur* God is best known by
ignorance; for all knowledge falls infinitely short of him: And therefore we
best know him, when we come most fully to see that he cannot be known.

Another this, Deus est tenebrae: post omnem lucem in mente relictae; That
darkness or ignorance that is left in the mind after all its light: I conceive
he meant, that what a man comprehends of God, that is not God, but that which
is yet above him, hidden in the dark from him, that is God.

And Plato speaks thus of him: The maker of this Universe it is as hard to find
out, as having found out to speak worthily of him.

But to leave his Divinity which does over-match all finite understanding, we
shall descend to his Humanity, and so we shall find him wonderful.

2. In the second place as Man; He was indeed a man, but the Phoenix of the
world, and Nonesuch, a wonderful man.

Wonderful in his Conception, formed by the immediate finger of the Spirit,
without the concurrence of any natural Plastique power from man; which David in
his own person as the type speaks of, Psalm. 139. 14. I am fearfully, and
wonderfully made: And therefore it was said to the Virgin Mary, The power of
the most High shall overshadow thee; to imply, that Christ was to be formed in
a dark, hidden, and mysterious way within her.

And so he was a man wonderful in wisdom; His wisdom was wonderful, both in
respect of the conveighance of it, and the extent, and perfection of it.

First, for the conveighance, not attained by study, travel, and inquiry, as
Humane knowledge and wisdom ordinarily are: but immediately descending upon him
in the light of the Divinity; the Godhead opening it self upon him, and pouring
forth it self into him. And therefore the Baptist tells us, that what Christ saw
and heard, that he testified: He saw and heard all in God; Joh. 3. 32.
which made the people to wonder at him; saying, Whence has this man this
wisdom, not having known letters? Mark 6. 2.

Secondly, For the perfection of it; all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
were hid in him; when he was but a child, he was found in the Temple, disputing
with the Doctors, and putting them to silence; and we often read, that when the
Scribes and Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law came to entrap him, by the wisdom
of his answers he delivered himself, and sent them away ashamed.

And so further, he was a man wonderful in power; What manner of man is this,
say the people, that the Wind and Seas obey him? Beloved, while you look upon
him speaking to the devils, and they tremble at his voice; speaking to the
dead, and they rise; to the graves, and they open; does not this declare him a
man wonderful in power.

He was also wonderful in his holiness, a man without the least tincture of
sin: and amidst all the tentations and defilements of this world round about
him, yet kept himself unspotted and pure, never departing from his Fathers
Will; never seeking himself in any one act, never so much as beholding any
object through a false and deceitful notion.

And all divine and heavenly perfection and virtues did shine forth in a
wonderful manner in him; wonderful patience, strange humility, unconceiveable
mercy, astonishing kindness, and goodness.

We might add also how he was wonderful at his death, when as the rocks rent,
the graves opened, the dead arose, and darkness was upon the face of the earth:
which made a learned man in those times, cry out (...). Diony. Areopagita. Vid.
Tertul. Apologet.
, Either God suffers, or does sympathize with him that suffers.

But thirdly, Considering him as God-man, so we shall again find wonderful
things in him. Here in General, you may see the Eternal God, coming down into
the lowest depth of debasement and humility, and frail man raised up into the
highest pitch of dignity and glory; so that, as Divinity could not well stoop
lower; so neither could Humanity be raised higher.

1. First, Here we see, a poor low Creature, made one person with the highest
God; two natures infinitely distant, yet so wonderfully united as to make one
person. To see the Elements of differing and contrary qualities, to meet
together in one compound body; to see the soul that is of a spiritual
substance, to be in so near affinity and conjunction with an earthly body, is
strange; but to see God and man met together in one Person, is such a mystery,
that neither men nor Angels can comprehend.

So that by virtue of this union, the properties of the Godhead are ascribed to
the Manhood; as to be Infinite, Omnipotent, etc. And, the properties of the
Manhood are attributed to the Godhead; as to shed blood, dye, and suffer, and
the like.

Yea, for the Creator to become a Creature; for the Eternal Spirit to be made
Flesh; for the Holy God to be made Sin; the Ever-blessed God, to be made a
Curse; the strong God to become weak; the Lord of Life to dye: for riches and
poverty, glory and shame, strength and weakness, righteousness and sin, fullness
and emptiness to meet thus together in this union, is such a Mystery as
swalloweth up all finite Understandings.

2. And Secondly, In this union again, we see Heaven and Earth embracing; and
that two ways. First by way of Reconciliation, Christ in the nature of man,
does reconcile man and this whole Creation to the Father, as the Apostle
speaks, Col. 1. 20. By him to reconcile all things to himself, whether they be
things in earth, or things in heaven. Secondly, by way of union, man being made
one with God, who is in himself a little world, this whole Creation is come
also into a union with God: Christ clothing himself with our nature, was, in a
manner, invested with the whole Creation, and all his works did do him Homage
and Service, and bring in praise and glory to him in the Man Christ Jesus. The
Apostle speaks forth this Mystery, Ephesians. 1. 10. That in the dispensation of the
fullness of times, he might gather together in one, all things which are in
heaven, and which are on earth, even in Incarnatio, est elevatio totius
universi in divinam personam.
him. And, learned Cajetan, speaks thus; says he, The incarnation of Christ,
is the lifting up of the whole Universe into the Divine person.

3. Thirdly, In this union, we see Man in the sovereignty and power of God:
Man, exercising power and dominion over all the works of God; for the Humanity
does cooperate with the Divinity in swaying the Scepter, both of heaven and
earth, Math. 28. 18. All power is given unto me, both in Heaven and in Earth.
And is not this wonderful, to see our Nature, sitting upon the Throne of God,
and reigning in the same authority and sovereignty with the Eternal God?

4. Fourthly, In this union, we yet see further wonders; we see the wonderful
perfections of Almighty God shining forth in the highest and clearest
discoveries of themselves to the world. Though God is wonderful in all his
works: this fabric of Heaven and Earth is a wonderful piece, and much of Gods
glory appears in it; yet nowhere is he so fully and gloriously declared as in
the Man Christ Jesus: so that the Angels themselves, as it were, passing by the
rest of Gods works, do especially gaze upon those discoveries that God has
made of himself in Jesus Christ: we read, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 10. whether
ye speak of Mercy, or of Truth, or of Patience, or of Justice, or of Power, or
of Wisdom: all these in an eminent and astonishing way shine forth in the Man
Christ Jesus. Thus we have showed him first wonderful in his person.

2. In the second place, we shall present him wonderful in his Offices, as King,
Priest, and Prophet: And it is sometheir wonderful to see these three formally
to meet in their highest perfection in one and the same person. Melehizedeck,
was a King and a Priest; Solomon a King and a Prophet; Samuel a Priest and a
Prophet; but we read of none in whom all these Offices did formally meet
together, but in Christ alone.

1. But to consider them distinctly:

First, He is a wonderful King; wonderful in respect of outward meanness; a
great King, and yet in the meanest garb, in the lowest state; born a King, and
yet laid in a Manger; a King, and yet had not where to lay his head; a King,
and yet riding upon a poor silly Ass: In nothing was he like the Kings of this
world. The Thief upon the Cross, desires him, to remember him when he came
into his Kingdom: to whom, I remember Augustine makes these witty
Interrogatories, O thief, what royalty do thou see? Do thou see any other
Crown on his head, but Thorns? any other Scepter in his hand, but nails? any
Throne, but a Cross? any Purple, but Blood? any Guard, but Executioners? Again,
A strange King, if you look upon his anointing: The Spirit was that oil
wherewith he was anointed of God: and the Scepter he sways is a strange
Scepter; other Scepters are of gold and silver, but Christ's Scepter is, the
word of his mouth; by this, he slays the wicked, destroys the Man of sin,
subdues the hearts of men to himself: other Scepters only reach the outward
man, but this puts forth its authority in the soul: by it he writes his Law in
the heart, which no other King can do: This Scepter not only kills, but makes
alive; not only wounds, but heales not only lays commands on men, but gives
heart and power to obey those Commands, which no other Scepter can do.

Again, He is a strange King, if ye look upon the nature of his Kingdom, which
consists not in outward pomp, magnificence and state, worldly honors, riches,
and delights as the Kingdoms of this world, but in righteousness, Romans 14. 17.
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost* Its Power, Majesty, and Glory, is set up and
appears in the hearts of men. Neither is it carried on in a way visible to
sense, for it comes not with observation, but secretly and silently without
noise or tumult insinuates its self into the spirits of men, and is subduing
the world before it. This Kingdom in times of want, suffering, and persecution,
when the Kingdoms of this world are whithering and falling, is then usually in
the most rising and flourishing State; neither is it upheld by the power of
sword, weapons of war, the Authority and Laws of Princes, but by the power of
the Eternal Spirit, by the word of Christ's mouth, and that when the powers of
this world have generally engaged against it.

2. Secondly, If you look upon his Priesthood, He is a wonderful Priest: He is
so a Priest, as that he is also the Altar and the Sacrifice: the Sacrifice is
the Humanity, the Altar is the Divinity; the Priest is both these in their
union; for he himself as God-man, offers up himself as man, upon himself as God.

It is said, Judges 3. 19. that in the Sacrifice which Manoah offered up to the
Lord, The Angel of God did wonderously: The Angel ascended in the flame of the
Altar; which did represent Christ offering up himself as a Sacrifice, in the
flame of his own love, and the fire of his Fathers wrath; In which Sacrifice he
did indeed do wonderously, made an end of sin, brought in everlasting
righteousness, reconciled man and the whole Creation unto his Father, and for
ever perfected them that are sanctified: Other Priests had an outward
consecration, anointing, washing, outward ornaments and attire, as a Mitre,
Breastplate, Vrim and Thummim, an embroidered coat, an Ephod and Girdle, etc.
but Christ had none of these, and yet had all these in a spiritual and
transcendent way.

3. Thirdly, as a Prophet, he was wonderful also; such a Prophet as has his
chair in the hearts of men: A Prophet that not alone presents divine truth to
us, but gives light and understanding for the receiving of the truth he does
present: A Prophet that not only speaks out truth, but brings the soul under
the power and obedience of what he speaks; that unites truth and the soul
together, Christus est qui docet and docetur.
and transforms it into the very nature of it: Yea, he is both the Teacher and
Truth taught. This is the excellency of Theology above all other Sciences; That
the person teaching, and the thing taught, are both one and the same. Thus we
have showed him wonderful in his Offices.

Lastly, He is also wonderful in his works; If you speak first, of the works of
Creation, his wonderfulness shines forth here* There is not the least creature
but speaks out this Name of his. And here I might lead you into the hidden
secrets of Nature, and read you a large Lecture of Natural Philosophy; were it
a work suitable to this place and Auditory: And further, I might carry you along
through the works of Providence, and show you the wonderful administration of
the things of this world; with what admirable Wisdom, Truth, Justice and
Goodness, they are all managed; every Providence, though never so strange,
uncouth, and improbable, yet by Jesus Christ made to center in his Fathers
glory, and his Churches good.

And so we might pass to the work of Redemption, and show you how wonderfully
he has raised up salvation to his people. How wonderfully Satan is conquered,
sin done away, righteousness brought in, Justice satisfied: all the designs of
God, and the necessities of man fully answered in this glorious work. Would you
see the Mystery of it? in one word, it is this, God coming down into Communion
with man in his sin, shame, weakness and misery; and then drawing up man into
Communion with himself in his own Righteousness, Power, Blessedness and Glory:
God departing for a season out of his Glory, and then rising up into it again,
and carrying man into the same glory with himself; as Athanasius boldly
expresses it, (...), God was made man, that man might be deified in himself.

And when he comes actually to bring forth this redemption within us, and to
accomplish the work of salvation in the souls of men; here he is wonderful
again when he comes and sets up a glorious light in the midst of that thick
darkness that before did cover us; when he comes and opens the door of man's
heart that was fast shut up against him, turns the will and the affections into
quite contrary channels, yea, turns upside down the very frame and foundation
of corrupt nature; throws down the powers of darkness, dissolves all the works
of the devil, and sets up a new Creation purely upon a new bottom, erecteth a
beautiful structure of righteousness and holiness, and a spiritual Temple to
the Lord in the midst of that rubbish of confusion, desolation, and disorder
that was there before; and all this by the mere power of his word; He that does
these things, his name is and shall be called wonderful.

These things I briefly pass over, that I might not be too much straightened in
the Application, where I shall speak something further of them.

Application.
Use. 1. This may first serve for Invitation, to draw in souls to Jesus Christ:
First, you that are strangers, me thinks your hearts should be powerfully drawn
to Christ, by that discovery we have now made of him. Things wonderful, every
man has a secret natural itch and appetite to be prying into, and inquiring
after. Things common and ordinary, we slight and pass by; but what is
wonderful, that we are apt to gaze upon. When the Sun is eclipsed, though then
it has lesser glory, yet because there is some strangeness in that appearance,
every man's eye is turned upon it: So, although when we tell you of the glorious
beauty of Christ, and endeavor to set this before you, your souls are not
moved toward him, yet because we tell you there is a wonderfulness in him, let
this draw your eyes and your hearts to him: Many men are of contemplative
spirits, who delight to enquire into the knowledge of things hidden and secret;
here in Jesus Christ are the highest mysteries, and the greatest rarities that
Heaven and Earth can afford. Was not this that which drew the Queen of Sheba
from the uttermost parts of the Earth, the report which she heard of the
wonderful wisdom of King Solomon? And do not stories tell us, that men came
from all parts of the earth to behold the rare beauty of Penelope? But yet, lo,
A greater then Solomon is here, one in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, and a beauty which that of Penelope was scarce a shadow of. Oh
that men would come to feed and to feast their souls in the contemplation of
those rare excellencies, delights and perfections, which are treasured up in
Jesus Christ.

Yea, here are all perfections, not only to gaze upon, but to be improved for
your salvation and happiness. Here is wonderful mercy shall be improved to
pardon thee; wonderful grace to accept and entertain thee: wondrous goodness to
relieve and supply thee: wonderful power to redeem and support thee: wonderful
wisdom to instruct and guide thee: and wonderful holiness to adorn and
sanctify thee* and wonderful fullness to fill and satisfy thee.

And as for you who already know him; seeing he is wonderful, be you still
searching and enquiring into him; his Person, his Offices, his Works, for in
all he is wonderful. Things that are wonderful, have a height, depth, and
breadth in them, not easily discovered: and the further we search into this
great mystery, the Lord Jesus, the more will his wonderfulness shine forth
upon us: And though we may see an end of all created perfection; yet in him
there is still a perfection beyond our reach to entertain our admiration.
Solomon does advise us to seek after wisdom as silver, and to search after her
as hidden treasure: This wisdom is our Lord Jesus, in whom all the treasures of
heaven are hidden and laid up; and are discovered unto those spirits that are
in the power and light of God searching into them: The Apostle in the third to
the Ephesians. having spoken in the beginning of the Chapter of the great mystery
of Christ which was hid in God, comes to pray in ver. 18. that the Ephesians
might be able with all Saints to comprehend what is the height, depth, length
and breadth: In natural things there are but three dimensions, length, breadth
and depth: but here are four for Saints to be daily exercised in the
comprehending of.

Oh that therefore you would bend your thoughts hither, and fix your
contemplation upon the wonders of Jesus Christ! Especially considering, that
Christ has this name Wonderful given him in order to your salvation, and as he
is the Savior of his people: So that you do but discover the treasures of your
own comfort, happiness and glory, while you are enquiring and searching into
him. As you find him a rich Mine, and unsearchable riches treasured up in him:
so are they all laid out upon your salvation. As the eye of your soul goes
before, and makes discovery; so Faith, the hand of your soul, may follow after,
and take hold of what is discovered. He that is heir apparent to the Crown,
looks upon the Majesty, Royalty and Riches of the King, with another eye then a
mere stranger; the one may gaze upon them, and wonder; but the other does
behold them as in a propriety, and so does secretly possess them, rejoice and
glory in them.

Use 2. If the Lord Jesus be thus wonderful, then let us not circumscribe and
limit him; not confine and measure him by our narrow understanding; seeing he
is in every respect wonderful. And,

1. Take heed of limiting his Person, by framing mean and low conceptions of
those immense perfections that are in himself: we are apt to conceive of him,
by what we see in the creature, and to measure the Infinite by the finite: his
infinite beauty, mercy, sweetness, and wisdom by what we see of these among the
creatures below: Indeed Jesus Christ has all these perfections of the creature
in himself, but in such an eminent and transcendent manner, as no created
understanding can reach. To whom will you liken the Lord, says the Prophet, or
what likeness will you compare unto him? Isa. 40. 18. And there is nothing that
can be compared to him, in Heaven or Earth: And therefore when thou fallest
down before him to worship him, take heed of representing him to thy self under
any created form, lest thou worship an Idol set up in thy brain instead of God.
Si quis viso Deo, cognovit id quod vidit, non illum vidit, says a Learned man:
Thou that say, thou see God, if thou do Comprehend what thou see, thou
see not God; for he is infinitely above all comprehension.

2. Take heed of limiting him in respect of his working, for he is herein also
wonderful: Which speaks out three things:

1. Prescribe him not his way, dictate not to him his method; for if we do, we
limit him: He will accomplish his own designs and end, but happily in such a way
as thou did never imagine: for, he is wonderful. Who Isa. 40. 13.
has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor has taught him?
says the Prophet. In nothing is God more wonderful, then in the path and
method wherein he walks: And this is that which many forward Professors in our
days have been offended at; having prescribed to God his way, wherein they
intended to follow him, he choosing out another-way to himself, they have then
deserted him, and departed from him.

2. Again, do not distrust him, for then we limit him: As the Israelites thus
limited God; Can God (say they) prepare a Table in the wilderness? Can he give
us water in this dry and thirsty Land? We forget this name of his in the Text,
when ever we distrust him: we say indeed that he is Almighty, and
All-sufficient, but when we come into such extremities that Almightiness must
help us or nothing, how do our hearts faint and die within us? He is wonderful
in Counsel to guide thee, in Power to support thee, in Mercy to pardon thee, in
Goodness to supply thee; and therefore distrust him not. Thou happily see the
work of thy salvation encountered with great difficulties, and strong
opposition, and great mountains laid in the way of Sions glory: yet let the
remembrance of this name of his support thy faith against them all.

3. Do not censure him: when he has put thy reason to a stand, and is quite
gone out of thy sight, and is doing his work under the dark clouds, that thou
can not see him, and where thou would least look for him, censure him not:
for, he is wonderful. He will answer the prayers of his people, and work out
the salvation of Sion, but in a way that few shall be able to bear.

We have cried and prayed for Justice, for Reformation, for the Kingdom of
Christ, the throwing down the Man of Sin: but few of us knew what indeed we
prayed for; and therefore when God has been giving in these things to us,
though not according to our apprehensions of them, the same zeal has been
improved against them as was before for them.

And so we now pray for the conversion of the Jews; but happy is that man that
shall be able to stand to his own prayers, when God shall come to effect this;
for it will be such a time of trouble, as has never been since there was a
Nation as Daniel speaks, Dan. 12. 1. And the work may be done in such a way, as
that those men that have prayed for it, may then oppose it. I know many men who
now pray for the conversion of the Jews, and yet would be ready to oppose their
coming to live amongst us; which may yet seem to be the most probable way of
effecting it.

Use 3. If Jesus Christ be wonderful, let us learn to have high expectations of
him; let this give life to our hopes, and wings to our faith: thou have great
works to be done within thee, great corruptions to be subdued; great
temptations conquered; great wants to be supplied; and so there are yet great
works to be done in the world, the peace of Sion to be established, the throne
of the Beast to be demolished, the Nations to be called and gathered, the
Gospel to be propagated, Gog and Magog to be destroyed; judgment and
righteousness to be settled in the Earth; that nothing but wonderful power and
wisdom is able, to accomplish these things; yet, let our expectations be kept
up to the height; for here is One whose name is Wonderful, is engaged in them:
And we shall see this name of his, written upon the instruments whereby he
works, and upon the method wherein he walks, and upon the glory and perfection
of the works themselves when they are brought to pass; His works all along
shall savor of this name of his.

Our expectation of a person, is usually, according to his abilities; as the
man is, so is his strength; and as his strength is, so are his actings: what
manner of salvation may Saints then expect from such a wonderful person, as
Jesus Christ, and who will ingrave this Name of his in visible Characters all
along upon it!

Use 4. If Jesus Christ be thus wonderful, then sure it is both his
expectation, and our duty, to wonder at him. Let us learn then, silently to sit
down and wonder at what we cannot comprehend. Sure this is the great end of
God, in all those wonderful appearances of his, in the Lord Jesus, to put the
hearts of his poor people for ever, into a sweet astonishment.

It is said of Christ at his glorious appearance, that he shall come to be
admired in all that believe, 2 These. 1, 10. He shall appear every way
wonderful; and the proper and genuine entertainment of wonderful things, is to
wonder at them.

We never better find Christ, then when we do most lose our selves in him: This
divine admiration is that sacred mount which the soul ascending, there enjoys
the clearest vision of God, and sweetest communion with him. Therefore let us
set apart some time, every day, to go up into this mount of vision, retiring
our selves from our selves, and all things visible and secular, and divinely
gaze upon these wonderful things of Jesus Christ, till we find a sweet
amazement seizing upon all the powers of the soul, and carrying them forth into
a divine ecstasy. And,

First, Look upon his person, and wonder there; look upon him first, in the
glory of his Divinity, and lose thy self in it, as in a sea of sweetness and
pleasures: pursue thy thoughts, till thou arrivest at infinity, and there
delight to lose thy self; for the more thou know of God, the more shall thou
be better able to see, that he is above all knowledge.

The mind of man has three degrees of the knowledge of God, as a Learned man
has observed. In the first degree it uses many words of God; in the second
fewer; in the third none at all, but is stricken dumb with silence; as seeing
all words falling infinitely short of him: As Job, he was at his first
discourse with God full of words, whiles he knew him only by the hearing of the
Ear; but after a more clear sight and knowledge, words fail him, and he lies
down dumb at the feet of God, saying, Once have I spoken, but I will no more;
yea twice, but I will proceed no further. Job 40. 5.

That you may be upon some advantage for this heavenly Work; we shall briefly
set some of the divine perfections of Christ before you; and then forbear
wondering if you can.

First, Look upon his Knowledge, and wonder; his knowing all things past,
present, and to come, open and secret, certain, and contingent; that which
shall be, that which shall never be; and all this not by species, or
information from others, but immediately by himself; not by succession, but all
at once; not by discourse or reason, but in one simple intuitive act: what
wonderful knowledge is this!

Then look upon his Immensity, and wonder, being one who contains all things,
and yet is contained of nothing: comprehends all things, and yet is himself
incomprehensible, whom the heavens, yea, the heaven of heavens cannot contain,
whose center is everywhere, and circumference nowhere, as an Heathen speaks of
God; so that his presence is as much with one creature as with all, and with
all as with one; is as much in one place as all; in all places as one: what a
wonderful person is this!

And so look upon his Eternity and wonder. Eternity (as the Schools define it)
is, Interminabilis, and tota simul vitae possessio; The possession of an
endless life all at once. Time it is Nunc fluens, but Eternity is Nunc stans,
an everlasting moment; whereby, Christ (considered as God) possesses his own
endless life in one moment: so that, there is nothing past to him, nothing
future, but both parts of Eternity (as Divines speak) and all things that have
been, are, or shall be betwixt these two parts are actually present, and that
continually before his face.

Then turn your eyes, and look upon him in his Simplicity, and wonder; In the
Divinity (which we are now speaking to) there is no manner of division,
composition, or alterity at all; though we are ready both to divide, it, and
compound it through the weakness of our understanding; here Wisdom is the same
thing with Power, and Power with Justice, and Justice with Mercy: nay, there is
not matter and form, actus and potentia, essence and operation in him: the
power by which he acts, and the act it self, are all one in God. As God loving
himself, the loving, the loved, and the love, that is the band of both, is all,
but one and the same thing.

And lastly, to go no further here: look upon him in his Eminency and wonder,
as having all the perfections of every creature, from the highest to the lowest
Eminently in himself, they being all but dark beams of that divine glory
whereof he is the Sun from which they proceed, and upon which they do depend,
and are infinitely, as in the first cause comprehended in himself. As Xeuxis,
when he drew the Picture of Helena, had all the beautiful Virgins of Greece
before him; and whatever stamp of beauty or comeliness he saw in any, put all
into that one Picture: so all the several stamps and lineaments of beauty which
are scattered up and down through the whole Creation, are all gathered up in a
transcendent manner in the person of Jesus Christ.

And to look lower, down upon his Humanity, and there wonder at those rare
perfections and eminent graces that dwell in it: look upon it as the
Representative of all the Saints, the Epitome of the whole Creation; behold it
in that intimate and immediate conjunction it has with the Godhead: and here
wonder to see how heaven and earth embrace: the Humanity raised infinitely
high; the Divinity stooping infinitley low: God coming down in this humanity
unto us; and through it raising us up unto himself, and his own life,
blessedness and fullness, as we spoke before;

And then pass on to his Works, and admire him there.

First, the works of Creation, for this name of his in the Text is visibly
written there: here are as well mysteries for admiration, as causes for reason,
even such as have non-plust the deepest Philosophers, and the ablest Humanists:
so that the creatures are not (as the Papists say of their Images) Idiotarum
libri, books for Idiots only, but Cabinets of wonders for the highest Scholars
and Christians to admire. David speaking of these works of God, in the 104.
Psalm. His heart was so full, that he is faint in the midst of his discourse to
stand still, and wonder; saying, as in the 24. verse. O Lord, how manifold are
thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all. And Elihu calls upon Job, Chap.
37. 14. Hearken, O Job, stand still, and consider the wonderful works of God.
And God presenting these before him, drove him into a speechless silence; as we
read, Job 40. 4. I will lay my hand upon my mouth.

And Agur, Prove. 30. 4. looking upon the Creation, wonders at the Creator; Who
has ascended up into heaven, or descended; who has gathered the wind with his
fists, who has bound the waters in a garment, who has established all the
ends of the earth? What is his name, or his Sons name, if thou can tell? And
give me leave by way of imitation of this holy man, to propound some questions
to you.

What is it that props up the heavens that they fall not; and what hidden
virtue or quality wherles them about in such a rapid and regular motion? Whence
is it? That the Sun, Moon, and Stars send their light, heat, and influence
downward, when it is more natural for light and heat to ascend upward? What is
it? that gives the Rainbow its various colors, and bends it through the sky
like a bow? What is that? which thunders in the clouds, and ratleth like a
Chariot in the heavens? Whence has the wind its force, and out of what
treasury is it brought forth?

And to come yet lower: Whereupon are the foundations of the earth fastened,
and what Axel tree bears up the burden of it? Whence is the ebbing and flowing
of the sea; and why do not the proud waves thereof overflow the bancks, when as
they rise many degrees above them? Whose power and wisdom has done all these
things, what is his name, or his sons name, if thou can tell?

Make this heavenly advantage of your Country houses, as to admire the wonders
of God that shine forth there round about you. Every Flower in the Garden, Tree
in the Orchard, those several beauties wherewith thou see the Earth bedecked,
may represent this wonderful one Jesus Christ in a delightful appearance to
thee: who is the sweetness of all things sweet: the beauty of all things
beautiful: the glory of all things glorious. Yea, who is the form of every
form, the life of all lives: that One Eternal root and seed, out of which all
other seeds and roots do originally spring. And all that multiplicity,
diversity, contrariety which is seen in things here below, do meet in the
greatest simplicity and unity in him: for it is unity that brought forth
plurality: and all plurality is eminently comprehended in unity. And therefore,
seeing Jesus Christ has as it were multiplied himself into such various
beauties, forms, and images, let us by these rise up above these, unto himself
who is all, and infinitely more then all these. And endeavor in the most
simple and abstracted acts of the mind, to close with him, who is the most
simple and abstracted being; ascending from the finite to the infinite, from
the visible to the invisible, from the corruptible to that which is eternal.

And then, pass on to the works of Providence, and wonder again here:
Providence, it is Ordinatio rerum ad finem, as Aquinas speaks: And it is
wonderful to see how providence does sweetly dispose of all things to their
proper ends. As, we see in a Watch, the wheels are many, their motions various
and contrary; that an unskilful man sees no reason or method in them: but the
wise Artificer sees method and reason in all. So divine providence, in a secret
and invisible way, guides the several, cross, and interfering motions of the
creature, with much Order and harmony, to their due and proper end.

And here I might lead you back into the Story of former times, and show you
the wonders of providence in the several Ages of the world; and in what a
strange method it has carried on the affairs of the Nations: especially those
that have more immediately referred to his Church; how wonderfully it has been
preserved, as a Lamb in the midst of Wolves, as a little spark of fire in the
midst of those impetuous waves of persecution that have every moment threatened
to overwhelm her: Yea, and how in all Ages, God has made the malice and policy
of her enemies to conduce to her further spreading and rising in the world.

But we need go no further then our own Nation, and these latter years; wherein
God has carried on the affairs of his people, by a continued series of wonders.

To extirpate that Prelatical power that had so deeply riveted it self into the
bowels of the Nation, and yet the Nation stand, is wonderful.

To raise up the heads of a: few contemptible men, the People of God in this
Nation, called Puritans in the dialect of late times, and since put under other
disguizes, to represent the (...) to ^^ise up these, and make them to become a
terror to their enemies, though far more and mightier in outward strength then
they, is again wonderful.

And further, to consider what eminent acts of Justice have been done upon men
of the highest rank, of the greatest power, and interest.

What changes have been made in Government, both Martial and Civil; putting
both into new forms, and models; and all this to be done without the loss and
destruction of both, is, to considering men, strange and wonderful.

As also to behold what mighty Armies have been subdued, what impregnable Forts
gained, what deep and desperate Plots discovered, what eminent Victories
achieved in England, Scotland, Ireland: as scarce any Age can report the like:
All these laid together, may cause us with astonishment to cry out, as it is in
Balaams Prophecy, What has God wrought! Who can look upon Number. 23. 23.
these things with an unprejudiced spirit, and not stand still and wonder?

And to you that are Saints experienced in the love of God, and the life of
Christ, and the divine methods of grace, in your salvation; look hither, and
wonder.

First, wonder at that mercy that has pardoned thee: considering what a kind
of thing sin is, how it strikes at the very Authority, Dignity, Life, and Being
of God: how it robs him of his glory, seeks to undermine him, in the great
designs he is carrying on in the world, makes Him a shadow, a mere nothing,
setting up it self, or some poor creature in his Throne: I say, that God should
pardon such a thing as this: yea, thousand thousands, even an infinite number
of sins, and that freely, above the desert, and against the desert of the
(...), speaks out his mercy wonderful.

And wonder again at that grace which has accepted thee, in thy rags; embraced
thee, in thy blood; followed after thee, when thou wast running from it; laid
hold on thee, and overcame thee, when thou wast fighting against it.

And so look upon his patience, and wonder at it, that did so long wait upon
thee, bear and strive with thee, whiles thou wast desperately fighting against
heaven, and wilfully barring up thine heart against the most high.

And then look upon that transcendent happiness, those unutterable delights,
dignities, prerogatives and perfections which God has provided for thee, and
bestowed upon thee in Jesus Christ, look on them till thou art amazed before
them.

And further, look within thine own breast, and wonder at the goings and
workings of God in thine own heart: what strange innovations he has made
within thee: what glorious deliverances he has accomplished for thee: When
Christ was upon the Earth, he opened the eyes of the blind; unstopped the ears
of the deaf: raised the dead, dispossessed the devils, rebuked the wind, calmed
the seas, stopped issues of blood, cleansed the Leapers, etc. which the people
beholding, in one place we read, they wondered greatly, in another, they were
astonished with a great astonishment, in a third, saying, What manner of man is
this?

So, can thou look within thee, and see all these works, and miracles
wrought, in thine own heart? let that glorious power, that has done these
things, be wonderful to thee.

And from what I have now said, there are three sorts of persons justly to be
reproved.

1. Those who in stead of wondering, do condemn and deride those things that are
wonderful, and which they cannot comprehend, as the Papists, Lutherans,
Arminians do the high and secret work of divine Vid. Calv. Instit lib. 3. ca. 23
Predestination; The Celestines, and Manichees the Doctrine of Gods particular
Providence: And some in our days have exploded the deep mystery of the Trinity,
as a chaffy and absurd Opinion: and so the high mysteries of the Gospel, were
laughed at, as ridiculous and foolish Melior est sidelis ignorantia quam
temeraria scientia. Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 20.
things, when they were preached by the Apostles to the world; men measuring
divine things by carnal reason, comprehend them not, and so turn from them,
with offense or derision.

Not but that all the truths of heaven, and all the ways of Godliness are
built upon the purest and sublimest reason in the world: and when reason in man
is elevated and renewed into its primitive state, and is not biased or seduced
by fleshly lusts, it suggests nothing that is repugnant to the Oracles of God,
or inconsistent with true Christianity; but Reason considered as in its present
situation in the midst of fleshly lusts, and debased and degraded by the Fall,
so it discerns not the things of the Spirit, nor is it subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be.

2. Secondly, This serves also to reprove the Curious, who dive into things
above their reach, and have an ear to hear where God has not had a tongue to
speak, will venture to pry even into the secrets of heaven, and beat their
brains about unattainable, if not unprofitable knowledge. Things above us, we
are rather to admire, then too busily inquire into: As Paul does modestly leave
that deep mystery of the breaking off the Jews, and grafting in of the Gentiles
with an (...), as we read, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches, of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! and Dionysius Areop. reading the Book of the
Revelation, left it thus, Non reprobo quod non intelligo; sed eo magis admiror,
quo minus assequor; I do not reject what I do not understand; but the less I
comprehend, the more I wonder.

And here I might (though perhaps, not without a little digression) acquaint
you with the frothy fancies, and vain disquisitions of some of the Schoolmen,
and other modern Writers: As, One will undertake to tell us what was our
Saviors dispute among the Doctors: Another, what he wrote with his finger upon
the ground: a third, what became of Moses his body; and where is local hell;
and what language Saints shall speak in heaven; and who shall sit highest in
heaven; and when is the day of Judgment; and in what place the world shall be
judged. When Peter asked our Savior somewhat a curious question concerning
John, Joh. 21. 21. And what shall this man do? Christ's takes him up somewhat
roundly, in the next verse, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that
to thee? follow thou me; And so the disciples propounding a question of the
like import, Act. 1. 6. Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom
to Israel; Jesus Christ gives them a check for it, in the following words. It
is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in his
own power; so far as we can find footing, it is safe to wade; and so far as is
revealed, to search, and leave secret things unto him to whom they do properly
belong.

3. Thirdly, and especially, This reproves sottish people among us, who though
the Lord Jesus is thus every way wonderful, in his Person, Offices, and Works;
and though God has in such an admirable way discovered himself, through him,
unto the world; yet pass him by, look not upon him, as if there was nothing in
him worthy their thoughts, or to be wondered at.

Some are Ignorant of Jesus Christ, have never seriously set themselves to
inquire into the deep mysteries of the Gospel, in whom the god of this world
has blinded 2 Cor. 4. 4.
their eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ shines not upon
them, but live as if there was neither Christ, nor Gospel, nor Heaven, nor God
in the world. And though he has made his arm so naked, in his might works
among us; yet have not seen him, or taken notice of him to this day. David
sadly complains in Psalm. 106. 7. Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in
Eggpt, etc. but provoked thee at the sea, even the red sea: so, many understand
not the present design of God, and the import of his late glorious works; but
by their murmurings, discontents, and detractions from his glory, provoke him
to anger against them.

Others are taken up about things secular and earthly; about their private
ends, personal interests, raising their estates, advancing themselves, and
their children, and are so buried in the world, that they look not up to Jesus
Christ, to admire those divine wonders that are evidently held forth in him.
The Prophet complains of some, Isa. 5. 12. That the Harp the Viol, the Tabret,
and wine are in their Feasts, but they regard not the works of the Lord, nor
consider the operation of his hands. Men, whose eyes are bewitched and dazzeled
with the enchanting splendour of earthly things, are disabled from beholding and
admiring the Spiritual glory of Jesus Christ, and of his works. Philo Judaeus,
speaking of such persons, gives them this Lib. de mundi opificio.
Character, (...), more admiring the world, then the maker of the world. God
has made the creatures, and all the beauties and delights of them to be as so
many steps to raise men up to himself, and they determine their thoughts and
affections upon them, and rise no higher, and so are spiritually guilty of that
Idolatry which the Apostle charge upon the Heathens, Romans 1. Who worshipped,
and served the creature more then the Creator, God blessed for ever. Romans 1. 25.

But that we may now in the close of all excite you to this heavenly work of
Admiration, we shall set it before you, both in the sublimity, and the efficacy
of it, that you may not look upon it as a fancy, or a mere speculation.

1. First, for the sublimity of it: This divine admiration is that act of the
soul, which of all others does most sublimate and raise it. It is a kind of
divine rapture, wherein the soul is brought to see that which is infinitely
above all sight, and to enjoy that which is beyond all comprehension: The soul
has never such a clear sight of God as God, then when she is rapt up highest,
in the admiration of him: for so long as in our pursuits after God in his
being, or in his works, we comprehend what we pursue, we conceive him under
some finite notion, and make but a creature of him; but, when the soul loses
it self in him, when all understanding cease; and is silently wondering at
what it cannot comprehend, and lies down astonished under the brightness of that
glory it cannot behold: now has it a rude discovery, even of infinity, and
incomprehensibleness.

And thus the Saints in glory, though their spirits are raised, enlarged,
fortified, that they might be able to receive living streams of bliss,
pleasures, and beauty that flow from the face of God; yet, there is something
still in him infinitely beyond what they receive, or can possibly comprehend,
into which they are absorpt, and swallowed up, and enjoy it only by a holy
amazement, and admiration of it.

2. But Secondly, look upon it in the efficacy of it, this admiring Jesus
Christ, will,

1. Enlarge, and open our mouths in his praises. How natural is it for
greatness and admired excellency, to set the heart and tongue upon praising!
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: If the heart be filled
with anger, the tongue will be bitter and invective: If with joy, it is full of
singing and triumphant expressions of its own contentment: and so, if it be
filled with admiration of any excellency, though for a while it may be
silenced, yet will presently break forth into exaltation and praise. It is
said, Matthew. 15. 31. When the multitude heard the dumb to speak, and saw the
lame to walk, they wondered, and glorified God; first; wondered, and then
glorified. And so 2 These. 1. 10. It is said, Christ shall come to be admired in
his Saints, and to be glorified in them that believe. We cannot but glorify
him, when once we do admire him. And indeed, what is not wonderful to us, that
we are not apt much to extol or praise. As I have read of a fellow, who having
perused a very obscure and difficult Author, and being demanded his judgment
of it, Answered, (...), etc. What I understood in him was excellent, and what I
understood not, sure was more excellent; so will the soul that has a real
acquaintance with Jesus Christ say: what I know and understand of him is very
sweet, glorious, and worthy of praise: but, what I cannot understand, but is
yet above my reach, that is sure more sweet, more glorious, and more praise
worthy.

2. This will also possess the soul with an awful, and reverential fear of him:
A divine and holy fear of God, fills the heart, whiles it is wondering at him.
When the soul is gazing upon a majesty and glory, that is infinitely above it,
it cannot but secretly tremble before it. As the Disciples beholding the glory
of Christ, at his Transfiguration, Matthew. 17. it is said, they fell on their
faces, and were sore afraid. And Job having looked upon, and wondered at the
incomprehensible works of God, confesses, Chap. 37. 1. That his heart
trembled, and was moved out of its place. Therefore well have the Schoolmen
made admiration one of the kinds of fear; for the soul has a secret fear of
the greatness of that object, which it wonders at, but cannot comprehend: As
Augustine speaking of the deeps of divine Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 20.
Providence, and the secrets of Predestination, against those that cavil at
them, says, Quaeris turationem? ego expavescam altitudinem: Art thou enquiring
a reason? I will tremble at the height, etc. When a man is beholding the
infinite wisdom, purity, and excellency of Christ, it cannot but make him to
reflect upon his own darkness, filthiness, and baseness, with an holy fear and
trembling.

3. This will also draw out the soul to a more confident dependence upon Jesus
Christ. Could we comprehend the utmost bounds of that power and wisdom, that
righteousness and fullness that is in him: they were but finite, and so we might
distrust them, as not able to serve our turns: But seeing he is every way
wonderful, his righteousness a wonderful righteousness, his power, wisdom,
mercy, all wonderful, above all our thoughts: this makes him to be a sure
Bulwark, a strong and everlasting Rock for the soul to rest and betrust it self
upon. So that, have thou been a wonderful sinner? here is a more wonderful
Savior: are thy sins wonderfully great? here is a more wonderful mercy to
pardon them, and righteousness to atone for them: And are thy wants, thy
weakness, thy distempers wonderful, that thou can not know them? here is
power, holiness, fullness more wonderful, and farther above thy knowledge. And
therefore cast thy self with much confidence upon him in all streights, wants,
dangers, and difficulties whatsoever.

4. This will also have another effect, it will take off thine heart from
admiring the creature. By thy wondering at Jesus Christ, thy soul will be so
raised and enlarged, that it will apprehend all things besides him, but mean
and trivial. The Eye, having beheld the brightness of the Sun, sees all other
light far below it. Moses seeing him that is Invisible, beheld such riches and
glory, enjoyed such sweetness and pleasures in God, as made the Heb. 11. 24.
25. 29.
glory and pleasures of Pharoahs Court mean, and worthless in his esteem. Paul
being rapt up to the third heavens, and in a divine ecstasy, admiring the
unutterable things Phil. 3. 8.
of Christ, accounted all but loss and dung for the knowledge of him. And our
Lord Jesus living always in the clear sight of his Fathers glory, was not at
all allured or affected with the glory of the Kingdoms of this world, when it
was by Satan set before him. (...), says the Philosopher, Men of great and
raised spirits, despise those things which others are taken with.

And, nothing will be so effectual to bring down the thoughts of man to a mean
esteem of himself, then to be thus raised in the admiration of Jesus Christ.
That act of the soul that does most exalt Christ, does most debase man. As
those two Stars called Gemini, the one arises as the other falls: So as
Christ is raised and exalted in us, so do we fall down lower and lower in the
esteem of our selves.

5. Lastly, This will also lead the heart into an holy boasting, and triumphant
rejoicing in Jesus Christ. As man will more boast in a treasure that he knows
is inexhausted, then in the greatest riches and possessions that he can
discover the bounds of; So whiles we are beholding the fullness and riches of
Christ, as inexhausted, and unsearchable, and are wondering at them; this will
naturally carry out our spirits to boast and triumph in him; When after all thy
knowledge of him, thy Commmnion with him, thy enjoyments and receipts from him,
thou hear yet a voice speaking to thee, thou shall yet enjoy and see greater
things then these.

Use last: I have only one word more to add: If Jesus Christ be thus wonderful,
and declares this name of his, especially in our salvation: Let us learn and
endeavor to be wonderful in our actings for him, as he is in his actings for
us. That we may now all strive to be (as it was said of Zach. 3. 8.
Joshua the Priest, and his fellows in another sense) men of wonder. Surely if
we do visibly deny our selves, subject all our own Interests to the glory of
Christ, the promoting the Gospel, and establishing Justice and Righteousness in
the Nation, and in our whole conversation, cross the common course of the
world, we shall be men of wonder in our generation, and in generations yet to
come: that England may be made the wonder of the world for righteousness,
wisdom, truth, and holiness, as it has been made the wonder of the world for
salvations and deliverances. Surely we shall not answer the extraordinary
appearances of Christ for us, if we do not now extraordinarily and eminently
appear for him: He now has put us to the trial, by giving great opportunities
into our hands; and certainly great things may be done, if we lay down
Animosities, self ends, and corrupt principles, and with sincerity, wisdom, and
unity, address to the great works of God and the Nation that are before us. The
change of Government will avail us little; the name of a Commonwealth will do
little service, if we do not see the common good sought and promoted, common
grievances and burdens removed, and Common Justice impartially administered
throughout the Nation. And O that you (Right Hnorable) who sit at the Stern of
this City, and those that do, or hereafter may sit at the Stern of this
Commonwealth, would set their shoulders effectually to these great works, that
the poor Church of Christ may live and flourish under the wings of such Rulers
and Governors, which the Lord has promised she should enjoy in these last
times: And that sweet promise may be fulfilled upon her, Isai. 60. 17, 18. I
will also make thy Officers peace, and thine Exactors Righteousness; Violence
shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders;
but thou shall call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

FINIS.

