GOOD THINGS TO COME. OR, A Setting forth some of the Great Things that will
Contemporize and take place, when our Lord Christ shall come again, mentioned
in the holy Scriptures. I. As the resurrection and raising of the dead to live
again: with the order of it. II. The reign of our Lord Christ here on earth,
and for how long; namely, till he has subjected all his enemies, and put them
under his feet. III. The resigning and delivering up the kingdom by the Lord
Christ unto the father of whom he received it. IV. Of God the Father, then
becoming all, in all, in Dominion, power, and rule, the great Omega. V. Of the
kingdom of the father, Succeeding that surrender and giving up by the Lord
Christ, and something the holy Scriptures intimate concerning the same, with
sundry other things treated of by way of essay from 1 Cor. 15.
The Second Part. Containing the proposing of that great Mystery showed by holy
Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 53. That the Saints then alive shall not die but be changed,
with something concerning the Restoration and world to come, and New Earth,
which at the coming again of our Lord, will take place. By P. G. B

1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Joh. 16. 22. But I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy no man takes from you.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed, in the Year, 1675.

To the READER.
HEre is offered to thy view and consideration, some of those great good things
to come; which will take place at the coming of the Lord Christ in power and
great glory: the certainty of them is great: the faithfulness of God is
engaged to make them good, and his power none can question: for encouragement
to hope and wait patiently until the appointed time come of their fulfilling:
they were collected together, and set forth also; and likewise that the further
knowledge and understanding of them might take place, and the vails removed
that hinders the breaking forth of the light thereof. The time hasteneth; the
day draws nigh; some further light would be very comfortable to the blessed
expectances of his coming. It is expected that the making of it public, will
be differently resented; some it may be will dislike it, or something in it, as
fabulous; some happily will decry it, as holding forth something erroneous; some,
that those things are not so necessary for these times; others, it is likely,
may be well pleased and glad of them; and being such things as they have not
thought of, will consider soberly of them, and it may be some fruit may follow
for the further advancing the knowledge of the coming of the Lord Christ and
his kingdom, and all those great things spoken of in the scriptures of truth,
that shall come and take place at that happy day. Though there seems much in
the spirits of some against it; yet notwithstanding the further knowledge of
these things gets ground, and is much on the spirits and hearts of many of the
good servants of God and lovers of the Lord Jesus, whom nothing pleases more,
and makes their hearts glad and joyful, then to hear of the coming of their
dear savior again; and it is likely, it will be so, more and more, as the day
thereof draws nigh; something of the good spirits of God in the bride, will
cause this desire, and cause it to grow higher and higher: the spirit and the
bride, will say come: oh come Lord Jesus come quickly: this matter was much on
the spirits of the blessed servants of God of old, as the Apostle Peter tells
us, in 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11. who comprehensively speaking of the great salvation,
not only in the beginnings, but also in the full and final completing of it,
says, Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently,
etc. Searching what, or what manner of time, etc. They searched, what, about
the sufferings and glory; and what manner of time. 1st. In regard of his coming
in the state of humiliation to suffer, And 2ly. His coming in glory to reign:
the spirit of Christ in them did signify, declare, and show, aforehand, the
sufferings of the Lord Christ, which they also declared before hand, and they
came all to pass: and the glory that should follow after; which is yet to
come, and looked for by the servants of God, and shall be made good as the
others were, when our Lord shall come in the glory of his father, and of all
the holy Angels. And as the prophets of God in the old testament, and the
Apostle Peter since in the new (as in the last mentioned scripture, and in Acts
3. 18. to 21. 1 Pet. 4. 13. chap. 5. 4. 2. 13. 14.) have spoken of, and looked
for his great salvation: so, the Apostle Paul, and John, have therein likewise
told, of the great things, that will attend and take place, at the time of that
glorious coming of our Lord: when he appears, we also shall appear with him
in glory, Col. 3. 4. Be like him, and see him as he is, John. 3. 2. shall not
only behold his glory and admire him, but be also glorified and admired in
them. 2 The. 1. 10. shall be ever with him, 1 The. 4. 17. His tabernanacle with
them, and he dwelling amongst them: they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God, Rev. 21. 3. And being made kings and
Priests unto God, by Christ, shall reign with him upon the earth, Rev. 5. 10.
Rev. 20. 4. 5. 6. The blessed Restoration or restitution of all things; a new
heaven and a new earth (very heavenly): and all things made new. Acts. 3. 19.
20. 21. Rev. 21. 1. 5. True and faithful sayings: in the general, or for the
matter of them, foretold and confirmed by our Lord himself, before his death;
as in several places in the four Evangelists; and also more particularly and
plainly since his resurrection and ascension, as in this book of the
Revelation, which is his, Rev. 1. 1. and given him by God the father to
communicate to his servants for their joy and comfort; likewise, then, and
there, that blessed potentate, king of kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lord
Jesus, shall reign gloriously; and the kingdom, and dominion, and greatness of
the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall come into the hands of the saints of
the most high God, as Daniel has foretold, Dan. 7. 27. Dan. 2. 44. also Christ
himself, and John, as is before mentioned. In the world to come, after the
burning and destroying of this 2. Pet. 3. 7. to 13. will this it is very likely
take place; when the righteous will flourish indeed, and be happy: as now they
may comfortably rejoice in hope of the glory of God: for then, there will be no
more curse: [neither in respect of the creation, nor the throne of the beast or
Antichrist] but the throne of God, and of the lamb shall be in it, and his
servants shall serve him, to the fulfilling of Rev. 22. 3.

There are some general notions, and common sayings amongst persons religious,
and professing much love to the Lord Christ, and desire of the advancement of
his glory, both here and hereafter, and yet they do greatly obstruct and hinder
the advance of the knowledge of his coming.

The first obstruction we mention, is a decrying of it as a thing not orthodox,
but a thing newly started up or revived: the Milleniant Tenent, which they that
are orthodox meddle not with: it is much to hear any that profess love to the
Lord Jesus, to speak so at this time of the day: and to fright themselves, and
others with such a bugbear, and thereby to hinder themselves, and others, from
searching or making enquiry into the scriptures concerning the good things to
come: whenas some have outlived the notions and ways they counted orthodox;
and have closed with, and adhered unto, in notion and practice, the things they
counted heterodox, and it may be, they may do so again. This fallacy of being
orthodox, is but an aerie notion: a name only: the religious tenants, and
practices settled by power, in any nation or country are orthodox there, where
they are so settled; and all other dissonant tenants to the establishment are
counted heterodox, though they be never so right tenants: the Papists will so
decry the Protestants of all kinds, the Protestants do the like, and will when
they are settled by power decry as heterodox the Papist; and every different
party amongst all sorts of Christians, are apt to baptize their own opinion as
orthodox, and all dissenters as heterodox, and the dissenter will do the like
back again; so as in effect this bugbear signifies nothing at all but is as a
shadow. Another thing obstructing is a common notion, and speaking
inconsideratly of the world to come, of which the holy scriptures speaks, Heb.
2. 5. As that which sball take place, when this world sball give place, be
burned, and be no more, which by many is quite overlooked; and by some counted
as heaven above: as if nothing was to be here below, after the burning and end
of this world, but heaven and being in heaven. Nay, in common speaking some
tell of going to heaven before this world have an end; not taking notice of the
world to come at all: and very hardly admitting it to be any other thing, then
heaven above, as was said before; by which notion and speaking, they make void
and insignificant, much of the holy scriptures, and the sayings of the Lord
Christ, the Apostles and prophets therein, as concerning things to come. And to
help in the case, they adventure to allegorize, and put spiritual meanings on
plain prophecyes, prophesying thereby themselves, instead of believing and
receiving the sayings of the prophets; though the prophets declared nothing but
what God commanded them to speak and declare. And in like manner they do by the
holy visions of John and others; declared and set forth in the holy scriptures;
whereby the minds of persons are diverted and taken off, from searching into
the prophecies and looking out after the good things to come, and from the
believing of them any otherwise, then they conceive they will suit with heaven,
and the state of heaven above. So as the coming again of our Lord Christ, the
coming of his kingdom, and his will done on earth as in heaven; which himself
has so greatly foretold, witnessed to, and exhorted his servants to pray for,
Math. 6. 10. The blessed restoration of all things, when he shall be sent
again, spoken of by Peter, Acts. 3. 19. 20. 21. The creatures deliverance from
the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, called
the adoption, or redemption of the body, which they who have the first fruits
of the spirit [viz. the hints of the glory thereof upon their spirits] and the
whole creation, by a secret instinct, are said to groan, travel in pain and
wait to be delivered into, Romans 8. 21. 22. 23. The new heaven, and new earth,
and all things made new: the true and faithful sayings, which our Lord Christ
sent and signified by his Angel to his servant John, The reading, hearing,
keeping whereof, has the promise of a blessing annexed to it, equal with, if
not beyond any other part of the holy scriptures, Rev. 1. 1. 3. with very many
things more that might be mentioned, will signify little or nothing; but as
they are made by some to hold forth some attainer, or enjoyment in heaven above.

Another hindrance of the knowledge, and looking out after the great good
things to come, and which takes the minds of persons from searching and
looking out after them, is a narrow notion, received and held forth upon little
ground but tradition, namely, that the Lord Christ will come at the day of
judgment, to judge the quick and the dead, according to that short summary in
the Creed: and in, and under this, is by some, wrapped up, all the things
spoken of in the scriptures, concerning the ends of his coming again; without
taking any notice of them at all; so as if you speak of Christ our Lord, coming
in glory to take unto him his great power and to set up his kingdom, and to
reign in the midst of his enemies, and to break them in pieces as a potters
vessel, Psalm. 2. 9. Rev. 2. 26. 27. And his being admired at, by and in them
that believe, when they see his glory, 2. These. 1. 10. Romans 8. 17. 18. As the
disciples, that our Lord told of the sufferings he was to accomplish at
Jerusalem, Luke 18. 31. to 34. It is said, they understood none of those
things; and those sayings were hid from them: so in like manner, speak now of
the great things that will take place when the Lord Christ shall come again, in
his glory, and they understand none of these things; and these things are hid
from them: and they understand nothing, but Christ our Lord his coming to
judgment; and that they seem to mind as a transcient thing, and not a set,
solemn, and formal thing; a real judicature; and incline to think, it will be
in heaven rather then here below on earth: speaking as if they thought that the
Lord Christ will but come to the Clouds, and then return again to heaven. Thus
as the former notion concerning the world to come, so these in their notions,
do make insignificant much of the holy Scriptures, as if written in vain,
unless allegorized, or making them speak out some spiritual meaning, which is
put upon them; with the which, some please and content themselves, without
further enquiry or looking out after our Lords coming, and the good things that
shall attend the same; otherwise then heaven above, as is said before. Whereas,
if the Scriptures be well minded and considered, it will plainly appear, that
many, if not most of the exhortations in the new testament, to believe, to
repent, to add to faith virtue, etc. To grow in grace, and so all other duties
toward God, and man; are, from the consideration, of the great glory and
happiness, that is to be brought to, and enjoyed by the saints, at the fore
mentioned, glorious coming and kingdom of Christ, here upon earth; and not so
much from the consideration of the glory of heaven above; save only as it is in
the last place comprehended therein, and to be enjoyed by them, to wit, after
the last judgment here upon the earth is ended, and our Lord Christ has
delivered up the kingdom to God the father.

There are yet other hindrances, of which briefly. Some say, it is a
controversy, and they do not care to meddle with controversies: what does this
signify? at our Lords first coming, it was a controversy among the people,
whether he was the Christ or no? some said, he was; others denied it, and said
he was a deceiver, and those deceived, that did own him; have any of the
rulers, or pharisees belived on him? but this people who know not the law, are
cursed. Joh. 7. 48. 49. John sent to him to know, art thou he that should come?
or do we look for another? Indeed, so great a thing, and of so high
concernment, as the coming of the Savior, veiled, and so much opposed; should
make men to search, and seek into it the more, lest happily they be found at a
loss when be comes.

And yet further, some say and upon that account look not after it, but let it
alone: namely, That the ancient fathers, and some add, the modern Divines, were
not for it, but rather against our Lord Christ his coming, to set up his
kingdom and reign here on earth: this is taken for granted, though very
questionable, and not likely to be true; which if it were, what does it
signify? little or nothing at all: the high Priest, and elders were against
Christ, and the Gospel; do any of the Priests, or rulers believe on him? They
did not then, and if they do not now or have not done what does it avail?

But notwithstanding all before said, of the obstructions, the knowledge of it
increases, and is very likely so to do; till that be made good, that the
Gospel of the kingdom, [and coming again of the Lord Christ to reign] be
preached to all nations, then shall the end come, Math. 24. 14. great things
will attend that great day: and though now it is dark and hidden, it will come
to be preached on the house top, and received and entertained more and more; as
it begins to be, being as the present truth of the day, and that which is much
on the spirits of many of the good servants of the Lord, who look for the
return of their Lord, and are in great expectation, like good old Simeon who
waited for the consolation of Israel, and was glad, and greatly satisfied, when
he had seen the Savior: as those blessed expectants now will be with the
signs of his coming: and much more when they shall see him come in the clouds
of heaven; when they will be changed in a moment, and caught up to meet him,
when he comes, when he comes; Fully to take unto him his great power, and to
reign: at which, the nations will then be fully angry, Rev. 11. 17. 18. when he
comes to judge the world in righteousness, and the people with his truth,
Psalm. 96. 13. when he comes to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in, and by all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. when he comes in flaming
fire, to render vengeance, etc. as in verse. 8. when he comes to make
inquisition for blood, Psalm. 9. 12. to wit, the blood of the righteous, from
Abel, to that day, shed by cruel and envious ones, and wicked oppressers on the
earth, Rev. 16. 6. Rev. 18. 24. that cry, will be a sad tone to the wicked, and
will make them shake and tremble; Psalm. 96. 13. for he comes for he comes to
judge the world with righteousness etc. as on the other hand, it will be
gladsom to the Saints; they may lift up their heads and hearts with joy: for
their redeemer, their redemption and full blessedness is at the very door.

If these proposalls, and essays come into the hands of the learned, their
favorable censure is desired, and that they would overlook any failer if in
want of art and well dressing the matter; or over often mentioning of of
things, called tautologie, which could not well be avoided, the things relating
to Christ his kingdom and coming having so many great things and various
attending of them. And besides, those for whom this principally was intended,
and made common, may not have that acuteness; but what they may want that way;
they have in love and affection, in zeal and readiness to receive and embrace
the truth at all times. In the time of our Lord Christ's being here, they owned
him; the poor, then, received the Gospel; when those of higher rank stood at a
distance, and rather made opposition. The Apostles were men of low rank;
fishermen, and the like; yea, the women were very forward in the then owning
our Lord Christ, and great lovers of him; and such as our Lord Christ being
risen, first appeared unto; and made them messengers to the Apostles, to inform
them of that great truth, of his being risen again from the dead: his way is
so, to make men humble, that they might learn not to despise the day of small
beginnings or things. Consult the holy histories, and the histories down, and
since: the histories of France, Germany, the Waldenses and others; and it is
likely, as it has been so; it will be found still; not but that sometimes God
annoints persons of higher rank, and makes known his mind unto them, and makes
use of them; but it seems not to be his ordinary method, but the contrary.

If any advantage by the things proposed come to any, either for the furthering
of their knowledge, or their being encouraged to believe, hope, and wait for
their fulfilling; the proposer of them, will think himself well appaied: read,
and consider well of what thou read; nothing is imposed on thee: try all
things, hold fast that which is good.

Farewell,

P. G. B.

CHAP. I. Of the Resurrection in general. 1 Cor. 15.
THe great doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, was a thing, that holy
Paul, the great Apostle of the gentiles, had a great insight into, as he had
also, in many other high mysteries which were revealed and made known unto him;
the which he imparted, for the benefit and profit of others. That truth looking
forward, eyeing a future time, when it shall be made good; but in all times
necessary to be made known and believed, by all the servants of God, whose hope
is not in this world.

This, of rising again after death, in his proceed on that subject; he begins
with that, of the Lord Christ his being risen; of the truth whereof were many
witnesses, as is mentioned by him; he taking knowledge of some amongst
themselves, that said, there was to be no resurrection from the dead, 1. Cor.
15. 12. contrary to the faith that was preached and believed: and being a
thing, that did render the assertors of that truth, as false witnesses; which
he makes good, from the tising from death, the Lord Christ; laying very great
stresse on that, as a foundation and bottom, on which the whole building
stands; he mentions it again, ver. 15. and argues from thence, to the 20th.
verse, to make out, and clear that truth; and then in verse. 20. he concludes
saying; but now is Christ risen, and become the first fruits of them that
sleep, (so he calls death).

This doctrine of the resurrection, looks backward, and forward: as it
looks backward, it eyeth death which came by man, to wit, Adam: as it looks
forward, it eyeth living again by man, to wit, the man Christ, our Lord, as in
verse. 21. He is the blessed redeemer from the grave, and the restorer to life
again, after death.

verse. 22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: this; It
looks backward, and forward: backward, It eyeth Adam: forward it relates to
the Lord Christ, the new and second Adam: as by the first Adam, sin entered, and
death by sin, as the effect following its cause: Adam was forewarned and it was
told him in the garden of Eden, that in the day he did eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evel, he should die: he did notwithstanding take and eat;
he sinned, and death seized on him; by sin came death, and it went over all.
Adam being the father of all, the stock from whence man proceeded; his sin, or
sin that entered by his disobedience, was propagated and entailed to all his
posterity, Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, etc. verse. 17. By one man's offense, death reigned by one. In Adam all sin;
In Adam all die.

In the Lord Christ, all shall be made alive; the just, and the unjust; the
righteous, and the wicked: all, over whom death has reigned; all, that dyed in
Adam; so is the parallel and proportion; as, and so: all, shall be made alive,
by the power of the Lord Christ, the great conqueror of sin, and death.

The matter is considerable, as it relates to the resurrection, and rising
again of the sons of Adam; the argument, or thing, the Apostle was upon; and it
does not meddle with that, of election, and faith; or living by faith in a
spiritual way; neither may it be so understood or made use of, without
straining, and forcing it to speak that the Apostle never intended. In Christ
shall all be made alive, so as to rise and live again in the body. There shall
be a resurrection, of the just, and of the unjust: some shall be made alive
again to everlasting life, Dan. 12. 2. And some to shame and everlasting
contempt: some shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. They shall be bid, depart ye workers of
iniquity; shall be bid, go ye cursed, etc. Math. 25. 41. Whereas the just, and
righteous, shall be gathered to the Lord Christ, and be for ever with him. 1.
These. 4. 10. The Apostle argues, from the resurrection of the Lord Christ, his
rising again: after his being crucified, dead, and buried, he rose again. It
was said to the women, that came to the sepulcher, by an Angel. Math. 28. 6.
Luke 24. 6. He is not here, he is risen: He was buried in the grave, or
sepulcher, but he arose from thence, and was not there; he was dead, but he is
alive, and lives for evermore, and has the keys of death, and the grave. Rev.
1. 18. to open when he pleases, and as he pleases. Christ our Lord is risen
from the dead; a great saying, and blessed; Christ our Lord, is risen from the
dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept: so death, and lying in
the grave, is termed, 1. Cor. 15. 20. our Lord says, John. 5. 28. 29. The hour
comes, when all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. Christ the first fruits;
there is very much in that: he as conqueror of death; as the captain and
leader; the beginner, and finisher; one that has, and ought to have the
pre-eminence; he being the beginning, and first fruits from the dead, that in
all things he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 18. the Lord Christ, as man,
is first, and chief; to him the pre-eminence belongs in all things: for God the
father, has highly advanced him, and made him mighty. Phil. 2. 9.

As by man, [to wit, Adam] came death: so by man: [namely, the Lord Jesus, very
man, and the son of man, so he styles himself] came also the resurrection from
the dead. By the first man, Adam, came death: by the second man, the Lord Jesus
Christ, came the resurrection from death. Alas for those sadduces! that say,
there is no resurrection. It is good for all the servants of God, and lovers of
the Lord Christ, to be of like confession and belief with the Apostle Paul,
Acts. 24. 15. And have hope toward God, that there shall be a resurrection
from the dead, both of the just, and the unjust. The power and virtue of the
resurrection of the Lord Christ, produces great effects; as to the one; so to
the other.

The forementioned words, in verse. 22. As in Adam all die; so, in Christ, shall
all be made a live, are so full and plain, as nothing can be said further;
there needs no dilating on them, only keep to the thing in hand, to wit, death
or dying: and rising and living again after it. As to that, of all dying in
Adam; ask the many ages and generations that are past, since Adam, since God
created man upon the earth; ask what is become of the great potentates, the
mighty men, the rich, the wise, the honorable, yea, the good, and just men
also; and all free, and bond; and they will all bear witness in a real wise to
this; that in Adam all die: they are all dead and gone; they are all in their
graves, death has gone over all; as sin went before, so death followed after:
all the sons of Adam as well as he himself, have dyed; only, two, or three
excepted, that dyed not, but were translated,

In like manner, and in way of parallel and proportion: In Christ, and by
Christ, shall all be made alive: sooner or later; not one of Adams sons
excepted; there is no reserve in the case: all must arise; all must appear and
give an account of the things they have done in the flesh, whether good, or
evil, 2. Cor. 5. 10. all must be judged, and be either acquitted, or else
condemned; the whole race and posterity of Adam, in whom all dyed.

CHAP. II. Containing something concerning the order of rising again, and the
Lord Christ, the first in that order.
BUt now to prevent mistakes; lest any should think, that all shall rise
together (to wit, the just, and unjust) and to give information touching the
thing in hand: the Apostle discovers a great thing, of which very little had
been declared before in the holy Scripture, though much had been said touching
the resurrection; he in verse. 23. tells of an order, in which all these shall
rise: but every man in his own order.

This order, is very considerable; a great thing, a great discovery: first, in
regard of the persons rising; secondly, in regard of the time, when they shall
rise; for all shall not rise at one and the same time, and together: but every
one in his own time, according to order; it is by the Apostle laid down thus;
first, Christ the Lord; that was over and past: then those that are Christ's,
[when?] at his coming: that is their turn or order; and also is the time of
their judgment, blotting out of their sins, pronouncing them blessed and holy,
and their inheriting the kingdom. Acts. 3. 19. Rev. 20. 6. Math. 25. 34. Then,
after the thousand years Reign is ended, in the interval between that and
coming of the end, to wit, of his kingdom and his delivering of it up to God
the father, the unjust shall arise to judgment; that is their turn or order, and
the time of their judgment; for they shall not live again until the end of the
thousand years. Rev. 23. 5. and then shall be the resurrection and judgment of
the unjust, Rev. 20. 12. 13. of which more hereafter.

An order there is, and will be; so the Apostle has declared: but every man in
his own order: they shall arise, and stand forth; as it was said to Daniell,
thou shall stand up in thy lot [or order] at the end of the days, Dan. 12. 13.
when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in
Glory. Col. 3. 4. that is our lot or order.

Touching this of order, our Lord Christ was the first, the leading, and
pre-eminence; it did belong to him: he arose and was the first fruits of those
that rose from sleep, so in verse. 20. of this 1. Cor. 15. He did rise again
according te the Scriptures: Two Angels told the women that prepared spices
and ointment and went to the Sepulcher to look for him; He is not here, but is
risen. Luke 24. 6. 7. being risen, he was seen of many; first, of the women,
then of Peter, after of the two Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24. he was seen
of five hundred brethren at once; then of James, then of all the Apostles,
after of Paul himself, 1. Cor. 15. 5. to 8. who though he spoke low of himself,
was a high, a great witness and asserter of this truth, of Christ being risen.
It is a part of the Gospel; a great truth, Preached, and witnessed, by many
faithful witnesses, and accordingly believed by the servants of God in the
ages since, to this day: and were it not so; the servants of God, and more
especially the Martyrs and great sufferers for Christ, were of all men the most
miserable: but Christ is risen, and is the first fruits of them that rise, and
it was his order.

The next order, or lot, declared by the Apostle, it is to the just, as it is
said; afterward they that are Christ's: they shall be raised, and shall enjoy
the redemption of the body from the power of the grave; it shall no longer have
dominion over them: they shall come forth to the resurrection and judgment of
life; and as in the first place it relates to them, is the true understanding
of what is spoken on that account, in Joh. 5. 28, 29.

So sure as Christ, the Lord, is risen and ascended; so surely shall they rise,
in their order, and time: they, with Daniell, shall stand up in their lot
together; all the servants of God that have fallen asleep in the several ages
of the world, and have for a long time slept in Jesus; they shall awake, arise
and meet the Lord when he comes. 1. These. 4. 14. 16. 17. God that raised up
the Lord Jesus, will raise us up also by Jesus. 2. Cor. 4. 14. he will raise us
by his own power, 1. Cor. 6. 14. and an exceeding great and mighty power; it is
worthy our knowledge, and our desire to know, Ephesians. 1. 19. 20.

The dead in Christ shall rise first: it is their order, their lot, next after
the Lord Christ. 1. These. 4. 16. the Lord Christ is risen, and ascended,
sits at the right hand of God; it is now sixteen hundred and seventy four
years since: he will come again to them that look for him, he will appear the
second time, without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9. 28. and then, at his coming,
shall their order and turn be: when the Lord Jesus shall descend from heaven,
with a shout, and with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God:
and the dead in Christ shall rise first. 1. These. 4. 16. at his coming, the
Apostle tells us it will be: two great things will then concur, and be
together: Christ, our Lord, his coming, and the righteous their rising again,
and meeting with him.

The next order or lot, is to the wicked, or unjust; of which the Apostle
says little; only: then comes the end: not hereby meaning, that Christ's
kingdom would be at an end, and delivered up to God the father, presently upon
his coming, and raising the just; for there are many, and great things to be
done before; he therefore therein secretly comprehends and includes the
resurrection of the unjust, to wit, between the resurrection of the just, and
coming of the end of his kingdom, when he is to deliver it up, and before the
same: then shall the unjust arise in their order, and turn; a thousand years
after the rising of the just: touching whom it is said, Rev. 20. 4. and they
lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years. verse. 5. but the rest of the
dead [to wit the unjust or wicked dead], they lived not again, until the
thousand years were finished. In the blessed morning of the resurrection, the
just will have the dominion, they will have the pre-eminence then, Psalm. 49. 14.

A rising again of the unjust there will be; so the Scripture holds forth: it
was the confession and belief of holy Paul, Acts. 24. 15. and have hope toward
God, that there shall be a resurrection, both of the just, and unjust. But as
to the time, or order, of raising the unjust, he says no more, but then comes
the end, strongly implying, that toward the end of Christ's kingdom, and before
he delivers it up, they also shall arise, and come to judgment: Christ our Lord
the first fruits: then, a long time since: [not yet come] after, those that are
Christ's; expressly declared to be, at his coming: then comes the end: implying
as before; near that time they shall arise, and not before: toward the end; a
little before the last session; near a thousand years after the rising of the
just; as before.

Then comes the end; the end of time, or of a state: it may be considered as
in a more General way, as holding out the latter end of a state, or of time; as
a day, year, or years near accomplished, is said, to be the end of that day,
year, or years: as was said by the Lord himself to Noah, Genesis 6 13. the end of
all flesb is come, etc. It is at hand; It is but a little while, and the flood
will come and sweep away all; it only stays while Noah builds the Ark; but the
end was come.

Yet further, when the flood was come; all were not drowned presently; happily,
some might live twenty, thirty, or forty days after the flood was come and
begun: and it is said, that the end of all flesh was come.

But secondly; the end, may be taken strictly, for the utter end of time, or
being of a thing; as the utter end of a day, year, or years; the filling, or
full finishing thereof: nothing remaining; an end, an utter end. According to
such an end, as was come upon the old world, when the flood was at hand; so it
may be minded and taken here, as in order to the rising of the unjust and
wicked to judgment: toward the end of Christ's kingdom; and reign on earth, a
little before he resigns: before the utter end be come; shall the rising of the
unjust, and wicked, be to judgment. And as, in the last place, it relates to
them, is the true understanding of what is spoken on that account, in John 5.
28. 29. for suitable to the several resurrection, both of the just, and unjust;
so also is their judgment to be; and also what is spoken, in Math. 25 34.
concerning the judgment and salvation of the just; and in verse 41. of the
judgment and destruction of the unjust, is thus to be understood, and will be
found to be truth, in the day thereof.

CHAP. III. Containing sundry things of the reign of our Lord Christ: of his
putting down all his enemies; and how long his reign will be.
THe Apostle in his proceed, seems to make a digression from the matter in
hand, namely, the resurrection; which he returns unto, and speaks largely of,
afterward: but here, having mentioned the coming of the end: he falls on:
speaking of very high, and great things that shall attend the end, in order to
our Lord Christ his kingdom and reign: and having put down all enemies; his
then delivering up his kingdom; and God the father becoming all in all; he
waves the mentioning of the resurrection of the unjust, and speaks no otherwise
then thus; then comes the end; and so takes on another thing, that shall be at
the end also.

Verse. 24, Then comes the end, when he shall have put down all rule, and all
Authority, and power; that which is first set down, is the last thing that will
be done at the utmost end, when all things relating to the reign and dominion
are finished; then he shall deliver up the kingdom to God the father: when all
power and authorities are put down, all enemies under his feet; then he shall
deliver up the kingdom to God the father, of whom he received it. Then all that
are under our Lord Christ, then, shall give up their power also: and God the
father shall be all, in all.

When he shall have put down all rule, and authority, and power. Great kings
and monarchs, use to have all rule, authority, and power, derived from them by
all that are under them; and what they meet with in their dominions that is not
so derived, they put down and suppress. Our Lord Christ, a mighty king and
monarch: then; will do in like manner; put down all rule and authority, not
derived from him, all that make opposition; his enemies that would not have him
reign over them; that will not subject themselves: the princes, and rulers of
the unsaved Nations, Gog, and Magog: and the captains and mighty men, with all
that exercise rule and power; they will then, by our Lord Christ, he utterly
dispossessed of their power, and put down. The prophecy of Malachi will, then;
in the reign of our Lord Christ, be made good to the life; they shall be so
burnt up, as there shall be left, neither root, nor branch: there will be none
to succeed them, to take their dominions and thrones after them; as now, the
son succeeding the father: but it will not be so then; their places will be no
more sound, for ever.

All authority, and power, and rule, in the time of the kingdom and reign of
our Lord Jesus, in the thousand years, he will subject: and put down all, that
have enmity in them; sooner or later, he will put them under his feet. This is
one of the great things to be done, before the utter end come: the putting down
all rule, authority, and power, in an active, visible way: and until then; he
must reign, and his kingdom continue: for so it is said, expressly, in verse.
25. He must reign, until he [himself] has put all his enemies under his feet.

All his enemies: great and small, high, and low, one, and all; by what name,
or title soever they be named, or called; he shall subdue them; and as a
mighty, mighty Monarch, shall subject them under his feet, and put them down:
all that have enmity in them against him: sin and death, and the grave; they
shall all be destroyed by him: the last enemy that shall be destroyed, will be
death, as after is expressed; the Apostle lays great stresse upon it; he must,
he must reign, until then.

This until seems not to be the same, with that in the 110. Psalm, mentioned
by our Lord, Math. 22. 44. Also by the Apostle, Heb. 1. 13. Sit thou at my
right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool: Which scriptures some
urge, against the personal coming of our Lord Christ the second time, and his
reigning here, on earth: saying thus: he must stay in heaven, until all be done
here; his enemies made his footstool: So, as if all the scriptures, that speak
of his kingdom and reign, shall be made good in a virtual way, and that is all.
To dilate the matter a little.

First, that in the 110. Psalm, and the other alleged scriptures; is done by
God the father himself: he said to the son, the Lord Christ; as those places do
show: but this is done by the Lord Christ, himself; he must reign, until he
has made, etc. Again, that is done by God the father, in heaven: this, is done
by the Lord Christ, himself, on earth. That Is done by the father, in heaven,
where the Lord Christ is sitting, at his right hand; This, is done by the Lord
Christ, he reigning on earth, and being come the second time unto the earth,
and having taken to himself his great power, and reign, Rev. 11. 17. And he
must reign, till his enemies be made his footstool. That Is, but enemies, in a
general way of expression; and may refer to, and be meant, only, of some
enemies: but this, here; is of all enemies; even the last, even death it self.

That of the 110. Psalm, seems to be an investing of the Lord Christ with
power, and a deligating to him, soveraigntie or rule over all things, in
heaven, and earth; as it is said, 1 Pet. 3. 22. Angels, authorities, and
powers, being made subject unto him.

But this of the Apostle, here, is of acting, and exercising that power; and
putting it in execution; putting down, and under him, all rule, authority, and
power, and his enemies under his feet actually.

Lastly, That in the 110 Psalm, so often mentioned in the holy scriptures; is
of a prophetical, promisary nature, and was made good unto our Lord Christ, by
God the father, when he had performed his so low humiliation: then, and
therefore, God has highly exalted him, and given him a name, above every name,
Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. That at the name [to wit, the soveraigntie, and power] of
Jesus every knee should bow; of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
things under the earth: and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ
is the Lord, to the glory of God the father: that so highly exalted Jesus, our
Lord. He is exalted, far above all principallitie, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name, that is named [to wit, of dignity, honor, and power]:
he has a name above all; whether in this world, or that which is to come; and
has put all things under his feet, etc. Ephesians. 1. 21. 22. God the father, has
advanced our Lord Jesus above them all; and put all things under his feet. Our
Lord Christ, he is above; above them all, higher, and greater; and over them
all; And they, all below; and under his feet: the Apostle Peter says, he is
gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God: Angels, and authorities, and
powers, being made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

So, as upon the whole, to say no more; there is no need of our Lord his stay
in heaven upon that account; his enemies not being made his footstool and
subjected under him: that being done already; he need not stay but to the
appointed time. As in the appointed time, or the fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4.
he came before, in the state of humiliation: so he will in the appointed time,
come the second time, in power, and great glory: then he will take unto him his
great power, and rule in the midst of his enemies: when he takes to him his
great power and reign; then all nations shall serve, and obey him, and all
kings shall fall down before him, Psalm. 72. 11.

And his kingdom and reign, shall be outward, and visible on earth: (as his
converse and humiliation, was, in the days of his being here on earth): when he
shall come the second time, in power, and great glory. The holy Apostle,
seems fully to speak unto, that, before declared, Heb. 2. 8. Thou have put
all things in subjection under his feet; for in that he put all things under
him, he left nothing that is not put in subjection under him, etc. And this
according to his sovereignty, and greatness of power; so he is highly advanced
over all.

But according to his dominion, kingdom, and reign, he has not entered upon it
yet; he has not yet taken unto him his great power: he has not yet, subjected
and put down, all rule, authority, and power, as the Apostle tells us; and we
may say, as he said: we see not yet all things put under him. When he comes, he
must reign till he has put them under his feet; even death; that great, and
last enemy to be destroyed; as then when the Apostle did write; he did not
then see all things subdued under him: so now, we may say; the great, and
opposite powers, and rulers, they remain in dignity and power. The Ethnic, and
Infidel Monarchs and Potentates, the Mahumetans, the antichristians; do yet
keep up their authority: with other enemies, not a few. And sin, and the last
enemy death; all these remaining; does speak out this fully, we see not yet all
things put under him, the Lord Christ. Though we see the Lord Christ, that was
made low by the suffering of death, highly advanced, and crowned with honor,
and glory; in which, the promise, Psalm. 110. which is prophetical is fully
made good by the father, and as before was said, is no let of his coming the
second time, till his enemies be made his footstool first.

So, as that until Psalm. 110. and the rest; differ from this until, the one,
relating to the time, of his taking upon him his great power and reign as a
mighty monarch here on earth; unto whom all shall stoop, serve and obey: and
till then, he must reign; even till death, it self, the last enemy, be
conquered, subdued, and destroyed, by him that mighty conqueror, that shall
cause death to be swallowed up in victory, verse. 54. that triumphing may be
made; O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? verse. 55. and
thanks given to God for the same, verse 57. thanks be to God, which gives us
the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: that great and mighty conqueror.

Further, there will be enemies in the time of Christ our Lord his reign on
earth, which he must subdue and put down: all rule, authority, and power,
wherein there is enmity; gog and magog, with all their confederates, and
company; whose numbers will be as the sand of the sea, Rev. 20. 8. and these
enemies: must, by him, be all destroyed, before the end of Christ our Lord, his
kingdom and reign: for that death, also, that last enemy, must likewise be
destroyed, as it is written, Rev. 20. 14. and death, and hell, (or the grave)
were cast into the lake of fire: gog, and magog, and all other enemies, must be
first destroyed; for that the last enemy that is to be destroyed, is death.

Verse. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death: of death being the
last enemy; something has by occasion been often said, it shall therefore be
waved here: but death, as an enemy: we shall mind a little. Death; it is an
old, and common enemy, an enemy to all the sons of Adam: an enemy to the Lord
Christ himself; an enemy to those that are Christ's; to the promised seed: few
have escaped him: death as an enemy, it seized on the Lord Christ, and had
power over him; but could not keep it: for it was not possible that he should
be holden of it, Acts. 2. 24. He tryumphed over it on the Cross; and by death,
overcame him that had the power of death. Heb. 2. 14.

Enemies there will be in the time of the reign of our Lord Christ, to be put
down, and to be destroyed by him; but the last enemy, to be destroyed, will be
death. Rev. 20. 14. it is said; death and hell, [or the grave] were cast into
the lake of fire; and then presently, follows the end of Christ his kingdom
and reign here on earth, and a delivering up all to God the father.

Verse. 27. For he has put all things under his feet: he to wit, God the
father, has so put all things under the feet of our Lord Christ. He has
highly advanced him over all: far above all principalities, and powers and
mights, and dominions; and every name, that is named, to wit, of power and
dignities: all; God the father put under the feet of Christ, as before, is more
largly held forth.

But here the Apostle comes in with a caution, or reserve: for God the father,
in putting all things under him (namely the son) he did not subject or put
under himself: there is an exception in that; there is a but there; so says the
Apostle in the words that follow; but when he says, all things are put under
him, it is manifest, he is excepted: he is not meant or intended; he is not
comprehended in this, all things; but the contrary: God, that put all things
under; it is manifest he is excepted; so the Apostle, that did put all things
under him; the sum of all seems to be this; that God the father, in the high
advance of the Lord Christ; did not subject or make lower himself: for (says
the Apostle) it is manifest, he is excepted.

Verse. 28. He goes on further; saying, and when all things shall be subdued
unto him: (by the way; the words, subduing, subjecting, putting under, putting
under feet; are all of like import, and tendenoy): when the Lord Christ in the
time of his reign, has subdued, and actually put down all authority and power;
when all enemies are put under his feet, and the last enemy death destroyed,
(for till then, he must reign); then shall the son, himself, be subject unto
him (namely the father) that put all things under him, that God may be all, in
all. When the Lord Christ, that great, and mighty monarch; king of kings, and
Lord of Lords, shall have finished his reign, and done what he had to do, here
on earth, then shall he deliver up the kingdom to the father, of whom he did
receive it: God the father, that so highly advanced him; and put all things
under him, shall have all surrendered and delivered up to him, and be all, in
all. An end, a final end of that happy kingdom of our Lord Christ here on
earth, and of our living, and reigning with him therein a 1000 years: and all
the time of the last Session of judgment following the same, which is the last
and most glorious administration of his kingdom, and as worthy Mr. Archer
apprehends, will last near a thousand years more, which I leave to the day to
declare, all which is comprehended in Christ's and the Saints reigning together
therein, though not so particularly expressed: and also a mentioning of one to
succeed; to wit, the kingdom of the father. Of which something after. These
being very high and great mysteries.

CHAP. IV. Containing something of the beginning, and end, of Christ our Lord
his kingdom, and of such things as will be, at the beginning, and end, of the
same.
TO dilate a little concerning the beginning, and end, of the kingdom of our
Lord Christ, so often mentioned to be a thousand years: the beginning, and end,
have a medium, or middle time to make up the whole; so as to suppose, if a
hundred, or if fifty years be reckoned to the beginning, in a general way; and
a like number to the end; then the middle or body of the time, will be eight or
nine hundred years: the Apostle speaks of the beginning, at our Lord Christ,
his coming; when will be also the resurrection of the just (mentioned Luke 14.
14.) he mentions the end; when the Lord has reigned his time, and done or
finished his reign what he had to do therein; and had received that honor he
was to have done him on earth; he says, then comes the end: but he speaks
little expressly, touching the middle time, and what shall be done therein; only
inclusively, he says, he must reign, till the end; until he has put down all
rule, authority, and power; till his enemies be made his footstool, and death,
the last enemy, destroyed.

But as to the Beginning, and likewise, as to the end; he speaks of very
high, and great things, that will fall in with, and be done in, both the one,
and the other; of which we shall dilate a little; and first, of the things that
concur with the beginning.

First, then will be the coming of the Lord Christ, in the glory of his father,
and of all the holy Angels, Math. 25. 31. then; when he appears, we shall
appear with him in glory: Col. 3. 4. When Christ who is our life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory: then will he fit on the throne of
his glory; and before him, will both the good, and the bad, the saved, and the
unsaved nations, that are then living, be gathered: the righteous will have the
pre-eminence, then, they will be set on the right hand, verse. 33. then will be
the resurrection of the just, Luke 14. 14. to live again, and to reign with the
Lord Christ a thousand years upon the earth, Rev. 20. 4. Rev. 5. 10. (no
mention is made of the wicked dead rising at that time): then, will be, the
redemption of the body, and an entertaining again of the soul, or spirit, Romans
8. 23. A great thing, a high mystery: then will actually be made good, that
great mystery, the holy Apostle has told us of, verse. 5. We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed; in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye;
and be caught up with the raised saints to meet the Lord Christ together, 1
These. 14. 17. Then, will be the time of our being unclothed, and clothed upon:
when corruption, shall put on incorruption, and mortallitie, put on
immortality. 2. Cor. 5. 4. 1 Cor. 15. 53. Then, shall be the refreshing, from
the presence of the Lord, and the restitution, or restoration of all things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world
began, Acts. 3. 19. 20, 21. Then, shall the new heavens, and the new earth
wherein righteousness will dwell, take place, according to the promise of God
the father 2. Pet. 3. 13. Then, will the new Jerusalem come down from heaven,
and the bride, the lambs wife, be richly adorned, and exceeding glorious. Then,
will be also the marriage supper of the lamb, Rev. 21. 2. 10. Then shall all
things be made new, as at the beginning. (For these sayings, are faithful, and
true, Rev. 22. 6.) then, God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of his:
then, will no more be death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain there, to the
servants of God for ever, Rev. 21. 4. Then, shall satan be bound, or chained,
that he hinder not the saved nations in their great felicity, Rev. 20. 2. To
say no more, although much more might be mentioned relating to the beginning,
and first coming of the Lord Christ into the kingdom, and reign, on earth.

We shall, in the next place, take notice of some things relating to, and
contemporizing with, the end. First of all, soon after the end of the thousand
years reign, and some short time before the last session of judgment
begins, will satan be let loose for a little season, and will deceive the
unsaved of the nations, who had been chained up with him till then, to their
total ruin and destruction; then will Gag, and Magog, and their number, as the
sand of the sea, gather together, and compass the camp of the saints about,
and the beloved city; then will fire come down from God out of heaven and
destroy them, Rev. 20. 7. 8. 9. Then shall the devil that deceived them, be
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and false prophet (as
being more wicked and abominable in the sight of God then he) had been cast,
whilst alive, above a thousand years before, Rev. 20. 10. Rev. 19. 20. Soon
after, then will be the resurrection of the unjust, and wicked sinners; they
shall, then, arise to judgment; for then, will be the second, and last, great
session of judicature to that end, mentioned, Rev. 20. 11. 12. Then shall they
be judged, condemned and cast into the lake of fire, called the second death.
Rev. 20. 12. 13. 15. Which, as it is the last time, or concluding act, of the
saints judging the world; 1 Cor. 6. 2. So there being nothing, as to the time,
mentioned before, and they being reserved to the judgment of that great day and
to be judged by the saints, so is it also the time of their judging of Angels.
1 Cor. 6. 3. 2. Pet. 2. 4. Jude verse. 6. Then, the last enemy death, and hell,
or the grave, shall be cast into the lake of fire Rev. 20. 14. Death, the last
enemy will be then destroyed. All enemies will, then, be totally subdued and
destroyed, and put under his feet, actually, to the through fulfilling of 1
Cor. 15. 16.

Then shall be an end of all rule, authority, and power, then will the Lord
Christ deliver up the kingdom unto God the father, of whom he received it:
then, will he become subject, himself, unto the father; and God, even the
father, become all, in all: these are some of the great things that will attend
the end.

We may, here, in a general way, a little take notice, what will be in the
middle, or body of that time of the thousand years of Christ his kingdom and
reign on earth, according to what the scriptures hold forth, as to the great
blessedness of the servants of God, and their long continuance in that
happiness, and high enjoyments for ever; once begun; ever continued. Those great
things mentioned, as relating to the beginning, are not, many of them, to be
minded exclusively; but inclusively, as continuing to the very end. The things
the righteous shall enjoy and be made partakers of; the eye has not seen, the
ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.
The psalmist admires it (as may we) Psalm. 31. 19. Oh how great is thy
goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee: which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men. It is said, in 1 John 3. 2. Now are we the sons of God [a great thing] and it does not yet
appear what we shall be: [to wit, how happy, how blessed and glorious]: but we
know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, and see him as he is. A
great thing indeed. And we shall be for ever with him, and never severed from
him more, 1 These. 4. 17. And in his presence will be fulness of joy, at his
right hand, there are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. The holy scriptures
of the old, and new testament, speak much of the happiness of that day to the
righteous: in particular, holy Peter, Paul, and John. The psalmist David, Psalm.
72. 7. speaking of Solomon in the tipe, but of our Solomon in the antitype; the
Lord Jesus says, in his days [to wit in the time of his kingdom and reign],
the righteous shall flourish; and abundance of peace, [shall be in the earth]
so long as the Moon endures. This will be, and continue, the whole thousand
years reign (and also all the time of the last session of judgment, which, as
has been said before, is the last and most glorious part and administration of
Christ's kingdom, and as some apprehend will last near a thousand years more,
until he deliver up the kingdom to God the father and God the father become
all, in all. That gathering of Gog and Magog at the end of the thousand years
Rev. 20. 8. will be little, or none interruption thereunto, for it will be very
short, and is only to give the Lord an opportunity to destroy all the wicked
that are left, in order to the speedy resurrection of the whole, that had been
dead, from Cain, to that time, to come to judgment, and is to usher in the
same; which kingdom of our Lord Christ, in all the parts and administrations
thereof, being ended and delivered up by him to God the father, and God the
father become all, in all; the Saints shall then receive and enjoy higher and
greater glory, and shall go, and be with the Lord Christ for ever in the
kingdom of the father; a particular setting down of things, we shall forbear,
for fear of tiring the reader.

CHAP. V. Of the great wisdom and understanding of the Apostle Paul, and his
high knowledge in the heavenly mysteries, and the many revelations he had.
IN the next place, upon the whole of those verses forenamed, we may mind, the
great wisdom and understanding, that holy Paul was endued withal, the many
revelations he had, and the high mysteries that were unfolded and made known
unto him; which he has declared for the good and benefit of others, being made
an instrument in the hand of God for that purpose. He had high discoveries, and
an abundance of revelations; and yet was kept humble; Gods grace being
sufficient. 2. Cor. 12. 7. 9. holy Paul had much made known unto him, of very
high and great secrets: he had a great insight into the high mysteries of
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 3. 4. they were declared by him: such high mysteries, as are
not declared and held forth, so particularly, by any other; as namely, the
order that will be in the resurrection, and when the just shall arise; in their
order; and when the unjust. The resurrection is a great thing; purely Gospel:
the order mentioned, is a great thing also, not so mentioned by any other: he
has declared unto us the concurrents of the resurrection of the just, with
Christ, our Lord, his first appearing: and likewise, he has very plainly told
us of the end of Christ's kingdom, and reign. He has given us some short hints,
but very plain, of another time, and state, that will succeed that of Christ's
kingdom and reign on earth; namely, that of the kingdom of the father, when God
the father, shall be all, in all. He has showed a great mystery not mentioned,
but by him verse 51. Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep: but
we shall all be changed; in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, etc. to wit
all those Saints that shall be alive at the coming of the Lord Christ; he has
declared the mode, or manner of it; a great secret: this corruptible, shall put
on incorruption, and this mortal, shall put on immortality, verse. 53. a blessed
change: a putting off old clothing, and a putting on of new; very rich, and of
great worth.

By him was declared the groaning of the creature by reason of the burdens they
are under; with also their expectation of freedom from them, Romans 8. 19. 21.
22. and how they shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the children of God.

Unto him, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, it was revealed, that great
mystery, that was not known in former ages; but was hid in God from the
beginning of the world. Ephesians. 3. 5. 9. The matter of which mystery, was the
taking on of the Gentiles; great strangers and aliens, into oneness, and
fellowship with the Jews: making them fellow-citizens, and of the household of
God. Ephesians. 2. 19. that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel. And likewise, the
rejection of the Jews, the breaking of them off, and grafting the Gentiles on
the same stock, Romans 11. a very high matter; a great mystery, holding forth
very rich grace and mercy; at which, the Apostle very greatly admired, and
cried out, verse. 33. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God, etc!

The Apostle Peter, was a man of great knowledge: he had visions, and
revelations. He had by a vision made known to him, the breaking down of the
partition wall between the Jew, and the Gentle, Acts. 10. which, when he
understood, he said, in verse. 34. of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, etc. But Paul had the full of the mystery revealed unto
him, as before is declared, Peter had great insight into that great thing; of
the pouring out of the spirit, Acts. 2. and of the holy spirit come down from
heaven; which things [to wit, the great things of the Gospel,] the Angels
desire to look into, 1. Pet. 1. 12.

He had made known unto him, the great burning of the world, that now is; and
likewise the new heavens, and the new earth, that shall be, according to the
Lords promise; wherein dwells righteousness. 2. Pet. 3. 7. 12. 13. Unto him
was made known; the times of refreshing that shall be, when God shall send
again, Jesus: as likewise the times of the restitution [or restoration] of all
things: which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the
world began, Acts. 3. 19. 20. 21.

Blessed Stephen, the first martyr for Jesus; he had wonderful sight, or
vision, Acts. 7. 55. 56. he saw heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, the which he declared, and was stoned for so doing, verse. 58. That
good servant of Jesus; holy John; he had visions and revelations, great secrets
and mysteries, declared unto him; for him to make known unto the Churches. Rev.
1. 1. his book bears record hereof, and is styled, the revelation of Jesus
Christ, which he sent and signified by his Angel to his servant John. Wherein
he has declared many things that were to come; and some things concerning the
resurrection of the just, and the unjust, Rev. 20. 4. 5. 6. 12. 13. And the
kingdom of Christ, and the new Jerusalem state, and the Saints reigning with
him therein, Rev 20. 4. 6. Rev. 21. 1. 2. 3. Rev. 22. 3. 4. 5. And the first,
and last session of judgment. etc. Rev. 20. 4. 6. 11. 12. 13. Which are true
and faithful sayings, Rev. 21. 5

But the Apostle Paul, seems to have exceeded in the number, and nature of
the things that were revealed to him, and declared by him: he had an abundance
of revelations: and was the man that was taken up into paradise; into the third
heaven, and heard unspeakable words, not lawful to be uttered to fallen
mortals: which he did not speak of, till after fourteen years. 2. Cor. 12. 2.
3. 4. He has declared the manner, and order, and time, of the just; and
unjust; their rising again; very plainly, in express words: first Christ; then
those that are Christ's, at his coming. Only the just, that are Christ's, are
then to be raised, compared with Luke 14. 14. Rev. 20. 6. not the unjust, then:
but in an after time, according as has been mentioned before, Rev. 20. 5. 13.
Where do we find the like? He has made known, likewise, the beginning, and, in
special, the end of the kingdom and reign of our Lord Christ, on earth: and the
delivering up of the kingdom to God the father, and becoming subject himself.
He has given us some short hints; but very full, and plain; of a state
succeeding: very glorious; where, and when, God the father, shall be all, in
all: and that, we may further take knowledge of, from the close of those
verses; of which we shall dilate a little; by way of inquiry and essay.

CHAP. VI. Of the Lord Christ delivering up his kingdom to his father; and of
God the father becoming all, in all: where will be a more glorious state.
ALL things that have a beginning, and are measured by time; they have had, and
will have, an end; only the great Jehovah, that has no beginning, nor end; but
is from everlasting, to everlasting; and is not measured by time. There are
many ends mentioned in holy Scripture, of which we shall forbear the
mentioning. This world, that now is, will have an end, and be destroyed by
fire; as the world, before, was by water. When this world shall have an end;
then will take place, and begin, the world, to come; when, will begin, and take
place, that happy time and state, of the kingdom and reign of our Lord Christ,
on earth, for a thousand years: and after that; all the time of the last
session of judgment, which as has been mentioned before, some apprehend will
last near a thousand years more: that also, will have an end; when, the Lord
Christ shall deliver up the kingdom, to the father; that God, the father, may
be all, in all; as our Apostle has declared. A very high thing; a great
secret, of which, the Scriptures seem most silent, and to say little; at least,
the understanding and insight into this great mystery, or secret, seems
little, in this age; holy Paul hints something, God shall be all, in all, then.

By way of assay, we shall propose to consideration, some thing, that the holy
Scripture seems to hold forth of that glorious state, that shall succeed the
surrender of the kingdom of the Lord Christ, unto God the father, that he may
be all, in all.

That God may be all, in all; seems to have much comprehended in it. What is
not included in all? With reference to any matter, or thing: it seems to eye
that before spoken, of the sovereignty, rule, and power of the Lord Christ in
his kingdom; and his giving of it up, when he had put down all rule, authority,
and power whatsoever, and become subject, himself, unto the father, that gave
him that power, and put all things under his feet: then will God the father be
all, in all. No medium then; nor no deligating of power, or dominion, to any;
seems to be, then: but God the father, to be all, in all, in power, rule, and
dominion.

This all, in all, seems a great thing, and to contain much: but not much,
seems to be revealed; at least, we understand little, for the present; but
are much in the dark herein. More, it may be, is held forth in the Scriptures,
then we as yet discern: that there shall be such a time, and state; when God
shall be all, in all; shall have the kingdom of the Lord Christ delivered up to
him, and the Lord Christ become subject to the Father, that he may be all, in
all: that such a state, such a kingdom, there shall be, after the kingdom of
our Lord Christ is ended; the Apostle Paul, seems to hold forth, as is
mentioned before; and something there is, that seems to look that way, and to
import something, of such a state, and kingdom, of God the father; as the last;
and most glorious. By way of assay, we shall propose something, and leave it to
the judgment of the wise in heart. That there shall be such a glorious state,
and kingdom of the father, exceeding in glory, the kingdom of our Lord Christ,
wherein, as has been said, will be great glory, and is the glory that he
requested his father, that those that he had given him, might be with him, that
they might behold his glory, Job. 17. 24. and Col. 3. 4. partake of his glory:
and Romans 8. 17. be glorified together; which glory will be very great: but in
the kingdom of the father, when God shall be all, in all; then there will be
higher and greater glory.

CHAP. VII. Of a higher degree of glory, in the kingdom of the father; and
higher attainers for the Saints, then.
THat in the kingdom of the father, when he is all, in all; then; there will be
higher, and greater glory; that of our Lord, Math. 13. 43. seems to speak
out. Then shall the righteous, shine as the Sunn; where? In the kingdom of
their father. It seems to hold forth, that the father will have a kingdom,
and that the righteous will shine forth in glory, then: and there: of which we
shall dilate a little. Our Lord, a little before; had spoken of his own
kingdom: he shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them
into a furnace of fire etc. He seems to wave the further speaking of his own
kingdom, which will be very near the end, then: and speaks of the kingdom of
the father, near at hand; and says thus: then shall the righteous shine forth
[in greater luster of glory] as the sun; [the most glorious of all the
creatures: where shall this be?] in the kingdom of their father. They were
glorious before, in the kingdom of the son, the Lord Christ: but then, in the
kingdom of their father, they shall be more glorious, then, and there: for as
says our Lord Christ: they shall then shine forth as the sun, very
gloriously. In the kingdom of the Lord Christ, they shall be very glorious;
sharing with the Lord Christ, and being like him: far beyond the glory of the
Saints in their highest attainer here, or elsewhere, before that time: they
shall shine forth, and appear with the Lord Christ in glory then: holy Daniel,
Dan. 12. 3. tells us, that then, they that be wise [or have been wise in their
day] shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament [very ferene] and they that
turn [or have turned] many to righteousness; [shall shine] as the stars, for
ever, and ever: very bright and shining: there will be great glory in the
kingdom of Christ.

But in the kingdom of their father, they shall shine forth as the sun: the
glory of the sun, is far greater then that of the stars, or Firmament; so
faith the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 41. there is one glory of the sun, another of
the Moon, and another glory of the stars, for one starr, differs from
another, in glory: degrees there are, and will be, the glory of the sun, is the
greatest. In the kingdom of the Son will be great glory; the righteous will
shine, there, as the stars: but in the kingdom of the father; they shine forth
as the sun; more gloriously By way of illustration: the eye is able to behold
the light of the Firmament; and the brightness of the stars, in their light and
brightness: but what eye is able to behold the sun, in the full glory and
brightness of it? As the glory of the sun, surmounts the glory of the stars,
and Firmament: so will the glory of the kingdom of the father and the attainer
of the righteous, then, and there, exceed that of the righteous their attainer,
in the kingdom of the Lord Christ. In the kingdom of the father, they shall
shine forth, as the sun.

It may be looked upon as a very great thing, for raised Saints, newly raised
out of their graves, and reunited, body, and soul, in one again; and the
changed Saints, then, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye; as it is written
in that great mystery, showed by the Apostle verse. 51. of the aforesaid 1. Cor.
15. for them to take on and be clothed with immortality, and the glory of that
happy estate and great glory; and not be over-sett, over-powerd with it: but to
take on the glory of the sun, in the the kingdom of the father; how high a
thing is that? The wisdom of God the father, did foresee, and order, for that
cause (it may be) a gradual way of proceed, from glory, to glory; from a
lesser, to a greater; and the greatest, and highest, of all, last; like the
great and good master, that kept the greatest, and best, till last; that so the
Saints, might with the more facility, take on the glory of the kingdom of the
father; having been a long while before in the kingdom of the son, the Lord
Christ, there, enjoying that great glory; they, with the more facility, may
take on that greater, and higher glory, of shining as the sun, in the kingdom
of the father.

Our Lord adds, in that verse, he that has an ear to hear, let him hear; not
with the hearing of the outward ear of the body, only; but with the ear of the
mind, and understanding; by conceiving and understanding the greatness of the
thing; a high thing! a great mystery! which few do understand, or are able to
apprehend or conceive of. I know, the Lord Christ in Isaiah. 9. 6. is called,
the everlasting father, and so minded, as he is God, coequal with the father;
and God blessed for ever, in the unity of the three, in one: and so, he, and
the father, are one, Joh. 10. 30. Joh. 17. 22. I, and my father, are one: weigh
but the places; and the difference between father, and son, will appear.

CHAP. VIII. Of the mystery of God, and the father, and of Christ: so, in like
manner; the kingdom of God, the kingdom of Christ; and the kingdom of the
father.
BUt there is also a different count, and consideration, and, likewise, a
different denomination, betwixt God the father, the creator of all things; and
God the son, the redeemer; the mighty God; sent of the father, sent of the
father, the first time, in the state of humiliation: and will be sent again the
second time, in power, and great glory.

Great is the mystery of God, manifested in the flesh: the consideration of
minding the matter so; is so necessary; as to deny it; or decry it as an
error; has very ill consequences attending of it: of which; more hereafter.
Here, I say only this; let the context be minded, and the close, be weighed:
that of the Lord Christ, the son; delivering up his kingdom, that God the
father, may be all, in all: the righteous shining as the stars, in the kingdom
of the son: and shining as the sun, in the kingdom of the father, succeeding
the delivering up of the kingdom of the son, to the father, that so, the father
may be all, in all: I say, let it be minded; and see, if it does not hold forth
the distinction: as betwixt, the father, and the son: so, betwix that, of the
kingdom of the son, and that, of the father succeeding, that God, the father,
may be all; in all.

And it may be taken notice of, that the Lord Christ, speaks very often, of
the father; and of his father, and ours: but no where does he call himself,
father: but styles himself, the son of man, very often; and sometimes, the son
of God also. Many, in a general way, seem without any distinction at all, or
putting any difference, between the kingdom of God, the creator of heaven, and
earth: the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of God the father: and
accordingly they speak, and apply: but how rightly they do, in so understanding
and applying the Scriptures so; may be considered.

Further, in the 26th. of Matthew; we have something that seems to look that
way: our Lord Christ, having eat, and drank with his disciples, says to them in
verse. 29. I will not drink henceforth, of this fruit of the vine, until that
day when I drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. The father will have a
kingdom; as the son will have a kingdom: these seem to be distinctly spoken of
in the holy scriptures. The son will have a kingdom, in the which he will
reign, and which he will deliver up to the father, and the father become all,
in all: the end of the one, (to wit, that of the sons) being the beginning of
the fathers, when he shall be all, in all. As there is the kingdom of Christ
spoken of, very plainly expressed, and the righteous, there, shining as the
stars: so there is the kingdom of God the father spoken of, and the righteous,
there, shining as the sun; as is before set forth: and these seem to be very
distinctly set forth in the scriptures. As the son, is not the father, nor the
father, is the son: even so, it seems to be, in regard of the kingdom of the
son, given him of the father; and the kingdom of the father, When he shall be
all, in all. The son will have a kingdom, which the father has appointed him.
Luke. 22. 29. And he is gone to receive it, Luke 19. 12. He will come again,
and his kingdom will come with him, verse. 15. 2. Tim. 4. 1. In his kingdom, he
will reign to the end; and then deliver it up to the Father, and the Father be
all in all; In his kingdom, when, and where, our Lord Christ will drink with,
his, of the fruit of the vine: in his fathers kingdom. Our Lord Christ Luke 22.
30. speaks of eating, and drinking, in his own kingdom, in express words,
and very distinctly, that ye may eat, and drink at my table in my kingdom, etc.
But in the 26th. of Matthew, he says, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit
of the vine, till I drink it now with you in my fathers kingdom.

We read of the father, and the son, and take them distinctly, and do not take
them, as on Ephesians. 5. 5. This we know, that no whoremonger, etc. has any
inheritance, in the kingdom of Christ, and of God, to wit, God the father; and
not, that the kingdom of Christ, and of God, there, is all one kingdom, as some
apprehend. We cannot without offering loss to the scripture and counting it a
kind of tautologie, but count them as distinct kingdoms. We read, Col. 2. 2.
The Apostles prayer unto God in the behalf of the Colossians was, that the eyes
of their understanding might be opened, to the acknowledgment [of what?] of the
mystery of God, and the father, and of Christ. Very distinct: the three, in
one, is a great mystery: the three distinct; are three great mysteries. The
mystery of God, (to wit, the creator of heaven, and earth) a great mystery:
the mystery of God the father, reconciling the world unto himself, (to
believers; by Jesus Christ, our blessed redeemer, and Savior. 2 Cor. 5. 9.) a
great mystery! the mystery also of God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
is a great mystery.

As we read of the mystery of God; the father and of Christ: so we read of
the kingdom of God, and of the father, and of Christ, very distinctly held
forth in the holy scriptures: and to be able to understand them aright, seems
a great attayner. To take them, and make them all one, and the same; seems to
be an offering of loss to the holy scriptures, as if they had spoken in vain.
To say, that the mystery of God, and the mystery of the father, and the
mystery of Christ, are one, and the same thing, without any difference at all;
and so, in like manner, to say, the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of the
father, and the kingdom of Christ given him of the father; to hold, or say,
that these are all one, and the same; seems to reflect on the spirit, by
which the holy scriptures were written; All scripture being given by
inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Holy men of God, of old, spoke, as they were
moved by the holy spirit, 2. Pet. 1. 21. Christ, our Lord will drink of the
fruit of the vine, in his fathers kingdom. As to that of difference and
distinctnes betweeen the kingdoms forenamed; that in Ephesians. 5. 5. seems to
hold forth. something: the Apostle, there, speaking of several sorts of
sinners, says, know ye not, that the unrighteous, shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. In like manner that before, Ephesians. 5. 5. He says,
we know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, that is an
Idolater; has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God; to wit,
God the father's kingdom; such wicked sinners, they have no part or
Inheritance, in the kingdom of the Lord Christ: they shall in no wise enter
there, or dwell there Rev. 21. 27. Rev. 22. 15. There will be no way found, or
entrance provided for them, into the Everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 1. 11. In like manner, they shall have nothing to
do in the kingdom of God the father, more high and glorious; when God shall be
all, in all: no wicked sinners shall ascend thither, or dwell there; this know,
[as it is said] the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, [the
father:] it will be too high, and too glorious. In the kingdom of God, the
creator, they have lived, and do live, as sometime rich Dives did; and had his
share and part of good things. The case will be otherwise then; when the
kingdom of the father takes place, where God shall be all, in all; that of the
psalmist being very prophetical, and spoken prayer-wise, may be minded, as that
which will be made good. Psalm. 104. 35. Let the sinners be consumed out of the
earth, and let the wicked be no more, etc. The sinners will be consumed out of
the earth, in the time of the kingdom of Christ, in the new earth, and before
his kingdom be ended. See Rev. 19. 17. 18. 21. Rev. 20. 9. see the places and
others of the like import: but when the kingdom of the father takes place, and
God the father be all, in all: then the wicked will be no more. Halelujah. Our
Lord Christ will drink of the fruit of the Vine there, and the righteous will
shine as the sun, there; where those wicked sinners shall not come, nor be no
more: then: for ever.

The kingdom of God as the creator of Heaven and earth, of which the holy
Scriptures speak very much, It is a subject, so high and comprehensive, and so
much spoken of it in the holy Scriptures; as that I shall only speak a few
things in a General way, and that by way of essay. This kingdom began with the
creation, wherein soveranity was delegated to Adam, and it lasted till the
flood, when all flesh perished. Then from the flood, it has been carried, and
will be carried on, to the great burning to come, 2. Pet. 3 6. 7. of the world
that now is: when the world to come, shall take place, and the blessed kingdom,
and Power, and dominion of our Lord Christ shall take place, and begin: he,
then, a king, will take to himself his great power and reign; and all rule,
authority, and power rest in him, Rev. 11. 17. all power, and rule, being given
unto him, both in heaven, and in earth, Math. 28. 18. of the great Jehovah, the
maker of heaven; and earth.

This kingdom of God, the creator; as it has; so it shall rule over all, Psalm.
10. 3. 19. he has set up, and pulled down, as he pleased; and so he does; and
will do, while, this world, lasts, as it was said, by Daniell, to
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 32. Till thou know that the most high rules in the
kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will; as before he had said, in
verse. 25. and says in verse. 24. this is the decree of the most high; which is
come upon my Lord the King. By him, or under him, kings reign, and have ruled:
been set up; and pulled down; his ordering is so high, and of such extent and
largness in order to all things, as that a sparrow falls not to the ground
without his Providence, and the very hairs of our head are numbered, Math. 10.
29. 30. we may say with the psalmist. Psalm. 8. 9. O Lord, our Lord, [our King,
our governor] how excellent is thy name [thy sovereignty and power] in all the
earth! And shall end with that of the Apostle, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. and, as in verse. 36. for
of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever.
Amen.

Of the kingdom, rule, and government of the Lord Jehovah, the maker of heaven,
and earth; we may mind it as from the flood; how he ruled, and gave power to
rule under him, in his kingdom; from Noah, to Abraham, and the Patriarchs: to
Moses Joshua, and the judges, unto the time of Samuel, Acts. 13. 20. then they
desired a king, and God gave them a king; Saul, of the tribe of Benjamin, a
goodly person, and some way eminent: but in that their desire, which was
condescended to of God; God said to Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. 1. Sam. 8. 7. Readiness
reign lasted not: but for his disobedience to the king of heaven, he was put
down: and God, the great Jehovah, and ruler over all; chose David, and his
seed, a type of our Lord Christ. Touching David, it is said, the Lord has
found a man after his own heart, 1. Sam. 13. 14. and his race, according to
Gods promise, continued. Solomon that eminent one for wisdom continued after
him, and he advanced the kingdom to the greatest height of glory that ever
Israel attained unto. A breach was made in that kingdom, and state, not only in
the division: but in the departing of the Scepter, as it has been for a long
time.

The kingdoms of this world, out of the line of Abraham and David, in a more
general way, they have been ordered according to his pleasure. The rulers, and
sovereigns, have been set up, and taken down, according to the pleasure of the
great Jehovah: from the beginning it has been so. And to particularize a few.
Those great monarchs, and monarchies; the Assyrians, the Babylonians, the
Persians, the Graecians and the Romans; and all others under them; and not
under them; as the ethnich potentates; they have been at the ordering of God
Almighty, maker of heaven and earth; though, it may be, some of them have said,
and may say, as Pharaoh said of old; who is the Lord? And as it has been: so
it will be; his kingdom will rule over all; and he shall give the power, and
dominion to whom he pleases: for he is God over all, blessed for ever.

Until the time come, that the kingdom of the Lord Christ take place, and his
dominion and rule begin, when he shall take to him his great power and reign,
and after, deliver it to God the father: so as God the creator of heaven and
earth, will be first, in kingdom, and rule. The great Alpha: and will be the
last, in kingdom, rule, and power: the great Omega. The middle; it will be to
the Lord Christ, when he takes it on: all power in heaven and earth being given
unto him; and he must reign, till the end, and then deliver up; and God the
father, be all, in all; the Alpha, and Omega. In the kingdom of God Almighty,
there has been two great Mediums, or two, that have been eminent, between God,
and man, besides others; namely, Moses, a great Prophet, raised up of God, of
great authority, and rule: and the Lord Christ, sent of the father; first to
suffer, and then to be highly advanced, and to reign: but I shall forbear to
dilate further.

In the next place, we propose that direction of our Lord Christ, about prayer,
Math. 6. from verse. 6. to verse. 15. which seems to speak to the same matter;
to wit, the kingdom of the father: and his being all, in all: after this manner
[saith our Lord] pray ye: our father which art in heaven, etc. thy kingdom
come; the kingdom of the father, we are to pray that it may come: implying, it
was not then, come: and likewise, that it was not that kingdom which had been
since the creation; then was; and now is; and also shall be; till the kingdom
of our Lord Christ, takes place: but, a kingdom that was to come, when our Lord
Christ shall resign, and God the father, be all, in all, and his kingdom shall
come and take place, and wonderful shall be the glory of it; beyond all
conceiving. This kingdom we are to pray, that it may come. I do not here intend
the excluding of the kingdom of grace, or glory, to be comprehended within this
desire or prayer; the further advance of the kingdom of grace, in the increase
of the number, and the advance of the intrest of God and Christ, here; may be
included in it; and likewise the coming of the kingdom of our Lord Christ, when
he, and his kingdom shall appear, and come in power, and great glory. Whatever
of God, and Christ, has not yet had its time, and highest attainer: we may
pray that it may come, as included in this direction of our Lord: thy kingdom
come.

But in special; as that which was mostly intended by our Lord Christ in this
direction; was, that the kingdom of God the father, that it may come; being the
last, and highest in glory; when God the father will be all, in all; in
kingdom, sovereignty, and rule; the great Omega. This being that, it is likely,
which the voge and spirits of the servants of God in their desires and wishes,
go out after, and that, which their daily expressions are of; as the sum of all
blessedness, to wit, heaven, and glory; and to be with their heavenly father in
glory, in his kingdom, as the uttermost of all their desires. The close of our
Lords prayer has much in this his attest: for thine is the kingdom, the Power,
and the glory, for ever, and ever Amen: all, in all. He had in the times, and
ages of the world, delegated and given kingdoms, and authorities, and powers to
others: he has given unto the Lord Christ, kingdom, power, and authority: he
has made and appointed him, to be king, of kings, and Lord, of Lords, 1. Tim.
6. 15 and he shall come, and take to him his great power, and all nations
serve, and obey him: but when the end of his kingdom is come; he will deliver
up all unto his father, and be subject unto him himself: and the father shall
take all into his own power, and be all, in all: for thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever, and ever, Amen: It will be so in an eminent
manner, then: God the father, his will be the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, and all, in all. Holy Paul has a like close: he having spoken of the
rejection of the Jews, and taking on the Gentiles; and the restoring of the
Jews again, by the coming of the deliverer out of Sion, when all Israel shall
be saved: high mysteries which he admired! and cried out; O the depth of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33. he closes thus, in
verse. 36. for of him, and through him, [or by him] and to him, are all things,
[to his glory] to him be glory for ever. Amen: for his, is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory, for ever, and he shall be all, in all.

I further propose, as worthy our consideration; that consolatory speech of our
Lord Christ to his disciples, in Joh. 14. 1. 2. 3. they being much troubled at
the thoughts of his departure from them; he says to them; let not your hearts
be troubled, ye believe in God, [to wit, the father] so is the Creed, I believe
in God the father Almighty etc. believe also in me. [God the son]: that he
spoke of God the father, the words following show: in my fathers house: he does
not say, in his own house or kingdom: but in his fathers house. Whether by,
house, here, be meant the new heaven, and new earth, wherein will be several
degrees of glory? Luke 19. 15. to 19. 1. Cor. 15. 41 or whether heaven only? or
whether both together? to wit, the kingdom of the son, and the kingdom of the
father? so it may seem to be; it being a blessed estate they are to be in,
after Christ, at his coming, has received them to himself: or whether it be a
borrowed way of speaking? I shall not determine; but leave it to consideration.
The tendencie is consolatory to the Disciples: in my fathers house are many
mansion places; places of great contentment, happy repose, and much
blessedness: I shall not venture to allegorise this saying of our Lord; but
rather believe it as it is spoken, for that our Lord does attest it, saying, If
it were not so, I would have told you. There is such provision, such
blessedness, in my fathers house: and I go to prepare a place for you. A place:
our Lord tells his disciples, he goes to prepare for them: not expressing
where it shall be: happily, in his fathers house: very great and spacious like
the master of it; the great Jehovah. I go to prepare a place for you: hapily,
in his own house, or kingdom, which he is one to receive, Luk 19. 12. 15. in
the new heaven, and the new earth; where he will dwell, and reside with his,
for a thousand years, Rev. 20. 6. Further, he says, if I go [or though I go]
and prepare a place for you; I will come again, good news and comfortable; the
Lord Christ: gone into heaven; will come again:] and receive you to my self,
that where I am, there ye may be also. Very comfortable, and gladding to all
his, that love him, and are sad for the absence of him: but shall abundantly
rejoice when they shall see him again, Joh. 16. 22. They shall be with him in
his kingdom; they shall never be severed from him, or deprived of his presence
any more, but be for ever with him, 1. These. 4. 17. with the which, the
servants of the Lord Jesus may comfort themselves, and one another, as the
Apostle Paul bids them to do; with the considerations of those sayings.

But where will our Lord Christ be then, to wit, when he is come from heaven?
may some ask? answer; he will be in his kingdom: for he is the noble man, that
is gone into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return,
Luke 19. 12. And being returned and come again; he will send and gather all his
elect, to himself, and they shall then be with him where he is, he prayed so to
his father aforehand, Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will, that those that thou have
given me, be with me where I am that they may behold my glory: which is the
same with those words, aforemontioned, Joh. 14. 3. I will come again, and
receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. If it yet be
asked, where our Lord Christ will be then? to wit at his coming? we say, as
before, in his kingdom, in the new earth: where those that are his, shall live
and reign with him a thousand years, Rev. 20. 6. The Lord Christ has made
those that are his; kings and Priests unto God the father, and they shall reign
on the earth. Rev. 5. 10. he, the Lord Christ, when he has received his
kingdom, must reign; till the end: and then deliver up to the father. While he
stays; they stay with him; when he goes, they go with him; a higher, and
greater attayner of glory, they shall proceed unto then; they shall have
mansion places prepared; they shall shine as the sun, on the fathers kingdom;
they shall be still with Christ: they shall drink of the fruit of the vine with
him in the fathers kingdom, be it in heaven, or wherever it shall be.

The father, and great Lord of the house; that good householder will keep the
highest; and best enjoyments, till the last: and so great it will be; as the
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, the
things which God [to wit, the father] has prepared for them that love him:
which they, then, shall enjoy in his kingdom, when, they shall shine forth as
the sun, for ever. It is true, in respect of the kingdom of the Lord Christ,
also, and the saints enjoyments there: it is not manifest what we shall be for
happiness and blessedness; then, and there, 1. Joh. 3. 2. But higher, and
greater, shall the saints enjoy, and be made partakers of, in the kingdom of
the father, when God is all in all. This distinction of kingdoms; and gradual
way of proceed, from glory, to glory, or to higher, and higher glory; may
hapily, seem strange to some, that think of nothing, but stepping into heaven,
presently, when they leave this world; but I shall forbear.

CHAP. IX. Something held forth concerning a mixed or interwoven way of
speaking in the holy scriptures, when the kingdom of God, and of the Lord
Christ, are spoken of.
FOr the better minding and taking knowledge of this matter: I propose; how
that in sundry prophecies, and high sayings, in the old, and new Testament,
concerning kingdom, and glory, to come; there seems to be an interwoven or
mixed way of speaking: some part of the matter, relating to the Lord Christ,
his kingdom and glory; and some part, relating to the kingdom of the father,
and the high sovereignty and glory, when he shall be all, in all: the matter
warily minded; it may hapily appear to be so: in way of instance; we shall
propose a place or two.

That in the 1 Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 6. 15. 16. seems to be so, Paul
having laid a charge on Timothy, verse. 13. as likewise he had done before,
chap. 5. 21. And this charge, it being as is set forth: before God, or in the
sight of God, who quickneth all things: and before Jesus Christ, who before
Pontius Pilat witnessed a good confession; that thou keep this commandment,
etc. How long, it might be asked? he answers, until the appearing of Jesus
Christ: verse. 15. Which in his times he shall show, [to wit, them himself in
his glory: for that is a sure word, and shall be made good: the Lord Christ,
shall be manifested and shown forth in his times, to be the only potentate, the
king of kings, and the Lord of Lords: the words are], Who is the blessed, and
only potentate; the king of kings, and Lord of Lords, That has all power in
heaven and in earth given unto him of the father, Math. 28. 18. He being highly
advanced, far above all principallitie, and power, and might, and dominion; and
every name that is named [to wit of power, and dignity] not only in this world,
but also in that which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 21. In the world to come, will his
kingdom, and reign be: for that will not be subjected to the Angels, Heb. 2. 5.
but to the Lord Christ, and those he shall authorize to rule with him, over ten
cities, and over five cities, Luke 19. 15. 17. 19. When that blessed time shall
take place, when the kingdom of the Lord Christ shall be come: then the Lord
Jesus, that great potentate, king of kings; shall rule and reign in his
kingdom, before his ancients groriously, Isa. 24. 23. That, this, thus far, is
spoken of the Lord; there is, I conceive, little doubt, or question, to be made
of it.

But that which follows, in verse. 16. seems to be spoken of God the father,
who in verse. 13. of this, 1. Tim. 6. is named the quickner of all things, who
only has immortallitie, etc. The Lord Christ, he had no Immortality: the
scriptures do not attribute that to him: he dyed, he suffered, according to the
design of heaven: he redeemed and purchased the Church with his own blood;
Acts. 20. 28. He was humbled to death, even the death of the Cross. Phil. 2.
8. and was afterward advanced highly by God the father. It follows dwelling
in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen or can see:
this seems to be spoken of God the father, and is true in him; and is not
applicable to the Lord Christ; touching whom it is said, we saw his glory, as
the glory of the only begotten son of the father; Joh. 1. 14. Holy Stephen, he
saw heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. Acts. 7. 55.
Paul likewise saw him: and it is said, When he comes in the clouds, every eye
shall see him, Rev. 1. 7.

But God the father, the great Jehovah, told Moses he could not see him, and in
great condescension showed him his back parts. He is the invisible God, Col. 1.
15. The holy scripture tells us, that no man has seen God [to wit the father]
at any time, 1. Joh. 4. 12. 20. His brightness is so serene where he dwells,
that no mortal, no created eye, is able to approach unto it, or to abide the
beholding of it.

But the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God: as we have
seen him, as before is said; so we shall see him, and behold him in his glory,
and be with him for ever; as he made it his prayer unto his father, that it
might be so; When he shall again appear, we shall then appear with him in
glory: and as holy John says, When he shall appear we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is. Joh. 3. 2.

The close of that scripture seems to relate to God the father likewise; to
whom be honor, and power everlasting, Amen: the great Omega. That is, and will
be all in all.

Further, that of Daniel. 7. Is of like consideration, verse. 9. likewise verse.
22. It speaks of the ancient of days: God the father: very high things are
spoken of him: that in verse. 13. One like the son of man; seems clearly to be
meant of the Lord Jesus Christ. Much the same, seems that to be, in Rev. 20.
11. I saw a great white throne, and him that sat thereon, from whose face the
earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them: and I
saw the dead, small, and great, stand before God, [to wit, God the father:] it
seems to be spoken of him: but that which follows in that verse relating to
the judgment, it is very likely to be meant of the Lord Christ, to whom all
judgment is committed: all judgment is given to the son, by the father; and as
Peter says, 1. Pet. 4. 5. That he is ready to judge the quick, and the dead:
all must appear before his tribunal, and be judged by him: this of judicature,
to the end of that 20. chapter, relates in a tacit way to the Lord Christ.
That in the second Psalm, seems to be of like consideration: and other
scriptures, that I shall forbear to name: being of an interwoven way and manner
of speaking; of the power and dominion of the father, and likewise of the son,
the Lord Christ. I shall end these essays, with that prophetical Psalm of the
kingly prophet David, in Psalm. 72. speaking to his son Solomon, as the type:
but chiefly relating to a higher and greater Solomon, in the antitype, namely,
the Lord Jesus Christ: very high, and great things are spoken of in that Psalm
concerning the kingdom of our Lord Christ, how that in his days, as in verse. 7.
The righteous shall flourish, and abundance of peace shall be, so long as the
Moon endures, verse. 8. he shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the
river to the ends of the earth. Then he speaks of the submission of kings and
of their bringing of gifts, saying, verse. 11. Yea, all kings shall fall down
before him: all nations shall serve him: Then he speaks of his great kindness
to the poor and needy, and of how high esteem they shall be in his sight, and
how he shall take care of them, and do for them; for which he shall be daily
praised. Verse. 17. It is said, His name shall be continued for ever, his name
shall endure as long as the sun, and men shall be blessed in him. And all
nations shall call him blessed.

Great will be the glory of our Lord Christ in his kingdom; and when he shall
come in his glory, and reign in his kingdom; of which there seems little
doubt, but that this Psalm treats of it: and blessed will they be, that shall
enjoy their share therein.

But toward the end of the Psalm, the prophet seems to turn and address
himself to the Author and giver of all this glory and blessedness, namely, God
the father, with the which he closes the Psalm: and in the two last verses,
says thus; Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel who only does wondrous
things; and blessed be his glorious name for ever; and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen. With the which he closes, as I shall
also these essays; referring the whole to the serious consideration of the
wise in heart.

A MYSTERY: I. Showed by holy Paul, That the Saints alive at the Coming of the
Lord Christ shall not then die but be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye. II. Something treated of concerning that change; wherein it will
consist; and the Standard or Measure of it. III. That many of the great
Prophecies in the Holy Scriptures, do eye that Time, and those Changed People
and state; for their Great Fullfilling. IV. Something held forth concerning the
Restoration of all things, and the world to come, that shall take place when
our Lord Christ shall come again. V. Of the Great Happiness of that day, and
the Flourishing Estate the Righteous shall then Enjoy: Proposed to
consideration; With sundry other things occasionally Discussed.
By P. G. B

Joh. 11. 26. And whosoever lives and believes in me [to wit, in Christ at
his coming] shall never die; believe thou this?

Psa. 31. 19. O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, which thou have prepared for them that trust in thee, before the
sons of men!

Joh. 20. 29. Blessed are they that have not seen me, yet have believed.

Printed in the Year, 1675.

To the READER.
THou have here offered to thy view and consideration, that, which few happily
have much minded; though it be a very great thing: a mystery, no less: and
that, which it is likely will be found as a key that will help to open diverse
great prophecies and high sayings in the holy Scriptures, which some have been
very ready to allegorize and put some notion of a spiritual meaning on them; as
if that were all: whereby they have drawn a veil over them; rendering them
another thing. This mystery, it relates to the very time of the second coming
of the Lord Christ; when those servants of God, believing in Jesus, shall be
changed, in a moment, without dying: they shall put off corruption and
mortallity; and put on incorruption, immortality, and everlasting life, and be
rechanged into their former state as man was before his fall: and, it is very
likely, they will be the blessed inhabitants of the world to come: and such as
shall inherit and dwell in the new earth. Consider of it, and what is offered
about it; it may be very true, though thou do not understand it: or at first
resent it. Remember how it was with the disciples of our Lord Christ, Luke 18.
31. 34. our Lord told them, verse. 31. of what he was to suffer, and that all
things that were written by the prophets concerning the son of man, should be
fulfilled: and that at Jerusalem he should be spitefully dealt withal, etc.
and delivered to the gentiles: as they did. verse. 34. it is said, they
understood none of those things; and these sayings were hid from them: neither
knew they the things that were spoken: in like manner, our Lord Christ, the
Apostles, and prophets, have spoken and declared many things, concerning his
coming again in power and great glory; and that every eye shall see him. They
have spoken of very many great things that wlll contemporize and take place
then and amongst them; in particular, this mystery showed by the Apostle Paul,
of the not aying of the servants of God, but being changed, whilst alive, and
put into their former happy estate which was lost in Adam: but many of the
servants of God, and followers of the Lord Christ understand none of those
things, and the saying is hid from them, and they know it not. Happily, it may be
even so, in this our day; and in particular concerning this mystery, this being
changed whilst alive; in a moment. It is likely, it may be better resented and
understood hereafter, and therefore I shall leave it to the giver of light and
understanding, to give forth as he shall please. The day hasteneth: the time it
draws nigh; he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. In the mean
time, the just shall live by faith, Farewell.

P. G. B.

The Mystery of Not Dying, but being Changed whilst alive, Discussed. 1 Cor.
15. 51.
CHAP. I. Something offered in a brief and general way touching the
resurrection of the dead, from that in 1 Cor. 15. from the 34. to the end of
verse. 50 In order to the better taking knowledge of some other matter.
THe Apostle Paul, having mentioned a question, that some did or might make,
verse. 35. How are the dead raised up? and with what bodies do they come? He, in
an upbraiding manner, answers in an allusive way; to the sowing of grain in
the earth, vors. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except
it die, verse, 37. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body which
shall be, but bare grain, etc. [a grain sown becomes a stalk with ears, and
grain]: For verse. 38. God gives it a body, as it has pleased him, and to
every seed [of this or that kind of grain] his own body [his own in nature and
kind: wheat, brings forth wheat; barley and all kind of grain, their like. In
verse. 39. the Apostle alludeth to flesh: and mentions the several kinds; all
not being the same; there is one of men, another of beasts, another of fishes,
another of birds: then in verse. 40. He tells also of celestial bodies, and
bodies terrestrial. And in verse. 41. he speaks of the difference that is
between the celestial bodies in glory; that there is a difference in degree,
and in the greatness of their glory; as in the sun, and the moon; And how one
star differs from another, in glory: and this he does, in an allusive way, to
the matter in hand.

In verse. 42. He applies that before spoken of, to the resurrection; saying, so
also is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption, etc. And so according to that allusive way of speaking of sowing:
man's body is so sown in corruption, and raised in incorruption: God gives a
body as he pleases, so as he gives to the grain. A body incorruptible, as is
set forth in verse. 43. it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; It is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body. There will be a difference betwixt what they are when
sown, and what they will be when raised; in sundry considerations. In the
latter part of verse. 44. the Apostle does positively assert, that there is a
natural body [such is the present condition of all the sons of Adam] and there
is a spiritual body; so will be the case and condition of all the just,
hereafter, when they are raised again. He speaks, as the holy Scriptures use
to do, of things, that as yet are not, as if, at present, they were. There is a
spiritual body: it will surely be so. What he means by spiritual body, the
matter following, in verse. 45. does show; he confirms the differencing so, by
what is written, saying, and so it is written: the first man Adam was made a
living soul, a living man, Genesis 2. 7. God breathed into his nostrils the breath
of life, and man became a living soul. The last Adam, to wit, the Lord Christ,
the prince of life, Acts. 3 15. He was made a quickening spirit: being the
first fruits of those that rose from death. verse. 46. He shows that the natural
state is first, the spiritual state is afterward. verse. 47. the first man is of
the earth, earthly: Adam was formed of the dust of the earth: the second Adam,
or man (the Lord Christ) from heaven.

Verse. 48. As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy [as was Adam, such
are all his posteritie] as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly: as
is the Lord Christ, such will be all the just; they shall be like him. 1. Joh.
3. 2. Their vile bodies shall be changed, and made like unto his glorious body.
Phil. 3. 21.

Verse. 49. The Apostle fully asserts it, As we have born [and do yet bear] the
Image of the earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly. The Apostle
says, we shall: not that we do bear it now: for our present state, is a state
of regeneration: but our future condition, will be a state of glorification,
which we shall then attain unto: when Christ, who is our life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Col. 3. 4.

Verse. 50. The Apostle has another positive assertion, and a resolve in the
case: this I say, brethren, that flesh, and blood, cannot inherrit the kingdom
of God. What he means by flesh, and blood; that which he says further
explains: neither [saith he] does corruption, inherit incorruption; namely; man
in his corrupt, unchanged estate: earthy Adam; he cannot inherit that incorrupt
estate as to dwell in the new heaven, and the new earth, wherein shall dwell
righteousness; or righteous ones, only: so in Rev. 21. 27. And there shall in
no wise enter into it anything that defiles, etc.

Man clothed with mortallity, and corrupt flesh, and blood, cannot come there,
or have any share or inheritance in that blessed state, of which holy Peter
speaks, 1. Pet. 1. 4. an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in heaven for you, to wit, such as are begotten again
to a lively hope thereof, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ: but must be
first sown in weakness, before they come to be raised in glory; or else changed
in a moment; without which, there is no coming there to inherit: earthy Adam,
cannot, flesh and blood, so, cannot attain to that happy estate: though they
should cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, it would be in vain.

This briefly premised concerning the resurrection; the better to give light,
and make the ensuing matter more easily conceived of; it being of near affinity
to it, namely, the mystery of being changed, in verse. 51.

CHAP. II. Containing a brief proposal of sundry things to consideration;
touching the mystery of the living: then: not dying: but being changed; in a
moment, at the coming of the Lord Jesus.
Verse. 51. Behold, I show you a mystery: we shall not all dye: but we shall all
be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, etc.
the matter is high and considerable; a mystery, or great secret, little known,
or understood. He begins the declaring of it, with a, behold: which sets a mark
on it, as some noteable great thing: great secret, little known: which; behold:
calls for the minding and consideration of, I show you: I Paul; the Apostle of
the gentiles. And he was a man, of much knowledge and understanding, in the
great mysteries of the Gospel; and also of an infallible spirit. He has
declared, and showed it; and none besides himself has done it: and he has
done it, again, and again, and positively asserted it to us, I show you: you
gentiles; to whom he wrote his epistle. You the Church of Corinth: and all
other the servants of the Lord Jesus: the thing showed, is a mystery: that ye
may know, understand, and believe it.

The Apostle proceeds to declare it: first, negatively: we shall not all dye:
then positively he attests: that we shall all be changed. There is much
considerable in both: the persons in both, in the which he includes himself. We
shall not: and we shall: inquiry may be made, who he means, by we? it is very
likely, he means the servants of God, believers in Jesus Christ, then alive in
the body at the coming of the Lord Christ: those are the [we] that shall not
dye: those are the [we] that shall all be changed. The prayer of the Lord
Christ, will be answered then, and in them: father I will, that those which
thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, etc.
Joh. 17. 24. Not one related; so; shall fail of that great blessedness.

Death will have a great check, a great blow, then: and lose of his power, over
the righteous ones, at that very time; that moment, as the Apostle after
expresses. Over the unrighteous, and unsaved people, and nations; death may
have power: not only in respect of killing their bodies; which will be, till a
little before the final judicature, or the second, and last session of
judgment begins, Rev. 20. 9. but also in keeping under, or in the grave, the
whole wicked, (all being then dead) until the time that session is begun; who
are then raised, to come thereunto to be judged, as in Rev. 20. 11. 12. 13. and
at the end, and as the conclusion thereof; death, and hell, or the grave; shall
be cast into the lake of fire, never to have power or a being more, as in verse.
14. but as is said before, death has no power over the righteous after that
Christ our Lord is come, it being said, in Rev. 21. 4. There shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for
the former things [to wit, The old heaven, and earth, with the dying and
sorrow, etc. therein] are passed away: which I conceive is to be understood,
not only in respect of the saints that are raised at the coming of our Lord
Christ; that they shall not dye any more: as also the saints who were then
changed; that they shall not dye at all. [But also in respect of the converted
in that time, who if any alteration afterward pass upon their bodies; it will,
in all likelihood, be a change, and shall not dye:] it being said, as before,
in respect of the righteous, we shall not all dye: but we shall all be changed:
the not dying: but changing, of the saints that remain alive to the coming of
the Lord Christ, being an eminent token and forerunner thereof.

Further, we may take knowledge, that in the holy scripture account: that to
sleep in the grave and to dye, are one, and the same: and so; to say, we shall
not all sleep, and we shall not all dye, are terms equivolent, and do import
one, and the same thing: see Act. 13. 36. David fell asleep, and was laid to
his fathers, etc. them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1
These. 4. 14. So Dan. 12. 2. Many that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall
awake, etc. as to that of death or dying: see the many expressions: as here: in
Adam all dye: death went over all: it is appointed to men once to dye, etc.
Heb. 9. 27. Jacob went down into Egypt, and dyed, he, and our fathers, Acts. 7.
15. so, as his negation of the Apostle, leads to take knowledge of a very
high case, wherein there is much of mystery: we shall not all dye; the
restriction that is in this all, is only to the righteous, then living and
remaining at the coming of the Lord Christ: this all relates only to them:
they are the all that shall not dye but be all changed, then: but none of the
unrighteous shall be so.

At which time: death that had reigned so long over Adam, and all his
posterity: his power over the just, over the righteous, shall then be
superseded: they shall be put into a condition out of his reach; having put off
mortality and put on immortality and life everlasting. As every thing that
has a beginning; will have and end: so will death: and in order to the ceasing
of his power over the righteous, and putting a stop to his universal reign; it
will begin, then. So, as that appointment of death to all men, Heb. 9. 22. is
to be understood: So: to wit, until this time take place, this Mystery be
actually opened, we shall not all dye; as it is said, when this corruptible,
has put on incorruption, and this mortal, has put on immortality, and made
this happy change; then it shall be; and also that Prophecy fulfilled, death is
swallowed up in victory. verse. 24. latter part.

By the way, we may take notice: who would have thought in a likely way that
that Prophecy, Esa. 25. 8. should reach so far as to that time? and to have its
fulfilling then; so long after? who is there, that would have understood it so?
had not the Apostle so declared it: that, then, death should be swallowed up in
victory? we shall forbear to speak further to the first part of the mystery,
namely, that we shall not all dye.

The second part, is: but we shall all be changed. All the just or righteous;
then: alive at the coming of the Lord Christ, shall be so changed. It medleth
not with the unjust: we shall be changed: the consideration of the change it
self, and wherein it consists, we shall refer to the Apostle his following
description of it, and shall make some enquiry what other Scriptures speak of
it, and witness to it: first, that in Paul. 3. 21. who shall change [to wit,
the Lord Christ, shall at his coming from heaven, make that change] our vile
body [or corrupt and sinful body] that it may fashioned like unto his [to wit,
pure, spotless, and incorrupt] glorious body. Col. 3. 4. when Christ shall
appear then shall we appear with him in glory: be like him, and see him as he
is: as holy John says, 1. Joh. 3. 2. this change is wrought by a mighty hand
of power, and working, whereby he, namely, the Lord Jesus, is able to subdue
all things unto himself: put them under, and subject them: even sin, and death,
and the grave, and all principality, and power; he is over them all; and he is
able to do whatever he pleases: make this change so as is after declared. In
the next place mind we, that in 1. These. 4. 15. 17. This we say unto you by
the word of the Lord, that we that are alive, and remain [So] unto the coming
of the Lord: [implying, there will be such living then:] shall not prevent
[anticipate or get before] them that are asleep, to wit, in their graves: for
as in verse. 16. they shall be awakened with a shout; with the voice of the
Archangel and with the trump of God, and shall arise first. These dead in
Christ, they will rise first; that being their order. Then comes these changed
ones; as it is said, then shall we which are alive, and remain, be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. It is premised,
that they be first changed, in a moment before this conjunction and going
together to meet the Lord, so: mounting up, like the Eagles with wings. Isa.
40. 41. these waiters on the Lord Christ, shall be so renewed then: as to do,
as is there said: this Prophesy seems to relate to that very time, and to
have its fulfilling then. We shall: then: both the raised, and changed,
together, meet the Lord, so: and be for ever with him. Blessed and happy souls
indeed.

Further the restoration of all things; spoken by all the holy prophets, Acts.
3. 21. it does speak out fully, and in a more general way, this change, and the
time of it also: man being the principal thing in that blessed restoration. The
heavens, the earth, and the Creatures; they groan for it, Romans 8. 19. 21. 22.
they shall all share in this change, and shall be answered unto in their
groaning. They shall all be changed, as a vesture folded up; and they, being
old, shall be changed, Psalm. 102. 26. and the new heaven, and the new earth,
taking place, 2 Pet. 3. 13. all things shall be changed and made new; as the
Angel said unto John, Rev. 21. 5. behold, I make all things new even as holy
Paul said, behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not a dye: but be changed.
The holy Apostle, verse. 52. does very positiuely, the second time, assert it:
we shall all be changed: as it is fully asserted by him: so, it is ncessary to
be fully believed by us.

That which yet further we may mind about this change; whither as a part of
the mystery, or as an appendix, or a relate to it, I shall not essay to
determine. That, we may take notice of, is; how sudden and transcient it will
be: in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye: very-sudden, and expeditious, will
this change be. The coming of the son of man: and this as an attendant thereof;
will be like the lightning, that is very quick, and transcient, Math. 24. 27.
sudden, in the shining from the East, to the West; over, in a moment of time:
as sudden, as a thought: and while they begin to think: it will be over: in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, it will be over, and done. A very great
work; in a very little time; done, and brought to pass, by a mighty and
wonderful workman, the Lord Christ, that is able to do all things: it is beyond
our reason and thoughts, but not our faith. What our Lord Christ said to
Thomas, may here be said in this matter: blessed are they, that though their
reason cannot reach it, nor their thoughts comprehend it; yet their faith
believes it, because it is written: so: in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, in the least of time, very transient, will this changing be, And we shall
be changed.

Then lastly, as relating to the time, when: said, to be at the last trumpet:
for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible; of
which, in order. To the dead, raised, something has been said before: and at
that very juncture of time, shall the living be changed. This saying of the
Apostle: at the last trump; is considerable. Whither it be the last, of the
seven trumpets: (it is very likely,) or some other? this rising, and changing,
we are now treating of, seems to contemporize (in time), with the time of our
Lord Christ his coming, Mat. 24. 31. when that scripture, Rev. 11. 15. the
kingdoms of this world, are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever and ever, will have it is through fulfilling, he
then having fully taken to himself his great power and reign: for which there
will be so great thanks giving, as in verse. 17. we give thee thanks, O Lord,
God almighty, etc. because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have
reigned.

CHAP. III. Containing the proposal of some things by way of essay, from verse.
53. and 54. concerning the Apostles further making out the matter wherein this
mystery consists: with the manner of the effecting of it.
THe holy Apostle, verse. 53. 54. further to show the matter, and contents of
the mystery, of not dying, but being changed: he likewise shows the way, and
manner of it: saying, this corruptible, must put on incorruption, and this
mortal, must put on immortality: wherein the matter, and likewise the manner,
is held forth: of which, we shall dilate a little. And first, for the matter.
It is, by being freed, or rid of corruption, defilement, and all pollution:
and, by being put into a state of perfect rectitude and uprightness: and this,
beyond the highest degree of mortification, that is to be attained unto here.
And on the other part, an attayner of holiness, purity, and clearness from sin:
an estate, beyond the highest attainner of sanctification, that the happy
estate of regeneration is attended withal, in the polluted world, in this
polluted state. We shall in this change, be quite rid of sin, and defilement,
and of sinning any more: then. That which holy John says of those that are the
sons of God, in the blessed estate of regeneration, such as are born of God:
that they cannot sin, because they are born of God (true only in a sense or
consideration) will then in the highest sense, and degree, be made good. And it
might be said, they cannot sin, because they are so changed, and have put off
corruption, and put on incorruption, holiness, and purity: the seed of sin and
corruption being quite put away, and they in their persons washed from it in
the blood of the lamb. Rev. 1. 5. Rev. 7. 14. then: with that change: the
mystery of God will be fully finished, to wit, that of full redemption of the
body, the whole man; waited for by those that have the first fruits, (or
earnest) of the spirit, Romans 8. 23. it will then, be enjoyed, the bodies of the
just, and saved people, will be changed, and made like the pure, and spotless
body of the Lord Christ, Phil. 3. 21. what they lost in Adam, this change, will
restore to the just, with very many, and great advantages, for it will be a
restoration, as well as a change; or a restoration in the change, very much for
the better. And not like that, which attended Adam in paradise, which was so
much for the worse. This change, will not only have rectitude, and purity
restored, but also a state of stability therein: together with immortality, and
that which is the effect, following, namely, everlasting life, Life for
evermore.

This is one of the great things in this change: from a state of sin,
defilement, and corruption, to a state of purity, holiness and innocence: so:
as (being wholly pure) to be capable to see God; as is promised to the pure in
heart, Math. 5 8. and to see the Lord Christ, as he is, in his glory: and also
to be for ever with him, 1. Joh. 3. 2. 1 These. 4. 17.

The second thing in this change, is immortality, that put on: and mortality,
that put off. This dying body which is dying daily, as we are carrying it about
with us, shall then be put into a state and condition of immortality, so as not
to dye at all, but to live for ever; to have a life eternal, a life
everlasting, instead of a life of seventy years, or the like, as the posterity
of Adam have had, and has been counted a blessing from God, Psalm. 91. 16.

But this change, will put men into a state of freedom from sin; the cause; and
death, the effect: as for sin, and iniquity, that prophecy, Jer. 50. 20. will
then be thoroughly fulfilled: at that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and
they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve: these changed
ones, in a moment; which is something like that, Zech. 3. 9. And I will remove
the iniquity of that land on one day: which things have never been made good:
these prophecyes were never fulfilled as yet: and though they may in a great
measure have their fulfilling before, yet are they never likely to be so fully,
and thoroughly fulfilled, till that day; when sin and corruption shall be taken
away, put off, and death swallowed up in victory, and be no more; and Mortality
swallowed up of life, to wit, life everlasting; 2. Cor. 5. 4. so as death and
Mortality will, then, be no more among the righteous, and saved ones; who,
then, will be changed, and put into an estate, as neither to sin, nor to dye.
And if any should think, they had attained to a state of freedom from sin, here
in this world, before that day; if they could assure themselves, or others, of
a like freedom from death, and the grave, it were something; otherwise, that of
holy John, 1. Joh. 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves
and the truth is not in us, compared with Prove. 20. 9. will take place: but
then; at that happy time, they shall be freed; by being changed, and by putting
off corruption, and mortality, and be put into that blessed estate of freedom,
and glorious liberty of the sons of God.

And the grace of the new testament, or covenant confirmed by the blood of the
Lord Jesus, the blessed mediator, and advocate thereof; shall, in the highest
degree be enjoyed by them; then: and there: so: as God, being their God, in a
gracious wise, and they his people, he shall keep them in that blessed estate,
for ever, and they shall not depart from him any more for ever. Jer. 32. 40.
but shall enjoy everlasting life, in the enjoyment of happyness and felicity,
and freedom from all sorrow and misery whatever: the blessed fruits of that
happy change, into immortality, and everlasting life.

Now for the manner of this change: it is held forth in a way of putting off,
and putting on; a borrowed way of speaking: this corruptible, this mortal, must
put off and put on; to wit, they must be freed; quite rid of sin, corruption,
and mortality; and made pure, incorrupt and immortal: and this, by putting
off, and putting on, as men put off, and put on raiment, change their clothing,
put off, filthy, and torn, or old raiment; they put it off, put it away, lay it
by, and put on clean sound and good clothing, new, and fresh; so is this
putting off and putting on, here. A plain and known thing alluded unto, a
usual, and known thing, for the manner; so, this corruptible must put on
incorruption; and this mortal put on immortality, having put corruption and
mortality away, and laid them by.

Further, take we notice of that, of the prophet Zachary, Zech. 3. It is spoken
of Joshua, happily as a Type of the thing in hand, or it may be a prophecy eyeing
of it, to wit, the change: however the mauner is much the same: Joshua was
clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the Angel: the Angel bids those
that stood by, to take away his filthy garments from him (as the garments of
corruption shall be taken from the righteous) and to him, he said, behold, I
have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee (as shall then, the corruption,
and sin, and also mortality, pass away from the righteous): and it is spoken,
with a behold. In the one, and in the other. A thing, rare, and considerable:
behold, I show you a mystery: behold, I have caused thine iniquity to depart.
Joshua, his filthy garments, shall be taken away. As the changed, shall put off
their garments of corruption, and mortality: and shall put on garments, that
are pure, incorrupt, or spotless, and immortality also, and eternal life.
There is something declared, verse. 2. very high and marvelous; to wit, I will
cause the iniquity of that land [the land of Canaan, Isreal's possession] to
remove in one day. Never yet done: and though much of it may be done before,
yet is it not likely to be so fully and thoroughly to be done, till that day of
the restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his
holy prophets since the world began, Acts. 3. 21. and the time of the glorious
manifestation of the sons of God, which the creature grons for, Romans 8. 19.
when the Lord Jehovah shall bring forth [again] his servant, the branch: this
will then be fully performed; and then (according to his promise) we shall have
a new heaven and a new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness, 2. Pet. 3. 13.
In the which, iniquity will not be found.

In 2. Cor. 5. The like we may find, not only something of the matter before
treated of: but of the manner: we know (says the Apostle) that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands. etc. If our mortal bodies dye, and perish; we have better
provided, we shall have such hereafter. And therefore, as in verse. 2. we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, with our house which is from heaven,
with more pure, incorruptible, and immortal clothing: with glory, and honor,
and immortality, and life eternal, Romans 2. 7. the condition then: will not be
righteousness imputed; as now: but righteousness in us; perfect rectitude in
our own persons; we shall be like the Lord Christ. The attainer then: it will
be sure; beyond that of the attainer in the state of regeneration: and that of
imputation, it is likely, will cease.

The clothing, with our house from heaven, as it will be very pure, so it will
be lasting, and durable; and therefore we groan (or desire) to be clothed with
it, to be, in that state, that condition. verse. 3. if so be, that being [so]
clothed with it, we shall not be found naked, as Adam and Eve were, when they
had sinned, eating the forbidden fruit; they were stripped of that clothing of
the Image of God, righteousness, and holiness, in the which they were made,
Genesis 1. 27. it is said, they were naked: sin, and shame entered together; Adam
made garments of figtree leaves because of shame, and being naked: as, in like
manner, his posterity have done, and yet do; make garments upon that account.
In verse. 4. the holy Apostle speaks further, we groan, being burdened, [with
our heavy clothing, of sin, corruption, and mortality] not for that we would be
unclothed [namely, dye, and be dissolved: that, the Apostle denies to be the
tendency of the creature, or man: such as have the first fruits of the spirit,
to groan, for death, or dying; it being as an instinct in every creature, as
well as man, to preserve life by all means whatever they can attain: death, is
an enemy to life, and is, as an enemy, shunned. That Is a rare case and a kindly
spirit indeed, that is so disposed, as to desire to be unclothed, so: which the
Apostle denyes] not that we would be unclothed, but be clothed upon with a
better clothing, to be changed for a better and a more durable clothing,
incorruption, immortality, and life eternal, when and where, we shall not be
found naked, that is, the tendency and earnest desire which the servants of God
goes out after, and the creatures also.

Verse. 54. of this 1. Cor. 15. the Apostle adds further, when this corruptible,
has put on incorruption, and this mortal, has put on immortality [as it will
at the time of the raising, and changing of the servants of God] then will be
brought to pass [accomplished, and done fully] that which is written [Isay 25.
8.] death is swallowed up in victory; as mortality; shall likewise be of
life, to wit, life everlasting, compared 2. Cor. 5. 4. then the conquest and
victory over death, will be brought to pass, and the righteous freed from
being under his dominion any more, for ever: for then, they can dye no more:
but be immortal, and live for evermore.

There are very many great things, as well as this victory over death, that do
attend this time: very many, great, and high prophecyes contained in the
scriptures, relating to that time, will, then, be fulfilled and made good: of
which, something shall be said hereafter: yea, many of the prophecyes of holy
Isaiah, little minded or understood in this day: will, then be brought to
pass, and made good, seem they never so strange. It was so, at our Lord his
first coming, as the holy scriptures do hold out unto us: as Math. 1. 22. Mat.
2. 17. Math. 4. 14. Luke 24. 44. with very many the like, which I shall forbear
to set down. That of Luke, is the saying of our Lord Christ, very full: that
all things that are written concerning me, in the law of Moses, and in the
prophets, and in the Psalms, must be fulfilled: not one jot, or tittle of the
word of prophecy, as to things relating to the Lord Christ, and his kingdom:
but it must all be fulfilled. As it was in relation to his first coming: so it
will be also as to his second coming, when he shall come in power and great
glory: seem the things never so strange, or unlikely; the power and
faithfulness of the Lord Jehovah, whose word it is, will make them good: of
which, more hereafter. But for a close, take we knowledge of one place more in
holy Isaiah, because it is of like tone with what we have treated of,
concerning clothing, and garments; and putting on, and off.

Isa 52. 1. Awake, awake, put on thy strength O Zion, put on thy beautiful
garments, O Jerusalem, etc. It seems, as to the last, and full fulfilling of
it, to look at this blessed state, and day, we are treating of, when the
marriage of the lamb is come, and the bride, the lambs wife, is made ready; Rev.
19. 7. Likewise, that of Isa. 60. 1. Arise, and shine, for thy light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. All of like tendency and import:
all prophetical, and eyeing a time, not yet come: and though it may, in a great
measure, have its fulfilling before, and more especially, when the Jews are
returned to their own land, and converted; yet no time so likely to have its
full fulfilling, as then: when the Lord Christ shall come again: and the dead,
in him, raised, and live again: and the then living saints, changed, in a
moment; corruption, and all defilement, done away: and glory and honor, purity
and holiness, immortality, and eternal life, put on: with beautiful and
precious clothing. For Zion sball then put on her beautiful garments, and shall
shine very gloriously indeed; being so richly adorned, as a bride prepared for
the bridegroom the Lord Jesus; rich, and pure clothing then: without spot or
wrinckle: and that will be found true, eminently, to the very life: thou art
all fair, my love, and there is no spot in thee: cant. 4. 7.

And then also will it be, that the Lord Christ, will present the Church [the
bride, the lambs wife: the new Jerusalem] to himself, a glorious Church, not
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: but holy, and without blemish:
Ephesians. 5. 27. she: namely, the Church, is accepted in the beloved, now: and
fair and precious, as being clothed with his purity and righteousness. All:
now: in the state of regeneration, and living by faith: is by imputation of his
righteousness: and as we are in him; the reckoning and account stands good, on
the behalf of the servants of God: but then: that pure white linen, said, to
be the righteousness of the saints: their own: so given unto them for their
clothing, at their raising, and changing, Rev. 10. 8. It was granted to the
lambs wife, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for so
is it said, the fine linen, is the righteousness of saints: they shall be like
him when he appears. Their bodies, that were vile, shall be made like his
glorious body: very glorious, and shining: upon the whole, we may well say,
with the spirit, and the bride: O come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

CHAP. IV. Containing something further, in a general way proposed, concerning
the mystery, of all not dying: but being changed: in a moment. In which; some
things near relating to it, with some scriptures of like tendency are
discussed, in way of essay.
THe holy Apostle Peter, tells us, Acts. 3. 20. 21. of a very happy time: a
time of refreshing, from the presence of the Lord: when God the father, shall
send Jesus Christ, our Lord: he, that before, was preached unto them, that came
in his humiliation, dyed for our sins, rose again, for our justification,
ascended into heaven, and is at the right hand of God, in glory: whom, the
heavens must contain (be the place of his stay, and abode) till then: namely,
till that time of refreshing come: and the time of the restitution, or
restoration, of all things: that God has spoken, by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets, since the world began. This scripture comporteth in the tendency of
it, with that of Romans 8. 23. being for matter and time much the same: As in
like manner, this; of the changing, in a moment, the desire and groaning of the
creature, as well as the servants of God, that have the first fruits of the
spirit, as the earnest of it, (to wit, that happy day) when they shall possess
it; even their inheritance prepared for them. 1. Pet. 1. 4.

This groaning, and desire, after restoration: this desire of freedom, and the
liberty of the sons of God: seems to imply, a former happy estate, and
condition, which they would be at, and enjoy again; to wit, that, which Adam
was created in. He was created in the Image of God; a perfect man, in perfect
freedom; from sin, sorrow, misery, and death: in full felicity: he sinned, he
fell; lost his happy condition: and in him; all his posterity, and the
creatures also: as: this: they groan under, and desire to be rid of: so shall
they according to their expectation, be restored to their former estate, with
some addition of blessedness: at that day of restoration, forementioned.

Two ways, this is attained unto, as the holy scriptures do hold out unto us;
the one, is by dying; and after lying a time in the grave: rising again, or
being raised out of the prison of the grave, at the sounding of the trumpet of
God: when they shall, hear, awake, and rise.

The other way is, by not dying, but being changed, in a moment, at the very
same time, the dead are raised. This: change: is a mystery: a secret: not much
taken notice of. These; both; at the same time, at the coming and appearing of
the Lord Christ: will be raised, and changed, and caught up together in the
clouds, to meet him in the air [not then to go up to heaven with him, but to
attend him in his coming to the earth] and so will be ever after, with him, 1.
These. 4. 17.

These shall not prevent one another, by getting before one, the other: the
raised, shall not so do, by the changed; nor shall they be occasioned to stay
for them: for they shall be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
and caught up together, Very aierie, and spriteful, shall they be, then. This
change, or being changed: To: is a great thing indeed.

The change of regeneration: or being born again: which Nicodemus made so
strange, and impossible a matter to be effected: to be born again, to put off
the old man, with the affections and lusts; and to put on the new man, Ephesians.
4. 22. 24. Col. 3. 8. 9. 10. The new man, being after God, created in
righteousness, and true holiness. It Is a being quite another person. A very
great change, that has much of mystery in it. But the changing is a higher
mystery, a greater thing: the putting off sin, and corruption, and mortality;
at once; in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.

That, of regeneration, when begun by the spirit of Christ: it is carried on,
and advanced, in a gradual way; by the exercise of, mortification, and
sanctification, and by fresh supplies of the spirit of Christ, while we are in
this world; till death, or this change, take place.

As we may, by that before, take some notice of this change: so we may also, of
the near affinity it has, with the resurrection of the just; and how in
sundry things, they concur and agree together, in order to the righteous and
saved people: who then, shall the one, be raised, the other, changed, at the
same time, together. They shall both be rid, and freed of corruption, and
mortality, together. They shall both be caught up together, to meet the Lord in
the air: they shall be with the Lord Christ, together: they shall enjoy,
glory, and honor, and eternal life, together: and the blessedness of that happy
day, for ever.

The unjust, and wicked sinners, they shall not share at all, in the glory, and
blessedness, of that happy day; for as they shall not rise: then: that not
being their order, or time of rising: so such of them, as are then living,
shall not be changed, then, but shall be left in their old clothing of
corruption, and mortality, they shall have no share, or be concerned, in the
blessedness of this mystery, of being changed: so: for then: that of our Lord
Christ, Math. 24. 40. Luke 17. 34. 35. 36. will be made good, and fulfilled: at
the coming of the son of man: then: two shall be in the field: the one, shall
be taken, the other left; Two women shall be grinding together, at the Mill;
one shall be taken, the other left. The evangelist, Luke, holds it forth more
largely, thus. I tell you, in that night, there shall be two men in one bed,
the one shall be taken, the other shall be left. And as it follows, Two
grinding at the Mill: and two in the field, so taken, and left. Verse. 37. Our
Lord is asked; where, Lord? and he tells them in a dark borrowed way of
speaking; saying, wheresoever the body [or, carcass, Math. 24. 28.] is, thither
will the Eagles be gathered together. As if he had said, where I am, thither
shall mine, to wit, the raised, and changed saints, be gathered together.
Consider the demand: where, Lord? not where those, so taken, and left, shall
be, then: when they are so taken, and left: that our Lord declared plainly: in
the field, and in the bed: but where those, that are taken away, should be,
when they were so taken, from their companions, in the field, and in the bed?
they should be taken, and brought to the Lord Christ, to meet him in the air.
This: that in Math. 24. 31. comp. with verse. 27. 28. seems very fully to hold
forth.

When the Lord Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven, in power, and great
glory, verse. 31. He shall send his Angels, with a great sound of a trumpet [at
which sound, those: dead; shall awake; and arise: and those: living: shall be
changed; in a moment. The trumpet shall sound, and the dead, raised, and we
shall be changed. 1. Cor. 15. 52. the place we are treating of. So. 1. These. 4.
16. with the trumpet of God. And as it follows; he shall send his Angels] and
they shall gather his elect, [to wit, those, so raised and changed] from the
four winds: from one end of heaven, to the other. A great thing; a wonderful
gathering! this will be, at his coming: very sudden, and transperent: as the
lightning shining from the east, to the west; let this be considered, with the
answer of our Lord, in Luke: and then we may perceive, what those words, both
there and here, do mean; and what was the intent of our Lord in them: namely,
where the carcass, or body, is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.
The raised, and changed: shall: then: as Eagles, mount up together, to meet the
Lord in the Air, 1 These. 4. 17. then: shall that prophecy of holy Isaiah, be
fully made good and fulfilled, which, it is very likely, eyeth that day. Isa.
40. 31. they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength: they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles, etc. as Eagles mount up: so, shall these:
changed: and changed do then: according to the very letter: there needs no
allegory in the matter. The servants of God, shall be very agile, aierie: and
spriteful; and as the Eagles; shall mount up; so; to meet the Lord Christ.
Then: will be the difference, between the righteous, and the wicked, of which
the prophet Malachy speaks. Mal. 3. 18. be greatly made manifest, and clear
to be known, Between the righteous, and the wicked: when, the, one, shall be
taken, and the other left: when, one, shall be changed, and the other, left: in
their corrupt and mortal state and condition.

There are many great things, that will be attendants of this change As the
change will be very great, and misterious, so, will be the things that will
concur, and go along with it: such as we mentioned, when we treated of the
resurrection: as the attendants of that: the same, in like manner will be at
this change: we shall forbear to mention them here, having done it then.

This change, it will be accompanied with another, even the change of all
things: which God has spoken, by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the
world began, Acts. 3. 21. they will be restored into their former good
condition: renewed, refined, and made new. A new heaven, new earth, as it is
said, Psalm. 102. 26. as a vesture, shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. All shall be changed, and made new as at the first making Rev. 21. 5.
behold I make all things new. A blessed state, like that of paradise; if not
higher: this world, shall end, and cease: and with the change, the world to
come, shall begin, and take place: of which we shall treat a little.

CHAP. V. Containing something proposed to consideration, touching the world to
come; as being much the same, with the New heaven and the New earth, spoken of
in the Holy Scriptures, and that it will contemporsze, in time, with that, and
other great things that will take place at the Coming of our Lord Christ.
The holy scriptures declare. Heb. 1. 2. that God by Jesus Christ, made the
worlds; and by faith, we understand, and believe so: Heb. 11. 3. By says we
understand the worlds were framed, etc. the scriptures make mention of three
worlds: the old world, which began with the creation, and continued to the
flood; and then perished and ended, so Peter tells us, 2. Pet. 3. 6. This
present world, so called in scripture, and may be so called still; it took
place with the ceasing of the flood, and was peopled by Noah, and his sons: and
it continued and does yet continue, is grown old and is reserved (being grown
old) unto fire, and the great burning to come, verse. 10. at the day of
judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. The day of the Lord will come, verse.
12. and then will be the dissolution and end of this present world. The Apostle
expresses it, by the heaven and the earth that are now, verse. 7. As the same
thing: to wit, this world, this present evil world. There is in the third
place, the world to come, which will begin with the end or ceasing of this
present world, of which the holy scripture speaks very often, so frequent, as I
shall forbear quotations. When that end comes, which will be with the burning
spoken of: then will begin the world to come of which we are now treating; and
shall mention a few places. Math. 12. 32. Mark. 10. 30. Luke 18. 30. Ephesians. 1.
21. Heb. 2. 5. of which we may take notice hereafter: the time when: and how;
this will contemporize with other great things that will take place likewise,
then: to wit, at the coming of the Lord Christ, in power and great glory: to
them that look for him the second time; he will then appear, Heb. 9. 28. This
third world, this world to come; it will then begin. In the which the Lord
Christ will fully take unto himself his great power, and will reign very
gloriously: the dominion, power, and sovereignty, will rest in him, and he will
then appear on earth, as king of kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15.

Then, in the world to come, he will delegate power as he pleases: to one to
be ruler over five cities: and to another to be ruler over ten cities: they
shall rule under him: yea: then: will they rule with him, and that be made good
in Rev. 5. 10. And have made us kings and Priests unto our God, and we shall
reign on the earth: it is not said, in heaven; For the world to come; it will
be here below on earth and not in heaven, above.

This world to come, it will not be subjected under the power of the Angels;
the scripture expressly tells us so, Heb. 2. 5. as the other were: but it will
be under the power of the Lord Christ and the saints. Then: their noble rulers
will be of themselves, and from among themselves, Jer. 30. 21. This, and much
more that might be mentioned: seems very plainly to speak forth, that, that
the new heaven and the new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness, and the
world to come; are much the same, and there is very little if any difference at
all; both, beginning and taking place together at the coming of the Lord
Christ; and, both concurring in time, with the resurrection of the just: and
the changing in a moment, the then living servants of God; and other great
things, that will be the attendants of that happy day.

Then, will these so raised, and changed, be caught up together, to meet the
Lord, and they will be for ever with him in the world to come, and never
severed from him any more. When the wicked shall be put from him, and bid
depart. When the righteous shall enjoy great blessedness and felicity: then
according to that, which is a righteous thing with God: the wicked shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of, his power: even when he shall be glorified in his saints and
admired in all them that believe. 2. These. 1. 6. 9. 10. In the world to come,
wherein the righteous will be so happy and blessed, and the wicked so unhappy
and accursed, we may a little take notice, what the world says; and we may
begin with that of our Lord, Math. 12. 31. 32. where he tells us, that
blasphemy against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in that which is come: such wicked sinners as despite the spirit of
grace, here, in this world: they shall not be forgiven: there is no more
sacrifice for them. Such wicked sinners, as shall blaspheme the spirit, and
being under wrath, and punishment, blaspeme the God of heaven whose judgments
are all just: they shall not be forgiven then: in the world to come. The
evangelist Mark. chap. 10. 30. He declares the great reward the loosers for
Christ sake here, shall receive: then: in the world to come: as they shall also
in this present world: in the world to come, they shall have everlasting life:
they shall have it, with all the good things, and great happiness that attend
that life. The evangelist Luke, he tells us the same, Luke 18. 30. The Lord
Christ, will be high: then: his name highly advanced in the world to come:
where he will set up his kingdom, and reign, fully: even, here, below on earth:
in the new earth, among the righteous, who shall also reign with him then: and
there: as it is written, Rev. 5. 10. And has made us unto our God, kings, and
Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. And: this: when the wicked, and
unsaved of the nations shall be sent away, and bid depart to their doleful
places of abode, Mat. 25. 41. 46.

That will be made good, in the world to come: which is mentioned by our Lord,
in the parable, concerning Dives, and Lazarus, Luke 16. 19. 20. 22. 25. The
wicked (for the most part) with Dives, have their good things in this world;
and the righteous with poor Lazarus: they have affliction and sorrow, evil
things, but then in the world to come, it will be otherwise: the righteous will
have the good things, the blessedness and the felicity; and the wicked will have
then in the world to come the evil things; as it is said, son, remember that
thou in thy life time, received thy good things, and likewise Lazarus, evil
things; now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

The world to come, where the righteous shall receive and enjoy everlasting
life: it will not be in heaven above, but it will be here below on earth: as
the other world: The old world was so, and so is this present world, and so
will be the world to come: in the earth, in the new earth; where our Lord
Christ will be with his saints; when he comes the second time from heaven,
where he now is and will be till the times of restitution or restoration of all
things: Acts. 3. 20. 21. and the new heavens and earth take place, and all
things made new: when, and where, our Lord Christ will be with his saints,
reigning with them a thousand years, Rev. 20. 4. 6. The new Jerusalem, will
come down from heaven, then: and the tabernacle of God [as of old] will be with
men (where men will dwell then:) and God himself will be with them, and be
their God, Rev. 21. 2. 3. and shall afterward be with him, in the second, and
last great session of judgment, concluding their judging of wicked men, and be
judging of Angels. Rev. 20. 1. 12. 13. 2. Pet. 2. 9. Jud. ver. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 2.
3. as is mentioned before. All this, and very much more, that might be set
forth, will be in the world to come.

To understand as some do, that by the world to come; is meant heaven above;
said in holy scripture, to be the residence of the great Jehovah: seems to be
a miss-understanding, and a wrong applying of it; and the scriptures in all
things relating to the world to come. To cry, heaven, heaven, as some seem to
do, in all cases and concerns relating to the world to come; as when men dye
and are no more here in this world; it seems very much to dazel and darken
the right understanding of the scriptures, in order to those blessed promises
and prophecys that relate to the future happy condition of the servants of God
in the world to come: and to be the means of raising an Idea or unknown thing
in the minds of men: as if in the world to come, men should be Angels or
little deities: and not men and women; as was Adam, and Eve, and as many should
have been if he had continued in his first estate, and as men they will be and
so converse together in the habitable world to come.

To make all future things in order to the happyness and blessedness of men in
the world to come, or new earth, then to be either in heaven or hell, and so to
be meant; especially taken properly and restrictively so: seems to be far
from the drift and intent of the scriptures: rendering many things in them
declared insignificant, which do well agree with the habitable world to come:
but not with heaven properly so understood.

The world to come, of which we have been speaking: it will be new peopled with
the raised and changed saints: wherein Israel, the seed of Abraham; a nation
born in one day: will have the pre-eminence, being Gods nation: and the gentile
saved nations, shall walk in their light, to wit, the light of the new
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 24. And then: will that be fully fulfilled, in Romans 11. 26.
And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of
[or, to Isaiah. 59. 20.] Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodlines
from Jacob: a great number! of which we shall speak after.

Then: in the world to come: when the saints shall be so changed at the coming
of our Lord Christ; will those prophecyes be fully fulfilled, Ier. 50. 20. In
those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found, etc. and that also. Zech. 3. 9. And I will remove the iniquity of
that land, in one day, says the Lord: both in the one, and the other; which,
it is likely, will not so fully be in this world: but must be, in the world to
come.

CHAP. VI. Containing the proposing of some things to consideration, touching
the difference, and distinctions, that will be, between the raised saints, and
the changed; (though in many things the same) in a likely way, at the coming of
our Lord Christ, in the world to come: and that the resurrection, and this
changing, are not the same, but two distinct things.
THe mystery showed by the Apostle, touching the not dying, of the living
saints, at the coming of our Lord Christ, but then changed in a moment, seems
to be a very great thing; and to differ much from that, of the resurrection
from the dead: and likewise, that there will be a difference, betwixt the
raised, and the changed; though in many things, the raised, and those so
changed, will be alike, and the same; which will the easier appear if we shall
consider the state of man in paradise at his first creating; which seems, to
be the very Image, and figure, of the state and condition the living saints
shall then be changed into, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye: with some
blessed additions of stabilitie, immortality, and everlasting life.

This mystery, of not dying; but being, so changed, seems very much veiled
and little minded; but as the same with the resurrection of the dead; which the
holy Apostle speaks of as another distinct thing: behold, I show you a
mystery: after he had spoken largely of the resurrection.

As there will be much of likeness and oneness between the raised and changed,
so there will be much of difference, as may be gathered from what the Apostle
has declared; and it is likely much of the mystery lies in that: I show you,
[sayth the Apostle] a mystery: we shall not all dye but be changed in a moment;
of which we shall make inquiry. And first, of that, wherein the raised and the
changed; will be the same, in their joint attainers and enjoyments: and after
we shall propose wherein they will disser.

1. They will agree, and be jointly the same; in the time of their rising and
changing together: at the appearing of the Lord, at the sounding of the trumpet
of God, the dead will then be raised, and the living changed in a moment.

2. They shall be caught up, together in the clouds; and shall meet the Lord
Christ together in the Air; being capacitated so to do.

3. They shall be with the Lord Christ, together, and never severed from him
any more.

4. They shall be both rid of corruption and mortality, and shall be clothed
with incorruption and immortality and life everlasting.

5. They shall both enjoy the world to come, and the happyness of it; dwell in
the new earth, live and reign wirh the Lord Christ, then and there for a
thousand years; and afterward shall be with him, the whole time, whilst the
second, and last session of judgment is passing.

6. They shall; both; enjoy the great blessedness, of that happy day: and the
good things which God has prepared for them that love him; and wait for the
Savior. Which good things: the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1. Cor. 2. 9.

7. They will: both: be without pain, sorrow, or misery: and tears, will be
wiped from their faces, and death, shall not meddle with them any more.

8. And to add no more, they shall both enjoy the grace of the new covenant or
testament: God to be their God and they his people, in an eminent manner, then:
and the grace of the new covenant, to keep them in that blessed condition for
evermore.

These raised and changed, so, although in many things they agree, and be the
same in their attainers and enjoyments; yet they differ in some things, and
that very considerable; and are not one and the same in all things; as the
mystery which the Apostle shows: which he declares with a behold, after his
treating of the resurrection, and raising of them from death, something plainly
does implie: behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all dye but be changed;
and that alive, or living: which we may take notice of in the first place. The
different way of attaining that happy estate and great enjoyments in the world
to come; it is by dying and lying in the grave and rising again; and so that
way freed from corruption; and clothed with incorruption; and with glory,
honor, and immortality, and eternal life: rich clothing indeed then.

But now, the changed: in a moment: alive without dying: it is clearly another
way: living being alive without dying: they shall be so changed; as to put off,
or to be rid of corruption: and to put on, and be clothed, with incorruption,
immortality, and everlasting life. This as a ground of the difference, whence
many things will follow. Again, the raised; having once dyed: will rise, and
live again: but the changed will never dye nor live again, but be changed in a
moment into a state of incorruption, and immortality; as the Apostle tells us;
we shall not all dye, but we shall all be changed.

The raised will not be the same (yet the same): not the same they were in
body, as they were when they dyed; as the Apostle, verse. 37. 38. compared with
verse. 42. God gives to every seed his own body; though not the same as sown:
so, he says, is the resurrection sown in weakness, raised in power, etc.

But the living, then, at Christ's coming and the trumpets sounding, will have
the same bodies without dying; they will be changed being alive and living:
corruption will be put off, and mortality, and they restored to their first
estate which they had and were created in Adam in paradise before his fall;
when he suffered, and they suffer in him: the change then being so much for the
worse, unto which these living then will be restored for the better, with some
great addition of blessedness; into which perfect estate, according to what
they were created, consisting in righteousness and holiness, will they be changed
then, at that great change, and restoration of all things, Act. 3. 21. wherein,
the sons of God, that have the first fruits of the spirit as the earnest
thereof, will have the highest share; beyond all earthly things, or creatures
whatsoever.

The eyeing and well minding what man was before his sin and fall may give some
light in the case in hand: Adam and Eve were perfect man and perfect woman, so
made of God; little inferior to the Angels, Heb. 2. 7. man and woman at the
first making consisted of flesh and blood, bones and sinews, made up of
several parts and members; with several senses and faculties of soul, and
body, which the posterity of Adam have and do enjoy unto this day; only, they
have lost the rectitude, and have by transgression been clothed with corruption
and mortality; being deprived of the glory of God, his Image, holiness and
righteousness, wherein at first they were created, and into which they shall be
restored by being so changed. The regeneration in this world it has a tendency
unto this; but this changing in a moment: will fully effect it; and at that
day, in the world to come it will be so fully and perfectly: so, as Adam and
Eve changed for the worse, and yet lived in the body, as they were made; so,
those of the servants of God, which live and remain at the coming of the Lord,
shall be changed for the better, and restored again to their first happy and
perfect condition of body and soul, parts and members, senses and faculties, as
Adam then had, and his posterity yet have.

This mystery of not dying; but being changed, living, in the body, it is a
great thing in it self, and great things (not much minded:) will necessarily
follow. As namely, that this change and restoration are different and distinct
things, and not one and the same with the resurrection; but also that there
will be, it is very likely, a difference in condition and estate, betwixt them;
and that those of the resurrection, will be of a higher degree then those so
changed.

The Apostle tells us of a difference in the celestial bodies; and there will
be also a difference in degree among the caelestial; the sun, the moon, and the
stars, are different in glory; yea, the stars differ in glory: so is the
resurrection, verse. 42. And it is very probable there will be difference
between the raised and the changed: and that they will be different in degrees
of Glory. The raised will be as the Angels of God, as our Lord says, Math. 22.
30. but the changed like to Adam and Eve will be as the sons and daughters of
the Lord God Almighty: as they were in the regeneration; and as Adam and Eve
were before the fall.

And these changed, so, and restored to their first condition without dying,
and living again, as the raised, it is likely, that as they will be restored to
what Adam was, and likewise Eve, at their first making; so they will do the
things which they did, or might have done, and enjoy the things which they did,
or lawfully might do, in their innocent condition before corruption seized on
them: of which we may treat something afterward: the raised being restricted
and not in a condition so to do.

And because some take no notice of the mystery of this not dying but being
changed alive; reckoning it, as the same thing with the resurrection; without
any difference, or distinction; and seem to ground it on that of our Lord his
answer to the question made to him; whose wife, the woman that had had seven
husbands, whose wife she should be at the resurrection? Seven having had her,
Math. 22. 28. 29. we shall a little treat of it. To the question so made, our
Lord answers; first, saying, they erred not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God. Then further, ver. 30. he says, in the resurrection, [not in the
changed] they neither marry, nor are given in marriage but are as the Angels of
God in heaven: and so goes on in a restricted way, as to the resurrection: but
as touching the resurrection; so, as in Matthew; there is nothing that includes
the mystery of the change: the evangelist Luke, has it more largely, Luke 20.
34. the children of this world marry, and are given in Marriage: verse. 35. but
they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, [to wit, the world
to come] and the resurrection from the dead, [the saying is restricted to them]
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, verse. 6. neither can they dye any
more; [having dyed once, which I conceive cannot be mean tas including the
changed; that shall not dye at all] for they are equal to the Angels, and are
the children of God, being the children of the resurrection: he does not say,
of the changed: and further, he says, verse. 37. now that the dead are raised,
which does not relate to the living; that shall not dye at all. This answer of
our Lord, declared by both these evangelists, holds forth much; but seems to
have nothing that relates to those alive at the coming of the Lord, who shall
not dye, but be changed. So as the mystery holds it forth clearly to be another
thing then the resurrection: of which, the Apostle having spoken largely says,
behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all dye; but be changed. He holds it
forth, as another distinct thing: though something like it, and related to it,
in special, in time, when they shall both be. That in Matthew, and likewise in
Luke, relate to the resurrection and the raised people; it wholly speaks of
them; and so it answers the question, whose wife shall she be? first our Lord
tells them, they err not understanding the scriptures, then further he tells
them, that in the resurrerection, they marry not, nor are given in marriage but
are as the Angels: and so goes on in that of the resurrection. Luke, has
marrying, and giving in marriage, in this world: but denies it to those, in
the world to come; for then, they shall not do so: but be as Angels of God: he
says, neither can they die any more. Which the changed never did: and having
put on immortality; can never do. He goes on further, concerning the
resurrection, Luke 20. 37. see the place; and nothing will appear in a probable
way, that does conclude the mystery of the changed people, as if it were one,
and the same. And that they are two and not one, and differ greatly, as has
been said; let that of the Apostle be considered, 1. These. 4. 15. We that are
alive, shall not prevent them which are asleep, [or dead] he speaks so as of
two distinct people: one dead the other alive, and that they shall not prevent
one another; as some time it is found; as Jacob, prevented Esau: but as in
verse. 17. they shall be caught up together, as two different, and distinct
people; though, as we said: very like.

I shall end this chapter, and the essays therein proposed; how largely the
holy Apostle, having treated of the doctrine of the resurrection, and the order
of it: and yet after all said therein: says, behold, I show you a mystery: a
rare secret: not the things he had been speaking of: but a case, wherein there
should be, not dying, or rising again: but a changing: in a mavelous manner;
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Let the reader judge.

CHAP. VII. Containing, the holding forth, that the righteous living and
remaining at the coming of the Lord Christ: changed in a moment. In special,
the Israelites, the seed of Abraham, will be the inhabitants of the new earth,
and habitable world to come, with some scriptures discussed, that seem plainly
to speak it forth.
THat there will be a new earth: and an habitable world to come; something has
been said before: and that the righteous alive, at the coming of the Lord;
then, changed in a moment, shall be the inhabitants of it; not excluding the
raised then living in the body again.

We shall now dilate a little, by way of inquiry; what the holy scriptures
speak, and hold forth concerning the same. First, the Apostle Peter, 2. Peter.
3. 13. speaking of the hebrews, commonly called Jews: who are said, to be the
first in order, Romans 1. 16. chap. 2. 10. To every man [found] working good,
glory honor and peace; to the Jew first, and also [or after] to the gentile. It
was so, in regard of the offer of grace and salvation: it is very like, it will
be so then: Peter he says, we, according to his promise, look for a new
heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, or righteous men and
women, according as the prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 60. 21. 22. Thy people also
shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever [to wit, the land
of promise, the land of Canaan]: a little one shall become a thousand, and a
small one a strong nation [a nation born in one day] I the Lord will hasten it
in his time: when the redeemer shall come [again] to Sion, and all Israel shall
be saved, which shall more fully be fulfilled at the time of their being so
changed, in a moment, as declared by him. And on the other side, holy John
tells us, Rev. 21. 27. There shall in no wise enter into it, [to wit the holy
city] any thing that defiles [or is unclean] neither whatsoever works
abomanation, or makes a lie: but they which are written in the lambs book of
life: those shall dwell in Gods mountain, then, or his hill, Psalm. 15. 1.
namely those raised, and changed ones; not excluding the children of the
resurrection. The Lord Christ shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather together his elect from the four winds from the uttermost part of the
earth, to the uttermost part of heaven, Mark. 13. 27. Very like to be made good
in these changed ones, not excluding the raised. And that this will be made
good then, see that in the fore going verse, And then shall they see the son of
man coming in the clouds, with great power, and glory; comporting with this.
And that, in a special wise, it relates to them, take we knowledge of that, in
Zech. 10. 6. 8. 9. 10. which as to its more full and through fulfilling, seems
in my apprehension to eye that time. This seeing of the son of man at his
coming, may mind us of that of our Lord Christ, Math. 23. 39. Ye shall not see
me henceforth, till we shall say, blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord: when every eye shall see him, and they also which peirced him, Rev. 1. 7.

Further we may take notice what Ezekiel holds forth Ezekiel. 36. Ezekiel. 37. In the
36th chapter, He declares the great displeasure of God, against his people, the
children of Israel; and speaks of great calamity that had been upon them; the
heathen people being the instruments in Gods hand, who dealt cruelly with them:
and that, when God has pity upon them, and returns to them, to take them
again to be his people, then he would cause his fury against those enemies to
break forth, and they should bear their shame and punishment: this from the 1.
to the end of the 7th. verse.

Then follows very high and great promises, verse. 8. 9. For behold, I am for
you, and will turn unto you, etc. verse. 10. And I will multiply men upon you;
all the house of Israel, etc. verse. 11. And I will multiply upon you, man and
beast, and settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you, then
at your beginnings, etc. And so goes on to the 16th. verse, in a promissary
way. Where the prophet begins again a further relation of their sin, and the
wrath that attends: and the reason of the stop and staying of their misery;
namely, the pity, and compassion he had to them, and the regard he had to the
honor of his great name. Verse. 24. God speaks of gathering Israel from all
countries, and bringing them to their own land, the iniquity of it being
removed in one day. And verse 25. and 29. he speaks of full cleansing promised.
verse 26. a new heart promised, and a new spirit to be given: the stony heart to
be taken away, and a heart of flesh given. [corruption wholly put off, and
incorruption put on: a great change, indeed; much the same we are treating of]
verse. 27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes. Verse 28. And ye shall dwell in the land, that I gave to your
fathers, [which land shall have the iniquity of it, removed in one day]. And ye
shall be my people, and I will be your God: The fullness of the blessing of the
new covenant. See what follows to the end of the chapter and weigh the whole.

Chapter 37. First, we have that of the dry bones, set together with flesh and
synews, and covered with skin, and life breathed into them, with the
interpretation of it, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. These bones, are the whole house of
Israel. The opening of graves, as to the full, or utmost fulfilling of it,
seems to eye the resurrection.

We have likewise, the two sticks, made one: to wit, Israel, and Judah made
one, as verse. 17. explained in verse. 21. behold, I will take the children of
Israel from among the heathen whither they be gone, and will gather them on
every side, and bring them into their own land, verse. 22. And I will make them
one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel, and one king shall be king
to them all: and they shall no more be two nations, neither shall they be
divided into two kingdoms any more at all. Then in verse. 23. There is the
promise of preservation from pollution: the promise of full cleansing; of full
salvation and being kept in that happy condition they were changed into: and
God to be their God, and they his people. And, as in verse. 24. David, Gods
servant, to be king over them, and they to have one shepherd.

Then follows, that very observable, and remarkable verse 25. And they shall
dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers
have dwelt [to wit, the land of Canaan] and they sball dwell therein, even they
and their children, and their childrens children for ever, and my servant David
shall be their prince for ever. We may take knowledge of the great thing in
verse. 26. and to the end of the chapter: as first, a covenant of peace, God
will make with them then, [for a thousand years only? no:] it shall be
everlasting, comporting with Psa. 72. 7. In his days shall the righteous
flourish: and abundance of peace, so long as the moon endures: God will set
his sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. And as verse 17. He will have
his Tabernacle amongst them, as sometime he had of old, wherein the glory of
God was, and a cloud covering of it; and as it shall be when the new heavens
and the new earth take place; which holy John in Rev. 21. 3. holds forth with a
behold, as a great thing: behold the Tabernacle of God is with men; relating to
the same time: a great thing, for God to dwell with men on earth, as once he
did, and will do again then: and further, God be their God, and they his
people, in a very eminent manner, which crowns the whole. And then, as in verse.
28. The heathens [the unsaved of the nations] shall know Gods favor and
goodness to Israel, and that it is he that does sanctify them, when his
sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore. In chap. 36. 11. God
says, he will do better for them then at their beginning: when they enjoyed so
great things by virtue of his presence with them: so as this prophecy clearly
relates to the Israelites, and by any thing yet appearing; it has never been
made good and performed since Ezekiells time. There was never such gathering,
and bringing out of their graves: never such uniting, as one nation: nor have
they had since his time, one king over them so united. David [to wit, Christ]
Gods servant, has never been king or prince over them: never did they enjoy
such an happy and blessed estate: never did they and their children, and their
childrens children dwell in the promised land for ever: neither was Gods
sanctuary and Tabernacle planted in the midst of them, since Ezekiels time, to
this day. All must be fulfilled and made good, so declared by Ezekiel, without
the least fayler. And although much of this may be fulfilled before, and more
especially when the Jews are returned to their own land and converted, yet
there is no time so likely for it to have its full and utmost fulfilling, as at
the coming of the redeemer, When all Israel shall be saved: at that happy time
of the restoration of all things, which God has spoken, etc. In the time of
the new earth, the dwelling of the righteous, and saved people: in the world to
come; wherein there will be incorruption, and immortality, and everlasting
life. And if any shall think, it may have its fulfilling sooner, even in this
day and in this world, and especially before the time comes of the Jews return
and conversion, and shall think to make it out by allegorising, and a spiritual
meaning, and saying, that all, or most of this is come, and done already,
within them; so drawing a vale over this great prophecy, it will signify
little: for that no happy attainer sooner, will any ways hinder the full and
final fulfilling then: all other fulfillings falling short of that time, in
comparison will be imperfect, and one jot, or title must not fail thereof.

That in Rev. 7. seems very much the same, and to comport with what we have
been treating of before; concerning the changed in a moment: and these so
sealed; as likely to be one and the same: and concurring also in the time, in
order to the things attending the coming of the Lord Christ; and in holding
forth the first-ship or pre-eminence of the Israelites the seed of Abraham.

It is declared, that an Angel having the seal of the living God: [the Apostle
Paul tells us what that seal is, 2. Tim. 2. 19.] this Angel verse. 2. he cries
to the Four Angels appointed to hurt the earth, to forbear the doing of it,
till he had sealed the servants of God in their forheads: so, as being sealed
[or marked] in their foreheads, they thus might be known, at least, to the
Angels that were to hurt the earth. The words are, hurt not the earth, neither
the sea, nor the trees [the words are short, but very comprehensive] till we
have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. This hurting the earth,
in my apprehension, is likely to relate to that great burning spoken of at the
end of the world, and the judgments that should attend it, before and after:
it being like the proceed, Ezekiel. 9. 4. of marking the mourners, before the
going forth of the Angel to destroy. And being compared with that, in Rev. 22.
4. It will inform us where and when this sealing and marking will be, In the
earth, at the great burning of the then world, at the coming of the Lord
Christ, and the restoration, and new earth, as before.

Holy John. Verse. 4. Having heard the number; declares it, to be One hundred
and forty and four thousand, in the whole sum of them so sealed, or marked, to
be as before. And that number was made up of all the tribes of Israel: twelve
thousand of every tribe: wherein, there is much of union: one nation then: and
there is much of equalitle: it seems to eye that of Ezekiel, about the
dividing the inheritance by Lot, in the holy land, to all the tribes, as set
forth, in Ezekiel. 48. very considerable: but dark as yet: and also it speaks
forth, that pre-eminence will be to Israel Gods nation: they as Noah, and his
family, were of the old world, and were reserved, to be the first inhabitants
of this present world: so those then sealed and not dying but living, are those
that shall be the inhabitants of, and have pre-eminence (above the gentile
believers, then living and changed and also partakers thereof) in the world to
come: and so be alive in both, as Noah, and his family were. Not hereby
excluding the raised saints from their great interest and share therein, then:
it being said, verse. 9. After this I beheld, and to, a great multitude, which
no man could number [hapily the gentle believers then changed: and all that
have slept in Christ since the creation, and fall] of all nations, and kinreds,
and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed
with white Robes, [they had changed, and put off the old robes of corruption:
and put on new, of incorruption, and purity] and had Palms in their hands.
[Much felicity, and abundance of peace, Psalm. 72. 7.] and as follows, verse.
10. They cried with a loud voice, saying, salvation to our God, which sits
upon the throne, and unto the lamb.

Of the sealed ones we read again in the 14th. chapter verse. 1. And I looked,
and lo, a lamb [to wit, the Lord Christ] stood on the mount Sion [whether the
redeemer will come] and with him an hundred, forty and four thousand, having
his fathers name written in their foreheads. By the way, we may take knowledge,
that sealing on the forehead, and writing on the forehead, and marking on the
foreheads are one, and the same. Verse. 2. and I heard a voice from heaven [for
the company were on earth:] much joy and gladness manifested by them: for, verse.
3. They sang as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
Beasts [or living creatures] and the elders; in that great assembly, of the one
hundred forty and four thousand, so sealed; and having the fathers name
written in their foreheads. Further, which were redeemed from the earth, being
found alive at the coming of the Lord Christ, according to the mystery showed
by holy Paul. It is not said, out of their graves, but from the earth, where
the burning was: as to that of coming forth of the grave, see that of our Lord;
Joh. 5. 28. 29. All that are in the graves shall come forth. The song that they
sung, none could learn, but they, and happily such as they were. The cause or
reason, why they could not, I shall forbear by way of assay to show: it is
said, none could learn that song: happily not so as to express it, not so as to
understand it or sing it; it being a peculiar, like the white stone, with the
new name in it, which none knows but they that have it: it being a peculiar to
himself, that has it. Rev. 2. 17.

In verse. 4. There is a description of them, they are such, as were not defiled
with women: the corruption that came by Eve and all her daughters: they were
rid of, and freed from; having put off corruption. They are said to be virgins,
in a pure virgin state. And they are such as attend the lamb, and follow him
whithersoever he goes. As in his providence, keeping faithful to him and his
truths before: so when he is come down among men on earth the second time, in
power and great glory. Further, it is said, these were redeemed from among men.
As from the fear and favor of men before: so hapily, at the burning, being
marked, or sealed for preservation: taken, one of two in the field: at the
mill: (women, as well as men) and in the bed: as is said, one shall be taken
and the other left, being, it may be, sealed, or marked in the foreheads
before; a very great thing! And they are said to be the first fruits to God and
to the lamb: the first fruits to God; of his blessed design, of restoring some
of Adams fallen posterity to their former happy estate and condition, then
fully perfected and finished, for his praise and glory; that, as his servants
they should serve him. They are the first fruits to the lamb: namely, of the
travel of his soul, Isa. 53. 11. In his great humiliation he took on him the
first fruits of his purchase, and full redemption: the first fruits of his
conquest, and saving to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. So as that may be minded
here as being then fully fulfilled, Rev. 12. 10. Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, etc. to wit,
full and perfect salvation of the spirit, soul, and body; the whole man: that
of regeneration and the life of faith, was a kind of first fruits: and men's
embracing and believing the Gospel is so called also, Romans 16. 5. 1. Cor. 16.
15. Romans 8. 23. But these of the changed sealed ones; are the first fruits to
God, and the lamb in a more eminent wise: the mystery of God and of Christ as
to man's restoration and full redemption and salvation to the uttermost and
blessedness; being then fully finished and made good, Rev. 10. 7. A new
virginstate then, (not hereby excluding what of that kind may be before, as
the forerunner of it) without defilement spot or stain: fitted to attend and
follow the lamb, and to serve him.

Lastly verse. 5. it is said, in their mouth was found no guile: [no hypocrisy
then, and further it is said] for they are without fault [or blame] before the
throne of God. All spots, stains, and corruption being off and done away; the
design and undertaking of our Lord Christ, which cost him so dear a price as
his own blood, being then fully accomplished: Ephesians. 5. 27. to present his
Church to himself, blameless, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but
holy, and without blemish, or fault.

What has been said concerning the sealed and changed ones, has not been
intended in the least in an exclusive way, to the prejudice of the children of
the resurrection or raised ones from the dead: for that they will be of the
highest degree, then, in their attainers and enjoyments, of the great
blessedness of that happy day; Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob: the holy
Prophets and Apostles of the lamb, with the blessed martyrs for the Lord Jesus,
they will have the greatest share, and chiefest intrest then, with all others
that sleep in Jesus, till they are awakened by the great trumpet of God at that
appearing of the Lord Christ: they will be very eminent in the kingdom of God,
and of Christ, Math. 8. 11. Luke 13. 28. 29. the faithful followers of Christ
and sufferers for him among them, and such as were beheaded or executed for his
sake, shall be eminent in the rule and government, and sit on throns of
judgment, Math. 18. 28. Luke 22. 28. 29. 30. Rev. 20. 4. Rev. 3. 21. yea our
Lord Christ says of the whole raised: they shall be as the Angels of God,
Math. 22. 30. It is not so said of the changed ones, they are changed alive,
and restored into their former good estate, with some additions of blessedness,
as before is said. To conclude, it is very probable, that the world to come,
will be here below; on earth. That the promised land, to Abraham, and his seed,
will be the center of the new earth. That the Israelites, those sealed ones,
together with the gentile Saints, then also changed; will be the inhabitants of
the new earth, and world to come, and the Israelites, of whom, chiefly so high
things are spoken, and in whom chiefly those high Prophecyes shall be fully
made good; shall have the prehemence above the gentile Sains. The whole matter
is submitted to the considerate readers to judge: and to take, or leave, as
they see cause.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a further proposal of some Prophecies, and sayings in
the holy Scriptures, not yet fulfilled in the utmost extent, eyeing that happy
day of the coming of our Lord Christ; likely then to be fulfilled and made good
to the utmost, to the seed of Abraham the Israelites, when they, together with
the gentile Saints, shall in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye be changed so.
SOmething has been said before, concerning the great things that attend the
coming of the Lord Christ, and come to pass then: as the restoration of all
things, Act. 3. 21. A new heaven, and a new earth: the raising the dead saints
out of their graves: the changing the living in a moment: the beginning of the
world to come: with other things, very many, that have been mentioned before,
and may be further said after; that are held forth in the prophecies, and
sayings in the holy scriptures, relating to the latter day, not yet fulfilled,
nor like to be in the full made good, till that happy day, in that blessed
world to come: of which we shall dilate a little.

In the former chapter, we treated of what Ezekiel has foretold. Ezekiel. 36.
Ezekiel. 37. Of the dry bones, and the two stiks: with the interpretation of the
same. The matter relating to Isreal's restoration, and reunion: and their full
enjoyments of the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: which had not
been made good in Ezekiel his time; but were, after, to be fully made good,
according as he declared: which, to this day, has not been made good; and not
very likely, so fully to be so, in any time yet to come, in this world: but
much more probable, to be made good then, to the full, when that nation shall
be so born in one day; and be no more two, but one nation for ever: they, and
their Childrens children, for ever: at that blessed day, when the world to come
shall take place; when that, of the redeemers coming to Sion, and to such as
turn [or are turned] from iniquity in Jacob, has its full fulfilling: which is
not very like to be, till the Lord himself comes: for he himself has said: ye
shall not see me henceforth, till the time come when ye shall say, blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord, Luke 23. 35.

The lambs standing on Mount Sion with the sealed ones having their fathers
name written on their foreheads; and the singing the new song which none could
learn but they: that pure virgin state: and being without fault before the
throne of God: it will not I conceive be so fully in this world; but in that
blessed world to come. All those forementioned things, will very fully
contemporise with that blessed time, and state; without any allegory,
interpretation, or framing a spiritual notion to make the matter good: for it
will be even so, in the letter, visibly, and be made good, without the least
failer.

Further, that of the Prophet Isaiah, is very considerable as to this matter,
Chap. 65. 17. where the new heaven and the new earth, is held forth with a
behold; a great thing, behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth. verse. 18.
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And therefore in the
beginning of the verse. it is said, be glad and rejoice for ever, in that which
I create, for behold, I create: a very great thing! so he goes on to the end
of chapter. In Isa. 66. 8. Who has heard sach a thing? shall a nation be born
at once? [in a moment in the twinkling of an eye; as those alive, at the coming
of the Lord; shall be changed then] As soon as Sion traveled she brought
forth; see the whole, to the 22. verse. And that in special in the 14. 15. 16.
See if they do not eye the very time of the destroying of this world by fire,
and the taking place of the blessed world to come; when the new heaven, and the
new earth will take place; of which before. And the certainty, and stableness
is confirmed by that, verse. 22. For as the new heavens, and the new earth which
I shall make, shall remain before me, says the Lord; so shall your seed and
your name remain. This comporteth with that Isa. 59. 21. very considerable: As
for me this is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit that is upon
thee [being changed so] and my words which I have put in thy mouth [to wit, of
thanksgiving and praise] shall not depart out of them mouth of thy seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth, and for ever. And this, I
conceive, relates to the coming of the redeemer to Sion; when all Israel shall
be saved, Romans 11. 26. then, as Isa. 60. 1. arise, and shine for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Jerusalems happy day will
then be come. We might mention much more of holy Isaiah, for that he had great
light in this matter, and has held forth much, as in chap. 60. and so, to the
end of his prophecy, which the reader may please to consider. As likewise, in
diverse other places, which I forbear to mention, lest we should be too large.
All that has been said, as to its full fulfilling, seems to relate to the
time, of the world to come; and the Israelites the seed of Abraham,
principally; not excluding the gentile Saints from sharing in the blessedness
of that day, and walking in Jerusalems light; when, it shall be very great
indeed. The light of one day, being from the sun; then; as the light of seven
days, Isa. 30. 26. that that changing, in a moment; will effect it to the
highest degree of being translated out of darkness, into this marvelous light,
1. Pet. 2. 9.

In the next place, we may take notice, what the Prophet Jeremiah holds forth,
Ier. 30. 31. and 32. of which we shall dilate a little. Ier. 30. 10. Jacob is
bidden, not to fear, nor Israel to be dismayed; for God will save them from
afar, and their seed from the land of their captivity, and Jacob shall return
and be in rest and quiet, and none shall make him afraid: he goes on, with
further promises and threatenings against the wicked, then; at the same time, to
wit, in the latter days, when God will perform the intents of his heart; read
on to the 22th. verse, where he sums up all; and they shall be my people, and I
will be their God; very happy will their condition be; for blessed is the
people whose God is the Lord.

Ier. 31. 1. he says, at the same time, will I be the God of all the families
of Israel, and they shall be my people. In an eminent wise they shall be so to
God, and he so to them; a very great thing! the one hundred forty and four
thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel, those sealed ones; with
their fathers name written on their foreheads, will be so Gods people, and God
their God so. The twelve thousand of every tribe and all Israel, when they
shall be saved by the coming of the deliverer to Sion; and the two sticks,
according to Ezekiels vision and the interpretation of it; one nation; and no
more two for ever: but one born in a day; changed in a moment: then will God be
their God and they his people, so, at that day. So he goes on, verse. 4. I will
build thee, and thou shall be built, O virgin of Israel, verse. 6. there shall
be a day, wherein it shall be said, arise ye, and let us go up to Sion, to the
Lord our God, verse. 7. the Lord says, sing with gladness for Jacob. verse. 8.
behold, I will bring them from the north, and gather them from the coasts of
the Earth. verse. 10. he that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as
a shepherd does his sheep, or flock, verse. 11. the Lord has redeemed Jacob.
verse. 12. therefore shall they come and sing in the height of Sion: for Sion
will be very high indeed then; and shine forth very gloriously, this is much
the same with that of holy Isaiah, chap. 2. 2. When; it shall come to pass in
the last days [the very time we are treating of] that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. He goes on, and speaks
of great things that shall be done for Israel, Gods people. At verse. 31. He
speaks of a new covenant, God will make after those days, with the house of
Israel, and Judah. Read the matter at large.

What it is: he declares, verse. 33. of Ier. 31. Namely, he will put his law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and he will be their God, and
they shall be his people. There is much of grace in it, in that he undertakes
to do it, without any condition: verse 34. Seems to look further, and to eye
another time, then that of grace and the state of regeneration, as to its full
fulfilling; it is said, they shall teach no more every man his neighbor; and
every man his brother; saying, know the Lord, [the reason is] For they shall
all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord.
This new covenant, it seems not only to eye the day of grace, but the day of
glory. Not only the day of Christ's first coming, when he confirmed it with his
blood. Heb. 9. The comfort, and blessed fruit whereof, all the servants of God,
in all ages since, have enjoyed and yet do and still shall enjoy, till that
happy time come, when they shall enjoy the high and full enjoyment of it, in
that blessed world to come: when the great fruit and blessedness of it shall
then be made partakers of; so as was never attained unto, or enjoyed before; in
that happy time that is coming, it will have its full fulfilling, and be made
good in every particular. That in verse. 34. of this Ier. 31. which seems to
eye another time in order thereunto: for in the day of grace, whilst this
world lasts, there will be need of teaching and exhorting one another, as it
is commanded Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to
day, (whilst the day of grace lasts) so chap. 10. 25. But exhort one
another, and so much the more, as we see the day approaches; wherein there
will be no need of doing it. Here, in the state of regeneration there will be
but knowledge in part; but then, in that happy state, and time, there will be
the full vision and knowledge of God, that man will be capable of: the greatest
according to the greatness; and the least, according to their littleness: every
vessel, bigg or little, will be brim-full, that it can receive no more: The
earth (to wit, the new earth) will be full of the knowledge of God, as the
waters cover the sea. Isa. 11. 9.

Holy Paul seems to eye this, of not teaching one another, 1 Cor. 13. 9. we
know but in part, we prophesy in part: so was it at the present: but there was
another time to come, when it would not be so. Verse. 10. When that which is
perfect is come, that blessed time, that perfect state takes place, as it will
do when the raised and changed ones shall appear with the Lord Christ: then an
end of things in part; and of teaching also: For prophesying or teaching as to
them, will then cease. Here we are but as children, then as perfect men: here
we see but as through a glass, darkly; but then we shall see face to face,
clearly and fully: we now know but in part, but then, we shall know as we are
known: for God will fully take away the face of the covering and vail, that
lets and hinders, Isa. 25. 7. when there shall be a changing so, that vail will
be done away. Very high knowledge of God then: our Lord will show us plainly of
the father; and in him we shall behold his glory.

In the eighth and ninth chapters of the epistle to the Hebrews, this is
treated of by the Apostle, under the term of a new testament. A covenant and a
testament differ something, strictly minded; though in substance they may be
the same. There were many covenants made by Almighty God: as with Noah, and
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; with the Israelites: with David, and with Levi,
etc. But he made but two testaments; a first by Moses; confirmed by the blood
of Bulls, and Goats. A second, by the Lord Christ; confirmed by his own blood,
or death, as a testament must be; else it is of no force: but a covenant is of
force whilst a person lives, and is otherwise confirmed. The new testament;
as a testament of the Lord Christ; he is the blessed mediator or surety of it,
as Moses, was of the first. It relates chiefly to the time of grace, and the
estate of regeneration, in this world; and is of high concern; and great fruit
and benefit to all believers; much of the mystery of godliness, and of the
Gospel being contained in it: but as a covenant, it seems to eye and look at
a further time not yet come; and a covenant that shall then be made good, when
they shall not teach; for there will be no need of it; they shall know as much
as they shall be capable of knowing: for such fullness they shall enjoy as
nothing can be added to it.

No great question but the Apostle had this in his thoughts, in order to that
blessed time to come; the last verse seems to speak out so much; to them that
look for him, [to wit, the Lord Christ] shall he appear the second time [as he
appeared the first] without sin [to wit, the imputation of sin; in a low
condition, in the form of a servant, so the first time: but the second time, in
power and great glory; without sin] unto salvation, Heb. 9. 28. to wit, to
full, and perfect salvation of body and spirit united in one, at that happy
day. There are many blessed expectants that look for the Lord Christ his
appearing, this second time: as good old Simeon and Hannah, did the first time:
there are blessed servants that look for their Lord his return from a far
country, whither he is gone to receive for himself a kingdom, and to come again
Luke 19. 12. There are many virgins, that wait with oil in their lamps for the
bridegrooms coming, Math. 25. To them that look for him the second time, he
will appear, to their great joy and consolation: the spirit and the bride, say
come, O come Lord Jesus come quickly.

Further; in the new covenant, spoken of by holy Jeremiah: it is said, I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more: so forgiven,
and so forgotten, as never before: no further need of an advocate then in case
of sin, for that will be fully made good then in Ier, 50. 20. In those days,
and at that time, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall
be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, etc. Then will be
the time when the Church will be presented glorious, without spot or blemish,
or wrinckle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. And that true really, without
imputation, Thou art fair, thou art fair my love, and there is no spot in thee:
Cant. 4. 1. 7.

Lastly, in this new covenant, or testament; as that which makes good all, it
is said; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. In a very high
and eminent wise, it will be so then; beyond what before: a very great and
blessed thing: this is still mentioned as the close: to have God, in a special
wise to be their God: and for a people to be so related to God, as to be his
people in a peculiar way, is a great thing, and that which renders them
considerable and happy, and blessed indeed, Psalm. 144. 15. Those sealed ones,
having their fathers name written on their foreheads; I conceive, comporting,
in time, and being the same with those Rev. 22. 4. His servants, shall serve
him, and see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. He that
sits on the throne, says, these words are true and faithful, that it
relates to that blessed time, in order to the high and full fulfilling of it;
we may mind that in Rev. 21. where the new heaven and the new earth is spoken
of, as verse. 1. John saw a new heaven and a new earth. Verse. 2. He saw the new
Jerusalem come down from heaven, very glorious. As he saw, so he heard also;
verse. 3. A great voice out of heaven, it is, with a behold the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and
God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And as verse. 4. And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes: all sorrow, and pain and death it self,
shall be done away and be no more; and all things shall be made new; and John
is bidden to write, for that these sayings are faithful and true, verse. 5.

In Ier. 32. verse. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. The prophet speaks again, of the Lord
his gathering of them out of all countries, and bringing them again;
comporting, as to the full fulfilling of it, with the Angels gathering the
elect from the four winds, Math. 24. 31. And making an everlasting covenant
with them, and doing great things for them; and that he will be their God, and
they shall be his people. And that he will plant them in their own land
assuredly; and do it with his whole heart, and soul: as, before he spoke of the
fureness of his covenant; as sure, as the ordinances of heaven, their abiding
stable; to wit, the sun and moon, and the stars. See the places at large.

I shall add a few testimonies out of the following prophets, that are of the
like import, and tendency, with what has been held forth before, and shall
begin with Daniel chap. 12. 1. At that time, shall Michael stand up, the great
prince, [very likely to be the Lord Christ, the prince of peace: when he
appears again, great things will take place: he will stand for Daniels
people, the Israelites, the seed of Abraham, unto whom he came before, but they
received him not; at that time] there will be such trouble as never was before:
and at that time, Daniels people shall be delivered: they shall be delivered by
the great deliverer, when he shall come to Sion, Romans 11. 26. As before is
mentioned. The Lord Christ, sball send forth his Angels, and they shall gather
his elect from the four winds Math. 24. 31. They shall be delivered every one
of them, (not one left behind) of those, that shall be found written in the
book, (of life, it is like, it is meant). The lamb, the Lord Christ, has a
book of life, wherein is written the names of his, from the foundation of the
world, Rev. 17. 8. Much comporting with the promise, Rev. 3. 5. 12. To those
that are overcommers. And it shows further what time this relates unto, Rev.
22. 3. 4. It will be, when there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God
and of the lamb, and his servants shall serve him, and see his face, and his
name shall be in their foreheads; when they shall reign for ever: verse. 5. At
that time, when the Lord Christ comes, and the dead are raised, and the living
saints changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye: it shall be fully made
good, and, it is likely, not before.

Further, in verse. 2. of this Dan. 12. He speaks of the resurrection, saying,
many that sleep in the dust, [to wit, in their graves] shall arise, some to
everlasting life [to wit, of felicity, and enjoying God and Christ, etc. their
names being in the book of life] and some to shame, and everlasting contempt.
As it is said elsewhere; To everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord; into everlasting punishment; everlasting; there is, in order to both;
according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. Then; will be great glory, and
happyness, to the just: and great woe, and misery to the wicked. The parable of
Dives, and Lazarus, speaks forth this very plainly: the righteous will then
shine gloriously; though now they are made black with reproach. Good Daniel,
was inquisitive about this; and the time when it should be? he is bidden, as in
the last verse, by the Angel to go his way till the end, [I conceive, of this
world, as if he should have said, then it shall be; and in a promissary way, it
is said] thou shall rest, [to wit, in his grave, as in a bed] and stand up in
thy lot [to wit, be raised again] in the end of the days, to enjoy his lot or
share of glory, then: much the same with that in 1. Cor. 15. 23. 24. Every man
in his own order: first, Christ, then those that are Christ's at his coming. The
wicked dead: in their order, or time; a thousand years after.

In the next place; take we notice, what the prophet Hosea says, Hosea. 1. 7.
where the Lord says, he will save Judah, not by bow, or sword, etc. but by
the Lord their God. Happily, by changing them, in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye. verse. 10. He says, yet the number of the children of Israel, shall be
as the sand of the sea, that cannot be numbered; and where it was said, ye are
not my people: there it shall be said, ye are the sons of the living God. Verse.
11. Then shall the children of Israel gather themselves together; and appoint
themselves one head; for great shall be the day of Jezreel: which has never
yet been made good, nor is it very likely to be so, to the full, till that
happy day and time we have often mentioned take place.

I might improve to the same account, that of the prophet Amos, chap. 9. verse.
13. 14. 15. That of the prophet Obadiah. verse. 17. to 21. That of the prophet
Micha, chap. 4. 13. But I shall forbear; and close this essay, with that, Mich.
7. 18. 19. 20. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
anger for ever, etc. He will turn again, he will have compassion, he will
subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the depth of the sea. If they
be sought for, they shall not be found: for there shall be none then, all being
done away. Verse. 20th. thou will perform the truth to Jacob, his mercy to
Abraham; as thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old. All sure, and
stable; and one jot, or tittle of it shall not fail.

So, as upon the whole we may with great probability conclude, that those
great prophesyes forementioned, and that new covenant; extend to the time of
the coming of our Lord Christ, the second time; when they will be all made good
to the full, to those believers found alive, and changed in a moment, then: and
be made the inhabitants of the new earth, and world to come.

That many things contained in them, are incompatible with the state of
regeneration in this world: but as to their utmost fulfilling, will fitly suit
and agree, without any allegory, or spiritual meaning put on them, they will
agree and suit, with those so changed in a moment: inhabiting the new earth and
world to come.

That those prophecyes and the new covenant, do in a special wise, appertain to
the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Israelites, to whom do appertain
the promises, Romans 9. 4. Not in the least excluding the right of the gentile
believers.

That they shall all have the full, and utmost fulfilling, without the least
failer; All which is submitted to the consideration of the wise in heart, who
have the promise, they shall understand. Dan. 12. 10.

CHAP. IX. Containing something, further proposed and dilated on; Touching
sundry high predictions, promises, and sayings of our Lord Christ, the holy
Apostles, and other penmen of the New Testament; eyeing and relating to that
happy day, of our Lords coming the second time; for their great and utmost
fulfilling and making good; with those great things before, which shall take
place then, also.
AS the new covenant, and those high and great promises and prophesyes in the
old Testament, will have their great and utmost fulfilling in the world to
come, at the coming of the Lord Christ in the new earth: so, in like manner,
will many prophecies, promises, and blessed sayings, in the scriptures of the
new Testament then; be fulfilled, and made good also; whatever fulfilling, in a
degree, they may have had before in the day of grace, Then, there will be full
redemption, full salvation to the utmost: full freedom, and very glorious
liberty of the children of God. There will be full restoration from their
corrupt and fallen condition in Adam to a perfect rectitude. Full deliverance
from sin, and death, and the grave; with full enjoyment of God, and the Lord
Christ; and likewise with the holy Angels, and saints of the most high God:
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; the holy prophets, and martyrs; the holy
Apostles of the lamb; with all the just men made perfect; Together with full
blessedness, felicity, and joy; and that without any sorrow, grief, or pain;
together with immortality, and life everlasting, in the enjoyment of all those
high enjoyments, and blessedness to the full, beyond conceiving. As it is
written, the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him, 1. Cor. 2. 9. All which, shall be made good, and enjoyed. Then; at
that happy day of our Lord Christ; in the world to come.

The loosers, and sufferers for Christ's sake; shall, then; be fully rewarded,
with all that forementioned; they are encouraged to wait and hope steadfastly to
the end: for great will be the grace that will attend them, at the revelation
of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 13. In the world to come, it will be so. Not so
fully, in any time in this world. Here, they have the word, and promise, sure,
and stable, that will not fail. Then, and there: they shall have the things
promised. Here, they have the earnest, (to wit, the spirit), then; and, there;
they shall have in possession, and full enjoyment. It is said of the faithful,
Heb. 11. 13. All these [to wit, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Sarah, and
those named before] dyed in faith, [so as they lived] not having received the
promises; but having seen them afarr off, [to wit, by the eye of faith] and
they were persuaded of them [with high persuasion and confidence] and embraced
them [cheerfully, and joyfully, no question] and confessed, that they were
strangers and pilgrims on the earth. Another, a better country, their hearts
went out after, and God prepared a better for them: that these blessed
expectants, and all others of like expectation might not fail or miss of their
hope, God has provided for them a city, verse. 16. These, they had the promise;
but they did not receive the things promised: verse. 13. It is said, they saw
them a far off. As our Christ said of Abraham, John. 8. 56. He rejoiced to see
Christ's day, and he saw it, and was glad. As they before mentioned were much
pleased and satisfied concerning the thing, and confessed That they were
pilgrims, and strangers in the earth: Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and
Sarah, etc. It is spoken of them: good servants of God: their thoughts were of
another, a better country, of a more heavenly nature or kind, and God has
provided one for them. A city, a country, new and undefiled. A new Jerusalem;
In that happy day of the coming of the Lord Christ, in the new earth, in the
world to come. The expectants of that happy day may say with holy Peter,
blessed be God, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again into a lively hope, by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead. Unto what are we so begotten to the lively hope
of? he tells us in the words following: it is to an inheritance incorruptible,
and undefiled, that fades not away: it is safe and in sure hands: it is
reserved in heaven, for believers: they are kept by the power of God through
faith, for that great salvation, ready to be revealed: and it is kept for them;
and shall be brought unto them, they shall not need to go to fetch it: but when
will it be? at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1. 3. 4. 5. He wills the
servants of God, to hope on, for that great grace that shall be brought unto
them at the revelation of Jesus Christ, verse. 13.

Then will Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob be chief among the holy ones, as it
is said, many shall come from the east, and from the west, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, Math. 8. 11. This
seems to eye that in Isa. 25. 6. The feast the Lord will make unto all
people, in his holy mountain: a feast of fat things: and wine well refined,
full of marrow and fat things: see the place, it eyeth, in a likely way, as to
its full fulfilling, such a time, when Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
holy prophets, and Apostles, etc. shall feast together, in the kingdom of
Christ. It looks beyond the spiritual feast of the gospel; to a time, as
verse. 8. When death shall be swallowed up in victory. Which the Apostle Paul, 1
Cor. 15. 54. Relates to a very far time, for the making of it good, and
fulfilling of it: even, the time of the kingdom of the Lord Christ, in the
world to come. When corruption shall have put on incorruption, and mortality
immortality. And as it follows, agreeing with and speaking out that to be
the time: all tears will the Lord wipe away from the faces of his people, and
the rebuke of his people shall be taken away from off all the earth. This world
will not as to the full fulfilling of it afford such a happy day: the waited
for salvation of the people of God shall then be fully enjoyed, and great shall
be their joy and rejoicing.

Redemption from the captivity of sin and satan: from death and the grave; sore
enemies and cruel tyrants: believers have redemption from them all in the blood
of Christ; and may reckon and account themselves virtually ransomed and
delivered by their redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ; and that they are redeemed
ones by the price of his most precious blood: but this is only virtually and in
the first fruits, in the sure promise, in the earnest, to wit, the spirit, the
redeemer shall fully come to Sion; then shall the great redemption and
deliverance take place, Romans 11. 26. the deliverer shall come to Sion, and
shall turn away ungodlynesse from Jacob: or as holy Isaiah expresses it, the
redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob. It is good and true in both readings: those believers, that have turned
to God by faith, and repentance: he shall come to them; and coming he shall
take their iniquities quite away. I conceive, by chainging them, in a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye: putting off their corruption, and putting on
incorruption: so he shall come to the turned, and likewise turn away their
iniquity.

The redemption of the body shall be then from the prison and power of the
grave, Romans 8. 23. A great thing! which believers have in the promise, and in
the earnest, to wit, the spirit: they shall have then in the enjoyment of it,
the whole man, Body and spirit, with all the parts and faculties of both united
in one: full and perfect, and it will be eternal redemption, which the
redeemer, the Lord Christ, has obtained for his, Heb. 9. 12. No more slavery
then to sin or death or the grave; Christ our blessed redeemer has fully
subdued it, then, and will set us fully free; so as instead of saying, as
sometime holy Paul did: who shall deliver us from this sinful body of death? to
wit, subject to sin death and the grave, those great tyrants: we, by faith may
say according to our present interest and hope, what shall then be said, and
sung aloud in the full posession and enjoyment of it by way of praise to their
redeemer, Rev. 5. 9. Thou art worthy, etc. For thou wast slain, and have
redeemeed us by thy blood; out of every kindred, and tongue, and people and
nation; and have made us unto our God, kings and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth: then follows that great thanksgiving, of that great number, in the
three following verses, in praise of the redeemer.

The time this relates unto, when it will be made good and fulfilled, it is
very likely it will be then, when our Lord comes the second time; when the
raised from the dead, and the then living, changed, shall take place: when they
shall meet the Lord Christ, and come with him to the new earth: where he will
fully set up his kingdom and throne: then will that be fully made good, Isa.
35. 10. Isa. 51. 11. The ransomed of the Lord, or the redeemed, shall come to
Sion with joy, and songs, and everlasting joy shall be on their heads, they
shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. Their
rejoicing and felicity then shall not be of the length of a kings reign, as to
instance in Solomon; in whose days there was great felicity: but it lasted not
beyond his days: but this, shall be everlasting, as long as the sun and moon
endures, Psalm. 72. 7. This world affords it not, nor never will, it is likely,
as to the fullness of it. Trouble and sorrow and disquiet, has been and is at
the present the portion and lot of the righteous, here, in this world, our Lord
has told us so, Ioh. 16. 20. Ye, [to wit, the righteous] shall weep and lament
[that is their condition, here, for a season: what shall the men of the world
do?] but the world shall rejoice, [it is their day] ye, [namely, the righteous]
shall be sorrowful: [oh, but when that time comes, they shall then rejoyce]
your sorrow shall be turned into joy: and their joy, shall none take from them.
As to the fulness of it, it is the time, when sorrow, and tears, and pain, and
death, shall be no more: we know what time that is; it is Jerusalems happy day,
in the new earth, in the world to come: then it will be so, and all made good
and fulfilled in the fullness and length of time.

Of near affinity with redemption, is salvation or being saved, which we shall
dilate on a little. Not after the way of a theme, or common place: but only, as
salvation by Jesus Christ, the blessed savior of such as believe in him. The
beginning of it, and first fruits, here, in regeneration, in this world: and
the full harvest and perfection in the world to come, at that happy day of our
Lord Christ, when, as it is written, Heb. 28. To them that look for him, he
shall appear the second time with ut sin unto salvation: full salvation of soul
and body, salvation to the utmost, Heb. 7. 25. Salvation, begun by the spirit
of regeneration; it has for the earnest of the whole; the holy spirit: and it
has sure promises; all yea and Amen in Christ. About which; faith in the
servants of God, is exercised, laying hold on them; and with much consolation
and encouragement go on from faith to faith, after the way of the living of the
just: they live by faith, and they also dye in faith, and do not receive the
thing promised, to wit, full salvation. They that went before, to wit, Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, etc. Nor those that followed after, since their day;
they have not; neither shall they, or any others, receive it, till that blessed
time come, Heb. 11. 13. These all dyed in faith, and received not the promise:
so, verse. 39. They obtained a good report through faith, but received not the
promise. It is the salvation of the whole man, body and spirit united in one,
as at the first, when God made man, and breathed into him the breath of life,
and he became a living soul, or person: of that we speak: which the Apostle
tells us, is nearer then when we first believed. It grows nearer and nearer. As
we have a mighty redeemer, so we have a blessed savior, who is able to save to
the uttermost. Heb. 7. 25. He has undertaken it, he has begun it, he will
perfect it, and finish it to the full, then, at that time, will that be made
good to the full, Rev. 12. 10. Now is come salvation: now so as never before,
full, absolute, perfect: it was before but in the beginning, and in the way to
perfecting, but then it will be fully finished in the world to come, and true
to the utmost; when our Lord comes again, and all his faints and saved ones
with him. Then, the mystery of godlyness and salvation will be finished; as he
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, Rev. 10. 7. This great
salvation, the prophets, as holy Peter tells us, 1. Pet. 1. 10. have enquired,
and searched diligently, who prophesied of that great grace: (the savior that
brought salvation unto all the saved ones) they enquired after the manner, and
after the time, testified by the spirit, when it began or was to begin, in a
way of humiliation, and suffering of the Lord Christ: and end: and be
perfected, in great ensuing glory, verse. 11. O happy, and blessed saying, Col.
3. 4. When Christ who is our life [and our salvation] shall appear, then shall
we also appear with him in glory; and behold him in his glory, and be like unto
him.

The happy restoration of all things that God has spoken, must here be treated
of; but I shall wave it here, and speak of it after by it self; and shall take
knowledge of something concerning immortality and eternal life; which Adam was
not possessed of: a great thing indeed; of which the holy scriptures of the new
testament speak much: a blessed thing to come which will be enjoyed, then; at
that happy day of the Lord Christ, in the world to come; immortality, and
eternal life are of near affinity, as the cause and the effect; the root and
the fruit: immortality, has for its contrary, mortality or dying which all
the posterity of Adam know experimentally: we have treated of it before, and
shall be brief in what shall be further offered. The same may be said of
immortality and life everlasting, as was said of redemption and salvation; the
servants of God, have the promise and likewise the earnest, to wit, the spirit
in their hearts, here in this world, but not the things themselves, otherwise
then as before, the things themselves in the real possessing and enjoying of
them to the full, in the world to come, as it is written, Mark. 10. 30. The
sufferers for Christ, shall have rewards here. In this world, and in the world
to come everlasting life, Luke 18. 30. the same. Immortality is so great a
thing, as the scripture tells us, God only has Immortality. 1. Tim. 6. 16 He
will give it, at that day, by Jesus Christ, to the raised, and to the changed
ones: they shall then and not before, (whatever some unwisely say) put on
immortality, as it is said, 1. Cor. 15. 53. 54. This mortality, it shall put
on immortality. Then it shall be, as is elsewhere said, mortality shall be
swallowed up of life. 2. Cor. 5. 4. to wit, of life everlasting, the
concomitant of immortality.

This of immortality, and life everlasting appertains unto, and shall be
enjoyed by the whole person, the body more especially: into which, the spirit
or angelical part was breathed by almighty God, when he first made man? this is
vulgarly called the soul: happily not very properly: it is a received principle
that dies not nor is capable of it, but returns to God that gave it, Eccles.
12. 7. how, and where, and in what manner it subsisteth, and whether it has
sympathy, and distinct desire, as it had in the body? is, I conceive, a very
high, and very hidden thing: of which I shall forbear to say any thing.

To be made immortal and put into such an estate, is a condition, beyond what
Adam attained unto in his happy estate: it is one of the additions of
blessedness, the raised and changed saints shall be made partakers of, at that
happy day very few have as yet, and it is likely none shall further attain it
till then; and then they shall put it on and enjoy it; those that by patient
continuing in well doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality, and eternal
life, Romans 2. 7. They shall then find it, according to the promise of the Lord
Christ, Math. 7. 7. Seek, and ye shall find, etc. such shall find and enjoy
immortality and everlasting life.

This life, (to wit, eternal life) of the saints of God, it is hid with Christ,
in God: and when he that is their life, so, shall appear; then shall they also
appear with him in that state of glory and immortality and life eternal. As it
is written, the gift of God is eternal life. It shall be given them then, as
our Lord says, concerning his sheep that hear his voice, he gives them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, or be lost, Romans 6. 22. 23. Ioh. 10. 27. 28.
they shall be immortal, then, though now for the present they be mortal and
dying daily.

The Angelical part or spirit in man, simply considered in it self, and barely
minded so, seems not to be reckoned as eternal life in the scriptures;
without the further gift of God, and grace of the savior; together with all
those adjuncts of blessedness, and happiness, adjoined as attendants, making up
the whole: for that the wicked, as they have such angelical spirits in their
day, here, so they in their day, hereafter, will have a kind of immortality,
and eternity in the world to come. The holy scriptures imply, of the
everlasting life of the wicked, Math. 25. 41. Then shall the king say, Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, etc. verse. 46. And these shall go
into everlasting punishment: 2 These. 1. 9. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and glory of his power;
their worm never dies, and their fire it never goes out: implying, their
continual being and existence, in order to woe and a sad condition: then; it may
be said of them, as sometime our Lord said of Judas; good had it been for that
man, if he had never been born: so, good were it for the wicked, if there were
no resurrection, nor life after this: but that they remained for ever in the
grave, in oblivion, and were anihilated and extinct for ever. But alas it is
otherwise! they must live again, and that in woe, and torment, for ever!

But the eternal life of the just, their life everlasting will be a blessed and
a happy life, accompanied with all the blessed attendants and enjoyments of
happyness and blessedness, and freedom from all woe and misery for ever: this
happy enjoyment of life eternal, or everlasting, often spoken of by our Lord,
and the Apostles, recorded in the new testament, it is only enjoyable here, in
the first fruits, and in the way of the beginning of it: believers have those
blessed fruits of the spirit, faith and hope: faith assures them and helps them
to reckon those things that are not as if they were, Romans 4. 17. And hope it
fixes a soul in the full expectation there of it; for that hope is of things
not seen or enjoyed; for says the Apostle, how can a man hope for that he
sees? Romans 8. 24. written to Titus. chap. 1. 2. chap. 3. 7. he speaks of the
hope of eternal life: and he says also, it is the hope of eternal life, which
God has promised before the world began, Holy John also, 1 Ioh. 2. 25. says,
This is the promise that he has promised us, even eternal life: We have it in
the beginning, we have it in the earnest, the spirit. We have it in faith and
hope, those blessed fruits of the spirit of God. We have it in the sure word
and promise, which is yea and Amen: we have it as the servants of God have
redemption and salvation: so we have immortality and eternal life: and it
shall be brought and given unto us, at the revelation of Jesus Christ; then
they shall be endowed with it: they shall then put on immortality and inherit
everlasting life. Hope as an anchor of the soul, sure and stable, has pitched
within the vail, Hob. 6. 19. 20. Whither the forerunner [to wit, the Lord
Jesus] is for us entered and gone before, in order to our enjoying of all those
great good things, before mentioned; together with everlasting life.

One of those great things that shall take place and be made good, at the
coming of the Lord Christ, is that mystery showed by holy Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 53.
That the believers that shall be found alive at the coming of the Lord Christ,
shall not die but be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye: of the
which, we have treated before: a very great thing, concurring, in time with
those other great things before held forth: I shall therefore forbear to treat
of it here. I shall only offer this as very likely: that the holy Apostle had
it by revelation; or otherwise he learned it of our Lord Christ, who in
communication with Martha, at Lazarus his death, held forth the very same
thing, Ioh. 11. 20. Our Lord comes where Lazarus was then dead: she, to wit,
Martha, goes to meet him, verse. 21. she says, Lord, if thou had been here,
my brother had not dyed. Verse. 22. her faith being strong, she says to our
Lord, I know, that whatever thou will ask of God, he will give it thee. Verse.
23. Our Lord says to her, thy brother shall rise again! verse. 24. She, well
informed in the doctrine of the resurrection; she says, I know that he sball
rise again, at the resurrection, at the last day. Jesus says to her, verse. 25.
I am the resurrection and the life, to wit, he is the author, in whose power
and ordering both are at his dispose: he is the raiser of the dead; the giver
of eternal life. And our Lord tells her further; that, he that believes in
him, though he were dead, [as Lazarus then was] yet he sbould live. As Lazarus,
presently after did: then; verse. 26. He tells her, that whosoever lives, and
believes in him, shall never dye: he asked her whether she believed that?
alas! she, its likely, was at a loss in the understanding of it, (as are many
of the servants of God now) and therefore she answers not: our Lord Christ
intended not believers of that time, such as Martha, and the Apostles, that
were there present; nor any others, believing in him, of that time: but only
such as believing should be alive at his appearing: as holy Paul, has fully
informed us; as for Martha, and all the Apostles, and believers in Jesus, in
that age, and in the ages since: they have all dyed, and so they will die, till
that day take place; and then shall that be fulfilled and made good, said then
by our Lord Christ: that he that lives, and believes in him shall never dye:
for such, shall only be changed: in a moment in the twinkling of an eye; as
Adam was changed for the worse, and lived; so shall they be changed for the
better, and continue living still; putting on immortality, and eternal life.

Mind we one place more, Rev. 21. 1. 2. The new heaven; and the new earth,
that John saw in a visional way; and the new Jerusalem coming down from heaven,
which he saw also: very rich and glorious. Verse. 3. He has declared that which
he heard also as well as saw; a great voice from heaven, [what does it
declare?] behold, the tabernacle of God is with men. It is uttered with a
behold: a great thing, a great blessing! but greater follows: and he, [to
wit, the Lord God] will dwell with them: in the new earth, holy John saw, where
men, to wit, the servants of God, will dwell then; God, will then and there
dwell with them: a very great and wonderful thing! which Solomon admired; as
well he might. 1. Kings. 8. 27. will God indeed dwell [with men] on the earth?
behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee; etc. And yet
further grace, and they shall be his people, and God himself, shall be with
them, and be their God. happy souls indeed: for happy are the people, whose God
is the Lord: who have him with them: in whose presence and favor is life.
Psalm. 144. 15. Psalm. 30. 5. this enjoying of God, and Christ is the great
adjunct of life everlasting: to be for ever with the Lord; in whose presence is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand, are pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.
11.

Verse. 4. of Rev. 21. and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there
be any more pain. And as Chap. 22. there shall be no more curse, etc. for the
former things are passed away. It is not hard to conceive, and determine, to
what time this relates. This world will not afford such full freedom, and
utter exemption from those bitter things forementioned: as it will not afford
those high attayners and enjoyments, mentioned by holy John; it will be in the
world to come; then will all things be made new as at the beginning suitable to
the new heavens, and the new earth, and the happy restoration of all things; of
which we shall treat in the following discourse: take we knowledge of what he
that sat on the throne, said further to John. Write, says he, for these words
are true, and faithful, and will be made good in their time. Alas for those
that believe not! all is submitted to the wise in heart.

CHAP. X. Containing the proposal to consideration, the great restoration of
all things spoken of by the Prophets; and the happy change that shall then
attend man, and the earth, and the creatures therein: when Jesus Christ shall
be sent the second time, and the world to come take place. With sundry great
and high Prophecies set forth, that seem to hold forth the same.
THe blessed restoration of all things, Which God has spoken by the mouth of
all his holy Prophets since the world began, Acts. 3. 20. 21. The first
creation, and making of all things, Genesis 1. may be minded; as the Image and
figure, according to which the restitution or restoration will be a returning
again into the same mode and figure, state and condition they were in at their
first making and framing by God himself: liked and testified to be very good:
which Adam by sin and transgression greatly marred and disfigured; sin and the
curse following; and all manner of woe and misery following, as the effect
follows its cause.

What holy Moses has writ concerning the creation of man, and of the earth,
and of the creatures therein, together with the gathering together of the
waters. What is said and testified by the Lord almighty the maker of them all;
concerning the goodness of them, and his liking of them; the testimony given is
very high, verse. 31. and God saw all that he had made, and behold, it was very
good. The weighing and consideratien whereof; will be a good copy to write by;
a good pattern or sample, for us to set before us in order to our better taking
knowledge of it.

Genesis 1. We have a description of the making the world day by day; and the
making of man as the most principal piece of the earthly creation: verse. 26.
and God said, let us make man in our own Image, verse. 27. so God created man in
his own Image, in the Image of God created he him, male and female created he
them. And verse. 26. God blessed them, [so made, in that marvelous condition]
and said, be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it;
having the grant of power given before, verse. 26. a very large grant a great
charter of power, given of God to man, in his innocent state, before his fall,
and transgression; and the loss he and his posterity, and the whole earthly
creation received thereby: upon the whole, it is said, verse. 31. and God saw
every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.

The restoration it will be proportionable, and also very good. Adam so made
was a very choice piece: in the Image of God, and in the likeness of God: of
great rectitude mavelous complete and happy: by his transgression and
disobedience, he suffered great loss and damage; as did his posterity, and the
whole earthly creatures, and great enmity attended them; and much thraldom and
misery.

But at the happy time of our Lord Christ being sent from heaven again, then
there will be a blessed restitution and restoration of all things. Then shall
many be rechanged, in a moment for the better; as he was before for the worse:
then shall that mystery holy Paul has showed, take place. Then this vile body,
sinful and corrupt, shall be rechanged, and made like his glorious body;
according to that full and clear testimony of holy Paul, Phil. 3. 20. 21. from
heaven we look for the savior, the Lord Jesus, who shall change our vile body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body: pure, serene, and
glorious, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: as he will make his
Church then also: and this by changing, in a moment, by putting off and putting
on putting off corruption and sin; and putting on purity, incorruption and
holiness, as it is written, 1. Cor. 15. 53. 54. holy Paul, tells us further, 1.
These. 4. 16. of the Lord Christ himself, [in his own person he] shall descend
from heaven: he did ascend as an Angel, Acts. 1. 11. told the beholders, and
lookers after him, when he so ascended, and said, this Jesus, which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into
heaven. Even the same Jesus Christ, as testifies the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 9. he
shall again descend, when God shall send him again; at the time of the
restitution of all things; and then shall those believers found alive, be
changed in a moment into their former happy state, with some happy additions of
blessedness.

The old man, so called, which the servants of God are bidden to put off, Ephesians.
4. 22. Which in this day of regeneration believers have been subduing, and
crucifying, by the exercise of mortification and sanctification of the spirit,
and yet carry it to the grave with them; they shall then be wholly rid of it: in
a moment, in the twinking of an eye, and shall then put on the new man indeed,
and be clothed very glorious, by being so changed; all new then, relating to
the servants of God; as he from the throne, said, Rev. 21. 5. Behold, I make
all things new: a new heaven, a new earth, a new Jerusalem, come down from
heaven, a new covenant, new bodies, new hearts and spirits, new creatures; all
things new.

Adams upright, and perfect condition as a man; and the goodness of the earth,
and the creatures therein, liked by God himself when he viewed them, after he
had made them: is it is likely the standard and pattern according to which the
restoration will be; as it was at first before man's fall; and the entering the
curse, so it is very like to be in the restoration.

In regard of man as man, the change in a moment will effect it. In that happy
time, when man will not only be, as at his first creating: but enjoy some
blessed additions to his happy estate: namely, stability therein, immortality,
and life everlasting: the high enjoyment of the presence of God, and the Lord
Christ, high interest in the new covenant, and more of the spirit and grace of
the savior, then Adam ever had, and that for evermore.

But there is something further considerable: man was made, male and female; in
the image of God they were created so. And was made with seed in him, whereby
to propagate posterity: he had a wise given him of God; for that, it was not
good for him to be alone. A woman, or female, suitable unto him, was formed out
of him, in a wonderful wise; and they were bidden to multiply and replenish the
earth, and subdue it. and God made nothing in vain. He had, no question, in his
innocent estate, if he had continued in it, and not fell from it, generated and
replenished the earth; as he did after, in his fallen condition; being bidden
to do so before: in order to what will be at the restoration and change, in
that moment, at our Lord his coming; the scripture seems silent in it, and so
I shall be likewise till time discover further; or that day it self declare. I
shall only intimate to prevent prejudice; that I do not in the least intend the
including of the raised ones, or children of the resurrection, in the case
before spoken of; their condition seeming much to differ from that of the
changed alive, then; it is said by our Lord, Math. 22. 30. That in the
resurrection, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the
Angels of God in heaven: but the changed alive; will be men and women (as Adam,
and Eve were in their first estate) such, by whom that happy world to come will
be begun and peopled: as that first world would have been, if Adam had not
fell. The old world was so after Adams fall; and how the new world to come will
be? some way or how it will be it is likely, I shall say no more. Further it is
intimated, that the separate condition of man is not in the least meddled with;
but man entire; as he will be at his being changed; at the restoration of all
things.

Having made this digression; I premise one or two things more, namely, that
the restoration and changing in a moment, it will be here below on earth: it
will be from this old corrupt earth under the curse, to that new: which God
will create; wherein will dwell blessing: which we according to the promise
look for, at that happy day.

And that by the world to come, spoken of in the holy scriptures, in which this
restoration will take place, is not meant of heaven above, but a state here
below on earth: and that to take it for heaven properly, or understand it so,
is to offer loss to the holy scriptures; and that which in effect renders
insignificant, and makes void what is said in them, concerning the restoration
of all things; the change, in a moment; the new earth; with all things made
new, by him sitting on the throne; with very many other things that might be
mentioned.

And lastly, I premise, that the Israelites, the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; will be the people highly concerned, and chief in this restoration, and
change: the twelve thousand of every tribe of Israel: and that their land, the
land of promise, will share, in a principal wise, in that happy restoration and
change; and in a likely way; be the center of the new earth. We shall now
return to the matter we had under consideration before; namely, man considered
according to propagation and offspring. How acceptable to some, the proposing
of it will be, I know not: but it will be some way necessary, in order to the
better minding and taking knowledge of sundry high prophecies that seem to
look that way, and to relate to that day. First, that, Isa. 59. 20. 21. the
coming of the redeemer to Sion; of which we treated before, it relates, as to
the full fulfilling of it, to that happy day, of the changing in a moment, and
the blessed restoration of all things then. See what follows, verse. 21. as
for me, this is my covenant with them, says the Lord [to wit, with the
Israelites the seed of Abraham] my spirit that is upon thee, [it is not said,
in thee; but upon thee; a very glorious unnoynting then; like that, Zech. 4.
14. such a kind of annoynting it is likely will be then, on the changed people;
it followeth] and the words I have put in thy mouth, [Whether Gods law in their
hearts, or the joyful tone of the Gospel and tidings of great joy, or the new
Song of praise and thanksgiving to the lamb, for the great grace and
blessedness enjoyed Psalm. 40. 3. it may be considered; the latter, very likely:
Rev. 5. 12. 13. it followeth] nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
henceforth, [As I conceive, from the time of the redeemers coming the second
time, and from henceforth, as to the fullness of is] and for ever. Of great
duration, when once begun. Whither this be the same Covenant with that Ier. 31.
31. may be considered; Or whether it will be another that will take place with
that happy day, and so forward, for ever: I will make no assay to declare: but
that it relates, as to the utmost fulfilling of it, to that blessed time of
the restoration; and that it implies seed and generation then, and seeds seed
for ever: seems very likely; and that it may probably relate to the changed
people, of whom we have spoken; and the rather, if we mind that that
follows, in Isa. 60. being the very same prophecy carried on; where Israel is
bidden, to arise, and shine; when Gods spirit, or annoynting is upon them: they
will then shine gloriously; as Moses shined when he had been in the mount with
God. Then their light will be fully come, and the glory of the Lord will be
risen upon them, and the gentiles will see it, etc. For great will be their
glory: see the whole chapter; and that in the close, where it is said, a little
one, shall become a thousand, and a small one, a strong nation, hapily, by
generation; for then, will be no conversion to increase: so further, Chap. 61.
8. 9. The Lord says, I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, and their
seed shall be known among the people; all that see them, shall acknowledge
them, that they are the seed that the Lord has blessed. What time this eyeth,
as to its full fulfilling, consult the 2d. and 3d. verses: mind the whole, and
in particular the two last verses: it eyeing that time, when the Lord Christ
shall appear, and his, shall appear with him in glory. Col. 3. 4. Chap. 65.
Where the New Heaven and the new earth are foretold, and promised, verse. 17.
for behold I create a new heaven, and a new earth: the old shall pass away,
and be changed as a vesture, Psalm. 102. 26. They shall also be forgotten, and
not remembered: amongst the many things there held forth, verse. 23. It is said,
they shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth [to wit, children] for trouble:
for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with
them. There are other things in the chapter, as to the full fulfilling of them,
relating to that time of the restoration, when our Lord shall again come from
heaven, which may be mentioned after. Take we further knowledge of that, Isai.
11. 6. That very high prophecy, in order to the restoration of all things:
speaking in the former part, of the Lord Christ, and the happiness then: verse.
6. He says, the woolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie
down with the kidd; and the calfe, and the young lion, and the fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them verse. 7. And the cow and the bear
shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat
straw like the Ox. Verse. 8. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of
the Asp: and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice Den. And as
it is said, verse. 9. none shall hurt or destroy then; no not these devouring
creatures, at that happy time of the restoration of all things: the prophecy is
very high: that we have mentioned. And that which follows, speaks forth a
wonderful change in the creature; and that their hurtfulnes, and devouring
nature, will then be taken away, by the restoration; and they made harmless,
as at their first making; so as that will then be that follows, verse. 9. They
shall not hurt nor destroy, [not these in the new earth] in all my holy
mountain. But as to that of seed, and offspring, then: here is a little child
and a sucking child; here is a weaned child, very likely to be such then; at
that happy time of the restoration, and change: when the groaning creatures,
under their present bondage, shall be freed, and be delivered into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8. 21. which as they are capable they shall
enjoy and be made partakers of. That of Ezekiel, is very considerable, Ezekiel.
36. 37. Ezekiel. 37. 25. Speaking concerning their dwelling in their own land: the
land of promise to Abraham: he says thus, And ye shall dwell in the land, I
have given to Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt, and they shall
dwell therein, even they and their children, and their childrens children, for
ever. And my servant David shall be their prince for ever. Very. 27. I will
make a covenant of peace with them, and multiply them, and set my sanctuary in
the midst of them, for evermore. Was there ever such a thing? such an attayner
by Israelites since Ezekiels time? or is there like to be, short of that day,
any such full fulfilling, as may answer what he has said? the Jewish monarchy,
or kingdom of stone, which some are strong in their thoughts for, as having
much of scripture for it, as they judge, which I shall not meddle with here: it
is reckoned short: but for forty or five and forty years: will that amount to
make good to the full, what he has said? they shall dwell in it, and their
children, and their childrens children for ever. And has David, Gods servant
(to wit, Christ) been, or is he in his person, like to be a prince or ruler in
this old world for ever? is it not more like to be in the world to come, in the
day of the restoration? let the wise in heart consider.

Having held forth something concerning the restoration and change of man, and
the creatures, according to what is held forth in the holy scriptures, and the
prophecyes therein contained: it may be necessary to take a little notice, and
see what is spoken concerning the place where they will have their abode and
being then, at the restoration: The prophet Isaiah, chap. 65. 17. He tells us
of a new earth: for behold I create a new heaven, and a new earth; for which
the servants of God in the verse following, are bidden to be glad and rejoice.
Holy Peter, likewise tells us, 2. Pet. 3. 13. That we according to his promise,
look for a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness; to
wit, righteous men, and things. Holy John he tells us, Rev 21. 1. Of a new
heaven, and a new earth, which he saw. This newnes it will be by a restoration
and change. Psalm. 102. 27. speaking of the old; he says, they shall perish and
wax old as a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed: and, as before made new; for the servants of God, the seed of Abraham,
to inhabit and dwell in for they shall be changed and continue, and dwell
there: see verse. 28. It seems to be prophetical and speaks out much; the
children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established
before thee. Even in the new earth; for till then they shall continue to make
good the prophecy: then shall that be made good in the new earth, Isa. 60. 21.
Thy people shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land for ever. This
planting, it will be of God himself, for his own glory: the changed in a
moment, will be such righteous ones: a blessed plantation indeed, where no
polluter or polluted, shall enter or be found, Rev. 21. 27. There shall in no
wise enter into it, any thing that defiles: the meek, they shall inherit the
earth. Math. 5. 5.

The restoration will effect great things for the better, as Adam his sin and
transgression, did for the worse; which will be removed and done away: it was
said by the Lord, Genesis 3. 17. 18. 19. Cursed is the earth (or ground) for thy
sake, in sorrow shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy life: thorns, and
thistles shall it bring forth; in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread
till thou return to the ground, etc. A very sore curse and punishment; a change
greatly for the worse; it not being so before: as it will not be then; when the
restoration takes place, and the change for the better, so greatly: all things
made new and restored as at first.

The curse taken off, no curse there then, Rev. 22. 3. as now; none of the
bitter fruits of transgression and the curse, that attended man and the
creatures: as sorrow and pain, sickness and want, hard labor, and toil for
bread: barrenness of the earth, and thorns, and thistles, and want of all good
things: all removed and taken away with the curse, at this happy restoration of
all things: wherein the land of promise, To Abraham and his seed, to Jacob, and
his called Israelites, Genesis 35. 12. The land I gave Abraham, and Isaac, to
thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee, will I give the land. This
land is like to fare well, and to be the chief: the center of that happy
change, and restoration of the earth, and making of it new. Psalm. 105. 8. He
has remembered his covenant for ever, the word he commanded to a thousand
generations. Not yet completed, it is likely: but that it will extend to that
time of the restoration. Verse. 9. 10. Which he confirmed by covenant and oath:
verse. 11. The thing is declared, to thee will I give the land of Canaan, the
lot of your inheritance, etc. If God will remember his covenant for ever, to a
thousand generations; it will fare well with that land then; as likewise with
the lands and dwellings of the saved nations, that shall walk in Ierusalems
light, and share with them in all their blessedness, and glory, then: that
speaks out much, and is very high, Zech. 3. 9. And I will remove the iniquity
of that land in one day, to wit, that happy day of the restoration: Ier. 50.
20. In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel
shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they
shall not be found, etc. Then; will there be no more curse, Rev. 22. 3. For
that will be gone and be no more found there. Then will that be made good and
fully fulfilled, Mal. 3. 2. And all nations shall call you blessed, for ye
shall be a delightful land; says the Lord of hosts.

It was prophesyed of old, by Noah; that God should enlarge Iaphet, and he
should dwell in the Tents of shem: likely to be made good to the full then. The
strangers of Iaphet. Ezekiel. 47. 22 23. The strangers cleaving to the God of
Israel, shall share with Israel, dwelling among them at that day. The prophecy
is dark as yet; but the day will declare it: but for Canaan, and Ham his
father, that servant of servants, under the curse of Noah: there seems to be
no mention of any grace or favor for him, or for his lands, or dwellings, at
that happy day: but the contrary, of which I shall not now discourse.

As for the interest of the creature, and their sharing, according to their
capabilitie, in the blessedness of that happy day; see what is said, in Romans 8.
19. The earnest expectation of the creature, waits for the manifestation of
the sons of God. How glorious they will appear then; when they shall be
restored, and changed, so. verse. 20. They are now subject, and they greatly
groan, to be freed and delivered: they groan under hope: a great word, hope; in
the creature that groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now, verse.
22. But that which is a most clear testimony in the case of restoration verse.
21. Because the creature it self shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God: which they shall
at the coming of the savior be restored unto, at that happy day of the
restoration of all things. Alas, for them that do not believe it and hope for
it! the whole matter proposed and held forth is submitted to the judgment of
the ingenious and intelligent reader.

CHAP XI. Containing the proposal of some other prophecyes, that speak of a
blessed and flourishing condition, and great prosperity, peace, and the
enjoyment of great blessings, the righteous shall then enjoy, when our Lord
Christ comes, and the blessed restoration takes place, and the freedom from all
want woe and misery then.
THere are other prophesies besides those that speak of seed, offspring,
children and posterity; that speak of great prosperity the righteous shall
enjoy then, at the restoration and coming of the Lord: namely of the enjoyment
of inheritance and posessions, vineyard, and olive yards; of planting, and
sowing, and reaping the fruit, of eating and drinking, building houses and
dwelling in them, of sitting under their own vines, and figtrees, and none
making them afraid, of flourishing, and enjoying abundance of all good things;
all which, are looked on as low carnal things, by some, incompatible with the
happiness of the blessed state and condition of the righteous in the world to
come: which they count and would have to be heaven it self: and therefore those
aforesaid things are passed over and little notice taken of them: or they are
referred to times, short of that happy day for their being made good: or
otherwise, they are allegorized, and have some spiritual meaning put upon them:
but however notwithstanding, it is very likely, that all those things in the
fullness according as they are expressed in the holy writ, as foretold by the
prophets, shall be made good and take place: and there has no such time been
yet: it is probable nor short of that happy time of the restoration and change,
is there like to be, the full performance and making good the same.

I do conceive that I cannot without the attracting consure, and suffering
loss, and being cried out on as being erroneous at the least, propose these
things to consideration; the spirits of some are so keen, and their thoughts so
high set the other way, that they will cry carnal, carnal, at the least, if not
far worse; however I shall bear it, and go on. And shall premise, as a copy to
write by, and as a standard to measure by, the condition and state of Adam and
the earth, as it was at the first, when God created it, before man's fall, and
the curse that entered thereupon: the restoration and change will be into the
same estate and condition, with some blessed advantages to the enjoyers of it,
at that happy day. Upon the serious-minding whereof something happily may appear,
not thought of: for as God neither made, nor ordained any thing in vain, so he
has foretold, or promised nothing that is insignificant, useless, and
unsuitable to the state and condition of man: Adam and Eve were man and woman:
the changed alive in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, will be the like.

We propose in the first place, Psalm. 72. It is spoken of Solomon, in the type,
but of the Lord Christ the great Solomon in the antitype. Weigh the Psalm in
the whole, as speaking of the happy day of Christ's kingdom: to be brief,
consider verse. 7. In his days [to wit, the Lord Christ] the righteous shall
flourish, and abundance of peace [with the enjoying of all good things] as long
as the moon endures. See also, verse. 16. A handful of corn in the earth upon
the top of the mountains, the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they
of the city shall flourish like the grass of the earth. There was in Solomon's
time, a very happy time; and an high attainer; the highest that ever Israel
attained unto at any time, or that for a time they are like to attain unto in
this world; of peace, plenty and prosperity; but alase! it lasted not, but went
off with him. And besides, it is short of what is spoken of in the Psalm: and
in lastingness no comparison: for that shall abide, as long as the moon
endures. When the Lord Christ reigns, there shall be great honor and
subjection given to him by the great ones; and it will fare well with the poor,
verse. 12. 13. 14. also verse. 2, 4, 6. of this 72. Psalm, then shall that be
fulfilled and made good, Psalm. 67. 3. 4. 6. 7. Let the people praise thee, O
God, let all the people praise thee; O let the nations be glad and sing for
joy: for thou shall judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon
earth. Let the people praise thee; As they will do then: they will sing
Hallelujans and praise to the lamb: what follows then? then shall the earth
yield her increase [very fruitful times then] and God, even our own God shall
bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him. It will be so
eminently then.

In the next place, take we knowledge of that very eminent place, Isa. 65. It
is the prophecy where the new heaven, and the new earth are spoken of and
promised; see what is said, in verse. 13. Therefore, thus says the Lord,
behold, my servants shall eat but ye shall be hungry [to wit, the wicked and
unsaved nations and people] behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be
thirsty: behold, [all with a behold: very observable] my servants shall rejoice
but ye shall be ashamed; verse. 14. Behold my servants shall sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit,
verse. 15. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen; for the Lord
God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another [a new] name: a great
difference then; like that of Dives, and Lazarus: we see, here is eating and
drinking then; for so did Adam, and Eve, and so did our Lord Christ in the day
of his being here, both before his death, and after his resurrection, Luke 24.
42. 43. And so very likely will those changed alive, then do: for they will be
men, and women. It follows, as a reason; and that with a behold, also verse.
17. For behold, I create a new heaven, and a new earth: The old will be done
away, and forgotten verse. 18. They are bidden to rejoice, for the great
blessedness and glory, Jerusalem will be in: God will create them so; a
rejoicing, a praise. Verse. 19. The voice of weeping shall no more be heard in
her, nor the voice of crying. It is easy to see, to what time and state that
belongs; this world, affords no such exemption from weeping, and crying: only
it will (as to the full fulfilling) be in the blessed world to come. Verse. 21.
They shall build houses, and inhabit them, they shall plant vineyards, and eat
the fruit of them. Verse. 22. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they
shall not plant and another eat, [it fares so in this world many times, but it
will not then;] for as the days of a tree [which are many] so shall be the
days of Gods people. It follows, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of
their hands; their building and planting, etc. verse. 23. They shall not labor
in vain, [as many do in this world] nor bring forth for trouble, [of which we
made mention before] For they are the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring
with them. Verse. 25. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together. The same with
that in Isa. 11. of which before. It is not hard to conceive, what time this
relates unto: it relates to and is a prophecy of the new earth, that God will
create, when there shall be the restoration of all things: When it shall all
come to pass, and be so, as is declared; whether we believe it or no.

The prophet Jeremiah, declares something to the like effect, Ier. 33. 6. 7.
8. 9. I will bring them health, I will cause their captivity to return; I will
cleanse them from all their iniquity, and it shall be to me, a name of joy and
praise before all the people of the earth. For the great prosperity, God will
procure unto it. And verse. 11. The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, etc. For he will cause
their captivity to return: And so he goes on in a promisary way, of good
things, to the end of the 16th. verse. See the prophecy at large: I spare to
set it down, for fear or being over-large; And consider to what time it
relates, for its full fulfilling: at the time, of the branch of righteousness
growing up to David; in the land, it will be. We may also mind that, Ier. 50.
19. 20. When Isreal's captivity shall be returned, etc. and the iniquity of
Israel and Judah, sought for, and not be found; for there shall be none: we
spoke of it before.

Hosea the prophet, mentioned by holy Paul, Romans 9. Eyeing the time of their
great return, and Gods gracious return to them, Hos. 2. 18. In that day [to
wit, of the restoration] I will make a covenant with them and with the beasts
of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground: and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the
earth, I will make them lie down safely. It may easily be minded, what day this
relates unto, it being the same with Isa. 11. mentioned before, when the
hurtful nature of the creature will cease, and man's enmitye also; and wars
cease to the ends of the earth, and the restoration of all things, and the
peaceable kingdom of the Lord Christ takes place, then it will be so, and it is
not like to be before. Verse. 19. I will betroth thee to me for ever. The
marriage of the lamb will be nigh then, yea I will betroth thee to me in
righteousness, etc. verse. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, I will
hear the heavens and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the
corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Iezreel: and I will sow
her to me in the earth, to wit, the new earth, as to the fulfilling of it: it
is not said, in heaven; but in the earth.

Further, see what the prophet Joel, says, chap. 3. 18. And it shall come to
pass when Jerusalem shall be holy, and no stranger pass through her any more;
as they shall, in no wise then; Rev. 21. 27. at that day, then at that day, the
mountains shall drop down new wiue, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all
the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters: a fountain shall come forth of the
house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Chittim. [It will go ill with
Egypt then]: verse. 20. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem, from
generation to generation: for God will then cleanse; so, as never before: I
conceive, by changing of them in a moment: for the Lord dwells in Sion: and
his tabernacle will then be with men, Rev. 21. 3. And he will dwell with men.

In the next place, see what the prophet Micha says also; in the matter, Mich.
4. 1. It shall come to pass in the last days [not yet made good] that the
mountain of the Lords house shall be exalted and established, etc: see the
place, verse. 3. And he [to wit, the Lord Christ, when he comes especially]
shall rebuke strong nations, and judge many people: And they shall beat their
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, nation shall not
lift up a sword against nation neither learn war any more: a blessed peaceable
time then. Verse. 4. But they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his
figtree and none shall make them afraid: though they have no defensive arms:
for there will be no need of them: sure enough to be made true and good: for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Then at that day, will be the peaceable
kingdom of the Lord Christ: and he as verse. 7. The Lord shall reign over them
in mount Sion from henceforth, and for ever.

See what the prophet Zechariah says also, Zech. 3. 9. 10. And I will remove
the iniquity of that land [to wit, the land of Canaan chiefly,] in one day;
namely, the day of the restoration: and when it shall be so, then; they shall
call every one his neighbor under the vine and under the figtree. The prophet
Malachy speaks of the blessedness of that day, even upon the same account
Mal. 3. 12. And ye shall be a delightful land, says the Lord God.

There are other high prophecyes in Isaiah, as that Isa. 49. from verse. 5. to
verse. 13. and from thence to verse. 24. See what great things of like
importance, are said, which I shall forbear to dilate on. So Isa. 52. Isa. 54.
Isa. 55. 11. 12. There are prophecyes in the holy scriptures, that speak of
inheritances, and possessions: of Lot and sharing by Lot, that seem as to their
full fulfilling to relate to that happy day of the restoration, and the new
earth promised taking place. As some time of old the land of Canaan, was by
promise given Israel for an inheritance by the Lord; was after a long time
divided to them by Lot; and accordingly possessed by them in a way of
particular propriety: for they had not only a general light in the whole land,
as so given them of God, but they had a particular interest in a part of it, as
it fell unto them by Lot: where the Lord himself was the determiner; as Solomon
says Prove. 16. 33. The Lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposing
thereof is of the Lord: whither that land so promised, and after a long time
possessed, and divided by Lot, was not a type of the new earth promised and
expected; and of some higher division and sharing at the restoration of all
things, may be considered; and the rather because of what Ezekiel has
declared, which will have its fulfilling and making good; though as yet we
understand it not: it is very probable it is not yet fulfilled; but will sure
enough; which the day will declare fully, though to us it is dark, and we
understand little. Every tribe, as well as the whole people, will have their
share and Lot: and the strangers will share with them, where his dwelling is
with them then; Ezekiel. 47. 22. 23. very considerable. The twelve tribes, they
are to have every one their share, or Lot: and the prince his: and he must not
take any of the peoples share from them, to drive them out of their possession,
see Ezekiel. 46. 18. The twelve tribes will have interest in the city, and every
one a gate called by their name: and the name of the city from that day [very
probable to be the day of the restoration] will be, the Lord is there: He will
be so, in the new earth, Rev. 21. 3.

The prophet Obadiah has something to the same effect, verse. 17. But in mount
Sion there shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness, and the house of
Jacob, shall possess their possessions. Verse. 19. And they of the south shall
possess the mount of Esau: and they of the plain the philistines; and they
shall possess the feilds of Ephraim, and the feilds of Samaria; and Benjamin
shall possess Gilead. verse. 20. And the captivity of the host of Israel,
shall possess that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity
of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the south.
Verse. 21. And saviors [or judges and disposers] shall come upon the mount
Sion, to judge the mount of Esau. And [this it will be when] the kingdom shall
be the Lords: for as yet it has not been nor is it likely so fully to be, till
that happy time takes place.

The rather is that considerable, because of what the new testament holds forth
this way, Ephesians. 1. 10. In the fulness of times, in the Lord Christ, he should
gather together in one, the things in heaven, and the things in the earth, even
in him; [restore them, make them new; all good, and holy, as at first.] Verse.
11. In whom we have obtained an inheritance or Lot. Verse. 13. 14. The spirit of
promise, is said to be the earnest of our inheritance; to wit, of our interest,
and right unto it, and that we shall in time possess it: we have for the
present the earnest, we shall have in the appointed time the full purchase: it
will be redeemed and settled on those it is redeemed and purchased for; to the
praise of the glory of him that has done it for his. Ephesians. 5. 5. It is spoken
of by the Apostle as a known thing; that no wicked, unclean person, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, or of God; to wit, in that kingdom to
come. Col. 1. 12. the Apostle speaks, of giving thanks unto the father, which
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.
The saints will then have inheritance given unto them, at that time when
Jerusalems light is come, and the glory of the Lord rises upon her, Isa. 60.
1. when she will sine gloriously; holy Peter, in like manner, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
blesses God, for the lively hope, the servants of God are begotten again unto,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance, [the
description of it suiteth with the restoration, and change: it is]
incorruptible and undefiled: it will be so when it falls in with that time;
when the iniquity of that land is removed, and the curse taken from the earth,
and it made new; in the inheritance then and there: then will be no corruption,
or defilement: for there shall in no wise enter any that defiles, Rev. 21. 27.
it is said further, that it fades not away; as many times in this world men's
inheritances do; but it will not be so then: it is in sure hands, in safe
keeping; it is laid up in heaven for you, to wit, for the servants of God. It
may be asked by some, how we shall come to have it? how we shall get to heaven
to receive it? take no care; there is no need of absconding: for verse. 13. holy
Peter tells us it shall be brought unto us. And tells, when also: at the
revelation of Jesus Christ, when the Lord Christ shall be revealed from heaven,
and the dead raised; and the living saints then changed, it will be brought
unto the servants of God from heaven. We have now the earnest of it, as before:
and we have the promise, Heb. 9. 15. then the called shall receive that eternal
inheritance, according to the promise: which faith, and hope, are now exercised
about, for the good of the servants of God: but shall then give place, when the
thing it self is possessed, and enjoyed.

The new testament seems to speak sparingly, concerning good things, in a
particular way. Our Lord tells his, Ioh. 14. of mansion places (or houses) he
is gone to prepare for his: that he would come again, and receive them to
himself: and that where he is, there they should be also. We are told, that in
his presence, is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 10. 10.
holy Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 2. 9. that the eye has not seen, nor the ear
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what [good things]
God has prepared for them that love him. Holy John tells us. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. now
we are the sons of God but it does not yet appear, [or is not manifest] what we
shall be: how fully happy and blessed in our enjoyments: only we shall be for
ever with the Lord; that may satisfy us.

The Scriptures of the new testament, they tell us rather of what we shall be
freed from: what we shall not suffer and undergo then: and that has the
contrary included as employed. It tells us, we shall hunger no more; nor thirst
no more [there will be then no cause] neither shall the sun light on them [so
as to scorch them] nor any heat [so as to annoy them,] the lamb shall lead them
to the living ountains of water: [for their refreshing] and shall seed them
also: and God shall wipe all tears from their eyes. Rev. 7. 17.

Rev. 21. 3. the tabernacle of God, is said to be with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself, shall be with them,
and be their God: and as verse. 4. shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more death [we may easily guess when and where that will
be] neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the
former things are passed away: all those former evil things, the bitter fruit
of the curse. verse. 5. he that sat on the throne, said, behold I make all
things new: and he said unto me, write; for these words are true and faithful.
And verse. 6. he said, it is done, I am Alpha and Omega. It is sure; there will
be no failer in it. Rev. 22. 3. there shall be no more curse; the sad effect of
Adams transgression, will be no more then, but all good, blessedness, and
felicity for ever. The throne of God and the lamb, the new Jerusalem, a pure
river of water of life: on either side of the river, the tree of life, which
bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: [for food, it
is likely, for God made nothing in vain, nor caused any thing to bring forth
fruit of no use]: and the leaves of the tree, will be good for healing to the
nations. And again, it is said, verse. 6. these sayings, are faithful, and
true; and must shortly be done. For behold, the Lord Christ, comes quickly,
verse. 7. the whole matter thus held forth, is left to the consideration of the
Reader.

CHAP XII. Containing the proposing to consideration some things which the holy
scritures hold forth, concerning dominion and power, soveraigntie and rule;
which the changed people; the Israelites especially, are likely to have at the
restoration, in the world to come, under the Lord Christ, being then come, and
reigning: with some eminent Scriptures, ascertaining the sureness of the making
all good, so foretold and declared.
MAn, at his first making, was ordered by the great creator, to have dominion
and rule over the creatures, Genesis 1. 28. It was said, in that state: have thou
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over
every thing that moves on the earth. Man having sinned and lost himself; the
curse it entered, and therewith enmity; not only among the creatures, but
rebellion, many times, against man himself, by some of the creatures. God of
his great goodness and compassion, so ordered and provided, for a number of
fallen man, amongst whom the enmity entered, and took place to a great degree,
according to his purpose, and pleasure, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity, not
only among the creatures; and man, and the creature, but between men among
themselves: these chosen and those rejected; Jacob and Esau: the seed, and the
seed: a great mystery: I shall not treat of it, I only mention the thing, in
order to our better proceed in the matter proposed. The enmity, it began and
brake forth betimes; witness that of Cain, Genesis 4. 8. That Cain rose up, and
slew his brother, righteous Abel. This seed of Abraham, yea Israel as a nation,
and the line of David, had not only the promise of dominion and rule; but had
the thing it self: happily it may be a type of some greater thing to come
hereafter: for save now and then for a little space; the seed of the serpent,
and not the seed of the woman has had the dominion in the old, and in this
present world, for the most part. Consult the holy histories and others, it
will plainly appear: and the state of this day will witness to the truth of it.
The time is not yet come for the seed of the woman, but it hasteneth: our Lord
Christ will take to himself, his great power and reign but he will save: then
will be the time: in the mean time, the enmity will continue and grow great:
Dives will have the day; and the woman's seed under the Hatches, as was Lazarus
then: but the day will change, the time of refreshing will come from the
presence of the Lord, and Jesus Christ will be sent, and come again, and a
happy morning for the righteous, when they shall have the full dominion, then
will that be made good, Psa 49. 14. The righteous shall have dominion over them
in the morning; that blessed morning of the raising and changing the righteous,
they shall have the dominion: their day will be, when the Lord Christ comes and
fully takes to him his great power and reign: then shall great power and
dominion be given to the saints: for they shall reign with him: Rev. 20. 4. 6.
of which more after. But to proceed in a gradual way, and take knowledge of
what the holy scripture holds forth, as relating to and eyeing that happy time
before mentioned: we may take knowledge, of father Jacobs blessing of Judah his
son, Genesis 49. 8. His hand should be on the neck of his enemies: his fathers
children should bow before him. Verse. 10. The scepter shall not depart from
Judah, etc. We may also take notice of Balaams prophecy, Numb. 24. 7. 8. see
the place; the height and fullness is like to be then: see like wise, verse. 17.
18. 19. All held forth, which I forbear to set down, relates to a time afarr
off, and not nigh. Verse. 17. Out of Jacob, shall come he that shall have the
dominion: a wonderful time it relates unto: for, as verse. 23. Who shall live,
when God does this? he will, he will do it.

Then: in the days of the dominion and reign of the Lord Christ, shall that be
fulfilled, Psalm. 15. acknowledged, and styled, a Psalm of Christ's kingdom,
verse. 14. In stead of thy fathers, thou shall have [or there shall be]
children, whom thou may make princes in all the earth [to wit, fully so; in
the new earth.] I will make thy name to be remembered, in all generations;
therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever. Psalm. 49. 14. Eyeing
the resurrection, when death feeds on the wicked in the grave: the righteous
shall arise, and have the day: the dominion, in that very morning: likewise,
will that be made good then, Psalm. 149. 9. To have power to execute the
vengeance that is written: it is said, this honor have all the saints: to
share with the Lord Christ, their blessed savior and redeemer, their king and
governor, sure enough to be true and made good then.

In the next place, take we knowledge of what holy Isaiah says, Isa. 60. 12.
The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, [to wit, Isrnel] shall perish;
yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted: verse. 14. The sons of them that
afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee,
shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and shall call thee, the
city of the Lord. That this relates to the time of Christ, and his kingdom,
few deny.

We shall proceed to that eminent place, Dan. 7. It is after the fourth kingdom
or monarchy; see what is said, verse. 18. But the saints of the most high, [to
wit, the Israelites, especially] shall take, and possess the kingdom for ever,
even for ever and ever: very great durations not yet begun, it is likely, but
will fully be fulfilled, at the restoration; when our Lord Christ shall be sent
the second time; then the saints shall fully take and possess the kingdom.
Verse. 22. And the ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints
of the most high; And the time came, that the Paints possessed the kingdom.
Some build the fifth Monarchy or kingdom of the stone, on this and other the
like scriptures; apprehending it will be in this world, before the restoration
and change we have treated of, which I leave to the day to declare, whether it
will be so or no: but what holy Daniel has foretold; will surely be made good;
even that, verse. 27. And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom, under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of
the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him, that is, their governor. There can be nothing more full
and plain: only the time is to be waited for: and very like it will be fully
fulfilled, when our Lord Christ fully takes to him his power and reigns, at the
happy restoration of all things. I shall mention no more out of the old
testament. Our Lord Christ in the new, has told us, that his kingdom is not of
this world, Joh. 18. 36. neither, as I apprehend, is, or to be, in this world,
save in a spiritual consideration; as the gospel and gospel dispensations; as
the spirit and word; and the fruits of the spirit, righteousness, peace, and
joy, with faith and love, etc. [though some apprehend from those words in the
latter part of that verse, but now is my kingdom not from hence, or then; to be
set up in this world, the emphasis of the words, as they conceive, lying in the
word, but now; that his kingdom will begin to be set up in this world before
his personal coming: but I leave it as not being the subject matter of this
discourse]: but that is clear another thing that we are treating of: from his
kingdom in a spiritual consideration only. It is dominion, kingdom and power,
outward and visible, which our treaty is of: this; our Lord has not taken to
him as yet; he has not taken to him his great power and kingdom: he is gone to
fetch it: when he comes he will bring it with him, Luke 19. 12. 15. 2. Tim. 4.
7. And then; he will fully set it up, and reign gloriously in the midst of his
enemies.

It is much, in my apprehension, that any should think, the saints of the most
high, should reign, and have kingdom, and power, and dominion, before the Lord
Christ; that would answer the prophecyes in the holy Scriptures, and be a
fulfilling of them: but, I conceive, though some so think and say; yet most of
them that judge, Christ's kingdom will begin to be set up in this world before
his personal coming, do not apprehend, that the prophecyes on that account will
have their full fulfilling therein; nor will be so fulfilled till he so comes.

Our Lord Christ tells his followers that continued with him in his temptations,
Luke 22. 28 29. 30. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has
appointed unto me, that you may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom [when
it comes. and he reigns in it] and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of
Israel. Mind we that in Math. 25. 24. come ye blessed of my father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you, etc. When will this be? when he shall come in his
glory, and all the holy Angels with him; and shall fit on the throne of his
glory: it will be, then; that the Saints of the most high God will be, so
advanced and dignified; so empowered to judge, know ye not, says the Apostle,
1. Cor. 6. 2. that the Saints shall judge the world, yea, and Angels also,
verse. 3. the world have judged, and wrongfully, many times, condemned them; and
they have been for Christ's sake killed all the day long, Romans 8. 36. it will be
otherwise then; they shall judge them that injuriously condemned them: then the
Saints shall have the day: and what Daniell has told, shall come to pass:
that the dominion, and greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall
be given to the Saints of the most high.

Our Lord Christ will be then the greatest monarch that ever was on earth, 1.
Tim. 6. 25. he will be the only potentate, the king of kings and Lord of Lords:
he will be far advanced in power and dignity, beyond and above all
principalities and powers, and might, and dominion, and every name [of power
and dignity, by which the potentates of this world are named] that is named in
this world, and that which is to come: far above them all will the Lord Christ
be then; it will be happy for the Saints then; for he is their head and they
shall share with him therein: they shall reign on earth when he reigns: he
will deligate power to them: they shall be invested with great authority, and
shall reign with him on earth. He will give power to the faithful improvers of
their trust, Luke 19. 17. 19. to one to be ruler over ten Cities, and to
another to be ruler over five Cities. And in like manner, it is likely, to
others, to be over nations, and countries, according to that, Psalm. 45. 16.
thou shall have children, whom thou may make princes in all the earth. Like
to be fully fulfilled and made good then; and as it follows, verse. 17. I will
make thy name to be remembered in all generations, therefore shall the people
praise thee for ever and ever: the promise to the overcomers, in the Church of
Thyatira, speaks forth much, and comports with the psalmist before; Rev. 2. 26.
27. he that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give
power over the nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, etc. even as
I received of my father, to wit, power to do it. Those alive and believing, at
the coming of the Lord Christ then, changed, in a moment, will be such
overcomers, and keepers of his works to the end; in an eminent wise; and happily,
may have that power given to them then; together with all other overcomers that
had been dead before to that time then raised. Holy Paul says, 2. Tim. 2. 12.
if we suffer, we shall also reign with him: and says, it is a faithful
saying: as it is a blessed word, and comfortable, Romans 8. 17. if so be we
suffer with him, we may be also glorified together. The world to come; it will
not be under the subjection and rule of Angels, Heb. 2. 5. he has not put in
subjection, unto the Angels, the world to come, of which we speak: happily, this
present world is so under them: but, that to come shall not: but it will be
under the Lord Christ and the Saints: they will be made unto God kings and
priests and shall reign on the earth; at that happy day, in the new earth, when
our Lord is come; they shall have full power and reign. Jude speaks of the
Lord Christ his coming with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment on
ungodly sinners; whose day will be over, then; like unto rich Dives; Lazarus
day will take place then; the righteous, will have the day then; and the
pre-eminence.

Rev. 20. 4. the martyrs for Christ's sake, it is said of them by way of
eminence as to rule and gevernment above the rest of the dead Saints, then also
raised, and reigning, They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. And
again, verse. 6. it is said of all the raised Saints, [compared with other
Scriptures, including the changed, at that time] they shall be Priests of God
and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. And we may believe
it; for these sayings, are no fables, or insignificant expressions. Whither
they be believed or no, they will be found to be the true sayings of almighty
God; and shall with the rest of the Prophecyes and sayings concerning good
things, to come for the righteous, be made good, and fulfilled to the full;
whatever fulfilling in a degree they may have had before. This also held forth
is submitted to the consideration of the wise in heart.

A Postscript, or, an Appendix to the whole.
THere are many great Prophecyes and sayings in the holy Scriptures, of the old
and new testament, that hold forth very great good things, and a very blessed
and happy time the righteous shall have and enjoy, and be made partakers of,
hereafter; when the Lord Christ shall come, and his reward with him: when the
refreshing from the presence of the Lord and the restoration of all things
shall take place; which are recorded to encourage the servants of God to
believe and hope, and wait patiently, for the appointed time.

There are very high attestations recorded in the holy Scriptures, of the
sureness and certainty of them; which we shall a little enquire into; and set
down for encouragement to believe, hope on, and wait patiently for the great
grace, and blessed good things, that shall be brought unto us, and we shall
enjoy, at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1. 13. I should tire the
reader, and as it were, hold a candle to the sun, to go about to set down what
might be gathered out of the holy Scriptures, this way: two or three places we
shall venture to propose and set down, and leave the rest. In Isa. 51. likewise
Isa. 54. we may see, how God himself, asserts his faithfullness in his word and
promises, of good to his people: as sure, as the waters of Noah, the flood that
drowned the old world, but shall no more do it, so sure will he perform his
promises of good things to his people. As sure as he divided the sea, and made
it a way for the redeemed to pass over; see the places In Jer. 31. 35. 36. 37.
See how the Lord sets forth himself, by his greatness; in the great works he
has done of old: and upholding of them by his mighty power: the ordinances of
heaven, and the foundations of the earth, that cannot be measured or searched
out: so will he be in his word, and promises to the seed of Israel his people;
see the place. And consider what the prophet Micha says Mich. 7. 20. Thou will
perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn
unto our fathers, from the days of old.

The words of prophecy, contained in the holy scriptures, they are very sure,
very stable, settled in heaven: confirmed by the promise and oath of almighty
God: it is impossible for him to lie, or fail; our Lord Christ has given a
high testimony, Math. 24. 35. Heaven and earth shall pass away but my words
shall not pass away. Has he spoken and shall he not do it? has he promised,
and shall he not perform it? he has highly engaged himself therein: he is
faithful, he is able, he will make it good and perform it. There is nothing
hard for him: he is mighty in power, and wonderful in working. What he has
declared by his servants the prophets, there shall nothing fail thereof; but be
made good, in its time.

The testimony of holy Peter, 2. Pet. 1. 16. Is very considerable, he tells us
that the things concerning the kingdom and coming of the Lord Christ, are no
cunning devised fables; but true and real things. first, that they were eye
witnesses of his majesty, to wit, of the Lord Christ's; shown forth, at the
transfiguration on the holy mount, Math. 17. 1. What honor and glory he
received, when there came a voice to him from that excellent glory; this is my
beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. This voice they heard from heaven,
namely, Peter, James, and John; being with him in the holy mount, where Moses,
and Elias were also present. Here were three good and authentic witnesses;
that both heard and saw themselves; against the validness of their testimony,
no exception could be made. They had it not by hearsay: but saw and heard
themselves: yet he: good humble servant of Jesus Christ, prefers prophecy
before it. Pet. 1. 19, We have a more sure word of prophecy, to the which, we
shall do well to take heed. A very high and blessed testimony, in the behalf of
what the holy prophets have spoken, concerning the power, and coming of the
Lord Christ: and he encourages the servants of God, to take heed unto it, as
to a light that shines in a dark place. But it may be asked: how long are we
so to do? He tells us, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts. The blessed day when Jerusalems light shall be fully come, and the
day star arise in the heart, and to the heart: when there will be light within,
and without: great light; as the light of seven days put together. When all
the prophecyes which concern Christ our Lord, his coming in power and great
glory, and the coming of his kingdom, with all the things relating to that
happy day, shall have their full fulfilling and making good: as those former
promises relating to his first coming and the day of his humiliation and
sufferings; had then their fulfilling and making good. Of which, we shall speak
a little, in a parallel way, with much assurance that it will be even so,
without any the least failer at all.

There is mention in the holy Evangelists of many prophecyes fulfilled, at the
first coming of our Lord Christ; observed, and written, and not in vain. God he
is the same, and his word is the same, and the promises relating to his coming
again: his second coming will have the same fulfilling, and making good whether
we believe it, or not. They are all true, and faithful: they are all, yea and
Amen. touching those in his humiliation, there were some of them, at his very
first coming: and some of them were fulfilled, at the end and finishing of his
suffering. In like manner there be prophecyes and high sayings, relating to the
beginning of his coming in power and great glory; and the coming of his
kingdom, and the things relating thereunto. And some prophecyes relating to the
latter end of his kingdom and reign, which will, accordingly, take place, and
be accomplished.

Take we knowledge of those relating to our Lord Christ his first coming; the
very beginning thereof, Math. 1. 22. His incarnation, is said to be on that
account; that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet [to wit,
Ifaiah, chap. 7. 14] behold, a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name Emmanuel. A very unlikely thing, and hard to be
believed, if reason had been consulted, yet was fulfilled and made good. Our
Lord Christ was born in Bethleem; so it was written, Mich. 5. 2. see Math. 2.
5. Herod's inquiry where Christ should be born, our Lord Christ being carried
into Egypt; and brought thence, was, that it might be fulfilled which was
written, Out of Egypt have I called my son. Hos. 11. 1. This had been fulfilled
before in Israel's being brought out of Egyps; so the prophet speaks of it;
yet it had an eye to annother fulfilling, which it had here in our Lord Christ,
Math. 2. 15. Verse. 17. Herod's cruel murdering the innocent children, was the
fulfilling of a prophecy: then was fulfilled that of Jeremie the prophet, Jer.
31. 15. In Rama was a voice heard, Lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel
weeping for her children, etc. When our Lord came out of Egypt he went and
dwelt in a city, called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled, that was spoken
by the prophet, he shall be called a Nazarene. Our Lord leaving Nazareth, came
and dwelt in Capernaum, in the border of Zebulon and Napthalie, Math. 4. 13.
14. 15. That, it might be fulfilled, Isa. 9. 1. The Land of Zebulon, etc. The
people that sat in darkness, have seen great light, etc. See the places, and
consider them.

At the latter end also, when he was finishing his sufferings and humiliation:
Judas his taking of money, thirty pieces of silver of the chief priests, to
betray his master, Matthew. 27. 9. was the fulfilling of a prophecy: then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by Zechariah the ptophet, Zech. 11. 12. 13.
Likewise, the parting of his garments, and casting lots for his vesture Math.
27. 35. It was, that it might be fulfilled that is written, Psalm. 22. 18. His
crucifying between two theives, was that the scripture might be fulfilled; that
says, He was numbered with the transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. Mark. 15. 28. That
very remarkable place we may see in Joh. 19. 28. 29. 30. When his suffering was
near over; he being then in the very last part of it, and knowing that all
things were accomplished (only, one little thing, as some might be apt to
think) that the scriptures Psalm 69. 21. might be fulfilled; he said, I thirst:
and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon hysop, and put it to his
mouth: which when he had received the vinegar, he said, it was finished [to
wit, fully; that being the very last thing,] and he bowed his head, and gave up
the ghost. So, as we see what great stresse lay upon it; our Lord could not die
till it was done; and then he said, it was finished, and gave up the ghost. The
like stresse, was on those other things before mentioned; as the parting of his
raiment; and casting lots for his vesture; his going to Nazareth, and
Capernaum, and the like; recorded and fulfilled in the very letter of the
scripture, without any allegory or spiritual meaning, which many are apt to be
putting on prophecyes. Besides these there are many more recorded in the holy
scriptures, and are not written in vain; which for brevity I forbear to set
down.

In like manner, and in way of proportion and parallel, we may reckon, account,
and believe, that all the prophecyes, and sayings of the holy prophets, and of
our Lord Christ himself, and the holy Apostles, written by inspiration, by the
holy penmen, and writers of the holy scriptures, relating to Christ our Lord
his coming again in power and great glory, and the coming of his kingdom and
reign; and all those great things that shall contemporize, fall in, and take
place, then; of which we have spoken before, and are too many to be here set
down: they shall all have their fulfilling, and making good then; these of the
holy psalmists; of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel; of Daniel, and the rest of
the prophets, relating to that time; shall then in like manner be fulfilled as
they are written.

We shall particularize a few, out of the new testament, and draw to a close.
First, that of our Lord, Math. 25. 31. With all that follows to the end of
the chapter, as it is setdown; when the son of man shall come in his glory, and
all his holy Angels with him: then will he sit on the throne of his glory:
likewise the gathering the nations: the setting them on the right hand, and on
the left: the saying as is their spoken: and judging and sentencing of them:
will be fulfilled, according as it is written, in all the particulars of it. As
also that, Luke 21. 27. and then shall ye see the son of man come in the
clouds, with power, and great glory. Every eye shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. As
sure as the wise men saw his star, and afterward himself, lying in the manger:
or as they in the time of his humiliation, saw him ride on an ass, and on a
colt the foal of an ass; as it was written, Zech. 9. 9. Math. 21. 4. 5. Tell
ye the daughter of Sion, behold, thy king comes unto thee, meek, and sitting
on an ass, etc. So as sure then, when he comes again, he shall come in the
clouds of heaven, in great power, and glory, and every eye shall see him.

That Acts. 1. 10. 11. Which the two men in white apparel, to wit, Angels,
told the disciples, looking after our Lord, being ascended: this Jesus whom ye
have seen go up into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him
go into heaven; it shall then be fulfilled. As likewise, that Heb. 9. 28. To
them that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin, unto
salvation. Then will be fulfilled that which holy Peter, and others have told
concerning the burning of this world; and the taking place of the new: a new
heaven, and a new earth; according to the promise of God: with tho raising of
the dead in Christ, out of their graves; and the changing of those saints then
alive; in a moment. The restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all
the holy Prophets: will be fulfilled as sure as those things spoken by them
were formerly when he came before. Then will that be fulfilled, written by holy
Paul, Romans 8. concerning the waited for adoption; the redemption of the body:
and the creatures also delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. Then shall Daniel, as was told by the
Angel, stand up in his lot, And Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob: and all the
Prophets; sit together in the kingdom of God, as it is written. That which holy
Isaiah, chap. 60. has foretold; and holy John, has showed, Rev. 21. Rev. 22.
concerning Jerusalems glory; coming down from heaven, and shining gloriously;
with the pure river of water of life, and the trees bearing fruit every month:
which he has attested to be the true sayings of Almighty God. And also that
concerning the righteous then, that they shall hunger no more, nor thirst any
more, nor suffer pain or death, any more for ever: nor no more curse; the
sayings being true and faithful, and will be fulfilled: then the righteous
shall see the vengence that is written, fully made good against their wicked
oppressors; their wrongs righted: their faith and patience rewarded: the
righteous proceedings of God manifested in punishing them with everlasting
destruction from his presence; such as sorely afflicted them, when they shall
have rest together: it will be all fulfilled as it is written. Great terror and
fear will attend the wicked then; and they will according as it is written, be
found, saying to the mountains, fall on us, and to the hills, cover us from the
presence of him that sits on the throne. And Gog and Magog, the beast, and
false Prophet; the captains and mighty men; and all their great numbers be
destroyed. And the devil that deceived them, and death also, and the grave, or
Hell, be cast into the lake of sire, for ever; with very many things of the
like kind, which in a prophetical way, by way of threatening against the
wicked, are written: it shall, then be fulfilled and made good from the
faithfulness of the Lord Jehovah that is engaged in it.

Why should any that believe the the power and faihfulness of God doubt of it?
why should any think that the things spoken of in the holy Scriptures, relating
to the Lord Christ his second coming in power and great glory, declared by the
prophets, and holy penmen of the Scriptures: that those should not as well be
fulfilled and made good: as those were fulfilled at his first coming, in the
state of humiliation and suffering? why should any go about to advance unbelief
and weak reason into the room and place of faith? and conclude, that those
things of Christ's coming and kingdom, are divised fables, or things impossible
ever to come to pass.

Holy Peter, strong in faith, and lively in hope, says, 2. Pet. 3. 12. seeing
so great things are to be done; (as burning and dissolving this old heaven and
earth, with the works therein, in order to the coming in of the new, in the
room thereof) we should be looking for, and hastening to, the day of their
performance: Verse. 13. we according to his promise, look for new heavens, and a
new earth, wherein dweleth righteousness. And again verse. 14. seeing that ye
look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, etc.
unto those that look for him, the second time; he will appear, Heb. 9. 28.

Great good things, will attend the righteous hereafter: a great change for the
better will come, when they shall enjoy a flourishing condition, and abundance
of peace and felicity. The blessed morning will come when they will come to
have the pre-eminence. The day hasteneth, when they, as Lazarus had, will have
the good things and be comforted, when the wicked will sadly suffer: the
righteous being in the height of their enjoyments of blessedness, enjoying the
presence of God, and being for ever with the Lord Christ, and having fellowship
with just men, thoroughly made perfect; and shall live and reign with Christ, a
thousand years; as it is written, and will be fulfilled. It is impossible, that
any thing thereof, should fail. or come short. I shall forbear to enlarge. The
reason, and scope of the whole, is to infor from what is written, as fulfilled,
of the prophecyes, at Christ our Lord his first coming: to show, what we may
look for and expect at his second coming in like manner: remembering, holy Peter
has told us, we have a more sure word of Prophecy, unto which we do well to
taken ed; Hope we steadfastly, therefore for the great grace, and blessedness,
that shall be brought unto us, at the revelation of Jesus Christ. O come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

Errata.
PAge line 7. for on, read gone. p. 32. l. 2. for on, r. in. p. 33. l. 27. for
had no r. had not. l. 22. r. Lord Jesus. p. 43. l. 30. for Psalm r. Esa. p. 44.
for psalm. r. phil. l. 33. for his r. this. p. 52. l. 15. for preceher r.
preached. p. 55. l. 17. for changed r. raised. p. 57. l. 36. for world r. word.
l. 30. r. is come, dole which is to come. p. 59. l. 22. for many r. man. p. 78.
l. 13. r. that will attend. p. 83. l. 16. for as our Christ, r. as our Lord
Christ. l. 11. r. the regeneration. p. 87. l. 12. for must r. might l. 31. for
as so great, r. is so great. p. 91. l. 12. for thee r. him. p. 102. dele for a
time. p. 105. l. 23. for light r. right. p. 107. for be r he. p. 109. l. 17.
for must r. may. l. 24. dele save.

In p. 13. at the close of the 3. chap. some thing intended to have been left
out was casually left in, concerning a long time after a 1000. years said to be
Mr. Archors judgment; also p. 16. toward the end, these words, and as some
apprehend will be a 1000 years more, Which not being the judgment of the
Author is here intimated.

FINIS.

