Universal Love CONSIDERED, And established upon its Right Foundation. BEING, A
serious enquiry how far Charity may and ought to be extended toward persons of
different Judgments in matters of RELIGION. AND Whose Principles among the
several Sects of Christians do most naturally lead to that due moderation
required. Writ in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, for the removing of
Stumbling Blocks out of the Way of the Simple; by a lover of the Souls of all
Men.

Robert Barclay.

1 John 4. 16. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God. 1
Jo. 5. 2. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments. Printed
in the Year, 1677.

The CONTENTS.
Sect. I. THe Introduction, giving an account of the Authors experience in this
matter, with the Reasons moving him to treat thereof. p. I. Sect. II. The
nature of Christian Love and Charity demonstrated, the consistency of true Zeal
therewith; its distinction from false Zeal. p. 4. Sect. III. The Controversy
stated, with respect to the different sort of Christians; how it is to be
fetched from the nature of their Principles, and not from the practice of
particular persons. p. 9. Sect. IV. An Examination of the Principles of several
sorts of those called Christians, compared with this Universal Love, and found
defective; As 1. Of Papists. 2. Of Protestants in general. 3. Of Socinians. p.
14. Sect. V. Some Principles of Christianity proposed, as they are held by a
great body of People, and whole gathered Churches in Great Britain and
Ireland, which do very well agree with true Universal Love. p. 30.
The Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen these Mistakes, for the better
understanding of the matter.
PAge 3. line 28, for pretented, read pretended; p. 7. l. 22. for sar r. far;
l. 29. for Saul David, r. Saul. David, l. 36. for d^ffers, r. differ; p. 8. l.
35. for so that, r. so but that; p. 11. l. 27. blot out in; p. 13. l. 16. for
necessary, r. necessarily; l. 26. for Improved, r. disapproved; p. 14. l. 2.
for practices, r. practice; p. 15. l. 6. for has, r* have; p. 16. l. 7. for
thinking r* thinking, p. 12. l. 21. for necessarity r* necessary; p. 18, l. 14.
for bassis r* bases, p. 11, l. 5. for hinders r binder; l. 6. for has r* have;
l. 14, for Comodies r* Comedies; p. 22, l. 31. for hut r* but; p. 23. l. 10,
for is, r* he is; l. 15. for has r. have; p. 24. l. 14. for is, r* are, l. 23.
for Chaty r* Charity; p. 31. l. 3. for incerted r* inserted; 32. in Margent,
2d. line r. as well in doctrines, l. 5. r* external band; p. 33. l. 12. for
Monites, r* Mentionites; p. 35. l. 21. for Now, r. Nor; p. 36, l. 1. for
recideth r. resideth; p. 39. l. 12* for they, r. it.

Books lately Printed for a general service to the Truth.
ISaac Penningtous Naked Truth, or Truth Nakedly manifesting it self in several
particulars, for the removing of hindrances out of the way of the simple
hearted, that they may come to true Knowledge, Life, Liberty, Peace, and Joy in
the Lord, through the virtue and power of his precious Truth, revealed and
working in them; by way of Question and Answer.

The Flesh and Blood of Christ, both in the Mystery and in the outward
testified to, by I. P.

R. Barclay's Truth cleared of Calumnies.

The Staggering Instability of the Pretended Stable-Christians discovered, by
R. B. against William Mitchel.

An account of a Dispute between the Students of Divinity of Aberdeen, and the
People called Quakers, by R. B. G. K. -- Quakerism confirmed, in Answer to
Quakerism canvassed.

The Anarchy of the Ranters, and other Libertines; the Hierarchy of the
Romanists and other pretended Churches; equally refused and refuted in a
twofold Apology, for the Church and People of God, called in derision,
Quakers, by R. Barclay.

G. Fox, to all the Kings and Princes, and Governors in the whole World.

The Spiritual Man Christ Jesus, the Blessed Seed, Light of Life, Purger of
Conscience, by G. Fox.

-- Christian Liberty commended, and Persecution condemned.

A small Treatise concerning Swearing, its use in the Law, and end in the
Gospel, by G. Fox.

The beginning of Tithes in the Law, and ending in the Gospel.

A Testimony to all Masters of Ships and Seamen, by G. Fox.

Thomas Bayles Testimony to the Universal Love of God in Christ Jesus to the
Sons of Men.

A Warning against the Deceit of setting up Man's Reason as Judge in Spiritual
matters, Translated out of Low Dutch, by Stephen Crisp.

Immediate Revelation not ceased, by G. Keith.

The Universal free grace of the Gospel asserted, by G. Keith.

Quakerisme no Popery, by G. Keith.

Universal Love, etc.
SECT. I. The Introduction. Giving an account of the Authors Experience in this
Matter, with the Reasons moving him to treat thereof.
ALbeit, it were very desirable that Man could from his very tender Age upwards
receive so living an Impression not only of the truest and surest Principles of
the Doctrines of Christ, but also of the Life and Power of Godliness to leaven
the whole Mind and Affections unto the pure and holy Nature of Jesus; yet
seeing that this Happiness befalls to few (most of Men being by the prejudice
of Education, either pre-possessed, or defiled with wrong notions; or else
those who come to receive, even at first, a right Impression in their
Understandings, as to Opinion or Principle, do either by the power of inward
Corruption, working upon their Natural Complexions, or by other Temptations
from without, oftentimes fall exceeding short of this pure Life) the best way
to Redeem the Time, and to repair that Loss, is from the experience we have had
of the Evil, and the Memory we retain of, how far we have been wrong to confirm
and strengthen our selves in the good now revealed and embraced, which by the
powerful working of God's Infinite Goodness, turning all to the advantage of
those that love and follow Him, makes the Ministry of such the more effectual,
as in the example of Paul and others was manifest.

It being then so, that the condition of my life hitherto (Albeit, I as yet am
but a young Man) gives me experience more then perhaps to many others, to treat
of this subject: Therefore, finding a true freedom and liberty in my spirit, I
have willingly undertaken, for the sake of some, to write something briefly,
and yet I hope clearly thereof, that my experience herein, if the Lord will, by
His Blessing may be made useful to others.

My first Education from my Infancy up, fell amongst the strictest sort of
Calvinists, those of our Country being generally acknowledged to be the
severest of that Sect in the heat of Zeal, surpassing not only Geneva, from
whence they derive their Pedigree; but all other the Reformed Churches abroad
(so called) so that some of the French Protestants being upbraided with the
fruits of this Zeal, as it appeared in Jo. Knox, Buchanan, and others do,
besides what is peculiar to their Principles of this kind, allege the
super-abundance thereof to proceed a fervido Scotorum Ingenio, i. e. from the
violent Complexion of our Country men. I had scarce got out of my Childhood
when I was by the permission of Divine Providence cast among the Company of
Papists, and my tender years, and immature Capacity not being able to withstand
and resist the Insinuations that were used to Proselite me to that way; I
became quickly defiled with the Pollutions thereof, and continued therein for a
time, until it pleased God, through his rich Love and Mercy, to deliver me out
of those Snares, and to give me a clear understanding of the evil of that way.
In both these Sects, the Reader may easily conceive that I had abundant
occasion to receive Impressions contrary to this principle of Love herein
treated of, seeing the straitness of several of their Doctrines, as well as
their practice of Persecution, do abundantly declare how opposite they are to
Universal Love (as shall hereafter more at large be shown) and Albeit, the time
it pleased God to deliver me out of these Snares, I was so young, that it may
be presumed my Observations could be but weak, and consequently my Experience
inconsiderable; yet for as much as from my very Childhood I was very ambitious
of Knowledge, and by a certain felicity of Understanding, I think I may say
without Vanity, successful beyond many of my Equals in Age, though my
Observations at that time were but weak, yet since I have with more leisure and
circumspection gathered thence so much experience, as I am confident will serve
for a sufficient foundation to any Superstructure I shall build upon it in this
Treatise.

The time that intervened betwixt my forsaking of the Church of Rome, and
joining with those, with whom I stand now engaged, I kept my self free from
joining with any sort of People, though I took liberty to hear several; and my
Converse was most with those that inveigh much against judging and such kind of
severity, seeming to complain greatly for want of this Christian Charity among
all Sects, which Latitude may perhaps be esteemed the other extreme opposite to
the preciseness of these other Sects, whereby I also received an opportunity to
know what usually is pretented on that side likewise; and thence can say
somewhat experimentally on that part also.

As for those I am now joined to, and whom I justly esteem to be the true
followers and Servants of Jesus Christ, the World speaks diversely of them, as
to this matter, some highly accusing them of the want of Charity, and
quarrelling with them as such who peremptorily condemn all but themselves:
Others have a contrary conceit of them, each according as they are prejudicated
and informed. What may be truly said in the case, shall after appear: I my self
have been diversely* censured in this matter, being engaged in Controversy,
which as they can be scarcely handled without something of sharpness, so are
seldom managed by any so successfully, as not to bear the Censure of some or
other, in this respect. Having then upon the whole matter observed that this
want of Charity is that, for the want of which, each Sect accuses the other,
and yet are most averse to see this defect in themselves, and that some do
accuse all Sects as guilty of this Crime. I have judged it meet to commit my
sense hereof to writing, according to the purpose signified in the Title
aforementioned.

SECT. II. The Nature of Christian Love and Charity demonstrated, the
Consistancy of true Zeal therewith, it is distinction from false Zeal.
THe Nature of Christian Love and Charity is fully and abundantly described in
the Holy Scriptures, where it is preferred before all other Virtues and
properties whatsoever, as that which comprehends in it all other perfections,
and is the root and spring of them, for there can be no true Virtue but that
which proceeds from Love; hence God himself is called Love, I Jo. 4. 7. as
being that, under which all his innumerable and inutterable perfections are
included: By this Love we are Redeemed from the Corruption of our Nature, and
have received the benefit of a Mediator, Joh. 16. This is the Banner wherewith
God covers his Children, Cant. 2. 4. This is that which Constrained our Lord
Jesus Christ to lay down his Life for us, Joh. 15. 13. The exercise of this is
given by Christ as the principal Token of his Disciples, Joh. 13. 35. It is
numbered as the first fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. It is called the
fulfilling of the Law, as that, wherein all consists, Romans 13. 10. For to
Love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves, is the sum not only
of the Law, but of the Gospel also, 1 Cor. 13. 13. Therefore the Apostle Paul
gives to this Love or Charity the Precedence before either Faith or Hope; in
which Chapter he does briefly, but very emphatically describe it, for having
first shown that the speaking with Tongues of Men, and Angels, that the gifts
of Prophesying, Understanding, and Knowledge, that the Faith that even could
remove Mountains, and the giving of all to the Poor, yea, and the Body to be
burnt, is nothing without it: He proceeds to the description of it thus,
Charity suffers long, is kind; Charity envieth not, Vaunteth not it self, is
not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeking not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in
the Truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things, never fails, Albeit, other gifts have, 1 Cor. 13. from
the first Verse. As by this the excellency of Love is shown, so the necessity
of pressing after it, and living in it, will be readily acknowledged by all;
but seeing the sum of this Love, as well as the perfection thereof, consists in
loving God above all; so whatever diverteth in any thing therefrom, is not to
be accounted Love, though the same word be used to express it, and that in the
Scripture it self; such as the Love of Self, the Love of the World, the Love of
any Creature. Hence for the attaining of the true and excellent Love, the Love
of all these other things is not only to be laid aside, and the Love of God
preferred to them, but they are to be hated as Christ himself Phraseth it, He
that hates his life, Jo. 12. 25. Yea, he uses it so, as to speaking of hating
Father and Mother, Luke 14. 26. though when the Love to such, is truly
subordinate to the other, it is both commended and commanded.

The Testimony which is required of our really being in the Love of God, Christ
himself signifies to us: If you Love me, keep my Commandments: And as the
Beloved Disciple John said in the case of Knowledge, showing us the falsehood of
such as pretend to know God, and yet do not so; saying, He that says he knows
God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him, 1
Jo. 2. 4. So may be also said, He that says he loves God, and keeps not his
Commandment, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him, according as the same
Apostle says, I Jo. 5. 3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his
Commandments. Hence it is apparent, that Love without Purity is but a false
pretense; and that whatsoever hinders from the practice of this Love of God, or
with draws from the obedience of the least of his Commands, is to be denied,
and no ways to be entertained, as being either the love of the Devil, the love
of the World, or the love of Self, and not the love of the Father; and as from
the true love of God, having taken place both upon the Understanding and Will,
there arises a great fervency and desire of Mind, that it may be wholly united
with the Lord, and made conformable unto his Will in all things: So from hence
arises also a certain Aversion from, Indignation of, and even Hatred, to
whatsoever is contrary thereunto, or has a tendency to lead from it, which is
commonly called Zeal; which Zeal, having a right bottom and foundation, and
proceeding purely from the Love of God, is a great Virtue, greatly to be
commended and pressed after, and the defect thereof is justly reproveable in a
Christian. That Zeal then thus considered, is a thing excellent, pure, and holy
of it self, appears in that it is ascribed to God himself, 2 King. 19. 13. Isa.
9. 7. Where the performance of the Blessed Evangelical promises is to be
performed by the Zeal of the Lord, Isa. 19. 17. He is said to be Clothed with
Zeal as with a Cloak, and 63. 15. His Zeal is numbered with his Bowels and
Mercies; next David recommends himself to God, for that the Zeal of his House
had eaten him up, Psalm. 69. 9. and 119. 139. And Paul commends the Corinthians
for their Zeal, 2 Cor. 7. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 12. and for this end has the Grace of
God appeared unto all, that there might be a People gathered, Zealous of good
Works, Tit, 2. 14. And as this is commended and recommended on the one hand, so
is the contrary thereof; to wit, Indifferency and Lukewarmness reproved and
rebuked as a thing displeasing to the Lord, of many instances whereof that
might be given, that unto the Church of Laodicea may serve at present, Rev. 13.
15. 16. Because for a Remedy against this Evil, she is Exhorted, v. 19. to be
Zealous and Repent.

But as there is a true Zeal, so is there a false one, and it is not more
needful to have the one, then i^ is to avoid the other. Now as the true Zeal
proceeds only from the pure Love of God, and single Regard to his Honor and
Glory, so the false Zeal proceeds from the Love of something else, and the
regard to other things: And of this false Zeal there are several kinds as well
as degrees; all of which, though they ought to be shunned, yet some are far
more hurtful and pernicious than others; the worst and highest of these is when
as Men, through the height of Pride, Lust, Ambition, or Envy, show themselves
furious and Zealous to satisfy and fulfill their desires and affections, this
is the highest Zeal for self; From this Zeal did Cain flay Abel, Ishmael mocked
Isaac, and Esau hated Jacob, Pharaoh Persecuted the Children of Israel, Saul,
David, and Jezabel, the true Prophets of the Lord.

A second kind is, when as Men that are not true and faithful, even to those
principles of Religion, they profess themselves to acknowledge as true, as
being Conscious to themselves, and also publicly known to be such as are
Vicious and Profligate, yet do violently persecute and oppress others that
differs from them; though they be not only equal to them, but even by their own
acknowledgment exceed them in Temperance and Virtue, having nothing to charge
them with, but that they agree not with them in judgment and practice in
matters of Religion: This apparently is a false Zeal, and not of God, for if it
proceeded from the true Love of God, it would first operate in themselves to
the removing of all those things which they acknowledge to be contrary to this
Love of God, before it exerted it self toward others, seeing as the Proverb
is, Charity begins at home. And like unto this was the Zeal of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who Persecuted Christ for a breaker of the Law which themselves did
not fulfill: As is also the Zeal both of the Papists and Protestants in their
Persecutions at this day.

A third sort is of such, who do indeed walk strictly and closely to their own
Principles, making Conscience of their way; but yet being blinded in their
understanding, do Persecute Truth, supposing it to be Error: Of this number was
Paul before his Conversion, Being as to the Law blameless, and Persecuting the
Saints out of Zeal, Act. 22. 3. Gal. 1. 14. And therefore, in this Class he
numbers his Countrymen, saying, They have a Zeal for God, but not according to
knowledge, Romans 10. 2. And perhaps among these, such may be numbered, of whom
Christ speaks, saying to his Disciples, and when they kill you, they shall
think to do God good Service.

A fourth or last sort is, when as Men being truly enlightened in their
Understanding, but their Will, Heart, and Affections not being thoroughly
leavened with the Love of God, do condemn things justly reproveable, but not
out of the pure drawings of Divine Love, but even from a mixture of self in the
forwardness of their own will, as not suffering any to be contrary unto them.

This is the most innocent kind of wrong Zeal; yet not so that it ought to be
watched against, and of those few that are guilty of it, it were fit they
waited to be Redeemed from it; but the pure undefiled Zeal that is acceptable
to God, is that which proceeds not only from a pure and clear understanding,
but also from a renewed and sanctified Will which moves not of, nor from Self,
but from and for the Lord.

SECT. III. The Controversy stated, with respect to the different sort of
Christians; how it is to be fetched from the nature of their Principles, and
not from the practice of particular persons.
THe sun of what is said, is, that true Christian Love and Charity, is the most
excellent of Virtues, most needful to be sought after and attained, that it is
never joined, but with purity, which it naturally leads to; and therefrom does
consequentially arise an Indignation and Zeal against Unrighteousness, which
true Zeal is justly commendable, and really distinguishable from all false and
ignorant Zeal.

For the more clear stating of the Controversy in proceeding in this matter,
these following assertions relating thereto may be proposed and affirmed.

I. That whatsoever Love is consistent with the pure Love of God, may be safely
exercised toward all sorts, as well of Men as Christians.

II. That whatsoever Love or Charity really conduces to the salvation of their
souls, and so far as they are capable thereof, may and ought to be showed
toward them.

III. That therefore the good in all ought to be commended, encouraged, and
loved, and no true Good either denied, rejected, or despised, because of any
Errors peculiar to respective Sects.

IV. That the Evil, either in Opinion or practice, ought neither to be spared,
encouraged, nor fomented under any pretense of Love whatsoever.

These I shall not enlarge, nor yet offer to prove (studying to avoid
prolixity) because I presume they will be readily granted and assented to by
all. That then, which principally comes under consideration, is to consider and
examine which of all the several sorts of Christians at this day do most truly
observe these rules, and show forth most of the true Love and Zeal of God in
their way and principles, avoiding that which is contrary thereunto; wherein,
that I may proceed clearly, there are some things previous to be warily and
seriously weighed; as

First; when I speak of the Charity of the several sorts of Christians, I speak
of such as are settled in their in respective Principles, as persuading
themselves certainly in the truths and soundness of them, so that their Love
and Charity is really to such as they judge and believe are wrong, seeming to
have Charity to all, and be afraid to judge them from an unsettledness in ones
self, as not knowing which is right or which is wrong, is a Virtue of necessity
and not of choice, and proceeds no ways from the Love of God, neither has any
resemblance thereunto, for God loves and Compassionates Sinners, and such as
are out of the way, not as being ignorant, or doubting whether they be such,
but as really knowing them. It were indeed the height of madness and folly for
these unsettled, uncertain, and straggling souls to take the liberty to judge
others for being wrong, while they profess they know not yet who is right and
who is wrong; being only sure of this, that themselves are not come to rights,
for they could not in so doing, but be Self-condemned; not but I believe that
the condition of such, if they be truly forbearing, and ready to embrace the
good when seen by them, is both more tolerable to others, and safe for
themselves than those that are hardily confident in a wrong belief from thence
forwardly judging others. But this I mention for the sake of certain men of
loose, and uncertain principles, who being really Conscious to themselves of
their own unsettledness, finding themselves at a loss, as concerning many of
the controverted Principles of the Christian Religion, which is right, and
which wrong, and not finding a ready way to come to any certain determination
therein, and being perhaps unwilling to undergo the trouble and difficulty of
such a serious search and enquiry, as well as desirous to avoid these
troublesome circumstances, or other inconveniences which may seem to them
necessarily to accompany their imbodying themselves with any particular People
or Fellowship, and therefore find it more easy to satisfy and please
themselves with some general notions of practical Truths, commonly acknowledged
by all, and therefore cover themselves by condemning that heat, asperity, and
severe censuring that is among the several sorts of Christians, one toward
another, as not consistent with, nor suitable to that Love which ought to be in
all Christians; whereas, poor Men, they mind not how much they fall in this
Crime, and that in a degree far more reprovable than those they thus accuse:
For,

First: Are not they found guilty of the want of this Christian Love and
Charity, that do judge and condemn all these several sorts of Christians as
defective in this so principal and necessary a Christian Virtue, whereby they
do indirectly shut them out from being Christians or Disciples of Jesus; for if
they judged it an Error inconsistent with Christian Love and Charity, to
condemn or accuse one another for difference in Opinion; why are they found
themselves so guilty of it? for since in this censuring and condemning of one
another among the several sorts of Christians is practiced by them as their
duty, and a necessary consequence of their Doctrine, why should these judge
them for it, if they say they condemn them for it; Because they believe it to
be a wrong Principle, shall not others be allowed the like liberty to condemn
Principles they likewise believe to be wrong; one of two then must of necessity
hold, either that wrong Doctrines or Opinions may be justly reproved, confuted,
and condemned without breach of Christian Love and Charity, and therefore the
so doing amongst the several sorts of Christians, upon their own respective
Principles in it self simply considered, not evil or reproveable; and therefore
these men wrong in judging it so, or it is an evil and inconsistent with
Christian Love and Charity to condemn any sort of Christians for their
Doctrines and Opinions; and if so, these men fall foully in this Crime, that do
accuse all others for this judging of Principles, and yet themselves judge them
for their Principles herein: And,

Secondly: Their envy in this is of an higher degree by their own Sentence,
then those others thus judged by them, because the others proceed upon a
certain belief and firm persuasion that they are in the right, and those they
condemn wrong, and so proceed rationally consequential to their own Principles;
but these Men, Albeit they be Conscious to themselves, that they are not come
to a determination of what is right and what wrong, and remain yet in doubt for
want of a clear Understanding what to approve and what to condemn, do never
the-less most irrationally and inconsequentially to their own affirmations,
reprove, censure, and condemn all others as destitute of, or at least defective
in a virtue and quality so necessary and essential to all Christian Societies;
to whom, therefore, may be fitly applied the saying of the Patriarch Jacob, to
his Firstborn Ruben: Unstable as water, thou shall not excel, Genesis 49. 4. And
that of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, Romans 2. 11. As also that other saying
of the same Apostle to the Galatians; For if I Build again the things that I
destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor, Gal. 2. 18.

2dly. To make a judgment of the several sorts of Christians, we must fetch it
not from the practices of particular Persons, but from their respective
principles, by enquiring how far they naturally lead to, or draw from this
Universal Love, because that it cannot be denied, but that among all and every
sort of the several Sects of Christians, there are men of diverse and sundry
humors and complexions; some more hot, violent, and froward, who prosecute
what they judge right, with great Zeal, have, and fury; others of more calm,
meek, and loving dispositions, who though they be not less desirous to advance
their way, yet do it in a more complacent, affable, and deliberate manner: Some
there are that are naturally of a careless, indifferent, Gallio-like temper in
such things, and therefore behave more forbearingly and civilly toward such as
dissent from them, not because of any Virtue, but because such things do not
much trouble or touch them. Neither then of these Virtues, as they are incident
to particular Persons, are so justly chargeable upon a Sect or People, as from
thence to make a positive judgment of their Universal Charity or not; seeing
these are not the consequences of their Principles, or that which necessary
comes from them, as relating to this or that Society, but the mere product of
their natural and private humors, how far any particular or singular Persons
among the several Sects, have attained to the performance of that true Love and
Zeal formerly described: I shall not determine, neither does it necessarily
belong to this Question; for if any should be found to do any thing which were
so far from being the consequence of their Principles, as to be quite contrary,
their Brethren would not suffer their Principles from thence to be improved; so
neither can the excellency of any singular Persons, while not proceeding upon
their Principles, approve them as justifiable in this respect: As for instance,
where it is the Universal Principle and general practice of a Sect, to
persecute even to the utmost those that differ from them, as in the Church of
Rome, should there be found one or two, or a very few of a more moderate
spirit, that should profess an aversion from such sort of severity, and also
practice it in their station, according to their Capacity, who would ascribe
this moderation and Charity to the Church of Rome, would take his measures but
badly; and on the other hand, where it is the Universal Principle and general
practices of a People, not at all to persecute for the matter of Conscience,
should any private Persons of that Society be carried by their fury and heat to
the practice of any such thing, though directly contrary to their Principles,
who would charge this upon the whole People, and thence measure them, would
make also a bad consequence. Nevertheless, I shall not deny but some Principles
are so pernicious, and so strait and narrow, that they seem by a certain
Malignity generally to influence all their followers, as shall after be
observed: But I shall now proceed to the forementioned Examination.

SECT. IV. An Examination of the Principles of several sorts of the so called
Christans, compared with this Universal Love, and found defective: As 1. of
Papists: 2. of Protestants in general: 3. of Socinians.
AS there are two ways chiefly whereby a People or Society do signify their
Charity or Love toward others that differ from them; so by these two also, is
signified their contrary Principles and practice.

The first is by a favorable and Charitable judgment of the condition of Men's
Souls; Albeit, of different and contrary principles from them, in supposing, or
at least not absolutely denying, but that they may even upon their own
Principles, if faithful thereto, obtain Peace with God, and Life Eternal.

The Second is by a Friendly and Neighbourly deportment toward Men's Persons,
in not seeking to ruin and destroy them, whether in Life, Liberty, or Estate;
Albeit, their judgment concerning God, and things Spiritual in the Nature and
Manner of the exercise of their Worship, be both contrary and different; where
the defect of any of these two is, there of necessity must be wanting Universal
Love and Charity; for thou that have bound up, and tied the means of Salvation
to thy Principles and Doctrines, so as to exclude from Salvation all that
differ from thee, or contradict thee, has certainly declared, thy Charity
exceeds not the limits of thy own form, and that the best Opinion, and highest
esteem thou have of any that differ from thee, for any virtues or excellencies
that may appear to be in them, resolves at last in no better then this
Conclusion, For all this they must be Damned; neither will it serve to prove
the Universal Charity of any People, in this respect, that some of them may
Problematically affirm, that Salvation may be possible to some such Dissenters,
living in remote parts, who are excluded from the benefit of all means of
knowing their Principles; making this possibility only as an effect of Gods
Omnipotency, and so purely miraculous; alleging, they will not deny but God in
a miraculous and extraordinary way may bring some to Heaven; for this shows no
Charity at all, either in the Principle or People, but is only a mere seeming
acknowledgment of God's Omnipotency from a sight of the gross absurdity that
would follow from affirming otherwise: Those only can be esteemed Charitable in
point of Doctrine, and truly to commend the Love of God, whose Principle is of
that extent, as naturally to take in within the compass of it; both such as
have not arrived to their discoveries, and who are also different in judgment
from them, and that without any extraordinary and miraculous conveyance, as
being the common means and order of Salvation appointed by God for all, and
truly reaching all.

Moreover, in the second place, far less can thou pretend to have Charity for
me, that wilt rob me of my Life, Goods, or Liberty, because I cannot jump with
thee in my judgment in Religious matters; to say thou do it for good, and out
of the Love thou bear to my soul, is an Argument too ridiculous to be
answered, unless that the so doing did infallably produce always a change in
judgment; the very contrary, whereof experience has abundantly shown, and to
this day does show; seeing such severities do oftener confirm men in their
Principles, then drive them from them, and then by thy own confession, thou
do not only destroy my body, but my soul also, and cannot avoid thinking upon
thy own Principle; but I must be Damned if I persist in my judgment, which for
thee to be the very immediate occasion and Author of, is certainly the greatest
act of Malice and Envy that can be imagined; seeing thou do what in thee
lies, through the heat of thy Zeal and Fury, to cut me off from obtaining that
place of Repentance, which for ought thou know, it might please God to
afford me, were not my days thus shortened by thee. To allege the example of
putting to Death Murderers, and other such Profligate Malefactors, which is
allowably done by the general judgment of almost all Christians; from thence
urging, that as this is not accounted a breach of Christian Charity, so neither
the other will no way serve the purpose, nor yet be a sufficient cover for this
kind of Unchristian cruelty, because the Crimes for which these are thus
punished, are such as are not justified as matters of Conscience, or
Conscientiously practiced, which are unanimously Condemned, not only by the
consent of all Christians, but of all men, as being destructive to the very
Nature of Mankind, and to all humane Society; and it is confessed, even by all
such Malefactors themselves (I know not if one of a hundred thousand can be
excepted) and the punishment of such is justifiable, as all generally
acknowledge; but to kill sober, honest, good Men, merely for their Conscience,
is quite contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, as has been elsewhere upon other
occasions largely demonstrated.

This being premised, I shall briefly apply the same to the several sorts of
Christians, that thence may be observed, whose Principles do most exactly agree
with, and lead to that Universal Love and Charity, so much in words commended
by all, and for the want of which, every sort take so much liberty to judge and
condemn each other. There are many other particulars by which the several Sects
may be tried in this respect, but these two forementioned being the principal,
I shall chiefly insist upon them in this present application.

To begin then with the Papists, there is nothing more commonly acknowledged
and assented to among them, then that Maxim, Extra Ecclesiam nulla Salus,
without the Church there is no Salvation; which Maxim, in a sense, I confess to
be true (as shall hereafter appear) but according as it is understood among
them, it does utterly destroy this Universal Love and Charity; for by this
Church, without which there is no Salvation, they precisely understand the
Church of Rome, reckoning, that whosoever are not of her Fellowship, are not
saved; and this must needs necessarily follow upon their Principles, seeing
they make the Ceremonial Imbodying in this Church, so necessarity to Salvation,
that they exclude from it the very Children begotten and brought forth by their
own Members, unless formally received by the Sprinkling or Baptism of Water:
And Albeit, they have a certain place more tolerable than Hell for these
Unbaptized Infants, yet hence is manifest how small their Charity is, and how
much it is confined to their particular Ceremonies and forms, since if they
think Children born among them, for want of this Circumstance are excluded from
Heaven, Albeit, never guilty of actual Transgression, they must needs judge
that such as both want it, and also are guilty of many sins, as they believe
all men are who are come to age, especially such as are not in the Church, go
without remedy to Hell.

Secondly: All Dissenters and Seperatists from the Church, Infidels, Turks, and
Heriticks, which in short are all that profess not fellowship and Communion
with the Church of Rome, and own her not as their Mother, are in a most solemn
manner yearly Excommunicated by the Pope; and it were a most gross
inconsistency to suppose that such as are so Cursed and Excommunicated, and
given over to the Devil by the Father and chief Bishop of the Church, can in
the judgment of the Members be saved, especially while they think he is
approved of God, and led by an Infallible Spirit in his so Excommunicating them.

And lastly: To suppose any such Universal Love or Charity, as extending to
Persons either without the compass of their own Society, or dissenting and
separating from them, so as to reckon them in a capacity or possibility of
Salvation, were to destroy and overturn the very Bassis and Foundation of the
Roman Church, which stands in acknowledging the Superiority and Precedence of
Peter and his Successors, and in believing that Infallibility is annexed
thereunto.

Now such as are not of the Roman Society, cannot do this; and those that do
not thus, are such to whom the Church of Rome can have no Charity, but must
look upon them as without the Church, and consequently as incapable of
Salvation while there abiding.

If it be objected that the Church of Rome professes Charity to the Greek,
Armenian, and Ethiopian Churches, Albeit, vastly differing in many things from
them.

I Answer, that whatsoever Charity the Church of Rome either does, or ever has
professed to any of these, shall be found to be always upon a supposed
acknowledgment made by them to the Sea of Rome, as the Mother Church and
Apostolic Seat, from thence seeking the Confirmation and Authority of their
Patriarchs, at least as the Romanists have sought to make the World believe
(how true, is not my present business to enquire) and all these differences of
Ceremonies that are betwixt them, are only approved by the Romanists as such
which are indulged to them by the Pope, who pretends out of a Fatherly care and
compassion to yield these things unto them, which if it be true, is done by him
rather to uphold the show of his Authority; and because distance of place, and
other incommodities hinders him from pressing more upon them, since in places
nearer hand, and where fitter opportunities has been presented, he has shown
himself very Zealous and Violent to bring all to a ready obedience to the least
of his Commands, as by many examples could be largely proved; yet some are of
the mind that all these Stories and pretended acknowledgments of Patriarchs to
the Romish Sea are but the mere effects of the Policy of that Court, to uphold
their Grandeur, and nothing better but pretty Comedies to amuse the Vulgar and
Credulous, and augment their Reverence toward the Pope and his Clergy; but
whatever be in this, it is abundantly manifest that there can be nothing more
contrary to this Universal Love and Charity than Romish Principles, and that no
man of that Religion, without deserting his Principles, can pretend to it.

As to the other Principle of Persecution, how much it is Preached and
practiced in the Church of Rome, will need no great Probation: Those that are
acquainted with, or have heard of the Spanish Inquisition, of the many Inhumain
Butcheries and Massacres committed both in France, and the Netherlands, upon
Men merely for the matter of their Consciences; the many Plots, Consultations,
Combinings, and Wars, contrived, fomented, and carried on by the Bishops of
Rome themselves, and the chief of their Clergy, yielding large and voluntary
Contributions thereto for to ruin and root out the Dissenters from the Romish
Society, after Luther appeared; cannot but see how natural and consequential it
is to Romish Principles so to do: And thence also observe how contrary and
opposite these things are to Universal Love and Charity, and how much they act
the Hypocrite when they pretend Christian Charity to any that differ from them.

And this manifestly appears in these two, which none of them that has
understanding to know, or honesty to confess their Principles can deny: I might
also add a third, which Albeit, by some Popish Doctors in some Nations it be
denied, yet is no less firmly believed and contended for by other eminent
Persons among them, especially Bellarmine, and approved by the Pope himself; to
wit, the Popes power to depose Princes in case of Heresy, and give their
Kingdoms to others, allowing them upon that account to fight against them, and
accounting their so purchaseing of them, lawful. Small offenses heretofore
would have provoked to this Sentence, as appeared in the example of Hildebrand
and others; but of late he is more sparing and deliberate in his denuntiations,
finding his Authority less regarded, and his power to bring to obedience much
abbreviated: But surely this principle cannot consist with Universal Love, when
that, which by all is acknowledged to be an Ordinance of God, does not secure
the lawful Administrators thereof from the bitterness of it: If you will not
allow a King to be a King, Albeit, his right and title so to be, is every way
as good as such among your selves, unless he be of your mind, certainly there
is but small hopes of your Charity to other persons. There might be much more
said and enlarged as well upon this as other things, which sufficiently
evidenceth the Church of Rome can have no just claim to this Universal Love,
which I purposely, to avoid all manner of prolixity, do omit.

The great variety of Doctrines among Protestants so called, will make it
somewhat harder to decipher them particularly in this matter; yet to take first
notice of those, who by their most public Confessions, as well as by their
possession of whole Nations, are most commonly and Universally understood to
bear that name, (to wit) the Lutherans and Calvenists seems most regular.

And because of their Unity, as well as of several others in that doctrine and
practice of Persecution, I shall make my first observation from thence, which
being not only held by them, but also by several others dissenting from both of
them, may be termed (the more the pity) a general Doctrine of Protestants; how
far this contradicts Universal Love, is beforementioned. But as to them, it
has this additional aggravation which is very considerable that they do, and
that upon their owned Principles so rigorously persecute one another, not
permitting one another the free exercise of their Conscience in their
respective Dominions; Albeit, they acknowledge that they agree in Fundamentals,
and that they have both upon the same design of Reformation departed from
Antechrist; how then can these Men pretend to any thing of Universal Love or
Charity, who upon so small difference by themselves, not esteemed Fundamental,
do deny one another the very common and natural Benefits of the Creation? And
of this the Island of Great Britain can give good evidence: for Albeit, the
Protestants there be in a sense all Calvenists, or at lest, not at variance in
that which was, and is the great Controversy among the Lutherans and
Calvenists abroad; and that their difference lie only in the matter of the
Government of the Church, and some other Ceremonies; many of which, Calvin
himself confesses not to be of that consequence for which the Godly should be
at variance; yet how little Charity they have to one another, and how great and
irreconcilable prejudice and malice, is openly known to the World: So that upon
this account, the Prelatick Party has Persecuted the Presbyterian, and the
Presbyterian them, as they respectively found themselves in a Capacity to do
it, not only to the ejection of the Clergy for this difference out of their
Function, and the Excommunication and publicly Cursing one of another, but
also to the turning in and out of State-Officers, to the Imprisoning,
Forfeiting, Banishing, yea, and judicial Execution both of private and public
Persons; not to mention the horrible devastations and public Wars, whereby by
this Island became as a bloody Tragedy, to the ruin of thousands of Families,
which took its rise from their differences, and was carried and fomented from
the very Pulpits under this notion; also those common and usual denominations,
wherewith they used, and yet do design on one another, are not unknown, as
self-seeking and self-separating Hypocrites, seditious Incendaries,
presumptuous Rebels; and on the other hand, Proud and Bloody Prelates, Ignorant
and Ungodly Curates, Wicked and Hateful Malignants, Idolatrous and
Superstitious.

I could also, were it not both tedious and troublesome to repeat such stuff,
give instance of not much less severity and reproaches, very near of the same
quality, that have passed betwixt other subdivided species of Calvenists, as
betwixt the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants in Holland, upon the
difference of their Principles; Albeit, they agree in the matter of Government:
And the English Presbyterians and Independents, who quarrel not much (at lest
the generality of them, as themselves are willing the World should believe)
about Principles, but only in a small circumstance of Government, all which
does well witness how void those men are of true Charity, and how far from that
true Universal Christian Love, so much commended and pretended to by them,
especially considering that these are not only some personal Infirmities or
escapes of private persons among them, but the universal, necessary and
consequential effects of their respective Principles, which proceed from them
as men so circumstantiated and related to such and such Fellowships and
Societies.

There is another Principle, not only common both to Lutheran and Calvanists,
hut even to these subdivided Calvinists, I mean the Episcopalians and
Presbyterians, which cannot but obstruct and necessarily hinder this Universal
Love. To wit, the pressing after, and seeking to establish a National Church,
whereby upon the Magistrates, or great part embracing any Religion, they
distribute the whole Kingdom into several Parishes or Congregations, and
appoint Preachers of that way to them all; so that a man cannot be a Member of
the State, without he be a Member of the Church also; and he is robbed of the
very Privileges which he ought to enjoy as a Man, unless he will agree,
Albeit, against his Conscience, to every Circumstance of that Church, which is
established in the Country he lives, for the making of which the more
effectual, the Law in our Country provides, that when a Man is Excommunicate,
or cast out of the Church, is also cast out of the State; so that a Man upon
the Churches Censure, for a matter merely Conscientious, incurrs the same
hazard of the loss of his Estate and Liberty, as if he had been guilty of some
heinous Crime toward the State. But how can those pretend to Universal Love
that has thus so confined all, both Spiritual and Temporal Blessings to their
Sect, that they think not Men worthy to live as Men, or breath the common air,
unless they will subscribe to all their Sentiments. Surely this is far from the
Nature of God's Love, that causes his Sun to rise both upon the Just and
Unjust. Thus far as to Persecution, and what depends upon it.

I observed before that the general defect of this Universal Love did proceed
from wrong Notions concerning the Love of God; for such as confined God's Love,
did consequentially confine their own. Now the chief way, whereby men by their
own narrow Opinions, seek to limit and confine the Universal Love of God, is by
proposing the necessary means of Salvation appointed by God, as not reaching to
all, for such, to whom they reach not, we cannot suppose to have any real Love
extended to them: In this the generality of Protestants are deficient; Albeit,
some exceed others in a particular respect, as shall be hereafter observed.

That wherein they are generally wanting, is by affirming that there can be no
Salvation without the explicit knowledge of Christ, and benefit of the
Scriptures. This is held both by Lutherans, Calvenists, and Arminians; I mean
by these Churches, whatever may be the private Sentiments of particular persons
among them.

Now whereas all these do acknowledge that many thousands, yea, whole Nations,
have been, and are excluded from the benefit of this knowledge, they must
necessarily conclude Salvation impossible to them, and so they can have no
Charity for them, so as to suppose a possibility of Salvation to them. And this
goes directly against, and destroys the nature of Universal Love, which cannot
be entertained toward any, but upon the supposition that they are under a
possibility of being saved, or that those circumstances they are under, not
being in themselves, simply considered sinful as being such, as is not in them
to help, do not absolutely exclude them from it: I confess that I cannot have
Charity to a wicked Man, that he can be saved so long as he continues wicked;
and if thence any should seek to infer, that so likewise we cannot have Charity
to those men that want the Scriptures, and the outward knowledge of Christ,
that they can be saved so long as they want that. Therefore as the one is not
contrary to Universal Love, neither is the other. I Answer: The Comparison
holds not at all, because the ground of my not having Chaty to him, is his
continuing in a thing which himself knows to be displeasing to God, by the Law
of God which he has revealed to him, and acknowledges to be good; and therefore
the ground of my hopes of him, that he may be saved if he Repents, is, because
he knows the means how to Repent, and be Converted; so my Universal Love,
reaches to him not only in that I believe it is possible for God to bring him
out of his Wickedness; but in that I acknowledge that God in order thereto, has
actually made manifest to him the way how he may be Converted, and so I exclude
him not from the Universal Love of God, which I suppose in that manifestation
of his will, to have already really, touched and reached him. But the other
case has no parity with this; for first, that defect of the Scriptures and
outward knowledge of Christ in an Indian or American, etc. is no wilful
malicious act of them against any Law known to them, but is the mere providence
of God by them inevitable; neither is it unto them any moral evil, that they
are born or brought up in these parts, or come not to those places where they
may learn and find that knowledge: If I then judge that God's Love reaches not
any such, whom by this Providence he has permitted to be thus Born and Educated
in order to save them, my Universal Love can no ways reach to them, so as to
suppose Salvation possible to them, not because they refuse or resist the means
of Knowledge and Salvation appointed to them of God, but because they want it
by the will of God, who thought not meet to give it to them, I look not upon it
as my work in this Treatise to refute this Doctrine, and show its Contrariety
to Truth and Scripture, having done that largely elsewhere, as in my Apology,
Expl. of the 5th. and 6th. Proposition; it is enough here that I show that such
as hold this Opinion cannot justly pretend to Universal Love, as does evidently
appear by what is said, and needs no further Question.

Perhaps the Socinians may step in here, or others of more general Principles,
who will affirm they do not believe that the want of this explicit knowledge
does necessarily exclude Men from Salvation: It is true, there are some of that
mind, but it were hard to rank them under any particular denomination, it being
rather a Notion of these Men, of whom I made mention before, that are uncertain
in their Principles, and join with no people absolutely, then acknowledged by a
people or any public Confession of any united or gathered Church and People.

The Socinians generally lay very great stress upon the outward knowledge of
Christ, and do believe the outward knowledge of Christ, or of the Resurrection
at least, to be absolutely needful, holding the sufficiency of that alone upon,
Romans 10. 9. But passing that, and taking it for granted that the generality of
Socinians, and several others with them, who being all taken in Cumulo, may
pass, for as much as a whole body of people do believe and affirm Salvation
even possible to such as are by an inevitable Fate excluded from the benefit of
that external knowledge, in that they say that such as will improve that light
of Nature which all Men have given them of God, and exercise that common
Principle of Reason, may from the works of Creation and Providence, certainly
conclude that there is a God, forsake many evils, and do much good; and that
such as do thus improve this natural and common light, do obtain of God, to
send them miraculously either some Man or Angel to signify to them the outward
knowledge or Resurrection of Christ, that they may believe it, and be saved.

I Answer: This does not reach the full extent of Universal Love, because it
still limiteth it to this external knowledge, and supposes no means of
Salvation without it. And next, because it supposes somewhat Miraculous, which
as has been before observed, is a limitation not to be admitted in this case:
But if any would affirm that the improving of this Natural Light proved to them
a means of Salvation, without supposing any necessity of having the outward
knowledge of Christ at all; Albeit, it would see^ by the extent of their
Charity, that their Love were very universal, yet they do not establish true
Universal Love more than the other, because nothing is true Universal Love, but
that which naturally proceeds from the true Love of God, and is founded upon
good and sound Principles deduced therefrom, and which has not its rise from
the love of Self, or from a selfish principle; which though it may have a show
of Universal Love, is not really such, else, he that would affirm he believed
that all men, as well the Wicked as the Godly, the Unbelieving as the
Believing, should be saved, and that no wickedness can hinder a Man from being
saved, might be said to be a truer Preacher of Universal Love than any, and
most Charitable of all Men; and yet how would this be justly condemned by all
Christians: There can then be no true Universal Love but that which is built
upon the love of God, and is pure, and of the nature of it: So then those that
affirm that men may be saved (even without the outward knowledge of Christ, and
of the Scriptures) if they improve the light of Nature; whether it be that they
judge that the light of Nature can carry them through to the end, and
accomplish the work, or that they suppose the improving of it, will procure any
such Miraculous Revelation; do not truly Preach or establish Universal Love,
because the same is not founded upon the true Love of God, but is an exalting
of the Nature and Reason of Man, which is really defiled, and proceeds from
Self: Since these Men, for the most part, do look upon Grace, or the operation
of the Spirit in the Saints, as but a mere fancy, so I say these men do not
commend the true Love of God, which is contrary to Self, but only their own
corrupt Nature and Reason, and do therefore really oppose and slight the
Universal Love of God, in that they suppose Man capable of himself, to save
himself, without Christ the alone Mediator, in and by whom the Universal Love
of God to all is only extended, for whom ever God loves, he loves them in
Christ, and no other ways; and this Love of God in Christ cannot be truly
received and entertained to the Salvation of the Soul, but as the Old. Man, the
first Man with his deeds, which are altogether corrupted, and can claim no
share in Man's Salvation, is put off and done away; and as the New Man that
proceeds from a Divine Spiritual Seed, which is not of, nor from Man's Nature,
comes to be born and brought forth in the soul. But much more do they
contradict and declare themselves void of, and Strangers to the Universal Love,
who hold the precise decree of Reprobation, with the other principles depending
thereupon, in believing that the far greater number, not only of Mankind, but
even of those that profess the Name of Christ, are necessarily damned, and that
by Virtue of God's absolute decree, who from all Eternity ordained to Create
them for that very end, and appointed them to walk in such Wickedness, for
which he might Condemn them, and punish them Eternally: So that not only such
as are ignorant of the History of Christ, and of the Scriptures, are certainly
Damned; but even most of those who have the benefit of this Knowledge, are
notwithstanding Damned also, for not right using and applying the same, which
miserable Crime they necessarily fall in, because that God, Albeit, He
publicly, and by his revealed Will does invite them all to Salvation, yet by a
secret Will unknown to Men, He does withold from them all Power and Grace so
to do. Now I say, whoever are of this mind, as all Calvinists generally are,
cannot justly pretend to Universal Love; for seeing they limit the Love of God
to a small number, making all the rest only objects of his Wrath and
Indignation, they must by consequence so limit their own Love also: For God
being the Fountain and Author of Love, no man can extend true Christian Love
beyond his; yea, the greatest and highest Love of any Man, falls infinitely
short of the Love of God, even as far as a little drop of water falls short of
the great Ocean. Now none of these Men, without manifestly contradicting their
own Principles, can pretend to have Love to any of those that are thus
predestined to Death; for what sottishness were it, and inconsistency to
pretend Charity to such so, as to suppose a possibility of Salvation for those
whom God has appointed to be Damned, and to be Sons of Predition; for to say
we ought to have Charity to all, because we know not who is appointed to Life,
or may be called to it, says nothing to solve this difficulty, because even to
such as may be supposed to be Elected, I am not to have Charity, so long as I
see them in Wickedness, and in any unconverted state, for that were to walk
against all true judgment, and a putting light for darkness, and darkness for
light; a calling good, evil; and evil, good; which is expressly forbidden.

Next, this were to make true Christian-Love as blind as the heathens supposed
their god of their Lustful Love to be; for I ought to love Men for some real
good I see in them, as feeling them to partake of, and grow in the Love of God,
and not upon a mere perhaps God may do them good, perhaps they may be called,
unless I believed there were something of God in all given them in order to
call them.

Thirdly: Seeing these Men do believe and affirm that God in this case appoints
the end, so he does the means also; they are not only obliged upon their
Principle without all Charity, to conclude as Damned, and appointed to
Damnation all such as have not the benefit of these means they think needful,
but even all such among themselves enjoying these means in whom appears not,
according to their notion of it, true and convincing tokens of Conversion. And
as this Doctrine naturally leads from any thing like Universal Love. So as I
observed before, it so leaveneth and defiles with an unlovely humor, such as
strictly and precisely hold it, that for most part they are observed to be Men
of peevish and persecuting spirits.

For these two Principles, to wit, that of there being no Salvation without the
Church among Papists, as precisely understanding it of the Church of Rome, and
this of absolute Reprobation among Protestants, are the very root and spring,
from whence flows that Bloody and Antichristian tenet of Persecution for the
case of Conscience; and therefore both it and they are directly contrary and
diametrically opposite to the true Catholick-Christian Love of God.

SECT. V.
Some Principles of Christianity proposed, as they are held by a great body of
People, and whole gathered Churches in Britain and Ireland, which do very well
agree with true Universal Love.
SUch as most commonly complain for the want of Universal Love, do alledg this
defect to proceed from the nature of a Sect, unto which they think this want of
Charity so peculiar, that from thence they conclude that it is impossible
either for any Sect universally to have this Universal Love, or for any Member
of a Sect, so long as he stands to his Principles, or is strictly bound up and
tied to a Sect to have this Universal Love; and indeed this in a great measure
is too true, if the nature of a Sect be rightly understood, and therefore to
avoid mistakes, it will be fit to enquire somewhat in this matter.

A Sect is commonly and universally taken in the worst part, and always so
understood; where it is mentioned in the Scripture, as being either really
understood of such as are justly so termed, Act. 5. 17. Chapter 5. 5. Chapter 26. 5. or
reproachfully cast upon such as ought not to have been so denominated, Act. 24.
5. Chapter 28. 22. For a Sect is a company of People following the Opinions and
Inventions of a particular Man or Men, to which they adhere more, and for which
they are more Zealous than for the simple, plain, and necessary Doctrine of
Christ. But such as are not a Sect, nor of a Sect, are those that follow the
Faith and Doctrines of Christ, and receive and believe the same, as purely
Preached and held forth by him unto them, and not as by the recommendation of
Man, as clouded and encumbred with their interpretations and additions, and so
are mere Christians, and yet true and faithful Ones too; yea, the most True and
Faithful.

Now, which of the several sorts of Christians, are to be accounted Sects, and
which not, is a great Question, and would take a larger Discourse, than is
proper to be incerted in this Place, truly to enquire into it; and therefore,
it shall suffice me at this time, to have Asserted this in General, which, I
judge, will be generally accorded to by All, and leave the Application to each
understanding Reader; for the clearing which, there may several weighty
Observations fall in hereafter: Probably, this will be almost granted by All;
and I am sure, may be truly affirmed, that whatsoever people hold forth, and
preach Doctrines, which in the Nature of them contradict, and are inconsistent
with true Universal Love; Such may truly be termed a Sect, which may be easily
applied to those heretofore-mentioned; and so, consequently, who ever hold
forth Principles and Doctrines consistent and agreeable thereunto, are, and may
truly be esteemed mere Christians, and no Sect. Next, the Nature of a People's
Society, and the Causes drawing them together, with the Method of their being
gathered, does much contribute to evidence, whether they are to be esteemed a
Sect or not; first, whose Fellowship stands merely in Judgment, and in that
which reaches the Understanding, and so are joined together in and for one
Opinion; are only to be esteemed a Sect, however true their Notions may be
supposed to be, for the true Principles and Doctrines of Christ. Albeit, they
do truly reach the Understanding, and require its Assent, yet they are of an
opperative Nature; however, they may be held by one or two Members of the
Church, without working upon their Hearts; yet cannot be held, nor never was by
any entire Society, without purifying their Souls, and reaching to, and working
upon their Hearts, to a true and real Conversion: I mean, upon the greatest,
and most considerable part, (but false Doctrines may be firmly believed by a
whole Society, without having any Operation): for the gathering of the Apostles
and Primitive Christians, was an uniting of Hearts, and not of Heads only:
Those three Thousand Converts were pricked in their Hearts, and not in their
Heads only; yea, where there may be a Dissent in some things in point of
Judgment, if there be this Unity of Heart through the prevailing of the same
Life of Righteousness; yet the true Fellowship is not broken, as appeared in
the Example of the Apostles themselves. Now, these People who hold forth the
Principles and Doctrines, here-after to be mentioned, were not gathered
together by an Unity of Opinion, or by a tedious and particular Disquisition of
Notions and Opinions, requiring an Assent to them, and binding themselves by
Leagues and Covenants thereto; but the manner of their gathering was by a
secret Want, which many truly tender, and serious Souls, in diverse and sundry
Sects, found in themselves; which put each Sect upon the search of something
beyond all Opinion, which might satisfy their weary Souls, even the Revelation
of God's righteous Judgment in their Heart, to burn up the unrighteous Root,
and Fruits thereof; that the same being destroyed, and done away, the inward
Peace and Joy of the Holy Spirit in the Soul, might be felt to abound, and
thence Power and Life to follow him in all his Commandments; and so, many came
to be joined and united together, in Heart and Spirit, in this one Life of
Righteousness, who had long been wandering in the several Sects, and by the
inward Unity, came to be gathered in one Body; from whence, by degrees they
came to find themselves agreed in the plain and simple Doctrines of Christ;
Which external Agreement, as well in Doctrines, as in the Practices necessarily
following thereupon, became as one External bond and tie of their outward and
visible Fellowship obvious to the World, whereby they are distinguished even
to the observation of Man from the several Sects professing the Name of Christ,
as the true Christians of old were by their Adherence to the Orthodox
Principles from other Heretics, that laid claim likewise to be Christians.
and as this inward Power they longed for, and felt to give them victory over
Sin; and bring the Peace that follows thereon, was that whereby they were
brought unto that Unity and Community together; so they came first thence to
accord in the Universal Preaching of this power to all, and directing all unto
it, which is their first and chiefest principle, and most agreeable to this
Universal Love, as I shall hereafter show. And it is very observable, that as
those whose gathering and fellowship arises from this mere unity of Notions and
Opinions, do usually derive their name and designation from the first Authors,
Inventers, and Fomenters of those Opinions, as of old, the Arians, Nestorians,
Manicheans, etc. And of late the Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, Socinians,
Monites, etc. So those people, whose unity and fellowship did arise from their
mutual sense of this Power working in and upon their souls, so that Society
derives not their name from any particular Man, and therefore are
providentially delivered from that great mark of a Sect; but as the Ungodly
will be always throwing some name of Reproach upon the Children and Servants of
God; it being observed, that through the deep and inward operation of this
power in them, a dread took hold on them, not only to the begetting of God's
fear in their hearts, but even to the reaching and instructing of their outward
Man: hence the name of Quakers or Tremblers has been cast upon them, which
serves to distinguish them from others, though not assumed by them; yet as the
Christians of old, albeit the name of Christian was cast upon them by way of
Reproach, gloryed in it, as desiring above all things, to be accounted the
Followers of Christ; so they also are glad that the World reproacheth them as
such who tremble before the Lord, and who work out their Salvation in fear and
trembling. And truly the Lord seems by his Prophets of old, to have foretold
that his Children should be so reproached; as Isa. 66. 5. Hear the Word of the
Lord, ye that Tremble at his Word; your Brethren that hated you, that cast you
out for my Name sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified, and He shall appear to
your joy, and they shall be ashamed. Where a joyful appearance of God is
promised to these Hated and Reproached Tremblers or Quakars, and Jer. 33. 9.
does more clearly Prophecy how this Reproachful Name, when cast upon his
Children, shall be owned and countenanced by the Lord in these very plain and
comfortable words: And it shall become a Name of joy and praise, and an honor
before all the Nattons of the Earth, which shall hear all the good that I do
unto them, and they shall fear and Tremble, or Duake, for all the goodness, and
all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

As the nature of a Sect arises from the love of Self, and its production, so
in the last place there can be no more signal or certain mark of a Sect, then
when a People seek to advance and propagate their way in the strength of their
own Spirits reckoning the Preaching and publishing thereof by their own natural
or acquired parts, without the necessity of the inward motion of the Holy
Spirit, both lawful and commendable; and not only so, but the advancing and
establishing of the same by outward force and violence: For, here is Man
working without God, or the guidance of his Spirit, in his own mere strength
and will, to set up his own Images and Inventions under a pretense of Truths
and pure Christianity; but those that dare not seek to advance even that, which
they are persuaded is Truth, in their own will and spirit, far less by outward
force and violence, but in and by God's Spirit, as he leads and moves to it by
his Life and Power; show that such are not a Sect nor Followers of Man's
inventions, but of Christ alone, waiting to follow Him as He acts and moves
them by his own Spirit and Power, and therefore are no Sectarians, but mere
Christians.

The chief and first Principle then held by those Christians, which as I
observed before, naturally arises, and was assented to by them from their
inward sense that tied them together, is, that there is somewhat of God, some
Light, some Grace, some Power, some measure of the Spirit, some Divine,
Spiritual, Heavenly, substantial Life and Virtue in all Men, which is a
faithful Witness against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness in the heart of
Man, and leads, draws, moves, and inclines the mind of Man to Righteousness,
and seeks to leaven him as he gives way thereunto, into the nature of it self,
whereby an inward, through, and real Redemption may be wrought in the hearts of
all Men, of whatsoever Nation, Country, or Kindred they be, notwithstanding
whatsoever outward knowledge or benefit they be by the Providence of God
necessarily deprived of. Because whatsoever they want of that, yet such a
measure of this Light, Seed, Life, and Word is communicated to all, as is
sufficient truly to convert them from the evil of their ways, purify, and
cleanse them, and consequently bring them to Salvation. And in the affirming of
this, they do not at all exalt Self or Nature, as do the Socinians in that they
freely acknowledge, that Man's Nature is defiled and corrupted, and unable to
help him or further him one step in order to Salvation; judging nothing more
needful then the full and perfect denying and mortification of Self in order
thereunto. Now do they believe this Seed, Light, and Grace, to be any part of
Man's Nature, or any thing that properly and essentially is of Man, but that it
is a free Grace and gift of God, freely given to all Men, in order to bring
them out of the fall, and lead them to Life Eternal. Neither do they suppose
this Seed, Word, and Grace, which is sufficient to lead to Salvation, to be
given to Men without Christ, for they believe it to be the purchase and benefit
of Christ's death, who tasted Death for every Man: So that they confess all to
be derived to them, in and by Christ the Mediator, to whom they ascribe all;
yea, they believe this Light, Grace, and Seed, to be no other but a measure of
that Life and Spirit that was in Christ Jesus; which being in Him, who is the
Head, in the fullness of it, is from Him in whom it recideth, as He is ascended
up unto, and glorified in the Heavens, extended to all Men, in order to redeem
them from sin, and convert them to God.

Thus according to this Principle, without attributing any thing to Self, or to
the Nature of Man, or claiming any thing without Christ, the Universal Love of
God to all Men is exhibited, whereby the means of Salvation by Christ, and
reconciliation unto God is so asserted, that no Man is altogether excluded from
it, but each so reached, as puts him in a capacity to be saved. Such then as
believe and Preach this Doctrine, must of necessity be esteemed great advancers
and asserters of Universal Love, as those that truly establish it, not through
any uncertainty or doubtfulness in themselves, but upon their own firm and
acknowledged principle, since that does necessarily extend their Charity to the
not only supposing, but even concluding Salvation possible, not only to the
several sorts of Christians, but even to such, who by the disadvantage of
Education, and the remoteness of their Habitation, are ignorant of the Name of
Christ; providing that this Seed, Grace, Word and Light, which is in them all,
and the free gift of God to them all, receive place in their hearts, so as to
work out the fruits and nature of Unrighteousness, and to beget them unto
Righteousness, Purity, and Holiness, which according to this Principle is
believed to be very possible where the external knowledge is thus unavoidably
wanting; for albeit, those who hold this Principle, do believe that the outward
knowledge of Christ, and these other advantages which from the use of the
Scriptures are enjoyed among Christians, are very comfortable, and conducing to
facilitate Salvation; yet they reckon them not absolutely needful, holding them
only to be integral and no essential parts of Christianity, for they place the
essence or being of Christianity only in the in the true and real Conversion of
the heart by virtue of the operation of this Light, Seed, and Grace there, Let
not the Reader think strange that I assert this Principle, and enter not upon
the probation of it (having done that largely elsewhere, as in my Apology) it
not being my business here so to do, but only to show how such and such
Principles do not agree with Universal Love, as on the other hand, when I make
mention of other Principles, I do not offer to refute them, it being enough
here to demonstrate that* they are contrary to Universal Love.
even as the essence and being of a Man consists in the unity of soul and body,
which is enough to denominate one a Man; albeit, he should want a Leg, or an
Arm, an Eye, or an Ear, or have some other defect; or even should be destitute
of some of the faculties of the mind, as of the memory, etc. that other Men
have; yet such a one would still, and that truly, be called a Man; albeit, not
a complete and entire Man; yea, those that live in the most Barbarous and
Unciviliz'd places of the World, where they are destitute and ignorant of all
the liberal Arts and Sciences used among us, and of all these conveniences
which so much conduce to the facilitating of Humane society, and accomodating
of Mankind in their living together; I say, those are still truly accounted
Men, as having that which is truly essential or constitutive of a Man as such.
In like manner this Principle supposes the possibility of Salvation, both to
those commonly called Heathens, and to many among the dark and erroneous Sects
of Christianity, in that this essential part of Christianity is extended to
them; albeit, they want those other Integrals and comfortable parts which may,
in and with respect to the Spiritual Man, be fitly compared to these defects
that those Barbarous Nations want, which we enjoy as to the Natural Man; as
none can deny but this Principle is most agreeing to Universal Love: So the
practice of all, even of those that deny it, does evidence and show how
agreeable it is, as well to the Love of God as to right reason; where, when
ever any of the Sects come to deal with a Heathen, or any such, against whom
they cannot urge any thing from Scripture or Tradition, as being Principles not
acknowledged by them, then they are always forced to recur to an inward innate
light in the soul, to which they labor to make manifest their Principles,
(albeit, they differ about the nature and sufficiency of it) yet they are
forced to concede that this is God's Love to Mankind, and that in this the
Universal Love of God is extended to all; so that to every one, to whom they
come to Preach, they may find something by which they may urge or commend their
Doctrine, of which I shall give one singular example out of the words of
Franciscus Xaverius, a Jesuit, whom that Tribe, for the high esteem they have
of him, term the Apostle of the Indies, as it is Recorded in Bernhardus
Varenus, his Descriptio Regni, Japoniae, p. 195. cap. 8. where he puts down the
words of Francis Xaviers Letter, thus, p. 247. The Amargurians, before they
received Baptism, were straightened with an odious and troublesome scruple; to
wit, That God seemed not unto them merciful and benign; who had condemned all
the Japonians before our coming, to Eternal Punishment, especially who ever did
not Worship God according as we Preached; and therefore they said that He (to
wit, God) had wholly neglected the Salvation of all their Predecessors, in
permitting that these miserable souls should altogether be destitute, to their
utter ruin, of the knowledge of saving Truth: This, most odious thought, did
much draw them back from the Worship of the true God; but by the help of God,
this error and scruple was taken from them; for we first did demonstrate unto
them, that the Divine Law was the oldest of all; yea, before any Law was made
by the Ancients, the Japans knew by the teaching of Nature, that it was
unlawful to Kill, Steal, Forswear, and other things contained in the ten Divine
Laws, as was evident in that, when any of them committed these Crimes, they
were tormented by the Pricks of their Consciences, that hence Reason it self
does teach to flee the Evil, and follow the Good, and therefore was implanted
in the minds of all Men by Nature, so that all have the knowledge of the Divine
Law from Nature, and of God the Author of Nature, before Discipline be added,
of which, were it doubted, trial might be made in some body altogether void of
Discipline, who has been educated in some Mountain or Wilderness, without any
knowledge of the Laws of his Country: For if such an one, thus altogether
ignorant and unacquainted with Humane Discipline, were asked, Whether to Kill a
Man, to Steal, and these other things which the Law of God forbids, were sinful
or not; or if they were not right, to forbear these things: Truly, I say, such
an one utterly ignorant of Humane Discipline, would so answer, that it would
easily appear that he were not void of the Law of God. From whence then shall
we judge he has drawn his Notion? unless from God himself, the Author of
Nature: If then this be manifest in Barbarous Men, how much more in Men
civilized and well Educated? which being so, it necessarily follows that the
Divine Law was implanted in Man's heart, before all Laws made by Man: This
Reason was so manifest to them, that they were fully satisfied, and so being
delivered form these snares, did easily subject themselves to the sweet Yoke of
Christ. Thus far Xaverius.

Thus it may seem, that to satisfy these Japonians, that their Forefathers
were not all necessarily Damned; and to show that the Universal Love of God
reached unto them, to put them in a capacity of Salvation: This cunning Jesuit
could not find another way, then by asserting this Principle; albeit, it be no
ways Congruous to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; for these Ancient
Japonians could not be esteemed Members of the Church of Rome; and as not being
such, according to the Romish Principle (who say there is no Salvation without
the Church, that is, without the Church of Rome) must needs have been Damned.

Secondly: That Notion and definition of a Church which naturally arises from
this Principle, and is accordingly believed by the Assertors of it, does also
both very well agree to, and establish this Doctrine of Universal Love; for
where, by virtue of this Seed and Light, purchased and extended by Christ unto
the hearts of all (it being supposed that Men may be truly Converted, and
consequentially united to Christ) it naturally follows that such become Members
of the Church, else none of Old, but the Families of the Patriarchs, and of the
Jews could have been judged to be saved; nor yet any, during all the time of
the Apostasy, which as it is false in it self, will be hardly affirmed by any;
and therefore since such might be saved, they must be esteemed Members of the
Church, without which, in this large sense, there can be no Salvation, as
including the whole Body of Christ, of which Body, who are not, are certainly
excluded; and therefore it is that the Church Catholic or Universal is not so
confined to any Sect, Form, or external Profession, as that those that are not
initiated in those forms, are excluded absolutely from being Members of the
Church, unless it be upon refusal or resistance of the will of God really
manifest to them, as drawing them to the practice of particular things; for it
has pleased God at several times, to require several things, both of
particular Churches and Persons, which he has not of others: As to the Jewish
Converts, to abstain from things Strangled and Blood; and to the Churches of
the Gentiles not to Circumcise, which was permitted to the Christian-Jews for a
time; and from particular Persons many particular things have been required,
which albeit, they were not general Obligations upon all Christians, yet in so
far as manifested to, and required of them, were sufficiently obligatory; and
their disobedience to them should have been in them a breach of their general
obligation of Obedience which we owe to God, in all things He requires, and
consequently pernicious, how-ever others, to whom they have never been
revealed, nor required, might have been saved without them.

Thirdly: As the asserting of Principles, which commend the Love of God, and
show the great extent of it to Mankind, do most agree with Universal Love, so
this People in another chief Principle of theirs do greatly show it; for as by
the Preaching of this Universal Principle of the Light, they show the extension
of God's Love to all; so by Preaching that God both does, and is willing to
reveal his Will immediately by his own Spirit in the hearts of all those that
receive his Light, that so they may be guided, acted, and lead thereby, and
know the Mind of God thus inwardly immediately in themselves; they hold forth
the intension of God's Love to all those that follow and obey him; so that they
neither bind up this being lead by the Spirit of God only to themselves, nor
stint it to singular and extraordinary occasions, but hold it forth as a common
and Universal privilege to all true Christians and Members of the Church. Now
this Doctrine greatly commends the Love of God, and establishes the Principle
of Universal Love in that it show how Universally God has offered this blessed
Privilege to all, in that He has given his Light unto all; upon the receiving
of which, this immediate guidance of the Spirit follows as a necessary
Concomitant; for such as deny this immediate Revelation of God's Will by his
Spirit in the hearts of his Children, to be a common and Universal Privilege
to all true Christians and Members of the Church, must needs suppose the
knowledge of his Will necessary for them, to be communicated to them by some
other external means, as by outward Writings and Precepts; in so much that all
such as are robbed of this Benefit, are necessarily excluded from partaking of
the Universal Love of God, in order to the Salvation of their Souls.

Fourthly: As the confining of the Gifts and Graces of God to certain external
forms and Ceremonies, are directly opposite and contrary to Universal Love,
such as the limiting of the work of the Ministry to outward Ordination, and to
a particular Tribe of Persons, the making humane Parts and Arts more necessary
thereto than the Grace of God; so that the Grace of God is not judged
sufficient to make a Man a Minister, or to privilege him to Preach without
those other Artificial and Ceremonial things: So I say on the other hand, those
People to the commending of the Universal Love of God to all, but especially in
the visible Church, do affirm, that as this Light and Grace of God is given to
all, in order to save them; so whoever find himself truly called in his heart
thereby, and fitted to Minister to others, may lawfully Preach and Declare to
Others the good things that God has done for his soul, and direct and instruct
them, as by the same Grace he is enabled, how they may come to the experience
and attainment of the same things, albeit, he have no outward Ordination or
Call from Men, be not initiated in their Ceremonies and Orders, nor yet
furnished with their Learning and School-education. This greatly commends and
holds forth the Love of God, because it does not confine the Ministry unto such
a narrow compass, as by the several Sects it is done; but supposes, that among
those that had not the Scriptures, and outward knowledge, there might have been
Ministers or Preachers of Righteousness, as it was said of Noah, that he was
one who was ere the Scriptures were writ; and Job was another; besides Socrates
amongst the Greeks, Pythagoras amongst the Latins, and several others that
might be named among the Arabians, Indians, and Ethiopians; and this Doctrine
does very much hold forth the Universal Love of God in the visible Church, in
that it excludes none from Ministering his Gift, as he has it; albeit, a poor
Tradesman, or Mechanic Men, as is done among the far greater parts of the
Sects of Christendom, by the presumptuous Usurpation of them.

Fifthly: This People do greatly commend and hold forth the Universal Love of
God to all, in denying the use of outward carnal things which perish in the
using; such as Washing or Sprinkling with Water, or eating of Bread and Wine,
to be the Seals of Gods Covenant with Man, or to be the means or Channels, by
which Grace and Spiritual refreshment is Ministered to the soul; for thereby
they confine not Gods Love in the communicating of his Gifts and Graces to the
application, or not using of Elementary things, which may be as truly as to the
matter of them, performed by the most wicked and greatest Hypocrite of the
World, as by the most Godly and sincere, as do the greatest part of the Sects
among Christians, who make such a noise of the Sacraments and Ordinances, and
do so quarrel and jangle about their matter and manner of performance, but do
affirm and believe that increase of Grace, and refreshment in and by the Life
of Christ, is conveyed unto the souls of all those that are Faithful, as this
Seed receives a place, and grows up in their hearts: Without these outward
Ceremonies, this cannot be performed but by such as are sincere and Godly
indeed; for such can only be truly Faithful, and wait in that place where Grace
and Refreshment, Strength and Power, Wisdom and Courage, Patience and all other
good gifts are received.

Sixthly: These People do much establish Universal Love in that they affirm
Persecution of Men, for the matter of their Consciences to be Unchristian and
Unlawful; believing that as God can only inform and enlighten the Conscience,
so it is contrary to the Universal Love of God, for Men to seek to force and
restrain it, as has hitherto been sufficiently shown.

Lastly: They do very truly and observably establish Universal Love, in that
they Preach Love to Enemies, and the necessity of bearing and suffering
Injuries without Revenge, holding it Unlawful for Christians to fight or use
carnal Weapons, even to resist such as oppose them, and wrongfully prejudice
them: As this is most agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ, so is
it to the Universal Love of God* whose long-suffering-Patience, even toward
the Wicked, Stiff-necked, and Rebellious, after many provocations, does above
all declare his Love, in which they cannot pretend to be Followers of him, who
believe it Lawful for them to Revenge every Injury, to give Blow for Blow, and
Knock for Knock, and so know not what it is patiently to receive and suffer an
Injury, if they have any opportunity of revenging themselves, and so
consequently cannot have Universal Love, which necessarily supposes and
includes Love to Enemies; and he that will Beat, Kill, and every way he can,
destroy his Enemy, does but foolishly contradict himself, if he pretend to Love
him; and those that do not Preach and Practice Love to Enemies, but that which
is quite contrary, cannot justly pretend either to the Doctrine or Practice of
Universal Love. Wherefore I desire the Reader may make Application hereof, as
to the several Sects of Christians, and examine whose Principles and Practices
do most agree herewith, and seriously consider whether there be any entire
united Body of Christians, except these here mentioned, who do unanimously hold
forth so many Doctrines, so directly establishing and agreeing to true
Universal Love.

Writ in Aberdeen Prison the first Month, 1677.
THE END.

