A SERMON Preached at St. Mary Le Bow, ON Whitsunday, May xxxi. 1691.

AT THE CONSECRATION Of the Most Reverend Father in God JOHN Lord Archbishop of
CANTERBURY, And Primate of all England.

By RA. BARKER, Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fellow of Gonvil
and Caius College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for James Adamson at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1691.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY.
MY LORD,
THAT your Grace was pleased kindly to Accept this my Mean Performance at your
Consecration, was, I do believe, for the Plainness and Sincerity of it, which I
always knew to be most Acceptable to you; and what you would choose to
Countenance in the Clergy, rather than any thing of Panegyric, which might
perhaps have been expected on such an Occasion. And therefore I shall only beg
your Acceptance, of these my first Fruits; as a Hearty Acknowledgment of those
great Favors, which for many Years together you have Vouchsafed to

Your Grace's, Most Humble, And most Faithful Servant, RA. BARKER.

A Consecration Sermon* etc.
St. JOHN, xxi. 17. He said unto him the third time, Simon, Son of Jonas,
love thou me? Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time,
love thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou know all things; thou
know that I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my Sheep.
THESE Words are part of the Gospel, for this great occasion; in which that our
Savior should no less than three times put this searching Question to St.
Peter, argues something in it very remarkable, both with respect to him, and
all other the Bishops and Pastors of his Flock. With respect to St. Peter, we
may consider our Savior applying himself to him, rather than to any of the
rest, his putting the Question to him three times, his calling him Simon Son of
Jonas, and from thence gather (as many of the Ancient Fathers do) that all this
was to restore him to his former Office and Dignity, from which he had fallen,
by denying his Master thrice, and so no new Privilege, nor enlargement of his
Power; for had St. Peter thus understood it, would he have been grieved at our
Savior's so often insisting on it? They that would have this the meaning of
it, think they cannot hear of it, or make others hear of it too often.

Let others find out, if they can, the height of Power and Dominion given to
St. Peter here, over all, even the Apostles themselves; it will be a more safe
and comfortable Employment for us, to join in the Heavenly Rejoicing, which St.
Peter's Repentance did occasion, and to admire the goodness of our Lord, his
tender Pity and Compassion, his readiness to forgive and receive into Favor
this straying Sheep; and from thence learn to do the like toward others. See
how wisely our Savior prevents any ill use, which might have been made of St.
Peter's Fall, that it might not lessen him among the Apostles, that it might
not undermine the effect of his Preaching: That he that was of a fierce and
warm Temper, might from himself learn, how to pity and treat others in their
Faylings. And lastly, to teach us all, Candor in our Censures, Prudence in our
Judgings, Charity in our Hopes and Expectations, after Slips and Faylings; and
to be as ready to observe Men's Repentance, as their Faults; Men's Usefulness,
as their Miscarriages. Our Savior could remember his Weeping, more than his
Denial; and is more earnest in publishing his Love, than his Fear. Oh merciful
Savior, who art more strict to mark what we do well, than what we do amiss!
And can so remember our Miscarriages, as to make them the happy occasion of
our greater Love, Inspire us with this Wisdom, Increase this Love in us

Before I treat of the Duty it self, give me leave to observe, with what great
Care and Caution, our Savior commits this great Charge unto him; how strictly
he examins, how narrowly he pryes into his very Soul; not that he wanted St.
Peter's judgment of himself; for he knew him better than he did himself; but to
teach us with what wariness and strictness, Persons are to be admitted unto
this great Work: Although we cannot know their Hearts, we may know their Lives;
though we cannot see, we may require them to declare, with what Mind and
Affection they undertook this Office; Whether they find themselves moved by the
Holy Ghost; Whether they act sincerely and honestly, their Consciences bearing
them Witness in the Holy Ghost: That not merely for any secular Ends or
Preferments, which the Catechismus ad Parochios will tell them is Sacrilege;
but out of pure love unto their great Master, and an holy desire to do him
service in the feeding of his Sheep.

In treating of which, I shall chiefly have Respect to our great Apostle St.
Peter, and, from his Writings and Example, endeavor with all plainness, to
recommend this great and seasonable Duty; and I could wish with all my Heart,
that they who most admire him, would spend their pains in learning this Duty
from him, rather than inforceing such Powers and Privileges upon him, as do
null the great design both of his Life and Doctrine.

And so I come to consider the main Design of these words, and in them, First,
the Duty it self, Feeding Christ's Sheep: And then, Secondly, our love to
Christ, as the Ground and Foundation, the Guide and Measure of it.

I begin with the first of these, the Trust and Charge of Feeding Christ's
Sheep, which I shall a little enlarge upon, because it has been most
shamefully mistaken, abused and neglected; and when we have a fair Prospect of
the Duty, it will, I believe, set us in a right Way, and be no small advantage
in setting forth our Love to Christ, as the surest Ground and Measure of it.

And here I shall not Criticize upon the Words, which have made such a noise in
the World, (...), because they are promiscuously used in this place; and that
which others have insisted most upon, used but once, and the other twice; nor
shall I nicely press the Metaphor of Shepherd and Sheep, but rather consider
the general design of it, from the care and watchfulness of a Shepherd, in
preserving, nourishing and improving his Flock, to infer the like in every one
that loves the Lord Jesus, and is entrusted with his Sheep, that they may be
treated as his Sheep, and fitted for his Service; which may be done these three
ways; by providing them with convenient Food, by watching over them, and being
examples to them.

First by providing them with convenient Food, such as will be sure to nourish
and do them good, which in St. Peter's judgment, is the sincere Milk of the
Word; that Word, which by the Gospel is preached unto us, that is, the Holy
Scriptures; that most sure Word of Prophecy, unto which we shall do well, if in
all our Preaching we take exactest heed, as unto that Light which is to shine
into all the dark corners of our Souls, that Christ's Sheep may hear his voice,
and not another, that they may know him, and follow him. Should not Christ's
Sheep know the mind of Christ, and be instructed in the Words of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as Titus and the first Christians were taught that sound Doctrine, that
Edifying which is in Faith, that Depositum which he committed to his Chuch? And
can we better express our love to our Lord or his Sheep, than by giving them
the Food which he has appointed for them, that sanctifying Word, which is able
to make them perfect and save their Souls?

And shall any be such Stewards of God's Grace, as to hoard up this in a
Napkin, as too luscious and over-light Nourishment for Sheep? Give them some
latter Traditions, some Pictures or Legends, which may keep them Humble and
Ignorant: Better be lean than wander, better starved than lost; the Hireling
may think so, because he is to have the Fleece of such as die alone; but the
good Shepherd whose own the Sheep are, knows very well that Sheep are more apt
to wander, through want of Food than through Plenty, and he knows better how to
prevent surfeiting than by starving, can easilier teach Humility, than see so
many perish for want of Knowledge; can there be a greater Error, than to part
with our Scriptures for fear of Error; and because some wrest them* must others
not see them? Because the Lambs suck, must the Sheep do so too? Good God, that
such Nonsense should pass for Reasoning! that Christ's Sheep should have such
Shepherds!

But secondly* to feed does include an Holy Zeal and concern for them to
preserve and secure them, as much as may be, both from Sin and Error; to watch
for their Souls, as they that must give an Account of them to the great
Shepherd; not suffering them to fall into the Hands of such (and such there
are) who if they get them into their Hands, will, as St. Peter fore warns us,
make Merchandise of them through Covetousness and fained Words, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
such False Prophets, such Damnable Heresies did he foresee were coming into the
World. And therefore he explains Feeding the Flock which is among you, by
taking the oversight thereof, being acquainted with the State and Condition of
their Flocks, their Dangers and Temptations, their Capacities and
Circumstances; that so their Preachings and Instructions, their Care and
Inspection may reach them, and come home to them; may be suited to their
several conditions and present wants: The good Shepherd is as much concerned to
fold his Sheep safely, as to provide them with Plenty; to preserve them Sound,
as Fat; to take care of the Sick and Weak, to recover the Lost and Wandering:
For which purposes he has his Tarr and his Crook, the Spirit of Meekness and a
Rod of Power; Power to Rebuke, to Censure, to Exclude, for their own good, and
for the good of the rest: St. Peter knew how to treat a dissembling Ananias.

Thus Feeding does comprehend all that Spiritual Power and Authority, which
Christ left with his Church; and which would not miss of its designed Effects,
if kept within its due Bounds and Measures; and such as our Apostle has taken
care to fence it in with; a due Respect to the Civil Rights and Interests of
Kings, and the Governors which are Commissioned by them; such as is consistent
with Modesty and Humility, that Pity and Compassion, that unfeigned love of
the Brethren, which is due to our Fellow Christians as they are Christ's Sheep,
God's Lot and Heritage. All which Expressions, so far as I can gather from St.
Peter's use of them, are a safe and good state of the Case, betwixt the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Power, which has puzelled and endangered so many
Undertakers in it; some of which have felt the Weight of that Power, which they
themselves have unwarrantably advanced, and understood at last, what exercising
the Authority of Kings and Lording it over their Brethren did signify, both in
Christ and in St. Peter, when they so earnestly forbad them.

If Pastor do signify sometimes Spiritual, sometimes Temporal Rulers, it is
altogether as unwarrantable and unsafe from thence, to mix the Temporal with
the Spiritual, as to mix the Spiritual with the Temporal; for Kings and Rulers
may as justly hence make themselves Priests, as Priests make themselves Rulers
and Kings: If (...) signified among the Grecians the Prince and chief Rulers;
may every Bishop claim as great Power and Authority as ever they exercised?
Then may every Christian make himself a King or Priest, or what he will; as he
may pick up some Word or Expression, used among the Poets or better Authors,
for the purpose he would have it.

But to return, Feeding does imply in the third place, and according to our
Savior's use of it, being exemplary, and going before the Flock, according to
the Custom of those Countries; and is expressed in our Apostle, by being
Examples to the Flock; in all things showing themselves Patterns of good Works,
in Faith, in Conversation; for a good Life is the surest Ground, the best
Disposition for the Understanding of our Duty, gives the greatest Courage and
Assurance in the Performance of it, adds the greatest advantage and furtherance
in the Success thereof.

I say it is (First) the surest Ground and best Qualification for the
Understanding the business we go about: They were the Holy Men of God, says
our Apostle, who in all Ages were moved by the Holy Ghost; they that do his
Will, shall know of his Doctrine: For is not our Religion a Practical Knowledge,
a Doctrine of Godliness, the Work of Righteousness? And shall we separate the
Knowledge, from the Practice, the Doctrine from the Godliness? That is, would we
walk in the ways of God, without stirring one step? All practical Things are
gained by Practice, and I am sure in nothing more than in Religion; as it does
by degrees quit us of those Prejudices and Entanglements, which debase our
Understandings and Affections, clog our Inclinations, and discourage our
Attempts; as it gives us the true Relish of the Ease and Pleasure of Religion;
as it gives God's Spirit the Opportunity to concur and work with us,

2ly. As it gives Courage, and Assurance, in the performance of our Duty. St.
Peter styles such an one, a Living stone, and does not think himself lessened,
by our Saviors comparing the practical Christian, to the house built upon the
rock. He that loves Goodness, may with confidence and a good grace, recommend
it; he that hates Vice, may with boldness, and ex animo, reprove and outface
it. How sneakingly, how coldly must that Man act, who is bound to reprove what
he dearly loves, and recommend that, which he has no relish for, no
acquaintance with? Is not this acting of a Part, and turning our very Churches
into Stages? If our business be Religion, for God's sake, let us be religious.

3dly. This gives the best Advantage and Furtherance, in the success of our
Duty. Such believe, and are sure they speak from their Heart, and from their
own Experience, which is always accompanied with life, and warmth, piercing to
the very heart, and inward affections of the hearers, has the advantage of
men's Senses, as well as of their Understandings, and every where besets them,
that the Righteous find such a man's Conversation, an Exhortation; and the
Wicked find it a Reproof to their ways; such a Preacher cannot be silenced,
when his mouth, when even his breath is stopped, he yet speaks.

And here give me leave to instance in one thing, as particularly exemplary in
Pastors, and the chief of Pastors, and that is Patience and Constancy, Courage
and Resolution, under the many sufferings and discouragements, which they are
to meet with, in the discharge of their duty: Our Savior enjoining St. Peter
to feed his Sheep, immediately adds to it, Verily verily, I say unto thee, when
thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would,
but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another
shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not; signifying both his
death, and what treatment he was to expect in the discharge of this duty. Our
Savior, who had foretold his Denial, here foretells, and by that commends and
increases his Patience and Courage; and being thus converted, how does he, both
in his Practice and Preaching, endeavor to strengthen his Brethren? How stout
and bold was he in his Preaching to the People, in arguing with the
Magistrates, in taxing the Sanhedrim. He saw there was no standing against that
stream, but with an holy Confidence and Christian Courage. He was slighted,
despised, persecuted, for showing them the way of Salvation, but against all,
he was a true Rock, unshaken, unaffected with it.

His Epistles are full of Exhortations to this indispensable Duty, full of
encouragements, under these unavoidable Trials. He tells us, it is part of our
Calling to suffer wrongfully, to be buffetted and reviled, to bear the greatest
scoffs and slanders, the greatest indignities and persecutions, and yet for
conscience toward God, to endure it all, and neither be afraid of their
terror, nor yet troubled, but to be armed with the same mind that was in
Christ; yea to rejoice under all this, as being thereby partakers of Christ's
sufferings. Was not our great Shepherd thus abused, thus stricken and smitten,
and was it not thus, that he entered into his glory; and that he accomplished
the saving of his Flock, and shall the Servant expect to be better treated than
his Master? Shall any be such a Satan as to be far from suffering, and not to
savor these things which be from God? Let us not then for these things, faint
or draw back, we have a faithful Creator, who has the charge of our Souls, we
have the promise of his Spirit to rest upon us, to support and comfort us, and
we have this assurance, that when his glory shall be revealed, we shall be glad
with exceeding joy.

These Considerations carried on our Apostle, in the many years service which
he did the Church, and he was so far from shrinking under his Persecutions,
that he rather affected the aggravation of them in his desires, as we are told,
to be crucified in a more disgraceful and painful posture than his Master; thus
did this good Shepherd, lay down his life for his Sheep, and therein manifest
that he loved Christ, and his Sheep more than life it self; for herein is Love,
that a Man lay down his life for his Sheep. Would we then have an unerring
proof of our Love, let us ask our selves, Can we look afflictions in the face?
endure hardship and despise shame? Can we count all things loss and dung for
the fellowship of Christ's sufferings? if we suffer can we count it a gift? if
reproached, can we think it honorable? if evil entreated, can we exult and be
glad? Whilst we bear about the dying of our Lord Jesus; can we feel the life of
Jesus manifested in our mortal bodies?

These are the Expressions, which he will sometimes seek of our Love, these are
the instances which others will seek, and depend upon from us when there is
occasion, as that which must support and encourage them to bear their shares of
the afflictions of the Gospel; we must lead up in the day of trial, we must
stand against the Wolves, and the Foxes, (are we not in the midst of them?) and
have we not seen the comfortable effects of our Pastors standing in the gap,
the courage and deliverance which it occasioned to the whole Flock?

This is that found Love, which in the New Testament is joined with Patience,
and to walk in Love, is to walk so as Christ also loved us, and gave himself
for us, that is such a Love as holds out under trials and sufferings, and
neither waxes cold, nor remitteth; which elsewhere is made the highest pitch
and perfection of our Love. Herein is our Love made perfect, that we have
boldness in the day of Judgment, that is, that we be constant, and courageous
in our Profession, and Duty, notwithstanding all the attempts, and proceedings
of our Adversaries, and are neither frighted at the greatness of the Work, nor
dismayed at the opposition which it meets with: and so I come to the second
thing I proposed, which was to consider our Love to Christ, as the Ground, and
Foundation, as the Guide and Measure, of this Duty.

2. Love is indeed the affection, and disposition of the Soul, but such as is
active, and vigorous, and will display it self, in proper applications, to the
thing loved, so as the please and oblige it, as far as it has opportunity:
Thus to love Christ, is to keep his Commandments, that is, to do that which he
delights to see done, and so this Love reaches not only all our Heart, and all
our Soul, but also all our Strength.

We must then judge of our own Love by the effects of it, and we must judge the
effect of it, to be proper and genuine by the sutableness, and acceptableness
of them, to the persons loved, especially, where they can judge better than we
can. To know then the greatness, the sincerity of a Pastors Love, is by his
care of Christ's Flock, and how suitable and acceptable this is to Christ, may
be gathered from Christ's love and concern for it: that he purchased it with
his Blood, that his whole Life, all that he did and suffered whilst here, all
that he does now transact in Heaven, as our High Priest, our Mediator and
Advocate, was and is for the purchasing, the purifying, the securing, and
increasing this Flock.

3. We are then his Substitutes, carrying on his Work, and whilst we do that,
we are made the Conduits, and Pipes through which his Love is transmitted unto
them, the conveyancers and inlargers of his Love; and can any thing be more
acceptable to him? Can we say we love him, whilst we restrain his Affections,
stint his Bowels, stop the current of his Love? His Love wants nothing, to make
even Him, if I may so say, and all others happy, but the diffusing and
communication of it, which therefore is the greatest Service, the most
acceptable Love unto him.

And since he has made us the Instruments, and Dispensers of his Love, we then
love him most, we please him best, when we are active, when we are successful
in it, when we make his Love known unto Men, in Preaching his sincere Word;
when we use that Authority, which Christ has left us, for the edifying of his
Church; when we hazard all that is dear to us, our Ease, our Credit, our Lives,
that we may at any time, and by any means comply with his Will, carrying on the
design of his Love.

4. The Work is great and hard indeed, but as the Apostle says of all the
Commandments, 1 John v. 2. upon this Principle of Love, they are not grievous,
if we sincerely love Christ, ((...) Ephesians. vi. 24. so as not to be corrupted by
the baits and allurements of this World) this great, this hard Work, will be
but the Labor of Love, and that we know is the gentlest, and easiest of all
Labors, and in many cases cannot brook the name of Labor: for in all Love,
the Spirits flowing to the Heart, make the person active and vigorous, able and
willing to take pains. This Love of Christ is a most active busy Principle,
always putting us in remembrance of this Duty, always stirring up the Grace of
God, which was given us, by the imposition of Hands, at our entrance upon this
Work, and continually pushing us on in our endeavors, and making our very
endeavors both to enlarge our Strength and Love, that we shall find it a
Spirit of Power, and of a ready Mind.

Love must be the inward Principle of this Duty; this Duty must be the outward
expression and proof of this Love; Love without Duty is but empty Complement,
Duty without Love is but Toil and Drudgery.

5. When then, we enter upon this Work, is it not necessary, that we should do
it with a solemn Profession, that we trust, we are moved by the Holy Ghost; by
this Divine Principle of Love unto Christ, and desire to serve him in it? He
that enters not thus into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, it
is to steal and to rob, and I wish such would seriously ask themselves, when
they profess to be moved by the Holy Ghost, whether they do not lie unto the
Holy Ghost? And as this Love must be the first and great Principle of this
Duty, so must it be the Guide and Measure of it, we must feed Christ's Sheep out
of love to them, as well as unto Christ; with Love unfeigned, and a pure Heart
fervently: For what we do to them, we do to Christ; what Meekness, and
Tenderness, what Bowels of Mercy and Compassion, what long Suffering and
obliging Behavior we show to them, (and these I take to be some of the most
proper expressions of Love,) are thereby done to Christ himself.

6. Can we love him, and at the same time persecute him? Can our Bowels yearn
toward him whilst we are tearing out his very Bowels, and making havoc of all
his Members? Can we be kindly affectioned toward Him, and above measure mad
against his Sheep? If the Sheep will not starve her Lamb, to spare us all her
Milk, shall we suck her Blood? Because the Lamb cannot feed on such strong meat
as the old one does, shall we starve her? Because some go astray, must they
become meat to all the Beasts of the Field? Ezekiel. xxxiv. 5. and all this out of
pure Pity and Compassion? Ah weeping Crocodile! Ah ye Holy Fathers of the
Inquisition!

Is this Christ's way of Feeding? Is it not that spoken of by the Prophet, as
the severest threat. Thus says the Lord my God, Feed the flock of the
slaughter; whose possessours slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and
they that sell them, say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich: and their own
shepherds pity them not. Zach. xi. 4, 5. If this be the Spirit of Christ, that
Love which is the whole of the Gospel, the filling up, and completion of it;
surely the Gospel it self, is Transubstantiated, and worser abused, than ever
Christ's Body was: that Bread should be made his Body, is not so great a
Prodigy, as that Cruelty, should be Love; Oppression, Mercy; Fire, Dragooning,
and Devastation, should now be the Bowels of Christ, and the tender Mercies of
the Gospel.

7. But let the Extravagances of some, make us wiser, and teach us such a Love,
as may preserve us from being thus beloved: let us Instruct with Meekness,
Correct with Mildness, gently leading on, as the Flock is able to bear, that
they who are not of our Minds, may yet partake of our Affections: they who are
not in our Congregations, may yet be in our Hearts: that although we do not
Convert them, we may yet Convince them: if we cannot satisfy them, we may be
able to satisfy our own Consciences, both now, in the presence of Christ, and
of all the World.

Feeding does imply something more than just setting Meat before any, it is the
doing it, in such a manner, as may do them most good, it is the Kindness, and
the Seasonableness of an Entertainment, which does recommend it. The Shepherd,
the Parent, the Nurse, are feign to study the Palate, the Stomach, the Strength
of those they are to Diet, or else they may Weaken, and Starve them with good
Fare: and I have often observed, some Truths, proposed in such a manner, as
have provoked the person whom they should, and might have instructed.

Would you persuade a Man of small Courage, to decline such an occasion of
quarreling, by telling him, that to your knowledge he is a Coward, the Argument
is the worst Provocation; and it is just the same, to convince a Man of Error,
by calling him Heretic, and then railing against Heresy: it may well be
questioned, whether this has not made more Heretics, than ever it Convinced.

Is not the Duty of a Pastor expressed by his beseeching, praying, obliging,
winning? Such I am sure was S. Paul's Method. And is not the Bishop to be
Patient, able to bear the Infirmities of those that are in the wrong? Is he not
to behave himself with all lowliness, with long Suffering, and forbearing in
Love? Are they not to please their Flocks for their good, unto Edifying,
showing all Meekness toward all Men, even them that oppose themselves, (...).
and is not Meekness a yielding Temper, a steping back that it may more surely
gain its great and main end? Must not the Bishop be one of a good Report, in
Credit with his Flock, one whom they have a good Opinion of, one whom they find
to love both the Truth, and them: the Truth for their sakes, and them for
Christ's.

For when all is done, most Men do hear with their Affections, and there is no
coming at their Understandings, but by them; we lose our labor, if we think to
storm that Fort without gaining these Outworks, and seeing it is so, we must
speak to Men as they are capable of hearing; perhaps it is thus on purpose; to
teach us, that Love is as valuable, as many Truths, that it is the way of
gaining all. Has not God commanded us to follow the Truth in Love? has he not
resolved, that he will teach the meek his ways? that he will not accept all
Knowledge, all Faith (and what can Truth it self aim at more) without Charity?

It is not the prerogative of Truth to convince, it is but the Way, not the
End, we water, but God gives the increase; we propose, but God convinces; we
rebuke, but it is God who gives Repentance. What Pride, what Presumption then
is it, for any to be angry and peevish, if so soon as they have watered, the
increase does not appear, if upon their proposing, the Person is not presently
convinced, if upon their rebuking he show no Repentance? And shall any do well
to be angry in these cases? Does not all such Passion fly in the face of God
himself, who is pleased to withhold his Concurrence? either because they
proceed not in his way, did not rebuke with Meekness, or because they claimed
too great a share in it themselves, they must have them to be their Converts;
or lastly, because God knows better than we, when to interpose and bestow his
Mercy, that the power may be of God and not of Man, that it may answer his
ends, rather than theirs. I have been the longer upon this, because I do
believe, that our feeding in Love, is loving of Christ, the Object different,
but the same Affection; for that very Union which makes Christ to be one with
them, makes our Love of them, to be our Love of Christ; and that Feast of Love,
which we are going to partake of, makes us to be one with Christ, as it unites
us in Love and Good Will toward each other, whereby we being many, become one
Body, one Church, the members of Christ, and of each other. To conclude all,

Suffer, I beseech you, a word of Exhortation, and let me once, twice, and a
third time, enforce this Duty, that if you love Christ, that as you love
Christ, that as you desire your Love may be approved, and enlarged by him, you
would feed, and thus feed his Sheep, gathering the Lambs with your Arms, and
carrying them in the Bosom, gently leading those that are with young, and
fetching back the lost upon your shoulders. These are the Expressions which God
by his Prophet, and Christ in his Gospel are pleased to make use of, setting
forth thereby their great Care and tender Concern for their Sheep; and can you
take a better Course? Can you follow a better Pattern than to be merciful as
your Heavenly Father is merciful, than to be sent, as Christ himself was, to
seek and to save? May you so faithfully discharge this great Duty, that Christ
may own and bless whatsoever you do for him and his; and the God of Peace who
brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect to do
his Will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, to whom be
Glory for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for James Adamson.
I. A Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy, in answer to a Book of Mr. David
Clarkson; lately published, Entitled Primitive Episcopacy: by Henry Maurice,
D. D. Octavo.

II. Vita Reginaldi Poli, Cardinalis ac Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi; and Acta
Disceptationis inter Legatos Angliae and Galliae in Concilio Constantiensi, de
utriusque Gentis Dignitate and Praerogativa; in Conciliorum Tomis desiderata.
Libri Rarissimi, olim quidem Editi, sed paucis noti, ac nullis facile obvii.
Octavo.

III. Pauli Colomesii Observationes sacrae, Editio secunda, auctior and
emendatior; accedunt ejusdem Paralipomena, de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, and
Passio sancti Victoris Massiliensis, ab eodem* emendata: Editio quarta and
ultima long auctior and emendatior. Oct.

IV. The Travels of Monsieur de The venot into the Levant. In three* parts,
viz. 1. Into Turkey. 2. Persia. 3. The East Indies. Folio.

V. Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [ The Religion of Protestants, a safe way
to Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents; and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's never before printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Motives. Quarto.

VI. A Treatise of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein its Rise and Progress
are Historically considered. Quarto:

VII. A Treatise proving Scripture to be the Rule of Faith; writ by Reginald
Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, before the Reformation, about the year 1450.

VIII. Doubts concerning the Roman Infallibility. 1. Whether the Church of Rome
believe it. 2. Whether Jesus Christ or his Apostles ever Recommended it. 3.
Whether the Primitive Church knew, or used that way of deciding Controversies.

IX. A brief Historical Account of the Behavior of the Jesuits and their
Faction, for the first twenty five Years of Q. Elizabeth's Reign; with an
Epistle of W. Watson a Secular Priest; showing how they were thought of by
other Romanists of that time. Quarto.

X. A brief Examination of the present Roman Catholic Faith, contained in Pope
Pius his new Creed, by the Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and their own Modern
Writers. Quarto.


