William Michel UNMASQUED:

OR, The Staggering Instability of the pretended Stable Christian Discovered,
his Omissions observed, and weakness unvailed.

In his late faint and feeble Animadversions by way of Reply to a Book
Entitled TRUTH cleared of CALUMNIES.

Wherein The Integrity of the Quakers Doctrine is the second time Justified,
and Cleared from the Reiterate, Clamorous but Causeless Calumnies of this
Cavilling Cetechist.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

John 16. 2. They will put you out of their Synagogues, yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think he does God good service.

1 John 4. 4. Ye are of God little Children, because greater is he that is in
you, than he that is in the World.

3 John 10. Wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds (which he does)
prating against us with malicious words.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

The Preface TO THE READER.
READER,
HAving seriously perused W. M. his late Animadversions upon my Book, I find my
Judgment of it, though a party concerned, to jump with that which is the sense
of several juditious persons, who neither own nor walk in that Profession I am
in; and therefore can the less he suspected of partiallity, viz: that they
coutain nothing of a solid or satisfactory reply; for though he seems to take
notice of all the particulars mentioned, yet he omits in many, more then the
half of what is said by me concerning them, and against that which he does
mention in my name, his most frequent Arguments are without any Proof; having
no other bottom but his own Judgment, thoughts and conjectures, whereby it
seems, forgetting or mistaking his work, he plays the Catechist rather then
the Disputant. This put me to some stand, whether it was fit to give him any
Reply; though truly such as will be at the pains to compare his with my last,
will need little further, yet knowing how many are apt to take things upon
trust, and to receive Misrepresentations concerning us, who are a People so
generally Reproached, I found it expedient to Write this succinct Reply, which
may lead the Reader to a narrow observation of the invalidity of W. M. his work
against us, and may present in short his most Obvious Omissions, his most
manifest Contradictions, unvail his Disingenuity, lay open his Weakness, and
show his Unstabillity, especially so far as he has deserved; most of these
Arguments he used in his Dialogue, as not being able further to mantaine them,
and discover how faintly such new ones as he, does now bring forth, millitate
aginst us. Let it not startle thee that so small a bulk as this is should answer
his, for thou may perceive several pages of his taken up in the Cappital
Letters of the contents of his many heads and subdivided Sections, which makes
it not unlike the City Mindus whereof the Ancients spoke, whose Gates were so
disproportionable in greatness to the quantity of the Town, that a certain
Philosopher is said to have advised the Citizens to shut them, least the City
should flee out at them. We may ver well so far extend the parallel, as to
aver, That the Contained in no ways answers to the Contents; there is a deal of
more Heads, then either Heart or Horns, several Sections but small Substance,
and a great show of Method, but very little Matter. I confess I might have far
more enlarged this Duply, had I taken notice of all the Impertinencies which
herein comes under my observation, but that the more Juditious, and Intelligent
would ascribe these things not so much to the cause as his weakness who managed
it. I desire to contend for Truth and not for Victory, knowing, though I were
so minded, the Triumph should be but small the I could gain from so
Inconsiderable an Antagonist, therefore Reader, I shall wish thee for the Truths
sake (that thou may be found truly owning it, and not something else in stead of
it) seriously to Read and peruse these papers, with such as relate unto them:
And may that Spirit of Truth which teaches all things, so direct thy
Understanding, as thou may discern what Doctrine is truly and really most
according to the holy Scriptures which thou art heartily invited in this matter
to search and peruse, By a well-wisher of thy soul and of all Men.

R. B.
Urie, the 24th of the 10th Month commonly called December, 1671.
WILLIAM MICHEL Unmasqued; OR The Staggering Instabillity of the pretended
Stable Christian Discovered, his Omissions observed, and Weakness Unvailed, etc.
THAT which first presents it self to my View is W. M. his Epistle directed to
me, and the Quakers in and about Aberdeen, which he prefixes as his
Considerations upon my Preface, but that which is the substantial part of it,
he has left unanswered, for my Preface was to show the Method of the Priests
of Aberdeens Procedure against the Quakers, giving account of most if not all
the papers had past betwixt them, and also how by their Instigation some of us
had been Imprisoned; particularly the falseness of G. Meldrum his way with us,
first in Pulpit to accuse us as Heretics, and then in private to desire to
know of us our Principles, but all this he has wholly waved, it seems he
either could not or would not, defend his own, nor his Brethrens double dealing
with us: As to what he mentions I take notice,

First, Of his denying that any in or about Aberdeen has reproached the
Quakers, as Demented, Distracted, or bodily posessed: Checking me for taking
things upon Trust. Well, it suffices me that they are ashamed of such
falsehoods, though if need be, I can instance that I had ground to say so.

Secondly I take notice how that not being willing wholly to clear us, he says
some of us in England have given ground to be so charged by their
extraordinaryly Trembling, etc. but it is strange W. M. should so far forget
himself as to account this a ground to charge People as Demented, etc. seeing
there was a season wherein himself acknowledged, he seldom or never went to
the Pulpit without sensible Trembling, which if he dare to deny I offer to
prove by undeniable Testimonies. As to what he adds of Women's going naked in
the Streets, and some offering to raise the Dead, alleging for proof Samuel
Clerk, the Newcastle Ministers, Pagets Herisography. I Answer, as these
calumnies have been particularly answered by our Friends in England, so they
signifi no more against us being Writ by our declared Enemies, then Cochloeus
lies against Luther, particularly that he assayed to cast out Devils, or what
the Popish Authors Writes of Calvine, that he made a Living Man counterfeit
himself Dead that so he might raise him, and that Beza was Stigmatized for
Sodomie: and much more of this kind.

Thirdly, The thing I observe is his Comparing us to John of Leyden, and
Ignatious Loyola, and that because they Preached in the Streets, cried down
wearing of Rings, and other superfluities as we do, were against needless
Salutations, spoke much of Mortification, and pretended to or expected
Immediate Revelation; but our resembling them in these things, which the
Apostles of Christ commanded, and practiced, will not prove the Jesuits our
Grandfathers, (as W. M. terms it) more then their being found in them, will
prove them the Grandchildren of the Apostles, we must not forsake doing good
because hypocrites seem to do so, nor forbear to Preach the Gospel because
Judas did it, but as for the other practices of John a Leyden, and Ignatius
Loyola's followers the Jesuits, to wit, their cutting down all that would not
be of their way, their assuming outward Power, their seeking to overturn
Kingdoms, their Preaching up War and Blood: the Principles and Practices of W.
M. this Brethren do declare, how much more they resemble them then the Quakers,
who from the Pulpit blew the Trumpet of all the late Troubles, Seditions, and
civil Dissentions, which have proved so bloody and monstrous to the Inhabitants
of this poor Island. And many of them have now turned their backs upon that
Cause, which they hunted out others to fight for: and some, to wit, W. N and
his Brethren at Aberdeen can find out Jesuittical distinctions, and Mental
Revelations, whereby (notwithstanding they swore against all detestable
Newtrality) they can make a shift to Preach under Bishops, dispense with the
Doxologie, forbear Lecturing, and several other parts of the Directorian
Discipline, as W. M. has done at the Bishops order, and yet keep a reserve for
Presbitery in case it come again in fashion.

Forthly, I take notice of the Impertinency of W. M. his bringing in this story
of Ignatus Loyola, upon my saying some Professors in Aberdeen, found that
savor of Life in the Quakers Testimony, which formerly had stired among others
who were come to a great decay; now because it was Obvious, I intended by these
Professors who were come to a decay W. M. and some others of his Brethren who
pretended to be for Independancy in that day, but now were turned with the
times, knowing how much it would reflect upon him to harp on this string, he
runs away and says, these others are Ignatus Loyola, and thereupon makes the
Comparrison above mentioned, which Impertinent Digression is abundantly
manifest.

Fifthly, I take notice of his charging us as rather Reproachers of others then
Reproached, because of the plain Language we use against him and his Brethren,
aledging we will not find Christ and his Apostles use the like to such as
Professed Christianity, for a reproof of his Ignorance in the Scriptures let
him read Romans 16. 18. Phil. 3. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. ib. chap. 4. 1, 2, 3, etc.
ib. chap. 6. ver. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2. 17. Tit. 1. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. 1 John
2. 18, 19. etc. his adding that they show earnestness of desire that Souls may
be saved, and willingness to promote that design, says nothing except this
desire and willingness proceed from the right ground, Papists are as zealous in
their earnestness and willingness as they, and do no less Profess subjection
to the Gospel, owning Christ to be the Messiah, and yet Calvine spared not to
term them impuri Canes, filthy Dogs, Innumerable are the expressions of this
kind used by the zealous Luther against them.

Sixthly, I take notice of his cautions to me, wherein he charge me of Pride,
Passion, Censoriousness, Folly, contrariety to the Word of God, Ignorance, and
Endeavoring to Promote the Popish Intrest: but had he truly minded my good in
his Cautions, he should have Produced some Reasons to prove me guilty of these
Crimes, he concludes us Proud for separating from them in Burial Places, and so
condemns the French Protestants for doing the like from Papists: he falsely
charge us with placing Religion in forbearing Ribands, keeping on the Hat,
and saying, Thou and Thee, and thereupon concluds me Ignorant of true
Conversion, while his Ignorance of us has made him thus Calumniatious: he
concludes us advancers of the Popish Interest, because we decry their Ministry
and Churches, while he borrows this very argument from the Papists, who used,
it against the first Reformers, aledging that their crying down the Church of
Rome, was a joining hand with the Turks, who did the same, though then the
first Reformers were no Turks though they agreed with them in denying the
Church of Rome neither are we Romanists though with those of Rome we condemn
them, especially considering that it is because of their too great Affinity
with Papists that we do so.

Seventhly, I take notice of his confessing he never intends to tell the World
the Scriptures we use, aledging we abuse them, but if he could have proved we
did so, it would have tended more to our disadvantage, and whereas he says he
resolves to Write no more, I confess it will be his Wisdom except he speak to
better purpose, it is a very apparent subterfuge to cover his Resolutions of
not prosecuting farther this Debate, by aledging it will prove endless, and
compairing us to Scoulds who will have the last word, which in reason can have
no place in this matter, seeing being challenged by me of many great Omissions,
he freely acknowledged he had not, nor did not intend to answer me fully, and
what he had writ was but some Animadversions which I have indeed found true,
having allowed some time as he desired to read them, though it very hardly
deserves to be so much regarded.

As to his Epistle, if he had as really affected Retirement as he pretends he
does, he should have done well to have appeared in Public with some more solid
stuff, he has herein almost only showed his Ingenuite, in that he
acknowledges himself amongst the weakest of our Opposers, comparing his Work
but to a small quantity of Water, brought to quench a House one Fire, we have
indeed found it of less force then many that have come before it, to Smother or
Drowned that Truth which God has Revealed among us. In the end of his Epistle,
he would wilingly have the Reader believe he is an upholder of the Protestant
Interest, against our endeavors to overthrow it, but to how little purpose
may, as it occurs be manifested.

After he has made an entire Ommission of what is particularly directed by me
to him in my 8. and 9. pages (as not being able to Vindicate himself) he enters
upon the matter of Salutation, undertaking in his first Section, to prove such
as are used by gestures, wherein I observe.

First, his most manifest Omission of the first part of mine concerning this
thing Page. 9. and 10. where I charge him with Dis-ingenuity in wrong Subsuming
of our words, which he shufleth over with this general, That after the Quakers
rate I have Saluted him with Reproach.

Secondly, he having expressed my Argument against their manner of Salutations,
viz. that being it is the Expression or Signification of our Worship to God, it
ought not, nor cannot be given to the creature without Idolatry, he makes
there unto no direct answer, but instead of one frames a distinction of Worship
in Civil and Sacred, the first he says may be given to men, but the 2d. to God
only, aledging this distinction to be founded on Scripture, Luke. 14. 10. Then
shall thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee. Now
these words ought to be translated thou shall have glory, praise or renown, and
therefore in the Latin it is, Et erit tibi gloria, for so the Greek word Doxa
Signifies, which W. M. will not show me to Signify Adoratio, or Worship: its
therefore but a poor Argument that has no better bottom then this manifest
mistake of the Translation. For other proof he has none, neither for his
Distinction, nor former Assertion.

Thirdly, I observe his Instancing of the practices of Abraham, Lot, Joseph,
Jacob, adding that though they be not to be followed in all things, yet in such
they may as are not else were Reprehended nor Prohibited. For Answer, let him
look unto Rev. 22. 9. where the Angel refused it, and seeing I suppose he may
have so much Charity for this beloved Disciple, as to Judge he was not Tempted
with Idolatry, especially in a season wherein God was Revealing such precious
things unto him: he may observe how this Holy Man was a stranger to this
unscriptural distinction, of Civil and Religious Worship.

Fourthly, I observe his endeavors to shift Affinity with Popery but he has
no waydisproved the parity in that wherein I compared them, viz. the Papist
distingish the Worship they give to God, and that they give to their Images
only in the Intention, and nor in the outward Signification, and ye distingish
the Worship ye give to men and that ye give to God, only in the Intention, and
not in the outward Signification, for ye bow and take off your Hats to the
worst of men as well as to God, and therefore ye agree, in so far as both has
nothing but their Simple Intention, to plead the difference whereunto nothing
is ansewred: He concludes his Section saying, I seem to Justify Moses his
doing Obeysauce, to his Father in Law; adding, what is Obeisance but civil
Reverence by bowing the Body; this is a fit conclusion to close up such a silly
Section, for after he has labored long in vain, he Concluds, thus begging the
thing in question. And if Moses bowed himself as I said in my last, that makes
nothing against us. His second Section is to prove Salutations by words, which
might have been spared until he had proved how and where we deny them, but
because he had something to say from Scripture for this, which we deny not, but
own as much as himself, he would have it in that he might seem with some credit
to bring in his Inference, which is that bowing of the Body and expressing our
Affection by words, is agreeable to Scripture: the Latter Part of this concerns
not us as being not denied, and for the first, of bowing, it signifies nothing,
until it be brought in with some more pressing Premises, in this Section he
acknowledges that taking of the Hat is without any Scripture Warrant, and from
Arguments passes here to Entreaties, Begging that it may not be Quarrelled at,
but seeing the taking of it off or uncovering of our Heads is that which the
Aopstle requires, as a sign of Subjection in our Worship toward God, 1 Cor.
11. 4, 7. we Resolve to keep it to Him, and not to give it to man wherein if he
will solve our Scruple, according to Scripture we may be the more easily
Induced to answer his desire; it is to be Observed that notwith-standing of
this, we are not against outward Signification of Honor, though in the end of
this Section he fasly would be Insinuating the contrary.

He has here Subjoyned a third Section, which he terms an Answer to my
Objection, and which in Reason should have some relation to Salutations as
being under this Head, though indeed it has none at all, but is a mere Cavil
at some of my words upon another Subject, concerning the single Language, where
Page. 11. I confess with him that the Kingdom of God Consists not in words,
adding that it seems Inconsistent with his Principles, seeing the Gospel
according to him, is but words, yea the Scripture it self (I mean that which ye
have of it, to wit, the Letter) Now this Parenthesis he has Dis-ingeniously
omitted, and thereupon goes about to explain their meaning of the Scripture
and the Gospel, alleging if we be for another, we may justly be accounted
Subverters of the Christian Religion, but such shallow Critisims brought in
beside the Purpose, whereas other things more Material, are either wholly
Omitted or scurvily shifted over, will easily appear to the Impartial and
Juditious Reader.

In his second Head, concerning our using Thou and Thee, which is the singular
number to one Person, I observe.

First, how he has given away his own Cause, by confessing that Luke. 22. 31.
is not understood of one exclusivly, of others, and therefore no wonder if
Christ used the Plural Number, seeing as W. M. confesses he Intended to speak
to all the Apostles. As for that expression of Bildads, Jobs Friend (granting
both the Transcription and Translation to be true) shall this one Expression
overturn the Universal practice of Christ and the whole Saints in Scripture, or
let him tell us plainly, whither these words and Practices of Jobs Friends
which are Recorded, be for to be our Rule so as we ought to Immitate and follow
them? especially where they contradict or differ from the Practice of Christ
and his Apostles, but to follow this so frequent Practice of the Saints is with
W. M. to be Proud, knowing nothing but doting about Questions and Strife of
Words, for so he misapplyes 1 Timothy 6. 4. and to his own Confusion uses it
himself, in the end of his Epistle to the Reader, where he has these Words, I
am thy Servant, and thereby has Condemned himself as one of those Ignorant,
Proud, Boasters he speaks of, etc.

Secondly, The second thing I observe, that he produces not one Argument
against our Practice in this thing, but his own groundless, yea lying
Imaginations and Conjectures, aledging he is of the mind, that if the
Translators had not kept to the Rigor of Construction, but Translated Atach,
and so not thou (which is the true Signification) but you we had kept our old
tone though his disdainful Insinuation of our Ignorance be here apparent, yet
experience might have taught him and his Brethren, that even where the
Translators have favored them with their escapes, the Quakers have both had
Hebrew and Greek enough to find them out, it is also here to be observed how
easily W. M. can dispense with mistakes, even willful ones, in the Translators
when they make for his purpose, thereby in effect (for all his pretenses of
Exalting the Scripture and making it his Rule) he signifies his desire not so
much to Square his Practices to the Scripture, as by twining it like a Nose of
Wax to make it Squar to them.

He Superscribeth his third Head, an undertaking to prove that our departing
from them is not to be Justified by their departing from Papists, wherein is to
be observed his manifest Omissions, which the Reader will see by comparing the
12, 13, and 14 Pages of my last with this his third Head.

Next I Observe the weakness of his Arguing in what he has mentioned, wherein
he concludes, That because we grant we had a measure of Integrity while among
them, that therefore it was begot by their Ordinances so called, but does not
the same recurr in the Case of the Primitive Protestants, or will he say that
all of them were void of any measure of Integrity, while they were among the
Papists? Moreover whereas he Objects, that though God visited some among
Papists, it was not by Popish Traditions, aledging Luther had the benefit of
the copy of a Latin Bible, whereby he was Instructed; for Answer, the same
recurrs in our Case, for whatever advantages Luther had either by the use of
the Bible or otherways, had not we the same?

And therefore in the Third place is to be Observed that he has altered the
State of the Question, aledging it to be Incumbent upon me, to prove that they
were Converted by the Popish Traditions, which is a willful mistake, for the
Question (as may be seen in the Pages abovementioned) was whether God might
not countenance us with a regard to that measure of Integrity he has begot in
our Hearts, though we were indeed wrong as to our walking with them in their
Way; and this I did Illustrate by the example of the Disciples of Cornelius and
of Luther, who though he came but Gradually to his Discoveries, yet was
Countenanced in the first as well as last steps, yea notwithstanding of his
erring grossly in the matter of Transubstantion, all this he has wholly
Omitted, closing up this Head by endeavoring to draw from my words a
reflection upon P. L. as if I accounted an Objection coming from him, weak, but
it is ill Inferred to conclude P. L. from thence a feeble Person, for though P.
L. as well as I, might reckon it weak comparatively in respect of others more
strong, yet he might Judge it strong enough for such faint Disputers as W. M.
or his Brethren at Aberdeen to Answer: as that which he reckoned would put the
Quakers to a great Nonplus, he proposed in his Dialogue upon this occasion a
Query, Viz. Wehther it was safe to lean to the Guidance of that Light, which
one while says This is the Way of God walk in it, another while, Come out of
it, for it is Babylon? To which, beside the general Answer abovementioned, I
show him how easily it might be Retorted upon most of all the National Ministry
of Scotland, who now are gainsaying, and contradicting that which they had
formerly pleaded for as the Cause and Work of God, even then as this their
Changableness cannot be ascribed to the Scripture, which they pretend to be
their Rule, neither will any man's Instabillity who pretends to be giuded by the
Light, prove the Light ought not to be followed, this, because he felt might
touch him and his Brethren to near therefore he has wholly Omitted it.

His fourth Head is concerning the Light, containing five Sections, from Page
9. to the 25. wherein is to be observed.

First, how he has gone from the State of the Question, as it is in his
Dialogue Page 5. where he denies Christ to be in the Wicked or Unconverted in
any other manner, then as he is in the very Bruits and unsensible Creatures,
but now he grants Christ to be in such as to common Operations, and Page 22. he
says, That the Light is in all men, and that Christ is in all men, in so far
as his Light is in all men, and thus he overthrowes his chief Argument used
against us; in his Dialogue Page the 5. where he says, That Christ is in none
but in such with whom He is in Union, for here he grants Christ's Light to be in
all men, even such as are not in Union with him, adding that where the Light of
Christ is, there is Christ the Donator of it, which is all we say; so then the
Controversy is no more, if Christ or his Light be in all men.

But after what manner He is in them, and whether this Light be Saving yea or
nay?

And here in the 2d. place I Observe his shameless Dis-ingenuity and Omission,
in saying, It remains for me to prove that this Light in all is Saving, whereby
he would make the Reader believe, that I had never offered to prove this, for
clearing of which I desire he may look into Page the 23. of my last where from
Romans 5. 8. Joh. 3. 16, 19. Heb. 2. Tit. 2. 11. Col. 1. 23. I did prove that the
Universal Grace of God given to all men is Saving in its Nature, and in order
to Save, and now though no Rules of Strict Debate could require me to proceed
further, yet I shall go on to Examine the Question as he has now Stated it,
Viz: That such as are not in Union with Christ have not saving Grace; To prove
this he produces some Scriptures, where such as have Saving Grace and Light
are said to be in Union with Christ, which is not in the least denied: But the
Question is, whether all that have saving Light are in Union with Christ which
he has not so much as offered to prove, and therefore it is here to be
Observed how he has not so much as mentioned, far less meddled with my
Arguments, proving Saving Light and Grace to be in men before they be Converted
or in Union with Christ, showing, He must needs be in them before He be in
Union with them, that He may work the Faith by which He may be united unto
them, seeing, without Him, the Scripture says, we can do nothing Joh. 15. 5.
as it is more Amply contained in Page 15. of my last. Page 14. he seems to take
some notice of an Example brought by me to show that Saving Grace Presupposes
not Conversion, it is from the Instance of a Plaster, and a Wound; the being
healed of a Wound Presuposeth a Plaster, but the Application of the Plaster
Presuposeth not the being healed; this he Rejects as not to the Purpose,
because as he says, who have Saving Grace are in part healed, cured of the
Reigning Power of Sin, but for this he brings no Proof, nor has not shown us
where in the Comparison Answers not after the Like Manner. In the same Page
he adds, That the difference betwixt having of Saving Grace, and being in a
State of Grace, is but the Figment of the Quakers own Brain, without giving any
cause for it, either from Scripture or Reason, but only he says so; these
are his most Frequent and Enforcing Arguments against us; Of this nature is his
arguing Page 11. Reckoning it as a great Absurdity flowing from our Doctrine,
that it would Import Christ in some measure to be in the Americans, because He
bears Testimony in them against Iniquity, but to prove this to be absurd, he
produces no Reason, and if we may believe the Apostle Paul he tells us, That a
Manifestation of the Spirit is given every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
So this Every one Includes the Americans.

The second Absurdity which he seeks to Infer from this has no better bottom,
that then it might be said that Christ is Revealed to Devils, and that we do
the Heathens small favor in putting them but in the same case with such, for
the Revelation of Christ to man before the Day of their Visitation be Expired,
and to such after they have Sinned it out, is far different as may appear by
Luke 17. Likewise W. M. has forgot how easily this Argument may be Retorted
upon himself, for it is not Questioned but Devils have enough of outward
knowledge, even such as is gathered from Scripture, and that which W. M.
accounts the great Privilege of Christians, does it therefore follow that
Christians are in no better condition then Devils.

And thus is Answered another of his profuse Assertions Page 12. That if Pagans
have Saving Light, their State should be as good as the State of real
Christians; for it is one thing to have Saving Light, and another to harken to,
and receive it, else according to his own Argument the State of Devils should
be as good as the State of real Christians.

He adds, Where Saving Illumination is, there is Saving Faith, because there is
a Concatination betwixt these Graces of the Spirit.

Ans. There is Grace given in order to Save, where Faith does not follow upon
it; which is evident by the Parrable of the Seeds, Ma. 13. 3. it was the same
Seed was sown in the Stony and Thorny Ground that was sown in the good Ground,
and yet it only brought forth Fruit there; the Light enlighteneth every man;
He came unto His own, and they received Him not: but it was only to as many as
received Him that He gave Power to become the Sons of God.

And, whereas he Objecteth, That where we are desired to believe in the Light,
it is understood of Christ's Person, else it would Import a belief in a
Creature.

I Answer, He that believes in the Light believes in Christ, for where the
Light of Christ is, as says W. M. himself (Page 22.) there is Christ himself.

In the same Page he further adds, That if Pagans have saving Light, then there
is no Spiritual benefit accrues to Christians by the Scriptures and Gospel: But
he has not heard us contra-distingish this Light from the Gospel, we say
expressly it is the Gospel, according to Col. 1. 23. where the Apostle says,
That the Gospel, whereof he was a Minister, was Preached to every Creature;
This Scripture mentioned by me in my last he has wholly Omited, nor is this
arguing of his concerning the bad Tendency of our Principle, but a reiterate
Clamor of what is already Answered in Page 16. of my last, where I show him we
distingish betwixt things absolutely needful and things very profitable, and how
they Admit of this Distinction themselves; As also how these bad Consequences
of Rendering the Gospel and Preaching useless, does far more follow from their
Doctrine of absolute Predestination, all which he has also Omitted; Now such
are far likelier then we to reprove David his Praying for more Understanding,
and that he might keep the Precepts of God, for being Predestinate to Life he
could not miss of it, and how can such but reckon it folly for him to Pray that
he might keep the Precepts, whose Principles Oblidges them to believe they can
never be made able to keep them.

Page 13. To say that men are Brutish in their Knowledge because they turn their
Backs upon the Light, he reckons a Begging of the Question, as having no proof
at all, whereas it is particularly Intimated 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. where the cause
of men's Walking in Darkness is said to be their not Walking in the Light,
though it be Pastors, mentioned in that 10. of Jer. 19. that are said to be
Brutish, yet he cannot be Induced to name them. It is easy to prove (though he
Insinnuate the contrary) that what in Scripture is called Darkness, has Saving
Light, seeing it is expressly mentioned that the Light shines in the Darkness,
but the Darkness Comprehended it not. And this was Saving, being Christ who is
the Savior, Joh. 1. 5.

Nor does his supposed Contradiction follow from this, as if men could be
Spiritually Dead, and not Spiritually Dead, in respect they have this in them
which is Saving, for though it be in them yet it is not of them, he that
beliveth in me, says Christ, though he be dead, yet shall he live, Joh. 11.
25. If Life be not in them as their Permanent condition, yet they may have some
touches of it, and the Principle of Life is Permanent even in those that are
Spiritually, Dead though many times as a Spark covered under the Ashes; he
adds further, That according to us, such who are the Children of Darkness may
be called the Children of Light, because a Child of Light is as much as one in
whom there is Saving Light and Grace, Citing for Proof, Luke 16. 8. the words
are, For the children of this world are wiser in their generation then the
children of Light, but he offers from this to Infer, That such who are indeed
the Children of Darkness, because of their Disobedience to the Saving Light and
Grace of Truth that is in them: he has not offered so much as to mention.

Page 13. He confesses with me, That the Light in some may be Darkness, but
speaks not one word of what Light I mention may be so; Page 17. of mine only
adds, That we will do well to exhort our Dsciples to take heed of our Light,
not to it; But we desire not People to take heed to our Light or their Light as
he terms it, but to the Light wherewith Christ-Jesus has Enlightened them, and
in this there is no danger; he greatly declares his Ignorance, in Alleging our
way of bidding People heed the Light within, is not Warranted by Scripture, for
God is light, 1 John 1. 3. is he not in us, Act. 17. 27, 28. Must we not then
there take heed unto Him, or is not that Light to be taken heed unto, which
shines in our hearts to give us the knowledge of the glory of God? 2 Cor. 4. 6.
And is not the Word of God Light, which the Apostle says expressly is not far
off, neither above us, below us, nor without us, but nigh, even in our mouths
and in our hearts, Romans 10. 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Moreover W. M. himself Confesses,
That the Light of Christ is in Wicked Men, and if so, let him tell us plainly
if men ought not to take heed to the Light of Christ where it is, how has
Darkness Blinded him in this Matter.

Page 14. He repeats my words falsely, Alleging I say, The Light is Darkness to
them that Reject it, instead of, is as Darkness, For I said plainly, the Light
of Christ is not, nor cannot be Darkness, otherwise then as the Day of the
Lord in Scripture is called Darkness, this he has Omitted.

Page 15. Having sought but Ineffectually to overturn my Assertion, where I
say, some may have Saving Light and Grace, who after a certain manner may be
said not to have the Spirit, Viz. as not bringing forth the Fruits of it:
Averring, That unless I can Prove, that the Spirit calls upon all in Order to
Conversion, I cannot conclude that all have the Spirit. Ans. As the one is
easily proved so is the other safely concluded, these are the plain words of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 7. A manifestation of the spirit is given to every man
to profit withal: Now it were not profitable unto them, if it did not strive
with them in Order to Convert them. That other Scripture Joh. 16. 8. he passes
over, Alleging I should Prove the World there to be understood of all and
every one: though in Reason it might suffice for answer, that there is nothing
brought by him to show why the word World here is not taken in its Geunine and
Common Acceptance, yet the Apostle solves this Scruple in the following verse,
of sin, because they believe not in me: Then, if there, all unbelievers be
included, is not that all and every one in the World, for of the Saints, there
is not here any question.

In his Second Section, Page 16. he begins with Omitting my Concession of
the Benefit and Advantages that accrue to those that Believe, by the outward
Knowledge of Christ, and mentions nothing of the State of the Question, which
was, Whether any might be Saved without this outward Knowledge? and to show that
some might I gave him the Instance of Deaf People and Children, to which he
returns nothing, but takes up the Paper to Prove, That the Greek Preposition
(...), is sometimes Translated, among, which is not denied, yet I shall find him
twenty to one where it is rendered in, and can no ways be said to be among,
the Question is, whether in this place 1 Cor. 2. 2. it be In or Among? the
Reason Alleged by him proves it no ways to be Among, to wit, that it would
have been the Apostles Grief not his Joy, to know that the Light of Truth was
born down among them; This was the Apostles Joy that the Corrinthians come to
be sensible how they had Crucified Christ in them, that so looking upon, and
taking heed to Him whom they had Peirced, they might come to be Healed by Him.

Page 17. He slightly passes over that expression of Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 16. where
he says, Henceforth know we Christ no more after the flesh but after the
spirit, adduced by me to show that Paul prefered a Spiritual Knowledge of Christ
to all other, as if the Apostle were here only condemning earthly thoughts of
Christ, as if, as King of Isarael, he should begin a Temporal Kingdom, but for
this Exposition we have only the bare Authority of his own naked Assertion.

Page 18. For want of a true Spiritual Understanding Concerning what I mean by
the Inward Blood of Christ, he brings forth his own malicious guessings.

The first is, That I seem to Incline to Justify that which has been charged
upon some of my Brethren, to wit, That we are not such Fools, as to hope to be
Saved by that Jesus that died at Jerusalem; As he has no ground to Suspect
such a thing from my words, so there was never any ground for such a charge
against any, owned of that People.

The 2d. is, That Perhaps I Intend, that Christ, as man, dwells in us, there
can none truly charge us with such grosness, as to Assert the Manhood, or
Weshel, that walked at Jerusalem is in us, but if any of us have said, that
Christ as man dwells in us, they have said no more then the express words of
Scripture, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Let your adorning be the hidden man of the heart,
Ephesians. 4. 24. That ye put on the new man: now what is this new man but Christ
Jesus, and therefore says the Scripture, Romans 13. 14. Put on the Lord Jesus
Christ. Gal. 3. 27. As many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ;
and this is Christ which the Apostle traveled that He might be formed in the
Galatians, Gal. 4. 19. And whereof he Admonnisheth the Corinthians, that they
should know Him in them, else they were reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. If it be hard
for W. M. to take up the meaning of these things, let him acknowledge his
Ignorance in the Holy Scriptures, whose Language this is.

In his 3 Section, Page 19. He begins by offering to Prove, our Principles have
a tendancy to Introduce Paganism, and to Contradict him, he reckons an
Impertinency, but his Ridiculous Vanity herein will appear, by looking unto
Page 24. of my last, neither brings he any Arguments to Prove this, but such
whereby he might conclude the same against the Apostle Paul; The Quakers says
he, Spakes of a Light within, to which who take heed need no Teacher, and the
Apostle speaks of a Knowledge or Light, under the new Covenant, where there is
no need of a Teacher, Heb. 8. 10, 11. so if the tendency of the Apostles words
be not to Introduce Paganism, neither are ours, and because that W. M. finds
that notwithstanding of this we despise not Teaching, but are led even by that
Light, to hear and to recieve the Ministry of them whom God sends, he concludes
that herein we are Inconsistent: adding, That some of us have been heard to
say, That we only Taught to bring People off from other Thachers to mind the
Light within, that then they will need none, which he concludes, would quickly
make them like such among whom the name of Christ is not in Remembrance, but he
might as well seek to Infer the like hazard, and Contradiction from the plain
words of the Apostle, 1 John 2. 27. Ye have an anointing, and ye need not that
any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and
yet in the mean time was Teaching them.

As for that Story mentioned by him, Of a certain Dying Man in Aberdeen whom
two Quakers pressed so much to mind Christ within, It infers nothing for his
Purpose, for that Dying Person had Abundance of the outward Knowledge of Christ,
and they needed not Preach that to him which he knew, therefore was he sensible
of the seasonableness of their Advice, saying (as I am certainly Informed by
one of the two) how good a thing would it be for an old dying man like me, to
know that Christ within which ye speak of,

He brings not any thing of weight in his 4. Section as reply to that which
is contained in the 22. Page of my last, where I show we do no ways confound
the Light-giver with the Light, or enlightening given: the Reason Alleged here
is, because we call that Light Jesus Christ wherewith all men are Enlightened,
which implies no more his Consequence then that usual expression, that it is
the Sun by which we are outwardly Enlightened, implies any confounding of the
Sun with the Beams,

Whereas in his last he said, There was a certain Light in all men, and that as
the Remianders of Gods Image in him since the Fall; in the end of Page 24. he
explaines to be the Light of Reason and Understanding, and thereby makes the
Resaon of man all one with Christ and the Spirit, which Page 10. and 22. he
granted to be in Wicked Men, as to common Opperations.

After that he laboreth much in this 5 Section, to Prove, That man Retains
some Good since the Fall, he Instanceth nothing but the Soul, which he says,
is Good and Precious, and of great Excellency, and Worth, and Retains a
Similitude to the Image of God, as being Spiritual and Immortal, where it is
observeable; That he grants the Souls of Wicked and Unconverted men to be of
great Worth and Excellency, and yet he denies the Works of the Pure Spirit of
God to be of any Worth or Excellency, and that because the Soul has a share in
them: if so be the Souls of Wicked Men are conformed to the Image of God,
because they are Spiritual and Immortal, then are Devils also conform to the
Image of God, for they are also Spiritual and Immortal in the same sense that
the Souls of Wicked Men are.

Lastly, I desire the Reader may here Observe, how he has entirly Omited that
part of Page 23. of mine where I show how and in what sense the Light is to be
understood or called the Light of Nature, and of what Nature, therein clearing
us from the Aspertion of Pelaganisme, by which Omission it may appear how
willing these men are to Caluminate us, and apt to pass by that which tends to
our Vindication.

Page 25. Head 5. Sect. 1. He alleges, We vilify the Scriptures, and that
because we confess, That the end of our meeting is not to read them, but to
wait on God, adding, that therefore we make an opposition betwixt Reading the
Scriptures, and waiting on God; But as this conclusion has no Proof, so it is
most Inconsequential, as if nothing could be distingished except it were
Opposite: according to which he might Argue, that because Preaching and Praying
are not all one, therefore they are Opposite: that some have been Countenanced
of God in Reading the Scriptures is not denied by us, and therefore the
bringing of it forth against us, is wholly Impertinent.

And whereas he avers, That Reading of the Scripture is the means of having
the Word of God to dwell richly in us, alluding to Coll. 3. 16. he should have
first proved the Word there mentioned to be the Scripture, before he had been
so hasty to draw his Conclusion.

His Alleging some passages, where Christ and others spoke upon some words of
Scripture, says nothing to the purpose, for as I confessed it was sometimes
used by them, so I told him it was also frequent among us; but the Question is,
whether their settled Custom of speaking upon a Text be according to Scripture?
and thereupon I show him how Christ and his Apostles did Preach without it, as
Christ, Mat. 5. and in many other places: And Paul to the Athenians, but this
of Paul mentioned by me in my last he has left unanswered.

And in Answer to 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31. For ye may all prophecy one by one,
etc. He says, This will not conduce to keep up the Successive talking of
Quakers, Alleging it to be Ristricted to the Prophets, which he says, It will
be hard to prove our Preachers to be. Adding, That it makes not against their
Way, because Ministers speak among them two or three. Here though in relation
to us he Restricts this place to the Prophets, yet in relation to himself he
does it not, else he must prove their Ministers, that so speak, to be Prophets,
as he desires me to do our Preachers; Now this he cannot, since he says
Peremptorly, Page 97. That such a thing is ceased, and therefore this may show
how he twinds and wrests the Scripture, to make it Answer his Corrupt ends, it
is a manifest shift to avert the strength of this place, where the Order of the
Church which is quite contrary to theirs, is expressly mentioned. To run to the
matter of Women's Speaking, thereby to make a Digression to a new Debate, which
has been largly defended by us, and paticularly by Margret. Fell. in a Book
never yet answered, and as to the place Alleged we have often shown how it
cannot be understood, in a Ridged Litteral sense, else it would contradict the
same Apostle, 1 Cor. 11 5. where he Proposes to Women the Method and Manner of
their behavior, in their public Preaching and Praying; the Promise was, that
the Daughters as well as the Sons should Prophecy, Joel. 2. 28 Act. 2. 17.

As a 2d. Reason of our villifying the Scriptures he adds, and that by way of
derition, They will not have the Scripture called their Masters Letter (No
Forsooth) their Masters Letter is writ in their Hearts, etc. Ans. Here his
Malice has not only led him Foolishly to Deride us, but the Apostle, yea God
himself: for the Law of God is our Masters Letter, and this is in our Hearts if
we be under the New Covenant, Heb. 8. 10. I will put my law in their minds, and
write them in their hearts, and ver. 11. they shall not need every man to teach
their neighbor, for they shall all know me, etc. His Argument taken from
Christ's writing to the seven Churches of Asia, makes nothing against us, except
he will be so Ridiculous to aver, that these Churches had no Rule nor Knowledge
of their Masters will, before they received that Writting, which if they had,
it was not there only, and this was that Incumbent to be proved, for which
that example was brought, for the Testimony of Christ through his Servants,
whether by Word or Writ is Dearly Owned by us, as has often been declared.

With the like Impudence he Concluds, That we bend our strength to Evacuate the
Authority of the Scriptures, and confirm Negligent Atheists, in their
Contemptuous slighting of them, because we Speak of walking, or doing our Work
by the Immediate Council of God; But he might as well babble against the
Beloved Disciple 1 John 2. 24. Ye have received an anointing and ye need not
that any man should teach you, and yet was then teaching them himself without
Contradiction, as for that Scripture, Joh. 12. 24, 48. which he desires us to
read, we find not how in the least they strike against our Principle, for as it
is without doubt to us, that the words which Christ spoke will stand in
Judgment against him and his Brethren, because while in words they pretend to
Exalt it, both in Principle and Practice they Villifie and deny it.

As a 3d. Reason he Alleges, We Prefer our Silent Waiting to the Reading of
Scriptures, as if we must first come to this, ere we can know the Scripture
aright, adding that this waiting is defined by us, to be a silent posture of
the Heart, without thinking good or evil.

Answ. These thoughts which we say ought to be excluded from waiting, are man's
own thoughts, not such as the Spirit of God furnishes him with, and it is
great Ignorance to say that without this we can use the Scriptures aright,
seeing the things of God knows no man save the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
As for his own Imaginations which he Subjoines concerning our waiting they
signify nothing, because Alleged without any proof, we deny not but that
Faith Hope and Charity is exercised in waiting, yet not without such thoughts
as proceed from the Spirit of God and whereas he finds we clear our selves of
this Calumny, of being Vilifiers of the Scripture, by showing how much it is
our desire to try Doctrines by them: he alleges, We have herein been
suspected of Juggling; the proof is, R. Farmer says so. but R. Farmers saying
and W. M's. saying is all one in this matter, neither of them are to be trusted
without proof: Now the Reason because we say that the Scriptures are not the
Saints Rule of knowing God and Living to him, but this is just to beg the thing
in Question.

That Story mentioned by him of a Quakers telling a certain Woman in Aberdeen,
that she might as well read a Lattin Book as the Bible, does no ways prove
that we ate against trying of Doctrins by the Scripture, seeing the Quaker he
speaks of, might have had good reason to look upon that supposed Religious
Woman, as one alienated from that Spiritual Key of David which can alone truly
open the Scriptures, and so might well tell her, she would do well first to
come to that, else her Reading might be so far from profiting her, that she
might come to Wrest them to her own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

Sect. 2. Page 30. he begins with acknowledging, That something may be
accounted the Declaration of ones Mind, which is not his word, though Page 12.
of his Dialouge, he could not but smile at it as Irrational.

To prove the Scriptures to be truly and properly called the Word of God he
subjoyneth, That the Precepts of the Scripture were uttered and spoke of God,
but in Answ. to this I show him Page 26. of my last, that the Properties
peculiar to the Word cannot be spoken of the Scripture, but of the Inward and
Living Word, to which he replys nothing, only tells there is a twofould, Word
a Co-essentiall, Coeternal Word, and a Spiritual Word; the Temporal expressed
Word, or the Word written in time; but seeing he pretends to be pleading for
the Scripture, he should have used the Language of it, and not such strange
Antescriptural expressions which are not to be found in all the Bible: Where
does he read of a Spiritual Temporal expressed Word? a part of my Argument
showing that these Scriptures, Hos. 1. 1. Joel. 1. 1 Esa. 38. 4. are understood
of that Word from which the Scriptures are given forth; he has but mentioned,
not answered; for I told him, Page 26. of my last, that where it is said, The
Spirit of God came upon such a one, or to such a one, that therefore the
Scripture is the Spirit, and so as do the Socinians, call the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, the Spirit, denying the necessity of any other Spirit,
this he has wholly Omited: and indeed he seems pretty much to incline to the
Socinians in this matter, for he says, That the Scripture is the Sword of the
Spirit, and that because Christ in his conflict with Satan said, it was
written; but had this been Christ's only Sword, we must conclude the Devil to
have had the same, for he said also, it is written; and according to this
Doctrine who has a Bible in his pocket, wants not the Sword of the Spirit,
which favors of that Popish foppery, that the sign of the Cross puts away
Devils; but experience teaches us both these Opinions to be alike Ridiculous.

Upon this occasion in his Dialogue, Page 13. he asserted, That it is all one
to say the Scripture says, and God says; and whereas, in Answer to this, I
told him, that they might be said to be one because of their Agreement, yet
were no more one then the Sun Beam and the Shadow is one though they agree
together, because he knew not what to reply to this, he mentions a part of
these words of mine, and Subjoyns by way of Answer to them, that they tend to
advance humane Writings, and equal them with the Scripture, when they agree
with what God says: which as it is a manifest shift, and no reply, so it is a
notable Impertinency, to say, there is any hazard of advancing such Writings as
truly agree with what God says, for upon what other account are the
Scriptures to be esteemed?

Page. 32. to prove that word mentioned Mark. 7. which he Phancies are said to
be made void, is not the Living Word, but the outward Precept of the Scripture,
he says, It is plainly held forth to be so without any further Probation.

He adds, Page 34. That it seems we think they set up the Scriptures as an
Idol, instead of that from which they come; asking, If we did ever hear them
call it the Eternal Son of God, that Savior who died, etc.

Answer. Though we have not heard you term the Scripture, yet it is not without
Reason, we say, ye set them up in Christ's stead; for I have a Letter under one
of the present National Teachers hand, wherein he says, The Scriptures are the
alone means of Salvation; yea, the alone Way Truth and Life, and that none can
be saved without them.

And I have heard another call the Greek Testament, The only foundation. Now
being these are the peculiar Properties of Christ, have we not reason to say,
that such as ascribe them to the Scriptures, puts the Scriptures in Christ's
stead, though W. M. be pleased to term it unworthy dealing.

Sect. 2 Page 35. he says, It is not dificult to prove that the Law and
Testimony mentioned, Deuteronomy. 8. 20. was not an inward Law: The reason Alleged
is, Because the Prophet opposes what is written as no Light, if it agree not to
the Law and Testimony; But what then, does this prove the Testimony here not to
be inward? He adds, That let People pretend what they will to a Law within, if
it agree not with the Scripture Word, there is no Light in them; and that the
outward Law gets the name of the Testimony; but granting him all this, it does
not in the least follow, that the Law and Testimony; there mentioned was not
inward; It is more Observeably strange here then in any other place, with what
shameless confidence, he asserts his own bare Assertions instead of Arguments.

After the like manner without answering a word of what I infer, Page 27. of
mine against him and his Brethren from Joh. 7. 49.

He concludes, That Scripture fits us better then them, because of our known
rash censuring; upon which supposition of his own, he condemns us as like to
Pharisees without more ado: still also by way of reply to me, he says, It is
not probable that Christ checked the Lawyer in saying, How read thou? Luke
10. 26. not offering to add any further probation, and as for what he
subjoyneth, Page 7 That Christ used the Scripture about Divorcement, and in the
matter of the Sabbath; it does no ways prove them to be the only Rule, for, as
is said, we are willing to try Doctrins by them.

Page 37. He says, It is false to affirm that the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, cannot be proved other-wayes then by the Spirits inward Testimony:
adding, There are other Arguments whereby it can solidly and convincingly be
proved; and for this he instanceth one which he says, is excellently improved
by R. Baxter; what then, because W. M. thinks that Argument of R. Baxter will
prove the Scriptures Authority without the Spirit, must we therefore be of the
same mind? I doubt very much if R. Baxter think so much himself; Now W. M. his
deceit is very Remarkable, in quoteing some words of John Calvin, where he
says, If he were to deal with Arguments, he could produce many to prove the
Laws came from God, for that I never Imagined these Arguments could
convincingly, prove the Scriptures Authority without the Spirit, (which is the
thing in debate) it appears in the very following words, Lib. Inst. 1. Cap. 7.
Sect. 4. But if we will well look to our Consciences, that they be not troubled
with doubts, and stick not at every scruple, it is requisite the Persuasion
whereof we have spoken, be taken higher then humane Judgment or Conjecture,
Viz. the secret Testimony of the Holy Spirit. And a little after in direct
opposition, to wit his words, he adds, This word shall not obtain Faith in the
Hearts of men if it be not Sealed by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit; It is
necessary then, says he, that the Saints Spirit which spoke by the mouth of
the Prophets, enter in our Hearts, and touch them Livingly, to persuade us,
that the Prophets have faithfully delivered that which was Commanded them from
on high; and a little after, This then is a persuasion which requires no
reasons: And again, This is a Persuasion which cannot be Begotten but by a
heavenly Revelation.

And in the beginning of the next Chapter he adds, If we have not this
certainly higher, and more firm then all humane Judgment, in vain is the
Authority of the Scriptures proved by Arguments. This does abundantly show how
contrary W. M. is to Calvin in this matter; and not to him alone; but to the
whole Reformed Churches of France, who in their confession of Faith agreed upon
by the first National Synod they ever had at Paris, Anno, 1559. say thus, Art:
4. We know these Books to be Canonique, not so much by the common consent of
the Church, as by the Inward Testimony and persuasion of the Holy Spirit; and
whereas he advises me to read Calvin his 6th. Chap. but that it would prove to
long a Digression, I could easily show, that we are no such contemners of the
Scripture as those he there speaks to: And what if he contradict the Truth
which we, and himself else where acknowledges, I make use of his Testimony
against W. M. and his Brethren, even as he did the Testimony of Augustine,
Gregory, and others of the Fathers, against those of Rome, whom nevertheless he
spared not to reject sometimes. Read Inst. lib. 1. cap. 11. Sect. 5 lib. cap.
Sect. 4. and in many other places, thus also is added that which he adds about
Passur, whose Translation he says, We follow in one thing, but not in another,
for we are not bound to follow him further then he follows the Truth; Nor does
W. M. here produce any argument to prove that these words, Joh. 5. 39. should
be, Search the scriptures, and not ye Search the scriptures, but his own bare
assertion, adding That Christ did not check them, when he says in them, ye
think to have eternal life, whereas the very following words clearly Import a
reproof, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life; He says not, seek for
Life in the Scriptures, ye do well to think to find it there, but thus, Ye
think to have eternal life in the scriptures, but will not come to me that ye
might have life.

He ends this Section, asking, Seeing I grant the Scriptures are profitable for
doctrine, correction, reproof, etc. Why I deny them to be a perfect Rule? but I
never denied them, and I told him also, they were thus profitable, not to every
man, but to the man of God, i e. he that is led by the Spirit of God; Now to
this he replys nothing, only tells me, The man of God is most commonly
understood of the Ministers of Christ Jesus, which though I should grant him,
what he either can or would Infer from it; against my Argument he has left
unmentioned.

Sect. 3. Page 40. He alleges, The voice and Testimony of the Father, which
Christ speaks of to the Jews, not to have been inward, desiring the reader to
look to the place: and thereupon he cites Joh 5. 36. where Christ speaks of his
Miracles as a greater witness then that of John, but his deceit is here
abundantly manifest, for the place mentioned by me was, 1 John 5. 10. For this
is the witness of God, which he testified of his Son, he tha^ believes in the
Son of God, has the witness in himself; Now, this he has wholly omited, and
mentioned another in the stead of it, which makes nothing to the purpose, I
deny not but the Miracles were a greater witness then that of John; but then,
will it therefore follow that the inward Testimony of the Father is not greater
also; this was the matter in question. After the like manner he concludes the
voice spoken of, John 5. 37. Is not inward, but outward, citing for Proof, Mat.
3. 27. 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18. the one is the voice heard at Christ's being Baptized,
the other at his being Transfigured: But what way he seeks to Infer from
thence, that the Voice of the Father here spoken of by Christ to the Jews, was
not inward but outward, he has left unmentioned.

Likewise, the Exposition he adds upon this place, as if Christ were only here
reproving the Ignorance of the Jews, whose Predecessors had heard so much of
God, it would be the better received, that it had some other bottom then his
own mere assertion.

Page 14. He confesses, That where we are desired to try the Spirits, there is
no mention of trying them by the Scripture: And to my Question, asking if there
be any surer way of trying of Spirits, then by the Spirit of God? he returns
no reply, but another Question; Viz.

Whether there be any surer way then that for which the Bereans were commended?

I Answer, Yes, by the Spirit, Peter could never have discerned Ananias and
Saphira by the Scripture, and yet did it by the Spirit; To say (as he does)
That this was a matter of Fact and not of Doctrine, and that it was
extraordinary, is a mere silly shift, for it was only by the Spirit of God;
which is so ordinary to Christians, that none can be truly one without it, Romans
8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; And if this
Spirit can discern the secret hypocrisy of the Heart, in matters of Fact, far
more the Errors, and mistake of the Understanding, in matters of Judgment,
which all grant to be more Obvious.

And though I never aver'd, that John excluded all external Rules, by pointing
to the anointing, so his assertion to say: That the anointing directs us to
the Law, and to the Testimony, as supposing it to be outward, is but to beg the
thing in question already refuted.

Page 43. As he affirms, That man's being deluded proceeds not from the
Scripture, but their own blindness, so he acknowledges, That falling in
Delusion, proceeds not from the Spirit, but from the tricks and deceits of
Satan, and thereby he has clearly confessed, what is asserted by me Page 30.
and not answered: And whereas he adds, That leaning to the Spirit, and for
sakeing the Scripture, provokes God to give men up to strong delusions, which
he Illustrateth by the example of one I. Gilpen once a Quaker, who by harkening
to a voice within, was put upon Mischievous and Detestable Practices.

I Answ. He has not proved that we forsake the Scripture, nor will one man's
being deceived, by harkening to a voice within, prove the Spirit not to be a
certain Rule, more then as himself ackowledges, The Pharisees having the
Scripture in such high esteem, and accounting them their Rule, will prove their
delusion proceeded from them; that Story of Gilpens was largly answered about
5. years ago by E. B. and C. A. who have laid open his Deceit and Wickedness,
neither can any of these Rediculous Pranks, (granting the matter to be true)
which he pretended to do by a voice within, while appearing to be among us,
prove the insufficiency of that Light we Preach, or the hazard of following it,
more then his Beastly Drunkness and open Prophanity, naturally known in the
Garrison of Carlisle, where he was a Soldier, proves he was led by the
Scripture, which it is like he then pretended, was his Rule unto these wicked
practices, which were the best fruits of that Repentance, W. M. seems so much
to congratulate in him: Such filthy Dross whom God purges out from among us,
are fittest persons to be Proselited by him and his Brethren: and truly we are
well rid of them, and can heartily spare such unto them; They went out from us,
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us 1 John 2. 16.

Page 43. He says, That though the Scripture be sufficient for discovering of
Delusions, and ending of differencs, in genere objecti, yet the Spirit is
necessary, in genere causae affectivae: Now this necessity of the Spirit he
says himself, Is that we may be right discerners, for removeing our natural
depravedness; and now granting the Scripture were sufficient in this manner,
will it therefore follow that the Spirit within is not the Rule; which was the
thing to prove in this Section, in so far as he acknowledges this necessity of
the Spirits work, he has yielded to the Truth; yet it is observable, how in
contradiction to the Truth he overturns it all again.

Page 47. 48. Where he expressly pleads, For Preaching upon, and using the
Scriptures, without the joint Concurrance of the Spirit; alleging, I have no
ground to say they ought not so to do, then consider first he said, The Spirit
was necessary to Remove the depravedness of our nature that we might be
discerners, but now he says, we ought to use the Scripture without the Spirit,
though our nature be depraved, yea though we be in no capacity to make a right
discerning, and here he has notably manifested his affinity with the Jesuits,
Arminians, Socinians, Pelagians, and Semipelagians, in saying, How many cold
hearts have been Rubbed and Chaffed unto Spiritual hear, by reading and talking
of the Scripture; For is not this to set nature a work, and to grant a capacity
in man to beget Spiritual heat without the joint Concurrence of the Spirit; and
this is altogether agreeable to that known Maxim of the Semipelagians,
facienti quod in se est, deus non denegat gratiam, God will not deny him Grace
that does what in him lies. And hereby the Intelligent Reader may perceive, how
much nearer a kin our Adversaries are to these Errors then we, notwithstanding
they so falsely and frequently brand us with them, in their Pulpits and
elsewhere, as also that it is merely constraint when they are hardly put to it,
that they now and then, and that in contradiction to themselves, let a word or
two drop concerning a necessary Work of the Spirit.

Sect. 4. Page 45. He alleges, There is no convincing People by this Rul^^f
the Spirit within, because each way may pretend to the guidence of his Spirit,
and so both remain obstinate: adding, That according to them the Scripture is
the rule which lies patent to both parties; and though it do not actually
convince the stuborn, yet there is enough in it to satisfy any Inqusitive
Adversary.

Answ. And is not that Spirit sufficen to satisfy any Inquisitive Adversary,
that is willing to be undeceived, which searches all things, even the deep
things of God: There is no inconvenience can be pressed from making the Spirit
a Rule or Guide, but the same recurs by making the Scripture one; for is it not
laid claim unto by Persons quite different in Judgment, yea both sometimes to
one verse, and will have it speak opposite to the other, if it be said, that
Scripture being compared explaines it self; has not such as have so compared,
been found uncessantly to jangle even in their comparing of it. And this W. M.
cannot deny, but this has been because, one or both parties has been
estranged from the true Testimony of the Spirit: What is then the Ultimate
Recorse that can only resolve all doubts even concerning the meaning of the
Scripture, but the certain Testimony of the Spirit? for if the Scriptures be
only certain because they came from the Spirit of God; then the Testimony of
the Spirit must be more certain then they, according to the received Maxim of
the Schools, Propter quod unumquodque est, tale id ipsum magis est tale, That
which makes a thing certain must be more certain then it; and this arguing
against the certainty of the Spirit, checks not only at the certainty of the
Saints Faith now, from the Light within, and the assurance of knowledge, but at
the Faith and Knowledge, which all the Saints and holy Prophets had; not only
before the Scripture was writ, but even in their writing of them. We are in no
greater hazard to be deceived now, then they were then, therefore the Apostle
notably reproves such Pratlers against this certainty, 1 John 4. 6. We are of
God, he that knows God hears us, he that is not of God hears not us:
hereby know we the Spirit of truth and the Spirit of error.

Page. 48. He asks, Why I complain for his improving Esa. 59. 21. But mentions
not one word of that part of Page 32. of mine, wherein I show him how this
Scripture made against him, as holding forth Gods putting words in men's mouths
which they deny, as a thing ceased; This the Reader by looking to the place may
observe, that the Lord there Promises his Spirit and Word shall continue to
direct his People, is not denied.

In his Dialogue, Page 16. He says, That the Scriptures cannot be said to be a
dead Letter, because they are called killing, and whereas I told him, Page 31.
of my answer, That as dead things do kill if fed upon, so if men feed upon the
Letter of the Scripture, without the Spirit which is the Life they will kill:
he shifts a reply to this, telling me, The Scripture is called killing, as
being the Ministration of the Law, which threatens Death against the sinner;
What then does it therefore follow that they are not dead, and deadly to such
as feed upon them, without the Spirit which gives Life; it is an apparent
Malicious Passion, to add, That the drinking in of the Lifeless Poisonous
Opinions, of the Quakers, will prove hurtful to the Soul; seeing he brings
not the least shadow of proof for it. I observe, that he Intitleth this
Section, The Quakers way Inefectual to convince an Opposer; And yet how is it,
that he and his Brethren are so afraid that it spread, and are daily so much
crying out and clamouring against it as dangerous, entreating and beseeching
People to beware of us, and comparing our words and writings to Poison, as that
which is so ready to gain ground; I say how comes it that they are so pressing
in their importunate, and often reiterate Pulpit-exhortations, to the
Magistrates, to Suppress, Imprison us, and break up our Meetings, as such
against whom their labors will prove altogether fruitless and ineffectual, if
not assisted by the external Sword.

Sect. 5. Page 49. He undertakes to compare us with Papists, as having learned
our Language about Scripture from them, but herein he has notably manifested,
both his self contradiction and Ignorance; He alleges, We agree with Papists,
in that we say if the delusion be strong in the Heart, it will twine the
Scriptures to make them seem for it; and in that we say they are dead, and
occasion Sects, and Janglings, (whereunto we always add, because the Spirit is
wanting;) And yet in this sense he fully grants it himsef, Page 43. saying, It
is granted, that deluded Souls do wrest the Scriptures, etc. He concluds us one
with Papists, for saying there was a rule before the Scriptures, and yet grants
it himself, Page. 46. in confessing the Scripture was not a Rule to such Saints
as lived before it was writ, such then had some Rule before the Scriptures;
thus far as to his self contradictions: As to his Ignorance can there be any
thing more sottish, to compare us with Papist for our preferring and calling
the light within, as that which only makes the outward dispensation of the
Gospel profitable, and for our saying, that the Spirit is both our Teacher and
our Copy, according to which if we walk, we may profit without going forth for
a copy, seeing it is known, none to be more enemies to these Doctrines then
Papists; and if we deny the Scripture to be the principal and complete rule of
faith, that proves us no ways to agree with Papists: except we all agreed with
them concerning what is the rule of faith, wherein we differ wider from
Papists, then our opposers; therefore that sentence of Tertulian Viz. That
Christ is always Crucified, betwixt two Thieves, is Impertinently objected by
W. M. against us, and if the Lord will it may in due time be made appear to
public view that it far better suits our adversaries.

He looks upon it as a great absurdity, Page 51. To deny the more sure word of
prophecy, mentioned, 2 Pet. 1. 19. to be the Scripture: Alleging, I should
have confuted the Apostle who expounds it so, verse. 20. But before he had been
so peremptory in his conclusion, he should have first proved that the Apostle
mentions these words, by way of exposition to the former, seeing he thinks
himself so secure here why did he omit to answer that part of Page 31. of mine,
where I told him, That seeing the Scriptures have all their sureness from the
Spirit, they cannot be more sure then it; for to say that Scripture is more
sure as to us, being a standing Record, then a Transient voice from heaven
which may be mistaken or forgotten, answers nothing; seeing that more sure word
we speak of, is not a Transient voice, but that Word of God which is always
with us, nigh us, in our hearts, if we be willing to hear it and regard it: and
can far less be either forgotten or mistaken then Scripture, for it speaks
plain, home, and near, even to such sometimes who would willingly both mistake
and forget it, Heb. 4. 12.

Though I could freely refer his 6 Head, concerning Justification, to be
compared by the Juditious Reader, with that which is contained from Page 32. of
my last, to Page 44. As being a confused mass, which needs no further
refutation, yet because he makes a great noise, here I shall subjoyn these few
observations a little to unvail him in this matter.

And in His first Section from Page 52. to 58. I observe, how hastily he passes
over the Charges laid by me to his door, Page 23. which because he cannot clear
himself of, therefore he has not lesure to answer.

Secondly, I observe, how after he repeats my words, Of our sense of
Justification, which the Reader may see at length, Page 33. of my first, he can
say nothing against them, but only I seem to Insinuate, they had no need of
inward Righteousness; It appears his guilt has made him so jealous in this
thing, as if I had been reproaching him, where I only gave an account of my
own belief; his accusing or suspecting me of Fraud or Cheating, signifies
nothing, except he produce some reason for it.

In order to discover this, he proposes, What may be the sense of the word
Justify in Scripture, as it imports the sinners Justification before God;
which he determinatly affirms, Only to be a pronouncing or accounting a man
Righteous, and not a making him so; citing for proof, Pro. 17. 15. Though
Justify in someplaces may be so understood, as in this, which indeed, has no
relation to the sinners Justification before God; yet where it has such a
relation, it may be understood otherwise, Viz. a making a man just, as in
that notable expression of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6 11. But ye are washed, ye
are sanctified, ye are justified, etc. For if Justify here were not to make
men Righteous, but only to impute them or account them so, then Washing, and
Sanctifying, were not real but only imputative also, and at this rate the
Corinthians could not be esteemed truly washed of their sins, which the Apostle
mentions in the former verse, such as Stealing, Drunkness, Covetousness, but
only thought or imputed so, and this were to make the Christian Religion a
cloak for all wickedness, as if men were not by it truly cleansed of these
evils, but on the contrary fostered in them: In these places also,
Justification was taken in relation to inward righteousness, Rom, 8. 30. Whom
he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified, Rev. 22. 11. Qui Justus est, Justificetur adhuc, for so the Greek
and Latin has it, which being rightly Translated, is, He that is just let him
be justified still; It is to be observed, that I deny not, but the word
Justify, is sometimes taken in Scripture for pronouncing men just, though he
fasly seems to insinuate the contrary.

Thirdly, I observe his alleging, That our speaking of being Justified by
Christ revealed in us, is a falling in with the Popish sense of Justification,
adding, That our more full agreement with them, does appear, in that wherein I
say we differ from them, but here his shameless disingenuity is manifest, in
that he has not answered at all Page 34. 35. of my last, as to that wherein I
show our disagreement with Papists; And how this manner of Justification by the
indwelling of Christ is denied by them, and particularly disputed against by
Bellarmine: For to prove our supposed Affinity with Papists, and imagined
opposition to Protestants, he forms a Question, Viz.

What is that, which causes a man to stand pardoned and so Just before God,
and for which he is pronounced Righteous? adding, That the Papists have herein,
recourse to infused Righteousness, but Protestants to the imputed Righteousness
of Christ, namely the Satisfaction and Merit of His death.

But here is to be observed, how confusedly he has tumbled things together
that ought to be distinguished, whereby he may the more securely lurk under
them, though Originally the cause of both be the infinite Love of God, in which
Christ was given, who offered up himself a most sweet and satisfactory
Sacrifice, as the Ransom, the Atonement, the Propitiation for our sins; But as
to our being Justified, it is by Christ and his Spirit, as he comes in our
hearts truly and really to make us Righteous; which because we are thus made,
therefore are we accounted so of him, as the Apostle plainly intimats in the 1
Cor. 6. 11. That it is by the Spirit of God we are Justified, nor is this any
conivance with Papists, who as is abovesaid deny Justification in this manner;
and it is but to befool children and simple ignorants, that he covers himself
so much with the general term of Protestants, as if our Doctrine were generally
denied by all such, seeing many and that very Famous Protestants, have been of
our mind, and have eagerly pleaded for this real Righteousness, as to
Justification against his sense of it; particularly, Ossinder one of the first
and most Renowned Reformers of Germany, who not without ground, avered Luther
to be of this Judgment.

And Melancton, in the Apology of the Augustinian Confession, says, To be
Justified in Scripture, not only signifies to be pronounced Just, but to be
made Just or Regenerate; Johannes, Brentius, and Cheminitus, admit also of the
same signification; so Epinus, and Bucenus include, in Justification, not only
forgiveness of sins, but Regeneration, and Righteousness, wrought in us: And
Borheus, sive Cellanus, a Germane Protestant, and professor of Theology at
Basil; In the Imputation, says he, by which Christ is ascribed, and imputed to
believers for Righteousness, both the merit of His Blood, and the holy Spirit
given unto us by the virtue of his merits, is equally included; and thus says
he, we shall consider wholly Christ proposed to us unto Salvation, and not a
part of him; lib. in Genesis Page 162. again, Page 169. he says, In our
Justification Christ is considered, who Breaths and Lives in us; Viz. Put on
by us through his Spirit. And Page 181. he says, The form of our Justification
is the Divine Righteousness, whereby we are formed Just, and Good; this is
Jesus Christ, who is esteemed our Righteousness, partly by the forgiveness of
sins, partly by the Restoration and Renovation to Integrity, lost by the fall
of the first Adam; He being put on by us, as the new and heavenly Adam, of
which the Apostle, Ye have put on Christ, put him on I say, as a form; i. e.
the Wisdom Righteousness and Life of God. And, Pareus de, just. Cont. Bellar.
lib. 2. cap. 7. Page 469. We, says he, neither ever spoke nor thought the
Righteousness of Christ to be imputed to us, that by it we were and might be
named formally Righteous, as we have often now showed; for surely that should no
less fight with reason, then if one quite absolved in Judgment, should say, he
were formally Righteous by the mercy of the Judge. These are the plain and
positive expressions of several famous Protestants; though W. M. reckons G.
Keith's words, mentioned by him Page 5. 5. as Popish, which are nothing
different from these: And of late, R. Baxter (whom W. M. Page 37. terms, A
Juditious Servant of God) holds this Doctrine throughout, in his Book termed,
Aphorisims of Justification; who Page 80. says, That some Ignorant Wretches,
gnash their teeth at this Doctrine, as if it were flat Popery; not
understanding the nature of the Righteousness, of the new Covenant; which is
all out of Christ in our selves, though wrought by the power of the Spirit of
Christ. Page 195. He says, How this differs from the Papist he need not tell
any Scollar who have read their writings; hereby the Inteligent Reader may
observe how ridiculous, if not malicious, W. M. is, in making such a noise; as
if we were in this matter, either going with Papists or opposing Protestants.

In his second, Section, Page 58. Though he would be making a great bussle, of
our speaking of Justification by works, yet in the very entry, he cannot deny
but he is for it; According to the true sense and meaning of the Spirit: And
therefore it remains to prove, that ours is not so.

His alleging from some words of Samuel Fisher, Where he speaks of works
having merit, says nothing, for the question recurrs concerning the
signification of the word Merit, which we use in a qualified sense; for we say
that works are no other ways Meritorious, then as they are rewarded, Merit and
reward being relative terms, as I told him, in my last, to which he returns
no answer: And thus is solved, Sam. Fishers using of that argument, mentioned
by him, Page 60 (to whom he foolishly supposes, I cannot reconcile my self;
without being of a higher strain then for a reward of Merit) to wit, That as
Condemnation, is the reward of evil works; so Eternal Salvation, and
consequently Justification, is the reward of good works. Now, Merit in a
quallified sense, does not import an absolute desert, according to strict
Justice, as on our part, but a sutableness, agreableness, or congruity,
according to these Scriptures, Mat. 3. 8. Bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, the Greek word is (...), which signifies Moritorious, or Worthy,
and the same Greek word is used in these other Scriptures, 1 These. 2. 12. Walk
worthy of God, 2 These. 1. 5. That ye may be counted Worthy of the Kingdom of
God. And thus R. Baxter speaks of Merit, in the Book above mentioned, Page
90. in a large sense, says he, As promise is an obligation, and the thing
promised is called debt, so the performers of the conditions are called Worthy,
and their performance Merit; Though properly; it is all of Grace, and not of
debt.

Moreover, whereas Augustine, Bernard, and others of the Fathers, uses the word
Merit, in this qualified sense, W. M. and his Brethren can give it the right
hand, but where we use it; notwithstanding, we tell them the simplicity of our
meaning, we must be upbraided with Popery.

It is here, observeable, How he turns it to my reproach, That I seem to draw
near, in the least, to any of the moderate sort of Papists; And yet as to
things, wherein I charged him of affinity with them, he returns no solid
answer, but says, I must not be credited; Yea, he plainly, not only draws
near, but fully acknowledges his agreement with them. Saying, They hold some
things common with the Orthodox.

His third, and fourth Section, contains not any thing of a solid reply, to
that which is writ from Page 36. to 44. of my last, which the Reader by
comparing them may easily observe, He begins alleging, That Romans 3. 28. Gal.
2. 19. must exclude all works, even the Works of Christ in us; And that
because, the Apostle must be supposed, to exclude either evil or good Works,
not evil, therefore good; And consequently, the Works of Christ in us. But as I
told him in my last, some Works may be good materially, which proceeding not
from the Spirit of God, but man's own Spirit, are therefore excluded; And thus
the case of Abraham does not answer, who though a godly-man, was capable
sometimes, to have done Works from his own Spirit.

It is here observeable, How he seeks to shift, that which I enforce upon him,
from Tit. 3. 5. Alleging, He mentioned it in opposition to Justification by
Works; as the meritorious cause thereof; But of this, there was not one word:
Where he cites in his Dialogue, Page 20. nor does he answer any thing, for that
which I infer from this Scripture, showing Page 37. of my last, to which I
refer the Reader, he having wholly omitted it, that by this Scripture, where
the Apostle says, According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, the Apostle includes good works as to Justification; now all this
he shuffles over, as Insulting Triumphing words; And yet notwith-standing, he
himself insults here, as though he had found us guilty of Popery, though what
we say in this matter, be no other then what is clearly asserted, by these
famous Protestants above mentioned; and more particularly by R. Baxter, in his
Book aforesaid, from Page 185. to the end, where he says, That we are
Justified by Works, in the same kind of causality as by Faith, Viz. as causae
sine quibus non, conditions, or quallifications of the new Covenant, requisite
on our part, in order to Justification; showing, How the Apostle Paul, in the
places above mentioned, excludes only the Works of the Law from Justification,
and never at all the Works of the Gospel as they are the conditions of the new
Covenant; and there he refutes W. M's. exposition upon Isa. 2. 12. As if our
Justification, were only Justified by Works, or we declared Just by them
before men, And seeing W. M. has declared he has so good an esteem of R.
Baxter I refer him to read, how he is refuted by him, as being to large to be
here inserted.

Page 65. 66. To overturn that which is said by me, concerning the Faith,
Knowledge, and Obedience of the Saints, Page 38. 39. of mine; But his
Impertinency will be more then manifest, if the Reader do but look unto the
place, for I show him how faith was not always attended with doubting, by the
example of Abraham; And therefore his example of the Light and the Air is
foolish, for faith and doubt, are not only distinct but opposite, and not mixed
as is the Air and Light; and a little Gold may be perfect, and unmixed with
dross, so may little faith be perfect in its measure without doubting; And
though the knowledge and obedience of the Saints, be not such as there can
nothing be added unto, or answerable to the infinite Love of God, yet, that
does not prove them in what they are to be defined.

His Answer, to that Scripture brought by me, 1 John 3. 9. He that is born of
God sins not, is most Impious and Antichristian, as if the words imported
only, He makes not a trade of sinning, for accordingly he might argue, that
where it is said, Commit no Adultery, do not Steal, Murder, etc. it is only
understood, that we ought not to make a trade of these sins, but yet might
practice them now and then.

Page 67. He adds, That (as the Prophet Esa. 64. 6. says) not all our
righteousness which is of thy working in us, is as filthy rages; so neither as
we say, all our righteousness, which we, even the best of Saints can perform,
of and from themselves, are as filthy rags, from thence infering; That because
of this general term all, even the Righteousness of Christ in us, ought to be
accounted as filthy rags, but for this he brings no proof; and as the Prophet
says All, so he says Our, which implies it to be different from the
Righteousness of Christ: As he proceeds in the same Page, he is highly
confused, first he says, It ought not to make us ashamed, that our
Righteousness (understanding that which Christ works in us) are as filthy rags,
and then he says, That they are a special Ornament to the Soul, making it, in
Beauty to resemble God: And again, to get ground he says, That as so,
Imperfection cleaves to the very Grace of God here, absolute blasphemy; Can
there be any thing more confused and contradictory then to say, That which is
defiled, as filthy rags, is a special Ornament to the Soul, or makes it in
Beauty to resemble God.

In Answer, to Page 40. 41. He replies nothing, only grants, That the Saints in
heaven are cleansed but not on earth, which instead of reply, is a mere begging
the thing in question. He closes up this Section to prove, The Righteousness
of the Saints is defiled, with his old instance, of clean water passing through
an unclean pipe, alleging it, By me not to be weakened, though I do no ways
answer what I said against it Page 41. to wit, That Spiritual Water, is not
like outward Water, which an unclean pipe can defile, but is like the Fire, and
Light, which though it touch unclean things cannot be defiled, because every
thing of the Spirit is undefilable as is the Spirit; And whereas he desires me,
To instruct him of an outward Water, which is not capable of defilement, I
refer him to a more diligent study in his Physics, of which it seems he is
very ignorant, and that he may not have reason to think this a shift, let him
read the Essays of the Virtuosi in France; And those termed the Royal Society
at London, and he will find such a thing both practicable and practiced.

He begins his fourth Section Page 70. with a gross piece of dis-ingenuity, in
mentioning a part of my words, where I say, Justification is taken for making a
man righteous, and then it is all one with Sanctification, thereupon alleging,
I confound Justification, and Sanctification; whereas he omits the very former
sentence wherein I say, Justification is also taken, as Gods Judging men unto
Eternal Life, but this deceit, the Reader may at more length observe, by
looking to Page 41. of my last; And in that he adds, Men are not made Righteous
by an inward Righteousness, he does greatly declare his ignorance, for if men
can really be made Righteous, without Righteousness be really in them, by that
which is wholly in another, then they might as well be really made holy without
any inward holiness, and this were rather to confound that which God
distingisheth, and to alter the Scripture sense of the word Justify: He
alleges; That Phil. 3. 8. disclaimes the Righteousness of Christ, but brings
no proof for it, and as to his Comentaries, he must advert, he is not in the
Pulpit, and must bring nothing here without probation: And whereas I show, That
this argument from the 2 Cor. 5. 12. is most absurd and impious, because
accordingly it would follow, that as Christ was made sin for us, who of himself
knew no sin, no not in the least, so we may be made righteous before God,
though we have no Holiness, no Faith, no good thing wrought in us, he terms
this an impudent wresting of his words, alleging, That the strength of of his
argument lies in that; As our sins are inherent in us, and imputed to Christ,
so his Righteousness is inherent in him and imputed to us, but he does not show
me, how this in the least solves the consequence above deduced, which follows
as before; And as for that excellent gloss, which he says, A certain one put
on these words, it would appear the more such, that it had some shadow of proof
for it, it is with a fools consequence that he calls; This which I show was
deduceable from his words, my Inference, charging me with it, as if I were,
Impious and absurd, to imagine that God should except one as Righteous in his
sight, and yet his Person remain abhored as an unholy sinner; did I ever assert
any such thing, or can there be any thing more ridiculous, then for him to
dream I imagine that to be true, which I reprove in him as false, absurd and
impious, in the like manner he condemns me as impious, for insinuateing, that
they are against inward holiness seeing as he says, They profess that without
holiness none can see God, it is true, they say so sometimes, and therein often
contradict themselves, as is above remarked, yet seeing they look not upon it,
as any ways necessary to Justification, and terms the best of it, but as
filthy rags, their seeming to plead for it does but bewray their ignorance and
confusion: Now whereas to prove that works of the pure Spirit of God, are not
all as filthy rags, I did inquire of him, if the Apostles did sin in writing
the Scriptures?

He Answers, First, That it was a singular extraordinary thing, and so
supposes they might have been preserved.

Secondly, He demands, What were the hazard to aver, that they were wanting in
that which they ought to have had?

As to the First, it is but an evasion without proof, what singular and
extraordinary thing is in some of Paul's Epistles, which are concerning his
outward occasions; and if the last be admitted as I find he fears, I find he
will be forced to do, it overturns his example of clean water passing through
an unclean pipe, or else he must acknowledge the Scriptures are defiled, because
they come through the Apostles, whom his Principles obliges him to believe, not
to have been perfect.

In his Seventh Head, Page 74. He summarily passes over, and that by large
omissions, what is contained in the 44, 45, 46, and 47 Pages of my last, which
if the Reader do but review, he may easily discover that silly shift which he
uses; To wit, that he means to be thrifty of his Paper, in answering the
Quakers self-advancing words, seeing he is such a good manager of his Paper, he
might have bestowed some of that he has lavished, in the large Capital Titles
of his many Heads and Sections, to show the Impertinency or vanity of my words,
and then he might have been the better credited, after he has omited my answer,
wherein I clear the Quakers from that calumny, of exalting themselves; showing
they do therein no more then all other professions have done, and do do.

He adds, with a great exclamation, Oh, it is intolerable Pride to villifie
all the Saints and Servants of God in the World, and to shut them out from
being of Christ's stock! a strange inference, according to which we must
conclude, that because Luke called Theopilus (...), or most good, that
therefore there was none good but he, W. M. will do well to go back to the
Grammar School, and there learn the natures of degrees of Comparison, and when
he has instructed himself there, he may next look over his Logicks, and there
he will find that Majus and minus, non variat speciem, i. e. less or more of a
thing changes not its nature or kind; I suppose he will not deny but there are
several sorts of Christians, who though they do all profess Christianity, yet
are more or less pure in their Doctrine, Discipline, or Practice, is it not
upon this score, that the Calvenist has separated from the Lutheran, and the
Presbyter from the Episcopalian; Certainly W. M. himself looked upon
Independancy, as more pure then Presbytery, when he separated with the
Congregationists at Aberdeen, and Communicated apart with them; and yet his
practice now shows that he does not exclude, even, Episcopacy from Christ's
stock, though his Independent and Presbyterian Brethren, do look upon it, if
not within the walls, at least, in the Suburbs of Rome. Neither is this Clamuny
against us as if we trusted in our selves that we were Righteous, and despised
others, (for so he misapplieth the parable, Luke 18. 9.) any other then the
same which those of Rome used against the first Reformers, to wit, they were
Proud, and Boasters, as if all the World had been in darkness before them; Or
as if they were Wiser; then all the Doctors, and Fathers of the Church, seeking
to inovate the order thereof, which had been confirmed, by the Unanimous
consent of so many Generations.

It is observable, How here, as in other places, he is so ready to lay claim to
the Protestant Churches, alleging, That in disdain I call them their flocks,
which is utterly falls, I speak of their Hocks as inferior to the People called
Quakers, in point of mortification; But that I intended thereby the Protestant
Churches, is but his groundless conjecture; I let him understand I look not
upon their flocks as deserving the name of Protestants, and that because of
their shameless degenerating from such as were first so called, among whom as I
freely confess, there were several of a heavenly, and spiritual conversation;
So I look upon W. M. and his Brethrens laying claim unto them, but as the
Jews, boasting of Abraham as their Father. After the same disingenious manner
he concludes, That the Persons he spoke of in his Dialouge, as having such not
able Enjoyments of, and Communion with God, were from Quakerism, etc. But
answers not a word of Page 46. of mine, where I show, that those Professors
agreed with us, in many of these things wherein, W. M. And his Brethren oppose
us, but particularly, in the matter of the Spirits immediate teaching, it is
then likly they would have been far from us, especially considering, that
several who have received and owned the Quakers Testimony at Aberdeen, are such
who were the most-Intimate Friends, even in Spiritual Matters with these
Professors, whereas W. M. and some other of his Brethren, who walked also among
them that are not come to own the Qaukers, are degenerated and gone back unto
that which all of them acknowledged to be Antichristian; for which their gross
backsliding and degenerating, (to use rightly his own misaplied instance) it is
without doubt these Professors, would have lookt-upon him and his Brethren as
Monstrous, and abhored their treacherous, Time-serving, Turnings with the
greatest detestation.

Head 8. Page 77. He avers us to be guilty of equivocating, and that because we
say we are for Baptism, and yet are against Baptism with water; The reason
alleged is, because Baptism, is commonly understood of Baptism with water, and
therefore to understand it otherwise, he concluds, is to speak lies in
hypocrisy, etc. But this conclusion, is founded upon a supposition denied by
us, and therefore it is a mere begging of the thing in question, for since we
deny that common, because corrupt, acceptance of the word Baptism and gives it
the true one (as in its place shall be shown) therefore we are not obliged to
put another meaning upon it, then we are persuaded it ought to be understood;
But this calumny against us, as equivocaters or liars, W. M. has also borrowed
from the Papist, who used to upbraid the Protestans, for saying they were for,
or of the Catholic Church, because the Papist will have the Church of Rome
only to be the Catholic Church, but the Protestants denied her to be so, and
therefore would not call her so, even as we deny the sprinkling with water to
be Baptism, and therefore will not account it that which it is not, but reserve
the name; to that which truly is the thing, according to the Scriptures.

The like may be said of the Lords Supper, I mean that which is so called.

Head 9. Page 78. Because he can produce nothing against my concession of
singing of Psalms, he suspects I mean not honestly, and that because none of
his spies whom he sends to our Meetings, have had occasion to be witnesses to
our practice in this thing, which says just nothing: Why might not, W. M. his
intelligencers fail him in this as well as his brothers David Lial did, in
telling him, That there was not one word spoken among the Quakers at their
Meeting, the 3 of the 11 Month 1670. Which though a manifest untruth in matter
of fact, he spared not to bring forth in his Chair of verity, upbraiding the
Magistrates as if God had miraculously sent an Officer, to stop or Impede our
Worship, though they had refused to do it. The story of I. Nailor, which he
subjoynes, any may observe to be merely brought in to render us odious, and
fill up the paper, though indeed it tends no ways to our disadvantage, he
being in that thing, and at that time, altogether denied by us, and has since
in print freely acknowledged his fall in that hour of Temptation, of whose
sincere Repentance, and true return to the fellowship of the Truth, we have had
many evident tokens, whereas were we to retort, we could find a thousand to one
among your Church members, many whereof are daily knit up for Thieving, Murder,
etc. and some burnt for Wichcraft, without the least sense of true Repentance.

For to vindicate their manner of singing with a mixed Multitude, he alleges,
That all men, yea all the Earth are called to praise God; and though all be
called to do so, yet there are things absolutely needful previous to this duty,
and granting their want of praising to be sinful, yet the way to prevent this
evil is to come first to that, wherein they may be in a capacity to do it
acceptably, therefore says the Apostle, I will sing with the spirit, and I
will sing with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15. where he speaks of
singing he always subjoynes the instrument, wherewith it is altogether needful
that we take it, and that the same may be urged in the case of Praying without
any absurdity, in its place shall be shown; He says, It is no more a lie to
use words in singing which suit not our condition, such as (I water my Couch
with tears; My heart is not haughty) then to read them; but there is a great
difference betwixt reading and singing, in reading we but relate the conditions
and actions of others, as wholly distinct and extrinsick from our selves, but
in singing we do really adress our selves to God as in Prayer, and it is no
less a lie to sing to God words that suit not our condition then to pray with
them. The Saints in Scripture used such expressions as did suit the present
posture of their hearts, in their Spiritual Songs. See, Luke 1. 46. and 2. 29.
he shall not find me in the whole Bible, where they borrowed or sealed the
expressions of others experience, which no ways suited their own condition,
this is a mere humane invention which has its original from the Romish Vespers
and Mattins, and from no other foundation.

Head, 10. Concerning Baptism, Page 81. He alleges, That John distingisheth
not the matter of his Baptism from Christ, but only his work; but his proof for
this overthrowes himself, for since, as he says truly, John could only
administer Baptism with water, but Christ with the Spirit; this shows them to
have differed in the matter, for without doubt John could administer the matter
of his own Baptism, and whereas I told him they differed in the end because the
one pointed to the other, even as the shadow pointed to the substance, in stead
of replying to this, he tells me, That the Scripture speaking of John's Baptism,
calls it the Baptism of Repentance, intimating its end was to signify and Seal
remission of sins, which likewise is the end of Christ's Baptism; As this
no-wayes answers my argument, so it makes nothing to the purpose, for it is one
thing to signify Repentance, and remission of sins, and far another to know,
and possess it, which is the end and constant fruit of Christ's Baptism, Gal. 3.
27. As many of you (says the Apostle) as have been baptized unto Christ, have
put on Christ: And therefore it may be observed, that without any proof he
concludes, that John's Baptism and Christ's agree both in the matter and end.

Page 82. As a reply to Act. 19. 2 cited by me to show that they differed in
substance, he says, The meaning is not that they were ignorant of the Person
of the holy Ghost, contrary to the very express Scripture words, We have not so
much as heard if there be any holy ghost. He says further, That the Apostles
did not anew baptize such Persons, that had been baptized with the Baptism of
John, in direct contradiction to the Scripture words, ver. 5. When they heard
this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, And when Paul had laid
his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came upon them, now verse 3. she weth; That
they were baptized unto John's Baptism before, so let him clear himself here of
giving the Scripture the lie if he can.

Section, 2. Page 83. To prove the perpetuity of water Baptism he begins with
that often answered argument of the Apostles practice, adding, That though
Christ, Mat. 28. does not mention Baptism with water, so neither with the
Spirit, alleging, That thus the one may be excluded as well as the other.

Answ. Seeing Christ commanded them to baptize, it cannot be denied but it was
with his own Baptism, which is that of the Spirit; He adds, That if Baptism of
the Spirit were intended, it would infer a needless Tautology in the command of
Christ, as being all one with these words; Go Teach.

Answ. Teaching, and making men holy and Righteous, are different things, for
he will grant that he and his Brethren have been teaching People, these several
years, and yet he will have much ado to prove all their Church Members are
really made Righteous and Holy, why then does he account these two one
reckoning it a Tautology to express them severally; A little after he
insinuates, and that most falsely, that I deny Peter's commanding Cornelius to be
baptized, concealing my express words, Page 50. which are these, And though it
be said, ver. 28. that he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Christ,
yet it holds forth no command from Christ, only the thing being agreed upon
that it might be done, he bid do it, this he has left un-answered; And whereas
he adds, That doing things in the name of Christ is as much as his command, he
brings no proof for giving, but not granting, it did hold so, Mat. 18. 20. in
the case of meeting, that will not prove it is allways so taken. To evict my
objection, against any determinate Commission the Apostles had of Baptizing
with water, because Paul said, he was not sent to Baptize but to Preach, he
returns, That if he had no Commission, he would have Baptized none, but he
Baptized some, which would have been of self-will.

Answ. He might object the same as to Circumcision, that because the Apostle
Circumcised Timothy, therefore he had a Commission for it, he would not have
done it of self-will; His inference from, Hos. 6. 6. For I desire mercy and not
sacrifice, as if from thence, Paul were sent principally to Baptize and not to
Preach, as God there required only principally Mercy, not excluding Sacrifice,
is most ridiculous and inconsequential, nor is there any reason produced to
show the party, the Apostles were Commissioned to Baptize as principally as to
Preach, go Preach and Baptize are knit together; but the question is, Whether
this be a Baptism with water which remains yet unproven? And therefore his
additions to the Scripture is no ways Justified, as if Paul had been sent to
Baptize with water, but not principally.

Page 86. He undertaketh to prove that, Mat. 28. 19. is meant of Water Baptism
and not of the Spirits-Baptism, the reason alleged there, Because the Baptism
there mentioned is the action of the Apostles, and that to Baptize with the
Spirit is peculiar to Christ, adding, That it would be a confounding of the
Duty commanded, with the Promise of the blessing annexed to it; from thence he
concludes, That Baptism with water is to continue to the end of the world.

Answ. The reasons prove nothing, and might militate the same way against
Teaching, which is also there commanded as the action of the Apostles, and
though it be pecuilar to Christ to teach by the Spirit, that did not hinder
them to do it; further, the very Apostles by laying on of hands did administer
the holy Spirit, and so Baptize with the Spirit, Act. 10. 44. 19. 6. And this
is no confounding of the Promise with the duty, for therein was the Promise and
Blessing fullfiled that they did it efectually, and therefore from hence he had
no ground to conclude the perpetuity of Water Baptism; Moreover whereas he
cited in his Dialogue, Page 39. Act. 2. 28. 1. Pet. 3. 21. Act. 22 16. Ephesians. 5.
26. Gal. 3. 27. as holding forth the excellent uses of Water Baptism, though I
show him Page 5. of mine, that these Scriptures are only aplicable to Baptism
with the Spirit and not to sprinkling with water: When Page 87. he comes to
reply again, he offers not in the least to prove that they are aplicable to
Baptism with water, which is the thing in Question; but tells me, That those
Scriptures strike against the Popish opus operatum, quid inde? what then, does
it therefore follow that they are aplicable to sprinkling with water, who is so
blind as not to see through such silly subterfugies? He adds, That I proceed
upon a wrong supposition, as if they thought Baptism with water were of it self
effectual to cleanse the Soul.

Answ. I never proceeded upon such a supposition, that which I proceed upon is
this, That they should call or account sprinkling with water, the Baptism of
Christ, whereas the Scripture declares it not to be so, 2 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism
is not the putting away the filth of the flesh, etc. And also ascribe such
Scriptures to sprinkling with water, as are only applicable to the Baptism of
the Spirit, now this as is said above, he has left unanswered.

Page 88. He says, That the one Baptism spoken of, Ephesians. 4. 5. cannot be called
the substance, and Baptism with water the shadow, because they are the same
thing but this is pitifully to beg the thing in question: And thus W. Ms.
Arguments about Baptism runs round; Baptism with water is the one Baptism,
because the one Baptism is commanded by Christ, and the one Baptism is Baptism
with water, because Baptism with water is commanded by Christ; he wholly passes
by that part of Page 52. of mine, where I show how absurd and antescriptural
their manner of baptizing is, and thereby he comes the more easily to his
conclusion in this matter.

Head, 11. Concerning the Supper, Page 88. 89. He begin, confessing, That
Christ's instituting of the Supper does not prove its continuance, and here he
carps at my speaking of it with this addition, (The Lords Supper so called)
asking, Why I give it not that name the Scripture gives it.

Answ. It is to be observed, that where I speak of it thus, Page 52. of my
last, that it is in my entry upon this matter, addressing my self to him, my
words are, Thou come to prove that the Lords Supper, so called, etc. where I
intended not that which was Instituted by Christ, and had its season in the
Church, but that which they call so, but really is not so, though they seek
from this to draw a warrant for it; and whereas I show him that by breaking of
bread, Act. 2. 42. is meant their ordinary eating; His Answer is, That their
eating is not ordinary, but Scramental; and the Text speaks not of daily
eating, but a continuing daily in the Temple, and that the Syriack exposition
expounds it of the Eucharist, but it is in vain, he thinks by his Imaginations
to overturn the plain words of Scripture, Act. 2. 46. And they continuing daily
in the Temple with one accord, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart; can there be any thing more
plain, then that their breaking of bread here was their ordinary eating, and as
for his talk of Sacramental eating, where does he read of such a phrase in all
the Bible? It is ill argued to say, I am ignorant of the way of some Protestant
Churches, who uses breaking of bread once a fortnight, or once a month, because
I say, their doing of it once or twice a year is not according to the example
of such as of old used it. Page 90. He adds, That though this eating, Act. 2.
46. be conjoined with this, that they sold their possessions, etc. yet we are
to follow them in the one and not in the other, because the one was to continue
and not the other, but for this he brings no proof save his own bare
assertion. After the like manner, Page 91. He says, That though abstaining
from blood and things strangled be commanded, yet the Apostle Paul repeats it
extending Christian Liberty, to whatsoever is sold in the shambles; but
according to this he might argue, That though abstaining from Circumcission be
there commanded, yet Paul's Circumcising of Timothy might now warrant it; And
whereas he asks, If Paul Circumcised any other, what if he had not, Church
history tells us that many years after several Bishops of Jerusalem were
Circumcised, it will not therefore follow that was a repealing of the Apostles
determination by the holy Ghost, or that we should continue in the use of
Circumcission. He adds, That Washing of one another feet which was expressly
commanded, was not that we might practice it, but only to teach us humillity;
for this he adds no proof, it is only his own conjecture; upon all which I
desire the Reader to observe, how W. M. can find shifts to evict those
abovesaid which are expressly commanded by Christ and his Apostles, and yet
make such a great noise of our forbearing Water Baptism and the external
Supper, which are not more particularly pressed; as also how we can say far
more against the perpetuity of these last, then they against the former, and
yet they clamor against us, as if so much as to call the constant use of them
in question, were to despise the Ordinances of Christ, etc. He asks, What
clearer command there can be then these words, let a man examine himself and so
let him eat? But this question does not at all prove these words to imply a
command: His folly is observeable, Page 92. Where he desires, It may be
observed, That the Corinthians were to be often in the use of it, because it is
said, As often as ye eat, etc. a rare argument indeed, by which he might
conclude, that to say as often as a man sins he offends God, did import we
should sin often.

It is badly inferred, That this thing ought to continue by Divine Authority,
because the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 23. That which I received of the Lord,
have I delivered unto you, seeing the very following words declare it, to have
been the account of the matter of fact which he so received.

Sect. 1. Page 93. He slimly passes what is contained, Page 54. of mine,
alleging, I let off my great Guns, but make a noise without any spoil. The
Reader by comparing these Pages together, will easily observe his lurking in
this particular.

To my Question, What the one bread is spoken of, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16. If it be
the outward or the inward?

He Answers, It is both the inward and the outward, and yet but one, in respect
of the Sacramental Union, which is between the sign and the thing signified;
Now to this I answered, in the end of Page 54. of my last, that it cannot be
called one, because of the agreement betwixt the sign and the thing signified,
else by the same Inference one might plead for the continuance of all the
Sacrifices and Offerings, and say they are all one with the one Offering
mentioned, Heb. 10. 14. because they signified that one Offering; And whereas,
W. M. reckons this a pitiful evasion, saying, Any one may see a Non sequitur
in it, it would have become him better to have proved this by reason, then by
his own bare assertion, though any may observe this to be his constant course
when other Arguments fail him. As he proceeds to prove the continuance of this
practice, he says, It cannot be denied there was once a command for it, and
there is no repeal of it, but the same recurs in washing one-anothers feet and
anointing the sick with Oil, Jam. 5. 14. which were as expressly commanded and
never repealed, and yet W. M. can easily find a gloss to evict these, rechoning
it a small matter to forbear them, he adds, That coming of Christ, till
which, the Apostles were enjoined to be in the use of the outward Supper, must
be meant of his outward coming so many years after, because such to whom
Christ was come in the Spirit were found in the practice of it; but this proves
no more its continuance, necessitate Precepti, as he wordeth it, then the
Circumcising and being Circumcised under the Gospel, will prove Circumcission
to be binding upon us: He concludes saying, That surely we are great enemies to
our Souls that oppose this Ordinance; But answers not one word of Page 56.
where I show how great reason we have to forsake it, as also the many abuses
where with they have corrupted it; it suffiseth him to say, That it is meeter
to pass it by then to reply unto it, for part of it being about the
quallifications of Persons, W. M. is loath to tell his Judgment, least he should
harp upon the old Independent controversy; it is dangerous to touch this
string, especially while he injoyes his hire under the shadow of Episcopacy.

Head, 12. Concerning the Ministry, Page 96. He has nothing to say against my
affirming, that the Quakers own the Ministry of the Word: Page 97. speaking of
Ephesians. 4. 11. where Paul says, Christ gave some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers; He says, The first three are Extraordinary and Tempory,
the last two Ordinary and Perpetual, for this he brings no Proof at all, but
that frequent Argument, his own bare Assertion; And whereas I told him, Page
58. of mine, That the former three were not ceased, citing for Proof Calvin,
who, Inst. lib. 4. cap 3. avers, That in his day God raised up Apostles, and
Evangelists; to this he answers not one word: As he goes on he repeats my
words, where I say, That though we own the Ministry not to be common, yet that
does not hinder but that any may speak, as the Saints are met together,
according to 1 Cor. 14. 31. asking, How I can make out that? In that place is
meant an ordinary Office, though it might suffice for answer, to ask what
reason W. M. has to frame here his distinction of Ordinary and Extraordinary,
yet it is obvious, that the Apostle is here presenting the ordinary order of
the Church, he needed not present an order to extraordinary Offices, for such
as are extraordinarily sent, are also instructed how to go about their Office,
and not limited to set Rules, else it were not extraordinary. Page 98. He goes
about to prove this distinction of Mediate and Immediate asking, If the
Prophets and Apostles, were not called imediatly? And if Timothy was not set
apart to the work (imediatly) by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery?
What then? as the Apostles being called by the Lord did not hinder them from
receiving the approbation and Testimony of the Brethren, yea laying on of
hands, as did Paul, who without doubt was as imediatly sent as any of the rest,
Act. 9. 17. So Timothes having the hands of the Presbytery laid on him, does
not prove he wanted an inward imediate call in himself; it is without any proof
at all what he subjoynes, That Paul saying he was an Apostle, not by man, does
oppose himself to Ordinary Ministers; He adds, That seeing I say, That those
who come Preaching the Gospel, not in speech only, but also in Power, and in
the holy Ghost, and in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, give
sufficient proof that they are called of God; he thinks I should have favorable
thoughts of Protestant Ministers, who have given such proofs of their Call.

Answ. He should have told me what these Protestant Ministers are, whom he
says we impiously censure, or by what Rule he or his Brethren, would be laying
such claim to be Protestant Ministers, so as to exclude the Quakers from being
such.

Page 99. Though he quarrel me for saying, that with Papists he pleads for
Miracles, he is so far from vindicating himself from this charge, that he
gives again new ground for it, saying, That such as assert an imediate call,
ought to give tokens of it by Miracles, etc. adding, That though John did no
Miracles, yet his call was attended with extraordinary things at his Conception
and Birth; Now this was the very objection, which the Papists made against the
first Reformers, to whom Luther and Calvin replied, That though they had an
imediate call, yet there was no need of Miracles, and this objection of W. M.
is no other then that which almost in totidem verbis, in as many words was
objected to Beza, at the conference of Poizy in France, by Claudius Dispensus
Doctor of the Sarbone, who urged this very argument, of John the Baptist,
confirming his call by the Testimony of Malachy, etc. Alleging, That they
ought to confirm there call by Miracles; to whom these are Beza, his express
words, Hist. Eccles. of France, Page 581. And as to what dispense, thou
Allege, that extraordinary Vocation is allways aproved by Miracles, or by the
Testimony of the Prophets, I deny that it is always so verified, but if we
must come to Miracles, do you not think that the changing of the Life, the
fruit which is seen to proceed from this Doctrine in our time by Persons so
contemptable, and so much persecuted by the greatnest of the world, are not
sufficient Miracles, as said the Apostle to the Corinthians, that they were the
Seals of his Apostleship: So the rational Reader may observe, that
notwithstanding of W. Ms. so often laying claim to the Protestant Churches, and
Protestant Ministry, and crying out against us as opposers of them, he so
directly makes use of Popish arguments against us and how we defend our selves,
by no other but the very same answers the Protestants gave unto the Papists;
yea of late, W. Rett present Preacher of Dandy, in his Book against Papists,
printed but the last year at Aberdeen, does plead, That Miracles are not
needful, instancing, that John the Baptist did none; And so W. M. though he
compare us to the Jesuits in his Epistle, is so far one with them himself,
that if his evasion may be esteemed of worth, whereby he seeks to overturn this
example of John when brought by us, he will rather furnish the Jesuits with it
to fight against his Brother W. Rett, or rather borrow it out of their
atillery, whereby they fight against Protestants, then miss to have a hit at
the Quakers, may we not truly apply the instance in his Epistle to himself,
that he is sailing in one boat with Papists, though his face seems to look a
verse from them.

Page 100 He says, Whatever inward call the Elders mentioned Tit. 1. 5. Act.
14. 23. had, yet they had not an imediate call, which is by the imediate
command and voice of God without the intervention of men, but for this he adds
no proof at all; nor is there any Inconsistancy betwixt being imediatly called
by command from God, and afterward being aproved of men, or that being aproved
and set apart by man excludes having an imediate call from God.

Sect. 1. Page 101. He says, That Ephesians. 4. 13. is a pregnant and pertinent
proof for the continuance of the Ministry, which I never denied; But this does
not answer my saying, that it is impertinent as to them who deny perfection,
seeing that place says, the Ministry is for the perfecting of the Saints; now
to this he answers nothing, but that it cannot be gathered that this perfection
is on Earth, which is but his own assertion, yea by himself there after
overthrown, saying, That the Ministry is given that we may press after an
absolute full Perfection even of degrees; for it is folly to press after this
if there be no hopes of attaining it: He wholly passes by my objections against
their Ministry, Page 59. especially, in that they make not the Grace of God, a
necessary quallification to the esse or being of a Preacher, without so much as
making any mention of it, where I also show, how contrary it is to the order
delivered by the Apostles in Scripture; Therefore his conclusion is false, to
say we cast off such a Ministry, seeing he was not able to prove theirs to be
such, else he would not have wholly past in silence, my reasons showing it not
to be so.

His Thirteenth Head, Page 102. Is concerning the Sabbath or first day of the
weeks being so, as to which I desire the Reader first to take notice, that as
we believe the Apostles and primitive Christians did meet this day to worship
God, so we as following their example do the like, and forbear working, or
useing our lawful occasions upon that day as much as our Adversaries; so that
the debate is only, whether there be any inherent Holiness in this Day more
then in another, or if there be any positive command for it from Scripture?
Particularly, if the fourth command bind us to the observation of it? And here
W. M. notwith-standing of his great pretenses to the Protestant Churches, does
wholly disagree from them in this thing, who are of our mind as to it; the
generality of all the Protestants both in Germany, France, and else where out
of this Illand, do look upon the supposed morrallity of the first day of the
week as altogether ridiculous, which may be seen in Calvin upon the fourth
command, lib. inst. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 34. where he explains the signification of
it as we do, Viz. Typifiing a Spiritual Rest, wherein leaving our own works the
Spirit of God may work in us; he there refuts W. Ms. notion as a Jewish
Opinion, saying, Some false Doctors have abused ignorant People with it, adding
as we do, That the Apostle Paul reproves such superstitions, likewise he
plainly asserts, That the keeping of the first day is only for convenience,
and to preserve order in the Church, that the Saints might have a fit time set
apart to meet together to Worship; which we also say, hence does appear the
folly of that impertinent story mentioned by him, Page 105. seeking to infer,
That we agree with Papist, in taking away the fourth Command as they have done
the second, for by this he might conclude the first and chiefest Reformers
guilty of Popery, whereas himself agrees with papists both against the
Protestants abroad, and us, in pleading for this imaginary holiness of the
first day of the week, which in his Dialogue he sought to prove because Christ
did rise upon it; but to my answer showing he might from thence infer the rest
of the Popish holydaies, of His Birth, Ascension, Conception, etc. he replies
not one word, he summarly passes over what is said by me concerning this thing,
Page. 59, 60, 61, and 62, which the Reader by looking unto may observe; He
aledgeth, The fourth command speaks not precisly of the Seventh day, in order
from the Creation, and that the beginning and ending of it, mentions the
Sabbath day and not the Seventh, quid inde? etc. What then? is not the middle
of the command as observable? which says expressly, But the Seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord, there God himself expounds the Sabbath to be the Seventh
day, and W. M. must not think we will reject this exposition to accept of his
proofless glosses: My argument drawn from Coll. 2. 16, 17. Let no man judge you
in respect of a holy day or Sabbath days, and Romans 14. 6. which shows all
days to be alike and Gal. 4 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, times, and
years; He answers, aledging. These reprove not morral days, but ceremonial,
adding, That the fourth command binds to this, and therefore it cannot be more
abrogate then any of the rest of the ten commands but this is no proof at all,
only a mere begging the question, he should have more convincingly proved that
the fourth command binds to the observation of this day; Now the Apostle in
these places says not, I am afraid of you because ye observe ceremonial
days: W. M. has no bottom for this distinction, he confesses that Christ,
Mat. 24. 20. speaks nothing of the first day of the week, and therefore
overthrowes the inference he makes in his Dialogue from it, and what I further
add to show the folly of this inference from the Scripture; He has wholly
omited which the Reader may see, Page 59, 60. of my last.

Page 106. He says, Oh! the conscientious keeping of the Sabbath is a
comfortable evidence of those that shall be admitted to this Rest, viz. the
rest of the Lamb. But seeing these words are without any proof, they are only
like to have credit with such silly superstitious Bigots, as Calvin in the
place above mentioned reproves, and not with any solid serious Christians.

Sect. 2. Page 107. To prove, that the first day of the week is set apart for
the service of God, by Divine Authority, he cites, Rev. 1. 10. I was in the
Spirit on the Lords day; but whereas I told him this did no way prove that day
to be the first day of the week, because the day of the Lord, or the Lords day
in Scripture, is not limited to any particular day.

He answers, That these two ought not to be confounded, for all days wherein
the Lord executes judgment, are days of the Lord; but the Lords day,
mentioned, Rev. 1. is but one. For this he brings no proof but his own mere
assertion: As Ignatius calling the first day of the week, The Queen of days,
does not prove that Lords day, spoken of by John, to be the first day, so if
Ignatius had been of this mind, and had esteemed of it above other days, that
makes nothing against us; we know this Superstition was creeping into the
Church before Ignatius's time, therefore the Apostle Paul warned the Galatians,
Gal. 4. 10, 11.

To prove this day spoken of by John to be the first day of the week, he says,
Christ appeared to his Disciples, declared himself to be the Son of God, upon
the first day of the week; That it is supposed that was the day the Spirit was
poured forth: And that Beza, in an ancient Greek Manuscript, did find the first
day of the week called the Lords day. But all this does not in the least prove
the matter in question, except this may suffice for proof, W. M. thinks this
will infer the day of the Lord, spoken of by John, to be the first day of the
week, therefore it is so. There may be Superstition-enough found in old Greek
Manuseripts; It is near fourteen hundred years since the Eastern and Western
Churches were like to split about the observation of Easter, and yet
Protestants with good reason look upon that Controversy as both Superstitious
and frivolous.

Now giving, but not granting this day spoken of by John, were the first day of
the week, How does he prove from this, that the first day of the week is come
to Christians in place of the Jewish Sabbath, or that it stands as an
obligation upon them, as a part of the moral Law whereunto we are bound by the
forth Command, which though it be the chief thing in debate remains yet
unproved; seeing then he has had very few proofs for these his supposed
Ordinances but such as are only bottomed upon his own affirmations, the
Juditious Reader may judge it is with out ground he concludes here that we deny
the Ordinances of Christ and not the inventions of men.

His fourteenth Head, Page 109 Is concerning Original sin so called, which the
Reader by comparing with Page 62, 63, 64, and 65. of mine, will see that he
makes no real, but a mere counterfeit show of answer; and I desire the Reader
first to observe, That neither here nor in his Dialogue, he does not so much as
offer to prove that this phrase Original sin, is to be found in Scripture; and
for all his pretenses to make the Scripture his rule, he has no ground from
this, but from Popish Tradi ion.

Secondly, That we grant a real Seed of sin, derived from Satan which Adams
Posterity is liable to; But we say, none become guilty of this before God
nutill they close with this evil Seed, and in them who close with it, it
becomes an Origin or Fountain of evil thoughts, desires, words and actions:

And as by granting all capeable of receiving this real Seed of sin we differ
from the Socinians, and Pelagians; So by saying it is not the Childrens sin
until they do close with it: We agree with Zuinglius a famous Protestant, who
for this very Doctrine was condemned by the Council of Trent, in the Art. of
the Fifth Ses. Cons. Trent, lib. 2. Page 208. The acts of which Council, not
only against us, but against this famous founder of the Protestant Churches in
Zuitserland, is that which W. M. is here vindicating.

Thirdly, I desire the Reader may observe, That the thing he pleads for is,
that Infants are really guilty before God, that Infants are guilty before God
simply for Adams sin; And that some of them who die in their Infancy, and never
actually sin in their own Persons, do for this sin of Adam Eternally perish:
Now whither this Doctrine be suitable either to the Justice or Mercy of God, I
leave the Christian Reader to judge. I shall examine the reasons he brings for
it, his chief argument for this in his Dialogue Page 47. was, That because
Children die, citing Romans 23. The wages of sin is death, now I show him, Page,
64. of mine, how that made nothing, because natural Death of the Saints is not
the wages of sin; for their sins are forgiven them, etc. this he has not so
much as mentioned, far less answered; And whereas he might as well argue that
the Earth, Trees and Herbs were sinners, because they received great decay by
Adams sin; He slightly passes it over, aledging, It will not therefore follow,
that all mankind who suffer Death are not Sinners; Now this is no answer but a
mere shift, and the thing I intended against his assertion, does very naturally
follow from my argument; thus, If as W. M. says. Infants be guilty of Adams
Sin, because they are subject to diseases and Death, then the Beasts who are
subject to the like, and the Earth, Herbs and Trees, who have received their
decay are sinners before God; but this is absurd, therefore the other, let him
answer this the next time more effectually.

The first proof he brings here is, 1 John 3. 6. That which is born of the
flesh is flesh, adding, This intimates man by his natural Birth to be Corrupt
and Fleshly; But for this his gloss he brings no proof; though, That which is
born of the flesh be flesh, he shows us not how it follows thence, that
Infants are guilty of Adams Sin; after the like manner he concludes this his
doctrine from, Job. 14. 4. Psalm. 5. 5. But as the words in these places do not
plainly express any such thing, so he brings no reason to make his consequences
deduceable from them; after the like proof-less manner he aledgeth, Romans 5. 14.
By one man's disobedience many were made sinners; Now, though the matter in
question be, Whether these many were made sinners before they actually sinned
in their own Persons? He does not so much as offer to prove it; in the like
manner, though David said his Mother conceived him in sin, he shows us not
how it follows from thence, that David was guilty of sin before he actually
sinned; and here I observe how he asserts, That men are guilty of the sin of
their immoderate Parents, contrary to the plain Testimony of the Scripture
Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Son shall not bare the iniquity of the Father: To prove
Infants thus guilty he further adds, Romans 5. 12. aledging these words; For
that all have sinned, includes Infants, but I show him this includes not
Infants, because the Apostle clears it in the next verse, saying, Sin is not
imputed where there is no law, and that there being no Law to Infants, they
cannot be guilty of sin; To this he replies, There was a Law to Adam and that
he represented mankind, and stood as a publik Person, Therefore Children had a
Law in him; But for this signification of his own he produces no proof, and it
cannot be received, as being direct contrary to the Scripture above mentioned,
The Son shall not bare the Fathers iniquity; He aledgeth, That those the
Apostle speaks of who sinned not after the similitude of Adams Transgression
are Infants, but after his usual manner brings not the least proof for it:
the, 1 Cor. 15. 22. cited by him, is so far from making any thing for his
purpose, that it makes directly against him, which any that have the least
grain of true understanding may perceive; the words are, As in Adam all died,
even so in Christ, all are made alive; for here all are said to die in Adam,
even as all are said to be made alive in Christ; now as none are made alive in
Christ until they actually receive, and join with his Righteousness, so none
die in Adam until they actually receive, and join with his unrighteousness,
etc. He makes a deal a do Page 110, 111. about the Greek (...), wherein though
it were easy to refute him, were it not needless to fill up paper with
Gramatical Criticismes; for giving, but not granting the words might be
Translated, in Adam all have sinned, it will not from thence follow that
Infants are guilty before they actually sin, seeing all are said to die, or
have sinned in Adam, even as all are said to be made alive in Christ; and yet
none are said to be so, until they actually receive his Righteousness as is
above demonstrated.

Page 113. He aledgeth, Though it be said that the Kingdom of God is of little
Children, yet some Infants are not saved, because they are not of the Kingdom
of Grace; But for this he brings no proof at all: And I here take notice,
That he acknowledges, that God Sanctifies and Regenerats some Infants, and
thereby he notably conradicts his second Sect. concerning the Light. And Page
29. of his Dialogue, where he condems it, as a dangerous error in us, to say
any can be saved without the outward knowledge of Christ, of which Infants are
not capable to prove, That some Infants perish, even eternally, He aledgeth,
The burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, citing Jude. 7. But his wresting this
Scripture is very manifest, for the reason Jude gives of their suffering
vengance, was, because they gave themselves up to Fornication, and went after
strange flesh; Now of this Infants were not capable, of whom therefore Jude.
speaks not one word. He terms Impudent or else Ignorant, for bringing, Mat. 1.
22. against them, aledging, It is an unjust charge, to say they plead for a
Salvation in their sins; and yet he has the Impudence immediately to aver it
himself, saying, They are but in part delivered or saved in this Life; do they
not then dream of Salvation while in part they remain in their sins? Compare,
Math. 1. 21. with 1 John 1. 7. Christ is said to cleanse us from all iniquity,
not a part of it: It is a bad inference drawn from my assertion, that Children
are not guilty of sin, to say that therefore they need not a Savior; I told
him in my last, Christ was truly a Savior unto them in that he kept them from
sinning, as one that is kept from faling in a ditch is as truly saved as he
that is taken out of one: It is altogether Inconsequential to infer from this,
That Christ died to save the holy Angels from sin, because they are not
suffered to fall into it, for Christ is said only to have died for Adams
Posterity, of which number Infants are, but not Angels. It is likewise without
reason, that he compares us to Pelagians, as if we took from Christ the name
Jesus, seeing it has been shown we own him to be Jesus, or Savior to all, even
to Infants.

He begins his fifteenth Head, Concerning the perseverance of the Saints,
Page 115. Aledging, That in saying the Quakers hold not a falling away from
Regeneration, I seek to hide my self; Because G. Keith says, That Saints may
fall away from saving Grace; asking, if Saints be Regenerate.

Answ. Though all that be fully Regenerate are Saints, yet some may be called
Saints who are not fully Regenerate.

Page 116. He aledgeth, It is in vain to assert this falling away; because it
is said, Some who believed afterward fell away, and some make shipwreck of the
Faith; and some who tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the life
to come, etc. Because they use to distingish betwixt seeming counterfeit Grace,
and sound saving Grace.

Answ. Can there be any more palpable wresting of Scripture? For if so be, that
Faith which they had were not real, they were not to be blamed for falling away
from it, it were their mercy to make shipwreck of that which was counterfeit:
The Apostle speaks positively, Heb. 6. 4. of the capacity of such to fall away,
who were once enlightened, who have tasted of the heavenly gift, yea, who were
partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God; and the
powers of the world to come; he says not they seemed to be so: Nay the very
context shows the contrary, saying, It is imposible to renew such again to
repentance; Now had this been all in appearance, the Apostle needed not to
speak of renewing them again to repentance, or say, they crucify the Son of
God afresh, seeing if so, they had never been penitent and been allways
Crucifiers of Christ; whereas in answer to Phil. 1. 6. I told him it might be
supposed that Paul was as confident that God would perfect the work in himself
as in any other, and yet he supposes the contrary where he says, Least
preaching the gospel to others, I my self become a castaway; to this he
replieth nothing, but cites another Scripture, Jer. 32. 29. I will give them
one heart that they may fear me for ever; though God give them this, that they
may fear him yet such may abuse the gift of God, and so run out of his fear, he
gives to all his Grace, and yet it is said, that some turn it unto wantonness,
Jud. 4. He jeereth at my answer to Peter, saying, A goodly reply forsooth, as
if he had said, if the Saints fall from Faith they must fall, but he might
spare his insulting, until he had found some way to answer my words, which are,
That those that abide not in the Power of God through Faith, must fall away;
for he might as well Scoff at all the conditional Promises of the Gospel, such
as, He that continues steadfast to the end shall obtain the crown: To say that
Faith and the Power of God concurs to prevent the Saints faling away, answers
nothing, for so long as these concur, we do not deny it, and though they be
allways willing to concur, yet it is clear that some who have believed, not
counterfetily but really have departed from the power and so fallen away as is
above shown.

Page 117. Upon the words of, Jer. 32. 40. He says, It proves the perseverance
or impossibillity of faling away, because it is said, God put his fear in their
hearts for this end, That they might not depart from him, what then, that does
not prove that they cannot depart from him, Christ came to his own for this
end, that he might save them; and yet it is said they received him not, Joh. 1.
11. He says, I make short work of these Scriptures, Joh. 10. 27, 28. Joh. 13.
1. 1 John 2. 19. because I say, they speak of those who were come to a through
Regeneration, which he says is without proof; But the Reader by looking unto
them will find they cannot be understood otherways, then of such as are
thoroughly Regenerate, and it appears he was sensible of this, having produced
nothing to the contrary, and whereas he adds, That if those who are thoroughly
Regenerate were only to persevere, then this were the privilege of Saints in
heaven, and not in earth, who never come to be so; there can be nothing more
rediculus, then this manner of arguing, seeing that question whether the Saints
can be perfectly Regenerate on Earth is as much in debate as the other? That
objection of his, as if from this Doctrine it might follow one were a Child of
God to day, and a Child of the Devil to morrow, I answered in my last. Page 66.
to which he returns no answer, and therefore it is disingenuity in him to
bring it forth here again; and whereas in Page 66, 67. of my last I show him
how he contradicted himself in this matter, by granting some of the Quakers to
have been truly converted, and yet now to condemn them as Apostates; he is so
far from reconciling it, that he avers it a new in plain terms saying, Page
118. That some of them have felt a gracious opperation on their hearts; and
Page 9. He cannot but think That some of them were savingly wrought upon, and
yet adds, That it is clear that they have Apostatised from the Truth; Now to
reconcile this he has nothing to say, But he trusts the Lord will convince
them.

Answ. As some of them, to whom he and his Brethren were forced to give the
Testimony of gracious Persons, have already departed this Life not only not
shrinking from, but even Testifying to these Truths he calls error, so others
whom they have also accounted gracious, having been at deaths door have
asserted the same Truth and rejoiced in it, which suffiseth to overturn his
vain confidence, and truly such a groundless hope is but a poor shift to
reconcile so palpable a contradiction; whereby while in words they condem this
Doctrine of the capacity of man's falling away from Grace, yet as to the
experience of some particulars they are forced to acknowledge it, for fear they
should fall in greater Inconveniences of granting some among the Quakers to be
choice Saints.

His Sixteenth Head, Page 119. Is to prove the danger of Quakerisme, as he
terms it, but that his folly may appear in this particular, I desire the
Reader first to observe our Principle which he concludes so hazardous, even as
repeated by himself Page 121. Viz. That a man cannot, nor ought not to Pray
without the Spirits motion; and to say none can Pray without it, has no bad
tendency, because all such Prayers as are performed without the help of the
Spirit, are Abomination, not true Prayers, but hypocritical and deceitful; Now
he cannot deny this, and therefore grants it to be true, yea says plainly in
the next Page, That Prayer without the Spirit is Abomination, And whereas he
adds, That forbearing of Prayer is also Abomination, we do not deny it, but
freely confess, that forbearing of Prayer in the wicked is sinful, but the way
to prevent this, is not to commit a second evil, Viz. to Pray without the
Spirit, they ought first to come to the Spirit, that thereby they may Pray
acceptably, according to that of Paul, Romans 8. 26. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should Pray for as we ought:
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groans that cannot be
uttered, 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the Spirit; which being brought by me
in my last, he has wholly omitted so much muchasto mention, far less to
answer: And though omiting of Prayer be sinful, yet to bid a man Pray without
the Spirit, is as much as to desire a man to see without opening his eyes: This
thing may appear by a familar example, thus, suppose a servant turn slugard,
and sleep while he should be about his Masters work, if when he is raised out
of his bed he should run naked to it, without taking along those Tools or
Instruments which are absolutely needful for the doing of it, what will he
profit either himself or his Master? Yea he will but hinder the work more: Even
so the wicked, as they ought to Pray, so they ought first to come to the
Spirit, whereby they may do it to the glory of God, and their own Souls good.
Now though this be so undeniable that he cannot gainsay it, yet in
contradiction to the Truth and his own Concessions, he goes about to cavil
against it, aledging, It might take off men as well from their necessary works,
because the ploughing of the wicked is sin; and that also it might follow from
this, That Children should not honor their Parents, and Husbands love their
Wives, but when they have a motion of the Spirit for it.

Answ. This objection has no weight to overturn the Truth, for there is a
great difference betwixt these things that relate to the worship of God, and
what relates to outward things, either concerning our selves or our neighbors;
The worship of God is a Spiritual thing relating to himself, which we are
commanded to perform in the Spirit, and God does offer us his Spirit for the
performance of it; And because it is that which is merely relative betwixt God
and the Soul, he does not accept of it but as so offered, we cannot Pray as we
ought says the Apostle, But the Spirit helps, etc. Now though these other
things would no doubt be the more acceptable to God, and more frequently
accompanied with his blessing, that they were done in the sense of his fear,
and in the drawings of his Spirit, yet they are materially good in themselves,
answering really their end to them unto whom they immediately relate without it,
but it is not so of Prayer, which as it immediately relates to God, so W. M.
himself confesses without the Spirit to be Abomination: Thus is also solved
his supposition, Page 1 124. That if a wicked man contract guilt he may provoke
the Lord to withdraw the motions of the Spirit, and then his not Praying is not
sin, for I have asserted, that the not Praying of the wicked is sinful, and
this does not lull People in a sinful security; on the contrary they are like
rather to be lulled in such a security by being told they may be set about
Prayer when they please, whereby they foster themselves in a groundless hope,
because of their now and then repeating their words of Prayer, neither
expecting nor looking for the Spirits assistance, whereby instead of advancing
in Grace and Righteousness, they do but reiterate Abominations, and so
aggrevate their own guilt: And whereas here he is forced to acknowledge, that
motives of the Spirit will not be wanting to the Saints to Pray when they are
at the gates of Death, or in danger of present Drownding; He asks me, What
shall the wicked do in this case? Shall they not follow the advice which Peter
gave to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 22. pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart
may be forgiven thee; but here he minceth the Apostles words which are; Repent
therefore of thy wickedness, and pray, etc. here the Apostle puts repentance
before Prayer, it shall not be denied, but when the wicked have repented of
their wickedness, the Spirit will not be wanting to assist them to Pray. It is
therefore to little purpose, That Page 120. and 121. He pleads For craving a
Blessing when we use the creatures of God, calling the neglect of it a
phrophane custom; for we do not deny it, and condemn a profane neglect of it
as much as themselves; And as Christ had the Spirit without and above measure,
having all ways a ready access to the Father, so we are glad and willing at
such occasions to express words, if we find the Spirit assisting us so to do,
yea we reckon that we ought not to use the creatures, without our hearts be in
some measure retired to the sense of Gods presence, and stayed in his fear,
whereby we may secretly breath for a Blessing, for to speak audible words is
not essential, and therefore it is apparently malicious for him to say, That
when we are not stayed in Gods fear, we have liberty and freedom to full to
m^at my words had no such Importance, though he seeks (...) them, and yet can
wholly omit much of Page 67. of mine where I show their abuses in this matter,
how they mock God in it and provoke him to withdraw his Blessing; And whereas
he says, One of us confessed, That he had not called together nor Prayed in
his family for a twelvemonth past; He should have produced the persons name,
that we might have inquired concerning it, and therefore until he so do, we can
lay no stress upon it but reject it as false, especially considering, that W.
M. being particularly challenged upon this refuses absolutely to do it, nor
durst he aver he had any better ground for it then hearsay: Upon this ocasion
he asks, If Abraham must not keep up Religion in his family because an Ishmael
is in it, but this makes nothing against us, for none of us that are Masters
of Families, have forborne to keep up the worship of God, though enemies of
Truth have been in it, whom we have not barred from being present; And for whom
we have not been wanting to Pray, though we cannot join with them in their
Prayers, as W. M. advises us, until first they repent of their wickedness:
This was the method of Peter's advice to Simon Magus, first to repent and then
to Pray, as is above showed.

Sect. Page 125. He says, Quakerisme tend; to make Mortification of sin
useless, and to me, asking, Whether Mortification be useless where the end of
it (which is Perfection) is atained? He answers, That Perfection is toofold,
comparative and absolute, and seeing we are for an absolute Perfection, there
is no use for Mortification.

Answ. There can none come to this absolute Perfection, (as he terms it) but by
Mortification of sin, and even such as are so Perfect while on earth, do
constantly use Mortification to keep down sin, least it rise again, and to
resist the Temptations of the enemy, wherewith even such as be Perfect are
daily assaulted. He aledgeth, I Triumph before the Victory, in quarreling him
for saying, That a sinless Perfection wounds the very vitals of Religion; But
his silly subterfuge in this place may easily be discovered: I asked him in my
last, that seeing he says so, Whether the vitals of Religion consisted in
sinning or not sinning? Adding, That if it consist in sinning they that sin
most are most Religious, but if it consist in not sinning, then to plead for
such a thing as attainable, hurts not the vitals of Religion; to this he
answers, That the vitals of Religion consist in the means appointed of God:
Who sees not this to be a mere evasion; Why did he not give a direct answer?
But that he could not, without either denying his former Antichristian
expression, or else faling into palpable groseness; And whereas he adds, That
these means are Repentance, Mortification, Believing, application of the Blood
of Christ; though it be no answer to my question, I deny not, but that Religion
consists in these things; but I suppose he will not say that they are sinning:
It is not in the least absurd, that one who has attained to Perfection may
practice these duties; Man though he have attained to Perfection cannot too
much repent of his former wickedness, and therefore it is without ground that
he aledgeth, That I shift, and cannot deny but the forbearance of these duties
flow as a consequence from our Principle, nor is my saying, that they who come
to Perfection, witness the true use of these things any shift at all, though he
be pleased to term it so without any proof, after his wonted manner, according
to which he adds, That under the pretense of Perfection we take men off from
the practice of these duties, and so strike at Christianity in the vitals of
it; which though it fall of it self as being a mere assertion, yet the contrary
is above abundantly shown; He says, He does not contradict himself in
inferring a sinless man to be sinful; He affirmed only the Quakers conceitedly
sinless men to be sinful, who discover much sin in their pride, passion,
bitterness, railing accusations, adding, If such say they have no sin they are
but liars, and the truth is not in them.

Answ. There was no such addition in his Dialogue as conceitedly sinless, but
absolutely, He said, Bring me to the man that is sinless, and therefore his
contradiction remains: Moreover let him name that Quaker if he can, that told
him he was Perfectly free from all sin, and yet was guilty of those crimes he
speaks of, else he can deduce nothing from his own false supposition.

Page 127. To prove the Saints continuance always in sin, he desires to
remark that, 1 John 18 It is even such, who have heard, seen and handled of the
word of God etc. Who says, If we have no sin we are liars; And here indeed is
to be observed his detestable Impudence in adding to the Scripture words,
citing verse. 7. which he repeats thus, We who are cleansed from the guilt of
sin, whereas there is no such word as Guilt in that place, but only, We are
cleansed from all sin, which imports a cleansing from the filth; Mark these
words verse. 9. From all unrighteousness; now when the Guilt is only taken away
and the filth remains, as W. M. falsely supposes, they could not be said to be
cleansed from all unrighteousness; for it is an improper speech to say we are
cleansed from Guilt, it is from the filth we are cleansed, and the Guilt is
forgiven us; Therefore says the Apostle, verse. 9. first, He is faithful to
forgive us, and next he adds, To cleanse us from all unrighteousness; nor will
John's saying, If we say we have no sin, import John himself to be of that
number, more then the Apostle James spaking of the Tongue Jam. 3. 9. saying,
Therewith curse we men who are made after the similitude of God; will prove
James to have been of these cursers. Now in answer to me showing that Scripture
1 Job. 1. 8. is conditional else it would contradict what follows, verse. 9.
chap. 24. and chap. 3, 9. He returns no answer but his own assertions; He
says, The 9. verse speaks of forgiveness, but it also adds cleansing as is
above observed. He says, That 1 John 2, 4. Is understood of a sincere not
absolute keeping of the Commands of God, but for this he brings no proof at
all; He says, That Joh. 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God sins not, is meant
of sinning unto death, from which the child of God is secured, The reason he
gives of this gloss is, because the Apostle, chapter 5. v. 16. speaks, of a sin
unto death, which Sin W. M. supposes to be that the Apostle means, He that is
born of God cannot commit: but to prove this supposition we have nothing but
his own mere assertion: Reader, These are the best and strongest arguments he
has to prove his Doctrines.

His Seventeenth Head, Page 128. Is to show his Doctrines, not to be acceptable
to the wicked, and his Eighteenth Head, Page 131. Is to prove ours to be so,
But he is so pitifully ridiculous in this matter, that such as have the least
measure of understanding, and are unprejudiced, cannot but see his weakness:
Yet that he may be left altogether without a cover, I shall answer his
objections, and leave the unbiassed Reader as he desires to judge, which
Principles in their nature have most tendency to strike at or foster
wickedness: To prove that it is not acceptable to the wicked to hear they must
always sin, He says, Some are so conceited of their honesty that they cannot
be convineed of their sins, And that Mortification of sin is distastful to
them; But how he makes this to answer the other is not told us, if hypocrites
love not to hear of their sins, it does not therefore follow, that pleading for
a constant continuance in sin, is not acceptable to the wicked, they may be the
easier induced to acknowledge their sins, that they hear it told them for sound
and solid Doctrine, that they may be reputed good Saints and Christians though
they always remain in them, to prove that their Doctrine of imputative
Righteousness, and of Election and Reprobation, is not pleasing to the wicked,
He says, Some wicked men scof at them, what then, so some wicked men scof at
the folly of Machumetanism, will it therefore follow their Doctrine is good?
The question is, Whether their Doctrine of men's being altogether reputed
Righteous in the sight of God, by a Righteousness altogether without them, and
men's being elected to Life from all Eternity, without any respect to their
deeds be not more acceptable to the wicked, then to tell them they must seek to
be Justified by the Righteousness of God wrought in them? And as they are
joined to the elect Seed Christ Jesus, born again and brought forth in them
which works out all iniquity and unrighteousness in them. Now this he has
not in the least offered to answer: After the like manner, Whereas I show it is
more acceptable to the wicked to hear that the outward Letter is the Rule,
which they can bend and twin, then the inward which cannot be so twisted, He
says, Some wicked men could wish there were no such outward rule, and that
some understand not what is intended by Gods immediate speaking, but hate the
Ministry of the word, both which answers make nothing to the purpose; What
though wicked men hate the Scripture and the Ministry, does it therefore follow
that it is not more acceptable to them to hear; this is their only rule which
they can twin as they please, then the inward which cannot be twined as the
Scriptures may, nor bribed as the Ministry of men. He confesses, They allow of
Laces, Ribbons, Gold Rings, etc. and other superfluities, And therefore cannot
deny, but that their Doctrine therein is acceptable to the wicked; His shift is
here, That People ought not to exceed their rank and quallity, aledging, The
Apostle only condems this, 1 Timothy 2. 9. But that his detestable wresting of
the Scripture may be manifest I shall cite the Apostles words: In like manner
also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamfastness and
sobriety; not with broydred hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; is there
any word here that they should only not exceed their rank; who cannot but
abeminate his abusing of Scripture. And whereas he says, He thinks they should
be sparing of lawful games and recreations, it seems their deeds suit not
their thoughts in this matter, or else it must be accounted a sparingness with
him, not only to spend much of the day in Field sports, but even largely of
the night in Carding, etc. For so to my certain knowledge, some of his Brethren
in the Priesthood, of the Synod of Aberd en, are found doing and justifying
themselves in it. As to the Sabbath, he offers not in the least to answer,
That wherein I show it was acceptable to the wicked, according to the same
rate; In answer to my assertion, That the wicked love well to hear that they
may be members of the Church without having infallible evidence of Holiness; He
asks, If all the Members of the Quakers Church have so, adding, That our raw
conceited proselytes, are so ignorant and yet so confident, That sober men
suspect them to be in a fools Paradise; First, as this is a mere shift and no
reply, to disprove the Principle aforesaid to be acceptable to the wicked, so
likewise if his Spirit had not been in a raw conceited posture, filled both
with ignorance and confidence, he had not suffered himself so far to fall in a
fools Paradise, as to imagine this his mere proofeless Calumny, with many more
his groundless assertions would have any weight with sober men, not being
backed with any argument: He adds, Their Doctrine, once in Grace and ever in
Grace, has no tendency to please the wicked, because such never had Grace, and
therefore have no ground to think that belongs unto them; But seeing he
himself confesses, That such as had true Grace, may fall both unto detestable
practices, and Blasphemous or Erroneous Principles, may not such then foster
themselves in these evils, by saying, That since they once had true Grace they
can never totally fall from it: That part of Page 72. of mine, where I show by
example how the wicked living among them, and being their Church Members, and
also opposing and vilisiing us did declare their Principles to be more
acceptable to the wicked then ours, he has wholly waved, it seems he knew of
no shift how to shufle by this, and therefore found it fittest altogether to
omit it.

Head 18. Page 131. He says, The Quakers Religion is exceeding suitable to
carnal hearts, and thereupon he instanceth some particulars saying, They are
pleasing to the wicked, without offering any reason; The Reader upon the
particular debate of these matters in their places, will observe how he was
necessitated to bottom this conclusion of these Principles being suitable to
carnal hearts, upon the mere credit of his own affirmation, and therefore it is
no wonder he adds, That he is wearied raking in this dunghill; It is high time
for him to leave of trampling in such miry stuff as is the whole bulk of his
Book, and no doubt a dunghill is a very fit term for such a durty product, as is
these drossy dregs of his dark understanding; I charged him in the end of mine
for lying to God, for that in the Prayer, he ends his Dialogue with, he uses
these words, Follow with thy blessing, That which We have been about, which now
he is so far from clearing himself of, that he now acknowledges it was only a
supposed conference, And therefore it was a lie, yea a mocking of God, to
desire him to accompany a mere supposition with his blessing; as for his
expressing pity toward the seduced and wishing God to reclaim them, it was
not for that I challenged him, but for his desiring God to accompany with his
blessing a mere Chymaera, which never was, and therefore his best shift for
this is, What is it that some men will not carp at especially the Quakers, of
whom he adds, a pious Minister has said, That their Religion consists in
railing; and then he goes on and tells some terms, wherewith that Person says,
The Quakers have named the Ministers of Christ.

Answ. First, The Testimony of his supposed pious Minister is no more to be
recieved in this case then W. M. his own, and to say the Quakers gave these
names he mentions to the Ministers of Christ, is to take for granted the thing
in debate, for the Quakers deny them to be such: And is just one as if a Papist
should say, Luther and his assotiates Religion consisted in railling, because
they called (as to the Papists) their holy Mother the Church of Rome a Srumpet,
a Whore, the Mother of fornications, Babylon, etc. and all her devote Clergy no
better then Balls Priests, filthy Dogs, blind Giuds, Liars, Dissemblers, etc.
and all these other denominations W. M. men ions the Quakers give his Brethren;
dare he deny but there are some of his Fraternity guilty of all these terms,
And what knows he but the Quakers have applied them aright; it is manifest
enough, some of these terms are too applicable to them all, such as blind
Guids, Persecutors: It is here observeable, That among all these denominations
he aledges, the Quakers give him and his Brethren, he has omitted the two,
both most frequently used against them by the Quakers, and most universally
deserved by his fellow Priests, Viz. Hirelings and Time-servers; It seems he
feared every Reader would have found them applicable: Herein do we find our
selves Justified both before God and good men, that we have nameed them no
otherwise then as their Guilt deserved, and that we have no enmity nor hatred
at any man's Person, nor have desired to harm it, whereas while they plead
forbearance for themselves, that we should not speak the truth plainly to them,
and of them, terming our so doing Railing and Reviling, yet they are not
ashamed to speak all manner of evil falsely against us, Railing at us without a
cause; And not only so, but stiring up so far as they can the Magistrate, to
cause us to be beat, imprisoned, and persecuted, both in our Bodies, Estates,
and Libertys; by offering to banish us out of our Native Contryes: Yea and cut
us off if they could from the face of the Earth. Let the unprejudiced Judge who
shows forth here most meekness or most wrath.

Postscript.
Whereas W. M. in his fifth Head concerning the Scriptures, and in his twelfth
Head, Page 96. concerning the Ministry, aledgeth, That these words of the
Apostle Paul mentioned by me, 1 Cor. 14. 30. Ye may all Prophecy one by one; Is
restricted to Prophets etc. not for the common order of the Church: Adding,
That except we could prove all our Teachers to be Prophets, we ought not to lay
claim to that Scripture: I would desire him to answer his Brother Samuel
Rutherfords (Professor of Devinity at St. Andrews, So called; who in his Book
entitled, The due Right of Presbytery, Page 466, 467.) eight arguments, wherein
he has proved it to be of Pastors, etc. not of extraordinary Prophets, and
thereby has saved me that labor.

This coming to my hands after the other was committed to the Press, was the
cause of its not being inserted in the due place.

THE END.

