THE Genuine Remains OF That Learned Prelate Dr. Thomas Barlow, LATE Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

Containing diverse Discourses Theological, Philosophical, Historical, etc.

In LETTERS to several Persons of Honor and Quality.

To which is added the Resolution of many Abstruse Points.

As also Directions to a Young Divine for his Study of Divinity, and choice of
Books, etc. With great variety of other Subjects.

Published from his Lordship's Original Papers.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultery, 1693.

The Epistle to the READER.
THE Reader may be pleased to take notice that the Work of Bp. Barlow, which
leads the Van in the following Collection, namely, Directions to a Young Divine
for his Study of Divinity, etc. is what his Lordship employed his great
studious thoughts in preparing and polishing, during several distant times of
his Life. He gave me a Copy of his Manuscript on that Subject not long after
the Year 1650. and he gave the Minister of Buckden a Copy of the following Work
of that Subject, containing many additions and alterations, and writ with the
hand of one of his Lordships Amanuenses, after he was Bishop of Lincoln, and
wherein many Books Printed after the Year 1673 are cited; and the which Copy
begins in p. 1. and ends in the last line of p. 71. And what follows on the
same subject from thence to the end of p. 121. I saw written under the Bishop's
own hand, and which he wrote to gratify the request of a particular Friend who
had highly obliged him, and who was more than ordinarily Curious in his Study
of Theological Matters.

And as to the following Works of the Bishop in this Volume, that are writ by
way of Letter to several Persons, I saw them written under his own hand, and
many of them were written to my self, the which containing various matters
relating to Ecclesiastical Law and History, and points of Divinity so
instructful both to Divines, Lawyers, and Historians, (and wherein he had shown
such a complete Mastery of all that knowledge in himself, that he had
recommended the pursuit of to young Divines). I thought the publication thereof
could not be omitted without injury to the World, and bereaving the memory of
so Learned a Prelate of such lasting Monuments of Praise, as these his Works
have erected for it.

Nor are any Learned Works more grateful to Critical Readers than such as are
Comprised in the way of Epistles, and as has appeared by the reception the
World has given to the Praestantium ac eruditorum virorum Epistolae
Ecclesiasticae and Theologicae, Printed 1684. and among which are about 69 of
such Letters of Grotius.

The truth is, that as the first Painted draughts or dead-colour'd Paintings of
Men's Pictures by Great Masters, seem to have more of likeness than those in the
following sittings when their Pencils are applied to the most curious polishing
touches; so does the first draught of the thoughts of an Author, and such as at
once finished up, are to pass from him in a Letter, strike the Eye more with
the appearance of the likeness of his Soul and genius, than do the following
productions of his Mind, in which Art is exerting it self with variety of
labor, and with its colors and shadowings does often rather hide than
illustrate nature.

Moreover, the entertainment of the Reader in the following Volume is carefully
provided for by the abridgement of some of the Bishop's Discourses and
Determinations of Questions, the which if Published at length, would not have
possibly been so agreeable. For as short Voyages are most pleasing, so are
those passages of Men's minds from one subject to another; and when they are not
overlong detained by old from new matter.

We know there was lately a Conjuncture of time, when, though several Subjects
were dish'd up from the Press, yet men chose to feed only on that which was
about Popery, and had no gusto for any other matter, yet now being cloyed with
that, the Reader will find here such variety of matter to feast his mind with,
that may keep his appetite from being palled with any one subject whatsoever.

But as I account that there was no subject the Bishop ever writ of but what
fared the better by him, and was rendered by his opening it more acceptable to
Men's understandings, so I judge that there is one great excellency of his
Lordships managing of Controversy, very Conspicuous in his Discourses in this
Volume; wherein his example may be usefully directive not only to Young
Divines, but to Writers of most mature years and judgments, and that is his
great Talent of stating of Questions with exquisite Care and Skill. I ever
thought a Question so stated to be half decided. And as in Amsterdam the laying
of the foundation of any House requires as much Labor and Cost as the whole
Superstructure; so does the just founding of any Question by the stating of it,
take up as much time from an Author, as the Conclusions he builds upon it.

I have happened to provide for the Readers being entertained with the greater
variety in this Volume by my having been in a manner e^forc'd (though briefly) to
insert therein somewhat of my writing to the Bishop of two or three Subjects,
with an intent by such a Foil to set off the luster of the Bishops thoughts on
the same subject, and particularly in p. 273, and from thence toward the end of
p. 278. (and of the which I shall have occasion to say more when I take leave
of the Reader) and in p. 316, 320. and from thence to the end of p. 326.

After the Bishops Survey of the Numbers of the Papists, and of those of other
Persuasions in Religion, taken in the year 1676. (and which has not before
appeared in Print) I thought fit in page 320. to corroborate Dr. Glanvile's
assertion of the inconsiderableness of the number of the Papists, by
Calculation; and I have in the following Pages mentioned other Political
Calculations, that I adventured upon, the which I submit to the Censure of the
Critical Few, who mind things of that Nature, The great difficulty of making
such Calculations exactly well, has deterred many from attempting it; and
indeed the performance of it as well as it should be, is the height of humane
Wisdom in the Political Conduct of the World. But if what I have published here
and elsewhere of that kind, may occasionally excite others of greater abilities
to advance that kind of Knowledge, to do so, I have my end.

And here on a Passant review of what in p. 324, 325, 326. I wrote to the Bp.
concerning the L. Falkland, who was Secretary to K. Charles I. I have no
occasion to fear the attacques of any Critical Person, as if I had been a
Super-laudator in the Case of his Lordship, and on which account Mr. Marvel
does justly animadvert on Dr. Parker, as being extravagant and excessive in
praising Archbishop Bramhal, and for saying that he was fit to Command the
Roman Empire, when in its greatest extent; and whereupon Mr. Marvel has a
judicious remark on the danger of giving immoderate Praise. I am not so vain as
to apply the Tu regere imperio Populos, etc to that Lords great Character. But
yet reflecting on his incomparable abilities as a Minister of State, and his
drawing the long Declaration of the 12th of August 1642. will say, that he had
Talents adequate to the employment of Principal Secretary to the greatest Roman
Emperor that ever gave Law to the World. And the Bp. of Lincoln's Letter in
return to mine, sufficiently shows the great Figure that Lord made in the
Intellectual World, insomuch that it gives us the Figure of his Lordship, as
of such a Gamaliel, at whose Feet Mr. Chillingworth and his glorious Book, were
in some sort bred up.

I doubt not but when that the L. Secretary's Works that have been long out of
Print (and many of which were Printed at first in the way of Pamphlets) shall
be in one volume reprinted, and give the World in one Prospect, the view of the
productions of the Authors great fancy, judgment, and wit, and of such
perfections, as Huart tells us in his Trial of Wits, that the excelling therein
requires different temperaments of the Brain, our English World will receive
them with a great and just veneration; and perhaps some ingenious Forraigners
who have here been Refugees, understanding both English and French, may for the
honor of our Nation translate them into French, and let our proud neighbors,
who value themselves on the sharpness of their Wits, as well as of their
Swords, see, that our Climate has bred a Writer in Prose with so much depth of
Judgment and height of Wit, as has at least equaled if not transcended any
one among them.

And for the honor of our Country, I may here further occasionally say, that
as when long ago School Divinity was the Learning in vogue in the World, some
of our English Wits appeared as First-rate Writers of the subtleties in it; so
I think there was never any performance in that Learning more ingenious than
that of our Bishop, in his first Exercitation, which is here made English.

But there is another sort of Learning, of which the World abroad has produced
many voluminous Writers, I mean of Casuistical Divinity, wherein the Writings
of our Bishops, Sanderson and Barlow are Superior to them in weight, however
not in number.

And I believe a discussion of any one Case of Conscience, with such variety of
Learning as is contained in Bp. Barlow's Treatise of Mr. Cottingtons
Marriage-Case formerly Printed, is not to be found in the Works of any Foreign
Casuists.

There is in the following Collection one Letter of the Bp. relating to that
Subject, which was not before Printed, and it is in p. 216. (and where the
Printer should have Printed the name of Cottington instead of Collington) and
writ on the occasion of his Lordships having been informed that the Dean of the
Arches founded the Merits of his Sentence in the case, on his belief that our
Ecclesiastical Judges here could not question the validity of the Sentences of
Ecclesiastical Judges in Foreign parts: and which may be proper for any one to
have, who has what of the Bishops was formerly Printed of that Subject.

I remember the Bp. once asking me what I thought moved the Dean of the Arches
so to think and judge in the Case; I told him, I thought it was a Notion he had
of a Communion of Rights, between the several Churches here and abroad, and of
the Law and Practice of Nations, obliging Judges of several Countries
implicitly to allow one another Sentences as good, without questioning their
merits as to internal Justice: and whereupon his Lordship knowing that the
course of my life had led me to consider the Law and Practice of Nations, more
particularly than that of his had done, he was pleased to lay his commands on
me, to send him my thoughts of the same in the Case; and which I did at large,
and he was pleased to tell me he thought the publication of them useful. But
though I thought not so then, and therefore omitted it; yet I since finding that
the Judgment of the Dean of the Arches in the Case, has to this day obtained
the Vogue of a Ruled Case, and as such to be often cited in our Courts of Law,
I shall on that account perhaps shortly publish the same to prevent the growth
of a popular error; and am encouraged so to do by so many of the Writings of
the Bp. and other Casuists, and the argumentative opinions given by several
Civilians in the Case, having passed off in Print; and do suppose that new
matter of the same subject may not be unwelcome to the World.

I had lately just occasion given me to mention the Bp. and others, as having
adorned our Country in the view of the World, and I must now take occasion, as
I look over the Contents of the Letters of the Bishop here, (the which were
obtained from several persons to whom they were writ) and cast my Eye on his
Lordships Letter to Sir J. B. wherein he p^sseth his Censure on the definitions
in a Lecture before the Royal Society, to say that the Author of that Lecture
was one of the greatest Philosophers our Age has bred, and one whom I have
elsewhere called a Mathematical Statesman, and one who I believe has in
various kinds of the eruditio recondita exceeded any one of the Virtuosi in
Italy, or beaus esprits in France; however yet his haste made him not to take
the Scales of Genus and differentia into his hands as he should have done, when
he gave his definitions; and by which omission the definitions are justly
liable to the Bishops Censure. And there was another definition in the Lecture,
as liable to Censure as any, and in which that great man, aliquid humani passus
est, that is to say, did err, and it is where he defines Right to be the Image
of possession, and which none need refute. And therefore the consideration of
this may represent to us, the profound Wisdom that is in that Rule of Law in
the digests, Omnis definitio in jure Civili periculosa est, parum est enim ut
non subverti possit.

There is a Letter of the Bp. to Mr. R. S. p. 181. wherein his Lordship
Censures the Oxford Antiquities, and another to the same person on the same
subject, page 183, and 184. and where his Lordship mentions the Compiler of
them as too favorable to Papists.

I have not observed him so to be in others of his Learned and Loyal Writings,
and as for that Work of the Oxford Antiquities, I was informed that there was
at Christ-Church without the privity of that Compiler, such a low poor
diminishing Character of the Talents of Bishop Wilkins there inserted, as made
me averse from reading the Book.

That Bishop was an Ornament both of that University and the English Nation,
and one who adorned the Gospel it self by his great Intellectual and Moral
Endomments: And it was for his Honor that the Giver of his Character had not a
Soul large enough to be able to comprehend the Idea of his great Genius. Like
him mentioned by my Lord Bacon, for having cut out his whole Estate into
Obligations, this Bishop dealt so in the Expense of the greatest part of his
time; and his Soul was so continually in travel with the good of the World in
general, and of his Friends in particular, that the little design to lessen his
Character cannot escape Animadversion, and the vanity of attempting it in that
Person of Christ-Church, seemed to me the more nauseous, because I was present
with that Bishop in Oxford, when he made it his particular Request to
Cromwell's Major General, not to banish that Person from Oxford; and therein
prevailed with him, notwithstanding the Applications that had been made to him
for it by Dr. Owen, and by the Presbyterian Heads of Houses.

But as Aristotle has given his Judgment, That as to men of Heroic Qualities
not praise, but pronouncing them blessed is due, (...) So was Bishop Wilkins so
great a Blessing to our Age, that his Memory claims the being blessed by our
English World. And it is as needless to praise him, as to gild Gold; and as
needless too, to fear that his just Character can be deleted in men's minds, as
that Gold can perish; it being more easy to make Gold than to destroy it.

But it is time for me to take my leave of the Reader; and I shall here so far
consult his necessary Information, and the Honor of Bishop Barlow in the
following Collection; as to mention it that by the carelessness of the Press so
considerable a Mistake has happened in p. 279. that the Emendation thereof
ought to be better provided for, than by Insertions among the Common Errata.

The Proportion that the Number of the Levites bore as to that of the other
Tribes, is far from being an useless Speculation. It may rather be judged to be
a very momentous one. Some Sacrilegious Projectors have not been wanting in all
Ages. The many Popish Writers beyond Sea writing against Sacrilege, and of the
Church Revenues, usually insert this clause in a Parenthesis, concerning those
Revenues, viz. (quibus Ribaldi hujus saeculi turpiter inhiant) and to that
barbarity of Sacrilege they it seems applied a barbarous Word. And since what
has been may be, it is not imprudent for us in our own Country to lay up in
store the best furniture of Arguments we can against the alienation of the
Church Revenue: And Precedents relating to the Divine Wisdom appearing in the
Economy of God's old peculiar People the Jews, are by all agreed on, as
requiring great consideration and deference. And therefore that the Bishop's
labor in drawing up the Scheme of the proportion of the Levites with that of
the people of the other Tribes in Latin may not be ineffectual; and that the
les Scavans beyond Sea may not by the Printers Omissions be deprived of the
Information he intended them in that Point: The Reader is desired in p. 279. to
insert a Rule between the Numbers 9550 and 22000; and to take notice that the
Brace to the first Datus should enclose but two Lines, ending with the Word
Numerus.

The next three Lines are to be taken into that Brace, and the Number set
against it thus, 54. 19100./22000. In the Third Brace is the like Mistake, and
thus it should be, 54 9550./11000.

The Printer has there printed the Word Dimidum for Dimidium.

Some other Errata of the Press I observed, as to what concerns matters of
Numbers, and quota's by me writ of to the Bishop: For I in my Calculations
intending only what the Dutch-Painters call a Schytz, and not a perfect
Delineation or Draught, in several places I used the Word [about] where it is
omitted by the Press. And in p. 367. (whether by the fault of the Press, or my
Amanuensis I know not) there is an omission of the Words [in effect] after 1500
costs in the 5th line before the end of the page. For tho the Sentence of the
Dean of the Arches very justly condemned the party in Costs, for whom it went,
yet that particular Sum I take not to have been mentiond in it, but the Dominus
litis informed me how the Council on both sides were agreed about the payment
of that Sum to the pars victa, and that it was re vera paid; and so that effect
was the product of the Sentence.

I conclude to the Reader with a common Ending of Roman Inscriptions I have
seen;

Haec volebam nescius ne esses.
Vale. P. Pett.

THE CONTENTS.
(...). Or Directions to a Young Divine, for his Study of Divinity, and Choice
of Books, etc. Page 1 De Studio Theologiae. ib. Commentators on the Old
Testament. Page 11 Commentators on the New Testament Page 13 Apparatus ad
Scripturas intelligendas. Page 17 De Canone Scripturae. Page 18 De Patribus
Errorum saeculo scriptis, etc. Page 20 De Scriptis Patrum genuinis, spuriis,
etc. Page 22 Historici Ecclesiastici. Page 26 Geography. Page 29 Councils. Page
31 Schoolmen. Page 40 What Books, as to our Doctrine and Discipline are
authentic, and owned by our Church as such, etc. Page 51 What are the
Erroneous Opinions of the Enemies of our Church, as to Doctrine and Discipline.
Page 55 Writers of Controversies. Page 58 About the Knowledge of the Canon Law.
Page 62 Civil-Law. Page 65 De Indicibus expurgatoriis, or the Roman
Inquisitor's Arts. Page 67 Syllabus quaestionum praecipuarum, quae inter
Socinianos, reliquosque Ecclesiae reformatae, simulac Pontificiae Theologos
ventilantur. Page 73 Tota inter Remonstrantes and Contra Remonstrantes
Controversia ad Articulos 5. a Theologis passim reducitur. Page 84 De
Controversiis praedictis, melioris notae Scriptores nonnulli, cum occasio se
obtulerit, confulendi. Page 89 The Bishop's Learned Thoughts about the
Geneology in St. Matthew. Page 94 Quod Nullum Concilium sit proprie
Oecumenicum. Page 99 Syllabus provinciarum ex quibus Episcopi in Concilio
Niceno convenerant. Page 101 A Letter to the Reverend Mr. John Goodwyn,
Minister of God's word in Coleman-Street. Page 122 An Account by way of
Abstract of Mr. John Goodwyn's Book, called the Pagan's Debt and Dowry, etc.
Printed at London Anno. 1651. returned by way of Answer to the foregoing Letter
of Dr. Barlow. Page 131 Dr. Barlow having been Anno 1673. Archdea^on of Oxford,
and being obliged to communicate to the Clergy of that Diocese the Orders about
Catechizing, and which his Majesty in that Conjuncture thought fit to have
revived, here follows a Deduction of the factum about it in the several Letters
that the Affair gave occasion for. Page 142 Sir J. B. having sent to Bishop
Barlow a Lecture before the Royal Society on the 26th of November, 1674.
Printed in Twelves, his Lordship sent him the following Answer. Page 151
Another Letter to Sir J. B. Page 157 Of Co^djutors to Bishops. Page 160 Of the
Original of Sine Cures, etc. Page 164 Of Pensions paid out of Church Livings,
etc. Page 171 Another Letter of Annates, etc. Page 177 A Letter of the vast
Subsidy given by the Clergy to Hen. VIII. Page 179 A Letter to Mr. R. S. about
Mr. Wood's Antiquities of the University of Oxford. Page 181 Another to Mr. R.
S. about the same subject. Page 183 Some Quotations out of Bish p Barlow s
Answer to Mr. Hobb's Book of Heresy, wherein is proved the Papists gross
hypocrisy, in the putting Heretics to Death. Page 185 A Letter to Mr. R. T.
concerning the Canon Law allowing the whipping of Heretics as practiced by
Bishop Bonner at his House at Fulham. Page 189 A Letter to the Earl of Anglesey
answering two Questions, whether the Pope be Antichrist. And whether Salvation
may be had in the Church of Rome. Page 190 A Letter to another person about
Worshipping the Host being formal Idolatry: and about famous Protestant
Divines, holding it lawful to punish Heretics with death. Page 202 A Letter
about what Greek Fathers and Councils were not translated into Latin, before
the time of the Reformation. Page 206 A Letter concerning the King's being
empowered to make a Layman his Vicar General. Page 214 A Letter concerning the
allowance and respect that the sentences of Protestant Bishops may expect from
Popish ones; writ by way of Answer to a Friend of Mr. Cottington's, who
acquainted the Bishop that the Court of Arches here, was of Opinion that the
Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin could not here be questioned, by reason of
the practice of Popish and Protestant Bishops allowing each other Sentences.
Page 216 A Letter concerning Historical Passages in the Papacy, and of the
Question whether the Turk or Pope be the greater Antichrist. Page 224 The
Bishop's Thoughts about 1. When the famous Prophetical Passage in Hooker might
have its accomplishment, and 2. About the modus of deposing of a King in
Poland, the Circumstances of which it was propable the Bishop was well informed
^n, by his frequent Conversation with some Polonian Noblemen, and Students at
Oxford. He returned his Answer to the two Enquiries. Page 231 The Bishop's
Answer to this Question, whether the Famous Saying of Res nolunt male
administrari, (of which a Gentleman in London pretends to be the Author) had
not its Origin from Aristotle's Metaphysics; to which Venerable Bede, in his
Philosophical Axioms refers in his citing the Saying. Page 235 The Bishop's
Letter about Natural Allegiance, and of Kingly Power being from God, and
Confuting the Lord Shaftsbury's Speech in the House of Lords for the contrary,
etc. Page 237 A Letter answering some Queries about Abby-Lands, and about the
Opinions of Calvin and Luther, of the Punishing of Heretics. Page 240 The
Bishop's Remarks on Bishop Sanderson's Fifth Sermon ad Populum. 1 Timothy 4.3, 4,
5. Page 243 A Letter answering a Question about the temper of the Prophets,
when they Prophes^^d; and likewise a Query about the Tridentine Creed. Page 250
A Letter of a new Popish Book Published Anno 1684. Page 253 A Letter to Sir P.
P. Apologizing for his not going to Lincoln, and proving that H. 8. his
Marrying his Brother's Wife was only against the Judicial Law, and
animadverting on Calvin's making the Penal-Laws about Religion given to the
Jews, to bind under the Gospel. Page 255 A Letter about the liberty formerly
allowed to the Protestants in France to Print Books there against Popery, etc.
Page 260 A Letter about the French Persecution, and of our King's relieving and
protecting the French Refugees; in which Letter the Popish Tenet of the
Intention of the Priest, as necessary to the validity of the Sacrament, is
confuted. Page 263 A Letter of somewhat falsely and maliciously brought in, in
the body of the Canon Law. Page 268 The Bishop's Judgment about the Levitical
Revenue, and the proportion between them and the other Tribes. Page 271 A
Letter to Mr. R. T. concerning the Confirmation of the Order of the Jesuits,
the numbers of that Order, etc. Page 281 A Letter censuring the Trent Councils
denying the use of the Cup to the Laity in the Eucharist. Page 284 A Letter
charging the Tenet of the Lawfulness of burning Heretical Cities on the Church
of Rome. Page 287 A Letter of Gratian's, falsifying the passage out of Cyprian
in the Canon Law, to induce the burning of Heretical Cities, etc. Page 295 A
Lette^ to the Earl of Anglesey, of the Council of Trent, not being received in
France. Page 302 Another to the same Person, on the same Subject. Page 309 The
Bishop's Survey of the number of the Papists, etc. Page 312 A Letter about my
L. Falkland, etc. Page 324 The Substance of the Bishops Letter to Mr. Isaac
Walton, upon his design of writing the Life of Bishop Sanderson. Page 333 A
Letter giving an account of the Bishop and his Clergies Address to K. James.
Page 340 About Mr. Chillingsworth's Peculiar Excellency. Page 344 A Question
about the Case of the Marriage between Mr. C. P. and Mrs. M. C. answered. Page
351 Biretti's Case, in Bishop Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium. l. 3. chapter 1. Rule 4.
Page 358 The Case of the aforesaid Marriage between Mr. C. P. and Mrs. M. C. by
Sir P. P. Page 361 The Bishop's Judgment in point of Conscience to it. Page 372
A Letter asserting the King's not being by Scripture prohibited to pardon
Murder. Page 374 An account of Guymenius's Book, Apologizing for the Jesuits
Tenets about Morals. Page 378. A Letter about the Papists founding Dominion in
Grace Page 380 The substance of a Preface to a Discourse about the Gunpowder
Treason, etc. Page 383 The Substance of a Discourse, confuting Mr. R. Baxter's
Tenet in his Saints Everlasting-Rest; that common, or special, and saving-grace
differ only gradually. Page 424 The Bishop's Discourse in Confutation of the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome. Page 454 The Bishops Exercitation on the
Question, whether it is better not to be at all, than to be miserable? Page 469
An Abstract of the Bishop's Exercitation concerning the Existence of God, if
demonstrable by the light of nature. Page 521 The Bishop's determination of the
Question; if the Divine Prescience takes away Contingency? Page 568 The
Bishop's Determination of the Question, whether Election be from Faith
foreseen? Page 577 The Question decided; whether the Fathers under the Old
Testament obtained Salvation by the death of Christ? Page 583 The Question
resolved, whether the Church has Authority in Controversies of Faith? Page 594
The Determination of the Question, if Faith alone does justify? Page 601 Of
the Supreme Power as to things Sacred as well as Civil. Page 608 Of the
necessity of a Lawful Call to the Ministry. Page 611 Concerning the
Unlawfulness of Self-murder. Page 620 A Discourse of the Bishops proving every
Lie to be a sin. Page 625 The Bishops determination that the efficacy of the
Sacrament depends not upon the intention of the Priest. Page 629 The Bishop's
Attestation of Bishop Sanderson his Predecessor his dying a true Son of the
Church of England; in opposition to the Calumny of a Presbyterian Divine
reporting publicly that he died an approver of that Sect. The contrary whereof
is likewise made to appear out of the Bishop's last Will and Testament. Page
634 An Abstract of a Letter of the Bishops to the Clergy of his Diocese. Page
641
(...). OR, Directions to a young Divine for his Study of Divinity, and choice
of Books, etc.
De Studio Theologiae.
1. THeology (or Divinity) is a Science or Prudence containing our knowledge of
God, and our Duty, and the Worship due to him. And there are Two (and but Two)
Principles to know both.

1. Lumen Naturae; and the Principles of Natural Reason (common to all Mankind)
and on these Thologia Naturalis is solely built.

2. Lumen Scripturae, and Divine Revelation; on this Theologia revelata seu I
know that Theologia Revelata (in its full Latitude) may be 1. Patriarchalis; i.
e. the positive Revelation of God's Will and Worship made to the Patriarchs
before Moses; for to them the Messiah was promised, and Salvation by him; they
had the Covenant of Grace; and Sacrificia (...), which were Sacraments and
Seals of it. 2. Mosaica, which contained many further positive Revelations of
God's Will and Worship, etc. 3. Evangelica, of which only at present.
Evangelica, is built, containing such further knowledge of God, and our Duty,
as we have (beyond all that Natural Reason can tell us) by Divine Revelation in
Scripture.

The first, Theologia Naturalis, we may truly call Morality; and the Religion
common to all men, as men, and rational creatures.

The second, Theologia Revelata, we call Christianity, and is the Religion
peculiar to Christians. Now to be a Christian presupposes him to be a Man; and
Christianity does not exclude, but presuppose Morality; and is an addition to,
and perfection of it; yet those two, Morality and Christianity, are as distinct
as Natural Reason and Revelation, which are their respective Measures and
Principles.

2. Theologia Naturalis being totally grounded on the Law of Nature (or the
Moral Law) it will be convenient to know, 1. The Nature, Extent, and Obligation
of that Law (as also of Laws in general;) and for this we may consult such as
these.

1. Grot. de Jur. Belli, etc. Lib. 1 cap. 1. s. 9.

2. Pet. a Sancto Joseph. Idaea Theol. Moral. Lib. 1. de Legibus.

3. Aquinas 1a, 2ae, Quaestio 90, etc.

4. Suarez de Legibus.

5. Azorius Institut. Moralium, Part 3. lib. 1. cap. 1. etc. And when there is
necessity to see more, all the Commentators on Aquinas, and all Casuists, where
they speak of the Ten Commandments, or Moral Law; amongst others Filliucius
Quaest. Mor. Tract. 21.

2. The Number and Nature of the Moral Duties and Vices commanded or forbid by
that Law. And here besides those many Divines and Christians, who have expressly
writ upon the Ten Commandments, and all things commanded or forbid in them,
there are exceeding many Authors of excellent Use and Authority to understand
the Nature of Moral Habits and Actions good and bad: As,

1. Aristot. Eth. ad Nichom. Fill.

2. Andronicus Rhodius his Paraphr. ex editione Heinsii Lug. Bat. 1617. in 80.

3. The Graec. Schol. in Arist. Eth.

4. Hierocles in (...) Pythag. so called, because they contain Pythagoras his
Doctrine; for Philolaus Crotoniates was the Author of those Verses.

5. Johan. Stobaei (...), Aurel. Allobrogum 1609. highly commended by (...).
Suidas in Joh. Stob. vid. Pletii Biblioth. Cod. 176. page 366.
Suidas. A number of this kind there be (even amongst Pagan Writers) who have
excellently described the nature and kinds of Moral Virtues and Vices.

3. For Theologia Revelata, of which the Scriptures are the sole Rule we are to
consider and endeavor to know.

1. The Text it self. 2. The true meaning of it.
4. For the Text, it will be convenient to have, for the Old Testament,

1. Biblia Interlinearia Heb. Lat. Antwerp 1584.

2. Biblia Graec. Septuaginta Interpret. Paris 1628.

3. Biblia Lat. Junii and Tremel. in Folio or Quarto.

4. Biblia Lat. Sixti, 5 ti Romae 1590. and Bib. Lat. Clementis 8 vi, Romae
1592. if conveniently they could be had; both Popes pretend to Infallibility,
and yet their Bibles contradict one another expressly, and in terminis, an
hundred times. But it must be remembered, that the Bibles of Clement the Eighth,
are many times Printed, and with a Lying ((...)) miscalled Biblia Sixti quinti,
Thus, in an Edition at Antwerp in Octavo 1628. The Title is, Bibl. sacr.
Vulgat. Editionis Sixti Pont. Max. Jussu recognita, and yet it is the Bible of
Clem. the 8th. So in another Edition at Antwerp 1603. in Fol. and so again
Coloniae Agrippinae 1666. in eight little Volumes, in Octavo.

5. For the Text of the New Testament, there are many Editions, but two most
useful.

1. Novum Testamentum Graec. per Rob. Steph. Paris 1550. Folio. The best
Character, Paper and Exactness; besides, it gives an account of all the ancient
Sections and Divisions of the Testament: And that, 1. In Sectiones Majores seu
(...); sic Matthaeus habet, (...) 68. Marcus 48. Lucas 83. Johannes 78. vide
Suidam verbo (...). 2. In Minores seu (...), quorum Numerus multo major;
Matthaeus enim habet (...) 355. Marcus 236. Lucas 342. Johan. 232. 3. Minimas
quas (...) appellant, at, (Latini) versus, so that every Line in the Msc. was
called (...), or versus; and thus page 95. in In dicta Stephani Editione, Paris
15^0.
calce Evangelii secundum Marcum (...). i. e. 1590, etc.

2. N. Testamentum Graece a Steph. Curcellaeo editum Amstelodamae 1658. Octavo.
It has the Variae Lectiones, and the parallel places, more exactly than any
other I have yet seen; and yet the forementioned Edition of Rob. Steph. has the
variae Lectiones of 15. Msc.

6. When occasion is to consult the Bible

1. Biblia Complutensia compl. 1515. in three Fol.

2. Biblia Regia (Regis Hispaniae) per Ariam Montanum, Antwerp 1569.

3. Biblia per Mich. Le Jaii 7 Linguis, Vol. 10. Par. 1645.

4. Biblia Polyglotta, London 1657. By collation of these we may see the
difference and variety of reading, etc.

7. For better understanding of these

1. Some Concordances to find out words, how often, and when used in Scripture.

2. Lexicons for the meaning and significations of those words; for things
being far more than words; hence it is that almost all words are (...).

1. For Concordances we have many, and some very convenient; as these:

1. For the Hebr. and Chaldee Extant Concordant. Hebr. per Mazium. Calasium,
Tom. 4. Romans 1621. in Bodley's Library, W. 2, 6, 7, etc. Jur. much greater than
Buxtorf's, but whether better, Docti Judicent.
words too, as many as are in your Bible, Concordantiae Bibliorum Hebr. per
Joh. Buxtorf. Basil 1632. There be others, and worse Editions.

2. For the Hebr. and Gr. of the Old Testament, Conradi Kercheri concordant.
Vet. Test. Graecae Hebraeis vocibus respondentes, etc. Francofurti 1607. And it
will be convenient to have his Book (explaining the use of his Concordance) de
Concordantiarum Biblic. usu per Conrad. Kercherum, Quarto, Whittberg. 1622.

3. For the Greek of the New Testament, Concordant. Graecc Lat. N. Test. ab
Hen. Steph. Edit. Genevae 1624. there are former and worse Editions.

4. For Latin, which are of less use in our Trade, Concordant. Bibl. Lat. ad
Correctionem Romanam Editae, vulgata, etc. Francofurti ^620. there are former
Editions, but imperfect.

5. The use of the Hebrew and Greek Concordance is very great in many respects;
one (and not the least) when I doubt what this word signifies in this Text, I
turn to my Concordance; see how many times the word occurs, and by the
circumstances of some of those places, Vid. Corn. Jansenii Comment. in suam
Concordiam Evangel. Mogunt. 1612. 80. 2. Concordiam Evang. per T^eol.
Parisiensem. Octavo. Paris 1660. 3. Osiandri Elench. Harmoniae, etc. Basil.
1561. 4. Comment. Ja. Fabri Stapul. in 4 Evang. and ibi post praefat. Canones
seu Concord. Evang. 5. N. Test. Graec. per Steph. Lutetiae 1550. and Canones
Evangelistarum ab Ammonio conditos and ab Eusebio absolutos. 6. Vid. e^sdem
Canones apud Hieronymum Opum per M. Victorium Tom. 6. in initio. 7. Et Dan.
Tossanum in Evang. Harmoniam.
I find it must signify such a thing in such a place; being then sure it
signifies so, I apply that signification to the place of which I doubted and
see whether it will be suitable with it. For instance, Heb. 11.1. Fides est
(...), which some render persona, substantia, expectatio, etc. Now to say that
Faith is a person, or substance, or expectation, does not only seem, but really
is incongruous, and no way agreeing with the nature of Faith; which is neither
a person, substance, or expectation, but an accident, an assent of the
Understanding; and the Object of it, Truth, not bonum futurum, which is the
proper Object of Expectation or Hope. Here in this doubt I consult my
Concordance, and find the word (...), to say nothing of the Old Testament,
where it occurs many times, five times in the New Testam. where, 1. Hebr. 1.3.
(...). 2 Cor. 9.4. and 11.7.
It signifies a person; 2. And twice it evidently signifies (and we render it)
confidence. 3. And in the Heb. 3.14.
fourth place, though not so evidently, yet probably it signifies Confidence too;
for (...), is Faith opposed to (...) versu 12. -- 19. which is principium and
fundamentum fiduciae and confidentiae nostrae; the ground and foundation of all
our hopes of Heaven. 4. Now it being evident by the circumstances of the Text,
that (...) signifies confidence, if we apply that signification to Heb. 11.1.
(the place doubted of) it will appear to be most congruous to the nature of
Faith, and the thing there spoken of. These words then, Fides est (...), (i.
e.) Fides est eorum quae sperantur Tindal renders it so; Faith is a sure
confidence of things hoped for.

Glossae veteres in calct Cyrilli (...) arguo (...) probatio and Oecumenio and
Theophylacto. (...) in locum.


confidentia and eorum quae non videntur Argumentum, so (...) properly
signifies; and Hierom and the Vulgat render it, Faith is (...), i. e. (...),
such an Argument as is the ground of all the Assurance and Confidence we have,
or can have of Heaven: This seems to me the genuine sense of the place if we
consider either the signification of the words, or the nature of the thing
signified; it being certain, and (on all sides) confessed, that a true and firm
Faith in the Promises of God in the Gospel, is the foundation and evidence of
all our hopes.

2. For Lexicons and Glossaries will be necessary to find and know the
signification of the words in the Originals of the Old and New Testament; and
amongst them we may consult, for the Old Testament,

1. Lexicon Polyglot. 7 Linguis per Ed. Castellum, Land. 1669.

2. Lexicon Pentaglot. Valent. Shindleri, Han. 1612.

3. Masii Lexicon Hebr. Syriac. sive Chaldaic. and Graec. Antwerp. 157^.

4. Joh. Buxtorfii Lexicon Chaldaicum Talmudicum and Rabbinicum, etc. or his
excellent Opus triginta annorum (as he calls it) Basil. 1639.

5. Kercher's Concordance (before mentioned) may well be called and used for
Lex. Hebr. Graec. every word in the Bible, and the various Translations of them
being expressed by the LXX. in their (as they call it) Hellenistical Greek.

6. Nomenclator Biblicus Hebr. Lat. per Ant. Hulsium, Bred. 1650. useful for
all Divines.

7. For proper Vid. Hieronym. de locis Hebraicis, Tom. 3. p. 905, etc. and
Theatrum Terrae Sanctae per Adricomium.
Names (for these already named are for Appellative words) such as these may be
consulted.

1. Gregorii Lexicon Sanctum; Hannov. 1634. Octavo. in which all proper Names
in Scripture are explained.

2. Onomasticon Sacrum in quo omnia nomina propria, Hebr. Chaldaic. Graec. etc.
quae tam in Vet. quam N. Test. and Apocryphis occurrunt, explicantur per Joh.
Leusden. Ultrajecti 1665. in Octavo. and in ejus calce de ponderibus, and
mensuris, etc.

For the New Testament.

1. For Appellative words, I need not tell you (who know better) of Hesychius,
Suidas Pharonius Etimologicum magnum, Glossae veteres per Steph. and Bonav.
Vulcanius of Steph. his Thesaur. Harpocnation; all these are useful.

2. For proper Names, Lex. sanctum Greg. Greg. (before mentioned) gives an
account of all the proper Names Hebr. and Greek in both Testaments; so Steph.
((...)) There are two Supplements extant of Stephanus 1. Fragmentum Stephani de
Vrbibus per Sam. Tennulium, Amstel. 1669. Quanto. 2. Genuina Stephani
Fragmenta, etc. per Abraham Berkelium. Lug. Bat. 1674. Octavo.
of Cities, Suidas of proper Names of Men, etc.

3. For Graec. Barbarous words which occur in the N. Test. you may consult
Petri Chritomaei Graeco-Barbara N. Test. quae Orienti Originem debent, Amstel.
Octavo. and his Lexicon Graeco-Barbarum.

After the knowledge of words (quae sunt rerum signa and Indices) the next
business will be to know the true sense of Scripture signified by those words;
and here it will be convenient to consult Commentators, and that,

1. Such as have writ on all the Bible.

As 1. The Critics of the last Edition at London, or Synopsis Criticorum
sacrae Scripturae, etc. of which four Tomes are already published, the first at
London 1669. The benefit of which Book is very great, seeing when we doubt of
any Text of Scripture, we may uno intuitu see what five or six Learned Men say
of it, and then by collation of them and others, judge which of their
Expositions be true.

2. Biblia universa cum Commentariis, 1. Lyrani (Gente Judaei, Religione
Christiani, Oxomiensis hic enim literis operam dedit.) 2. Cum Glossa ordinaria
quam Strabo Fuldensis condidit circa annum 846. 3. Cum Glossa Interline aria,
Authore Anselmo Laudunensi circa Annum 1077. Of these three Lyranus is much the
best, especially on the Old Testament, as well understanding the Hebrew and
Greek, which the other two (as almost all the Barbarous and impious Age they
lived in) were wholly ignorant of

3. Biblia sacra Vet. and N. Test. cum Notis Tremellii and Junii Editiones
tertiae, Hannoviae 1596.

4. Cornelius a Lapide. Stephanus Monochius, Jacobus Tirinus, Emanuel Sa (all
Jesuits) and Jo: Deodati may be consulted.

Lud. de Dieu has writ short (and significant Critical) Notes on all the Old
and N. Testament, in five or six Volumes, Quarto.

Commentators on the Old Testament.

Such as have writ on all, or many, For the Old Testam. and how the Ancient
Jews understood it, 1. The Chaldee Paraphr. 2. Jose. 3. Philo Judaeus: as for
Antiquity, so for Authority and Sobriety they are more significant than any
(may be) than all the Rabbis. Maximonides (qui primus inter suos nugare
desiit) comes next them.
or at least some parts of the Old Testament; as,

1. On the Pentateuch, 1. Ainsworth inferior to none. 2. Cajetan. 3. Calvin
(ubi been nemo melius.) 4. Johan. Ferus (a pious and sober Papist) who has
said many things well and truly; which appears because the Spanish Expurgatory
Index has damned many passages in his Commentaries on the N. Test. and all his
other Works (and consequently his Commentaries on the Old Testament) are
prohibited Caettra ejus opera a Sectariis vitiata (they know this to be a Lie,
for they correct their own Editions of Ferus, in which they well know the
Sectaries, as they call them, had no hand) prohibentur donec corrigantur. Index
expurgat. ^ispan. Madr. 1667. in Joh. Fero (mihi) page 712. Col. 2.
absolutely, till they shall be (by the Inquisition) corrected. 5. Paulus
Fagius his Annotations on the Chaldee Paraphrase on the Pentateuch. 6.
Procopius Gazaeus. 7. Theodoret in his Questions on the Pentateuch. 8.
Hieronynues ab Oleastro, Ant. 1568.

2. Besides the Pentateuch, Cajetan, Calvin, Ferus, Theod. Hierom, Augustine and
Beda, etc. and Pareus, have writ on other parts of the Old Test. and (when
there is occasion) may be consulted.

3. Particularly (to name some few) you may consult, 1. For Genesis and Exodus,
Andreas Rivetus, who has writ well on both, he has also writ a very useful
Book in Quarto on Exodus cap. 20. Lug. Bat. 1637. Also Pererius the Jesuit has
long and learned Commentaries on both these two first Books of Moses, etc.

2. In short (for you have Catalogues of the Commentators on every part of the
Bible in Print, out of which you may choose the Commentaries of Brentius,
Calvin, Pet. Martyr, Joh. Wolfius, Bucer, Melanchton, Luther, Musculus, etc.)
amongst Protestant Writers Cajetan, Masius, Arias Montanus, Gaspar Sanctius,
Simeon de Musis (the best Popish Writer on the Psalms) A Lapide, Corn. Jansen.
Villapandus in Ezekiel. Franciscus Ribera in 12 Prophetas minores) These
(amongst Popish Writers) are very considerable, and their Writings worth
consulting; and Arias Montanus in 12 Proph.

1. In Hexameron you may consult, 1. Eustathium Antiochenum, Lugduni per
Allaticum 1620. Quarto.

2. Ambrosium in Hexameron, Tom. 4 Operum Edit. Erasm. Basil. 1527.

Commentators on the N. Testament.
For the N. Test. very many Ancient and Modern have writ Explications of it;
some, or, when occasion, all may be consulted; as,

1. Written on the whole N. Test. (or most of it; such as these. 1. Ancient. 1.
Chrysostom. has Hom. on most parts of the N. Testam. 2. Hier. the Gospels, Acts,
and all St Paul's Epistles; but they are indeed Vid. Riveti Critica Sacra, lib.
4. c. 5. page 373, 374.
none of his, as is certain, and confessed. 3. Venerable Bede, Tom. 5, and 6.
Quarto. 4. Theophylact on the Gospels, Acts, and all St. Paul's Epistles; his
Commentary on the Acts is by it self very hard to be met with; Gr. Lat. per
Laur. Sifanum, Colon 1567. Theophylact has nothing on the Canon. Epist. or
Revel.

2. Modern; 1. Beza's Notes on the whole N. Testament: The best Edition is that
of Cambr. 1642. Camerarius Notes upon the whole N. Testament are joined with
it. 2. Calvin on all the N. Test. except the Apocal. These two, paucis exceptis
quae Disciplinam Presbyterianam and Genevitismam sapiunt, are inferior to
none, for the literal sense of the Scriptures. 3. August. Marloratus in N.
Test. It is a Commentary upon the whole N. Test. containing the Expositions of
eight or ten (and sometimes more) Protestant Commentators on every part of the
N. Test. 4. Zach. Mathesius 4th Edit. 1611. 5. Dr. William Foulk in N. Test.
contra Annotationes Anglo-Rhemensium. 6. Erasmi Annotationes in N. Test. 7.
Aquinas in N. Test.

2. Written in the 4 Gospels.

1. For Protestants, such as these may be consulted: Chemnitius, Gochardus,
Brentius, Bucer-Novae Glossae in Matthew. Mar. and Lucam, per Robertum Stephanum;
they are damned by the Index Hispan. expurgat. Madr. 1667. in Rob. Steph.
(mihi) p. 874. Col. 2.
Spanish Inquisitors, and therefore more valuable.

2. For Papists, 1. Lucas Burgensis in quatuor Evang. Ant. 1606. 2. Maldonat.
Jesuit. Lat. there are former and worse Editions 1629. he is Vir Dotatus; but,
as Casaubon calls him, Maledicentissimus. 3. Hugo Cardinalis (alias Hugo de
Sancto Claro) who writ about the year 1244. in which he was created Cardinal
Bellar. descript. Eccles. In Hugone de Sancto Claro.
by Pope Innocent the Fourth, in a time of great Ignorance and Superstition,
when Popery was not yet formed; whence it is that he, and others of that Age
have many things which they at Rome like not. 4. Jacobus Faber Stapulensis in
quatuor Evang. He was an honest and sober Papist; has an excellent Preface
before his Commentaries concerning the Excellency, Perfection, and Universal
Use of Scripture; therefore that Preface totally, and many other things in his
Commentaries are damned by the Inquisitors Ind. expurgat. Belgico Vlyssiponensi
verbo Jacob. Faber.
, and all his Works prohibited by Clement 8. Possevinus in apparatu sacro verbo
Jacob. Faber.
till they be purged, i. e. corrupted and spoiled by the Inquisitors and their
Indices.

3. Writers on the Epistles and Apocal. if not all, or most, are these.

1. Ancient; as 1. Theod. in omnes Pauli Epistolas numero 14. He has nothing on
the seven Canonical Epistles ( James, Peter, John and Jude) nor the Revelation;
he is amongst the Ancients one of the best.

2. Ambrose in omnes Pauli Epistolas (excepta ad Hebr. peradventure because
that Epistle was not (in his time) received in the Roman Church, Epistolam ad
Hebraeos inter Canon. Scripturas consuetudo Latina non accipit, Hier. in cap.
8. Isaiae, Tom. 4. p. 32. Col. 2. idem ait cap. 6. Isaiae, ibid. page 24. Col.
9.
which may be the reason too why St. Hierom has no Comment. on that Epistle,
nor any Preface to it, as he has to most Books of the Bible) but those
Commentaries are denied to be Ambroses by many, Rivetum vid. and ejus Critica
Sacra, lib. 3. cap. 18. p. 291. Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. in Ambr. p. 130,
131, etc.
and suspected by more. 3. Primasius Vtiensis circa annum 545. 4. Sedulius
circa annum 430. 5. Vbi supra in Oecumenio, page 293.
Oecumenius (quisque demum fuerit) in omnes Pauli and Canon. Epist. cum quo
conjungitur Arethas Caesariensis in Apocal. who he was, and when he lived, is
uncertain. Bellar. places him after the year 1000. and some sooner: His
Commentary indeed is a Catena taken out of See their names in Posssevines
Apparatus sacer verbo Oecumen.
about 121 Ancient Authors (for so many he cites) and amongst them he often
cites Photius; whence it is evident he lived after Photius, who flourished after
the middle of the 9th Century, etc. 2. Modern; and 1. Protestants, such as
Conrad. Vorstius on all the Epistles, save that to the Hebrews, who has 1. The
Analysis, 2. The Paraphrasis; 3. Schola in Paraphrasin; 2. The loci communes of
every Chapter 2. Dr. Hammond on the Epist. and Apocal. -- sed caute legendus;
for he See his Notes on Joh. 5.2. Lit. a, the healing power not divine; but
natural. 2. (...) a Messenger, not Dei Angelus. So Act. 1.25. the Paraphr. and
Notes refers the words (his own Place) to Mathias, not Judas; and Act. 11.30.
in the Paraph. (...) Bishops properly, and in the Note
no secondary Presbyters inferior to Bishops once named in Scripture. 3.
Secondary Priests not Jure Divino; or no Divine proof that they are so.
has diverse Novel Opinions and Expositions inconsistent with the Text, or
Truth, or the Judgment of Antiquity, and several mistakes in Geograph. Chronol.
2 These. in the Argument praefix'd he says that Epistle was writ Anno Christi
51. then cap. 2. v. 3. the Man of Sin was not then revealed, and yet he says in
Paraphr. and Notis, that Simon Magus was the Man of Sin, and yet he and his
Heresies were published, if not much sooner ^^an Anno Christi 44. as is certain
out of Hi^^. de Illust. Eccles. Doct. cap. 1. Bar. Annal. Tom. 11. ad Ann. 44.
351, 525. and Dr. Hammond himself on 1 Pet. 5.13. Not. Tit. D.
History, etc. 3. Cameronis Mirothecium Evang. etc. Lud. Capelli Spicilegium
(both bound up together) Printed in Quarto Anno 1632. have many short and
considerable Notes on many particular places in the Epist. and Apoc. 2. Papist;
such as, 1. Estius in Epistolas, one of the best Popish Writers on that
Subject. 2. Joh. Gagnaeius in omnes Epist. and Apoc. brevissima and facillima
Scholia, Octavo, Ant. 1564. 3. Pet. Lombardus in omnes Pauli Epistolas; he writ
before Transubstantiation (Opinionis Potentum and Prodigium) was decreed in the
Lateran Council, 1215. And in many things honest Peter is no Papist. 4.
Dionysius Carthusianus in omnes Pauli Epist. and many other, etc. 5. Arias
Montanus in omnes Apostolorum Epistolas and Apoc.

For the better understanding of the Scriptures, it will be convenient to know,
and (when occasion to consult such Books as have given general directions for
studying Scriptures, and particular explications of the Jewish Antiquities,
etc. such as these.

Apparatus ad Scripturas intelligendas.
1. Antiquitatum Judaicarum libri 9. per Ariam Montanum, Lug. Bat. 1593. Quarto.

2. Buxtorfii Tiberias seu Commentarius Historicus didacticus Criticus ad
Illustrationem Operis Biblici, Bas, 1620. Fol.

3. Andr. Riveti Isagoge seu Introductio ad Scripturam sacram Vet. and N. Test.
Lugd. Bat. 1627.

4. Ant. Possevini Apparatus ad Studia, Scripturae, Theologiae Scholasticae and
practicoe, Ferrariae 1609. Quarto.

5. Ejusdem Bibliotheca selecta and dicta Bibliothecae, Lib. 2. and 3. Colon.
Agrip. 1607. Fol. There are many such more.

Bibliotheca Studiosi Theologiae per Gilb. Voetium, Ultrajecti 1651. lib. 2.
sect. 2. p. 841. de Apparatu Theologico; and Hen. Hollingeri Clavis Scripturae,
seu Thesaurus Philologicus Tiguri 1649. Quarto.

De Canone Scripturae.
12. Seeing Controversies there are concerning the Canon of Scripture, some
Books being Canonical to some which to others are Apocryphal, it will be
convenient to have some who have writ ex professo on that Subject; such as,

1. Joh. Rainolds de Lib. Apoc. Tom. 12. sent. 4. Oppenheim. 1611. There are
many Controversies learnedly discussed (obiter) in these two Volumes, besides
those about the Canon. 2. The Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture,
by Dr. Cousin late Bishop of Durham, Land. 1657.

3. Hen. Limmichii vindicatio Librorum Apoc. 1638. 8o. 4. Consulendi sunt (cum
opus fuerit) Scriptores irestici Pontificii and Reformati) qui Controversiam de
Canone Biblico tractant, quales sunt Chemnitius in Exam. Council. Trident. Dan.
Chamier. (Panstrat. Cath. Tom. 10.) Andr. Rivetus (Catholici Orthodoxi) Tom. 1.
Tract. 1. de Sacra Scriprura. Bellarm. (Tom. 1. Controv. 1 de Verbo Dei.) G.
Amesius contra Bellarminum. Vetus Erbormannus Jesuita in sua pro Bellarm.
Replica contra Amesium, Herbipoli. 1661.

5. It will be convenient also to consult what the Ancient Fathers and Canons
of Council determine concerning the Canon of Scripture: As,

1. Canon. Apostol. 85.9. apud Balsamonem, page 278. apud Zonaram and Canon 88.
p. 42. Dionysius Exiguus 1. Collector Can. Antiquissimus, Apostolorum Canones.

5. Tantum habet Spurius ideo est hic Can. 85. Vet. 84; etc. 2. Canon Concilii
Laodiceni 59. apud Justellum in Cod. Can. Eccles. Vniversae Can. 163. seu
ultimus. 3. Canon 47. Concilii Carthag. 3. apud Joverium Conciliorum part. 2.
p. 19. Col. secunda, and in Conciliis per Labbe, Par. 1671. Tom. 2. 1177.

But this Canon is spurious, Vide Joh. Rainolds Thes^s, p 90. Dr. Cosins
Scholastical History of the Can^n of Scripture, p. 111, 112, 113.
as were it my business) might evidently be proved.

4. Athanasius in Synopsi, Tom. 2. p. 55. Gr. Lat. reckons the Books of
Scripture as we do. 5. V^d Hist. Eccles. Analysis Bib^iothecarii, p. 180. Par.
1649 and Pet. Pithaei Opera, Par. p. 14, 15.
Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople, his Catalogue of Canonical Books, apud
Eusebium Chronologicorum p. 312. Graec. Edit. Amstel. 1658.

6. Hieronymus Vid eundem Hieron. praefat. 115. in Prove bia, Tom. 3. p. 6^2.
E^^it. M. Victorii.
Praefat. 106. quae est in Lib. Regum, Tom. 3. p. 682, 689. ubi Libros Vet.
Jest eodem plane modo quo Ecclesia Anglicana, enumerat, and tum addit, quicquid
extra hos est, inter Apocrypha reponendum.

7 Ruffinus in Symb. Apostolorum, inter Opera Cypriani per Pamelium, p. 552,
553. per Goulartium, p. 575. where he has a Catalogue of Canonical Books of
both Testaments, the very same with ours of the Church of England.

8. Epiphanius de Ponderibus and Mensuris, 4-5. Tom. 2. p. 161.

9. Nazianzenus Carmine 33. Operum, Tom 2. p. 98. Vtriusque Ttstam. Libros
(nisi quod Apocal. Amphilochius Jeoniensis in Jambis (in reliquis cum
Nazianzeno consentiens) Apoc. etiam habet in Bibliotheca Patrum per Marg. De La
Bigne, Par. 1589. Tom. 8. p 666.
desideratur) eosdem plane quos Eccles. Angl. agnoscit ac tandem carmen
concludit (...) 1. Eusebius (out of Origin reckons the Canonical Books as we
do; only he (neither Protestants nor Papists do reckons an Epist. of Jerem.
with his Prophecy and Lamentations, Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 25. p. 225.
Edit. Valesii. Vid. etiam Cyrillum Catechesi Mystag. 4. p. 36, 37. and
Nicephorum Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 46. p. 216, 217.

De Patribus Errorum Saeculo scriptis, etc.

13. For the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, 'twill be convenient to know
who they were when they lived, and what they writ; and for this such as these
may be consulted.

1. Nomenclator praecipuorum jam inde a Christo nato Eccles. Doctorum
Scriptorum, Professorum, Episcoporum, Testium Veritatis Scholasticorum,
Conciliorum, Haereticorum Imperatorum, Roman. Pont. etc. per Hen. Ozaeum, Han
1619 He (in an Alphabetical order) only sets down the Age and Year they
flourished in.

2. Hieronymus de Illustr. Eccles Scriptoribus extat Operum Sancti Hier. per M.
Victorium, Tom. 1. p. 236. Gr. Lat. ubi Sophronius dicitur Versionis Gr.
Author, cum tamen inepta sit Versio, illa est Vid. Isaac. Vossium in Notis ad
Ignatium, p. 257, 258.
Sophronio indigna. 2. prodiit Hieron. de Scrip. Illustribus (una cum Gennadio
Massiliensi de Illustr. Eccles. Doctoribus) Helmestad. 1611. Quarto Prodiit
postea (cum aliis) 1639. quod ex sequente Aub. Miraei opere constet.

3. Bibliotheca Ecclesiastica, seu Nomenclatores septem Veteres, Hieronymus,
Gennadius Ildefonsus, Sigebertus, and per Aubertum Miraeum cum ejus Scholiis
and Auctariis, Ant. 1639. Fol. Sed hi Authors a Miraeo Editi caute legendi;
Miraeus enim, non uno ^oco, Romae potius, quam Veritati favet.

4. Illustrium Eccles. Orientalis Scriptorum, qui secundo Saeculo floruerunt
Vitae and Monumenta; Authore Pet. Halloiec. Duaci 1636. habet etiam Pontifices,
Imperatores, Persecutiones, and Concilia istius Saeculi, etc. Fol.

5. Scriptorum Eccles. Abacus Chronologicus (Vet. and N. Test.) a Mose ad Annum
Christi 1589. Authore Phil. Labbe, Par. 1658.

6. Tabulae Eccles. quibus Scriptores Eccles. eorumque Patria, Aetas, Ordo and
Obitus exhibentur a Christo nato ad Annum 1517. Land. 1674.

7. Phil. Labbe de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, Tom. 2. in Octavo, Par. 1660.
in Calce, Tom. 1. Tract. 1. Joh. Papiffae Caenotaphium eversum.

8. Joh. Tritthemius de Scriptoribus Eccles. cum append. Par. 1546.

Many such as these are, who have given an account of the time wherein they
lived, and the Writings of the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, which
possibly you may better know; such as these.

De Scriptis Patrum Genuinis, Spuriis, etc.

14. But because in the Works of the Ancient Fathers and Ecclesiastical
Writers, there are many Apocryphal and Spurious Books and Tracts which are
indeed none of theirs whose names they bear, it will be necessary to know, and
have some of those Authors who have writ Critica Sacra, and Censures of Books,
discovering the Fraud or Ignorance of those who have published Erroneous and
Heretical Books under Catholic names; such as these may be consulted.

1. Plotii Bibliothcae^, by Shottus, 1611. Fol.

2. Hierome de Scriptis Eccles. etc. of the Edition of Par. 1630. or rather of
the Edition of Phil. Labbe (with his Additions) in two Vol. Par. 1660.

3. Censura quorundam Scriptorum, quae sub nominibus Sanctorum and Vet.
Authorum a Pontificiis citari solent, etc. per Rob. Cocum, in Quarto. Land.
1623.

4. A Treatise of the Corruption of the Fathers; by Dr. James, Quarto. Land.
1612.

5. Andr. Riveti Crit. Sacr. lib. quatuor, Octavo. cum Tracta. de Authoritate
Patrum, Errorum causis, and Nothorum notis, Genev. 1626.

6. Abrahami Sculteti Syntagma Medullae Theologiae Patrum, Quarto. Francofurti
1634. He gives an account of almost forty most Ancient Writers, of their
Genuine Works, of their Supposititious, of their Errors, of their Consent with
Protestants, and (the particulars wherein) and an Analysis of all their Genuine
Writings.

7. Joh. Dallaeus de Pseudopigraphis Apostolicis, Harderb. 1653.

8. Davidis Blondelli Pseudo-Isiodorus and Turvianus vapulantes, etc. 4 Edit.
1628. Vet. Romans Pontif. a Clement. 10. ad Sirisium, i. e. Ann. 383. Epist.
Decretales ab Isiodoro Mercatore suppositas, and a Joh Vid. Pet. de Marca de
Primatu Lugdunensis Ecclesiae, p, 353.
Bosco Editas, ac tandem a Franc. Turrianus ad Magdeburgenses Centuriatores pro
Canonibus Apostolorum, and Epist. Pontif. Quarte. Colon. 1573.
Turriano defensas spurias esse demonstrat Blondellus.

9. Bellarmine de Script. Eccles. Sixtus Lenensis in Bib. Possevinus in
Apparatu Sacro, etc. And many other Popish Authors confess and prove many
supposititious Books Printed and Published with the Genuine Works of the
Fathers, and yet very usually cite those Tracts (when they make for them)
against Protestants. In the Edition of Hierom's Works, the whole 9th Tome
consists of such Tracts as are now confessed to be Tom. 9. complectons fals^
Hier. ascripta in the (...) of the Tome.
all spurious. In the 17th Tome of the Magna Bibliotheca Patrum, Par. 1654.
There is Index Chronologicus, and Index omnium Patrum Alphabeticus, in which we
have many things well and truly said of the Times and Writings of the Ancient
Fathers.

10. Vid. Gratian. Did. 15, and 16 praecip^e Can. Sancta Romana 3. where we
have a long Catalogue of Authentic and Apoc. Books made by Pope Gelatius (and
his Council of 70 Bishops, 494.) the Canon Vid. Crab. Council Tom. 1. p. 991.
and Council. per Labb^, Par. 1671. Tom 4. 1259, 1260, 1261. Surius Council. Tom.
2. p. 318.
of that Council we have elsewhere better than in Gratian; in Canon and Council
they call some things Canon, or Anthentick, which they damn now as Apocryphal;
and so do we too; and other things they approve as Authentic, which now
neither they nor we approve Vid. Johan. de Turre Cremata in his Can. 15, 16.
and Glossas (especially the late Editionis Par. 1612. and 1618.
ones) where to reconcile the contradictions of this Canon and Council to the
present Opinions of Rome, they are glad to say that this Canon is so much
corrupted, Toto hoc Canone tot modis distant ab Originali; ut satis certo
statui non possit quae vera sit Gelasii Lectio. Nota ad verbum mandamus Can. 3.
did. 15. in utraque Editione Parisiensi.
that they cannot tell which words in it are really the words of Gelasius, and
which not.

15. It will be requisite to consult some Writers about the Authority and Use
of Fathers, etc. such as these.

1. Dallaeus de usu Patrum; extat, 1. Gallice; 2. Lat. per Joh. Mettaienum,
Genevae 1656. Quarto.

2. Tractatus de Patrum, Conciliorum and Traditionum Authoritate in rebus
Fidei, etc. Emenium K. Vyfalrinum cum praefat. D. Parei, Francofurti 1611.
Octavo.

3. Tractatus de Patrum Authoritate and ad quid etc. per Andr. Rivetum,
praefixus Libro suo quem Criticum Sacrum inscripsit.

4. Vid. Gratian. Did. 9. Glossam a Turre Cremata ibid. and multo de
Authoritate Scripturae Conciliorum Patrum, etc. The Socinians grant the Fathers
no Authority Totius Mundi praeter Apostolos, Authoritas in Religione nulla esi:
Smalcius in Refutat. duorum Lib. Smeglecii de Erroribus Nov. Arria^o^um, lib.
2. 16. p 225. and and ibid. p. 223.
at all, and the Papists are sworn never to expound in Juram^nto p^ofessio nis
Fidei in Council. Trident. Sess. 24. de Reformat. in Caic^, c^p. 12. Edit. Ant.
1633.
Scripture but secundum unanim. Patrum Consensum, but very little, and when
they make against them none at all; as we may see by Cajetan Who allows an
Exposition of Scripture, though contra Torrentem Patrum ad Comment. in 1. Genes.
Feuardentius Feuarde^tius says, If all were left out of the Fathers which we
now believe not; Bona pars Scriptorum Patrum periret. Feuardentius in
Iraenaeum, p. 494. ad Lectorem.
Maldonatus, Maldonat. in cap. 6. Joh. p. 1487.
who tells us it was the Opinion of Augustine and Innocentius, first, that it
was necessary to communicate Infants, Augustini and Innocentii sententia
sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia ibid. 116. p. 1488.
and that August. delivered this, non ut Opinionem suam, sed ut Fidei totius
Ecclesia Dogma; and that this Opinion prevailed in the Church about 600 years,
and yet denied now.

Historici Eccles.

16. For the better understanding Scripture and Fathers, the knowledge of
Ecclesiastical History will be necessary; such as these,

1. As have writ general Comprehensions and Epitomes of Ecclesiastical
Histories; for instance;

1. Timanni Gesselii Historia Sacra ordine Chronologico compendiose digesta, a
Mundo condito ad Annum Christi 1125. Trajecti ad Rhenum 1659. Vol. 1. Quarto.

2. Joh. Cluverii Historiarum totius Mundi Epitome ab origin Mundi ad An.
Christi 1633. Lugd. Bat. 1639. Vol. 1. Quarto.

2. Such as have writ Ecclesiastical History anciently and more fully: As 1.
Eusebii Hist. Eccles. cum Notis Hen. Valesii, Par. 1659. 2. Socrates and
Sozomen per eundem, Par. 1668. 3. Theodoreti Evagrii Philostorgii and Theodori
Hist. per eundem, Par. 1673. These give an account of Church Affairs for almost
600 years: And if Ruffinus his two Books of Ecclesiastical History by Ben.
Laurentius de la Bar, Par. 1580. And the Historia Tripartita composed by
Cassiodore, and published by B. Rhenanum, Basil. 1528. be added, it may be
complete, and facilitate the understanding of the forementioned Histories.

3. Such as have writ lately (but most fully) Ecclesiastical History: As,

1. Historia Eccles. per Centuriatores Mageleburgicos, Basil 1624. 2. Or the
Epitome of it in 7 Vol. Quarto, by Lucas Osiander, Tubing. 1607. 3. Annal.
Eccles. Baronii a Nato Christo ad 1197. Continuati a Provio ad Annum 1431. and
a Spondano ad 1646. Not. de his Annal. 1. Quod ex Editionibus omnibus illam,
Ant. 1612. solam and correctissimam agnoscit Baronius Baronius in Lteris Chri^.
Plantino latis quae extan in Calce, Tom. and 10 Edit Ant. 1611. Monet Lectrem
omne illua esse Adulteru^ and Spuriun quod Editio. Dictae non est
Consentatanum. Besid^s Baroniu^, we may consult Rob. Saliani Annals Eccles.
Vet. Test. Tom. 8. Colon. 1620. in F^l^ Notand. extat Epitome Annal. Card.
Baronii per Ludov. Aurelium, Octav. Monasterii 1638. 2. v.
. There were three or four former Editions. 2. Even in this best Edition 1612.
in the 4, 5, 6, 7 Tomes, the number of the Paragraphs are left out; whether
this omission of these numbers was Casu or Concilio, I know not; but sure I am,
that unless those numbers be supplied by the Pen, and writ in the Margent,
Quotations cannot without great trouble be found in those four Tomes which want
them. 3. Before those Annals of Baron. be used, the most Learned Contra
Casaubonum pro Baron. scripseruit. 1. Herebertus Rosweidus, Lib. Cui Titulus
Lex Talionis, etc. Quarto. Ant. 1614. 2. Audreas Eudaemon Johannes, Quarto.
Colon. 1617. Convi iis fortiter, sed Argumentis frigide contra Casaub. agunt.
Vid. ad Trebbechorii Exercitat. ad Annals Baronii ubi desiit Cafanbonus. Edit.
Kibonii 1673. in Q^arto.
Exercitations of Casaubon upon them will be of infinite use to discover the
many Errors of that Annalist. 4. And it must be remembered that Baronius studio
partium (...), is not only zealous, but every where factious in maintaining the
Popes Prerogatives, and all the received Errors and Superstitions of that
Church, and on the other side the Centuriators are in some things a little too
strait lac d, so that the truth many times lies between them; so that an
impartial Reader of their stories, by collections of what they have said, and
the Grounds why they did so, may find that Truth which they ((...)) either
could not or would not acknowledge.

4. Two Historians more I would commend (for understanding the state of
Religion since Luther) both persons of great Moderation and Fidelity (tho of
different Religions,) and writ what they might and did know.

1. John Sleidani Comment. de Statu Religionis ab 1517 ad 1556.

2. Thuani Historia ab Anno 1543. ad Annum 1607

3. Add to these Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent: all excellent
persons; Cedro digna locuti.

17. For the better understanding each History, some skill in Chronology will
be necessary for a Divine after a convenient knowledge of the Hac ae re Vid.
Pall. Crusium d^ Epochis, 80. Basil. 1578. D. Petavius in Rationario Temporum 2
vol. 80 Par. 1636 etc. Helvium in Prolegone^is ad suan Chronologian, Oxon 1651.
Tecknical part of Chronology, de Anno, Mense, Septimana and de Aeris seu
Epochis, etc. such as these will be necessary.

1. Helvicus his Chronology (...), (as they call it) Oxon 1651. of continual
use in reading History Sacred or Civil.

2. Jac. Vsserii Armachani Annals, etc. a Mundo Condito ad Annum Christi 73.
vol. 2. in Folio.

3. Chronicon Cath. Ed. Simson, Oxon. 1652. Folio.

4. Chronicon Charionis a Melancthone and Peucero, auctum and editum Aureliae,
1610.

Geography.
18. Chronology and Geography are justly the Eyes of History Sacred or Civil,
and therefore such Maps must be had. Erasmus when he writ his Annotations on
the Acts, had a Map of the Roman Empire always before him; when he writ on St.
Paul's Voyage to Rome, and finding all the places (mentioned in the Text) in
his Map, he was very much pleased, and highly commended the Study of Geography:
and Books as are useful in that kind may be consulted; such as

1. For Maps, See the large and distinct Map of Palestine prefixed to Eusebius
de Locis H^braicis and Bonfrerius Notes upon it, p. 246. in the Edition of
Eusebius mentioned a little after.
that Published by George Hormius, the Book is Entitled, Accuratissima Orbis
Antiqui Delineatto, sive Geographia vetus, sacra and profana, etc. Fol. Amstel.
1657. particularly those Maps which concern Palestine and other places in
Scripture.

2. For Books; such as by way of Lexicon explain the proper names of Nations,
Provinces, Cities, etc. mentioned in Scripture. As, 1. Stephanus (...) Graece
Basil. 1568. Note it is but an Epitome of Stephanus made by Hermolaeus
Grammaticus, and dedicated to Justinian the Emperor. Vid. Etiam Genuina
Stephani Fragmenta Gr. Lat. cum notis Abrah. Berkelii 80. Lugd. Bat. 1674.


2. Fragmentum Stephani de Vrbibus, per San. Tennatium Amstel. 1669. Quarto.

3. Eusebius de Locis Hebraicis seu Onomasticon urbium and Locorum Sacrae
Scripturae, etc. a Jac. Bonfrerio editum Paris, 1659. Gr. Lat. in Folio.

4. Lexicon Geographicum Stephani per N. Lloidium, Oxon. 1670. Fol.

5. Abrah. Ortelij Thesaurus Geographicus,

6. Lexicon Geograph. Mich. Antonij Baudrand. Paris, 1670. the most complete of
any in that kind.

Vid. Geograph. Episcop. Breviarium per Phil. Labbe. in Conciliorum Collectione
maxima, Par. 1671. Tom. 16. p. 12.
2. Such as have not writ by way of Lexicon, such as these,

1. Geographia Sacra Sam. Bocarti Cadami, 1646 Fol.

2. Geographia sacra Caroli a Sancto Paulo Par. 1641. Fol. very considerable
for each History.

3. Notitia Episcopatuum Orbis Christiani per Aub Miraeum, Octavo. Antwerp,
1613.

4. Notitia Graecorum Episcopatuum, a Jac. Gear. Edit. Par. 1648. in calce
Codini.

5. Notitia utriusque Vid Notitiam Dignitatum Imp. Romani ex nova recentione,
Phil. Labbe cum plurimis aliis opusculis and notis, Par. 1651. He has none of
Pancirola's Notes; but only the Text of the ancient Notitia, and that somewhat
more correct than the Edition at Genev. 1623.
Imperij cum notis Pancirolae, Genev. 1623. Fol.

6. Notitia Episcopatuum totius orbis, Msc. in Archivis Laudanis J. 17. Bibl.
Bodliana.

7. Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, and Biblicarum Historiarum cum Tabulis
Geographicis Auth. Christiano Adricomio Colon. Agripinae, 1590. Folio.

8. (...) Grae. Lat. cum notis Gothofredi, Edit. 1608. Quarto.

9. Geographia vet. and N. Test. per Cluverium Amstel. 1661. Quarto.

Councils.
19. Next those who have writ of Councils General, Imper. Patriarchal,
Provincial, etc. are to be consulted, and

1. Vid. (...) vetus omnes Synodos, tam orthodoxas, quam haereticas brevi
compendio continens, quae ab Apostolorum Tempore ad Synodum 8. (i. e.) ad 869.
celebratae sunt Gr. Lat. per Joh. Pappum Argentorati, 1621. 4o. Cum notis Joh.
Pappi and conciliorum omnium Historicam synopsin per Phil Labbe, Par. 1661. 4o.
Such Authors as have given a general account when and where, and by whom they
were called, what and how they acted, etc. such as these.

1. Synopsis Conciliorum, in qua indicatur Quale, Vbi, Quando, propter quod
habitum sit unumquodque Concilium, etc. there is joined with it. 1. Chronologia
Patrum, Pontificum, etc. and Chronologiae Eccles. continuatio ad 1671. opera D.
Douja Par. 1691.

2. Synopsis Conciliorum Historica, etc. In collectione conciliorum Maxima Par.
1671. Tom. 16. in principio.

3. Notitia conciliorum Eccles. per Joh. Cabassutium Lugd. 1672. Octavo.

4. Solomon Gesnerus de conciliis, Lib. 4. Wit. 1600. 2. Vol. Octavo.

The former Authors are Papists, the last a Protestant, and therefore much
rather to be credited than the other, who are all sworn Vid. Juramentum
Professionis Fidei in Bulla Pii Papae, 4ti, in Council. Trident. Sess. 24. In
calce cap. 12. de Reformatione.
to believe maintain and propagate all the Roman Doctrines and Practices, or
all their received Doctine, Discipline, Rites and Ceremonies.

5. Epitome Conciliorum omnium a Not. Christo ad 1619. Edit. Dan. Angelocrator
Francofurti, 1620. 4 to.

Angelocrator is a Protestant and a fierce Anti-Arminian as you may see, p.
162, 163. etc. dictae Epitomes.

6. Vid. Brevem Historiam omnium conciliorum in calce Epitomes omnium
Conciliorum per Greg. de Rives Lug. 1663 Fol.

2. Such Authors as have given us only the Canons of Councils and not the
Order, Acts and what was done in every Session; of these sort there are many, I
shall name only these.

1. Codex Canonum Ecclesiasticorum Dyonisii Exigui (i. e.) ipso interpret,
floruit Bellarmin de Script. Eccles. Labbe in Abaco Scriptorum Eccles. Ozeum in
Nomenclatore supra cit^tis.
circa Annum 525, 533, 540. Edit. a Justello Par. 1628. in Octavo. Erat Abbas
Romanus and Cod. Can. Eccles. Universae primus corrupit, si quidem Canones
Apostolorum 50 Concilii Laodicensis 21 Concilii Carthaginensis 138. and
Epistolam Cyrilli and Concilii Alexandrini Addidit. And he has left out V^d.
Codicem Canonum veterem Ecclesiae Romanae Par. 1609. Octavo. A^te^ erat edit.
Moguntiae 1525. per Joh. We^delstinum, in that Edition all is left o^^ except
the Canons of the Council of Eph^sus, and several other things put in which are
not in D^onisius Exiguus.
1. A great part of the last Canon of the Council of Laodicea (that is the
Catalogue of the Canonical Books) p. 86. 2. Four Canons of the Council of
Constantinople, p. 86. And 3. All the Canons of the Council of Ephesus. And 4.
The 28 Canon of Chalcedon; for these Canons even then in the sixth Century,
were not liked at Rome.

2. (...), Gr. were published by Joh. Tilius, Par. 1540 Quarto. In which the
last Canon of the Council of Laodicea, the Canons of Constantinople, Ephesus
and Chalcedon, (left out by Dyonisius Exiguus) are according to all the Greek
Copies faithfully put in: And the Canons of the Constantinopolitan Council in
Trullo 103. And 22 Canons of the second Nicene Council put in.

3. Canones dictos a Joh. Tilio Gr. solum editos Gr. Lat. cum notis nonnullis
edidit The same Canons were published Gr. Lat. by Andr. Gesner 1559. in a Book
Entitled, (...). Folio.
Elias Ehingerus Wittenbergae 1614. in Quarto.

4. Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Universae Gr. Lat. cum notis edidit Christ.
Justellus Par. 1610. This is the true and best Edition of that Codex Canonum,
as it is published by Justellus, and is indeed, next the Bible, the most
Authentic Ecclesiastical book in the World, as being approved and received by
the Universal Church (Gr. Lat.) East and West, whence it was called Codex
Canon. Eccles. Vniver.

5. Codex Canonum Eccles. Africanae Gr. Lat. per Justellum, Par. 1614. Octavo.
The best Edition of those African Councils. Cum notis Justelli.

6. Synodorum Generalium and Provincialium, Decreta and Canones, Scholiis,
Notis and Historica Actorum dissertatione illustrati, per Christianum Lupum
Tomis 5. in Quarto, Buxellii, 1673.

3. Such as have writ Conciliorum Summas, and have not only the Canons but
several Censures, Explications, and Animadversions upon them, etc. such as
these may be consulted, -- 1. Summa omnium Conciliorum per Barth. Caranzam,
Octavo. Rothomagi, 1633. little credit to be given to this collection of
Canons: for when any thing makes against Rome, Caranza will corrupt the Text,
so when they are condemned in the Council of Laodicea, qui Angelos Council.
Laodiceum Can. 35. apud Caranzam, pa. 191.
Colunt, He reads it, qui Angulos Colunt, and that both in Lemma and Canon too;
so of Pope Sylvester, for, Is Magus fuisse fertur, he Ibid. pa. 788.
has it, Is Magnus fuisse fertur.

2. Summa Conciliorum omnium per Francis. Longum a Cariolano, Antwerp, 1623.
Fol. A confident (to say no worse) Parasite of the Court of Rome, and
Pontificiae Omnipotentiae vindex Acerrimus.

3. Summa Conciliorum omnium per Lud. Basil, Tomis 2. Folio. Par. 1659. As high
for Rome as the former, but of much more use, etc. He has in the beginning of
the 1 Tome an Erroneous and Impious Apparatus de triplici 1. De V^rbo Scripto,
Scripturas Sacras intelligit. 2. De Verbo tradito seu traditionibus. 3. De
Verbo explicato per Eccles. Romanam intelligit: Idque vol. 1. per Concilium. 2
Vol. per Papam extra Concilium.
verbo Dei.

4. Sanctiones Ecclesiasticae tam synodales, quam Pontificiae in tres parts
distinctae. 1. Synodos Vniversales, 2. Particulares, 3. Pontificum Decreta
continet per Fran. Joverium Paris, 1555. Fol. This both for Method, a good
Index, and the Authors fidelity) is (by much) the best and of most use.

4. Such as have cast the Canons of Councils into common places having made a
Catalogue of Heads, and then referred to every Head those Canons which concern
it; such are

1. Epitome Juris Pontificii veteris per Antonium Augustinum, Paris, 1641. Fol.
or Romae, 1614. an Incomparable Book or rather a Library of the Canon Laws to
those who know the right use of it.

2. Epitome Canonum Conciliorum omnium per Gregorium de Rives Lugd. 1663. Fol.
He has the Heads for common places in an Alphabetical Order, and then refers to
each of them, those Canons which concern them: a book of good use but (as all
other) short of Ant. Augustinus.

5. It will be convenient to have such Authors as have made more full
collections of the Councils, with the order and time of each Session of their
Acts, Canons, Epistles, etc. such as these,

1. Concilia per Pet. Crabbe Tomis 3. Col. Agrip. 1551. There is a former and
worse Edition in 2 Tomes. Colon. 1538.

2. Concilia per Laurent. Surium in 4 Tom. Col. Agrip. 1567.

3. Concilia per Nicholinum, 5 Tom. Venetiae, 1585.

4. Concilia per Binium in 9 Tom. and 10 Vol. Par. 1636.

5. Concilia Tomis 37. Par. 1644.

6. Concilia per Labbe and Cossartium, Tom. 16. Par. 1671.

Concerning all these it may be observed, 1. That they are all Popish Editions,
and many things to be read with great Care and Caution, spurious Canons and
Decretal Epistles of ancient Popes put in, and genuine Canons left out or
corrupted, or industriously contrived notes, to make them look like Rome.

2. The way to be armed against these piae Frauds is to collate Editions and
Msc. Copies, and consult those Authors (before mentioned) which have writ
censures upon the Works of Fathers and Councils.

3. Of all their collections of Councils Pet. Crabbe is most commended for his
Fidelity, and (not for more, but) less fraud than those who follow him. All of
them generally leave out the 28th Canon of the Council of Chalcedon; and those
few who have it, rail at it, and damn it, as got by Fraud, and the Pride of the
Patriarch of Constantinople; and every one of them, even Crabbe and Cossartius
in their Concilia Maxima (though it be extant Concilium h^c Pisanum sec^ndum
Edit. Paris ab Hie^onymo de ^ro^ria 1514.
and Printed before Hoc est ante 1517.
Luther) leave out Concilium ^isanum secundum, and only name it, and both they
and their Index Expurgator. Index Expurgat Hisp^n. Mad iti 1667. Verbo
Concilium Pisanum, Class. 3 and Index Romae 1664. p. 29.
damn it, because it makes against them, though it was called by the Emperor,
King of France and Cardinals, and kept only by Catholics, and that according
to the Constitutions of their own General Councils of Constance and Basil; and
the Council it self, both in that time it sat, and after, was called It was
called 1511. and Printed 15^4. and the Title prefixed to it in the Printed Copy
is this, Constitution^s factae in diversis Sessionibus Sacri Generalis Pisani
Concilii.
Sacrum Concilium Pisanum, etc.

Of all the forenamed Editions, that of Labbe and Cossartius, Paris 1671. in 17
Vol. is the most comprehensive, containing above a fourth part more than any
former Edition; by reason whereof it is of far more use than any other.

6. There be other Editions or Collections of Councils, or their Canons, of
great use: As,

1. For particular Councils; 1. Versio Vetus Lat. Concilii Niceni secundi per
G. Long. Colon. 1540. in which p. 68. we have these words, Post Consecrationem
Corpus Domini and Sanguis vocantur; He speaks of the Eucharistical Elements.
Now Binius reads it thus, Binius Council. Tom. 1. p. ^58. Edit. Par. 1636.
(...). It was, (as is evident by the And Crabbeul^s that true Version 7.
Concilium. Tom. 2. p. 568.
Old Lat. Version) (...), and Binius makes it (...).

2. Illiberritanum Anno 305. cum discursu Apologetico Ferd. de Mendoza and
Notis Vberioribus Emannuel. Gundisalvi Tellei, Lugd. 1665. Folio.

3. Concilium Tridentinum cum Declarationibus Cardinalium, Citationibus
Sotealli, Remissionibus Barbosae, Additionibus Balthaseris Andreae, Antwerp,
1633. Octavo. It is of all Editions the best, of signal use, and a Repertory
for all Points of Popery.

4. Concilii Tridentini Canones and Decreta cum aliis in Concilio gestis, scil.
1. Cum Principum Literis ad Concilium. 2. Legatorum Orationibus ad Synodum
habitis. 3. Synodi Responsis. 4. Patrum Orationibus. 5. Eorundem Sententiis and
Disputationibus, de Rebus gravioribus in Synodo habitis, etc. per Phil. Labbe,
Par. 1667. Folio.

5. Concilium Constantiense and Basiliense, per Zacharian Ferrerium, Mediolani
1511. six years before Luther appeared against Rome.

6. Concilium Constantiense and Pisanum secundum (quod alias non extat) Editum
ab Hieronymo de Croaria, Par. 1514. Octavo.

These last Editions of the Councils of Constance, and Basil, and Pisa, are of
unquestionable Authority, as writ by Papists of those times, Men of great Note
and Learning, and no way infected with Luther's Heresies, seeing they writ
before he appeared against Rome, etc

7. And as for particular Editions of some particular Churches, it will be
convenient to know some more accurate Collections of the Canons and Decrees of
Councils; I shall mention two or three: As,

1. Bibliotheca Juris Canonici Veteris, etc. Opera Guil. Voelli Dris. Sorbonici
and Hen. Justelli (Men of great Learning and Fidelity) Par. 1661. in two Vol.
Fol. In them we have the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Anglicanae with Jastellus his
Notes upon both (scarce elsewhere to be had) and more particulars truly
published according to the Original M. Scr. (Gr. Lat.) and not, as many are, to
any partial Interest.

2. (...) seu Pandectae Canonum, Apostolorum and Conciliorum ab Eccles. Graeca
receptorum and Epistolarum Canonicarum S. Patrum cum Scholiis Balsamonis,
Aristeni Zonarae, etc. per Guil. Beveregium, Vol. 2 in Fol. Oxon. 1672. of
great use for a comprehensive knowledge of Ecclesiastical Antiquities.

8. Other Collections there are of Councils of particular Nations, which are to
be known and consulted; such as,

1. For our Nation, Spelman's Councils, in two Vol. Folio.

2. For Spain, Collectio Conciliorum Hispaniae per Garsiam Loaisam Madriti
1393. Fol. For although they may be in the Concilia Maxima by Labbe, yet neither
in so good order, nor so easy to be made use of.

3. For France; the Collectors of their Councils are many: As for instance.

1. Concilia Galliae per Sirmondum, Tom. 3. Fol. 1629.

2. Council. Galliae Novissima per Ludov. Odespun, Par. 1646. Fol.

3. Conciliorum Antiquorum Galliae Supplementum Opera and Studio Pet. De la
Land, Par. 1666. Folio.

4. Concilia Galliae Narbonensis; Stephanus Balasius Notis illustravit and
Edidit, Par. 1668. Octavo.

2. As Controversies in Religion are now stated, Acquaintance with
School Divinity will be necessary; The Fathers of the Schoolmen are Lombard
and Aquinas.

Schoolmen.
1. For Lombard the Master of the Sentences. Bishop of Paris, and flourished
about the year 1145. if Bellarmine Bellar. de Script. Ecclesiast. in Pet.
Lombardo.
say true, it will be convenient to have.

1. His four Books of Sentences, either Editionis Lovarii 1568. Quarto. Or 2.
Which is much better Editionis Moguntia 1632. Oct. Edidit Anton. Demochares Dr.
Sorbonicus; sub finem annexi sunt Articuli erronei in quibus Magister non
tenetur) partim Parisiis olim damnati, partim communiter non probati.

2. Lambertus Danaeus in primum L^brum Sententiarum, Octavo. Genev. 1589 He
has, 1. Prolegomena, quibus Scholasticae Theologiae Origo, progressus and
aetates ostenduntur. 2. Commentarius triplex. 3. Elenchus Locorum Scripturae
and Patrum, quos addendo, detrahendo vel mutando corrupit Lombardus. 4. In
Calce Synopsis sanae and Veteris Doctrinae de Trinitate.

3. Joh. Martinez de Ripalda in Libros quatuor Lombardi. He 1. Gives a short
Analysis of each distinction; 2. A List of the Questions the Schoolmen handle
on those distinctions. 3. Under every Question he cites the Schoolmen, who,
and where they handle such Questions, and so refers the Reader to the chief
Authors of each Question.

4. Durandus and Ariminensis amongst the more Ancient Schoolmen, etc. Ockam
Ockam is damned in Indice Expurgat. Alexandri Papae 7. Romae 1667. and
therefore we may be sure it is some great Truth he is guilty of.
, Scotus, Antwerp 1620.

5. For the later Commentators on the Sentences, Gabriel Biel and Estius are
worth the having (others Old and more Modern) may be consulted (if occasion.)
By comparing the Old and later Schoolmen, you, may see that Popery does
proficere in pejus; for the Old speak more freely many things (which since
Luther and the Trent Conventicle) pass for little better than Heresy at Rome.

2. For Aquinas; his Summae is the most considerable part of his Works; and, if
that impious and lying Picture before them say true, had the express
approbation Ita Christus in Cruce pendens Aquinaetem alloquitur in Iconismo
summae ej^s praefixo. Edit. Duaci 1614.
of our Savior, Been scripsisti de Me Thoma; 'twill be convenient to have.

1. His Summae Coloniae Agrippinae, An. 162.

2. Bannes Vasques, Suarez, etc. or Cajetan, who is the most moderate, and
comes nearer Truth, and such others; for there are many, and Catalogues Vid.
Catalogum Scriptorum in Summam Aquinatis in Calce.
of them may be consulted.

Concerning Schoolmen and their Theologia Scholastica we may farther consider,

1. That our Reformed Writers note three Intervals of time, which they call
Theologiae Scholasticae aetates. 1. Scholasticorum and Theologiae Scholasticae
aetas prima seu Vetus incepit Anno Vid. Lamb D^^^eum in Lib. 1. S^nt. P. Lombar
di Pr^ligom. c. 2.
1020. Lanfranco Papiensi Scholasticorum istius aetatis Principe, and duravit
ad Annum 1220. In this Interval Lanfrancus and his followers undertook the
Justification of Rome, and all her Errors, particularly Transubstantiation
which then begun to be hatched and watchfully defined in the Lateran Council
Concilium L^^^onum sub I^^^ntio Papa, ^. 1215.
. To effect this, they equal the Fathers to Scripture (finding some things in
them) but nothing in this for their purpose. 2. They make much use of
Aristotle's Philosophy. 3. Decretal Constitutions of Popes; and all the
received Doctrines and Rites of Rome were Authentic with them, and whatever
seemed contradictory was denied, or construed to a complying sense.

2. Scholastica Media ab Alberto Magno 1220. ad Durandu^ 1330. In hoc
Intervallo Aristoteles (aut Scholastica superiori ad Theologiae limen) in ipsa
Ad^^ a Sacrarii Theologiae Introductus and scripta ejus demonstratione niti
censentur; qua autem Verbum Dei docet credulitate and opi^ ^^r^ probabili
te^^^; quod etiam express and public patentur Gal. Ockamus ^n C^ntilo^^^
^^i^scule.
and asserunt eorum Doc^^^^^: Hac (...) ^uae^tione^ Vid. Lam^ert^m Danaeum Loco
citato ubi earum aliquas (plurimae enim sunt) brevi Catalogo Lectori exhibet.
Curiosas, ^^p^as, Blasphem^^ ^^mere p^o^^nunt Schola^^ic^ and Impie di
cuti^nt, and ex principiis Philoso^^^^ Peripateticae potias quam Scripturae
statuunt definiunt que.

3. Scholastica tertia ultima and pessima ab Anno 1330. ad 1517. Haec aetas
(says my Author) long Impudentissima, nam quae modestia in veteri and media
Scholastica adhuc manserat (ne temere de quibusdam ritibus and Quaestionibus
adhuc dubiis affirmaretur) ista aetate periit. Vtrum Papa sit simplex Hence
that blasphemous piece of Popish Poetry, Papa stupor Mundi, qui maxima Rerum;
nec Deus es nec Homo quasi neuter es inter utrumque. Vid. Glossam verbo Papa in
Praemio Clemuntinarum.
Homo, an quasi Deus? an participet utramque Naturam cum Christo? An potestas
ejus sit supra Concilium? An Mariae conceptio erat Immaculata? An Calix fit
Laicis negundus? Haec and similia, sub deliberatione quadam posita quaesivit
Scholastica prior, sed haec ultima temere decrevit.

1. But if any desire a fuller Account of the Schoolmen, and their Theologia
Scholastica, and the approbation Rome gave it, he may consult,

1. Hospinian. Hist. Sacramentariae, Tom. 1. l. 4. cap. 9. p. 401.

2. Lamb. Danaeus in Prolegom. ad Lib. Sent. Lombardi, 1. cap. 1, 2. fusi. 9.

3. Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. Sanctae, Lib 3. p. 216. Edit. Colon. Agr. 1626.

4. Possevinus Bibliothecae Selectae, Lib. 3. cap. 12, etc.

The two first give a true account of the Iniquity and Ignorance of those
Times, of the Corruption of Divinity, Introduction of Errors and
Superstitions, and the Schoolmens industrious endeavors to vindicate what the
Pope and his Adherents had as impiously introduced: The two last mince the
matter, conceal the truth, and tell a confused Tale of the Original of
School Divinity, and at last highly commend it, and its Authors (even for their
Learning) which all know they were never guilty of, Sixtus Senensis Bibl.
Sanctae, lib. 3. p. 217.
and excuses their bad Latin with a piece of Scripture, transferring that of
St. Paul to Peter Lombard and his Followers. 2 Cor. 11. v. 6. though I am made
rude in speech, yet not in knowledge.
But others, and more sober Papists, are of another Opinion, and heartily
confess that truth which Protestants affirm and know. I shall name one or two
more; and,

1. Johan. Tritthemius Abbas Spanhemiensis, speaking of the Time of the
Emperor Conradus tertius, and the Year 1140. tells us Tritthemius de Script.
Ecclesiasticis in Pet. Dialectico seu Abilardo, p. 161. Edit. Colon. 1546.
-- ab hoc Tempore Philosophia saecularis Sacram Theologiam, sua curiositate
inutili foedare caepit, etc. Tritthemius finished that Work long before Luther,
Anno 1494 Johan. Aventinus no Papist (I confess) yet commended by Learned and
sober Papists; (and Conradus Aldermannus Canonici Augustiani.)
.

2. Quod Legem Historiae, Johan. Andr. Quenstedt, Dialogo de Patrum Illustrium
Doctrina and Script. Virorum.
Veritatem scilicet religiose in scribendo observavit; I say Aventine speaking
of Lombard, (who was made Bishop of Paris 1159.) says thus, Ea Tempestate
Petrus Longobardus Lutetiae Parisiorum Creatur Pontifex: Is quidem Theologumen
(...), 4 Lib. scripsit, sed Sacrosanct. Joh. Avent. Anal. Boiorum, lib. 6. p.
392. Edit. Basil. 1615. and Edit. Basil. 1580. p. 508.
Philosophiae Veritatem, Fontemque purissimum, sicuti plus millies a Jac. Fabro
and Jodoco Chichtoveo Praeceptoribus meis (and they not Lutherans or Calvinists
we are sure) accepi atque audivi, Coeno Quaestionum, rivulis Opinionum
conturbavit, id quod and usus Rerum magis, nisi caeci simus, satis superque
docet. Verba haec lineis inclusa ex fussu Inquisitorum ex Indic. Expurgat.
Hispan. Madriti 1667. and Lusitanico Olysipone, 1624. sunt delenda, vid. dictos
Indices in Joh. Aventino. Floruit Aventinus circa 1500.

One thing more may be observed of the Schoolmen (and of Popish Casuists and
Commentators, especially those before Luther,) that when they speak of Moral
Duties, and those things which lie within the compass of Natural Reason to know
and judge of; we shall find many things well; (and some things acutely said;)
but when they speak of those things, the knowledge of which depends on
Scripture and Revelation (as of Faith, Repentance, Sacraments, Justification)
their ignorance of Tongues, Antiquity, and consequently of the meaning of
Scripture (besides, they are inslaved to maintain all the Errors and
Superstitions of Rome, which at that time were very many: In their discourses
of Subjects, it is no wonder if their mistakes (ex inscitia aut partium studio)
be many and great.

21. It will be necessary for a Divine to have some Casuists, etc. Amongst the
Popish Authors there are very many; so that all persons of their Faction may
find most Cases (at least in general) stated and determined according to the
Principles and Interest of their Church; and their prudence in this is great,
were their Cause good. For Protestants, there is no part of Divinity which has
been (I know not why) more neglected; very few have writ a just and
comprehensive Tract of Cases of Conscience. However, 'twill be convenient to
consult such as we have, Protestants and Papists.

1. For helps to understand Cases of Conscience, we may, amongst others which
are Protestants, consult such as,

1. Bishop Sanderson's two Tracts or Praelections de Obligatione Conscientiae,
and de Juramento, are of great excellence and use; for in them he has so
plainly explained and proved many Propositions concerning Oaths and Conscience
in Thesi, and in general, that he who understands and remembers them, and can
(in Hypothesi hic and nunc) rightly apply them, may determine many other Cases
not mentioned by him.

2. There are five Cases of Conscience determined by a late Learned Hand, etc.
London 1666. Octavo. No name to them but Parentem referunt, they look so like
that good Bishop, that any would suspect they are his, and worthy any persons
perusal.

3. Amesius de Conscientia, etc. He was a Nonconformist, and so caute
legendus; but he was a Man Rational, and his Reasons are commonly consequent.
2. His Resolutions short and perspicuous. 3. The Texts he urges pertinent; so
that when he is out, (which is not usual) you lose not much; and when he is
right, you have it in a little time.

4. Fridericus Baldwinus (a Lutheran he was) and caute legendus as to that
Point de Casibus Conscientiae, and. Witterburg. 1628.

5. Casp. Erasmi Brochmanni Systema Vniversae Theologiae, in quo singuli
Religionis Christianae Articuli, Controversiae priscae and recentes Polemicae
expediuntur, and praecipui Conscientiae Casus e Verbo Dei practice deciduntur,
Vol. 3. in Quarto. Lipsiae 1638. There be former and worse Editions.

1. For Popish Casuists, they are many, and some Antonius Divina consists of
twelve parts, and six or seven Vol. in Fol.
of them voluminous; amongst them such as these are of great Note and Authority.

1. Manuale Confessariorum, etc. per Martinum Azpilivetum Navarrum. Paris 1620.
Octavo.

2. Fran. Toleti Cardin. de instructione Sacerdotis, etc. Lib. 8. Rothomagi,
1630. Octavo.

3. Vincenti Filliucii Questiones Morales Colon. Agr. 1629. Fol. as full and
learned as any among the Jesuits, of which sort of Casuists we do not mince
the matter, nor (as some do) with soft and ambiguous words mollify their horrid
opinions; I shall name one or two who speak plain Popery, and confidently
profess and endeavor to prove their most desperate opinions; as for instance.

1. Antonii de Escobar Theologia Moralis Lugd. 1646. Octavo.

This is a good Edition, but there are two better ones at Lions and another at
Brussels 1651.

2. Thoma Tamburini Societat. Jesu, explicatio Decalogi, Lugd. 1659. Folio.

3. And that we may know what his erroneous opinions be, and where to be found,
we have a Catalogue of no less than one hundred and three pernicious Errors
found in his works, in a Book printed in the same place and same year, that
Temburinus his cases of Conscience were published: the Book has this Title.
Extrahit de plusieurs erreurs and maxims pernicieuses; contenues dans une
volume, du Pere Tambourin Jesuit, etc. Imprime a Lion en la present Anne,
1659. Quarto.

4. He who has a mind to see more of the Jesuits Casuistical Divinity may
consult the Theologia moralis Pauli Laymann Jesuitae Lugd. 1654 and Francisci
Bordoni propugnaculum opinionis probabilis, in concursu probationis operum
Bordoni, Tom. 6. Lugd. 1668. Fol.

5. And lastly, Vid. Amadai Guimonii opusculum singularia universae fere
Theologiae moralis complectens adversus Quorundam expostulationes contra
nonnullas Jesuitarum opiniones Morales, Lugd. 1664. 4^ He endeavors to justify
all the Jesuits extravagant and wild opinions laid to their charge by the
Jansenists in their Vid. L^d. Mo^^a^ii L^^^ras P^^ ^i^c^^^^. de M^^^^ and
P^^^^^ J^s^^^^^^ Disc^pl^^^ C^^^^. 1^05. in (...).
Provincial Letters, and the Jesuits Morals, The Je^u^e (...) ^als collected
out of their own Books by a Dr. of Sor^on, L^^d. 1670. Fol.
and the mystery In 4, or 5. Vol. in 8^. Notand that there is D^cretum conditum
in Congregatione Generali Romanae and Vni^^^salis I^quisitionis, etc. D^tum
Rome, 1641. in quo ^^^ia edita and edenda ^a (...)^ c ^t^a, quam pro Jansenio
pro^i^^^tu^, ne quis legate, retineat, and^. and yet ever si^ce they write,
read, and retain such Books amongst them.
of Jesuitism, and to do this he shows that many eminent Authors and Writers of
the Roman Church (before and besides the Jesuits) maintained with approbation
the same opinions, so that this work of Guimenius is a Common Place Book and
Repertory for us Heretics, wherein we may find all the most impious and wild
opinions of the Church of Rome (particularly cited by Guimenius) and eight or
ten or more eminent and approved Writers of that Church who publicly held and
defended them.

22. Besides Popish Casuists they have many Writers whom they call Summistae,
who have put almost all heads of Divinity in an Alphabetical Order, and then
explain each by way of position, case, or question; There be a World of such
Writings, the old ones (before Luther, when they Writ most secure) speak plain
Popery; the latter are more cautious and cunning, yet suffficiently erroneous;
I shall name two only.

1. Summa Vniversae Theologiae Raynerii de Pisis Ven. 1585. Quarto.

2. Summa Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae and totius juris Canonici aucta and
recognita, Lugd. 1598. Authore Pet. Crespelio. He is the most significant
amongst them. He does under every Head cite passages out of Fathers, Councils,
Historians, Schoolmen, etc. And any thing which he thinks makes for the
Catholic Cause, what such Writers say (their Books being in an Alphabetical
Order) is soon found; and therefore if in reading them little truth is got,
little time is also lost in seeking it: of these sort of Writers are Antonius
Archi-Episcopus Florentinus, Card. Cajetan Turre-Cremata in his Summa
Ecclesiae, a Book by reason of the Cardinals Authority and Learning
considerable, as also which occurs in the end of his Summa, for his Apparatus
super Decreto Extat hoc Decretum Gr. Lat. apud Binium Council. Tom. 8 p. 851.
Edit. Paris 1636.
Vorionis Graecorum in Concilio Florentino ab Eugenio Papa 4. Promulgato;
Augustinus de Ancona, and a Rabble of such Romish Janissaries, the Popes
Pretorian Band, Capitolii custodes and Pontificiae omnipotentiae Jurati
vindices.

23. Seeing every Divine of the Church of England is bo nd to subscribe and
defend the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church against all Adversaries, and
none can do that till he know what the Doctrine and Discipline is, and where
it is authentickly to be found; and seeing the Works of Jewel, Raynolds, Hooker,
Laud, and Whitaker, etc. tho they are the Works of Learned, and Great, yet
Private men; nor is any Son of the Church of England bound to subscribe to all
they say; It must therefore be considered what Books as to our Doctrine and
Discipline, are Authentic and owned by our Church as such: and of this kind we
have only four: That is,

1. Our Articles, 39. First composed and agreed on in Synodo London. 1552. i.
e. 6. Edwardi 6 ti, and Printed in Lat. 1553. They were 42. they were after
1562. Eliz. 5. revised in the Convocation at London, reduced to 39. and
published in Latin, 1563. A Copy of which is in Bodley's Library amongst
Selden's Books with the Original Subscriptions of the Clergy annexed to it.

2. Our Book of Homilies composed five years before the Articles, Anno. 1.
Edward 6 ti, 1547.

3. Our Liturgy which was first published 1549. then revised by Cranmer and
Bucer, and published 1552. That is 6 to Edvardi 6 ti, and Vid. Stat. 5. and
6to, Ed. 6ti, cap. 1.
left established at his Death, abolished by Mary, Stat. 1. Mar. Sess. 2. cap.
2.
and again established Vid Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
by Queen Elizabeth, with some alterations, 1558.

4. Our Book of Ordination; all these confirmed by Parliament and Convocation;
and so by the Supreme Power Ecclesiastical and Civil, and so whatever is
contained in those four Books, which concerns either Doctrine or Discipline, is
Authentic and Obligatory to the who^e Church and Nation, and all persons
whether Clergy or Laity; This our Common Lawyers will admit and no more,
because as they would have it to diminish the Ecclesiastical, and increase
their own Civil Power, No more are confirmed by Act of Parliament; but we say
and can prove Vid. M^c. de Excommnicatione C^^cellario missum, 166.
that there are other Books which are, and de Jure should be as Authentic and
Obligatory as the former four. As,

1. Our Ecclesiastical Canons made in Convocation 1. Jacobi. 1603.

2. The Provincial Constitutions; Quas Collegit Guil. Linwood (erat primo M.
Parker Antiquit. Britan. in Guil. C^ichly, p. 285.
Officialis Curiae de Arcubus, dein custos privati^ sigilli, ac demum^
Menevensis Episcopus) and Glossis Illustrare ^a Linwood in Praesat.
Incepit 1423. perfecit Vid. Glossam ad constitat. Finaliter Verbo R^moto, pa.
161. Col. 3. Edit. Par. 1505. de Haereticis, Lib. 5.
Glossas illas circa Annum, 1429. Constitutiones has, cum erant in Synodis
Provinciae Cantuariensis conditae, Provinciam illiam solum obligasse:
Constitutiones Legatinae Othonis and Othoboni (erant Legati Pontificis in
Anglia sub Hen. 3. cum Glosses Joh. de Aton. Canonici Lincolniensis, Notand. 1.
quod, Guil. In G^^^ and (...) Verbo (...) and ^xd^cto.
Linwood citat hunc Joh. de Aton. L^nwoodo erat antiquior. 2. Constitutiones
h^s Angl. Vniversam obligasse; conditae enim erant in Conciliis Vid. M. (...)
ad (...) 1237. in (...). 3. p. 446, 447.
ubi aderant utriusque Provinciae Episcopi Pontificio Legato Praeside.

Now all these Canons and Constitutions, (Provincial and Legantine) and indeed
the whole Canon Law is still in use, in all our Ecclesiastical Courts, and
Obligatory so far as they are not inconsistent with, 1. The Law of God. 2. The
Law of the Land or the Prerogative Royal, as may appear by many statutes (k)
not yet abrogated. Vid. S^^. 2^. Hi^. 8. ^^p. 19. ^^^ne which is ^^nfirm'd 1
Eliz. cap. 1. Vid. E^i^^ 2^. and 35. H^^. cap. 8. cap. 16.


That the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church are Authentiquely contained in
the foresaid Books, Canons, and Constitutions being certain and confessed: The
next query will be how and by what means a young Divine may come to know the
true sense and meaning of those Writings etc. In answer to which Query, with
submission to better Judgments, I say there can be no better means to know the
true meaning of Articles, Canons and Constitutions, etc. than by a diligent and
intelligent reading the Works of those excellent Persons, who (ab origin)
contrived those authentic Writings (ejusdem enim est exponere, cujus est
componere) or since successively have defended them against all the Adversaries
of our Church, and Pope, Presbyter, and Phanatick, and that with success and
Victory, I mean such as Cranmer, Bucer, Buceri Scripta Anglicana praecipue
Basil. 1577. V^t. Argentorati. He was Reg Professor at Cambr.
Pet. Martyr, He was Pr^fessor of Theol. at Oxon.
Jewel, Raynolds, Whit-gift, Bancroft, Hooker, Joh. White, Davenant, Abbot,
Crakanthorp, Field, Laud, Chillingworth.

As for our late Writers or Scriblers rather, to spend time in reading them is
to mis-imploy and lose it, and to speak freely many Apocryphal Pamphlets (let
him who likes them, call them Books,) have been of late years Writ and
Licensed, which data opera and ex professo, endeavor to confute the
established and known Doctrine of our Church, and all Reformed Churches in
Europe, and maintain Positions, which are evidently Socinian, Popish, or
Pelagian, whence we have too much ground to wonder why any Son of the Church of
England (for so these Scriblers call themselves) dare Write or License such
Apoc. Books, which they are bound by Law and Conscience to condemn.

And as a Divine should and ought to know the Doctrine and Discipline of our
Church that so he may be able to teach and vindicate it from the Cavils and
Oppositions of our Adversaries, so he ought to know what are the erroneous
opinions of the Enemies of our Church (especially the Papists) for no man can
confute what he does not know. To Write against Rome and confute her for her
Doctrines she does not hold, is a calumny, not a just confutation. All that
Lombard, or Bellarmine, or Vasquez, or Cajetan hold is not presently to be laid
to the charge of the Roman Church; but such things as she by public Authority
owns in her Authentic Constitutions, etc. Popish errors then are either Fidei
aut facti, in credendis aut agendis; such as concern their Doctrine and
Discipline.

1. For their Credenda and Errors in Doctrine they have declared authentickly.

1. In their Trent And so in all those Councils they call Ecumenical and
approve (tho we do not) as the Nicene Council, and about thirteen more which
came after it, whatever Errors be in any of these they do and must own; for
seeing they do approve those Councils, they must approve their Positions and
Decrees: We have a Catalogue of what Councils the Church of Rome acknowledges,
prefixed to the Corpus Juris Canonici, Paris 1618. Fol. and to the last Edition
of that Law, Lugduni. 1661. Quarto.
Council, the best Edition at Antwerp, 1633. Octavo. of which before page 18. 3.

2. In the Chatechismus Tridentinus ex decreto Council. Trident. jussu Pii
Papae, 5. There are very many Editions but the best is that at Paris, 1635.
Octavo.

3. In their Popes Bulls. 1. Eccloge Bullarum and Pii Quarti, 5 ti, Gregorii
13. Lugduni 1582. Octavo.

Item, 2. Literae Apostolicae, etc. de officio Inquisitionis cum superiorum
Approbatione, Romae, 1579. Fol. Extant hae Literae cum altarum Auctario in
calce Directorii Inquisitionis per Nicol. Eimericum Ven. 1607. 3. Nova
computatio Privilegiorum Apostolicorum Regularium mendicantium, etc. per Emman.
Rocherum Turnoni 1609. Fol.

In which collection we have the Bulls of about 44 Popes.

4. Bullarium Romanum Novissimum a Leone magno ad Vrbanum. 8. Tom. 4. Fol.
Romae, 1638. Edidit Mar. Cherubinus (extat editio hujus Bullarii alia
posterior, and additis Vrbani and Innocentii Constitutionibus auctior Lugduni
sumptibus Phil. Board, etc.) This last Edition is best. 1. Because it contains
more Bulls. 2. Because I find many things in this last Edition of Lions (which
being damned by the Inquisitors) are to be expunged, (...) 19. (...) ^^g^um
(...) and (...) In^^ (...) ^^um Ib. page: 371.
and the Edition prohibited till they be so.

4. In their Canon Law; all these are of public Authority received with
approbation of their Popes and Church.

2. For their agenda, Matters of Fact and Discipline, their Sacred and Civil
Rites and Ceremonies, we may have them Authentickly set down in such Books as
these.

1. In Missali Romano, There are very many Editions of it, and much differing
one from another, as is evident and may appear by comparing the Mscs. (of which
we have many in Bodleys Library, and some in mine) with the Printed Copies, the
first and more ancient with those that follow: Besides the Roman Missal (which
never was in England) there are many other proper for other Countries: so we
had here 1. Missale secundum usum York. 2. Missale secundum usum Sarum. 3.
Missale secundum usum Hereford. 4. Secundum Eversham. 5. Lincoln. 6. Bangor,
etc.

2. Breviarium Romanum. There be as many and differing Editions of this, and
Breviaries of other Churches as well as Rome. The Breviary of Sarum (so famous
in England) they called it Portiforium, etc.

3. Pontificiale Romanum, Containing their Offices for Ordination,
Confirmation, Consecration of Churches, etc. and other things peculiar to the
Bishop.

4. Rituale Romanum, continet ritus in administratione Sacramentorum usitatos;
videl. Baptismi, Eucharistiae, Paenitentiae, Matrimonii and extremae Vnctionis,
quorum Administratio ad Parochos spectat, etc. 5. Sacrarum Ceremoniarum seu
Rituum Ecclesiasticorum S. Romanae Eccles. libri tres Romans 1560. Fol. There are
many more Editions of it, at Ven. 1506. at Col. 1572. and there again 1574. in
Octavo. who ever desires to be informed and convinced of the many ridiculous
(as well as Impious) Roman Superstitions, and the prodigious Papal Pride, let
him get that Book.

Many more Books they have of this kind containing several Sacred Offices or
Rites; as their Processionale Graduale, Paris. 1668. Fol. Officium B. Mariae
Manuale, secundum usum sacrum Hor. B. Virginis, etc. And to omit the rest;
Psalterium B. Mariae per Bonaventuram (so they call it, and amongst his works
it is printed) the most impious and blasphemous piece of Superstition and
Idolatry that ever the Sun saw; for whatever in David's Psalms is spoken of God
or our blessed Savior, is in that Psalter attributed to the Virgin Mary, and
yet Possevine has the Impudence to say Possevine Apparatu Sacro, Verbo Rosarium
(mihi) p. 357.
Psalterium Divi Bonaventurae Laudibus B. Virginis summa pietate (Impietate
potius in Deum Blasphema and Idolatrica) Accomodatum.

All the forenamed Books, Councils, Canons, or Sacred Offices have been
received and publicly approved by the Church of Rome, and for what Errors or
Superstitions occur in them, we may justly lay to their charge, and they must
be responsable for them; But not so for the Writings of particular and private
men, although of greatest eminence in their Church.

Writers of Controversies.
25. Next it will be necessary to have a comprehension of the Popish
controversies of their Objections, and the Answers and Satisfaction our Men
give to their Elaborate Sophisms. Books of this kind are many, and the Volumes
great; to read them all is not opus unius hominis aut aetatis. Some few I shall
name, such as,

1. Dr. Crakanthorp contra Archiep Spalatensem, Quarto. Land. 1625. No Book I
have yet seen has so rational and short account of almost all Popish
Controversies.

2. Guil. Amesii Bellarminus Enervatus. I said before he was a Nonconformist;
but for Rome and Bellarm. he has distinctly proposed their pretenses, and given
a clear, short and rational answer to them. Vitus Erbermannus a Jesuit and
public Professor at Mentz, has lately published an Answer to Amesius, Printed
at Herbipolis, 1661. two Vol. Octavo. But, omnia cum fecit Thaida Thais olet.

3. Andreae Riveti Catholicus Orthodoxus, etc. It is extant in his Works,
Roterod. 1652. in French, Saumur, 1616. Lat. 2 Tom. 4 to. Lugd. Bat. 1630. He
well and fully handles all Popish Controversies.

4. Chamierus Contractus seu Panstratiae Catholicae Dan. Chamieri Epitome per
Frid. Spanhemium, one Vol. Fol. Genesis 1645. This is more full and large than the
former, and may supply their brevity and omissions.

5. When there is necessity of farther satisfaction in any Question, our Great
Men, Jewel, Raynolds, John White, Whitaker, Laud, Chillingworth, and others
before named may be consulted; for none have opposed Rome with more Learning
and Success, than those.

To these may be added such as have examined and confuted the Council of Trent.
As,

1. Chemnitii Examen Council. Trident, Erancof. 1578.

2. Examen Council. Trident. por Innocentium Gentilletum, Genev. 1586. Octavo.

3. Anatome Council. Trident. Historico Theolog. cum Historia Council. Trident.
per Thuanum and Vindiciis pro P. Suavo Polano, contra Scipionem Henricum, per
Joh. Hen. Heideggeum, Tom. 2. Octavo. Tiguri, 1672. More such Writers there
are, but Chemnitius is best.

26. For a short comprehension of Popish Controversies, how they explain and
state them, we are told (to name one or two who have writ Enchiridia, Epitomes,
or Summaries of their Controversies, and how the hold them) I say we are told
what their Opinions are, and the Explications of them in such Books as these.

1. Manuale Controversiarum per Mart. Becanum, Herbipol. 1623.

2. Or if that be too large a Work, then we may consult his Enchiridion
Manualis Controversiarum hujus Temporis, etc. Duact, 1631. He has Controversiae
Lutheranorum, 1. 2. Calvinistarum. 3. Anabaptistarum. 4. Politicorum, etc.

3. Enchiriaion Controversiarum per Fran. Costerum Jes. Col. 1587. and postea
Turnoni, 1591.

4. Controversiae generales Fidei contra Infideles omnes; (He puts all
Protestants in that Catalogue) Octavo. Par. 1660.

27. And because Scripture is urged on all sides, and there are passages in it
(...) in appearance contradictory; 'twill be convenient to know some of those
Authors as have writ Explicationes and Conciliationes Locorum difficilium. For
instance, such as these.

1. Frid. Spa^^^^ii dubia Evangelica, Tom. 3. Quarto. the first Tome Printed at
Genev. 1634. The second and third, 1639.

2. Guil Estius in Loca Scripturae difficiliora, Fol. Duaci. 1629. A
considerate and Learned Man, and explains many places well; but being sworn, as
all their Ecclesiastics are, to maintain all the received Doctrine, etc. of
the Church of Rome, (...), he does sometimes explain places so, as may make
most for the defense and interest of the Church of Rome.

3. Symphonia ^rophetarum and Apostolorum, etc. a Joh. Schorpio, Quarto.
Genevae, 1625.

4. (...), seu contradictiones apparentes Sacrae Scripturae, etc. Ven. 1645.
Duodec.

5. Vindicatio Locorum praecipuorum V. Test. a Corruptelis Pontificiorum
(Praecipue Bellarmini) Calvinistarum; (he was a Learned Man, and a fierce
Lutheran) Photinianorum, etc. Oct. Gissae 1620. per Helvicum.

6. Conciliationes Locorum S. Scripturae in specie pugnantium ex Libris
Augustinis per Ludov. Rabum, Quarto, Noriburgae, 1561.

7. Harmonia totius Scripturae seu conciliatio locorum Scripturae, etc. per
Mich. Walthaeum, Octavo. Argent. 1621. He was a Lutheran.

8. Conciliationes S. Scripturae per Andr. Athalmenum, Quarto. Norib. 1561.
Many more such Writers there are, but these may be sufficient, etc.

For the Original parts and use of the Canon Law, read Duck. de Vsu and
Authoritate Juris Civilis Romanorum, lib. 1. cap. 7. de Jure Canonico, p. 39.
Edit. Land. 1653.
28. Amongst other things, a convenient knowledge of the Canon Law will be
necessary; Books of this kind are exceeding many; but, amongst others, these
following will be necessary.

1. Institutiones Juris Canon. per Paul. Lancelottum cum casibus Joh. Baptistae
Bartolini, Octavo. Colon. 1609.

2. Arnoldi Corvini Jus Canonicum per Aphorismos strict. explicat. Amstel.
1651. Octavo. This, for brevity, method, perspicuity, may be more useful (at
first) for a Divine, than the aforesaid Institutions.

3. Corpus Juris Canonici cum Accessione Novar. Constitution. Summorum
Pontificum and Annotat. Ant. Naldi, Ludg. 1661. Quarto. This is the last and
best Edition of the Corpus Juris Canonici, and contains many useful things
which are not in any former Edition.

4. If the aforesaid former Edition cannot be had, then Corpus Juris Canon. at
Paris 1618. Folio. is the next in Time and Goodness.

5. Corp. Juris Canon. cum Glossis, Par. 1612. cum Indice Stephani Daoyes; it
consists of four Vol. Fol.

6. It Is very useful to have some Old Edition of the Canon Law with the Gloss,
as that at Par. 1519. 3 Vol. Quarto. or any other Edition before the year 1572.
For since that time many things are left out of the Gloss which were in before.

7. Censurae in Glossas Juris Canonici, Colon. 1672. where what is to be left
out of the Gloss is distinctly set down.

He who has a general knowledge of this Law, and has the body of the Law with
the Gloss, knows how to turn the Books, and find places cited: A few Books more
will be a great advantage and help to him to perfect that knowledge (so far as
a Divine may be concerned in it:) amongst many such as these.

1 John Cardinal. de Turre-Cremata in Decretum Gratiani.

2. Abbas Panormitanus in Decretales, etc.

3. Conclusionum Practicarum in Juris utroque foro, Tom. 8. Fol. per Card.
Tuscum, Lugd. 1634. The whole Work is in an Alphabetical way like a Law
Dictionary, and things easy to be found in it.

4. Epitome Juris Pontificii Veteris per Autonium Augustinum, Fol. Romae. 1614.
aut Par. 1641. It is divided into three parts. 1. De Personis. 2. De Judiciis.
3. De Rebus, etc. He has a Catalogue of the Popes Councils, Collectors of the
Canons, and his Censure of them; a Book of exceeding great use, and indeed
Bibliotheca Juris rather than the single Book.

Lastly; Some Law Lexicon will be necessary to explain the Law Terms, and many
Ecclesiastical words which occur in the Ancient Canons, Histories, Councils,
and Ecclesiastical Writers, Gr. Lat Many such there are; I shall name only two,
which I believe most useful; As,

1. For the Greek, Glossarium Graeco-Barbarum Jo. Meursii, Quarto. Ludg. Bat.
1614.

2. For Latin, Lexicon Juridicum Juris Caesarei Canonici per Joh. Calvinium J.
Christum, Genev. Notand. many things in this Lexicon are damned, and to be
expunged by the command of the Inquisitors in the Spanish and Portugal Indices;
sed salva res est; this Edition has escaped the Popish Purgatory. Vid. Indicem
Expurgat. Hispan. Madriti, 1667. p. 570. and Indicem Olysipone, 1624. p. 742.
1640. which Edition has escaped the Inquisitors Fury.

Though these may be ordinarily sufficient, yet there may be, on many occasions,
use for more; such as,

1. Lexicon Juris per Sim. Schardium, Fol. Col. Agr. 1600.

2. Vocabulum utriusque Juris, per Alexand. Scol. Octavo. Lugd. 1622. 3.
Notitia vocab. Ecclesiastici, etc. Ravolta da Domenico, Magri, etc. Romae,
1650. It Is partly Latin, and partly Italian.

4. Glossae P. Pithaei Capitulis Caroli magni praefixae, Par. 1640.

Civil Law. For a general knowledge of the Civil Law, its Original Parts and
Books, these you may peruse,

1. Ridley's View of the Civil Law, Quarto.

2. Dr. Ducks first Book De Vsa and Authoritate Juris Civilis, Land. 1655.
Octavo.



29. The knowledge of the Civil Law is also exceeding useful for a Divine; and
to say nothing of the litigious part of it in Foro Contentioso, to attain a
competent understanding of it, such Books as these;

1. Elementa Juris, per Joh. Arnold. Corvinum, Amstel. 1645. In Duodecimo.
Justinian's Institutions should be read with it, etc.

2. For a fuller Explication of Justinians Institutions, it will be convenient
to have,

1. Joachim Mynsingerus.

2. Joh. Scheidewinus; both have writ well on the Institutions; but
Scheidewinus later, and more fully, and in many things more useful for a Divine.

3. Theophili Antecessoris Institutiones, Gr. Lat. cum Scholiis Faberti, and
Notis Curtii, Quarto. Par. 1638.

4. Corpus Juris Civilis, 2 Vol. Octavo. per Dion. Gothofredum, 1614. Or, which
is far better, Corpus Juris Civitis, Par. 1612.

5. Codex Theodosianus cum perpetuis Commentariis Jac. Gothofredi, in 6 Vol.
Fol. Lugd. 1665. In which there are many Titles which concern Ecclesiastical
matters: For instance, De Summa Trinitate Catholica, de Sacrosanctis Ecclesis,
etc. de Episcopis and Clericis; de Episcopali Audientia; de Haereticis
Manichaeis and Samaritis, ne Sanctum Baptisma iteretur; de Judaeis; de
Apostatis, etc. and many such more. Now if we consider the Antiquity of those
Laws, and Gothofred's most Learned Commentary and Explications of them, it must
be confessed that the knowledge of them will be very useful for a Divine.

6. For Law Lexicons, to explain the Terms of this Law, Calvini and Schardii
Lexica Juridica, or one of them; Calvin is more useful, and will be sufficient
as to most Latin words Vid. Bar. Br^ssonii de verborum quae ad Ju^ pertinent
significatione Libros 19. Par. 1596. Folio; an excellent work. Alciate and Joh.
Goeddaeus have writ well on the same Subject, Oct. both. And after them
Arnoldus Cortinus very well, Oct. Amstel. 1646. One, or all of these may be
consulted.
in that Law. And for the Greek, besides Meursius his Glossary, you may
consult, 1. Rigaltii Glossarium, (...), de verborum significatione quae
Novellis Imperatorum Orientis post Justinianum regnabant, Quarto. Lut. 1601. 2.
Glossae Veteres verborum Juris in Basilicis per Card Labbaeum, Par. 1606. in
calce emendat. and observat. in Synops, Basilic (...).

7. There is one Title in the Law of great use in Divinity, as well as Policy
and Civil Prudence, and that is Libro 5. Digest. Tit. 17.
de Regulis Juris Antiqui; it contains above two hundred Maxims of Law and
Reason, so many Principles and Axioms of greatest Evidence and Authority,
being great Truths Universally received in the Roman Empire (Pagan and
Christian) by Divines as well as Statesmen and Lawyers. And because there is
hardly any Rule so Universal but it may admit of some exception or limitations
so those Regulae Juris have been cautiously and learnedly explained by several
eminent Lawyers: Such as, De Regulis juris Scripserunt. 1. Everand. Broncherst.
12. Lugd. Bat. 1641. one of the last and best. 2. Jac. Cujaci^js, Octavo.
Basil. 1594. 3. Pet. Fa^er Lugd. 1590. 4. Philippus Decius (cum additionibus)
Octavo. Lugd. 1601.


De Indicibus Expurgat.
30. It will be of great use for a Divine to be acquainted with the Roman
Inquisitor's Arts (impious Knavery and Fraud) in purging and correcting
(corrupting) Authors in all Arts and Faculties, (some of the Fathers not
excepted;) for this purpose we may consult,

1. The Popes V^d. Plures ^^n^isi^^m constitationes de Libris expurgandis in
Ballario Che^^i^i, In Ind^^^ Ballarii ^^tatas verbo ^^^i Prohibiti.
Bulls about their expurgatory Indices, as first, the Bulls of Pius 4. 1564. In
Bullario Cherubini Romans 1638. Tom. 2. page 81, 82.

2. That of Clement 8. 1595 In the same Bullarii ^om. 3. p. 37, 38. Vid. Ibi
citata de Congregatione Indicis, That is a congregation of Cardinals who
consulted about perfecting the Index Expurgatorius.

2. For the Rules and Directions given the Inquisitors for prohibiting what
Books they pleased, we have them (as given by the Authority of the Trent
Council) in the end of some Editions Vid. Council ^^id^^t. Antwerp. 1633 Octavo.
I^ca^ce Post Indic^^, and in the Editition by ^abbe Par. 1667 p. 230, 231, etc.
of that Council. For the Indices expurgatorii themselves, 'twill be of very
great use to have one or more of them (for there are many) and if possible of
their own Editions; amongst those we have,

1. Index Tridentinus published by themselves at the end of those Editions of
the Trent Council, named here in the Margent and many times elsewhere.

2. Index Hispanicus Madriti, 1612. Fol. Several other Editions there Madrit.
157^, 1584. and Salmurii 1601. and Madriti 1614. 1628. and Hispali, 1632. and
Madriti iterum, 1640.
are, both before and since that time; that which is beyond all others most
complete and useful, is that Madriti ex Typographaeo Didaci Diaz. Fol. 1667. In
which we have four or five thousand Authors damned absolutely, or to pass (with
a Purgation) corrected, not amended but corrupted. Si Episcopus Presbyter aut
Diaconus Chart am falsaverit, aut falsum Testimonium dixerit, deponatur, In
Monasterium detrudatur. and quam diu vixerit Laicam tantumm^o communionem
acc^piat. Council. Agathense (Agathae in Galla Narbonensi Celebratum) 506. Ca^.
50.


3. Index Libr. Prohib. Alexandri 7. Jussu Edit. Romans 1664, and 1665. extat
etiam 1667. Fol. In this last Edition the Index Tridentinus is joined with it,
and many Decrees of the Congregatio Judicii (wherein they name particularly and
censure Books) which elsewhere I find not extant. Some of the^e Decrees are
extant in a Book with this Title, L^b^^^m post Indices C^^^^tis 8. prohibitorum
Decreta omnia hact^^us Edita Romae. 1624. Octavo. It is bound up with the Index
Librorum Prohibit. Romae, 159^. Octavo.


4. The Portugal Index Olysipone, 1624. in Folio. Continet 1. Indicem Romanum.
2. Indicem Prohibitorum Lusitaniae. 3. Indicem Expurg. a p. 195. Vid. Paparum
Bullas ex Librorum Expurgandoram Regulis ibidem in Principio ante Indicem.

5. Index Expurgator. juxta council. Trident. Decretum Philippi. 2 Regis
Catholici jussu, Albani Ducis consilio ac Ministerio in Belgio concinnatus
1571. and a Fran. Junio Editus, 1586. Vid. Epist. Dedicatoriam and Praefat.
Junii Diploma Regis Catholici and praefationem B. Ariae Montani dicto Indici
praefix^.

Lastly, I would commend four Authors to you. 1. Historia Conciliorum
Generalium in 4 Libros distributa, Authore Ed. Richero Doctore Sorbonico.
Printed at Colon. 1680. and again at Colon. 1683.

2. Joh. Launoii Parisiensis Theol. Epistolae in eight parts or volumes. They
are both Sorbon Doctors and yet boldly and learnedly Write against very many
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

Some one (or more) of these will be very useful, where it is to be observed,

1. That in their Indices, Authors and Books are distinguished into three
Classes.

1. In the first Class; The Books and Authors too are damned; in this are all
Heretics, amongst which all Protestants are reckoned, and all their Books writ
of Religion. 2. In the second Class Books damned but not their Authors; when
the Authors are Catholics, and yet their Books absolutely forbid. 3. In the
third Class such Books writ by Papists or Protestants, as being purged may
pass. By this we may come to know, 1. the best Books (i. e.) Those condemned by
them, Magnum aliquid Bonum est quod a Nerone damnatur.

2. By considering their Indices we come to know the best Editions of many good
Books, for they name the Edition of every Book to be purged: so that if we have
that Edition they name, (or any before) we are sure it has not been in their
Purgatory, etc. nor (by putting in or leaving out) corrupted Editions.

3. Their Indices Expurgatorii (for that use we may make of them) are very good
and Commonplace Books and Repertories, by help of which we may presently find,
what any Author (by them censured) has against them. It is but going to their
Index and by it we are directed to the Book, Chapter, and Line, where any thing
is spoke against any Superstition or Error of Rome; so that he who has the
Indices unless Idle or Ignorant) cannot want testimonies against Rome.

I beg your pardon for this tedious, and (I fear) impertinent discourse. I have
not had time to read it ^ver again (to correct mistakes) and may be you may
loose time if you do; but I dare and do (...) trust you with all mine
infirmities being well assured that as your great judgment will soon find, so
your no less candor can (and will) pardon my errors and (not wilf^^ mistakes:
sure I am this (however rude) scribble, may be some little evidence (tho not of
my ability yet) of a great desire and willingness to serve you: If you desire
to see any of the aforementioned Authors, you may command and have the sight,
and use of them (some very few excepted;) for they are in the possession of

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and Faithful Servant. T. Barlow.

Sir,
Having lately heard from you, how you desire that I should further give you
lumen de Lumine about the Socinian and Arminian controversies and the Writers
pro and con, you may take an account thereof as follows, viz.

Syllabus Quaestionum praecipuarum, quae inter Socinianos, reliquosque
Ecclesiae reformatae, simulac Pontificiae Theologos ventilantur.
Quaest. 1. An sit Trinitas personarum in Vnitate Essentiae? Neg.

Q. 2. An Christus sit Deus? Neg.

Qu 3. An Spiritus Sanctus sit Deus? Neg.

Qu. 4. An Fides credat aliquid quod est contra vel super rationem? Neg.

Qu. 5. An Christus sit Legislator? Aff.

Qu. 6. An Patres sub antiquo foedere promissiones tantum temporales habuerunt?
Aff. Soc.

Qu. 7. An Patres sub Veteri Testam. in Christum credebant, vel in eum credere
tenebantur? Neg.

Qu. 8. An Deus sub N. Foedere tantum revelavit se justificare impium. Aff. Soc.

Qu. 9. An Eucharistia sit ullo modo instituta in Fidei confirmationem, aut
peccati remissionem? Neg.

Qu. 10. An Baptismus sit solum S^gnum exterius, and ad Regenerationem nihil
conducens? Aff.

Qu. 11. An Vita Aeterna aut donum Spiritus Sancti piis sub antiquo Foedere
promittebatur? Neg.

Qu. 12. An ad credendum Evangelio Spiritus Sancti dono interiori opus sit? Neg.

Qu. 13. An Christus moriendo pro nobis satisfecerit? Neg.

Qu. 14. An Fides Salvifica sit Obedientia Vniversalis Praeceptis Dei and
Christi praestita? Aff.

Qu. 15. An in homine post lapsum lib^rum arbitrium sit integrum, nec omnino
vitiatum, quin obedientiam Praeceptis Dei integram praestet? Aff.

Qu. 16. An sit peccatum Originale?

Qu. 17. An Adamus in statu integritatis fuerit mortalis? Aff.

Qu. 18. An Christus Virtute sua resurrexit, an solum virtute Patris? Aff. Soc.
quod solum virtute Patris, N. sua.

Qu. 19. An Christus habet idem Corpus nunc in Patria, in quo passus est, and
resurrexit? Neg. Soc.

Qu. 20. An Sancti eadem habebunt in Coelo Corpora quae in solo and Sepulchro
habuere? Neg. Soc.

Qu. 21. An in antiquo Foedere per Sacrificia illa legalia, peccata minora, and
infirmitatis, duntaxat expiabantur, and in novo solum peccata graviora? Affirm.
Socin.

Qu. 22. An in V. Foedere peccata expiabantur quoad poenam temporalem, in novo
solum quoad paenam temporalem and aeternam? Aff. Soc.

Qu. 23. An Chrisus fuerat Sacerdos antequam in Coelos ascenderat? Neg.

Qu. 24. An Infantes sunt baptizandi. Neg.

Qu. 25. An singularis aliqua missio requiratur in Ministris Evangelii? Neg.

Qu. 26. An Adam primo statu Innocentiae scilicet, cum Justitia Originali
creabatur? Neg.

Qu. 27. An ulla sit Patrum aut Conciliorum autoritas in rebus Fidei
determinandis? Neg.

Qu. 28. An Fides justificans non sit purum putum Dei donum, sed viribus
Naturalibus acquiri possit? Aff. Soc.

Qu. 29. An Magistratus Christianus maleficos morte puniat? Neg.

Qu. 30. An Pii defuncti Coelo and beatitudine fruantur ante diem Judicii? Neg

Qu. 31. An homo lumine naturali Deum cognoscat? Neg.

Qu. 32. An Deus futura contingentia certo cognoscat? Neg. Soc.

Qu. 33. An Christus fuerat Dominus and Rex ante Resurrectionem? Neg.

Qu. 34. An Christus Sacrificium pro seipso obtulit? Aff.

Qu. 35. An omnis Dogma in Ecclesiam inferens, vel Fidem Vniversam ejusve
partem Essentialem tollens, sit Haereticus? Aff. Soc.

Qu. 36. An Christus licet non sit Deus sit Cultu Divino adorandus? Aff.

Qu. 37. An Paulus ad Romans 7. a versu 7. ad finem Capitis, de seipso loquatur
an irregenito^ Neg. Sociniani Paulum de seipso loqui.

Qu. 38. An Christus ante mortem ullum Dominium in Angelos habuit? Neg.

Qu. 39. An Christus promisit Ecclesiae perseverantiam in Fide? Neg.

Qu. 40. An Sacramenta conferant gratiam? N.

Qu. 41. An mendacium aliquod sit licitum? Aff. Socin.

Qu. 42. An bellum offensivum vel defensivum sit Christianis licitum? Neg.
Socin.

Quaest. 1. HAnc Quaest. negant Sociniani. Socinus ipse, Institut. Brevissim.
p. 9, 10. Idem Animadvers. in assertionem 6. Col. Posnamiensis, p. 43. and
passim per totum Practatum illum, ut in Defens. Animado. contra Gabrielem
Eutropium Cateches. R^co^iensis, de cognitione Dei, cap 1. Volleglius passim.
Crellius de Deo, and A^cributis, Volkelio de vera Religione praefixus.
Gostavius a Bebelno Disp. De persona, and idem Libro Keckermanno opposito, de
Trinitate. Vide etiam fragmentum Socini de Trinitate. Smalcius in Refutat.
Thesium Jac. Shepperi de Trinitate, and in Resp. ad Hes. Ravensperg. de
Mysterio Trinitatis, and praecipue Jo. Crellius de uno Deo Patre, per totum.

Q. 2. Catech. Racov. de cognitione Dei, cap. 1. p. 47. and page 126, 127.
Instit. Brevis. c. 2. p. 5. etc. 5. p. 9. Smalcius in Refutat. Thesium Wolfong.
Frantzii, Socinus de Essentia Christi contra Volanum Joh. Stoienski in
relatione, disp. de Divinitate Christi, Smalcius contra Smiglesium de vero Dei
filio.

Q. 3. Catech. Racoviensis. De Proph. Christi munere, c. 6. p. 213. Smalcius in
Refut. These. Wolf. Frantzii, disp. 1. p. 7, 8. Socinus in Refut. lib. Wieki de
Divinitate Christi and Spiritus Sancti.

Q. 4. Smalcius contra Smiglesium de vero Dei Filio, cap. 6. p. 46. Meisnerum
vide in Isid. Theolog. Photinian, c. 4. p. 306, 307.

Q. 5. Cat. Racoviens. p. 132. Legislatorem illum volunt, non solum quod Leges
Evangelicas tulit, sed quod aliquid Decalogo addidit. Institut. Brevis. cap.
11. p. 27, 28. Socinus in Resp. ad Object. Vtri Object. 11. p. 85. etc.

Q. 6. Catech. Racov. p. 136. Vide Hug. Grotium in explicatione Decalogi, p.
70, 71. Socinus de convenientia and disconvenientia V. and N. Testamenti, p. 32.

Q. 7. Catech. Racoviens. de Christi munere Proph. c. 11. p. 271. Socin.
tractatus de conven. and disconven. Veteris and Novi Testam. inter Tractatus
ejus breves, p. 31. Jer. Schlichtingium in Verse. 6 c. 11. ad Heb. Socinus
Epist. 3 ad Math. Raderium, p. 137, 138. Smalcius contra Smiglesium de
Satisfactione Christi, cap. 10.

Q. 8. Vide Smalcium contra Smiglesium de Satisfact. cap 10. p. 237. Vide
fragment. Socini de Justif. p. 47.

Q. 9. Catech. Racov. p. 187, 188. Vide Socinum Tract. brevi de Coena Domini,
and Resp. ejus ad Epist. Niemojevii de usu and fine Coenae.

Q. 10. Catech. Racov. de Prophetico Christi munere, c. 4. p. 197. Instit.
Brev. c. 17. Soc. in Ep. 3. ad Math. Raderium, p. 127, 128.

Q. 11. P. 202. Crellius Respons. ad Hug. Grotium de Satisfact. Christi, c. 1.
p 30.

Q. 12. Catech. Racov. de Prophetico Christi munere, c. 6. p. 212. Soc. de
Libero hominis arbitrio and Divina predestinatione inter tractat. breves. F.
Socini, p. 31, 32.

Q. 13. Catech. Racov. de Prophetico Christi munere, c. 8. p. 221. ad 228.
Mich. Gittichius contra Ludovium Lucium de Satisfactione. Crellius contra
Hugonem Grotium de Satisfactione Christi. Socin. Instit. Brevis. p. 75. alii
passim.

Q. 14. Catech. Racov. de munere Christi Prophetico, c. 9. p. 246, 247. Socinus
in Animadv. ad Joh. Niemojevii Scriptum de Christo Servatore, p. 38. Inter
Tracat. breves Socini, Tract. 6. Smalcius in Refutat. Thesium Wolf. Frantzii,
disp. 4. ad These. 2. and ad These. 94. and disp. 7. ad Thesin Frantzii 6.

Q. 15 Cat. Racov. de Christi munere Prophetico, c. 10. p. 249. Instit. brevis.
c. 19. p 57. Volkelius de vera Religione, de lib. arbit. Socinus in Tractat.
brevibus Tract. 4. qui est de lib. arbitrio.

Q. 16. Cat. Racov. de Christi munere Prophetico, cap. 10. p. 249. Smalcius in
Refut. Smiglesii de Erroribus novorum Arrianorum, c. 12. l. 1. p. 116, 117.
Videsis brevem Disputationem Theolog. Photinianae per Baltharem Meisnerum, Art.
3. de peccato Originis, p. 679.

Q. 17. Socinus contra Fran. Punium, p. 54, 57, 228. alibi Osterodius in
Institutionibus Germanicis, p. 270. c. 33. Vide Joh. Winterum Naumburgensem
contra Socinum. Quaest. Theolog. An Adamus in statu Innocentiae fuerat Natura
mortalis, p. 1, 2, 3. and per totum Socin. praelectiones, cap. 1. and Junium in
refutatione praelectionum.

Q. 18. Catech. Racov. p. 276.

Q. 19. Catech. Racov. de Officio Christi Regio, p. 281.

Q. 20. Catech. Racov. ubi supra.

Q. 21. Catech. Racov. de munere Christi Sacerdotali, p. 287.

Q. 22. Catech. Racov. ubi supra.

Q. 23. Cat. Racov. de Christi munere Sacerdotali, p. 291. Schlichting. in
Hebraeos, c. 8. v. 4. Socini Themata vide inter breves Tractatus ejus, Them. 4.
p. 3.

Q. 24. Cat. Rac. de Prophetico Christi munere, c. 4. De Baptismo, p. 145, 146.
Institut. brevis. c. 17. De Baptismo, p. 52.

Q. 25. Cat. Rac. de Essentia Christi, c. 2. p. 305. Joh Volkelius in Resp. ad
Mart. Smiglesii vanam refutationem dissolutionis nodi Gordii and in Notis ad
Smiglesii refutationem, etc.

Q. 26. Socinus praelectionum suarum, cap. 3. Vide Andream Rivet. in 1 Cap Genesis
Exercit. 9. p. 46. Col. 2.

Q. 27. Valentinus Smalcius in Refutat. duorum Librorum Smigles. l. 1. c. 3. p.
25. ego vero tui Mundi totius and Vulgi fidelium nullam rationem habendam esse
dico. Faust Socin. Epist. 3. ad Mat. Raderium, p. 115. cum de Patribus and
Conciliis nonnulla superciliose satis pro more suo perorasset, subjungit, tamen
ista Omuta nullas Vires p^aet^rea apud homines Cordatos hab^re debeant.

Q. 28. Faust. Socin. in Resp. ad Objection. Cuteni, ad Object. 5. Inter breves
Tract. Socini, p. 83. Idem in discursu de causa Fidei, inter breves Tractatus
Socini, p. 90. Idem de Christo Servatore part 4. cap. 12. and Epist. 3. ad
Math. Raderium p. 107. Vide sis Erasmum Brochmannum Theologiae Vniversalis
Systemat. Tom 2. Art. 5. Qu. 14. p. 446. and Epist. Hilarii and Prosperi.
praefix. Libro de Praedestinatione Sanctorum.

Q. 29. Socin. Tractat. de Officio Christi, inter Tract. ejus breves Tract. 1.
Them. 13, 14. Vid. Apolog. Remonstrantium, seu Examen Censurae, c. 24. p. 259.

Q. 30. Faustus Socin. in Respons. ad Object. Cut. ad Object. 23. p. 89.

Q. 31. Faust. Socinus Praelect. Theolog. cap. 2. p. 3 4, 5. Vide Johannem
Junium Ecclesiae Sylvaeducentis Pastorem in Refut. c. 2. Praelect. F. Socini,
p. 27.

Q. 32. Anonym. in cap. 5. priora Mat. ad versum 28. cap. 5. Crellius de Deo,
Johan. Volkelio de vera Religione prefixus, l. 1. c. 24. p. 198. Smalcius in
Refutat. Thesium Wolfong. Frantzii, Disp. 12. p. 427. Vide sis Fredericum
Spanhemium Dub. Evang. 33. p. 272.

Q. 33. Faust. Socinus i^ (...) mad^. ad assertionem 23. Coll. Posnamiensis, p.
87, 88

Q. 34. Socinus in Praelect. p. 186. Vide Joh. Winterun. (...) refutatione F.
Socini de Justificatione, p. 104.

Q. 35. Theophilus Nicol^ide^ in Brevi Refutat. Tractatus d^ Ecclesia and
missione Ministrorum, per Alb. Borkowski, p. 3. ubi ^a^c habet verba, Nos
Haereticum eum dicimus, qui talia dogmata in Christi Ecclesiam insert, quae vel
Vniversam Fidem Christi, vel partem ejus potissimam and Essentialem, vel (ut
aliis verbis idem dicamus) quae vel veram Dei and Christi gloriam, vel veram
Pietatem tollunt.

Q. 36 Valent. Smalcius in Refutat. lib. duorum Smiglesis de Erroribus novor.
Arrianor. l. 1. c. 3. p. 23. and cap. 7. p. 46. and cap. 9. p. 65.

Q. 37. Prosper Dysidaeus in Cap. 7. ad Roman. (nempe Sociniensis erat) Edit.
Anno 1595. Socinus in defens disputat. P. Dysidaei (nempe suae) adversus
reprehensiones N. N. Racoviae 1628.

Q. 38. Valent. Smalcius in Refutat. M. Smiglesii de Erroribus Novorum
Arrianorum, l. 2. cap. 4. p. 209.

Q. 39. Valent. Smalcius in Refutat. duorum lib. M. Smiglesi^ de Erroribus
Novorum Arrianorum. In Catalogo Errorum Smiglesii, Errore 81.

Q. 40. Smalcius ubi supra inter Errores M. Smiglesii per se enumeratos. Errore
76.

Q. 41. Vide Johan. Volkelium de vera Religione, l. 4. c. 19. p. 286. Cat. Rac.
de Christi munere Prophetico, cap. 1.

Q. 42. Vide Themata F. Socini de Officio Christi, Them. 24. p. 7. Inter breves
Tractat. F. Socini Vid. Faust. Socin. Epist. 2. ad Christoph. Morstium inter
Epist. ejus, p. 498.

Sufficiat hic Quaest. Socinian. Catalog. utpote generalis Controversiarum
illarum Index and Syllabus, reliquae harum alicui facile reducendae. Sat novi e
quaestionibus hisce unamquamque aliarum Matrem esse satis foecundam, and si ad
minutias quasque singulares quis descenderet, sobolem satis numerosam inveniet.
Sic nonnulli Quaest. 13. de Satisfactione Christi in quaestiones particulares
5. dividunt.

1. An in Justificatione peccata nostra sine Satisfactione, nuda remissione
deleantur? Aff.

2. An Deus sic potuit condonare? Aff.

3. An Pietas nostra Deo satisfaciat, nos^ue justificet? Aff.

4. An Deus voluit pe^cata nostra sine satisfactione condonare? Aff.

5. An Christus pro nobis satisfecerit? Neg.

Quaestiones has omnes modo assignato tuetur F. Socinus, ut videre est in
praelection. Theolog. c. 15. etc. Vide Joh. Winterum Naumburgensem in Refutat.
Socim de Just. p. 3. Edit. Lipsiae. Ann. 1617.

Tota inter Remonstrantes and Contra-Remonstrantes controversia ad articulos 5.
a Theologis passim reducitur, sc.
1. DE Electione and Reprobatione, seu de Dei decretis in ordine ad hominem
salvandum damnandumve?

2. De morte Christi, ejusque latitudine, an ad omnes absolute extendatur.

3. De Natura gratiae Divinae.

4. De sufficientia and irresistibilitate gratia.

5. De perseverantia sanstorum.

Ad haec quinque capita Quaestiones subsequentes (aliaeque minutiores plurimae
quas scientes omnifimus) sunt referendae.

Art. 1. Quest. 1.

An decretum electionis sit absolutum? Aff. Vide collationem Hagiensem p. 50:
ad thesin 1. etc. and p. 106 ad alteram partem.

Art. 1. Quest. 2.

An decretum Reprobationis sit absolutum? Aff. vide collat Hag. p. 125. De toto
primo articulo vide brevem ejus expositionem in calce Collat. Hag. p. 464. etc.

An deus pro absoluto suo dominio potest creaturam innocentem cruciare, Aff.
vide Stephani Curcellaei vindicias quibus suam and Arminii sententiam de jure
Dei in creaturas, adversus Amyraldum propugnat. Anno 1645. 8.

Art. 1. Quest. 3.

An Electio sit actus misericordiae, Reprobatio justitiae? Neg,

An praestat Non esse quam miserum esse? Aff.

Art. 1. Quest. 4.

An sit decretum generale de salvandis fidelibus, decreto particulari de
singulis quibusdam personis salvandis praevium? Neg Vide Amesii Coronidem ad
Collat. Hag. Art. 1. cap. 1. page 1. and Arminium in these. private. disp. 41.
Thesi 1. and Collat. Hag. p. 88, 89.

Art. 1. Quest. 5.

An ulla detur infantium Electio? Aff. vide Amesii Coronidem ad Collat. Hag.
Art. 1. cap. 1. 2. page 3. and Nic. Grevinchovium, page 136, 150.

Art. 1. Quest. 6.

An praedestinatio non solum ad finem (Gloriam) sed and ad media (Gratiam)
terminetur? Aff. Vide G. Amesii Coron. Art. 1. cap. 1.. 3. page 4. Collat.
Hagiensem, p. 77.. 4. etc.

Art. 1. Quest. 7.

An Non solum fides, sed and bona opera sin^ conditio in decreto electionis
praerequisita, and electioni praecedanea? Neg. Vide G. Ames^ Coron. Art. 1.
cap. 1.. 4. p. 5.

Art. 1. Quest. 8.

An mediatio Christi sit fundamentum and causa Electionis? Neg. Vide G. Amesium
in Coronide, c. 1. Art. 1.. 5. p. 6.

An Cujusque vitae terminus sit immutabiliter praestitutus? Aff. Vide Joh.
Beverovitium de termino vitae fatali, an mobili? Lugd. Batav. 1636. 4to. and
Ejusdem partem tertiam Lug. Bat. 1639. 4to.

Art. 2. Quest 9.

An Christus pro omnibus and singulis mortuus sit and Redemptionem
impetraverit? Neg.

Vide Amesium in Coronide. Art. 2. cap. 1. Collat. Hagiens. p. 130 and p. 145,
146, and 157, and 203. De toto art. 2. Vide Brevem expositionem ejus in calce
Collat. Hag. p. 467, etc.

Art. 2. Quest. 10.

An in (...) Redemptionis deus silium morti, priusquam homines saluti,
destinct? Neg.

Vide Coronid. Amesii, art. 2. c. 1. p. 96. Collat. Hagierf. p. 127, 128, etc.

Art. 2. Quest. 11.

An notitia Evangelii ad t^^^m mundum pervenerit? Neg. Vide The Pagans Debt and
Dowry, by J. Goodwin.

Art. 3. Quest. 12.

An ex Contra-Remonstr^^tum hypothesi deus sit author peccati? Neg. ^^ 3. Art.
Vide brevem ejus expositionem in calce Collat. Hagiens. p. 470.

Art. 3. Quest. 13.

Am omnes quos externe vocat deus per verbum, etiam interne vocat per spiritum?
Neg.

Art. 3. Quest. 14.

An supposito quod non intendat Deus omnes salvare quos per verbum externe
vocat, sit dissimulator? Neg. Vide Coll. Hag. p. 97, etc.

Art. 3. Quest. 15.

An deus creaturam Rationalem ad actus liberos effective determinet, and an
talis determinatio libertatem tollat? Aff. prius. neg. posterius.

Art. 4. Quest. 16.

An in opere conversionis operatio gratiae sit irresistibilis? Aff. Vide
Collat. Hag. p. 216, 217, and 226, 227, and 237, and 269, 270. and vide brev^m
expositionem 4. Articuli in Calce Collat. Hagiens. p. 470.

Art. 4. Quest. 17.

An deus gratiam sufficientem omnibus offerat? Neg.

Art. 4. Quest. 18.

An in conversione peccatoris operatio Dei sit solum moraliter suadens, an and
Physice efficiens? Neg. prius. Aff. posterius.

Art. 5. Quest. 19.

An vere justi aliquando totaliter aut finaliter excidant? Neg.

Vide coronidem Amesii, Art. 5. p. 273. etc. Collat. Hagiens. p. 341, and 352,
353. and 401, 402. and de Art. 5. Vide Brevem ejus expositionem in calce
Collat. Hagiens. p. 475.

Quest. 20.

An possit esse bonus usus naturalium ante gratiam, qui Deum ad convertendum
moveat? Neg. Vide Collat. Hagiens. p. 226.

De controversiis praedictis, melioris notae Scriptores nonnulli, cum occasio
se obtulerit, consulendi.
1. COllatio Hagiensis Scripto Hagoe. habita. Anno 1611. Lingua Belgarum
vernacula; and per Henricum Brandium latin reddita and excusa Zirizaeae 1615.
40.

2. Collatio Delphensis habita Delphis Batavorum, 1613. latin facta per
Henric. Brandium and excusa Middelburgi, Anno 1615. 40.

3. Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem, per Amesium.

4. Acta and Scripta Synodalia Dordracena Remonstrantium. Harderivic. 1620. 40.
Vid. Acta Synodi Dordracenae.

5. Jac. Arminii opera Lugd. Batav. An. 1629. 40.

6. Censura quatuor Professorum Leidensium confess^onis and declarationis
sententiae Remonstrantium, inscripta Deputatis ordinum Hollandiae and West
frisiae.

7. Apologia pro confessione and declaratione sententiae Remonstrantium contra
censuram Professorum Leidensium, Anno 1630. Quarto.

8. Epistola delegatorum classis Walachrianae ad exteriarum ecclesiarum
Reformatos Doctores, etc.

9. Epistola Ecclesiasticorum quos in Belgio remonstrantes vocant, and opposita
Epistolae praedictae. Lugd. Batav. 1617 Quarto.

10. Anatome Arminianismi Pet. Molinaei, Quarto.

11. Censura Anatomes Arminianismi Petri Molinaei per Joh. Arnoldum Corvinum
Franc. ad Maenum, 1622. Quarto.

12. Responsio Antonii Walaei ad censuram Arnoldi Corvini. Lugd. Batav. 1625.
Quarto.

13. Brevis and dilucida explicatio, doctrinae de Electione, Praedestinatione
and Rebropatione, Authore Math. Archiepiscopo Eboracensi, cui accesserunt D. D.
Estaei, Somi, Chatertoni, and Wille^i ejusdem argumenti Scripta, cum articulis
etiam Lambethanis, Hardervici An. 1613. Octavo.

14 Richardi Thomsoni diatriba de Amissione and intercisione Justificationis
and gratiae, Octavo.

15. De gratia and perseverantia sanctorum Exercitationes, quibus accessit
animadversio in Rich. Thomsoni diatribam per Rob. Abbot Salisburiensem Episc.
Francof. 1618. Octavo.

16. Remonstrantium Semipelagianismus contra Hugonis Grotii pietatem (i. e.
Librum Grotii, quem inscripsit, Ordinum Hollandiae and Westfrifiae pietas) per
Gratianum Civilem, excud. Basili^^, An. 1616.

17. Exercitationes Apologetica pro Divina gratia, etc. per Samuelem
Rhaetorfortium, Amstel. 1636. Octavo.

18. Andreae Riveti disputationes 13. de justa and gratiosa Dei desponsatione
circa salutem generis humani, 1631. Octavo.

19. Ejusdem synopsis doctrinae de natura and gratia, 1649

20. Vide eundem Rivetum in Commentariis and Reliquis ejus Scriptis passim, ubi
multa occurrunt contra Arminium docte disputata.

21. Vide etaim Nicolai Grevincharii, Simonis Episcopii, Festi Hommii, Petri
Bertii, Guil. Twissi, Thom. Jacksonii, etc. Scripta, quibus (pene) omnibus de
questionibus praedictis earumve aliqua (Hommius and Twissus contra, reliqui pro
Arminio) fuse disputant.

22. Animadversions on a Treatise Entitled, Gods love to Mankind, by John
Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, Cambridge, 1641.

23. Determinatio Quaestionum per eundem, Fol. ubi vari^ Arminianorum placita
solid (more suo) ventilat; erat enim ingenii Scholastici vir, judicii subacti
and perspicui, Synodo Do^ dracenae praesens interfuit, controversiis h^s^^
ver^atissimus, adeo ut inter nostrates superiore^^ nullum habuit forte nec
aequalem.

24. Examen thesium Franc. Gomari de pred^^^atione per Jac. Arminium, Anno
1645. Oct^^^

25. Andreae Riveti Epistolae Apologeticae contra Mos. Amyraldum de gratia
Universali, 1648. Octavo.

26. Frederici Spanhemii Epistola ad Cattierium de gratia Universally, 1648.

27. Mosis Amyraldi specimen animadversionum adversus Spanhemium de Gratia
Universali.

28. Georg. Vellei ad Pamphilium Continium de specimine animadversionum Mosis
Amyraldi Judicium 1649. Octavo.

29. Johan. Dallaei Apologia pro duabus Ecclesiarum in Gallia protestantium
Synodis nationalibus adversus Fred. Spanhemii exercitationes de Gratia
Universally, 1655. Octavo.

30. Fidei Mosis Amyraldi circa errores Arminianorum declaratio, An. 1646.
Octavo.

31. Dissertationes duae; prima de morte Christi quatenus ad omnes extendatur;
secunda de Predestinatione and Reprobatione; per Joh. Davenantium Episcopum
nuper Salisburiensem, Cantabr. 1650. Fol.

32. Joh Gerrardi Vossii Historia Pelagiana, Quarto.

33. Joh. Peltii harmonia Remonstrantium and Socinianorum, 1633. Quarto.

34 Questiones hae passim occurrunt ventilatae apud Lutheranos; eorum precipui
sunt, Gerrardus (locis Communibus) Chemnitius (in examine Council. Trid.)
Brochmannus (in Systemate Theologiae,) Eckardus (Pandectis controversiarum
Religionis;) qui Remonstrantibus and Arminio favent. Calvinus suique sequaces
Calvinistae ex adverso stant, ut passim videre est apud Calvinum
(Institutionibus,) Bezam (in Romans 9.) Henricum Altingium (Io. 1. and 2.
Scriptorum Theologicorum) Paulum Ferrium (vindiciis Scholastice Orthodoxe,)
Perkinsium, etc.

35. Inter Pontificios Jesuitae pro Arminio, Domicani contra militant; Ideoque
Suarez, Alvarez, reliquique (presertim ubi de auxiliis Divinae gratiae
Scriptitant) consulendi sunt.

36. Huc spectat celebris illa and (...) controversia, tanto tempore and
Partium zelo in Galliis pridem agitata inter Jansenii and Molinae sequaces;
quorum hi Arminio, illi Calvino, magis favent; eorum Scripta adversaria omnia
pene prostant, Cognitu lectuque non indigna.

Having now endeavored to satisfy you with the Account of the Socinian and
Arminian Tenets and Writers about the same, I shall comply in the next place
with your desire of having my Thoughts about the Genealogy in St. Matthew.
FOR the Genealogy Matthew. 1. If you reckon from Abraham to David inclusive,
there are fourteen Generations. If from Solomon to Jechonias inclusive, you
have also fourteen Generations. But then if from thence to Christ) our blessed
Savior) inclusive, we have but thirteen Generations.

1. 2. 3. 1. Abraham. 1. Solomon. 1. Salathiel. 2. Isaac. 2. Roboam. 2.
Zorobabel. 3. Jacob. 3. Abia. 3. Abiud. 4. Judas. 4. Asa. 4. Eliakim. 5.
Pharez. 5. Josaphat. 5. Azor. 6. Esrom. 6. Joram. 6. Sadoc. 7. Aram. 7. Ozias.
7. Achim. 8. Aminadab. 8. Joatham. 8. Eliud. 9. Naasson. 9. Achaz. 9. Eliazar.
10. Sa^mon. 10. Ezekias. 10. Matthan. 11. Booz. 11. Manasseh. 11. Jacob. 12.
Obed. 12. Amon. 12. Joseph. 13. Jesse. 13. Josias. 13. Christus. 14. David. 14.
Jechonias.

To solve this doubt, (one Generation wanting) it is confessed that one
Generation (incuria Amanuensium) is left out, ver. 11. For it is certain in the
Old Testament. 1. That Jehoahaz 2 Chronicles. 36. v. 7.
succeeded Josiah immediately, but he Reigning only three months is omitted by
Matthew. 2. His Brother Jehojakim ver. 1.
succeeded, whom the Greeks call (...) and (...). 3. His Son and next Successor
was Jehojakim: ver. 5.
who is sometimes called Coniah, Jer. 22.24.
and sometimes Jeconiah, 1 Chronicles. 3.16.
(as Matthew here calls him) so that to supply this want of one Generation, the
Text should be read thus. (...), (seu Jehojachim) (...) (...), (seu Jehojachim)
etc. so the Text agrees with the Genealogy in the Old Testament, and the
Generation wanting is supplied, and the Truth of the Text cleared; which
(without such supply) is not true. For the Text (as now we read it) says, That
Josiah began Jeconiah and his Brethren about the time of the Babylonish
Captivity: whereas 1. Jeconiah was not Son of Josiah, but his Grandchild and
Son of Jehojakim. 2 Chronicles. 36.8.
2. Josiah was dead before the Captivity about eleven or twelve years; and
Jeconiah was toward nine years old when he was carried Captive to Babylon,
(for he began 2 Chronicles. 36.
to Reign when he was eight years old, and Reign d three Months and ten Days)
and therefore it was impossible Josiah should beget him, about the time of the
captivity, who was then above eight years old, and Josiah Dead eleven or twelve
years before. 3. And besides all this, it is evident that some Ancient Vide N.
Testamentum Graec. per Rob. Stephanum, Paris 1550. where in the Margin it is
read, (...). Vid. No. Testamentum Graece Land. 1648. and varias Lect. in
Bibliis Polyglottis. Tom. 6.
Greek Copies had and read it so, as appears by the various Readings noted in
our Printed Greek Testaments, and I have seen a Greek Testament Msc. betwixt
five and six hundred years old, wherein (...) is in the Text it self, though it
is evident that it was left out in many Copies long before, even in the time of
Epiphanius, Vid. Epiphanium ad versus Hereses. Tom. 1. page 21, 22.
in the fourth Century, who takes notice of it, and endeavors (though with
great Vid. Dion. Petavii Notas ad Epiphanium. Tom. 2. Notarum, page 18, 19.
mistakes) to solve the doubt. This omission is not only in our Bibles, but in
the Popish Vulgar Latin, even in those of Sixtus V. and Clement VIII. which
they call Authentic, and of more Authority than the Originals.

When I have urged this to some of their Priests; that their (as they call it)
Authentic Latin Bible was false, and called the Generations from Salathiel to
our Blessed Savior Fourteen, when indeed they are but thirteen: when (upon
examination) they found it so, they asked me, if it was not so in our English
Bibles, I told them yes, but we were not (nor pretended to be) Infallible. But
for them who constantly affirm the Pope and their Church to be Infallible, and
miscal us Heretics because we will not believe it, I say for them, to make St.
Matthew say, That there are fourteen Generations, when there are but thirteen,
this is so far from Infallibility, that it is an evident argument of their gross
negligence, and erroneous folly. To solve this doubt, there is a Pet. Possinus
in his Diallacticon. cap. 38. page 511. in calce Catenae Graecorum Patrum in
Matthaeum.
Jesuit, who puts in the Virgin Mary, to make the Generations fourteen, so
that in his computation of the third fourteen, from the Captivity, to our
Blessed Savior, Jacob is the Eleventh, Joseph Twelfth, Mary Thirteenth, and
our Blessed Savior Fourteenth. But why Mary (and no other Mother else) must be
reckoned in this Genealogy, no reason is, or can be given; or if all Mothers,
as well as Fathers must be reckoned, then in stead of Fourteen we shall have
Twenty eight Generations: and it should run thus; Matthan begat Jacob, Jacob
begat Joseph, and then Joseph begat Mary, (evidently untrue) and Mary begat
Christ.

BUT because you represented it to me as your Notion, that those Councils we
usually call General Councils, are not in strict propriety of speech to be
thought such, and as not having been convocated out of the whole Christian
World, and desired me to Write to you upon that Matter, I shall here acquaint
you, that a Friend of yours and mine, being to take his Degree in Divinity at
Oxon, and having chose this for his Thesis to answer the Doctors upon at the
Act, Viz. Quod nullum Concilium sit proprie Oecumenicum, he applied to me to
communicate in Writing to him, such Historical Learning, concerning the
Councils said to be General, as was necessary for his performance of that
exercise; whereupon he received from me the following Papers:

Quod nullum Concilium sit proprie Oecumenicum.
1. Imperium Occidentale.
IN hoc imperio erant diaeceses tres sub Praefecto Praetorio Italiae. Erant
autem hae, Vide Imperii Occidentalis notitiam cum Panceioli Commentar. p. 10,
etc.
1. Italia, in qua Provinciae 17 2. Illyricum, in quo Provinciae 6 3. Africa,
in qua Provinciae 7


Sub praefecto praetorio Galliarum erant etiam diaeceses tres, scil.

1. Hispania in qua Provinciae 7 2. Gallia in qua Provinciae 17 3. Britannia in
qua Provinciae 5 It a in imperio Occidentali erant Provincie 59
2. Imperium Orientale.
In hoc imperio erant diaeceses duae sub praefecto praetorio Illyrici, Scil.

1. Vide Imperii Orientalis, p. 7, 8.
Macedonia in qua Provinciae 6 2. Dacia in qua Provinciae 5 7, 8.
Sub praefecto praetorio per Orientem erant diaeceses quinque, Scil.

1. Oriens Provinciae 15 2. Aegyptus in qua Provinciae 6 3. Asia in qua
Provinciae 10 4. Pontus in qua Provinciae 11 5. Thracia in qua Provinciae 6 Ita
in imperio Orientali erant Provinciae 59 Illis add imperii Occidentalis
Provincias 59 In Vniverso igitur imperio Provinciae 118
Syllabus Provinciarum ex quibus Episcopi in Concilio Niceno convenerant.
Ex 1. H^penia solus Hosius Cordubensis. 2. Roma Victor and Vincentius pro
Sylvestro Papa. Hic provinciarum catal^gus extat apud Alphonsum Pisanum in
concilio Ni^^no a se edito l. 2. p. 259. Codiae Canonum vecerum Ecclesiae
Romanae 11. Provincias todem pena ordine enumerat, totidem tamen non habet.
Petrus Crab. in sua conciliorum Editione. Tom. 1. p. 257. hunc eundem
provinciarum Catalogum eodem prorsus ordine nobis exhibet. Vide subfriptiones
hujus concilii apud Se^dimum Binium, etc. Seldenum in Commentario ad

Batrick, seu Eutychium Alexandrinum numb. 16. p. 90, 91. Vide etiam Jac.
Gothofredum in suie ad Philostorgium Cappadocem dissertationibus, lib. 1. cap.
8. page 24, 25.


3. Aegypto. 4. Thebaide. 5. ^^bia. 6. Palaestina. 7. Phaenicia. 8. Caelosyria.
9. Arabia. 10. Mesopotamia. 11. Perside. 12. Cilicia. 13. Cappadocia. 14.
Armenia Majori. 15. Armenia Minori. 16. Ponto Polemoniaco. 17. Ponto
Paphlagoniae. 18. Galatia. 19. Asia Minore. 20. Lydia. 21. Phrygia. 22.
Pisidia. 23. Lycia. 24. Pamphylia. 25. Insulis. 26. Caria. 27. Isauria. 28.
Cypro. 29. Bithynia. 30. Europa, Thracia intelligitur. 31. Dacia. 32. Mysia.
33. Macedonia. 34. Achaia. 35. Thessalia. 36. Calabria. 37. Carthagine. 38.
Dardania. 39. Thessalia. 40. Dalmatia. 41. Pannonia. 42. Gallia. 43. Gothia.
44. Bosphoro.


In hoc Concilio nulli aderant provinciarum Episcopi extra imperium Romanum
positarum, Scil.

Ex 1. Aethiopia nulli. 2. Julia. 3. Parthia. 4. Tartaria. 5. Chinensi. 6.
Scotia. 7. Hibernia. 8. Dania. 9. Suecia, etc.


2. Concilium hoc Nicenum non fuisse Oecumenicum manifest constabit duplici
argumento.

1. Quia pars long major provinciarum, quae ditionis erant Romanae, ad
Concilium hoc Episcopos plane nullos delegabat.

2. Quia provinciae Christianae extra imperium Romanum, per Episcopos suos
plane nullae aderant.

1. Provinciae imperii, sub Niceni consilii saeculo, ut and saeculis aliquot
deinceps subsecutis erant 118. Quod ex Authentica ipsius imperii Vide Notitiam
utriusque imperii, Orientis sc. and Occi^entis ultra Arcadii and Honorii
tempora, cum doctissimi^ Guidonis Panciroli Comment. Gen 1623.
notitia, manifest constat. Ex quibus solum provinciae 44 suos ad Concilium
Episcopos miserunt (ut ex Subscriptionibus prius positis patet) and per
consequens provinciae 74 nullos habuere in Concilio illo Episcopos. Cum ideo e
provinciis 118 (plus minus) 74 a Concilio abe^ant. hoc est provinciarum pars
long major, Concilium Oecumenicum esse non potuit, quod etiam in confesso est
apud Pontificios. Vide Barth. Caranzam in praeludio 4. ad suam Conciliorum
summam, p. 5.


2. Nominatim nulli huic Concilio intererant Episcopi,

1. Ex Italia Vniversa, nisi Episc. Romanus per legatos, and Episcopus e
Calabria unus.

2. Ex Hispaniis solus Hosius est excipiendus.

3. E Galliis uno excepto.

4. E Germania.

5. E Scotia.

6. Ex Hibernia.

7. E Dania.

8. E Swecia.

9. E Polonia.

10. E Brittannia nostra, cum tamen constat in Concilio Aratadensi, Anno 314.
Episcopos Brittannos tres fuisse; Vna cum presbytero and diacono.

2. Concilium Constantinopolitanum primum.

Subscripserunt 1. Nectarius Constantinopolitanus, tum provinciarum episcopi;
Extat hic provinciarum Catalogus in Codice Canonum veterum Ecclesiae Romanae,
p. 92. and idem pene apud Pet. Crab. Tom. Council. 1. p. 412.
1. Aegypti. 2. Palaestinoe. 3. Phaeniciae. 4. Caelo-Syriae. 5. Arabiae. 6.
Provinciae Bostrensis. 7. Provinciae Osdroenae. 8. Mesopotamiae. 9. Augustae
Euphrasiae. 10. Cilinae. 11. Armeniae minoris. 12. Isauriae. 13. Cypri. 14.
Pamphyliae. 15. Lycaoniae. 16. Pisidiae. 17. Phrygiae Salutaris. 18. Phrygiae
Pacatianae. 19. Bythiniae. 20. Ponti. 21. Mysiae. 22. Scythiae. 23. Spaniae.
24. Ponti Polemoniaci.


Sed huic Concilio non intererant, primo Episcopi ^^^vinciarum 94. Imperio
Romano subjectarum. Ita ex Provinciis Imperii 118. solum Provinciae 24. suos
ibi habuere Episcopos and Provinciae 94 non habuerunt.

2. Nu^ ^rovin^tarum Christianarum extra In per^^^ ^^^num pos^tarum Episcopi
hic aderant. V^^nti ex Aethiopia, India, Persia, Scotia, Hybernia, etc.

3. Concilium Ephesinum.

Aderant solum Episcopi 156. ut constat ex Graeca hujus Concilii Editione per
Vide (...), etc. p. 99. Edita Heidelb. Anno 1591.
Hieronym. Commolinum Heidelbergae Anno 1591. Quamvis Caranza in Summa
Conciliorum, p. 297.
Caranza Patres 200. Synodo hac convenisse asserit. Eundem Episcoporum numerum
habet Codex Canonum Vetus Ecclesiae Romanae, p. 101. De hoc Concilio ex Actorum
ejus and subscriptionum diligenti collatione constat;

1. Nullum ex Provinciis extra Imperium Romanum Positis Episcopum ibidem
adfuisse.

2. Ex Provinciis sub Imperio and Ditione Romana comprehensis (sunt autem 118.
ad minimum, ut ex notitia Imperii Patet) pauciores Provinciae ad hoc quam ad
Nicenum Concilium Episcopos delegarunt.

4. Concilium Chalcedonense.

In hoc convenerunt Episcopi 620. Pet. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 736. Ekingerus in sua
Conciliorum editiine, p. 150.
de quo notandum,

1. Episcopi e Provinciis extra Imperium Romanum Positis nulli hic aderant,

2. E Provinciis Imperii 118. Episcopi Provinciarum 46. Codex Canonum Vetus
Ecclesiae Romans p. 137.
solum hic convenerunt, ita ut e Provinciis Imperii 72. Episcopus ne unus
quidem huic Synodo interfuit.

Synodo huic Episcopi nulli aderant.

Ex 1. Vniversa Italia (exceptis Episcopi Romani legatis.) 2. Hispania. 3.
Gallia. 4. Britannia. 5. Hibernia. 6. Germania. 7. Hungaria. 8. Polonia. 9.
Dania vel Suecia. 10. Aethiopia. 11. Indiis Vtrisque. 12. Parthia. 13. Persia.
14. Scythia.


Dub. At inquies Concilium Nicenum, Chalcedonense, etc. ab omnibus dicuntur
Oecumenica, Ergo, etc.

Resp. Dici poterant Oecumenica, 1. Respectu Orbis Romani and Imperii, utpote a
Caesare Convocata. 2. Sed non respectu Orbis Christiani, (de quo hic quaeritur)
utpote nullius Imperio subditi, a quo legitime Convocari poterant.

Memorand. To use all previous care and caution in the stating of the Question
after this manner; viz.

1. That by Councils we do not understand a Civil Senate, or Politic Meeting,
sed Conventum Cleri.

2. That whereas Councils are usually divided by Writers into Provincial,
National, and General, he should take notice that it is the last only that the
Fathers do call Ecumenical; that is, a Council wherein the Bishops of the
whole World do meet. And that, though it is to be granted, that in some Councils,
most of the Bishops of the Romish Jurisdiction may have met; yet that such
Councils deserve to be called Conciliabula rather than Concilia: And as for
example in the Council of Trent, only those who were called by the Bull of Paul
the third met, who were sworn Abettors of the Romish Doctrine. And that
certainly at the times of all those pretended General Councils meeting, there
were always Christians without the bounds of the Roman Empire, which might have
been, and ought to have been called to the Councils. Isa. 46.6. I have
appointed thee to be a Light to the Gentiles, and a Savior to the ends of the
Earth. And Christ gave his Apostles Authority to go over the whole World and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Theodoret gives Testimony to this in his
Book De Curandis Graecorum affectibus. Nostri illi Piscatores ac Publicani,
sutorque ille noster, cunctis Gentibus Legem Evangelicam detulerunt. Neque
solum Romanos, quique sub Romano vivunt imperio, sed Scythas quoque ac
Sauromatas, Indos, Aethiopos, Persas, Hircanos, Britannos, Cimmerios and
Germanos, utque semel dicatur, omne hominum genus, Nationesque omnes induxerunt
Crucifixi Leges accipere.

But since you are pleased to desire my thoughts about the sense in which
Protestants allow that the Body and Blood of Christ is really present in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and are likewise desirous to know whether
Papists do not, on occasion, sometimes, slight and disobey their General
Councils;

You may in the first place take notice, that all sober Protestants admit and
believe that the Body and Blood of Christ is in a sense really present in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. The Lutherans, who hold Consubstantiation, do
yet believe that, and so do the Calvinists too.

That there is a Substitution of Body and Blood in the place of the Bread and
Wine, nothing of the Symbols remaining, they deny.

Some foolish Papists bring a place out of the 6th of St. John for
Transubstantiation, (that makes nothing for it) where Christ says, Except ye
eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of the Son of God, ye can have no life in
you, etc. But this place indeed makes much against the Romanists. For as to the
eating of the Flesh of Christ, being spoken of, it is confessed by Bellarmine,
lib. 1. De Eucharistia, cap. 1. that those words of St. John do not properly
belong to the Sacrament, but the Mystery of the Incarnation. So Gabriel,
Cusanus, Cajetan, Tapper judge likewise. For Christ speaking of the necessity
of eating his Body, and drinking his Blood, must needs speak of something which
was possible; (for certainly he laid no necessity on Men to do impossibilities)
but the Sacramental eating of his Body was not then possible when he spoke
this. For then there was no such Sacrament in the World, Christ having then not
instituted his last Supper. And all Popish Writers do grant, that Christ did
not institute the Sacrament of his last Supper, or Eucharist, till a good while
after. So says P. Joh. Martinex de Ripalda in Brevi Exposit. Lit. Magistri
Sent. L. 4. distinct. 8. Assert. 2. p. 601. Hoc Sacramentum (inquit) fuit
institutum Nocte Passionis.

And then again secondly, our Savior in this 6th of St. John speaks of the
Eating, without which there was no spiritual life. But without Sacramental
eating, there may be spiritual life; as many of them who believed had that life
wrought in them then. And certainly all those holy Men who died before our
Savior's Passion, had spiritual life in them. Therefore these expressions are
not meant of a Sacramental eating, but of a figurative, a fiducial and
spiritual eating by Faith.

Thirdly; If Sacramental eating and drinking be here meant, no Lay-Roman
Catholic can then possibly be saved; for Lay Roman Catholics are
sacrilegiously denied the Blood of Christ, being denied the Cup.

Lastly; 'Twill appear further from the Text it self, that this eating was not
opus Oris, but Cordis. So verse 35. I am the Bread of Life; he that comes to me
shall not hunger, and he that believes on me shall not thirst: Where to come to
him, and believe on him, are manifestly said to be the same things, which
afterward he calls eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, v. 53, 54.

Now the generality of the Papists interpret this place of St. John, not to be
meant literally. And therefore the other of, Hoc est Corpus meum, may not be
meant literally.

These expressions of, This is my Body, and this is my Blood; that is,
Symbolical and Sacramental Signs, Seals, and Representations of his Body, and
Blood, and Passion, are most agreeable to the Common Dialect and Idiotisms of
the Jews, to the Genius and Language of their Country, and the Place where,
and Persons with whom our Savior lived; as is manifest by several phrases and
parallel expressions of the Holy Ghost in Scripture. So the seven fat Kine are
called seven years of Plenty. And Ezekiel speaking of dry Bones, says, These
Bones are the House of Israel. So in Daniel, Thou, O King, art that golden
head. So in the Gospel, The Rock was Christ. And Hagar and Sara are the two
Covenants; the seven Heads are seven Hills. The Woman is that great City, etc.
And our Savior says of himself; I am the true Vine. Why should we not infer
as well from hence, that Christ was turned into a Vine, as what the Papists
infer from other words? since he says only, This is my Blood, not my true
Blood; and here says, I am (...). So Christ says, he was (...). But the
Papists Tenet is a thing gratis dictum, a bare assertion without proof, a
begging of what should be proved. This Popish Opinion would never have been
received, if the Tyranny of some, and Ends and Interests of others did not
unhappily cause it. There is no more connection between the things contained in
it, than between Tenterton Steeple and Goodwin Sands; no shadow of consequence:
Nor has the antecedent any more Logical relation to the consequent than Chalk
to Cheese.

And now I shall give you a clear account of what we Protestants (at least what
I) believe in this particular.

Now that I may do this with as much clearness and sincerity as I can, I shall
say, 1. That the Body and Blood of Christ may be said to be present in the
Eucharist; first, respectu sui, by a Corporeal, Physical, and Local presence,
as if Christ's Body it self were substantially in the place where the Bread and
Wine is.

Secondly, respectu causati and effectus producti, when Christ's Body (though
comprehended in Heaven) that is, the gracious effect of his Death and Passion,
goes along with the Sacred Symbols, and is really present to the Believing
Receiver. That we call a Local, this a Virtual (yet real) presence.

Secondly; As to the Local presence of our Savior's Body, we may say it is in
Heaven only, not here in the Eucharist; and the Scripture says so too in
express terms: It is in Heaven, therefore not here; it being impossible (as
involving a manifest contradiction) that the same Numerical Body should at the
same time be here and there too.

Thirdly; As to the Virtual presence (which is real too) we say and believe
that the gracious Effects of our Savior's Body and Blood, are really present,
and go along with the Sacred Signs in the Sacrament to those who are true
Believers. But for wicked Men, who are Enemies to Christ, and dead in their
sins and trespasses, Christ's Body and Blood are neither locally, nor virtually
present to them. In that sense we now speak of, they neither receive his Body
nor Blood, nor any benefit by them.

Fourthly; We believe and say that the Cause of this presence is twofold;
first, Moral; secondly, Physical.

First; Faith being an Evangelical Condition, on which all the Evangelical
Promises and Blessings of God in Christ depend, it is manifest, that as the
want of it is a Moral Cause why we want those Blessings, so the having of it is
morally a Cause why we have them. For when once our gracious God does promise
us any thing upon condition of Faith (and he does promise Heaven it self on
that condition) the Condition being performed on our part, there lies an
Obligation on God (who will not, nay cannot break his promise,) to give us
those Blessings which he promised on that Condition. So that Faith being a
conditio praestita ex part nostri, I call it a Moral cause (and their own
Schoolmen call it so too) of Christ's real presence to Believers in the
Eucharist.

For as Faith was Conditio praerequisita, a Condition required in those Adulti
in the Acts, who were to be baptized; and the want of it was a Moral Cause why
Baptism was not effectual, and the presence of it a cause of all those gracious
Consequents sealed to Believers by Baptism: So in the Eucharist Faith is a
Moral Cause of the spiritual nourishment and growth of Grace sealed to us in
that Sacrament.

Secondly; But there is another power which I call a Physical Cause of that
real presence, and that is our blessed Savior himself as Mediator and Head of
the Church. For to him (as such) all Power is given of redeeming, justifying,
sanctifying, saving his Servants. And he is both the Efficient and Meritorious
Cause of all spiritual blessings bestowed on us: So that the real presence of
Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, is from Faith as a Moral Cause; and
from another Power, that of Jesus Christ as our Mediator, as from the Efficient
Cause.

You will find some of our Romish Adversaries so confident, as to tell us that
the first Christian World believed otherwise than the Protestants do in these
and other Points.

But there they must of necessity, if they will speak congruously, by the first
Christian World, mean the first hundred years after Christ, or that, and some
of the next Centuries following. And to make this good, surely they will bring
some Authors of that time to prove it. Some of them have cited St. Ignatius,
who lived in the time of of the first Century.

But why he is no Competent Witness, will anon appear. And as for D.
Areopagite, we know that he is a Bastard, and no Father; that the Works
ascribed to him are adulterate and spurious Brats, and confessed so to us by
the Papists and proved to be so many hundred years before Luther was born.

If Ignatius his Epistle to the Smyrnenses be not altogether forged, yet it is
so mangled and interpolated by the injury of time, and the subtilty and knavery
of persons enslaved to Interest, that it is impossible to know which is
genuine, and which not, and so the whole is of no competent Authority. How
strangely Ignatius is mangled and interpolated, you may see by the vast
difference of all Copies and Editions, Greek and Latin, as that of Videlius,
Vsserius, J. Vossius.

You may likewise observe that the Papists do in some things go contrary to
Councils: For they go contrary to the Concilium Nicenum secundum; that Council
utterly denying the picturing of God the Father, and yet they of Rome approve
and practice it.

This Doctrine of Anti-transubstantiatio^, is no new Doctrine crept into the
World since Luther's time, but the Ancient Faith of the English (and indeed of
all Christendom) long before the Conquest in the time of our Saxon Progenitors.
And so we find it in an Ancient Homily writ originally in Latin, but among
many others translated into Saxon by Aelfricus, Abbot of St. Albans in King
Edgar's time. Vid. Saxon. Homil, die Sancto Paschae, p. 35.

That Homily was no private thing, but commanded by Authority to be read in
Churches on Easter Day, where speaking of the Sacred Symbols in the Eucharist,
we are told, that it is naturally corruptible Bread and Wine, and is by might
of God's Word truly Christ's Body and Blood, yet not so bodily, but ghostly.
And then there are diverse differences put between Christ's Body in which he
suffered, and his Body in the Sacrament. As first, That was born of the Virgin
Mary, had flesh and blood: But his ghostly or spiritual Body is gathered of
many Corns without Bones, Blood or Limb, and without Soul; therefore nothing to
be understood therein bodily, but all ghostly. And a little after, This Mystery
(speaking of the sacred Host) is a pledge and figure: Christ's Body is Truth it
self.

This was the Ancient Faith of the Church of England seven hundred years ago,
and it is ours still.

If at, or after the Lateran Council Transubstantiation, and another new
Doctrine was broached by the Tyranny of Rome, and the slavish Credulity of some
of our Predecessors, let Roman Catholics ingenuously tell us, who are the
Innovators.

But suppose a few persons believed so; suppose any Fathers quoted for it were
incorrupt; yet it does not follow that because they believed so, therefore the
Christian World believed so.

And again, suppose that the Major part of Fathers and Doctors of the Church
were for such an Opinion, I ask if this does bind Posterity to be of their
Faith?

I shall here show you, that though none pretend more to Antiquity than the
Papists, or make a greater noise with Fathers and Councils, yet they slight
them as much as any, when they speak any thing against the sense of the present
Church.

As for instance (what I partly before hinted) Cardinal Cajetan (a very Learned
Man) in the beginning of his Commentaries on Genesis, has this passage; Si
quando occurrit novus sensus textui consonus, quamvis a torrente Doctorum
alienus, ^quum se praebeat lector Censorem: And a little after he adds, Nullus
detestetur novum Sacrae Scripturae sensum ex hoc quod dissonat a priscis
Doctoribus. Maldonat. in cap. 6. Johannis, that he might oppose Calvin,
confesses, (which no Witness but my own Eyes could make me believe) that he
chose a new Interpretation on the place against all the Ancients.

But in the next place, to prove that Papists have sometimes gone against
General Councils (since you give me occasion further to dilate on what I before
referred to by way of hint) I shall tell you, that the Canon of the great
Council of Council. Chalced. Can. 2. in Collect. Can. Graec. Lat. per Eliam
Elingerum. 29. In Cod. Can. Ecclesiae Universe. per Christoph. Justellum.
Chalcedon, (one of the four which Pope Gregory would have received tanquam
quatuor Evangelia) made by 630 Bishops, confirmed by the 6th General Council
held at Constantinople: And by that of Conc. Constant. in T^ullo, Can. 36. for
so it is acknowledged (though Binius and some o her^ would fain deny it) in the
b^dy of the Canon Law. C. r^nova^^es Did. 22. in the last and best Editions of
it. See Greg. 13. his Bull given at Rome July 1. 1580. Gratiano praefixum.
Constance too, ( Sess. 39. fol. 39. Edit. Antiquae Mediolani 1511.) is yet
every where slighted by Popish Authors. For Canon the 28th (or as in some
Editions the 29th) Canon of Chalcedon is quite left out in that Edition of the
Councils by P. Crab, and in that of Dionysius Exiguus in the Vetus Codex
Canonum Ecclesiae Romanae in Caranza, etc. And though Franciscus Longus Summa
Concillor. per Francisc. Longum a Coriolano, p. 402. apud illum, Can. 27.
a Coriolano has that Canon; yet in his Annotations he flatly denies it, and
goes about to prove it false in diverse particulars.

So that the Canonical determinations of 360 Fathers met in a General Council,
(whose Constitutions their own Extra. De Renuntiation^, cap. post Translationem.
Pope Gregory would have received as Evangelical Truths) when they make against
them, signify nothing, but are flatly denied.

And if it be said that this was no Canon of the Council, the contrary is
manifestly true; for it is in all the Original Greek Copies Printed, and
Manuscript, Videsis Cod. Canonum per Christoph. Justellum Ecclesiae Vniversae,
Can. 206. p 25. Zonaram in Canon. Council. p. 118. Theodorum Balsamon. in Can.
28. Council. Chalcedon. and Can. Concilior. Graec. Lat. Quarto. An. 1560. per
Andr. Gesnerum, p. 48. Vid. Caranzam in Notis ad Marginem, c. 36. Council.
Constantinop. p. 635. where he tells us that Canon is in the Greek Copies, sed
deest in Latinis exemplaribus.
and expressly confirmed by the 36th Canon of the Sixth General Council at
Constantinople, Registered by Gratian (Can. Renovantes. Did. 22.) though with
insufferable falsehood and corruption of the Canon, as will manifestly appear to
any who will compare Gratians reading with the Ori^inal. Vid. Vetus ^^sc.
Sy^^^icum in Bi^l. B ^le^^. i^^er M^c. G^^^ca e M^s o Barociano.


I know they of Rome sli^ht this of ^onstantinople, as much as that ^f
Cha^cedon.

For first, Binius tells us it smells more of ambition than truth and Caranza
in A^not. ad Can. 36. Conc ^ii 6. Genesis p. 635.
Caranza, ^rroneus a quibusdam existi ^^ur hic Canon.

And Indeed i^ is ^ecess^ry for them to deny that Canon; for it positively
asserts and determines such truths as utterly overthrow their Popes pretended
Supremacy, which they so much and so irrationally contend ^^r.

For First that great General Council gives (...) (not s^^ lia only as Gratian
falsely reads it, Gratian Can. Renovantes. did. 22.
even in the last and best Edition of their Canon-^aw, equal Privileges to New
and Old Rome: that is, declared and pronounced Constantinople, or the Patriarch
of that Imperial City, to have equal Privileges with the Pope or Patriarch of
old Rome.

Secondly, That the Roman Bishop had not those Privileges among other Bishops
by any Divine right or succession from St. Peter, (as now they would pretend)
but (...): they were given by ecclesiastical and positive constitution of the
Fathers.

Thirdly, And they to make this manifest tell us, that Rome had those ancient
prerogatives (not as its Bishop was St. Peter's Successor or with any relation
to it, but) (...), because it was the Imperial City. Vid. Cod. Canonum
ecclesiae universae per Christoph J ustellum Can. 206.
And so they gave Constantinople such great Privileges (above all others,) and
equal to Rome, (...): because it was new Rome, and had the Emperor and a Senate
there Can. Ibid.

And the Council of Chalcedon was ever received in Christendom with great
Veneration, and confirmed by the Co^ncil of Constance Vid. Council.
Constanti^ns. Sess. 39. fol. 39. In edit. vetere Mediolani, An. 1511.
which was a General one too made up of their Vid. Nomina Concilor. generalium
post bullam Gregorii 13. In editione ultima Corporis Juris Canonici. Paris,
1618.
own men.

By this it appears that Papists, when any thing is attested out of General
Councils to their prejudice, will deny them and the Synodical and Concurrent
Determinations of whole Assemblies: as here they deny three Councils, Council.
Chalcedonense, Can. 28 apud Justellum, 27. apud Longum a Coriolano. 29. apud
Eliam Elingerum.
Chalcedon, Syn^dus sexta Constan. in Trullo. Can. 36. apud Th^od. Balsam. p.
40. apud Zonaram. p. 159.
Constantinople, the Council of Constance. Council. Constan. sess. 34. Fol. 39.
edit. Mediolani in Fol. An. 1511.


I have here showed you, how they slight their Councils. And it is an easier
matter to show how upon occasion they slight the Pope.

You will be sufficiently satisfied in this if you again consult the Council.
Constantiense s^ss. 38. p. 37. in Editione Zac^ariae Ferre^ii Abbatis
Vin^entini. Mediolani. 1511.
Council of Constance: and will the^e see that Petrus de Luna, sc. Benedictus
13. Haereseos damnatur sic. Sacro-Sancta Synodus pronuntiat and declarat per
hanc diffinitivam sententiam Petrum de Luna Benedictum 13. esse perjurum, uni
versalis Ecclesiae scandalizatorem, schismaticum, and haereticum a fide devium,
etc.

Hoc etiam prae ^^cti Concilii de retum in calce Concilii (inter reliqua istius
Concilii statuta) habes a Papa confirmatum, sess. 45. p. 4.

To the Reverend Mr. John Goodwin Minister of Gods Word in Coleman-street.
Sir,
I Always find in the prosecution of your Arguments that perspicuity and
acuteness, which I often seek and seldom find in the Writings of others. You
assert the Universal Redemption of all Mankind, without exception, by Jesus
Christ. Possibly there wants not clear rays of Truth in your Discourse, but I
want Eyes to see them. Therefore I lay the blame on my self, well knowing that
you are not bound to find me Arguments, and find me Understanding too.

But without more Prefatory words; referring to chapter 18.. 6. and p. 464. of your
Treatise called Redemption Redeemed, where your Argument is this,

If Christ died not for all men, then all men are not bound to believe on him.

But all men are bound to believe on him.

Therefore he died for all.

I shall acquaint you that it is this Argument of yours I shall pitch on, and
the rather because it has been cried up by men of your Judgment as the great
Goliath of Gath, which no David could Conquer, a kind of Argumentum Achilleum.
And so Arminius calls it himself.

Many of our Divines do mistake in untying the Gordian Knot: And though several
of them deny the Major, yet I deny the Minor, and affirm that all men are not
bound to believe on Jesus Christ.

And here I shall first give my reasons why I deny it. Secondly, Answer yours.

By all men, it is to be supposed that you mean all men in general, and indeed
you say so in terminis. You say that Christ has obtained this favor of God
for all men without exception, that they should receive sufficient means to
enable them to repent and believe.

Your Conclusion to prove is that Christ died for all, and therefore your
medium which you prove it by, must be as large. For the principles of Logic
and Natural reason tell us, that there must be a just proportion and adequation
between the medium by which we prove, and the Conclusion to be proved. Else the
Argument must of necessity be weak and inconsequent.

Now I say that all men have not a legal tie and obligation on them to believe
on Christ. And here, first it will easily be granted that no humane obligation
can tie men to this.

For the internal acts of belief and dependence on Jesus Christ for Salvation,
as they are not within the compass of humane cognizance, so no man was ever
invested with such a Power and Dominium (which is the foundation of all Laws)
over all Mankind, as to be able to lay an obligation on all men universally,
which in this case is required.

Secondly, Neither is there any Divine law which binds all men to believe in
Jesus Christ, natural or positive.

First, Not Natural. The (...), or (in St. Paul's phrase) (...), those (...) in
Aristotle's Language, or those (...), and (...) (in the dialect of the Stoics)
those dictates of Natural Reason, cannot possibly bind a Man to the belief of
that which the light of Nature cannot discover. But the Light of Nature never
could, nor can discover that there was or ever would be such a Man and Mediator
as Jesus Christ, seeing the Being of such a Man and Mediator did not depend on
any principles of Nature, but solely and wholly on the liberum Dei decretum and
beneplacitum, which was not possible to be known by any created Understanding
whatsoever, further than he was graciously pleased to reveal and discover it.

For by Natural Reason we may know first, That God is merciful, and may if he
please pardon; but that actually he will, is beyond the power of any natural
Understanding to conclude. For it will no more follow, he is merciful and
therefore he will pardon, than it does, he is just therefore he will punish.

But Secondly, Admit that we might by the light of Nature know that he will
pardon penitent Sinners, yet whether he would do it ex potestate absoluta and
jure dominii, or propter meritum Christi, (seeing he might do either if he
pleased) this was above the finite capacity of any Man or Angel to know further
than God revealed it to them.

It Is true indeed that on supposition that God has revealed to all the World
that Christ should or had died for them, and that it was his Will that all
should rely on him for Salvation, then the Law of Nature would oblige all Men
(to whom the revelation was made) to believe accordingly, because Nature it
self binds us, omni verbo divino credere, when it is discovered to us: But then
the obligation is not originally and immediately from the Law of Nature, but
mediante revelatione Divina; of which in the next place.

Secondly, Therefore as no natural Law binds all men to believe in Jesus
Christ, so no positive Law does: and therefore all Men are not bound to believe
on him.

That this may appear, I say, that to bring a positive obligation on all
Mankind, two things are necessarily required.

First, Latio legis.

Secondly, Publicatio.

First, It Is necessary such a Law should be made. For every legal obligation
presupposes a Law made, which may oblige all those to and for whom it is made.
And to the making of such a Law, there are two things required:

First, Potestas, that the Lawgiver be Persona publica authoritate praedita,
and have a just power and authority to command, see Fran. Suarez De Legibus, l.
1. c. 8.

Secondly, Voluntas obligandi, that he be willing to give such a command as may
induce a legal obligation to obedience: Suarez ibidem. c. 5. Occham in 3.
Quest. 22. A Castro. lib. 2. De lege paenali. cap. 1. For if either of these be
wanting, it is impossible to make a Law to bind any, much less all.

Secondly, Nor is latio legis sufficient to induce an obligation; but there
must be a sufficient promulgation of it too. L. Leges Sacratissimae. C. De Leg.
Suarez ubi supra. l. 1. c. 11. 3. p. 35.

For suppose a Monarch who has a supreme Nomothetical power to make a law, and
when it is made and written, should lay it up in archivis imperii, so that it
be not known nor published to his Subjects, it is manifest that such a Law
neither is nor can be obliging till he takes care for the publishing of it: so
that a legal and sufficient publication must of necessity precede the
obligation of any Law. Cum lex per modum regulae constituatur (says Aquinas.
1. 2. quaest. 90. art. 4. in Corp. Vasquez ibidem) eam ut obligandi vim habeat
promulgari and ad eorum qui legi subjiciuntur notitiam deduci oportet.

Thus much in Thesi I conceive evident: and now in hypothesi that I may apply
it to our present purpose. Admit that there were such a Law made in the Gospel
as did intend to oblige all Mankind to believe in Jesus Christ for Salvation
yet I deny that de facto it does oblige all Men to that belief, for want of
sufficient promulgation and publication; since it is clear that many Millions of
men never heard of it.

During the legal Economy and dispensations of the Old Testament, God did
discover somewhat of Christ to the Jews, yet not so to the Gentiles, which were
infinitely the Major part of the World. And of the Gentiles none knew of it,
but such as were proselytes, and brought to an union with the Jews, who were
few in comparison of the rest who save in Darkness and in the Shadow of Death.
Hence it is that when the Gospel was published among the Gentiles, and the
Apostles preached every where that men should believe on Christ for Salvation,
(Act. 17, 18.) They called our Savior (...), a strange Deity or Demon, not
heard of before. The times of ignorance God winked at; that is, the men of
those times, as Grotius on the place. See Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3, 4. You cannot say
that God did promulgate such a Law to the Gentiles before Christ, as obliged
them to believe on Christ for Salvation. By the later discoveries of the World,
it is apparent that many Nations never heard of Christ. And some say there are
whole Nations that worship no God.

Episcopius the Arminian was of this opinion of mine, and quotes that place,
How shall they believe on him that they have not heard of? And how shall they
hear without a Preacher, (...), without a Promulgator or publisher: for so in
Suidas the word is taken, and praedicare is to publish in the Civil Law.

A Third reason why I deny this assertion is because Infants are not bound to
believe in Jesus Christ; and they are a considerable part of the World. And
therefore all Men are not bound to believe on Christ. The great and good
Lawgiver binds none to impossibilities. And if you can make it appear upon
just and carrying grounds that Infants, Naturals to whom God has not given the
use of Reason, and those many Millions in all ages who never heard the Gospel,
are bound to believe in Christ for Salvation, then I shall grant your Minor,
and admit your Argument to be good, namely, that Christ died for all without
exception, because all without exception are bound to believe in him.

I shall now weigh your reasons which make you think your notion to be as clear
as the noonday.

The first Objection of yours is, Now Gods commanding all men to Repent, as it
is in the Acts.

But Quid hoc ad Iphicli Boves? It does not follow, because to Repent,
therefore to Believe. For the Light of Nature commands all men who have sinned,
to repent of that Sin, and would have done so if Jesus Christ had never been
revealed to the World. If Sempronius has sinned, he is bound by the Law of
Nature to Repent. For the Law of Nature obliges men to love God with all their
Hearts, and therefore to repent and turn to him, and be sorry for their sins.
And so the Law of Nature bound Adam to Repent because he had sinned, and that
before the New Covenant was made. Adam had a command to repent from the Law of
Nature, but not to believe.

Your other Objection is, He that believes not shall be damned.

I answer, Infidelity is twofold. First, Privative, When we do not believe the
things, which we are bound to believe. And this is a Vice and Moral obliquity
opposed to the Virtue of Faith.

That Principle in the Schools is a clear Truth, Omne malum Morale est Carentia
boni debiti inesse pro eo tempore pro quo est debitum.

Secondly, Infidelity is Negative: and this is taken to be Carentia fidei in
iis qui non tenentur Credere.

Those Reprobates to whom Christ was never revealed, shall not be tried by the
Law of the Gospel, nor the positive Law given to the Jews, nor any part of it,
Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, as far as it was positive. For in this sense
the Gentiles are said to have no Law, Romans 2.14. and therefore not to be Judged
by it, Romans 2.12. But they shall be tried by the Law of Nature. For so St.
Augustine has long since stated the Question (Aug. in Johannem) eos (speaking
of the Gentiles) ad quos Evangelii praedicatio non pervenerit, excusari a
peccato infidelitatis, damnari propter alia peccata, quorum excusationem non
habent, utpote in legem Naturae Commissa.

Thus Sir have I in the way of a libera theologia communicated my Thoughts to
you. If you can convince me that I have therein erred, we shall both of us be
gainers by your so doing: You will gain the Victory, and I the Truth. And this
is all at present from,

Sir, Your very humble Servant.
September. 1651.
An Account by way of Abstract of Mr. John Goodwin's Book, called, The Pagans
Debt and Dowry, etc. Printed at London in the year 1651. returned by way of
answer to the foregoing Letter of Dr. Barlow.
MR. Goodwin there in p. 4. acknowledges that Dr. Barlow has pleaded the
cause of what he asserted, with as much ingenuity and strength, as any man
whatsoever could have done. But in page 6. he mentions that he will answer some
of the more material parts of Dr. Barlow 's Discourse, though not in the same
order to which he might be directed by his Papers, but only as they came to his
remembrance, he not having leisure for a second Review. But it is pity that he
had not endeavored for the Worlds satisfaction, to have answered Paragraph by
Paragraph, as is usually done by the answerers of Discourses writ with such
accurateness of method as Dr. Barlow's is.

However some of the more material replies of Mr. John Goodwin shall be here
set down and left to the Worlds consideration.

He says in page 10. and seque 4. That the Scriptures in several pl^ces
plainly insinuate a capacity in the Heathen, yea in all men by the light of
Nature, to attain or make out this Evangelical conclusion, that some mediation,
some atonement or other has been made and accepted by God for the sins of
Men. But I demand (says the Apos^le Paul, Romans 10.18.) Have they not heard?
Yes verily, their sound went forth into all the Earth, and their words unto the
end of the World.

He had said in the verse immediately foregoing that Faith comes by hearing; in
this verse, he shows in an answer which he gives to a demand or question put by
him what hearing it is by which Faith comes, or at least what hearing is
sufficient to believe upon, or produce Faith? This hearing, he says, is the
hearing of that sound, and of those words which the Heavens, and the day and
the night speak, and that are gone forth into the end of the World, as appears
by the Place in ( Psalm. 19.) from whence these words are added; If you ask me
but what is the sound, or what are the words, which the Heavens, and the Day,
and the Night, i. e. The constant course of the Providence of God, in the
Government of the World, speak in the Ears of all Nations, and of all People,
that Faith shall come by the hearing of them? I answer, They are the words of
Eternal Life too, as well as those which as ^eter acknowledges our Savior
himself had to speak, yea and did speak upon all occasions: only they are not
so plainly spoken as he was wont to speak, their Parable is somewhat more dark
and harder to be understood: but the sense and import of what the Heavens
moving still in their Natural courses, and the gracious Providence of God
jointly speak in the Ears of all Flesh is, that God is taken off from the
fierceness of h^^ displeasure against sin, and that he holds forth his White
Flag, and offers terms and conditions of Peace unto the World, and that upon
their coming in to him by Repentance, they shall be received into Grace and
Favor. And what is this but the very tenor, sum, and substance of the Gospel,
which yet is more plain from that of the same Apostle, Acts 14. to the Men of
Lystra who (says he, speaking of God) in times past suffered all the Gentiles
to walk in their own ways nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in
that he did good, and gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling
our hearts with food and gladness.

In respect of what was it, that God left not himself without witness amongst
the Gentiles, even then when he suffered them to walk in their own ways; viz.
without admonishing and directing them how to walk, and what to do, after any
such manner as now he does by the Letter of the Gospel sent amongst them what
did the witnesses the Apostle here speaks of, witness concerning God, or on his
behalf? doubtless he does not speak here of his Godhead, nor of his Power, nor
of his Wisdom, as if his meaning were, that God left not himself without
witness of these, (though it be true, that he did not leave himself without
witness, i. e. means of convincing men of these also,) but the works of
Creation, as distinguished from the works of Providence (whereof he here
speaks) are sufficient witnesses of these, according to the Tenor of Romans
1.20. and besides there are natural impressions of these in the Spirits and
Consciences of Men, which are witness on Gods behalf thus far; but doubtless
that in God, or concerning God, which (as the Apostle here says) God intended
should be testified or witnessed on his behalf unto men, was somewhat more
secret, more out of the way (as it were) of men's common thoughts or
apprehensions, and particularly it was that gracious and good affection which
he bears unto the World, through Jesus Christ, his inclination unto peace with
men upon their Repentance (which is the substance of the Gospel.) This appears
first. By the nature or quality of the Witnesses here spoken of, which were
God's giving men Rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, his filling their
hearts with food and gladness, such witnesses as these are only proper to
testify Grace and Love, and desire of the good of those, to whom they are
given, in him that giv^th them; They plainly show, that he that shows them, is
not extreme with, has not extremity against those that do amiss, and
consequently that he is by one means or other taken off from the rigor of his
Justice, and severity of his wrath against sinners. And 2. It appears from
hence, because Paul who was not only a diligent and faithful Preacher of the
Gospel where ever he came, but was in special manner designed to be an Apostle
to the Gentiles, Preached no other Doctrine than this at Lystra (a City of the
Gentiles.) Upon that great opportunity that was now offered him, we cannot
think that he should Preach a Philosophical or Metaphysical Sermon, concerning
the Essence or Natural proporties of God only, but which was Evangelical, and
savouring of the Gospel; now the Holy Ghost recording either the whole, or (at
least) the sum and substance of what he Preached in this place, reports
nothing Evangelical as spoken by him, except this be acknowledged for such; so
that clear it is from the Scriptures, that all the World, even those that are
most straightened and scanted in this kind, those that have not the Letter of the
Gospel, have yet sufficient means of believing granted unto them; of believing,
I mean, 1. That God is, 2. That he is a Rewarder of those that diligently seek
him; which is all the Faith or Belief the Apostle makes simply and absolutely
necessary to bring a man unto God, i. e. into grace and favor with him, Heb.
11.

There are several other Scriptures that speak home to this Point, besides
those argued, particularly that, Romans 2.4. Or, despisest thou the Riches of his
Goodness and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of
God leads thee to Repentance: The Long-suffering and Goodness of God are said
to lead Men to Repentance, because they testify according to a rational and
clear Interpretation, a willingness and readiness in God, to receive all such
into grace and favor with himself, who shall unfeignedly repent of their sins.
There is no other consideration, but this (at least none without this) in
respect whereof, the patience or bountifulness of God, can be said to lead, i.
e. to persuade or invite to Repentance. There is no motive or persuasive
whereof sinners are capable, unto Repentance, without hope of pardon upon
Repentance. In the mean season, you see it clear from the Scriptures; (and the
Scriptures, as you have seen, run parallel with evident and clear Reason all
along in this Point) that even Heathen Men, and those that want the History of
the Gospel, have yet a sufficiency of means whereby to believe, and to prevent
the Wrath and Indignation, which is to come, in which regard they are
altogether inexcusable, if they do it not.

He says in ^.29. That whereas you argue, that all Men have not a Legal Tie or
Obligation upon them to believe in Jesus Christ, and upon this account cannot
stand bound to believe on him; I answer by denying your Antecedent, and affirm
by all men, [ i. e. all men not wholly disabled, either through want of Years,
or defect of Natural Capacity, to believe, though there be a sense, which the
Schoolmen term, Sensus Divisus, wherein even such persons as these are under a
Tie of believing,] but all others (I affirm) are simply and directly under the
Obligation of believing on Jesus Christ.

And whereas you further argue; if so, then are they under this Obligation,
either by the Law of Nature, or else by some positive Law of God; and affirm,
that by neither, and hence conclude not at all: I answer; The Obligation you
speak of lies upon them, by the force and authority of both these Laws: First;
The Law of Nature requires all men; teaches all men, 1. To seek and enquire
after God, i. e. the knowledge of his Nature, Attributes, Excellency, and
Perfection of Being. 2. After the richest and best discoveries of his will and
pleasure concerning men, which are any where to be found. 3. And lastly; This
Law requires likewise of all men, to submit unto every part of the will and
pleasure of God concerning them, being any ways made known to them; otherwise
we must hold, either that this Law teaches not men to regard, mind, look or
listen after any manifestation or discovery which God makes of himself, in any
part of the World, but only near to them, and (as the saying is) under their
Noses, or within their own Thresholds: Or else that it teaches them to rest
satisfied with such discoveries in this kind, which are imperfect, and
unsatisfactory: Or lastly; That it does not teach them to submit to the Will of
God in all things, as far as it shall be discovered unto them; none of all
which can be affirmed, with truth, or likelihood of truth. First then; if the
Law of Nature requires of all men (except the before excepted) to enquire
after the best and fullest discovery, which God any where makes of himself,
his will and pleasure concerning men.

And 2. If the Gospel be the richest and fullest discovery in this kind which
he has made, or which is to be found, which I presume is no Christian man's
Question. And lastly; If it be the express Revealed Will of God in this
Gospel-discovery of himself, that all men who hear of it, or have come to the
knowledge of it, should believe in his Son Jesus Christ; it roundly follows,
that by the Law of Nature, all men of years and competent understanding stand
obliged to believe in Christ, either in sensu composito, as, viz. if they have,
or have had the Letter of the Gospel, or live, or have lived under the sound of
the Ministry of it, or else in sensu Diviso, viz. in case the Gospel has never
yet in the Letter or Ministry of it been revealed unto them.

There are more Notions of the same nature, that the reader may find in Mr.
Goodwin's said Book, and to which he is referred, it being learnedly writ, and
containing what can be said for Mr. Goodwin's Assertion, and both Dr. Barlow's
Letter, and Mr. Goodwin's Answer may be to such who write of Controversial
Divinity, an useful Specimen of two Antagonists writing of the same with
Candor, and like Gentlemen as well as Scholars and Christians, and the which
was suitable to the natural tempers both of Dr. Barlow, and Mr. Goodwin. For
though the latter has in many of his Writings often used sharp satirical
Reflections on the Authors he answered; yet it was always in the case of such
who treated him uncivilly and scurrilously, that he thus answered a Fool
according to his folly. But the soft, and gentle, and Christian Language he
bestows on Dr. Barlow in this his Answer, is in many places obvious to the
Reader; besides, in that before mentioned, in p. the 4th. He had before said in
p. 3. I find you a man of a fa^ better spirit, than I have yet met with in any
Antagonist. And afterward, I cannot but kindly resent in you that worthy
disposition in you to put honor where it was wanting, and to help with your
respects to fill up the Pit which others have dug in the field of my
Reputation, to find the Treasure of their own. And afterward; I greatly desire
it at the hand of my God, both yours and mine, etc. And you have writ not
without grounds worthy a Learned Man. And in p. 5. he says, Though I very much
honor you for those signal parts of Christian worth and ingenuity, which by
the light of your Papers sent me, I sufficiently discern in you. etc. And he
concludes his Letter with the soft and Christian Subscription, viz. Yours in
Jesus Christ, as your self, and your own Soul, J. Goodwin.

But here it is fit to advertise the Reader, that Dr. Barlow's Assertion in his
Letter to Mr. Goodwin, has in it nothing of heterodoxy, or what differs from
the measures of the Church of England. For our Great Bishop Sanderson (with as
much honor now quoted in the Divinity Schools as Aristotle is in those of
Philosophy) tells us in his 4th Lecture, and of the Adequate Rule of
Conscience, 21. That the Gentiles to whom the Gospel has not been Preached are
not bound to believe the Gospel, or to believe on Christ. For, Nemo tenetur ad
impossible. And he asserts the same thing in that Lecture, 32.

Dr. Barlow having been in the year 1673. Archdeacon of Oxford, and being
obliged to Communicate to the Clergy of that Diocese the Orders about
Catechizing, and which his Majesty in that conjuncture thought fit to have
revived, here follows a deduction of the factum about it in the several Letters
that the affair gave occasion for, viz.
Reverend Brethren,
IT has pleased his Sacred Majesty to give some commands to my Lord's Grace of
Canterbury, to be communicated to the Clergy of his Province. From his Grace
they have been conveyed to the Right Reverend our good Diocesan, who has
enjoined me to transfer them to you. What his Majesty's pleasure is, you will
(I hope) fully understand, by the Letters here enclosed. To have summoned you
to Oxon (or any other place) for the delivery of those Letters, would have been
some trouble, and possibly charge (which his Lordship is always willing to
prevent;) and therefore, having no other commands from my Superiors to
communicate (save those here enclosed) I chose rather to send them, together
with the Respects and Service of

(Reverend Brethren) Your Affectionate Brother and Servant. Tho. Barlow.
Q. Coll. Oxon May 22. 1673.
I Need not tell you, that the Laws and Constitutions mentioned in my Lord's
Grace of Canterburies Letter, are, 1. The Constitutions of Convocation. 1.
Jacobi 1603. Can. 59.2. The Rubric at the end of our Church Catechism in our
present Common Prayer Book. Which Canon and Rubric agree in this. 1. That
there must be Catechizing every Sunday and holy day. 2. It must be in the
Afternoon. 3. That all Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, are bound
to send their Children, Apprentices and Servants. But in some things they
differ. 1. The Canon injoins Catechizing (as to the time) before
Evening-prayer, but the Rubric says after the second Lesson. 2. The Canon
says, they shall Catechize Half an hour or more, the Rubric limits no time,
but leaves it to the prudence of the Minister, as he shall think convenient.
Now where they differ, the Rubric is to be followed, because ratified by Acts
of Parliament (which the Canon is not) and so more obligatory. 3. The Rubric
omits the Punishment the Ordinary may inflict, in case the Rubric or Canon be
not observed: But the Canon distinctly sets down the penalties. 1. Of the
Minister, if he neglect Catechizing according to Canon. 2. Of Parents and
Masters, if they refuse or neglect to send their Children or Servants. 3. Of
Children and Servants, if they refuse to come and be Catechized according to
Canon. Which penalties (upon neglect of Duty) will, I doubt not, be inflicted
by those in Authority.

My Lord,
I Have received a Letter from his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, a
Copy whereof I am required to transmit to your Lordship, by which you will
understand the Duty which his Majesty requires of your Lordship. The Letter is
as follows.

The Kings most Excellent Majesty being truly sensible that the growing
increase of the prevailing Sects and Disorders among us, proceeds chiefly from
the general neglect of instructing the younger sort of persons; or their
erroneous instructions in the Grounds and Principles of true Religion, is
therefore pleased to command me, that in his name I require your Lordship, and
by you the rest of my Brethren the Bishops of this Province, that by your
Selves and Officers, you will at all seasonable times reinforce the execution
of such Laws and Constitutions, as enable Us to enjoin the Use and Exercise of
our Church-Catechism, and that by the most effectual remedies that may be; such
as without License either publicly or privately teach School within your
Lordships or their jurisdiction, be forthwith proceeded against according to
such rules as are prescribed unto Us for their restraint; and to the end that
this mischief may be prevented for the future, He more-over strictly charge
us that none be admitted to that office without Subscription, Oaths, and
Declaration as are exactly requisite; but in the mean time I desire that your
Lordship and They, will with the first convenience let me know how we are
already defective in these particulars, that I may be able to give such
satisfaction as hereafter will be necessary. I bid your Lordship heartily
farewell.

Lambeth House, Feb. 6. 167^. Your Lordships very Affectionate Friend and
Brother. Guil. Cant.
Your Lordship does hereby fully understand his Majesty's pleasure, which I am
required to let you know.

London-House, Feb. 8. 167^. Your Lordships very loving Brother and Servant.
Humfr. London.



Mr. Archdeacon.
YOU hereby fully understand his Majesty's pleasure which I know not how better
to communicate to the Clergy with in my Diocese, than by your self, you being
the most proper officer in my absence; the manner of doing this I shall wholly
leave to your own discretion, and desire that with all convenient speed, you
would give me some account of what you have done herein, that I may be able to
give such satisfaction as hereafter may be required by his Majesty, from

Whitehall, April. 26. 1673. Your very affectionate Friend. N. Oxon.

THE Questions I sent the Bishop of Oxon, were 1. Whether by Sects (in my Lord
of Canterbury's Letter) Papists were (as well as others) included? 2. And
whether their Children, etc. should be summoned by the Minister to be
Catechized? And 3. In case they come not, what punishment? 4. Whether Popish
Schoolmasters might teach without License, etc?

Mr. Archdeacon.
YOU have put some Questions to me, which I believe have not been put to any
other Bishop, and therefore I shall not take upon me to give any other answer
than this, that I have no Commission to make any Comment or Explanation upon my
Lord of Canterburies Letter which was sent to me, but only to Communicate it to
the Clergy. Your speedy care in this will be necessary; whether you are willing
to appear in person concerning it, or to distribute such Copies of it as are
requisite, I leave to your own choice, but I pray fail not the doing of it. I am

Sir, Your very affectionate Friend. N. Oxon.
White Hall, May 10. 1673.
An Answer to My Lord's Letter of May 10. 1673.
Right Reverend, etc.
I Have received your Lordships Letter and Commands, in obedience to which I
have now communicated the Letters your Lordship sent, to the Clergy of your
Dioces. I did not think it convenient to summon them all to meet at Oxon (or
any other place) because that might be some trouble and charge to them; nor had
I any thing to say, or do, save only to deliver Letters to them: the way I
took, was this: There being eight Deaneries in your Dioces, I transcribed eight
Copies of those Letters, and sent one (enclosed in a Letter of my own, a Copy
of which I here send) to every Deanery directing it to some prime Minister of
that Deanery, and making the apparitor signify to the rest of the Ministers of
that Deanery, in whose hands those Letters were lodged, that they might come,
and (if they pleased) take a Copy, or (at least) for their directions read
them. Further (though your Lordship has given me no directions or command to do
it) I have commanded the Apparitors, to bring me a List of those, who
(publicly or privately) teach School, in this Diocese: which (so soon as they
have finished) I shall send to your Lordship; and (in the mean time) I shall
inquire (and know) who have, and who have not legal Licenses to teach School,
and then give your Lordship an account of it. When your Lordship shall be
pleased to communicate any further commands, though many have more discretion
and ability to execute them, than I do (or can) pretend to, yet your Lordship
may be assured of this, that none shall, with more honor and respect to your
place and person, or with more diligence and fidelity, endeavor it.

Having said this, I humbly crave leave to speak freely, as to my Spiritual
Father, and my Friend. Your Lordship seems to be displeased with the questions
(a resolution of which I desired in my last) as being such, as had not been put
to any Bishop, nor fit to be answered by your Lordship. They were put to me, by
as learned and pious persons as any in the Diocese, men who are ready to do
their Duty, but they desire (as in reason they ought) to know of their Guides
and Governors, the bounds and measures of that Duty they would have done. This
they cannot know, or (any way) learn out of the Letters sent down, in which
there is no command which concerns the Duty of the Inferior Clergy in any
Diocese. His Majesty's command in my Lord of Canterbury's Letter, concerns my
Lords the Bishops only -- That they should injoin Catechizing according to the
Laws and Constitutions, which enable them so to do. Those Constitutions
(whatever they be) are the Rule of the Bishops Power, (who is to injoin them)
and the Clergies Duty (who are to obey;) But what those Constitutions are, the
Letters mention not: that is left to my Lords the Bishops. As they best know,
what Canons and Constitutions enable them to injoin Catechizing, so they ought
to signify to their inferior Clergy, what Canons they are, which they would
have put in execution; that (by them) they may first know their Duty, and then
do it. It being impossible that they (or any) should obey Constitutions, before
they be made known to them, by those who injoin and expect obedience. As the
inferior Clergy, in dubious cases, are (in Prudence and Conscience) bound to
desire the directions of their Superiors (their Guides and Governors;) so
their Superiors are (by the same obligations) bound to give them directions.
We have several Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, concerning Catechizing,
which (in some things) clash and contradict one another. It is not probable
that every one of the Inferior Clergy, should know all those Constitutions,
and less probable that every one should be able to reconcile the real or
seeming Contradictions; and so certainly know what remains, as a Duty to be
done without directions from his Superiors. I humbly beg your Lordships pardon
for this tedious, and (I fear) impertinent scribble, and your Paternal
Benediction for,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged faithful Servant. Tho. Barlow.
Q. Coll. Oxon. May 29. 1673.
Sir J. B. having sent to Bishop Barlow a Lecture before the Royal Society on
the 26th of November. 1674. Printed in Twelves, his Lordship sent him the
following answer.
Sir,
I thank you for the Discourse you sent me; but am sorry so ingenious a person
should write, or others should approve it: for that I may freely (and sub
sigillo to you) say what I think and know: though there be several things in it
ingeniously said; yet there be too several things highly irrational, and indeed
most metaphysical Nonsense, and some things (I fear) impious, if not plainly
Atheistical: we are told, page 15. That place is the IMAGE, or FANCY of
Matter, or Matter considered. If this be true, then 1. Seeing all such Phancies
are only in the Soul, Therefore to be in a place, is to be in a Phansy, and
therefore in the Soul, where all such Phansies are, and cannot possibly be
elsewhere.

2. Motion (he says page 26.) is change of place. Now, if Place be Phansy; then
if the Sun change its place, it is only a change of phansy, and a change of
phansy will be a motion or change of place: and then (if men change their
Phansies, who only have Phansies to change) the Sun may stand still, and the
Earth move. For (you know) there have been, and still are, who strongly phansy
the Sun to stand still, and the Earth to move; and others, who as strongly
phansy the contrary. Now I would fain know which of their phansies is the place
of Sun or Earth? and (if either) why the one more than the other? and if
neither then place is not a phansy (as is pretended) and therefore the
definition it self is but a phansy, and a wild one too.

3. We are told also ( page 15.) that a place, is Matter considered; Ergo If
matter be not considered, it is in no place. Ergo Horse or Man, Sun and Moon,
and the World, when not considered, are in no place, and therefore no where,
for quod nusquam est, non est.

4. He tells us there, ( page 15.) That quantity is the phansy of place, and
therefore all quantity must be where the phansy is, and phansies can be no
where but in the Soul (which being a Spirit is capable of none;) and therefore
no quantity can be (extra animam) in any body whatever.

5. To say that place is matter considered; is to say, that the place of a Dog,
is a Dog considered: and then all those things in the World which are unknown
to Us, and therefore cannot be considered, must therefore be in no place, and
therefore not in the World.

5. He says ( page 17, 18.) That ALL the FIRST matter of the World are Atom's,
immutable in magnitude and figure. 2. That many of them joined make a Visible
object. 3. That this juncture is made by their own INNATE Motion.

Now 1. How well this agrees with Moses, Genesis 1. do you judge.

2. If such Atoms be the first matter of all things, and by meeting of them
all visible bodies be made, and they meet and are joined by their own innate
motion; then it is evident Adam was made of such Atoms, and they met in him,
(not by Gods appointment, and Divine-creating-power) but by their own innate
power, and so Epicurus (a Pagan Philosopher) and his Hypothesis, shall have
more truth and credit, than the Divine History of the Creation by Moses. And
how far this (if believed) may make for Atheism, a denying of Scripture, and
the Divine Power, and Providence of our infinitely good and gracious God, do
you judge: certainly if Atoms (or matter immutable in magnitude and figure, as
he says) be the first matter of the World, they must of necessity be either. 1.
Eternal, without, or 2. Temporal, with a beginning. To say, that those Atoms
are Eternal, is to deny the Christians Symbolum Athanasii in our Liturgy (and
all Christian Churches) received; and in our Articles, Art. Octavo.
Creed, wherein we say, (and should believe) that there is but one Eternal. And
if we had no Scripture, yet Nature, and the undoubted principles of our natural
Reason tell us, and efficaciously demonstrate, that there can be but one
Eternal. For whatever is eternal, of it self, and without all beginning, must
(of necessity) be infinite, (for nothing can give finitude or bounds to it
self; and whatever is eternal, cannot possibly have any thing before it, to
give it bounds, (and it is more impossible, that what is after it, and temporal,
should give bounds to an Eternal Being) so that if those Atoms be Eternal and
Infinite (as they must be, if they be Eternal) then they must be so many
Deities, or Gods; (for nothing but God can be Eternal and Infinite) and then
consider how many Gods we shall have; even as many as there are of those Atoms.

Now he tells us ( p. 124.) that perhaps a In minimo corpusculo continentur
multae Atomorum Myriades. vid. Philosophiam Epicuri, per Gassendum, cap. 6. p.
39. Edit. Londini, Anno. 1660.
Million of those Atoms do not make one corpusculum, or visible body; and then
how many Millions must go to make up all the Corpuscula, and corpora in the
World, will be a hard work for him, or any body else, to number, He then who
says, those Atoms are Eternal, brings in a (...), a multiplicity of Gods, and
so denies the only true God; for more than one true God there cannot be.

2. He says those Atoms have magnitude and motion (page 17, 18.) which no
Eternal and infinite thing, is capable of: as Aristotle Metaphysicorum lib. 14.
cap. 6. and Natural. Auscult. lib. 8. cap. 15.
Aristotle (from natural principles) has evidently proved. But if he say, (and
nothing else, can be said) that these Atoms are Temporary, and had a
beginning, I ask, when, and by whom did they begin. 1. It is said by him, (p.
17.) that they were the FIRST MATTER of the World. Ergo, they must be before
the World: (as the matter of an House must be, before a House can be made of
it) but if Moses say true, (Genesis 1.1.) In the beginning God Created the Heaven
and the Earth, etc no mention of Atoms. Heaven and Earth were created (says
Moses;) and all Jews and Christians say, that was ex nihilo, non ex Atomis, aut
materia ulla praexistenti.

Sed apage nugas, (quae Christianum Philosophum non sapiunt, sed Atheum, aut
Epicurum; qui creationem, (ne virtute quidam divina) Vid. notam Gassendi, ad
calcem cap. 5. Syntagmatis Philosophiae Epicuri. page 37. supra citat.
possibilem esse negabat) sunt Apinae tricaeque and si quid vilius istis, quas
refer pudet and piget refellere.

I am troubled (nor can I without some sorrow and impatience speak or think of
it) to see the Skepticism (to say no worse) which now securely reigns in our
miserable Nation; while some dare profess and publish irrational and wild
Notions in Philosophy and Divinity too; to the great prejudice of our Church
and Truth, and gratification of our adversaries (especially those of the Roman
faction) whose work we foolishly do for them (quod Ithacus Velit) and (without
hope of reward or thanks) ruin our selves gratis, whilst others (by Authority
and Duty) obliged to suppress such opinions, and punish their Authors, betray
their trust and truth, and either knowingly License, (which I am loath to
think) or negligently permit such Apocryphal and Erroneous positions to be
published, in veritatis damnum and Ecclesiae Anglicanae scandalum. God Almighty
be merciful to this bleeding Church (and Nation) and to every true Member of
either of them, to your self, and

Sir, Your faithful Servant. T.B

Another Letter to Sir J. B.
Sir,
I received yours, and return a thousand thanks. I am glad that neither you,
nor that excellent person (to whom you did innocently and prudently
communicate, what (sub sigillo) I communicated to you) do condemn my censure of
the Book I mentioned. I confess I am, and (a long time) have been not a little
troubled, to see Protestants, nay Clergymen, and Bishops, approve and
propagate, that which they miscall New-Philosophy; so that our Universities
begin to be infected with it, little considering the Cause or Consequences of
it, or how it tends evidently to the advantage of Rome, and the ruin of our
Religion.

1. It is certain this New-Philosophy (as they call it) was set on foot, and
has been carried on by the Arts of Rome, and those Vid. Juramentum Professionis
fidei (which all her Ecclesiastics take) in Concilio Trident, Sess. 24. De
Reformatione, in calce cap. 12.
whose Oath and Interest it is to maintain all her superstitions. Campanella de
Monarchia Hispaniae (I have lent out my Book and cannot cite you the page)
gives this advice to the King of Spain, to give large stipends to some persons
of great parts and wit, who may (in Flanders) propagate some new opinions in
Philosophy; tells him, that the Heretics (such as you and I, he means) are
greedy of novelty, and will be apt to receive such New opinions in Philosophy;
whence divisions and new opinions in Divinity will arise. By which divisions
(so set on foot, and well managed) the Heretics may (with much more ease) be
rooted out and ruined. Since which time, Papists (especially the Jesuits) have
promoted this New-Philosophy (and their new design to ruin us by it;) for the
great Writers and Promoters of it are of the Roman Religion: (such as Des
Carts, Gassendus, Du Hamel, Maurus, Mersennus, De Mellos, etc.) and what
divisions this new Philosophy has caused amongst Protestants in Holland and
England, cannot be unknown to any considering person. When I was (though
unworthy) Library Keeper, and seeing the Jesuits and Popish party cry up their
New-Philosophy; I did (by friends) send to Paris, Venice, Florence, Rome,
Alcala de Henares (Academia Complutensis in Spain, etc.) to inquire, whether
the Jesuits, in their Colleges, trained up their young men in the
New-Philosophy; or whether (in all their Disputations) they kept them to strict
form, and Aristotle's way of ratiocination? and the return I had from all
places was; That none were more strict than they, in keeping all their young
men, to the old principles and forms of Disputation. For they well know, that
all their Schoolmen, Casuists, and Controversy-Writers have so mixed
Aristotle's Philosophy, with their Divinity; that he who has not a
comprehension of Aristotle's Principles, and the use of them, in all Scholastic
Disputes, and Controversies of Religion, will never be able rationally to
defend or confute any controverted position, in the Roman or Reformed Religion.
Now, while they keep close to the old way of disputing, on the old received
Principles; if they can persuade us to spend our time about novel Whimsies, and
not well understood Experiments, and neglect the severer Studies of the old
Philosophy and Scholastical Divinity; they will (in all Divinity Disputations)
be every way too hard for us. Just so, as in this case: If I should challenge a
Man to fight a Duel with me, in the Field; and when we met there, if I could
persuade him to cast away his Sword, (or keep him from having any skill to use
it) I should certainly be too hard for him. A comprehension of the Principles
of the old Philosophy, and School Divinity, is a Weapon so necessary, for a
rational defense of any Question against Rome; that he who wants it, disables
himself to defend (and so betrays) the Truth: and this is unhappily manifest in
many of our late Scriblers, etc. I am

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. T. B.

Sir,
FOR the Case you propose, concerning a Coadjutor for an honest and learned
infirm and sick Bishop; I have neither time, nor ability to say much, or any
thing considerable. I received yours late the last Night, I consulted my Notes;
and I find Augustine. Barbosa de Canonicis and Dignitatibus, etc. Lugduni Ann.
1658.
a learned and late Canonist, has very much about Co-adjutors; but it is for
Co-adjutors to Archdeacons, and dignified men, below the Order of Bishops. But
Cardinal Tuschus Conclus. Practicarum Juris. litera C. verb Coadjutor.
Conclus. 402, 403.
Tuschus has many things about Co-adjutors to Bishops; whom you well know, and
may (at your leisure) consult.

Whether our Provincial or Legatine Constitutions, or Linwood or John de Aton
in their Glosses upon them, have any thing concerning Co-adjutors, or no, I
have no time to seek. If they have, it must be under the word Coadjutor or
Suffraganeus. For I find that in the Canon Law, he who is usually called
Coadjutor, is also called Cap. Suffraganei. 11. extra. de electione, and electi
protestate.
Suffraganeus, and (I doubt not but) the Gloss and Panormitan upon the
Chapter, will tell you more. But that which will most effectually do your
business in this particular, concerning a Co-adjutor, is the Statute of Henry
Statut. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 24.
the VIII. which is still in force. For although it was abrogated in Queen 1,
and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.
Mary's time, yet it was received in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and so is now
1 Eliz. cap. 2.
obligatory. By which Statute it appears.

1. That for a Bishop to have a Co-adjutor, or (as the Statute calls him) a
Suffragan to assist him, was no new thing, but of ancient use, in England,
before Henry the VIII.

2. That any Bishop, not only in England, but any of the Kings Dominions (and
therefore in Ireland) might, if he desired it, have a suffragan.

3. That such Suffragan or Co-adjutor, was to have no Revenue, or Jurisdiction,
in his Diocese, whose Suffragan he was; save what the Bishop should by
Commission under his Seal allow him, and only for such time as he allowed.

4. That such Suffragan, for his better maintenance, might keep any two Livings
with cure.

5. And his residing in the Diocese of which he was the Suffragan, should free
him from residence on any Living he had with cure.

6. But then he who desired a Suffragan, was to name two to the King, and he
was to approve one, (the Pope did it before,) who was to be consecrated by the
Metropolitan, and really made a Bishop.

By the Premises, and the foregoing Statute, which is still in force and
obligatory; it may (and I believe) does manifestly appear;

1. That a Co-adjutor or Suffragan Bishop is, quoad Ordinem, really and
properly a Bishop, being consecrated to that office by his Metropolitan.

2. That he has Liberam Ordinis executionem, he may Ordain and Confirm, etc. in
that Diocese, where he is a Suffragan.

3. That being really a Bishop, he may validly Ordain and Confirm, and (with
the leave of the Bishop of the Diocese) lawfully too, in any other Diocese.

4. That to be such a Bishop, and able to execute the Episcopal Office, in all
the parts of it, is a great honor to him, for (whatever our fanatics may now
say to the contrary) the whole Christian World for 1500. years, judged it so;
and (a few Scotch and Fierce Presbyterians, and Independents only excepted)
even the Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, who have no Bishops, are of the
same judgment.

5. To be such a Suffragan Bishop, will be a great profit and privilege to
him. For besides what the Bishop whose Co-adjutor he is, will allow him; he may
hold two Livings, with the privilege of Non-residence.

6. If he demean himself piously and diligently, in his Office, as a Suffragan;
it will be a great and most probable means to prefer him to a Bishopric of his
own, which may be to many a great encouragement, to undertake the Office of a
Suffragan.

7. And this Law and Statute is a good security to him, who has a Suffragan;
seeing that Suffragan can have no more Revenue or Jurisdiction, or for any
longer time, than is conveyed to him by the commission of him, whose Suffragan
he is.

8. To have such a Suffragan, is the most conscientious and safe way, that
Pious and Learned Prelate you mention, can take, in this his sickness and
infirmity. For if none of our Bishops, this hundred years, have been condemned,
for not executing the Offices of their Calling, when Sickness, Age and
Infirmities disabled them, although they had no Co-adjutor; certainly, your
friend will be commended, who carefully provides a Suffragan to do those things
which (through sickness and infirmities) he could not do himself.

Your affectionate Friend and humble Servant. T. L.

My Honored Friend;
THE two Queries you proposed, (and require my Opinion, and Answer) are these;
1. Of the Original of Sine-Cures, and the Reason and End of their Constitution.
2. Concerning Pensions paid out of Ecclesiastical Benefices.

For the first; The Original of Sine-Cures, is, (at least to me) like that of
Nilus. -- Natura maluit ortus mirari, quam nosse tuos. That there are
Sine-Cures, we all know, but when they begun, or how they came, few, or (may
be) none of us can distinctly determine. However, (in obedience to your
command) I shall say something, though (may be) not much to your satisfaction.

1. Then, it is certain, that a Sine Cure is Beneficium Ecclesiasticum,
consisting of Tithes, Glebe-Land, etc. and so of some part of the Sacred
Patrimony of the Church.

2. It Is confessed too, and received for certain, on this side, and beyond the
Sea, (by our own, and the Canon Lawyers) that Beneficium Ecclesiasticum, is
either 1. Vide Duarenum, De Beneficiis, lib. 2. cap. 5, 6, 7, 8. Card. Tuschum
Conclus. Practicarum Juris, Tom. 1. verbo Beneficium Conclus. 60, 63.
Cum dignitate, as a Bishopric, Arch-Deaconry, etc. 2. Cum Cura, sine
dignitate, ut Paraecia, a Rectory, or Vicary. 3. Sine dignitate, and Cura, quae
Beneficia nuda and simplicia dicuntur; ut Praebendae and Canonicatus. Thus
Duarenus, Card. Tuschus, and the Roman Canonists. So that (with them) a
Sine-Cure is an Ecclesiastical Living, without Dignity, or Cure of Souls. And
the Statut. 21 Hen 8. cap. 13 in the last Proviso save four.
Law of England has (much to the same purpose) told us, in express terms, That
Deanrys, Arch Deaconrys, Chancellorships, Treasurerships, Chanterships,
(Chancellors, Treasurers, and Chanters in Cathedral Churches are meant;)
Prebends, in any Church; Parsonages, where a Vicar is endowed, and all
perpetually Appropriations was the word then, the word Impropriation was
unheard of, till Abbeys were pulled down, and ^^^tories and Tithes ca^^ (...)
^^y-mens hands, (...).
appropriated Benefices, are Sine-Cures. So that our Law acknowledges many
kinds of Sine-Cures, more than there are, in our vulgar, and common acceptance
of that word. For we commonly take Sine-Cures, for Parochial Tithes and
Glebe-Land, the Ecclesiastical Revenue of a Parish (or some part of it)
possessed by some one person who takes no pains for it, nor has any Cure of
Souls. However this Statute may give us any Authentic ground to state the
Question, as to that part of it, what a Sine-Cure is? Thus How Appropriations
came in? See Seldom of Tithes cap. 6. 3, 4.
Appropriation (the word in the Statute) is the Alienation of Tithes, and the
Church-Revenue (Glebe-Land, Oblations, etc.) from the Parochial Incumbent, to
some body else. And this twofold, 1. So that the Cure of Souls was likewise
alienated, and went along with the Appropriation, and charged on those to whom
such impropriation was made. And thus it happened in all Appropriations, where
no Vicar was endowed; for then those who had the Appropriation, were bound to
see the Cure supplied. And such Appropriations could not be called Sine-Cures;
because the Cure of those Souls in the Parish whose Tithes were appropriated,
lay upon those who had the Appropriation. 2. When there was a Vicar endowed, on
whom the Cure of Souls lay; and the Appropriation was properly a Sine-Cure;
because they who had the Appropriation, possessed the Sacred Patrimony of the
Parish, without any Cure of Souls annexed.

A Sine-Cure then (in general) is, and consists in the Ecclesiastical Revenue
of a Parish (or part of it) alienated from the Parochial Incumbent, (and
appropriated to some other) where there is a Vicar endowed, to whom the Cure of
Souls belongs; so that those who possessed the Appropriation are Sine-Cure, and
freed from the Cure of Souls. I say, the whole, or part of the Revenue, may be
alienated, and appropriated in such Sine Cura. If the whole Tithes, and
Glebe-Land, and other Obventions be appropriated, then the Vicar, on whom the
Cure of Souls lies, must be endowed with a set and certain stipend in So
Vpton-Gray in Hampshire is an Appropriation belonging to Q. Coll. in Oxon. the
College has all the Tithes, and the Vicar 20 l. per Annum in money.
Money; so as they who possessed the Appropriation enjoy the whole Parochial
Revenue. If only some part of the Parochial Revenue be appropriate, then the
remainder is the indowment of the Vicar, whether it be in the small Tithes,
Easter-Book, etc. (which is the usual endowment of Vicaridges) or whether the
Parish be divided, so as all the Tithes (great and small) of part of the
Parish, be Assigned to the Vicar, and all the rest (great and small)
appropriated. As in some Sine-Cures in Wales in the Diocese of St. Asaph, the
Tithes (of some Towns and Villages (great and small) are appropriated; and all
the remainder of Tithes great or small) of other Villages, belong to the Vicar.
Now such alienation and appropriati^^ of all or part of the Tithes, where there
is a V^caridge endowed, (which is properly a Sine Cure) may be either,

1. To a Corporation or Soeiety, as to Colleges, Abbeys, Monasteries,
Nunneries, Hospitals, etc. (for many such appropriations were made, and
approved in the Gratian. Can. Quoniam 68. Cause. 26. Quest. 1. Gratian cites
Hierome for it; but Hierome has no such thing, nor were Tithes heard of in his
time. I confess, that Juo Carnotens. has that same thing which Gratian says,
Epist. 207. writ about the year, 1130.
Canon Law;) and the best of our Rectories in England were thus appropriated.

2. To particular Persons, Note, The Livings in England were 9284. of these,
3845. (and the best of them, you may be sure) were appropriated to Societies,
or single persons. Weever's Funeral Monuments. p. 183. Edit. Land. 1631.
as to an Archdeacon; so the Rectory of Iphlay to the Archdeacon of Oxon,
(there is a Vicaridge (but meanly) endowed) to which the Arch Deacon has no
Institution. Or to a Canon or Prebend of a Church, so many Prebends in
Cathedral Churches are founded in some Living appropriate, which is their
Corpse, and the Principal part of their Revenue. Or to some public Professor;
so the Rectory of Shipton near Oxon, to our Law Professor, (though a Layman)
who is not capable of Presentation or Institution, as even our common Hobarts
reports 1631. p. 149.
Lawyers confess.

And it must be further noted, that such Sine-Cures, which might be, and were,
and are given to single persons; are either,

1. Such as were given to a Succession of Persons, in such an Office; as to an
Archdeacon, Canon or Prebend, or a Professor of Law, in the University, etc.
and such Sine-Cures are rather given to the Office, to which they are
appendent; and to the person only, as he is in that Office.

2. Or such as were, and are given particularly to a person for his life; and
after his Death, may be given to any other person, whom the Patron shall think
fit: whether the Patron Vid. Linwo^d de cohabit. Clericorum and mulier. ut
Clericatus. Verbo, Beneficiati in Glossa. Provincial. lib 3. p. 64. Edit.
Paris. 1505.
be the King, a Bishop, or That Laymen held Ti^bes and the Ecclesiastical
Revenues of Churches, by the g^ft of the King and Laymen without institution
or induction (which were Sine-Cures) and he says, that they held them, non ^t
be eficium; sed prop^ietatem; and therefore as Lay-fees. How justly, I dispute
not now. Linwood. loc. dicto.
Layman. For the King (I have heard) has some such Sine-Cures in his gift. The
Bishop of St. Asaph, has about 25, or 26. in his gift, and the Earl of Thanet
gave me the Sine-Cure of Hartfield in Sussex, worth clearly 200 l. per Annum,
Though I received only 60. l. per Annum; and let the Vicar (an honest able man,
who Preached twice a day, and served the Cure) to receive all the rest.

3. And if it be demanded how particular persons (and sometimes Laymen) came
to have such portions of Tithes and Rectories (as Sine-Cures) given to them?
Linwood there tells us -- Linwood Ibidem verbo, Beneficiati. in principio.
SAEPE VIDEMVS (it was, it seems an usual thing then) quod CLERICIS ETIAM de
bonis Ecclesiasticis, in certis redditibus percipiendis, quaedam assignantur,
ad suam exhibitionem and sustentationem, pro certis laboribus and oneribus
subeundis, ad ipsorum vitam, etc. And I have been told (by a good Civilian)
that such Sine-Cures have been made, and given to some Priest (in the time of
Popery) to maintain him at Rome, (and in his Journey thither) that he might buy
and learn there the Arts of that cunning Court, solicit business, and be
serviceable to his Country and Friends at home.

Lastly, But if it be demanded concerning the Original of appropriating
Parochial Tithes, and making Rectories of Sine-Cures? I say, 1. We never hear
of Tithes for many Ages, in the Primitive Church. In the Extat gr. lat. in 8vo.
per Justellum Paris. 1610. and in Bibliotheca Juris Canonici Veteris, per
Justellum. Par. 1661.
Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Universae (the most Authentic Book in the World, next
the Bible) which contains the Canons received by the Universal Church, till the
year 451. there is not one word of Tithes. The Clergy were then liberally
maintained, by the free oblations ((...), they called them) of the people. The
Peoples Charity and kindness to the Clergy, was great then, and so were their
oblations for their maintenance. But the case is much altered; and the people
so far from giving freely, that they will seldom pay, what is (by law) due;
sure the people then were much better Christians, or we of the Clergy now worse.

2. But I find not Tithes, (and the payment of them) established here in
England, till the end By King Offa's Charter. Anno. 786. See Seldom of Tithes,
cap. 8. 2. p. 198.
of the eighth or the middle of the ninth Seldom, Ibidem. 4. page 204. and page
209.
Century; and the division of England into Parishes, not before Honorius
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the year 636. so that the division of Parishes
being so late, and Tithes not established, till the end of the eighth or middle
of the ninth Century; it is certain, that the appropriation of Tithes, could not
be before Tithes and Parishes were established: but how soon after they came to
be alienated, and made Sine-Cures, I know not, nor have I time to search.

One thing material in this business of Sine-Cures is: that heretofore
Donatives and Sine-Cures, might be in Laymens hands. Since our late Act of
Uniformity. 14. Car. 2. none but a Priest is made capable of them: a Layman
(by that Act) is made incapable; see the Be it further enacted. Next after the
Declaration against the Covenant, etc.

I am Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant. T. L.

My honored Friend,
IN a former Letter, you asked a Question about Pensions paid to others, out of
Ecclesiastical Livings? about the payment of them, at home, and abroad?

The Question may be 1. De facto, what has been done in this case. 2. De Jure,
what justly might be done.

Now, de Facto, it is evident, that Pensions have been paid out of
Eccles^astical Livings.

1. To the Pope, as Annatae, Primitiae, Anni primi fructus, or first fruits.
And I find the Canonists call them (in the Neuter Gender) Dua^^nus de
Beneficiis. lib. 6. cap. 4. p. 83.
Annuum, so that Annuum solvere, signifies the same as Annatas, primitias, aut
unius Anni fructus solvere: When these Annats Sanctio Pragmaticae cum Gl^ssis.
Paris. 1613. p. 1009. and in Editione ultima. Paris. 1666. p. 468.
began, how they were Vid dictam Sanctionem, Edit. 1613. p. 630, 631, etc.
fuse, and Editionis, 1666. p. 465, etc.
paid, and condemned at home and abroad, the Authors in the Margent tell us,
especially the Sanctio Pragnatica (Caroli 7. Galliarum Regis) and the large
Glosses upon it, in the places cited. And (to omit others) Lib. 6. cap. 3, 4.
and sequentibus.
Duarenus de Beneficiis, has fully handled the business of Annats. And (you
know) Cowels Interpreter, Verbo, Annats, and Spelman's Glossary, Verbo,
Annatae, give an account of them. So does my Lord Institut. part. 4. p. 120.
Cook too, In whom we may clearly see, that the Story Spelman has out of
Platina (that Annats were first brought in by Boniface. 9. Anno 1400.) is
untrue; for Annats demanded here in England, and denied by Ed. 3. in the second
year of his reign, which was Anno Christi 1327. and so 73 years before.

But though the Council of Council. Basiliense, An. 1431. Sessio. 21.
Basil damned the payment of Annats; yet they were paid here, till Hen. VIII.
Statut. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 3. H. 1. Eliz. cap. 4.
annexed them for ever to the Crown. Miseris malorum altior sensus, I speak
this more feelingly, because I am to pay the King above 800 l. for these scurvy
Popish Annats.

2. Besides, Decimae, or Tenths were paid to the Pope, and now to our Kings,
and are likely to be so for ever, for our Statutes call it, Statut. An. 2. and
3. cap. 35. and in the end of the Sanctio Pragmatica Edite Paris. 1613. page
1009. we are told, that the K. of France has the Tenths which the Pope had
before.
a perpetual Disme, and for ever, 26. Hen. VIII. chap. 3.

3. Besides these, there were many other payments out of Ecclesiastical
Livings; which they called Corrodia, Othoboni Constitutio. Vo^entes. Verbo,
Liberationes.
Liberationes (so they were commonly called, at least here in England.) Now for
these Corrodia, Liberationes or Pensiones (for by all these names they are
called) we may have the whole nature of them explained (as what they were, who
might impose them, on whom, for how long, etc.) in many Authors (Foreign and
Domestic, of our own and other Nations;) I shall only name a few; and in
reading them you will find a hundred more cited who writ on the same subject.

1. In the Canon Law, (which you know better then I) Decret. Greg. lib. 3. Tit.
39. De Censibus, Exact. and Procurat, there are many chap. about this business.
As cap. Scientes. 3. and cap. 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 15, etc.

2. Panormitan on those Chapters; and Cardinal Turrecremata, ad Can. Quaesitum
est. 4. Cause. 1. Quaest. 3.

3. Linwood Provincial. lib. 2. De Rebus Ecclesiae non alienandis. cap. ut
secundum, 2.

4. Othoboni Constitutio. Quia plerumqu; De his, qui pactionem faciunt cum
praesentato. mihi page 105. cum Glossis Johan. De Aton Canonici Lincolinensis:
and ejusdem Othoboni Constitutio. Volentes. Quod nulli Religiosi vendant, vel
assignent aliis Liberationes, seu Corrodia. Ita enim habet summarium, dictae
constitutioni praefixum, page 126. Col. 3.

5. Cowels Interpreter. Verbo, Corrodium. Spelman's Glossary: verbo, corrodium.

6. Duarenus de Beneficiis, lib. 6. cap. 3, 4, etc.

7. And (to omit others) Covarruvius Institutionum Moralium, Tom. 2. lib. 8.
cap. 5, 6, 7, etc. fully explains this whole business about Ecclesiastical
Pensions, what they are, and how far permitted in the Roman-Church.

1. In England, the King has by Statut. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 3. and 1. Elizab. cap.
4.
Law, out of Ecclesiastical Dignities and Livings;

1. Primitiae, Annatae, or first fruits of all Arch-bishopricks, etc.

2. Tenths of all Vicaridges (as well as Arch-bishopricks, Bishoprics, etc.)
above In the Statute 26. Hen. 8. cap. 3. in the last Proviso save two; entry
Parsonage, or Vicaridge above 8. Marks in the Kings Books, paid first fruits,
etc.
10 l. per Annum, in the Kings Books; and of all Personages above 8. Marks in
the said Books.

3. There besides these, many Corrodies, Pensions and Annual Fees (named so in
Statut. 1. Eliz. cap 4.
the Statutes) are payable to the King out of many Ecclesiastical Livings.

2. Not only the Kings, but Bishops now have many Pensions payable to them out
of Ecclesiastical Dignities, and Parsonages, Vicarages, Hospitals, etc. so the
Bishop of Lincoln (your servant) has many small Pensions (many great Manors
being taken from that Bishopric) which we call sometime praestations, sometime
Pensions, paid to him.

1. By the 6. Archdeacons in that Diocese, some paying 5. l. some 10. l. per
Annum, some more.

2. By about 150. Parsonages, Vicarages, Hospitals, etc. the Pensions small.
And I know, that other Bishoprics and Colleges, etc. have such Pensions
payable to them out of Ecclesiastical and Parochial Benefices.

3. And it seems, that anciently the Bishops and Ordinaries had power to lay
such Pensions upon Benefices; (The Statut. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 3. And be it also
ordained.
Statute implies as much) provided, it were not above one third part of the
value of the whole Benefice. But then (the Popish lawyers Covar ruvius
Institut. Moralium Tom. 2. lib. 8. cap. 6. p. 943, 945.
tell us, that) there is Pensio duplex.

1. Quae Beneficio imponitur, which is perpetual, and paid out of the Benefice
successively, who ever be Incumbent: and they say no Bishop can lay any such
Pension on a Benefice.

2. Quae Beneficiario imponitur, and this is temporary, payable only by that
person on whom it is imposed; and when he dies, cease. And they grant,
Bishops might impose such Pensions.

4. De Facto, thus it was; But Quaeritur de Jure. What Is past, I shall not
question. What has been done heretofore, they who did it, have (before this)
answered for it. But pro futuro, I conceive neither the King, (nor any other
much less) can lay any such pension upon any Ecclesiastical Living, so as to
oblige the present incumbent to pay it.

1. Because it is against our Magna Charta, 25. Ed. 1. cap. 6. And the Statute
de T^llagio non conc^dendo. cap. 1. In my Lord Cook's Institut. part. 2. p. 532.
and many Statutes, to take from any Subject, any part or penny of what is
their's, without their consent in Parliament.

2. And (if I may speak freely what I think) I believe, it is not in the power
of the Parliament, to alienate any of the Church Revenue, to any other use,
than that sacred one to which they were given: and this I believe is
demonstrable from the principles of Nature and Scripture, from the Civil,
Canon, and our Common-Lawers; and from principles received by Divines and
Lawyers of all Conditions and Countries. But to prove this Heretical position
(for so many think it) will require more pains and paper (and possibly more
abilities) than you expect, or are like to find in.

Oxon Sept. 29. 1676. Your faithful Friend and Servant. T. L.

Sir,
ONE thing (in your last) about first Fruits, and Tenths, I forgot in my Answer
to your long and kind Letter: and have now only time to tell you, (what, I
believe, you better know) that what we commonly call first fruits the Popish
Canonists call Annatae, or Annates; because they were one years Revenue, of all
vacant Ecclesiastical Benefices, paid to the Pope. To which he had no right, by
any Law of God or Man, but by Tyranny and unjust usurpation, and great
oppression of the poor Clergy.

When Hen. VIII. (by Statute) forbad Annates and Tenths to be any more paid to
the Pope; the Act passed, with great willingness and joy to the Clergy; who
believed, that they should never pay them any more. But this they were mistaken
in; for what the Pope had most tyranically, and (by oppression) most injustly
got, Hen. VIII. kept to himself. So that the burden lies still heavy upon the
Clergy, only (the Pope being cast off) they have a better Landlord.

But I need not say any more of Annats or Tenths; you know that Spelman, In
Glossario. Verbo, Annatae.
Cowel, His Interpreter. Verbo Annats.
my Lord Cook, Institutes, part. 4. p. 120.
Bzovius, In Continuatione Annalium Baronii, Tom. 15. ad Annum, 1397. 4. p.
143, Col. 2.
The Gallican Sanctio Pragmatica, Sanctio Pragmatica cum Glossis. Paris. 1666.
p. 468. Col. 2. C.D. and eadem Sanctio Edita Paris. Anno. 1613. p. 1009 and
Concilium Basiliense. Sess. 21. De Annatis.
with its Glosses, and many others, have given us a full account of their
Original, and the Injustice and iniquity of that Papal Imposition.

Sure I am, that in Impropriate Livings, the payment of Tenths, usually lies on
the poor Vicars, who (as you well observe) since the Reformation, and the
ceasing of Oblations, (which in times of Popery, were very great,) are many of
them so very poor, that none will take Institution to them, that making them
liable to pay Tenths; and therefore we are necessitated, to let them hold such
small Livings by Sequestration, otherwise the poor people can have no Preaching
or Prayers.

It were a great work of Charity, worthy the care and piety of our gracious
King and Parliament, to find a Remedy for this, etc. I am,

Buckden Jan. 2. 1682. Your affectionate Friend and Servant. Tho. Lincoln.

A Letter of the vast Subsidy given by the Clergy to Henry the VIII.
Sir,
WHAT you say, of the Susidy the Clergy gave to Henry V. in Chichley's time,
That you cannot find what, and how much it came to; I am of your opinion, (and
for the reason you give) that the particular sum it came to, cannot now be
distinctly known.

But I can tell you of a far greater Subsidy given to Hen. VIII. in Woolsey's
time by the Convocation, Anno. 1523. which was no less than one entire half of
every Ecclesiastical Persons Revenue, for one year.

This all Natives of England paid to the King; and all Strangers beneficed in
England, (and of such there were then many) paid one whole years Revenue, (only
Erasmus, Polydore, Virgil, and three or four more, who had Ecclesiastical
Preferments here, excepted;) now do you Judge, what a vast sum this must
make, when all Natives of England gave one half years revenue of all their
Ecclesiastical Preferments, and all Strangers (some few excepted) gave one
whole years Revenue. This Dr. Burnet tell's you in the 1. part of his History
of the Reformation, p. 21. And gives you the Authentic Record for it, in the
end of that first part of his History, amongst the Collection of Records, lib.
1. number. 5. page 7, 8. where you will have the motives, which moved the Clergy
then to give such a prodigious subsidy.

I can say no more at present, save that I am,

Your affectionate friend and obliged servant. Tho. Lincoln.

A Letter to Mr. R. S.
WHAT you say of our late Antiquities, is too true; we are alarmed by many
Letters, not only of false Latin, but false English too, and many bad
Characters cast on good Men, especially on the Anti-Arminians, who are all
(especially Dr. Prideaux) made seditious persons, Schismatics, if not
Heretics; nay our first Reformers (out of Pet. Heylin's angry and (to our
Church and Truth) scandalous writings) are made Fanatics. This they tell me,
and our Judges of assize (now in Town) say no less.

I have not read one leaf of the Book yet; but (I see) I shall be necessitated
to read it over, that I may with my own Eyes see the faults, and (so far as I
am able) endeavor the mending of them. Nor do I know any other way, but a new
Edition, with a real correction of all faults, and a declaration that those
miscarriages cannot justly be imputed to the University (as indeed they cannot)
but to the passion and imprudence (if not impiety) of one or two, who betrayed
the trust reposed in them, in the managing the Edition of that Book. I am of
your opinion, that if good Dr. C. would finish and communicate his
animadversions, he would do a kind office, (p^us vident oculi quam oculus;)
though (I hope) we shall (being now awakened) set those to work about that
Book, whose eyes and care will be critical enough, to see (without Spectacles)
and (without partiality) to correct the errors, which either ignorance or
disorderly passions have produced.

God Almighty bless you, all yours, and

(Sir,) Your most obliged, faithful and thankful Servant. T. B.

Another Letter to Mr. R. S. about the same Subject.
Sir,
FOR the Antiquitates Universitatis Oxon. (which you mention) The Author was
one Mr. Wood, of Merton College, who writ them in English; but they were put
into Latin at Christ-Church, by the Order and authority of the Dean. And (as
you truly observe) the Latin is very bad, and indeed very In the Epi^t^e to
the King, in the beginning of it, Commentariis boni consulat, is not Latin,
etc.
false many times. The Translators subscribe the Authors Epistle with his name
(which in English was Anthony Wood) Antonius a Wood; had they said, Antonius a
Sylva, it had been Latin, but Antonius a Wood, is neither Latin nor Sense.

The truth is, not only the Latin, but the History it self, is in many things
ridiculously false, p. 114. libri 2. They say that Burgus subtus Stainesmoram,
is in Cumberland; whereas all know that it is in Westmoreland, about 20. miles
distant from Cumberland. In that 2. Book, page 122. They say, that I was born
in vico vocato Orton: whereas I was born in no Village at all, but in a single
house, two miles from Orton. In the 1. Book of those Antiquities, p. 285, 286.
you have a story told (in English and Latin) to make our Reformation and
Reformers ridiculous: and in that p. 286. The Translater makes himself
ridiculous, for his gross Ignorance. For speaking of one, who was Clericus
Signetti, (as he calls it) that we might know what the Signettum was he adds,
-- Sigillum ita Regium privatum nuncupamus: so that if his Latin and Logic be
true, the Signet and Privy Seal are one and the same thing: which (I believe)
that Excellent and Worthy Person, my Lord Privy Seal, will not allow. Mr. Wood,
(who was the compiler of those Antiquities) was himself too favorable to
Papists; and has often complained to me, that at Christ-Church, somethings were
put in, which neither were in his Original Copy, nor approved by him. The truth
is; not only the Latin, but also the Matter of those Antiquities, being
erroneous in several things, may prove scandalous, and give our Adversaries
some occasion to censure not only the University, but the Church of England and
our Reformation.

Sure I am, that the University had no hand in composing or approving those
Antiquities, and therefore the Errors which are in them, cannot (de jure) be
imputed to the University, but must lie upon Christ-Church and the composer of
them. I am Sir,

Your faithful Servant, etc.

Some Quotations out of B. Barlow's Manuscript-Answer to Mr. Hobbs Book of
Heresy wherein is proved the Papists gross Hypocrisy, in the putting Heretics
to Death.
WHEN the Church of Rome delivers over some impious and degraded person to the
secular Power, to be punished with Death (for to that end they Ad hoc sit ista
traditio ut puniatur morte. Ho^i^nsis apud Pano^m. ad Caput, n^^imus, 27. 8.
extra de v^rb. sig. and Aquinas 2. 2. Qu. 11 and A^^. 3. relinquit j^dicio
saeculari exterminan^^m per mort^m. So Linwood, Lib. 5. de h^ereticis. cap. 1.
Verbo paena in gl.
deliver him;) then the Bishop who delivers him to the Secular power
Intercedes, Efficaciter and ex Cord (so says the Rubric) for the person in
these words -- Pontificale Romanum Romae 1610. p. 456. vid. cap. novimus 27.
extra de verborum sig. and Panorm. ibid. 8. 9.
Domine Judex, r^gamus vos, cum omni Affectu, quo possumus, ut amore Dei,
Pietatis and misericordiae intuitu, and nostrorum interventu precaminum,
miserimo huic nullam Mortis vel mutilationis periculum Inferatis. Now this is
strange Hypocrisy, for the Secular Magistrate can neither alter, nor The
Secular Magistrate must believe not examine the Sentence of the Ecclesiastical
Judge. Cook s reports part 5. de Jure Regio eccle. p. 7. Edit. London, 1612.
moderate the Sentence, but (if otherwise he will not) must be compelled to
execute it. Vid. (...) ad bullam Alexandri Papae 4. in bullario Cherubini tom.
1. p. 116. and Council. Trid. sess. 25. C. 20. de Reformat. in Criminal Capit,
Edit. Antwerp. 1633. p. 623. cogantur omnes Principes, etc.
Cogendi sunt magistratus and officiales quicunque ad exequendum sententias,
etc. So that Luther justly said -- Articulo 33. inter artic. a Leone 10.
damnatos.
sic verbis ludunt, in mortibus Innocentium. Nor does Roffensis operum, p. 642.
Roffensus (though he endeavors it) give any just Answer or Apology for that
their practice.

And Panormitan instead of answering the objection, does indeed confirm it, for
when he had told us, that the Prelate who delivers the condemned and degraded
person to the Secular Judge should intercede for him, Panormit. ubi supra ad
cap. novimus. 27. extra de verborum sig. 8.
Dicendo quod ille est Imago Dei, and reducit sibi ad memoriam multos, qui post
delicta atrocia egerunt paenitentiam, ut in Petro Apostolo, Maria Magdalena and
similibus, Then he cites the opinion of Hostiensis (a great Canonist,) who
expressly says, That whatever Intercession the Prelate may make to the Secular
Judge, for the Malefactor delivered to him, his intention is that he must
execute him; for to that very end he delivers him. And this is evident by the
authentic Constitutions of the Popes, which gives the Inquisitors power
Cogendi quoscunque magistratus ad exequendum eorum sententias constit. 17.
Alexandri. 4. in bullario cherubim. tom 1. p. 116. and quocunque nomine
censeantur. ibid. 1. p. 117. and they must execute the sentence absque
sententiae revisione. Leo 10. Constitut. 43. Ediri. Tom. 1. p. 456.
Quicquid dicatur a Praelato, ad hoc fit ista traditio, ut puniatur morte.
That Is his desire and purpose, though he pretends to pray for moderation and
mercy. And then he adds; that the common opinion is, that such intercession
with the secular Judge, has no reality in it -- Solet Communiter dici, quod
ista intercessio, est potius pefucata and colorata, quam effectualis.

So that I have Hostiensis and the common opinion of the time, Floruit circa
Ann 1440. And. Quensted de triis and Scriptis virorum strium in Nicholao
Tudesc. which was Panormit name.
in which Panormitan writ, of my opinion: that such intercession is delusory
and hypocritical; and the Prelate seems only to ask that, which he desires not,
and knows that the Judge neither dare, nor can do it; the delinquent being
delivered up to the Secular Power to that very Ad quid Ergo tradit; seculari
potestati, cum ipsa eccles. p^test cum punire paena minor^. Pan. ibid. 8.
end, that he may be executed.

Well, but Panormitan seems not to approve this, as being scandalous to the
Church, and against the Letter of the Canon. And therefore he adds -- Certe
isti non been dicunt, and videntur dicere contra textum, qui dicit, Efficaciter
Innocentius 3. dicto cap. Novimus 27. extra de verb. sig.
Intercedendum, Ergo non fuco. No doubt they do speak against that Text, and
the practice of the Popish Prelates, in this their hypocritical intercession;
(though Pope Innocent be for it, his infallibity being neither believed nor
known in those times (the time of Panormitan) no less than three general
Councils of their own, Council. Pisanum Ann. 1409. Sess. 14. Constantinense
Council. anno. 1414. Sess. 12. and Sess. 37. Council. Basiliense Anno 1431. Sess.
34. Panorm. erat. 1. Abbas 2. Archiepiscopus Panormitanus and Cardinalis.
Obiit. Anno 1443. Labbe descript. in Nicholas Tudeschio.
having deposed several Popes, as Heretics, within less than forty years
before) nor has Panormitan any thing to justify that practice, or to free them
from deep dissimulation, and inexcusable Hypocrisy.

A Letter to Mr. R. T. concerning the Canon Law allowing the Whipping of
Heretics as practiced by Bishop Bonner at his house at Fulham.
FOR your Story of Bp. Bonner's cruelty I have read it, in the Book of
Martyr's. Such punishments (by Whipping, Cudgelling, etc.) Cap. Cum fortius. 1.
extra de Calumniatoribus.
the Canon Law allows, even of their own men in Orders (after degradation) when
they are highly peccant. And a learned Popish Author (in a Book purposely writ
to prove the Popes Supreme co-ercive Joseph Stephanus Valentinus de Potestate
coactiva quam Romanus Pontifex exercet in Saecularia, etc. Romae. 1586. p. 209.
power, even to desposing Kings and Emperors, and Dedicated to Sixtus 5. (or
Size-cinque, as Q. Elizabeth called him) I say that Author tells of a Rescript
of Alexander the 3d. Quo Panormitanus Pontifex jubebatur loris flagrisque
caedere criminis peracios, eo solo temperamento adhibito, ne flagella in
sanguinis effusionem exirent. So careful he was, that no blood should be shed,
and yet that very Pope Alexander the 3d. raised Armies, and murdered many
thousands of the poor Waldenses.

I am Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant. T. B.
Buckden Nov. 4. 1679.
A Letter to the Earl of Anglesey Answering two Questions, whether the Pope be
Antichrist. And whether Salvation may be had in the Church of Rome.
I Have had the Honor, and Comfort to receive your Lordships very kind Letter;
and this comes to bring (with my humble Service and Duty, which are both due)
my hearty thanks, for your continued, though undeserved kindness. For the two
Queries your Lordship mentions; they are (at this time, and in those
Circumstances we, and our Church now are) most considerable; and indeed,
deserve and require our timely and serious consideration: whether we will serve
God or Baal? That is, whether we will (Notwithstanding our danger, or Death)
with a generous and Christian courage and constancy, maintain and profess our
own Protestant Religion; or for fear, worldly ends and interest, embrace the
many gross Errors, Superstition and stupid Idolatry of the Church of Rome. This
I say, because I find it, in a late Pamphlet positively affirmed, that the
difference between the Church of England and Rome is little, only about some
disputable Questions, which do not hinder Salvation; seeing it is confessed by
Protestant Divines, that Salvation may be had in the Popish Church; and more
cannot be had in that of Protestants. So that it may seem to some, to be an
indifferent thing, whether we be Papists or Protestants; whether of the Roman
or reformed Religion. I pray God forgive them who believe and propagate this
pernicious Opinion, and give them the knowledge and Love of the truth. But that
I may come to the two Querirs. The first is, whether the Pope be Antichrist,
and to this I say,

1. That (though it be not much material what my Judgment is in this
particular, yet) I do really believe the Pope to be Antichrist. Some Reasons I
have given why I think so in my last Brutum fulmen, or the Bull of the Pius, 5.
etc. Observations. 8. page 181.
Pamphlet, and have endeavored to show the groundless vanity of Grotius his
opinion, who would have Cajus Caligula; and Doctor Hammonds, Who would have
Simon Magus to be Antichrist.

2. The most Learned and Pious Divines of England, ever since the Reformation,
(and of Foreign Churches too) have been of the same Opinion, and Judged the
Pope to be Antichrist: so Jewel, Raynolds, Whitaker, Usher, etc. the
Translators of our Bible into English, in King James his time, call the In the
Epistle of the Translators of the Bible to King James, perfixed to our English
Bibles of that Translation.
Pope THAT MAN OF SIN, and in both our Universities, the Question (An Papa sit
Antichristus) was constantly held Affirmative, as appears by their Questions
Disputed in their public Acts and Commencements, which are extant in Print; I
have heard it so held in Oxon many times, between the Years, 1624. and 1633.
The first, who publicly denied the Pope to be Antichrist in Oxon, was my late
Lord Archbishop, Doctor Sheldon. The Doctor of the Chair (Doctor Prideaux)
wondering at it, said, Quid mi fili, negas Papam esse Antichristum? Doctor
Sheldon answered, Etiam nego. Doctor Prideaux replied; Profecto multum tibi
debet Pontifex Romanus, and nullus dubito, quin pileo Cardinalitio te donabit.
After this Doctor Hammond In his Paraphrase and Annotations, on 2 Thessalonians. 2.3,
4. and in his Book against Doctor Blondellus.
denied the Pope and affirmed Simon Magus to be Antichrist.

But which is much more, the Church of England has ( in her See our Homilies,
Printed Anno. 1633. page 38. of the first part of those Homilies, and the
Homily against the peril of Idolatry and Superstition: in the 2. part of these
Homilies' page 11, 12. etc.
Homilies, confirmed by Acts of Parliament, and Convocation, and Subscribed by
all the Clergy, and all Graduates in the Universities) declared the Pope to be
Antichrist: And then I desire to know, whether they be true and Obedient Sons
of the Church of England, who publicly deny her Established Doctrine, which
they had before publicly Subscribed.

But if this be granted, that the Pope is Antichrist, then the Second Query
will be whether the Church of Rome under him can be a true Church: And in what
sense she can be called so? In answer to which Queries, I shall crave leave to
say.

1. It is certain, that the Seat of Antichrist shall not be amongst Pagans,
Jews, or Turks, but in the 2. Th^ss. 2.4.
Temple of God; that is (even as In Templo Dei. id est, i^ Ecclesia Dei,
Ecclesias occupal^it. Hen. Helden, Doctor Sorb^nicus, in locum.
our Adversaries expound it) in the Church of God, the Christian Church, and
amongst Christians: It is certain also, and confessed by our Adversaries (even
the Jesuits Jacobus Tirinus and Stephanus M^nochius in their Commentaries on
Rev. 17.11, 16, 28. and on Rev. 18.4.
themselves) that Rome is the Mystical Babylon, which is the seat of
Antichrist, though (as they are highly concerned) they would not have Rome, at
present) to be the seat of Antichrist, As Doctor Hammond (without any, and
against all Reason) says in his Annotations, on Rev. 18.2.
but say, that he is not yet come, or it must be Pagan Rome which is meant.

2. But let Babylon, or the seat of Antichrist be what Christian Church they
will, (and some Christian Church it mu^t be) it is evident from the Text, that
God had a true Church even in Babylon; in the Kingdom, and under the
Jurisdiction of Antichrist. For speaking of Babylon, or the seat and Kingdom of
Antichrist, God commands, by his Angel, Rev. 18.4.
come out of her my People, lest you be partakers of her sins, and Plagues. God
had his People, his Elect (as the Jesuits Electos suos ut e Babylone exeant
admonet. Stephanus Menochius in locum.
expound it) a Church of his Servants, even in Babylon: For it had been
impossible to call any of his People out of Babylon; if none of them had been
in it: That People of God was in Babylon, in the Antichristian Church or
Synagogue, but not of it; they dwelt in Babylon, and had external Communion
with Antichrist and his followers, but did not Communicate with them in their
Sins, and Antichristianism; for then they could not have been (what he who best
knows, calls them) His People; so that we may truly say, that in the Kingdom of
Antichrist, even in Babylon it self, there are two Churches. 1. One visible,
consisting of Antichrist, and those who adhered to him; and this is not a true
Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Antichrist.

2. Another invisible, consisting of the People of God, who kept themselves
from Antichristianism: and this was a true Christian Church.

So in the Church of the Jews, after Jeroboam had set up his Calves at Dan, and
Bethel; and the Idolatrous Worship of those Calves was Established by Law, and
generaly received by the People: There were two Churches in the ten Tribes. 1.
One visible, consisting of all those who obeyed Jeroboam, and received, and
practiced that Idolatrous way of Worship he had set up. 2. The other Invisible,
consisting of those 7000, who had not bowed 1. Kings 19.18. Romans 11.4.
their knees to Baal. These I call the invisible Church; because (though their
persons as Men, were as visible as the Idolatrous Worshippers of Baal, yet)
their pi^ty, and rejecting that Idolatry which was, by public Authority of
their Kings, Authorized and set up; and (by the generality of the ten Tribes,)
received and practiced; this was so far from being visible, and known to
others, that Elijah, the Prophet (who lived amongst them, and was a Prophet
sent to the ten Tribes) knew it not; but thought that he 1. Kings 19.10, 14.
Romans 11.3.
only remained a true Servant of God, free from that Idolatry, which Jeroboam
had set up, and the ten Tribes did generally practice. Now this invisible
Church of the Jews, consisting of those 7000 (it is numerus finitus pro
infinito, a definite, for an indefinite number) who had not polluted themselves
with Idolatry, were the true Church Romans 11.1, 2, 4, 5. Romans 9.27.
of God in the ten Tribes, and owned by him as his People. But that which I
called the Visible Church of the ten Tribes, who professed and practiced the
Worship of the Calves, set up by Jeroboam; this was no true but an Idolatrous
Church. To bring this home to our present purpose

3. That the Church of Rome (as it has for some Centuries last passed, and
still does lie under that fatal 2 These. 2.3. and 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. where we
have two signal characters of that Apostasy, and Antichrist the Author of it.
1. Forbidding to Marry. 2. To abstain from Meats, which agree to that Roman
Church evidently, and to no other Church in the World.
Apostasy spoken of by St. Paul) is very like the Church of the Ten Tribes,
after Jeroboam had set up Idolatry, and caused them to sin. For as that Church
of the Ten Tribes was Idolatrous; so the Church of Rome now, is guilty of gross
Superstition, and stupid Idolatry. This is not my opinion only, all the
Reformed Churches in Europe say the same; particularly the Church of England:
as may and does evidently appear by her approved and authentic Writings,
established by the Supreme Power of our Church and State, attested by the
Subscription of all her Clergy, I mean our Homilies, See our Homilies Printed
1633 par. 1. p. 36. in the 3d. part of the Sermon of good Works. And the Homily
against the peril of Idolatry, in the second Tome of our Homilies, p. 11, 12,
etc.
our See the last Rubric at the end of the Communion, in our present Liturgy;
and we have the same Rubric in the same place, in the second Liturgy of E. 6.
Printed Anno 1552.
Liturgy, etc. to which we may add the Canons of the Convocation in the year
1640. which however not confirmed by Parliament, yet by them it is evident, that
the Clergy met in that National Synod, declared Rome to be Idolatrous, and
grossly Superstitious in the seventh Canon; And the truth of this, (were it the
business of this Letter) might evidently appear (to omit other things) by that
adoration their Church gives to the Eucharistical Vid. Council. Trident. Sess.
13. de Eucharistia. cap 5.
Host after Consecration in the Sacrament, and to the Cross; Vid. Pontificale
Romanum Romae, 1611. page 480. de ordine accipiend procession.
for to both these they give Latria, which they themselves confess, is due to
God only, and therefore must of necessity be gross Idolatry.

4. And as the Church of the Jews in the ten Tribes, and the Church of Rome now
agree in this, that the one was and the other is Idolatrous: so as in the
Church of the ten Tribes, there were 7000 who kept themselves pure from
Idolatry, even then when Idolatry (under Jeroboam and his Successors) was the
public and received worship: So in the Church of Rome now, I doubt not but
there may be, and are many more thousands, who (in Spain, Italy, etc.) live in
the Church of Rome, and in external communion with it, and yet do not
communicate with her in her Idolatry and Antichristianism. And these not only
I, but all Protestant Divines generally, call the Invisible and true Church of
Christ, known to him, though not appearing to the World to be such. But for the
Visible Church of Rome; That is, the Pope and his Adherents, (Clergy and Laity)
who acknowledge him Christ's Vicar, and Supreme Head of the whole Christian
Church, who believe and profess the whole Doctrine of the Roman The Popish
Doctrine in which Popery property consists, as it is different from truth and
the church of England; is summarily comprehended in their new T^ent Creed
published by Pope Pius 4. and is in some Editions of the T^ent Council, at the
end of that Council. So in the Edition of the Trent Council by Labbe, Paris
1667. p. 224, 225. in other Editions, it is put into the Body of the Council.
So in the Edition of that Council at Antwerp 1633. we have that Creed, Sess.
24. de reformatione p. 450, 451. in which Creed, we have 12. new Articles
(comprehending their Popish Doctrine prop^rly so called) added to the ancient
Creed of Constantinople, which we receive, and is the Creed used by our Church
at the Communion.
Church, and practice the Superstitious and Idolatrous ways of Worship approved
and received by that Church; these are no true Church of God, but an Idolatrous
and Antichristian Synagogue.

Objectio. But it may be said, that Protestant Divines generally say, that
Salvation may be had in the Church of Rome, and therefore it seems to be a true
Church of Christ, a true Christian Church, and therefore it cannot be an
Idolatrous and Antichristian Synagogue; in which no Salvation can possibly be
had. And therefore some of our Divines (as Mr. Thorndike) deny the Church of
Rome to be Idolatrous: others (which I shall not name) say that she is guilty
of Material, but not Formal Idolatry.

Solutio. To this Objection I say in short. 1. That it is true our learned and
pious Divines do usually grant, that Salvation may be had in the Church of
Rome. 2. For what Mr. Thorndike (in his Weights and Measures) has said; ( That
the Church of Rome is not guilty of Idolatry) it is only gratis dictum, but no
way proved: And besides he denies that truth which the Church of England had
affirmed, and he himself subscribed. 3. For those who talk of Material
Idolatry, it is absolute nonsense. For although in actual sins of Commission,
(as in Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, etc.) there be materiale peccati, the act
it self, and formale peccati, the obliquity of that act: yet forma dat nomen
and esse; there neither is, nor can be, any Idolatry, Murder, or Adultery,
without the form and obliquity of those Acts. So in a Man, the Body is
materiale Hominis, and the Soul is formalis pars: But no Man ever called a Dead
Corpse (though it be Materialis pars, the material part) a Material Man; it
being evident that a Dead Corpse is no Man at all. So to call the Act (which is
the material part of Idolatry) Material Idolatry, is not sense, for without the
obliquity of the act (which is the form) it is no Idolatry at all. 4. When
Protestant Divines say, that Salvation may be had in the Church of Rome: their
meaning neither is, nor (without they deny their own Principles) can be, that
those who live and dye in the Profession, and Practice of the Popish Religion
can be saved. They say and prove, that Popery is such a Mass of Errors,
Superstition, and abominable Idolatry, as cannot consist with Salvation; For 1
Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.8.
Idolatry, Rev. 14.9, 10.
Antichristianism were declared to be damnable when till Death persisted in.
But they say, as there were seven thousand in the Idolatrous Church of the Ten
Tribes, who kept themselves from the pollution of Idols; So they doubt not, but
there may be in the Church of Rome (in the external Communion of that Church)
many thousands, For the opinion of Protestant Divines concerni^g Salvation of
Papists, s e Mr. Chillingworth's answer to the Jesuit Father Knott, cap. 7, 8,
17, etc. p. 397, etc. and Dr. Featly's Defense of Sir Humphrey I^nds V^a recta,
Land. 1638. p. 148. in Alphabeto 3. I^^ius libri.
who, by the Grace of God, are kept from Communicating with that Church in her
Idolatry and Antichristianism, And these may obtain Salvation. 5. They say,
that there are two things, which may be (to some who live in the Communion of
the Church of Rome) helps and remedies to serve them against the pernicious
effects of Popery: so that although it be in it self damnable, yet it shall not
be so to them.

And those helps are,

1. True Repentance, for that is Secunda Tabula post naufragium; so that if
they truly repent, (as I hope many of that Church does, though they do not
profess it) and really forsake their Popish Superstitions and Idolatry, they
shall surely find pardon for their former sins, which shall Ezekiel. 33.15, 16.
never be laid to their charge, and so (for our Blessed Savior's sake)
Salvation. But unless they keep themselves pure from those pollutions, or (if
not) sincerely repent, they neither have nor can have any well grounded hope or
possibility to attain it.

2. The other help is invincible ignorance, which will excuse Vid. Suarez de
Legibus lib. 5. cap. 12. and authors ab eo Ibidem citatos.
persons so ignorant, a paena and culpa, and make many actions (which otherwise
would be sinful) not so to seem. So in Spain and Italy, where Popish Tyranny
prevails, and the poor people have no possibility to be better instructed;
there many innocently believe; and do many times against positive laws, and
Divine Revelations, which otherwise were impossible, if the Gospel were
sufficiently revealed to them. This is the judgment of Protestant Divines
concerning the possibility of Papists being saved, who live in the Communion of
that Idolatrous and Antichristian Synagogue.

My Lord I must humbly beg your pardon for this tedious and (I fear)
impertinent Scrible. I shall give your Lordship no further trouble at this
time. That God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless your Lordship and
all yours, is, and shall be the prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged, thank-ful and faithful Servant. Thomas
Lincoln.

A Letter to another Person, about Worshipping the Host; being Formal Idolatry:
and about Famous Protestant Divines, holding it Lawful to punish Heretics with
Death.
Sir,
I Remember that in your last, you proposed two Questions to me, which now I
have (which I had not before) time to Answer.

The first was; in what place of his Works, Doctor Hammond, would have the
Papists Worshipping the Host, with Latria (which worship they Council Trident:
Sess 13. De Eucharistia cap. 5. Cultus Latriae, qui vero Deo debetur, huic
Sacramento exhibendus.
confess is due only to God; and yet they give it to their Consecrated Host) to
be only Material, but not Formal Idolatry? I answer, that it is in his Tract of
Idolatry, 364 Page 41.

Whereas to call any thing material Idolatry, is formal nonsense: For forma dat
nomen and esse. As nothing is, or can be a Man, which has not the form of Man;
so nothing can (with sense) he called Idolatry, which has not the form of
Idolatry. It is true, that in all Sins of Commission, there is materiale and
formale; so in Adultery, Murder, Idolatry; the positive Acts in those Sins, are
the Materiale; and that habitude and relation to the Laws, of which they are
Transgressions, is the formale, which denominates them such sins: for in a Man,
there is Materiale, the Body; and Formale, the Soul. But no Man (who
understands sense and Logic) would call a dead body (when the Soul is gone) a
material Man; seeing it is not Man at all; but only materiale hominis, and not
homo materialis.

Doctor. Jer. Tailor (Bishop of Down) was of the same opinion, in his Liberty
of Prophesying. page 258. And is earnest in freeing the Papists from Formal
Idolatry. But the same Doctor Tailor, aftewards, in his Dissuasive from
Popery,. 12. page 148. Printed at Dublin, 1644. Fully Confutes both Doctor
H^mmond and himself; and truly proves, that the Popish Adoration of their Host
in the Eucharist, is properly Idololatrical. Sure I am, that our Church of
England Vide Canones Anno 1640. Can. 7.
did, and still does declare it to be detestable See our present Liturgy, in
the last Rubric, at the end of the Service for the Communion.
Idolatry.

For your second Quaery; whether you have mistaken my meaning, in your Notes
out of my Tract against Mr. Hobs of Heresy? and whether I did mean that
Zanchius, Bullenger and Beza, did approve the putting of Heretics to Death;
and inflicting Capital punishments for Heresy? What I said in that Tract
against Mr. Hobs, I do not well remember, nor have I now that Tract by me. But
it is certain, that they (and many more Protestant Divines) have approved that
Doctrine, of punishing Heretics with Death.

1. For Beza, he has writ largely and Learnedly, De Haereticis a Magistratu
puniendis: Operum Tom. 1. page 85. Edit Genevae. 1582 Where he proves (against
Billius, and Bas. Montfortius) that Heretics may be punished with death: And
for this, he cites Calvin (Libro contra Servetum scripto, and in Commentariis
in Titum,) Bullinger, Melanchton, Wolph. Capito, etc. The Senate of Geneva put
Mich. Servetus (an Arrian) to Death; and consulted the Divines in Helvetia,
whether they might Lawfully do it? And the Helvetian Divines answered, that
(the Case and Circumstances considered) Servetus might be put Lawfully to
Death, and so he was.

And for Zanchius, he is expressly of the same Opinion: Operum Tom. 4. lib. 1.
in tertium praeceptum. cap. 28. page 580, 581, 582. Edit. 1618. per Sam.
Crispinum. Now you know, that the Church has no power to put Heretics (or any
other Offenders) to Death; Excommunication is the greatest punishment, the
Church can inflict; which (though many of our Fanatics Contemn it, yet it) was
in the Primitive and purer times, (what the Good Father calls it) Tremendum
vltimi judicii praejudicium.

I shall only add; That God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless you,
and all yours, is, and (God willing) shall be the Prayer of,

Mar. 23. 1684. Your affectionate Friend, and Faithful Servant. T. L.

A Letter about what Greek Fathers, and Councils were not Translated into
Latin, before the time of the Reformation.
Sir,
I Received Yours, and this comes (with my Love and Service) to bring my
thanks. You desire me, in two or three lines, to tell you, what Greek Fathers
and Councils, were not Translated in Latin, nor commonly to be had in the Latin
Church; before the time of Henry the 8th, and the Reformation.

You know I am willing, (as for many Reasons I ought) to obey your commands so
far as I am able. But in this particular, you do (praeter solitum) command
impossibilities. For it is not a work of a Letter, or two or three lines to
give such an account, as you desire; nay, I dare say, that no person, (though
of far more reading and abilities (than I do, or can pretend to,) can do it in
two or three years; nor indeed is it to be done, by any one Man in an Age.

However (in general) give me leave to tell you, (what I think true and
evident,) 1. That in our present case, two Intervals of time, are to be
considered. 1. That before the It was taken by Mahomet the 2. Anno Christi.
1453.
taking of Constantinople, by the Turks; before Printing It was invented by
John Gutenberg An. 1440. vide Hospinian: de Templis. page 448.
was invented; and before the Reformation begun by Which was begun by Luther
Anno. 1517.
Luther. 2. The time since the Reformation.

For the time before Printing and Reformation, it is certain that the Roman
Church, in the Primitive times, had, 1. The Scriptures Translated into their
own Language, long before Hieromes time, who tells us, that in his time, there
were almost Tot versiones quot Codices; that is, there were very many Latin
versions of the Scriptures; that all might have, and (as they were concerned)
read them: Though the Church of Rome now impiously prohibits the having or
Reading the Scriptures in any vulgar Tongue?

2. As they had the Scriptures, so they had some of the Greek Fathers
Translated in Latin. For instance, they had Irenaeus Translated into Latin,
(for it is certain he writ in Greek,) so as the Original Greek Copy is lost, and
neither they nor we can find it. And it is certain, that they had many other,
Greek Fathers Translated into Latin, as appears by their Canonists, Schoolmen,
and other Latin Writers (who Cite Chrysostom, Basil, Nazianzen, etc.) who
understood no Greek, and therefore made use of their Latin Translations only.
It is also certain, that they had (in their Liberaries) many Greek Fathers,
which lay there Untranslated. But how many were Translated into Latin, and how
many were not, I know no Man has, or indeed can tell.

In the tenth Century, (which all learned Men, even Papists, call Saeculum
indoctum, for the horrid Ignorance of that Age) and those five Centuries, which
followed till Luther, Evangelical Truth, and Greek, were rare commodities at
Rome: Latin was the Language of the Beast, in those six Centuries: Their
Canonists and Schoolmen understood no Greek, (nor good Latin) as is well known
to all, who know them. Nay, he who understood, and studied the Greek Tongue,
was suspected to be an Heretic. And no wonder, seeing the Greek Tongue was
condemned in their Cap. Inter Solicitudines 1. Clem. 4 De Magistris.
Canon Law. For when Pope Clement the 5th, in the General Council at Vienna,
Anno, 1312. had Decreed eight Professors of Tongues, to be Established in five
Universities, ( Rome, Paris, Oxford, Salamanca, and Bononia,) two in Hebrew,
two in Chaldee, two in Arabic, and two in Greek; publicly to teach those
Languages; in their Canon Law, (before cited) the Greek Tongue is left out, in
all the Editions I have seen; Corpus Juris Canonici cum Glossis, Paris 1519.
( Old and New) Corpus Juris Canonici cum Glossis, Paris. 1612. and sine
Glossis, Paris, Anno. 1618. and Lugduni. Anno. 1661.
both in the Rubric and Text it self. And the Author Johan. Andreas Boniensis,
verbo, Hebraicae.
of the Glossa there, gives the Reason, why the Greek Tongue is left out of the
Law, (though it was in the Canon of the Council of Vienna) Quia Graeci sunt
Schismatici. The Greeks (as the Gloss Confesses) were anciently obedient to
the Pope, but now, (when Pope Johannes Papa, 22. An. Pontificatus, 2. Annoque
Dom. 1316. vid. Glossam ad Calcem Proaemii ad Clementinas, verbo, Pontificatus.
John Published the Clementines) they were Schismatics, and therefore the
Greek Tongue was damned at Rome, where Ignorance was the Mother of their
Antichristian Devotion. Hence that horrid Ignorance of the Greek Tongue, which
prevailed in the Papacy, before the Reformation; even in their greatest
Schoolmen and Canonists.

To give you an Instance or two: They give us the Derivation of the Greek word
(...), and tell us; Istud vocabulum fit ex duobus vocabulis, ab Allo, quod est
alienum, and goro, sensus. Stupid Ignorance, and nonsense: There is no such
word as Goro, to signify sense, or any thing, save that they wanted sense
themselves. And an Old Schoolman (my namesake Thomas de Argentina) gives us
the Derivation of Latria, thus, Istud vocabulum fit ex duobus vocabulis, a la,
quod est laus, and Tria, quod est Trinitas, quia Latria est laus Trinitatis. So
great was their Ignorance of Greek; sed transeat cum caeteris erroribus.

3. As they had Scripture and Fathers Translated into Latin, so they had
Councils too. Dionysius Exiguus, Abbas Romanus, in the sixth Century,
Translated the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Vniversae, (which next the Bible, is the
most Authentic Book the Church ever had) into Latin, and most impiously He
leaves out the Catalogue of the Canonical Books of Scripture, in the last Canon
of the Council of Laodicea, page 86. Edit. Paris, 1628. 2. He leaves out four
Canons of the first Council of Constantinople; 3. All the Canons of the Council
of Ephesus. 4. And the 28. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. 5. He corrupts
the Canons of the Council of Sardica, and other Canons etc. Besides, he adds
many things to his Codex, which were never received into the Codex Canonum
Ecclesiae Vniversalis. For Instance, The Canons of the Council of Sardica, in
all 21. The African Canons also, in number: 138. And the Canons of the
Apostles, 50. None of which belongs to that Authentic Code which he pretends
to Publish and Translate. All which appears by the Ancient Greek Copies of that
Authentic Code: Especially by that Codex Canenum Ecclesiae Vniversae,
Published by Christ. Justellus, in Greek and Latin, with his Learned Notes, at
Paris, Anno 1610.
corrupted it; leaving out what made against the Popes, and the Church of
Rome's pretended greatness.

But (to name not more particulars) it is certain,

1. That before the Reformation, the Roman Church had many of the Greek
Fathers, and Councils, and corrupt Translations of them; as is evident by
Ancient Mscr. of both, yet extant in Bodleys, and other Libraries. The Greek
Copies of those Fathers and Councils, being kept in Libraries, That the Latin
Church had Copies of the Greek Fathers and Councils, both in Latin and Greek,
appears because that since the Reformation, we have (out of those Mscr. Copies
which lay in Libraries) most of those Greek Fathers, and Councils Published in
Print.
very few consulting or understanding them, and their corrupt Translations of
them only in common use, and cited by their writers.

By the gross Ignorance and neglect of the Latin Church, (which should have
been a more careful keeper of Ecclesiastical Records) many of the Ancient Greek
Fathers have been lost; as appears by Photius his Bibliotheca, where he gives
us an account of many Greek Fathers and Writers, which are not now any where
Ext^^t.

That which expelled that more than Egyptian darkness, and Ignorance of the
Church of Rome, under which it had laid above six hundred Years, and thereby
introduced her prodigious Errors and Idolatries, (which had been impossible for
her to have done, had our Western World been awake, and not benighted with
fatal and gross Ignorance) I say that means which expelled this darkness (the
good providence of God so ordering it) was,

1. The Invention of Printing; whereby good Authors ( Greek and Latin) were
more easily, and with less charge got.

2. The taking of Constantinople by the Turks, which occasioned many Learned
Men of the Greek Church, to retire into the West and the Roman-Church, who
brought considerable Greek Manuscripts with them; and (to name no more)
Theodorus Gaza (who was the most Learned of them) writ a Greek Grammar, to help
those who desired it, to learn their Language; by which means many begun to
Love and Learn the Greek Tongue.

3. But that which most encouraged and necessitated the study of Languages, and
especially the Hebrew and Greek, was Luther and the Reformation by him begun,
Anno, 1517. Luther (which was rare in those times, in a Monk) understood Hebrew
and Greek; and having many disputes with Cardinal Cajetan, (who was then Legate
in Germany) the Cardinal urging Scripture against him, according to their
Vulgar Latin Translation; Luther told him, that Translation was false, and
dissonant from the Original: This puzl'd the Cardinal, (though a great
Schoolman) who thereupon set himself to study both Greek and Hebrew, which with
great diligence he did, that he might be better able to Answer and Confute
Luther and his followers; many of which were excellent Grecians, such were
Melanchton, and many others. And hence it was, that the Pope and his Party,
seeing the necessity of Languages (especially Hebrew, and Greek) for the
Defense of their Religion (or Superstition rather) against the Protestants:
Pope Paul the fifth, Renews the Decree of Clement the fifth, and the Council of
Vienna, (before mentioned) and though that Decree had been neglected, and the
Greek Tongue damned in their Canon Law; yet he earnestly injoins the profession
of it (and of the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Arabic) in all their Vide
Constitutionem 67. Pauli, 5. in ^^llario Romano, Editionis, Rome, 1638. page
185, 186.
Universities, Monasteries, and Schools, to this end, that they might be better
able to Confute the Heretics.

I am Sir, Your affectionate friend and Servant. Tho. Lincoln.

A Letter concerning the Kings being empowered to make a Layman his
Vicar General.
Sir,
THAT my Lord D. of Ormonds Commission (which you say, you have seen) has no
particular mention of the Kings Ecclesiastical Power deputed, I wonder not. The
Commission which makes him Viceroy, Deputy, or Lieutenant, to the King, does
(ipso facto) make him his Vicar General, to execute both powers (Ecclesiastical
and Civil;) and (by that Commission) he does so.

Does not the Lieutenant there ( de jure ordinario, and as Lieu-tenants call
Synods, collate Bishoprics; and other Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Preferments? does he not hear and determine Ecclesiastical Causes, by himself,
or some commissioned by him? does he not punish Ecclesiastical persons when
they are criminal? Do not your Articles of Religion established in a National
Articles of Religion in the National Synod or Convocation at Dubl^n, 1615. 57,
58. etc.
Synod of Ireland, give our Kings the same Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Causes
there, as he has here? And do not our Kings here execute their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, partly in Person (in giving Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics,
calling Synods, etc.) partly by Commission; so the Chancellors of England, by
their Commission, have power to give some Ecclesiastical Dignities and Livings,
to visit Winsor, (I mean the Collegiate Church there) and all his royal
Chapels and Churches of his Foundation (if he have not otherwise appointed
other visitors, etc.) In short, I do believe, that (in England) never any but
Cromwell had such a large Commission, and full power to Visit all persons, in
all Ecclesiastical Causes, yet I believe it most evident, that he may (when he
shall think it convenient) give such a Commission.

I am Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant. T. L.

A Letter concerning the allowance and respect that the Sentences of Protestant
Bishops may expect from Popish ones; writ by way of answer to a friend of Mr.
Collington's who acquainted the Bishop that the Court of Arches here, was of
opinion that the Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin could not here be
questioned, by reason of the practice of Popish and Protestant Bishops allowing
each others Sentences.
Sir,
FOR the contempt they of Rome have of our Bishops, and all their Sentences and
Judicial Acts, (especially in foro exteriori and contentioso) it is notoriously
known, that they have no value at all of our Bishops, and pronounce all their
sentences and judicial Acts null, and every way invalid. For,

1. They generally deny our Bishops and Ministers to be true Bishops or
Priests, but admit them to be Laymen only. A Sorbon Anth Champney. P. and D.
of the Sorbonne Douay. 1616.
Dr. In a Treatise about the Vocation of Bishops and Ministers, endeavors to
prove, against Du Plessin, Dr. Field, and Mr. Mason; that Protestant Bishops
(particularly those of England) are not true Bishops, nor have any lawful
Calling. Another (and he a Popish Bishop) speaking of our English Bishops and
Pastors, says R. Smith Bp. of Chalcedon in praefat. ad Collationem Doctrinae
Catholicorum ac Pr testant. Paris. 1622.
Eos quos nunc pro Pastoribus habent, NIHIL EORVM OBTINERE, quae ad ESSENTIAM
hujus muneris requiruntur. Another thus, Rich. B^istow Motivo. 21.
Qualis est illa Ecclesia, cujus Ministri NIHIL ALIVD sunt quam MERE LAICI, NON
MISSI, NON VOCATI, NON CONSECRATI? Our Countryman Card. Alan, and the Rhemish
Annotators say, Annotatores Rhemenses in Romans 10.15.
All our Clergymen from the highest to the lowest, are false Prophets, running
and usurping, being NEVER LAWFULLY CALLED. And Dr. Kellison, speaking of our
Bishops and Ministers, Kellison in Repl. contra D. Sutlisse, p. 31.
NEC ORDINES, nec JVRISDICTIONEM habent.

And Bellarmine Bellarmin. De Ecclesia militant. l. 4. c. 8.
Nostri temporis Haeretici, nec ordinationem, nec successionem habent, ideo
long inverecundius quam ulli unquam Haeretici, nomen and munus Episcopi
usurpant. And some Popish Priests in their Petition to King James, expressly
tell the King, Supplicat. ad Jacobum Regem. 1604.
NVLLI ministrorum vestrorum ad Catholicam fraternitatem accedentes, habentur
alii quam MERE LAICI.

Lastly, (Not to trouble you or my self with more Quotations) Turrian tells us;
that Donatists and Luciferian Heretics have some kind of Bishops and Priests,
Turrian. de Jure Ordinand. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Protestants vero, NULLAM PENITVS formam Ecclesiae habent, quia NULLOS PENITUS
Ecclesiae and Verbi MINISTROS habent, sed MEROS LAICOS.

This is their opinion of our Bishops and Clergy; that they have no just Call,
or Ordination, and consequently no Jurisdiction; and then it necessarily
follows, (if this were true) that all their Sentences and Judicial Acts are
invalid and absolute nullities.

2. They say, that all Protestants (especially the Bishops and Clergy) are
Heretics and Schismatics, extra Ecclesiam; and neither have, nor can have any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: so that whatever cause be brought before them in
their Consistories, it is coram non Judice, and so whatever they do is a
nullity. That Heretics and Schismatics (and such they declare all Protestants
to be) forfeit all their Ecclesiastical Authority and Jurisdiction, their own
Gratian. Can. 4. Audivimus. Can. vit Caelestinus. 35. Can. Aperte. 36. Can.
Miramur 37. Cause. 24. Quaest. 1. vid. Card. de Turre-Cremata, ad dictos Canones.
Canons expressly say. And besides those, Gratian speaks home to this point, in
another Gratian. Can. Didicimus 31. Cause. 24. Quaest 1.
Canon. The Lemma or Title to the Canon, is this -- Sacri Officii potestate
PENITVS CARENT HAERETICI, etc. And the words of the Canon (if that be possible)
are more express -- Dicimus OMNES OMNINO HAERETICOS, NIL habere potestatis and
Juris. And Card. Turre-Cremata explains the Canon, thus -- Card. de
Turrecremata ad Can. Didicimus 31. Cause. 24. Quaest. 1. 1.
Potestas vel est Sacramentalis, (seu Ordinis) vel Jurisdictionis. The first,
being indeleble and permanent, may be in Heretics* Quoad esse, sed non quoad
usum; and yet, if they do use it, what they do will be valid. But for the
Potestas Jurisdictionis, that is utterly lost by Heretics; Their Heresy
deprives them of all their Ecclesiastical Authority and Jurisdiction; and si
quid fecerint, NIL ACTVM ERIT. Whatever they do is null. This their Canonists
and Casuists constantly say; and that so far, that if the Pope be an Heretic,
(as sure enough he is) Jure suo excidit, he ceases to be Pope. The same
Cardinal does not only say this, but seriously endeavor to Idem Ibidem 2.
prove it. And as great a Cardinal and Canonist as he, tells us -- Card.
Tuschus, Conclus. practicarum, Tom. 4. Tit. H. Concl. 102. 18.
Sicut Clericus PRIVATVR IPSO JVRE, beneficio and dignitate, SI SIT HAERETICVS;
Ita PAPA privatur Papatu, Reges regno, Imperator Imperio; quia in istis fidei
causis nulla ese distinctio. This is their doctrine at Rome, (erroneous and
impious;) yet, if they think Heresy of such pernicious nature, that it deprives
even their Pope of all his Papal Jurisdiction; it is a less wonder, if they
think it deprives heretical Bishops (such as they think all Protestant Bishops
to be) of all their Episcopal Jurisdiction.

3. All Protestants (especially the Bishops) being Heretics (in the Popish
account) they are ipso facto and by their law, excommunicate; as is evident by
their Vid. Cap. ad abolendum. 9. extra. de Haereticis. and cap. excommunicamus.
13. Ibid. and caput Noverit. 49. extra. De sent. excommunicat. etc.
Canons, and their Bulla In Bullario Cherubini, Romae, 1638. Tom. 4. Bullae
Vrbani. 8. 62. p. 76.
Caenae; wherein the Pope once every year, (on Maundy Thursday) excommunicates
and Anathematizes all Heretics, ( Lutherans Omnes Lutheranos, Zuinglianos,
Calvinistas, etc. Ibid. 1.
and Calvinists particularly and by name expressly:) Now such excommunication
takes effect immediately, without expecting the Judges Sentence. Iste talis
(says Stephan. de Avila, de Censuris Ecclesiast. part. 1. Dub. 7. p. 9, etc.
a great Canonist) statim incurret censuram, nulla expectata Iudicis Sententia,
est communis Doctorum; and est Textus in Cap. Pastoralis. Verum. De Appellat.
ubi dicitur, quod excommunicatio secum trahit executionem. And a greater than
he, expressly says the same thing -- Card. To^et. Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 1. cap.
11. 12. p. 49. Vid. Caj^tani Summulam verbo excommunicatio. Covarrutium part 1.
Relect. 1. Alma Matter. 7. De Excommunica. and ejus effectu, operum Tom. 1. p.
346. etc. Vincent. Fill lincium Mo^al um Quaest. Tractat. 22. cap. 7. De Paenis
Haereti^o^um, etc.
excommunicatio secum trahit executionem, and INHABILITAT, quoad omnes ejus
parts, illum qui in eam incidit, absque alia declaratoria, etc. But there
needs no more, for it is certain; that all contumacious Heretics (as to them
all our Bishops are) being actually excommunicate, (as all such Heretics
solemnly are once a year) are ipso facto deprived of all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: and therefore they of Rome do not only say, but (by their
received Law and Canons) must say, that our Bishops have no Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, and so all their Judgments and Judicial Sentences null and
invalid.

Lastly, It is to me a wonder, that any knowing person should think that the
King and Bishops of England, should have no power to Question the Sentence
passed in the Archbishop of Turins Consistory; when they do (and ought to do
so) question, and justly condemn the Sentence of the Pope (in many things
concerning Matrimony) passed in their General Council of Trent. And have not
the King and Bishops power to do a native and born subject of England right,
because a Popish Bishop by an injust Sentence has done him wrong? Dare any
Bishop in England say, that the Sentence of the Archbishop of Turin
(unexamin'd, or the just reason of it not appearing) is a just ground to quite
Mr. Cottington's (or any Man's) Conscience, so that he may safely and without
Sin, co-habit with Gallina (her former Husband being yet alive;) sure I am none
should, or justly can, and therefore (I hope) none will say so.

I am Your affectionate Friend and Servant. T. L.
August 14. 1677.
The Bishop being writ to, to send an account out of the Casuistical directorys
for Confessors, about the sins proper for Kings to be interrogated about in
Confession; returned this answer.
Sir,
Edit. Lugduni. An. 1646.
ANTONIUS Escobar Theologiae moralis Tractat. 1. Examine 12. cap. 1. page 147.
put this Question; Quinam ad praeceptum divinum Confessionis obligantur? And
then his Answer is this -- Fideles omnes adulti qui accepto baptismo lethaliter
deliquerunt.

And then Tractatu 2. Examine. 3. cap. 3. p. 261. He puts this Question.

De Papa.
Number Pontificis Summi delicta memorabimus? which he answers thus,

Profecto suprema ecclesiae potestas haud est fragilitatis humanae incusanda;
quare nulla Papae exprimam crimina: sanctissimus enim Ecclesiae vertex,
Sanctissimis operibus operam dabit. Si autem aliquid humanitati indulserit,
sapientissimus ille muneris tantionera non ignorabit.

Idem Ibidem p. 261. De Regibus.
De Regum vitiis haec habet.

Regum igitur ac Superiorum Principum accusationem praetendo.

And then he brings in a King confessing (amongst other) these sins -- ita
propria bona dissipavi, ut aliena aggressus fuerim usurpare: subditos nimium
molestis tributis aggravando, debita non solvendo: ingentem vim auri and
argenti, subditorum injuria, accumulavi. Leges poenales non in delictorum
repressionem, sed in subditorum expilationem indixi. Morti deputavi, aut gravi
supplicio, vivum inauditum, non intercedente gravissima causa: leges
Ecclesiasticae immunitati repugnantes praescripsi. Advertenter Iudices indoctos
creavi; vel cognita postmodum eorum insufficientia non illico amovi.

Johan Azorius, (a Jesuit too) Institutionum Moralium, part. 2. lib. 11. cap.
7. p. 1105, 1108. Edit. Lugduni, 1616. Has a long Catalogue of the Sins of
Kings; (not of such sins as are common to Kings and private men, but such as
are peculiar to Kings, for so he says;) and (amongst others) he reckons those;

Detestabliis est in Regibus injustitia; Regum enim est, suum cuiqu; tribuere.
Peccant Reges si tributa iniquae subditis imponant, vel antiqua augeant, sine
reipublicae necessitate-

I am, Sir, Yours T. L.

A Letter concerning historical passages in the Papacy; and of the Question,
whether the Turk or Pope be the greater Antichrist?
Sir,
Whether Pope Innocent the VIII. had such a pension, as 40 or 60000 Crowns,
from the Turk, I know not; though I do believe, had the Turk offered it, his
holiness would scarce have refused it. For both Innocent the VIII. who died,
Anno 1491. and Alexander the VI. who succeeded him, were prodigiously impious,
and beyond all measure covetous.

Innocent the VIII. had no less than 26 Sons and Daughters, yet no Wife; for of
him it was See Cyprian Valera of the Lives of the Popes; writ in Spanish, and
translated into English by John Golburne, and Printed at London 1600. p. 130.
said by the Poet.

Octo recens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas;
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem.
Spurcities, gula, avaritia atque ignavia deses,
Hoc octave jacent, quo tegeris, tumulo.
In his time, Bajazet the Turkish Emperor had a Brother ( Zizimus, or as, some
call him, Geme) who rebelled against him, and sent to Pope Cyprian Valera,
Ibid. p. 131. out of Friar John de Pineda, lib. 26. cap. 33.
Innocent to secure that brother, (who was retired to Rhodes, and was
afterward brought to the Pope.) Bajazet sent a present to the Pope, to wit,
the Title of our blessed Saviors Cross, in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. This the
Turk sent to the Pope, that he might detain his Brother Zizimus, (or Geme) that
so he might not be at liberty, to make War against him. Pope Innocent being
dead, the Turks Brother Geme, was Prisoner to his Successor Alexander VI. to
whom the Turk paid a pension of 40000 Ducats Annually, Cyprian Valera ( or De
Valera) Ibid p. 136.
for keeping his Brother Prisoner. But Charles the VIII. King of France
managing War against Pope Alexder, (who was not able to resist that King) the
Pope was constrained to conclude a peace; and one condition was, that he should
set the Turks Brother at Liberty. This exceedingly troubled the Pope; who if he
set the Turks Brother at Liberty, lost his pension of 40000 Dackats. At last,
the Turk gave the Pope Alexander, 200000 Ducats to take away his Brother,
Cyprian Valera Ibid. and he cites there Guicciardin and Jovius.
and accordingly, the Pope caused him to be Guicciardin in the 3. Book of his
History had this story of Pope Alexanders abominable incest with Lucretia; but
it was left out, both in Italian and Latin Editions; but the words were
published (with other passages left out of his History) Land. 1595. and since
at Amsterdam, 1663.
Poisoned, and so he died. This is that Pope Alexander, who could, and
(notwithstanding his Holiness and Infallibility) did commit such abominable
Adulteries and Incest with his own Guicciardin in the 3. Book of his History
had this story of Pope Alexanders abominable incest with Lucretia; but it was
left out, both in Italian and Latin Editions; but the words were published
(with other passages left out of his History) Land. 1595. and since at
Amsterdam, 1663.
Daughter Lucretia, as has not usually been heard of amongst Pagans; which gave
occasion to Johannes Pontanus, to make this Epitaph for the said Lucretia.

Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa,
Narus. But enough, (if not too much) of this. For even your best Popish
Writers, (who are more willing to conceal, than to publish their Popes
impieties) confess this Alexander the sixth, to have been a Monstrous villain:
that he had the Turkish Emperors Brother Zizimus, at Rome, that he delivered
him up to Charles the French King, and that he died a little while after. And
Sabellicus Vide Onuphrum Pa^^inium, Papizium Massonum, etc. in Vita Alexandri.
6. Ant. C^ecium Sabellicum Operum Tom. 2. Enneadis. 10. lib. 9. p. 778. D. 781.
B.
says, that Bajazet promised the Pope Magnam auri vim, si fratrem veneno
tolleret, p. 778. And it is certain, he died a little after; and then he adds,
that it was believed, that he was poisoned, the Pope knowing it -- Fuerunt qui
crederent eum Veneno sublatum, fuisseque Alexandrum Pontificem, ejus consilii
non ignarum, p. 782.

Again you say; It seems, that the Hungarians had rather be under the Turk,
than under the Pope and Emperor: so should I too, if I might have my choice,
and were put to it. If I had liberty and power to avoid it, I would be under
neither, It being a great unhappiness to be under either. For (as the Proverb
is) neither Barrel is better (nor good) Herring. But if my condition be so
miserable, that I must be under one of them, then (consonant to right Reason
and Religion) pars tutior est eligenda; I will choose that side, in which I
shall undergo less misery and mischief, that is, I will be under the Turk
rather than the Pope.

For under the Turk I may (as the Greek Church does) enjoy my Religion, and if
I do not rebel, but pay Taxes, I may enjoy the rest of my Estate. But under the
Pope I shall not have so good Quarter and Conditions. I must either turn
Papist, (with evident danger of Eternal Damnation) or I lose all. For the
Popish Apothegme, their declared Judicial Sentence is peremptory, short and
severe -- Turn or Burn. If with reasons, (grounded on Nature or Scripture) they
cannot, (as I am sure they cannot) convince me of the truth of their
Roman Catholic Religion, then they have (where they have power) Fire and
Faggot to consume me. So that under the Pope, If I keep my Religion, then life
and livelihood, and whatever I have in this World is absolutely lost: and if I
impiously desert my Religion, I shall have little reason to hope for any thing
but Hell, (Purgatory will not do it) in the World to come.

1. The next Query you mention, is whether the Turk or Pope be the worse
Antichrist; and you say, that honest John Fox disputes the Case pro and con,
and leaves the determination of it, till Elias come.

But I fear you are mistaken; for John Fox did believe the Pope to be
Antichrist: and so did (and do) all the Reformed Churches, particularly the
Church of England: as evidently appears by our Homilies; (which all our Divines
do still Subscribe) and though Dr. Hammond, has a new and wild opinion, that
Simon Magus was Antichrist; yet in that he contradicts the Doctrine of our
Church, which he had Subscribed; and not only so, but he contradicts express
Scripture, and the Sense of Christendom for 1600. Years: He being the first who
ever held that Apocryphal Opinion, and (may be) he will be the last; unless
some out of mere kindness to his Person (for his opinion has neither proof nor
probability) become his Proselytes.

2. If you would know my opinion, (though it signify little) whether the Pope
or Turk be the greater Antichrist? 1. It Is granted, that they are both
Antichrists. For even in St. John's time there 1. John, 2.18.
were, and ever since there have been many Antichrists (impious Heretics he
means, and deserters Ibidiem verse 19.
of the truth of the Gospel;) but amongst those many Antichrists, there was
(...), one great Antichrist, who was to come, as St. John there says; and of
all the rest, the Turk and Pope have the fairest Pleas to be that Antichrist,
(...). But the Pope is certainly to be preferred, and he shall have my vote for
that great place of being the great Antichrist: because he has some proprieties
and Characteristical marks of that Beast, which the Turk neither has, nor can
pretend too.

I shall only name one or two. 1. The Seat of Antichrist, was to be the Rev.
17.18.
great City which reigned over the Kings of the Earth. Which unquestionably is
Rome, where the Pope has, and does sit. And even the Jesuits confess this, as
also other Popish writers. Now the Turks Seat neither is, nor ever was at Rome.

2. Another mark of the great Antichrist is; That he exalts 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4.
himself above all that is called God, etc. above all Kings and Emperors, who
in Scripture are called Gods. This the Pope does who takes upon him (and his
own Canonists and Council say, he may do it) to depose Kings, and give away
Kingdoms: A most prodigious instance of this Papal pride, we have in Pope
Alexander the VI. (whom you have mentioned) who gave Vide Constitut. 2.
Alexandrio 6. in Bullario Romano Tom. 1. page 347. Editionis Romae. 1638.
to Ferdinand King of Arragon, and his Heirs for ever, all the West Indies;
(that is, almost half the known World) at one clap, as appears by his Bull,
Published at Rome, before mentioned in the Margent. But the Turk, has never
claimed such an Universal Monarchy over the whole World; and therefore has not
so good a Plea as the Pope has to be Antichrist.

3. It is a mark of Antichrist, or the Whore of Babylon, (as St. John calls
her) that she Rev. 17.6.
was drunk with the Blood of the Saints. Which agrees not to the Turk, who
suffers Christians to live, (if they do not Rebel, and pay their Taxes) and
does not take away their lives, because they are not of his Religion. But the
Pope (where ever he has power) suffers none to live, who will not submit to
him, and embrace his Romish and Idolatrous way of Worship. The many thousands
(nay many hundred thousands) who barely on this account, have in these last
600. Years, been Murdered by the Pope and his party, (either by open War,
Inquisitions, or otherways) are signal evidences of this truth; and amongst
others, the French Massacre, Anno. 1572. and our late Irish Massacre, are sad
and signal Instances.

I am, Sir, Your affectionate Friend, and Servant. T. L.
Bugden Sept. 9. 1682.
The Bishops thoughts being desired about two things, namely, 1. when the
Famous Prophetical passage in Hooker might have its Accomplishment; and 2.
about the Modus of the deposing of a King in Poland, the Circumstances of which
it was probable the Bishop was well informed in, by his frequent Conversation
with some Polonian Noble Men, and Students at Oxford; he returned his Answer,
to the two Enquiries.
THE passage enquired about in Hooker was as follows; viz.

By these or the like suggestions, received with all joy, and with all sedulity
practiced in Certain parts of the Christian World: They have brought to pass,
that as David does say of Man; so it is in hazard to be verified concerning the
whole Religion and Service of God. The time thereof may peradventure fall out
to be Threescore and ten Years, or if strength do serve, unto Fourscore. What
follows, is like to be small joy to them whatsoever they be that behold it.
Thus have the best things been overthrown; not so much by puissance and might
of Adversaries, as through defect of Council in them that should have upheld
and defended the same.

The Answer of the Bishop was as follows, viz.

SIR,
I Received yours, and though I have hardly time to (return my thanks and) tell
you so; yet (in obedience to your commands) I shall crave leave to tell you.

1. That the passage you name in Mr. Hooker, occurs in his fifth Book, and in
the end of the 79. Paragraph, page 432. of the The year when it was Printed, is
not mentioned, only that it was Printed at London.
Old Edition. And in the Anno. 1062.
last Edition of Hookers Policy, by Doctor Gauden Bishop of Exeter; the place
occurs in the same Book and Paragraph, page 329. 330. ( Note, that Mr. Hooker
had a Wife, and (if any be bad) one of the worst in England, and yet Bishop
Gauden in his Page 12. ^inca ultima.
Life before Hookers Policy, tells us, that Mr. Hooker was never Married.)

Now for Mr. Hookers Prophetical passage, the time of it is not yet come: For
though we talked much of it, and said it was fulfilled, when the Long
Parliament pulled down the Church, and sold Church Lands (for of such
Sacrilege Hooker speaks) yet it may be fulfilled hereafter, and Hookers
Prediction true.

For Hooker did first, Print his first Book in the Sea Hookers Life by Isaac
Walton page 117.
Year, 1597. (The first four of his Policy, being before Printed Ibid. page, 116.
Anno 1594.) Now if you add to that Number 80. (which is the utmost time Hooker
mentions) then the time of the fulfilling his prediction, must be in the Ann.
1597. Add -- 80. In all -- 1677.
Year, 1677. and so it is possible you and I, may live to see the Issue of it.
And so much for the Point of Prophecies; concerning which, (and our Country
Men) our old Historian, Gul. Neubrigensis (so they Print his Name, but it
should be Neuburgensis) tells us -- Gens Anglorum Prophetiis semper dedita.

For your other Query about Poland; The Historian I recommended to you (because
he was commended to me, by My Lord Goreski, and several other Polish Gentlemen)
was Mart. Cromerus, who has other Works, but those they commend, as giving the
best account of the State of Poland, are

1. His Chronicon de Origin, and rebus gestis Poloniae. Basil. 1582.

2. His Polonia, seu de situ, populis, moribus. etc. Poloniae. Basil. 2582.

Now the Story I told you, is (what those Polonian Noble Persons tell me, (for
I have not Read much in Cromerus) That Poland is an Elective Kingdom. 2. That
there are pacta conventa, and Fundamental Capitulations, between him and the
People; which contain Jura Regni and Populi, the power of the King, and the
Privileges and rights of the People. 3. The Elected King at his Inauguration,
Swears to observe Faithfully those pacta conventa. 4. Amongst those
Capitulations, to which he Swears, this is one, That if he do not (according to
his Oath) keep those Capitulations, then the Archiepscopus Guintisnensis
(Primate of Poland) is privately to admonish him; then (if he do not mend) he
is to admonish him more publicly before the great Lords. And if he continue
incorrigible, the Archbishop may send out an Edict to prohibit the Nation to
give him Obedience, or any part of his Revenue; in short, to depose him.

I am, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant. Thom. Lincoln.
Coll. Oxon. Aug. 23. 1675.
The Bishop being writ to, on occasion of a Friends desiring to know whether
the Famous saying of Res nolunt male Administrari (of which a Gentleman in
London, pretends himself to be the Author) had not its Origin from Aristotle's
Metaphisicks; to which Venerable Bede, in his Philosophical Axioms refers in
his citing the saying; his Lordship returned the following Answer.
Sir,
FOR that Axiom of Bid, (which you mention) Entia nolunt male disponi. I have
Bedes works, and I find, amongst his Axiomata Philosophica, this Axiom, in
these words -- Nolunt entia male gubernari. Beda inter Axiomata Philosophica
Tom. Operum 2. page 151. litera N.


But for the second Book of Aristotle's Metaphysics, to which (it seems) your
Book refers, there is no such Axiom there: Nor any thing that may give any
ground for it, unless they may relate to one passage in that second Book, where
speaking of the difficulty to understand some things, he says -- Aristotelis
Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 1.
(...), (...), That the cause of that difficulty is not in the things
themselves, but in us: We, through the weakness of our understandings may
mistake, and several Men may have several Opinions of the same things, but the
nature of the things, is fixed and the same, though Men (by mistake) may think
otherwise.

Whereas you say, that there is a Gentleman in your great Town, who pretends to
be Author of that Axiom; I do confess, you have in your Town many Errors more
impious, but hardly more ridiculous. For venerable Bede dyed in the Year, 735.
that is, 949. since; and Bid, (as by his Works is evident) has that Axiom, in
terminis; so unless that Gentleman be Older than Bid, (which I believe he is
not) he cannot be Author of that Axiom.

I shall say no more, save (that you may, and I hope will believe) that I am,

July 29. 1684. Your Faithful Friend, and Servant, T. L.

A Letter of the Bishop, about Natural Allegiance; and of Kingly Power, being
from God; and Confuting my Lord Shaftsbury's Speech, in the House of Lords, for
the contrary, etc.
Sir,
IN your Letter, you desire some things of me, which (jure tuo) you may
command; 1. That I would name to you, some of our Divines, who have (ex
professo) writ of natural Allegiance.

To this I would say, 1. That what our Lawyers say, I doubt not but you well
know; yet let me commend to your perusal (if you have not met with it before)
Spelmans Glossary, who was neither professed Lawyer nor Divine, yet a very
learned Antiquary, and has said some things of Allegiance, which are
considerable, in his last Edition, Printed Anno. 1664. under the word
Fidelitas: For though he have the word Allegiancia, in his Glossary, yet he has
nothing upon it there.

2. For Divines, it belongs to them to speak of Kings, and the Allegiance due
to them, only so far as they have Scripture for their Rule. Now, which of our
Divines have writ of the Natural Allegiance due to Kings, I do not (at present)
remember, nor (in the extraordinary trouble and business, I now am) have I time
to inquire.

Sure I am; 1. That no Commonwealth, or any such popular Government, is ever
heard of, or once named in Scriptures. Though the Author of Oceana, (I think
Harrington was his name) and his party say; That God by Moses, Established his
People in a Commonwealth.

But this they say in contradiction; 1. To the Learned Jews (Josephus, Philo,
etc.) who say, it was (...), a Government, wherein God himself was King; a
Theocratia, or a Divine Monarchy: Wherein God himself was King, not only in a
general way, as he is King of all the World; but to the Jews particularly; as
much and as particularly, as the Kings of England, or Spain, are to their
Kingdoms.

For, 1. God 1. Sam. 8.7.
himself says, he was their King; 2. And Samuel 2. Sam. 10.19. and 12.12.
tells them so too: 3. God was a particular Lawgiver to the Jews, not so to any
other Nation, he personally gave them all their Laws. 4. He did personally
appoint his Viceroys, and Deputies, (Moses, Josua, etc.) 5. God did receive all
their appeals, and personally answered them, by Urim, etc.

Again, Divines may evidently conclude out of Scripture: That Kings and their
Royal Power is, 1. A Deo and jure divino. 2. Non a Populo (no not in Elective
Kingdoms, as in Poland; for in the Elective Kingdoms, designatio personae may
be in the People; Yet) Collat. Authoritatis Regiae est a solo Deo, 3. Non a
Papa. 4. Non a Lege: My Lord (...) House, in a long Speech, to prove Kings were
not jure divino, told us, that Kings were A lege; it was the Law that made them
Kings; which was Seditious and Ridiculous.

For I would gladly know who made that Law, which made the Kings? Certainly the
King did not make it; for that Law which made the King, must (of necessity)
precede and be before the King, who had his Royal Power, and Kingly Office from
that Law.

Nor was there ever in this Nation, any other Power to make such a Law. For
this Nation (so far as we have any History that mentions it) was ever Governed
by Kings: So in the times of the Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans,
Kingly Government was Established here. Sed transeat cum caeteris erroribus.

I am Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant. Tho. Lincoln.

A Letter answering some Queries about Abby-Lands, and about the Opinions of
Calvin and Luther of the punishing of Heretics.
SIR,
AS to your first Question about the value of Abby-Lands, your Calculation is
ingenious; and if the Revenue was no more than that your Author says, the poor
Monks had very short Allowance. But he who says, the whole Revenue of all the
Abby-Lands was no more than 261100 l. per Annum, is much mistaken; for
undoubtedly it was far more.

Weaver in his Antiquities of Canterbury, has something of it, and Sir William
Dugdale in his Monasticon; but I neither remember what they say, nor have I
time to consult them.

2. As to your Query, What Calvin's Opinion was, of burning a whole City for
Idolatry, in his Commentary on Deuteronomy. 13.15. to which you refer me: I must to
this Query say, 1. That I find not any Commentary of Calvin, (though he has writ
on the Pentateuch) on that Verse or Chapter. 2. The Jews Rabbis (even
Maimonides, the most Learned of them, as Ainsworth on that place tells you)
expound that place of all the Inhabitants, which were guilty of Idolatry, (both
the Seducers and Seduced) but none else. Only the goods of those in the City,
who were not Idolatees, were to be burnt as well as the goods of the Idolaters.
3. When you inquire of Luther's Judgment on the same Text, I can only say, 1.
That Luther has not writ any Commentary on Deuteronomy. 2. Whether he do
occasionally explain that Text, in any of his other Works, I do not remember.
3. For putting the Heretics to death, as such, (that is, merely as Heretics.)

1. The Donatists (in St. Augustin's time) first put those to death which did
not consent to their Opinions.

2. The Papists universally agree in this, that Heretics, (that is, all who do
not believe as they do) must be put to death.

3. Calvin and the Senate of Geneva, put Vide Calvinum Libro in Servetum
scripto, and in Commentariis in Titum.
Servetus (an Arrian) to death. And Beza Inter Opera Bezae. T^m. 1. page 85.
Edit. Genevae, 1582.
justifies the fact, in his Tract, De Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis; where
he cites Melanchton, Bullinger, Capito, and many more Protestants, who (he
says) were of the same Opinion.

4. But the Church of England did never put any Papists to death, though
Heretics, and Idolaters; and it is publicly affirmed and justified, in a Book
called, Justitia Legum Anglicarum, etc. And, for my part, I should not be
willing that any Heretic should be punished with death, unless he join with
his Heresy, blasphemy of God, or disloyalty against the King; or some sins
against the Law of Nature, evidently punishable by the Civil Magistrate, for
the preservation of the Public Peace and Safety of the Commonwealth.

I am, Sir, Your most obliged faithful Friend and Servant, Thomas Lincoln.
Buckden, Feb. 26. 1628.
Bishop Sanderson 5. ad Populum, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.
3. Commanding to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
Thanksgiving, etc.

4. For every Creature of God is good, and not to be refused, if it be received
with Thanksgiving:

5. For it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer.


FOR the real and true meaning of this passage of the Apostle, it is evident he
condemns two Errors in those Apostates from the Faith, which should appear in
the latter days.

1. Their forbidding Marriage, of which I shall say nothing at present.

2. Their commanding to abstain from Meats -- For this second particular, we
are further to consider two things.

1. What Meats they were from which those Apostates were commanded to abstain;
and the Text tells us, that it was Meats which God had created to be received
(or eaten) with Thanksgiving.

2. The ground or occasion why the Apostle condemns this in the Apostates, is,
because every Creature of God is good, and not to be refused, if received (or
eaten) with Thanksgiving.

Now the most Judicious Bishop Sanderson (my dear deceased Friend) from this
general ground, that EVERY Creature of God is good, seems to infer, that there
are no Creatures in the World excepted, but every one might be received or
eaten with Thanksgiving.

Now this consequence seems to me not good, nor rational; nor is it possible to
conclude the lawfulness of the use of every Creature from the goodness of it,
in it self, and for those ends for which, by the infinite power and wisdom of
God, they were created.

For, it is most certain, that every Creature (without an exception) is good;
but, then it will not follow, that every Creature (without an exception) may
lawfully be received and used for meat. In the Text the Apostle condemns the
Apostates from the Faith, for commanding to abstain from meats, which God
created to be received or eaten. This was their Error and Tyranny, to forbid
men the use of those Creatures for their food, which God had created and given
them for that very use and end.

3. And upon this ground it is, that the 4th verse neither is, nor can be meant
universally, that every Creature of God (without exception) is good, and not to
be refused, if received with Thanksgiving; but with this limitation, every
Creature (which God has created to be received with Thanksgiving) is good, and
not to be refused; for otherwise, if the proposition be taken universally, it is
evidently untrue; for, when the Apostle writ the first Epistle to Timothy,
there were many Creatures which (though good in themselves, and for the end they
were made) were never created by God for Man's food and nourishment, nor were
to be received with Thanksgiving, nor could be sanctified by Prayer.

I instance in 1. Venenatis. 2. Prohibitis.


1. In Venenatis; it is certain that amongst God's Creatures (which are all
good, both in themselves, and for the ends for which they were created) there
were included Serpents, Rattle-Snakes, etc. which are venomous, and to humane
Nature pernicious; which were never created for Man's food, nor to be received
with Thanksgiving, nor to be sanctified by Prayer.

2. In Prohibitis; it is also certain that when the Apostle writ this Epistle to
Timothy, there werh several of God's good Creatures which (by Divine Law) were
prohibited to be received at all, and therefore not to be received or eaten.
That this may appear;

1. It Is generally agreed, that St. Paul writ this Epistle Anno Christi 52.
when that Excellent person Bishop Sanderson thinks that (by the liberty our
blessed Savior had purchased for us) every Creature of God was good, and might
(without sin or scruple of Conscience) be received with Thanksgiving.

2. It Is also generally agreed, that the Decree of the Apostles, Act. 15.28,
29. was made Anno Christi 50, or 51. (secundum computationem veram) wherein
things offered to Idols, blood, and things strangled, are expressly forbid to
the Gentile Christians; and therefore might not be received and eaten Anno
Christi 52. when St. Paul writ that Epistle, being by a Divine Law prohibited a
little before Anno Christi 50 or 51 The Obligation of which Law continued long
after the time of St. Paul's writing to Timothy, as appears by express Texts.

1. Act. 21.25. By what James Bishop of Jerusalem tells St. Paul, which was
Anno Christi 58. So that then (notwithstanding that every Creature of God was
good, yet) neither things offered to Idols, nor blood, nor things strangled,
could lawfully be eaten.

2. Revel. 2.14. -- 20. Where eating things offered to Idols, is by our blessed
Savior condemned as a sin, which was 45 years after St. Paul's Epistle to
Timothy, which was Anno Christi 52. and St. John Anno Christi 97.

To say nothing of the Universal Consent of the Christian World for above 1200
years, that by virtue of that Decree of the Apostles it was believed unlawful
to eat any blood.

But here it will be objected, that the Apostles Decree, Act. 15. was not
Praeceptum, or a Law, or bound all the Gentile Christians from eating blood,
etc. but it was only Consilium, a Counsel, which did not induce a necessary
Obligation to obedience; so, amongst others, Dr. Hamond in Acts 15 28 29 and
h^^ Review, page 95.
Dr. Hamond.

Solut. But this is gratis dictum, without reason given, or pretended to be
given for it, and therefore till it be proved, eadem facilitate negatur qua
proponitur; but that the Canon of the Apostles is Praeceptum, an obliging Law,
and not barely a Counsel, which (without any disobedience) we may receive or
reject, may appear by these (and other) Reasons.

1. It Is most certain, that Voluntas Dei de re facienda aut fugienda
sufficienter revelata, is a Divine Precept, and a binding Law; his Will, when
sufficiently revealed, is the adequate Rule of his Worship, and our Obedience;
and when it appears that it is the Will of God we should do this, or avoid that,
we are bound to obey, and do accordingly: Now in the Apostles Canon or Decree,
we have the express Will of God, sufficiently revealed, that we should abstain
from things offered to Idols, and from blood; for so the Apostle (who had the
infallible Assistance of the Holy Spirit) tells us, it seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and us, that you abstain from Idolatry, and from Blood, etc. It was the
Will of God, and therefore a Divine Law and Precept that we should abstain.

2. Consilium is not necessarium but voluntarium, we may (without any
disobedience) receive or reject Counsel; but the things forbid in the Apostles
Canon, are said to be necessaria; though as to other things they were left at
liberty, yet there was a nessity to abstain from Idolatry, and from Blood.

3. A Counsel (or things advised to in it) are not onus impositum; it never
does, nor can impose any burden upon me, seeing I may ad placitum and pro
Arbitrio, receive or reject, follow or refuse the Counsel, and do or not do
what is Counseled; but the Apostle's Canon is (...), onus impositum, a burden
laid upon them by the Holy Ghost and the Apostles; It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, to lay this burden upon you, etc. and therefore not only counseled, but
(by a Divine Law) bound to obey it.

4. Once more: This Canon of the Apostles is so far from being only a
Consilium, or advice of that great and infallible Counsel, that in the sacred
Text it is expressly called a Decree, or Apostolical Constitution, Act. 16.4.
which the Gentile Christians were to observe and keep; so Saint Luke tells us,
that they that were sent to deliver that Apostolical Canon to the Gentiles,
passed through the Cities, and delivered them the Decrees for to keep, which
were ((...)) ordained or constituted by the Apostles. I know the word in the
Text ((...)) which we render Decrees sometimes signifies only an Opinion, but
never in St. Luke, who uses it to signify an Imperial Decree, Luke 2.1.
Edict or Institution; so (...) is not the Opinion or Counsel, but the Imperial
Edict of Caesar: So elsewhere, Act. 17.7, etc.

T. B. Ep. Line.

A Letter Answering a Question about the Temper of the Prophets, when they
Prophesied; and likewise a Query about the Tridentine Creed.
Sir,
FOR your two Queries; I say to the First.

That the Holy Prophets Anciently, when they foretold blessings or great
judgments to come upon any person or Nation; they were of a sedate, calm and
quiet temper; and not troubled with defective sits of anger and overflowing
passion. For it was not of themselves, or, their own minds they spoke; but they
were 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21.
(...), Divinely inspired by the Holy Ghost, by the Spirit of 1 Pet. 10.11.
Christ which was in them. Now that Holy Spirit, was a Sanctifying Spirit,
which could, and did regulate all their passions, and by his grace and the
Divine truths he revealed to them, enabled them, ((...)) to 2 Timothy 3.17.
every good Work. And if you consider all the Prophets in the Old Testament
(Moses, Elijah, Elisha, Daniel, etc.) you shall find them, (without mixing
their own Passions) calmly denouncing Gods severe anger and judgments against
wicked Men or Nations. It Is true, your Pagan Prophets and Diviners, who (at
Delphos; and such other places where the Devil gave Oracles) took upon them to
Prophecy, and foretell future things; were usually, when they Prophesied, rapt
into a fury and kind of Madness. And hence it is, that amongst sober Pagan
Authors; Vaticinari, is taken for delirare. Quia sacerdotes oracula reddituri
furore quodam corripi solebant: Hence Cicero, Cicero pro Sextio.
eos qui dicerent, dignitati serviendum Vaticinari and insanire dicebat. And
elsewhere Cicero lib. 1. de Divinatione.
Vaticinari furor vera solet.

For your 2. Query, you desire to know when that Professio fidei, (mentioned in
a Book called, The Acts of the General Assembly of the French Clergy, etc.) was
agreed upon, and what Books writ of it?

In Answer to this Query, you must know; That the Professio fidei, mentioned in
that Book; was by Pius Papa, IV. first Published, Anno. 1564. in his Bulls
which has this Title -- Bulla Pii Papae 4. super forma Juramenti Professionis
Fidei. In this Bull you have that whole Professio fidei, or their New Trent
Creed, (as we justly call it;) and that Bull and the Professio fidei, or, Trent
Creed, occurrs usually at the end of their Trent Council, and at the end of
their Catechismus Romanus; and in some Editions of their Trent Council, you
have it in the In the Edition at Antwerp. 1633. Sess. 24. De Reformatione, cap.
12. page 430. you have this Professio fidei.
body of the Council.

Now concerning this Professio fidei, It was not made or composed by the French
Clergy, but by the direction of the Trent Fathers, and Pulish'd by Pope Pius,
4. Anno. 1564.
(they mention) you must know, that it consists of two parts.

1. The Constantinopolitan Creed, which is the very same with that in our
Liturgy, at the Communion: And this we believe as much, and as well as they.

2. Then they have added to this, (and make up as one Creed) more then twice as
much, in 14. or 15. Articles; every one of which, is evidently Erroneous, and
many of them impiously Superstitious and Idolatrous: And this second part of
their Professio fidei, is that we call their New Trent Creed. For it is most
certain, that no Church in the Christian World (no not Rome her self) ever did
believe it, before the Year, 1564. as might be manifestly proved, (were that my
buisiness) by,

Buckden March, 24. 1685. Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant. T. L.

A Letter of a New Popish Book then Published, etc.
Sir,
I Have received that new Popish Book you so kindly sent me. The Book is much
magnified by the Popish Emissaries, and put into the hands of many, to seduce
them from our Religion: particularly, it was given to a Gentlewoman in
Glocestershire. Two Ministers who were (by her Friends) employed, to undeceive
that Gentlewoman, desired me to give them some Motives, to dissuade her from
Popery; I did (in two Sheets of Paper) give them such Motives; to which (as
yet) no answer is returned.

But the Gentlewoman gave them a Paper (Penned by her Priest) containing
Motives for which she turned a Papist. The Gentlemen brought them to me, I
answered them at large in eight Sheets of Paper; and they procured of her, a
Copy of the Book you sent me; and last week allowed me time to Read, and return
it to them privately. So that I have Read the Book, which is Popularly Penned,
with great confidence affirming; but proving nothing with any good consequence;
the Author has some Rhetoric; but no good Logic. He makes Universal Tradition
of the Church, the prime and grand Foundation of all our Christian Faith and
Religion; and I have desired the Gentlemen (who procured me the sight and
reading of the Book) to make this offer to the Gentlewoman and her Priest; That
if they can prove any one point of Popery, by the Universal Tradition of the
Church, we will be their Proselytes. Nay, secondly, If they can prove any one
point of Popery, by the constant and successively continued Tradition, of their
own Roman Church, from the Apostles time to this day; I will be their Proselyte.

That which troubles me, is this: our Adversaries are (with diligence and
cunning) Sowing Tares, and (I fear) we sleep, (Math. 13.25.) while they are
sowing them.

I am Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant. T. L.
Jan. 3. 1684.
A Letter to Sir P. P. wherein he apologizeth for his not going to Lincoln;
and wherein he proves that Henry the Eighth's Marrying his Brothers Wife was
only against the Judicial Law; and animadverts on Calvin's making the Penal
Laws about Religion given to the Jews, to bind under the Gospel.
Sir,
I Received yours; and this comes (with my humble service) to tell you, that I
know not what to say; non ingratus beneficiis, sed oppressus. Your care and
kindness for me in this my business, has been so great and extraordinary, that
if I be freed from the trouble and disgrace of the threatened Visitation, I must
impute it (next to the gracious and powerful Providence of my good God) to the
undeserved charity and kindness of the excellent Marquess of Hallifax, and your
prudence and diligence in managing that affair. The truth is, I am exceeding
sensible (amongst many more) of the great Obligation you have laid upon me in
this business, which I can never requite, (beneficia tua indigne aestimat, qui
de reddendo cogitat) nor ever shall ingratefully forget.

For going to Lincoln, (the good Counsel of that The Marquess of Hallifax.
Excellent person) so soon as God shall be graciously pleased to give me
ability, I will not fail to do it. But (at present) my Age and Infirmities are
such, as disable me for such a Journey: I have not been out of my house this 13
or 14 months, nor able to take any Journey. I have writ to my Lord Privy Seal,
the Reasons of my not going to Lincoln: 1. I have no House there. 2. Buckden
(as you told him) is in the Center of my Diocese, and stands far more
conveniently for all business. 3. Bishop Sanderson lived and died at Buckden,
and Bishop Lany lived there too, till he was translated to Ely; nor were they
ever accused or complained on for it. 4. That Lincoln might not think I was
unkind and neglected them; I sent them 100 l. of which 50 l. to the Church, and
the other 50 l. to the City; and since that I gave the City 20 l. toward their
Expense in renewing their Charter, which none of my Predecessors have done; and
yet I only must be accused and uncharitably condemned by my Enemies; Causa
indicta and inaudita.

Ah! my dear Friend, it is not my absence from Lincoln, or any of those little
things they (I mean the Popish Party) object against me, which troubles them;
but that which indeed sets them on to calumniate me, is, they know I am an
Enemy to Rome, and their miscalled Catholic Religion and (God willing) while I
live, shall be so, and hinc illae Lachrymae.

I have been Loyal to my good King, and dutiful to my holy Mother the Church of
England; and (pardon my confidence) I have done them more faithful and better
service, than any of mine Enemies have, or can: And notwithstanding any
discouragements, I shall God inabling me continue to do so. I am not afraid to
anger my Popish Enemies, or of any mischief they can do me. I serve a most
gracious and omnipotent God, who can, and (I hope) will deliver me from their
Cruelties and, if not, they shall know, that I will never worship the
abominable Idols they have set up. I have something, which, in convenient time,
I shall publish, which will anger them more than any thing I have yet done.

For what you mention, of Henry 8. that his Marrying his Brothers Wife, was
only against the Judicial Law of the Jews; is evidently true; such a Marriage
is not against the Law of Nature.

For, 1. Cain and Abel could not possibly marry any, save their Sisters; yet
God (who never commands any thing against the Law of Nature) commanded them to
increase and multiply, who could not lawfully multiply, but by lawful Marriage.

2. Sarah was Abraham's Sister, (Genesis 20. v. 12.) and God himself says, that
she was his Wife, (Genesis 20.3.) but had it been against the Law of Nature to
marry a Sister, she might have been his Concubine, but not his Legal Wife. For
it is both Law and Reason, Contractus contra Naturam initus est nullus.

3. In the Levitical Law, God (who never does command any thing against the Law
of Nature) commands a Brother to take his Brothers Wife, (to marry her) to
raise up seed to his Brother.

But the thing is evident, and needs no further proof.

For what you desire, concerning Calvin's Opinion on Deuteronomy. 13.6, 9. and Zech.
13.3. His Opinion is on Zech. 13.3. That these penal severe Laws do bind us
under the Gospel; his words there, are these; Sequitur ergo non modo legem
illam fuisse Judaeis positam, quemadmodum nugantur fanatici homines, (so I am a
Fanatique in honest Calvin's Opinion) sed extenditur ad nos etiam eadem Lex,
etc. yet it is evident those Laws were never given to th Gentiles, (Romans 9.4.
Ephesians. 2.12.) and therefore neither did, nor could bind them: It being most
certain, that no positive Law of God or Man binds any, save those to whom it is
given; nor them, till after a sufficient promulgation.

2. And Zechary in that Text expressly says, That the Father and Mother of the
false Prophet shall thrust him through (kill him) when he prophesies.

Surely Mr. Calvin cannot think, that a Father or Mother may kill a Heretic
or false Prophet without going to the Judge: And indeed Calvin saw this, and
there says, -- Multo hoc durius est, propriis manibus filium interficere, quam
si ad Judicem deferrent.

I will give you no further trouble. That God Almighty would be graciously
pleased to bless you and all yours, is the prayer of

Your most obliged, faithful and thankful Friend and Servant, Tho. Lincoln.
Buckden, Jan. 26. 1684.
A Letter answering a Question about the Liberty formerly allowed to the
Protestants in France, to Print Books there against Popery, etc.
Sir,
FOR your first Question; Whether the Protestants in France, have Printed any
Books against the Doctrine of the Church of Rome?

I say, it is evident, 1. That there have been many hundreds in France, eminent
in all kinds of Learning; who have writ and Printed many things against the
Romish Doctrine, and Discipline; and therefore are, by name damned in their
Indices Expurgatorii: Such were (to say nothing of Calvin or Beza) Casaubon;
the Lord du Plessis, Budaeus, Robert and Henry Stephens, Carolus Molinaeus,
Peter du Moulin; etc. these and hundreds more,) you may find damned in their
Indices Expurgatorii.

2. It is evident, that the Protestants in France (till this present King
ruined them) had several Universities, in their command, and under their
jurisdsction, and Presses and Printers belonging to them. Now in those
Universities, they had public Professors of Divinity, who Read and disputed
against every Error in the Popish Doctrine, and then (in their own Presses)
Printed their Disputations So in their University at Sedan, they usually
Printed their Disputations: in the Year 1661. A good thick Volume of them, was
Printed, with this Title -- Thesaurus Disputationum Theol. in alma Sedanensi
Academia habitarum variis temporibus, etc. And then they set down the Names of
the Reverend Professors, who (at several times) did moderate those
Disputations: And they are these Eight, 1. P. Molinaeus, 2. Ja. Capellus, 3.
Ab. Ramburtius, 4. Sam. Maresius, 5. Alex. Co^uinus, 6. Lud. Le Blenc, 7. Jos.
Le Vasseur, 8. Jo. Alpaeus. There are many more such Disputations had at Sedan.
And in the Year, 1641. (to omit others) there was Printed a great Volume of
Disputations, in another Protestant University, in which you have an express
Confutation of all Points of Popery. The Title of that great Volume is this --
Theses Theologicae in Academia Salmuriensi, variis temporibus disputatae, sub
praesidio, D. D. Sacrae Theologiae Professorum, Lud. Capello, Mose Amyraldo,
Josua Placaeo, Salmurii. 1641.

3. Besides all this, the Protestants in France, have many Synods, wherein they
have made many Canons, to set down and explain their whole Doctrine and
Discipline, and then Printed them; in contradiction to the Popish Synods of
that Country.

For your second Question; whether the Protestants in France, Dedicated any of
their Books to their King? I do not now remember, nor have I time to seek. But
I shall refer you to a Book, which will give you a punctual account of many
public Disputations in France, in former times, between the Protestants and
Papists, and that before the King and Popish Bishops. The Title of the Book is
this -- Status Ecclesiae Gallicanae etc. Londini: 1676. Wherein you have an
account of the Church of France, from the first Plantation of it, till the
Reformation, and thence down to this time, to 1668.

I am Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant. T. B.
Feb. 22. 1685.
A Lettter of the Bishop, about the French Persecutions; and of our Kings
relieving and protecting the French Refugees; and in which Letter the Popish
Tenet of the intention of the Priest, as necessary to the validity of the
Sacrament, is Confuted
Sir,
I Received yours, and (with my hearty Love and Service) return my thanks:
Though our Gazetts (and some Letters) told us, that the French King was
recovered, and abroad again; yet (I confess) I did not believe it: And you have
given me some Reason, why I should not; when I consider his greatness, I know
there is none on Earth can punish him. But when I consider his Prodigiously
impious, and injust Persecution, and oppression of his innocent Subjects; not
only with Unchristian, but most Barbarous and inhumane Cruelty: I know there is
an infinitely powerful and just Judge, who can, and (in his good time) will
punish him; ultor malorum instat a tergo Deus. Pagans Acts 28.4.
knew it, that great and signal Sins, would have signal punishments; which
would follow, and speedily fall upon them -- Raro antecedentem scelestum
subsequitur poena pede claudo.

And when I consider the strangeness of his disease, I cannot impute it to any
casual or natural distemper in his Body, but to the immediate and most just
hand of Heaven, to manifest his Justice; and to demonstrate to the World, that
the great and most just Judge of Heaven and Earth, can, and will punish such
barbarous and inhumane cruelties.

And as the Justice of God appears in punishing the impious persecutor; so his
unspeakable mercy and goodness in providing for those Innocent Persons, who
(for his sake and the Gospel's) are unjustly Persecuted. For when I consider
his Sacred Majesty's cheerful admission of those poor Persecuted Christians
into his protection; and his Brief, in which are so many gracious expressions
of his tender Affection, and Charitable Commiseration of their miseries and
Afflictions; and so many powerful motives to incline his Subjects to a liberal
Contribution: when I further consider his Majesty's (not liberal, but)
Magnificent Charity, in Subscribing, 1500 l. and some others (by his example)
Subscribing 1000 l. some 500 l. some 300 l. some 200 l. etc. (such Sums as were
never subscribed to any Brief before;) and when I consider the strange
cheerfulness of all People to contribute, with a far more then usual
liberality: I say, when I consider these particulars, I cannot choose but impute
such a cheerfulness, such extraordinary and great Contributions, to the Divine
Providence, and the immediate hand of God, making all People willing to relieve
their Persecuted Brethren. So that the powerful providence of God evidently
appears, in this French Persecution. 1. His Justice, in punishing the impious
Persecutor. 2. His great Mercy, in providing (by such large Contributions) for
the Innocent Persons, who suffer such Persecutions. So that the Persecuted
French Protestants are in duty bound (and I doubt not but they will do it) to
acknowledge the gracious, and powerful Providence of God; and bless his most
Holy Name, who has given his Sacred Majesty, and his Subjects, both ability,
and a cheerful, and Charitable willingness, to relieve their necessities.

However I am persuaded, that this most inhumane and Barbarous Persecution of
the Innocent French Heretics, (as they miscall them) will make all sober
Papists abhor the Pope and his party, who use such Unchristian, and
Antichristian means to make Proselytes, and endeavor to bring Men to the
Catholic Faith (as they pretend) by Dragoons, and Imprisonments, not by
demonstrations, and Reasons out of Scripture.

For my Lord Anglesey's Papers (which you mention) I should be glad to see
them; for I well know, that he had a great Understanding, not only of things
Civil and Political, but Theological too.

Concerning the Question (you mention) of the Intention of the Priest, and the
dispute about it in the Council of Trent, by a Bishop there; you have the story
in Father Paul's History of the Council, lib. 2. page 240, 241. The Bishop who
Disputed excellently well, against that Intention of the Priest, was (as he
tells you) the Bishop of Minori; and that the Fathers did not Father Paul's
History of that Council page 242.
approve his Opinion; but that they were troubled and knew not how to Answer
his Reasons. However, the Bishop of Minori, did (as he tells us, in the Margent
of that Page, 242.) a Year after the Council, Write a little Book, wherein he
says, that the Fathers of the Council were of his Opinion.

The truth is, they maintain the necessity of the Priests Intention, to
magnify the Priests Power, and the Peoples dependence on him; for if they
Anger him, he may (as is and must be confessed) absolutely damn them.

For they Confess, if he intend not, all their Sacraments are absolute
Nullities: So that in the Eucharist; if the Priest intend not to Consecrate, it
remain Bread still, and they then Worshipping it (as they do) with Latria, are
the worst Idolaters This is confessed and proved by Costerus the Jesuit, in his
Enchiridion Controversiarum, cap. 8. number. 10. page 361. Editionis Colon.
Agrippin. 1587.
in the World. In short, this their Doctrine of Intention, is most erroneous,
and (to them) pernicious.

For, 1. None in the Papacy who is Married, can be so much as morally sure,
that his Children are not Bastards, and every time he lies with his Wife, he
commits not Fornication. For Matrimony (with them) being a Sacrament, if the
Priest did not intend to Marry them; then it is no Marriage, and then his
Children are Bastards, and he a Fornicator in begetting them.

2. And once more, (notwithstanding their pretended Infallibility) they can
never be so much as morally certain that there is one true Christian in their
whole Church. For if those who Baptize do not intend it, they are not Baptized,
and so not Christians; and whether they intend or no, is impossible for any
(save God who knows the Heart) to know; and therefore, it is impossible to know
that any in their Church (no not the Pope) is a Christian.

However this I am sure of, that I am, and intend to be,

Your affectionate Friend, and Servant. Thom. Lincoln.
Bugden April, 20. 1686.
A Letter of somewhat falsely and maliciously brought in, in the Body of the
Canon Law.
My Honored Friend,
FOR the Gloss you mention, on the Can. Quoniam Did. 10. give me leave to tell
you,

1. That in an old Edition of the Edit. Paris. An. 1522.
Canon Law, with the Gloss and Case, there is not one word, or any mention of
Cyprian or Julian.

2. In the Edition of that Law, with the Gloss and Case An. 1612.
at Paris, (which it seems you follow) there is mention of Cyprian and Julian
too.

3 If you consult a Late Edit. Lugduni, 1661.
Edition of the Corpus Juris Canonici, (without the Gloss, and many
considerable Additions) you will find several Notes subjoined to that Canon,
Quoniam, Did. 10.

For instance;

1. That in some Printed Copies of the Canon Law, the Title prefixed to the
Can. Quoniam, was this -- Cyprianus Julio Imperatori, which is ridiculous; it
being impossible that Cyprian should write to Julius the Emperor, who was dead
almost 300 years before Cyprian was born.

2. In those Notes we are told, that in all the Manuscripts (one in the Vatican
excepted) the word Imperatori, was left out, and in one Manuscript Copy it was,
Cyprianus Juliano Episcopo; whence (it seems) some ignorant Transcribers, had
made it, Cyprianus Juliano Imperatori; and yet Cyprian was dead, at least 100
years before Julian was Emperor, and so was not like to write to him.

3. In those Notes above In Edit. Lugd. 1661.
mentioned, in some Ancient Copies, it is, Cyprianus Episcopo Jubiano.

4. The Premises considered; that there is such great difference, and various
readings of that Gloss, as, 1. Cyprianus Julio Imperatori. 2. That the word
Imperatori, was in no Manuscript Copy, save one. 3. That in some Copies, it
was, Cyprianus Juliano Imperatori. 4. In others, Cyprianus Juliano Episcopo. 5.
In others, Cyprianus Jubiano Episcopo. 6. In others (as in the Printed Edition
at Paris 1522.) there is no mention at all, of Cyprian, Julian, or any Emperor.
So that nothing is, or can be certainly concluded (as to Julian's being
Pontifex, and the Glossator calling him so) from such various and uncertain
readings.

5. That the Roman Emperors (and anciently all Kings) were Sacerdotes and
Pontifices, Can. Cleros, Did. 21.
Gratian (out of Etymol. l. 7. cap. 12.
Isidore) tells us, in these words -- Ante autem Pontifice^ and Reges erant;
nam majorum haec consuetudo fuit, ut Rex esset Sacerdos and Pontifex; inde and
Pontifices Romani Imperatores appellabantur. At the beginning of the World, and
till Moses his time (when God annexed the Priesthood to Aaron and his Family)
Imperium and Sacerdotium, were in Primogenito. And after our blessed Savior's
time, the Priesthood was in the Apostles, and their Successors; yet the Pagan
Emperors kept the Sacerdotium in their hands, and were called Summi Pontifices;
but when the Emperors became Christians, (with the Gloss he mentions out of
Cyprian) (though Cyprian was dead before Constantine, and any Christian Emperor)
but cites no place in Cyprian to prove it.

6. For the Glossator (honest John Semeca) if you consult the Paralipomena, ad
Abbatis Vespergensis Chronicon, ad Annum 1256. page 332. you will find high
commendations of him and his Gloss; that he was Praepositus Halberstatensis,
and was an excellent Dr. of the Laws, and excommunicated by Clemens the 4th,
who was made Pope An. 1264. but both the Pope and he died shortly after, and so
(with their Lives) that Quarrel ended.

I am, Sir, Your affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant, Tho. Lincoln.

Sir P. P. having observed many to look with an evil Eye on the Clerical
Revenue, and that in the considering of the affluent Quota the Levitical Tribe
had allotted to it by the Divine Wisdom; yet of the Proportion that the Number
of the Levites held with the Number of all the People of the other Tribes, no
Authors he had read, had made any exact Calculations: And as for example, that
the Author of the Present State of England had quoted Seldom about the large
Revenue of the Levites, and their being not the fourth part of the Twelve
Tribes; and that the History of the Council of Trent mentions the Fathers of
that Council, as saying, that though God gave the Tenth to the Levites, they were
but the thirteenth part of the Jews; he knowing Bishop Barlow to be both an
excellent Textman in the Scriptures, and a good Arithmetician, he applied to
the Bishop to send him his Judgment in writing about the Levitical Revenue, and
the Proportion of their Number with the People of the other Tribes; and his
Lordship sent him in a Letter the following Paper; viz.

Numb. 1.46. The Number of the Twelve Tribes (reckoning Manasseh and Ephraim
for two, the Levites left out, from twenty years and upwards,) was -- 603550.

1 That is, of the Tribe of Reuben 46500, verse 21. Another numbering, Numb. 26.
verse 7.

verse, verse, 1 Of Reuben 43730. 2 Of Simeon 22200. 14. 2 Simeon 59300. 23. 3
Gad 40500. 18. 3 Gad 45650. 25. 4 Judath 76500. 22. 4 Judah 74600. 27. 5
Issacar 64300. 25. 5 Issacar 54400. 29. 6 Zebulon 60500. 27. 6 Zebulon 57400.
31. 7 Ephraim 32500. 37. 7 Ephraim 40500. 33. 8 Manasseth 52700. 34. 8
Manasseth 32200. 35. 9 Benjamin 45600. 41. 9 Benjamin 35400. 37. 10 Dan 64400.
43. 10 Dan 62700. 39. 11 Asher 53400. 47. 11 Asher 41500. 41. 12 Napthali
45400. 50. 12 Napthali 53400. 43.

Summa totalis, 601730 less than the former number 603550. by 1820. All the
former number were dead; save Caleb and Joshua, verse, 64, 65. In all 603550.
The Levites were numbered from a Month old and upwards, Numb. 3.39. and their
number was, 22000. So that the Levites (numbered from a Month old and upward)
were not a Twenty seventh part of the Israelites (though numbered only from 20
years old and upward) whose number contained the number of the Levites 27.
times, and 9550 over. ^

And although the Levites were so far from being a tenth, that they were not
the 27th part of Israel, yet they had,

1. A ten th of the whole Land, etc.

2. And very many other things more. A Catalog ue of them, we have
particularly, Numb. 18.8, 9, 10. etc.

3. They had 48. Cities, with their Suburbs, Numb. 35.7. Josh. 21.41. more
Cities than any Tribe had, save the Royal Tribe of Judah.

Sir P.P. having received from the Bishop the above account of this matter, so
elaborately drawn; and withal so satisfactorily, to demonstrate that the
Levites, were not the 27th part of Israel; he having been much Conversant with
the Calculations of the Curious Observator of the Bills of Mortality (as the
Lord Chief Justice Hales in his Origination of Mankind calls him;) he returned
the Bishop another Paper about that Subject (after having first shown it to Dr.
Robert Wood, an acute Mathematician, and found his approbation thereof) that so
he might have the Bishops further and final thoughts of the whole matter.

And that Paper is as follows, viz.

The Number of the Israelites from 20 Years old and upwards (the Levites, being
left out).

Numb. c. 1. c. 26. v. 21. 46500. Reuben 43730. v. 7. 23. 59300. Simeon 22200.
14. 25. 45650. Gad 40500. 18. 27. 74600. Judah 76500. 22. 29. 54400. Issachar
64300. 25. 31. 57400. Zebulon 60500. 27. 33. 40500. Ephraim 32500. 37. 35.
32200. Manasseth 52700. 34. 37. 35400. Benjamin 45600. 41. 39. 62700. Dan
64400. 43. 41. 41500. Asher 53400. 47. 43. 53400. Napthali 45400. 50. 46.
603550. Sum 601730. 51. c. 3. 39. 22000. Levites, 23000. 62. From a Month old
and upwards.

But the Number of the People of any Nation from a Month Old and upwards, is
more than double their Number, from 20 Years Old and upwards.

Wherefore, divide the number of the Israelites, from 20. Years old and
upwards; by half the number of the Levites from a month Old and upwards: And it
will appear (by any reckoning) that the Levites were not 1/52th, part of the
number of the other Tribes; perhaps not 1/60th, that is to say, The number of
the other Tribes contained the number of the Levites 52. times, perhaps 60.
times.

And yet the Levites had,

1. The tenth or tithe of the whole Land, together with its Culture, etc.

2. Many other profits and advantages enumerated, Numb. 18. v. 8, 9, 10. etc.

3. They had 48 Cities, with their Suburbs; or Territory for their Cattle.
Numb. 3^.7. Josh. 21.4. viz. more than any Tribe, save the Royal Tribe of Judah.

Be pleased to take notice that the Levites not being a 52. part of the number
of the other Tribes is certain: And their not being a 60th part is Conjectural;
because 16 is the middle Year of the number of the living, that is to say,
there are as many under the Age of 16. as above it. And consequently there are
more under 20. than above it; because some dye between 16 and 20.

So much as to the notion of the Israelites, being reckoned from 20. years old
and upwards, and the Levites from a month old and upwards.

Now as to the Levites having the Tenth, or Tithe of the whole Land together
with its Culture, that may very rationally be judged to be as much more: In
Ireland, the charge of the Culture, is four times at least as much as the Rent
of the Land.

In the best parts of England, as Essex, etc. Near London, the Culture is about
double the Rent of the Land; as suppose arable at a medium in Essex, 10
Shillings an Acre, the charge of the Culture is at least as much, Communibus
Annis. So that then the Levites had a double tenth; that is, they had a fifth
and yet perhaps were but the 60. part of the People. And they having a fifth,
and there being twelve times five in sixty; therefore every Levite at a medium,
or one with another, had twelve times as much as other People one with another
had.

There are in England 10000 Parishes, and every Parish may be supposed to have
a Curate, beside the Minister. If it be said that some Parishes, revera have
not Curates; I answer that the Supernumerary expectant Clergy may balance that.

It may further be rationally supposed, that each of our 10000. Ministers has
a Wife, and four Children; it having been made out by the Observations on the
Bills of Mortality, that one Marriage with another (first and second) produces
four Children; it appearing out of those Bills, that there are four
Christenings for one Marriage.

Thus then at this rate, we may suppose 10000. times six of the Tribe of Levi
in England, that is, 60000.

In Henry the VIII 's. time, the Church had a third of the Revenue of the
Kingdom. A fourth of this third, or a twelfth of the whole (supposing the whole
were a Shilling, the third must be a Groat, and a fourth of that three pence,
namely the groat must be a penny, which is the twelfth of a Shilling) was in
Abbey Lands suppressed. And consequently the unsuppressed Abbey Lands, are a
fourth of the whole, by the former Computation; that is to say three pence in
the Shilling; which according to Sir William Pettys Calculation, is t^o
Millions per Annum; the whole Revenue of the Land being reckoned by him to be
per Annum 8 Millions.

The Number now of the English Levites, i. e. our Levites and their Wises and
Children, being 60000. and the People of England, being according to his
Calculation six Millions; they are but the one hundredth part of the whole
People; so then a hundredth part of the People has a fourth: And then every
one with another, may seem to have the twenty fifth, i. e. twenty five times
one with another, as much as the Laity have one with another: That is to say,
more than double what they had in Israel.

But then if we consider the forty eight Cities, the Israelitish Levites had
with other Emoluments; the balance between their Levites, and ours may perhaps
be equal.

If Popery were here in England, the Levites would be but 10000. as being
hindered from Marrying, which Ministers now generally do. And supposing they
had none of the Abbey Lands back again; the 10000 would have to live upon now,
what now maintains 60000. and consequently one Priest would have as much as
150. now have.

The Kings 10ths. here would then be 200000l. a year.

Pondere, Mensura, Numero, Deus omnia fecit. Mensuram and pondus numeres,
numero omnia fecit. Facile est inventis addere. The Bishop being not more ready
to teach than to receive information in any thing, and being satisfied with the
measures of Calculation taken in this Paper; was willing that the World abroad
as well as here at home should be illuminated in this matter: And thereupon
sent to Sir P. P. his final thoughts drawn up in Latin; the which so
accurately setting forth what proportion the number of the Levites held with
the number of all the People of the other Tribes, are as follows, viz.

1. Numerus Populi Israelitici, ab Anno aetatis 20 Juxta Mosis Computum, Number.
1.20.46 erat, 603550 2. Numerus Levitaruus, a primo aetatis Mense; per Mosem
computatus, Numb 3.39. erat, 22000 3. Numero primo per secundum Diviso, quotus
erit, 27 9550/22000 4. Ex hoc igitur Calculo Evidenter Constat, numerum Populi
Israelitici, licet ab Anno aetatis 20. computatio instituatur, continere
numerum Levitarum (licet a primo aetatis mense numerentur.) 27 9550/22000

5. Sed supposito, quod numerus populi annum 20. nondum assecuti, aequalis sit
numero populi, post dictum Annum superstitis; Quaeritur, quae sit proportio
inter Levitas a primo aetatis mense numeratas, and populum ab eodom Termino
numeratum? Hoc ut Constet.

1. Datus populi numerus 603550. est duplicandus, eritique numerus, 1207100 2.
Dividatur dictus numerus, per numerum Levitarum 22000 eritque quotus. 54
22000/19100 3. Sed si dictus numerus 603550. per dimidum numeri Levitarum
11000. dividatur, tum quotus erit, 54 11000/9550

4. Hinc Constat quotum in utraque Divisione non esse eundem, (quantum ad
numerum reliquum divisore minorem, quia, 1. In priori Divisione est, 19100 2 In
secunda, 9550 3. Est Ideo prior numerus posteriori duplo major; bis enem
continet 9550 4 Numeris enim duobus postremis additis, oritur numerus (Ex
Tribus ultimis) primus, 19100

If the Reader has the curiosity further to entertain his thoughts about this
subject, he may consult Sir Peter Pets Happy future State of England, Printed
for William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstans-Church in Fleet Street
Where he will find the Number of the Levites thus adjusted in page 93. The
Index before the Book will direct any Reader to more Calculations about the
Clerical Revenue, than he will perhaps find from all other Authors: And this
Author does particularly deserve the thanks of our English Clergy for his
Animadversions on the most subtle and ingenious Book that ever was writ
against them, in p 160. 161. etc. And where to p. 167. he demonstrates the
present Clerical Revenue of England to be reasonable and necessary, and very
far from excess in its proportion. And all future assertors of the same may
usefully crave aid from his Calculations in that Book about it.

A Letter to Mr. R. T. Concerning the Confirmation of the Order of the
Jesuits, the Numbers of that Order, etc.
FOR the Jesuits, their Order was first confirmed, Anno 1540. and (the worst
Weeds and Vermin multiply most,) they were grown so numerous, that in the
Quarrel between the Pope and the Venetians, Claudius Aquivina (General of the
Jesuits) offered to assist the Pope with 40000 of his own Society, on this
Condition, That all those of his Society who were slain in that quarrel, should
be Canonized. Since, they are vastly multiplied to a prodigious number of
Persons, (some Clergy and in Orders, some Laiques of both Sexes) and Colleges,
and a vast Revenue; so that they neither want Men nor Money to do mischief.

That which is most mischievous to England, is the Colleges (they have the
Government of them) for Eng^ish Fugitives, and training up the Sons of our
Popish Nobility and Gentry, which have been constantly sent thither, and
infected with impious Principles, destructive to our Church and State, and then
sent over hither to practice them. For their Colleges, they have one at Vid.
Camdens Elizab. English. page 216, etc.
Doway, Founded Anno. 1568. Eliz. 10. by Card. Allen's means, to which the Pope
allowed a yearly Pension. Another at Rome, founded by Gregory XIII. Another at
Rheimes. Another at Validolid in Spain, and (if I forget not) another at
Salamanca. They take an Camden ibi. page 577. vid. Bullarium Romanum Romae.
638. Tom. 2. page 219, 220. vid. ibi. Bullam institutionis Collegii Anglici in
Vrbe, and lib. 4. dictae Bullae. 16. 17. de Juramento, etc.
Oath when they are admitted into those Colleges, to come into England, when
their Superiors send them to promote (quantum in se est) the Catholic Cause,
that is, in plain English, Rebellion and Heresy; which they have industriously
and impiously done, especially since the Camden ^b. page 217.
Jesuits first came into England, which was Anno 1580. Eliz. 22.

How they got Money to defray the Charges of their Missions, and their Persons
employed in mischief, you may be sure they will not tell us in Print, but the
World knows they have and give great Sums to such purposes. Holt a Jesuit
offered one Camden ^b. page 440.
Edward York 40000 Ducats to kill Q. Elizabeth; and before Idem. ibid. ^ag.
430.
that, 50000 Ducats were promised (and by agreement contracted for) to It was
Lopes Jew, called ^he Queens Physician.
one who undertook to Poison the said Queen. These are good Sums employed to
impious and bad purposes, and are raised sometimes by the Jesuits themselves,
(who are very Rich, (though they have vowed poverty,) sometimes by the Pope,
the King of Spain, Regulars of other Orders, (besides the Jesuits) or our
English Papists; for all concur to propagate the Catholic Cause. God Almighty
confound their Conspiracies, and (though we deserve it not) preserve the
bleeding Church and Nation.

Tuus, T. L.

A Letter Censuring the Trent Council's denying the use of the Cup to the Laity
in the Eucharist.
My honored Friend,
IN answering to yours, I shall acquaint you, that in the Chapter and Session
of the Trent Council you mention, it is determined that it is not necessary
that Laymen and Priests (who do not Consecrate) should receive the Cup; because
(say they) there is no Precept which requires Communion in both kinds; and
therefore the Church has power (salva Sacramentorum substantia) to add and take
away some things in the administration of them.

But 1. It is evident in the Text, that our Blessed Savior expressly commands
that they should all have the Cup, Drink ye ALL of it, Mat. 26.27. he does not
say so of the Bread, but only take eat; so that they might with some more
pretense, have taken away the Bread. 2. It is also certain, that to drink the
Cup is as much of the Substance of the Sacrament, as to eat the Bread. For as
Meat and Drink are substantial parts of our food to nourish our Bodies in a
natural way, so the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, are substantial parts of
our food to nourish our Souls in a Sacramental and Spiritual way. 3. If there
be 20 Priests at the Mass in the Church of Rome, only one of them (he that
Consecrates) receives the Cup: And yet at the Institution, there were 12
Priests (the twelve Apostles) none of which did Consecrate, and yet all
received the Cup, Mark 14.23. So that it is very observable, that concerning
the Bread, it is only said, Take eat, this is my Body. But there is nothing
expressed in any of Gospels, that he bid them all eat, or that they did all
eat. Whereas for the Cup, we have, 1 an express command in Matthew, Drink ye
All of this. 2. And St. Mark as expressly tells us, they did ALL drink it. And
therefore the Church of Rome had ill luck, to take away the Cup, seeing they
might have taken away the Bread, with less scandal to their Cause, for acting
against the express comm^n^ of our blessed Savior, who does (...) expressly
command them all to eat the ^read.

2. But besides this Instit^tion of the Sacrament in both kinds, a^^ Christian
Churches in the World, (both Men and Women, Clergy and Laity) received it in
both kinds for above 1100 years after our blessed Savior, and all Christian
Churches (except Rome) do so to this day.

That all in the Roman Church received in both kinds, (to omit many others) we
have the most signal Testimony of Cardinal Bona, (who is yet living, or lately
dead, for there is an Epistle of his to the Bishop of Condom's Book, dated Jan.
1672.) This good Cardinal expressly says, what I have done, as you may see in
his own words in the SEMPER and VBIQVE ab Ecclesiae primordijs usque ad
saeculum 12. sub specie panis and vini communicarunt fideles; caepitqu;
paulatim ejus saeculi initio, usus Calicis obsolescere, plerisque Episcopis eum
populo interdicentibus ob periculum irreverentiae and effusionis. Card. Bona.
Rerum Liturgicarum. lib. 2. Cap. 18. page 492. Editionis Romae. 1672.
Margent.

But they tell us, that the whole humanity of our Blessed Savior, (Body and
Blood) is in the Host, and so the Laics have the blood in that Host or Wafer.
Though this be a stupid and prodigious error, yet admit it, that the whole
body and blood of our blessed Savior be in the Wafer or Host (as they call
it,) yet certainly they do not (what our blessed Savior requires) drink the
blood in that dry Wafer.

I am Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant. T. L.

A Letter charging the Tenet of the lawfulness of the burning Heretical Cities
on the Church of Rome.
Sir,
IN obedience to your Commands, I shall return some answer to the Queries you
propose. 1. Then, when you inquire whether the Church of Rome may be justly
charged with that Doctrine of burning Towns wherein Heretics are, though many
Catholics be in them?

I answer, 1. That old Abraham (as honest and just as the Pope, no
^isparagement to his Holiness) thought it Genesis 18.23, 24, 25.
unjust for God himself, who is infinitely just and good) to burn Sodom, had
but ten, (or any) just Men been in it

2. But the Pope thinks otherw^se and I believe we may justly say it, not only
on him, or particular Papists, but to the Popish Church.

For 1. It is certain, that their Canonists generally, even the most approved
and greatest of them (such as John Semeca the Glossator on Gratian, Cardinal
Turrecremata, etc.) hold and vindicate that Opinion. The Can. si audieris. 32.
Cap. 23. l. 5.
Canon which you mention, is taken out of Moses his Deuteronomy. 13.
Law; by which Cities were to be burnt, for the Idolatry of some. And though
Cardinal Turrecremata (as you well know) says truly that, that was a Judicial
Law, and bound the Jews only, to whom only it was given; yet he adds, that in
the New Testament, DEBENT LONG MAGIS in Nov. Testamento talia praecepta
institui and instituta servari. Ad dictum Can. Si audieris.. 3.
MUCH MORE OUGHT there such a Law to be MADE against Heretics, and OBSERVED.
Now this Doctrine has never been condemned or censured as erroneous by the
Church of Rome; and then, quae non prohibet peccare cum possit, jubet. Consult
all their Indices Expurgatorij, (the Spanish, Belgique, that of Portugal, etc.)
And if you find that Doctrine damned in any of them, I will recant.

2. Nay, it is so far from that, that the Books which assert this Doctrine, are
published with the approbation and commendation of their Censores Librorum; who
are appointed by their Church, (by the Nulli liceat imprimere, quosvis libros
de re bks sacris neque illos vendere aut apud se retinere. nisi prius examinati
probatique ab ordinario, etc. C^ncil. Trident. Sess. 4. In decreto de Editione
and usu sacrorum librorum.
Decree of the Trent Council) to examine all Books which write of Sacred
Things, and meddle with Scripture, (as this and all their Canons do,) and not
to permit them to be printed, sine Licentia Superiorum; without the care and
approbation of their Superiors. So that it is eviden^ that the Books which
maintain this Doctrine, (and so the Doctrine it self,) have the approbation of
those, who are publicly authorized by the Roman Church to examine them.

3. But, what is much more (which you well observe,) this Doctrine of Burning
Cities, with the Heretics in them, is expressly approved and taught, in the
Body of their Canon Law; in Gratian's Decretum, (to say nothing of the
Decretals,) and before him in Juo Carnotensis; and before him, in Burchardus
Wormatiensis; It is also registered for Law, by the Author of their Pannormia;
(Pannomia he would have said, had he understood any Greek.) I need not cite the
places, because they are In the Corpus Juris Canonici. Paris, 1612. ad Can. si
audieris. 32. etc. The places in Burchardus, Juo, and the Pannonia are quoted
in the Margent.
cited in the Body of the Law it self.

Now it will be evident, 1. That this Law of firing whole Cities, to consume
Heretics, has been by the Church of Rome publicly received for Law, almost
for 700 Burchardus flourished Anno. 1010. Bellarmine de Script. Ecclesiast. in
Burchardo.
years last past, and that without any contradiction as to this Canon we are
now speaking of. I find indeed, that Thomas Manrique Master of the Sacred
Palace at Rome, almost an hundred years ago, Censura in Glossas Jur. Canonici
ex Archetypo Romans Coloniae. 157^
censured many of the ^losse^ of the Canon Law, (and he might have justly
censured many more;) but he does not at all censure the Gloss Glossa ad dictum
Canonem. verbo, Omnes qui.
of this Canon (si Audieris) we are speaking of; which contains the sense of
the Canon in short; and therefore it is evident that he did not dislike the
Canon it self, nor the burning an Heretical City, though some Catholics were
consumed in it.

2. But after this, in the Vide Gregorii 13. Bullam datam Romae, Anno. 1580.
Juri Canonico praesixam.
year 1580. Gregory 13. appointed some Cardinals, aliosque Doctrina and pietate
insignes (as he tells us in his Bull) to review the whole Body of their Law
(both the Text and Gloss) and purge it from all faults and errors. And
Bellarmine says, this was effectually done, Bellarmin. de Scriptor. Ecclesiast.
in Gratiano, ad Annum. 1145.
Hoc opus a mendis purgatum, and suae INTEGRITATI RESTITVTVM FVIT a Viris
quibusdam eruditissimis, authoritate Gregorii 13. And the Pope himself, in the
said Bull tells us; That the whole work was committed to the Master of the
Sacred ^alace, Recognoscendum and approbandum; and then (as it follows in the
said Bull) the Pope, ex plenitudine potestatis Apostolicae, confirms all this;
and commands all Catholics to receive this incorrupt Edition of the Canon Law
by him published, tam in judicio, quam extra judicium; so as, Nulli liceat
quicquid addere, detrahere, aut immutare: and if any disobey and Contra
inobedientes and Rebels etiam per censuras Ecclesiasticas etiam sapius
aggravandas -- Invocato, si opus fuerit, auxilio brachii saecularis, etc.
Ibidem in dicta Bulla.
rebel (as he calls it) they are to be compelled by Ecclesiastical Censures,
and (if that will not do) delivered over to the Secular Power, and so to death.

Now, as what is in our Canons of the Church of England (being approved and and
enjoined by the King our Supreme Power, and received in our Courts and common
use) may justly be imputed to the Church of England; so the Popish Canons
having been received as Law, and practiced and used as Law, in their Courts and
Consistories for almost 700 years, and confirmed by the express Constitution of
the Supreme (and if the Canonists and Jesuits say true) and Infallible Power
of their Church; I say, (on those grounds) whatever Doctrine (Burning Cities,
or any other) is contained in those Canons, may justly be imputed to that
Church.

But that which is much more to our present purpose, is; That the believing and
receiving the Sacred Caetera omnia a SACRIS CANONIBVS, and aecumenicis
Conciliis, praecipue a Tridentina Synodo definita, indubitanter recipio and
profiteor, etc. Hanc fidem Catholicam, extra quam non est salus, sponte
profiteor, eamque integram usque ad extremum vitae spiritum retinere, etc. Ego
N. Spondeo, Voveo, Juro. Vide Council. Trident. Antverp. 1633. Sess. 24. De
Reformat. in calce, Cap. 12. Vbi exta^ Bulla Pii. 4. super forma professionis
fidei.
Canons, is made an Article of their new Trent-Creed, and all their
Ecclesiastiques (Secular and Regular) are to Promise, Swear and Vow to profess
and maintain them to their last breath.

4. And when it is objected that their Canon Law was not received entirely in
England or France, and therefore all the extravagant Doctrines and Positions
contained in it, cannot be imputed to the Church of Rome.

In answer to this, I say, 1. That the Objection is inconsequent, and a
manifest non-sequitur. For the errors of the Canon Law may justly be imputed to
the Church of Rome, though England and France received it not; because what the
Pope (the Supreme Head of that Church) and the far greater part of the Popish
World do receive, the Church receives. Denominatio sequitur majorem partem.

2. And that this is true, that the Doctrines in the Canon Law (notwithstanding
some may not receive them all) are the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, I have
two Provincial Synods here in England expressly declaring it; one at Vide
Concilia per Hen. Spelmannum. Tom. 2. page 653.. Nulius quoque
Oxford, another at Apud eundem Spelman. Ibidem. Tom. 2. page 666.. 9.
London, under Archbishop Arundell; in both which they declare; That, Articuli
qui in Decretis aut Decretalibus continentur, sunt Articuli terminati per
ECCLESIAM; the Church of Rome (we may be sure) they mean. So that in the
judgment of these two Provincial Councils, the Canon-laws are the
determinations and definitions of the Church of Rome, and so whatever errors be
in those Laws and Canons, may justly be imputed to the Roman Church.

3. The Canon Law was received Nul^us de Articulis term^nalis per Ecclesiam,
prout in Decretis, in Decret^libus, nisi ad habendum verum eorum intellectum,
disp^tare praesumat, aut Authoritatem eorundem Decretorum aut Decretalium,
potestatemve condentis eadem, in dubium revocet. Paenas Haeresis and relapsi
incurrat, etc.
here in England, as is evident by the two Councils before cited, and in the
places cited. It is certain that the Canon-laws were received both in England
and France, except where (in some few things) they clash'd with our Common or
Statute Laws; for then the Parliament would say: Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari:
And so in France, if they clash'd with the Liberties of the Gallican Church,
they would neither receive nor obey the Canons. But if any can show me that
either England or France rejected the Canons, which allow burning of Cities for
some Heretics in them; I will confess it is something more pertinent, yet does
not prove the purpose for which it is brought in the Objection. For though
England and France had not received that Doctrine, yet it might justly be
imputed to the Church of Rome. Sure I am, that he who reads the French
Historians, Matthew Paris, and some of our own Popish Historians, will find
more Cities burnt in France, (or by open War Sacked and Ruined) upon this
account of having Heretics in them (the poor Waldenses,) than in all Europe
besides.

I am Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant. T. L.

A Letter of Gratian's, falsifying the passage out of Cyprian in the Canon Law,
to induce the Burning of Heretical Cities, etc.
SIR,
1. FOR Cyprian, he was Archbishop of Carthage, and Primate of Africa, and
Anno Christi Phil. Labbe Jesuita de scriptoribus Ecclesiast. in Cypriano. Tom.
1. page 237.
248. was was Consecrated, and Anno 258. suffered Martyrdom, as a great
promoter and Patron of Christianity, and because he would not be an Idolater
and Worship the Roman Pagan Gods. He suffered on the 14th of September, and on
that day, the memory of his Martyrdom is Celebrated in all our Martyrologio
Romano, Vsuardi, Bedae Adonis, etc.
Martyrologies. 2. Whereas you ask whether he was an Anabaptist?

1. It is beyond all doubt, that both he (and a whole Council with him) was
earnest for Baptizing Infants, as is evident in many of his Epistles,
especially that of him, and 66 Bishops with him, about Baptizing Cyprian Epist.
59. ad Fide de I^fantibus baptizandis. page 163. in editione Goula^tii.
Infants. 2. He and the African Bishops with him, were for Rebaptizing those
who were Baptized by Heretics; because they thought, and Synodically declared,
that Heretics could not give true Baptism, but that the Baptism given by
Heretics, was a nullity, and no Baptism at all; and therefore the Baptizing of
such, as had been Baptized by Heretics, was no Re-baptization, because that of
Heretics was a nullity, and indeed no true Baptism.

4. Lastly, when you ask whether Cyprian be pertinently cited by Gratian, Can.
si audieris. Cause. 23. Quest. 5. It is certain, that Gratian in citing Cyprian,
betrays his great ignorance, (if he understood not Cyprian s plain Latin,) or
his knavery, (if he did understand him,) or both, as many times he does. For it
is evident, that the place in Cyprian, does not prove what Gratian proposes:
That a whole City, now under the Gospel, may be burnt for a few Heretics. For
it is evident,

1. Cyprian's design is to encourage all good Christians rather to suffer
Martyrdom, than to commit Idolatry, by Worshipping other Gods. For that is the
Title and Subject of the Epistle, De Exhortatione Martyrii.

2. In order to this, he shows God's great hatred, and severe punishing of
Idolatry. 1. From a place in Deuteronomy. 13.6.
Deuteronomy: But this making nothing for his purpose, he wisely leaves it out
of his Canon. 2. Cyprian cites another place in the same Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13.
Chapter; the words in the Text are these: If thou shall hear say, in one of
thy Cities, which the Lord thy God has given thee; certain Men, the Children
of Belial, are gone from among us, and have withdrawn THE INHABITANTS of their
City to serve other Gods, etc. In which words, it is to be considered. 1. That
this severe Law concerned only the Cities of Israel; it is in the Text, one of
THY CITIES, which the Lord thy God has GIVEN THEE: As the Law, under that
penalty, was given only to the Jews in Canaan, so it concerned them only, not
any other People of other Countries.

2. It Is in the Text; withdraw the Inhabitants of that City, (these words
Gratian leaves out;) now the words are indefinite, and may mean All the
Inhabitants; and then it is evidently just to kill them all: And it is in
Cyprian, etiam si universa civitas consenserit ad Idololatriam.

3. But if the Major part be not indeed meant, then the Sea Ainsworth 's
excellent Commentary on Deuteronomy. 13. v. 12.13.
Jews Doctors say, that if a Major part of the City be drawn to Idolatry, then
that major part shall be slain, and the City be burnt. But if the Minor part
only be drawn to Idolatry, then they say, That the Minor part shall be slain,
but the City shall not be burnt. This the Jewish Doctors, (who understood the
Text much better than Gratian, or John Semeca his Glossator) took to be the
meaning of the Text, and not only they, but Learned Christians too.

4. Cyprian having shown how great a Sin Idolatry was, and how hateful to God;
he adds, Si ante adventum Christi, circa Deum colendum and Idola spernenda haec
praecepta servata sunt, quanto magis post adventum Christi servanda sunt? Now
the Mosaical Precepts are either De Officiis, or de Paenis.

1. De Officiis, such as concern our duty to God and our Neighbor; and of
these Moral Precepts Cyprian says, that if they were observed before Christ,
then, quanto magis post adventum Christi; who had (in his Mat. chapter 5. and 6.
Sermon on the Mount) fully explained, and given us the true meaning of them:
for the clearer understanding of any Laws, does induce a stronger obligation;
and hence it is, that Cyprian thinks truly, that Christians were more strictly
obliged to observe the Moral Law, than the Jews were.

2. But the Law De paenis and suppliciis, Cyprian does not at all mention, nor
in that place intend or mean. For Christians are not bound to inflict the same
punishments on the Transgressors of the Law, to which the Jews (by the Mosaical
Law) were bound. For to the Jews, Levit. 20.10.
Adultery, or breach of the Exodus 31.14.
Sabbath were Capital Crimes; but not so amongst Christians. Exodus 22.1.
Theft was not Capital, by Moses his Law, and yet by the Law of England it is
Capital. By the Jews Law it was, an Exodus 21.24.
Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, but our blessed Math. 5.38, 39.
Savior declares against that severity, as not to be used amongst Christians.
Now Gratian, (with great ignorance or knavery, or both) would have Cyprian
understood de Paenis, and would (against the sense of Cyprian and truth)
conclude, that because Idolatry was by the Jews Law punished by death;
therefore it should be so punished since Christ under the Gospel.

5. Once more, Gratian concluded his quotation out of Cyprian with these words,
Si ante adventum Christi, haec praecepta servata sunt* quanto magis post
adventum servanda sunt, quando ille veniens, non verbis tantum nos hortatus
est, sed and factis. By which words, he would prove, that our blessed Savior
did both by his words and deeds exhort us to kill Heretics. Whereas,

1. There is not one word in Cyprian, or the Texts of Scripture he cites, which
any way concerns Heretics or Heresy, but only concerning Idolaters, and
Idolatry, which are things of a far different nature.

2. Had Gratian considered and understood what immedia^ely follows there in
Cyprian, (which he cunningly and knavishly leaves out) he might have clearly
seen that Cyprian neither said, nor meant, that our blessed Savior did by
deeds and words exhort to kill Heretics; but that which Cyprian truly says,
our blessed Savior did by words and deeds exhort to, was, that Christians
should patiently suffer and (by no means) renounce the Gospel, by serving Idols
and Idolatry, For after these words, (with which Gratian ends his Canon)
Christus veniens, non verbis tantum nos hortatus est, sed factis, (there should
be only a comma after factis, though Gratian does make a full point, as if it
concluded the sentence:) It immediately follows in Cyprian thus -- Non verbis
tantum nos hortatus sit, sed and factis, post omnes injurias and contumelias
passus and crucifixus, ut nos PATI ET MORI EXEMPLOSVO DOCERET, ut nulla sit
homini excusatio PRO SE (pro Christo) non patienti, cum ILLE passus sit PRO
NOBIS, etc. That which Cyprian says Christ taught us with words and deeds, was
not that we should kill Heretics (as Gratian would have it;) but that we
should willingly suffer in defense of the Gospel against Idolaters

And it is a signal place to this purpose; where our blessed Savior himself
tells us, That when the Samaritans would not receive him, (who were Heretics
and Idolaters too,) and James and John would have had Fire from Heaven to
consume them; our blessed Savior rebuked them, and said Luc. 9.5.
That the Son of Man was not come to destroy Men's lives, but to save them.

How his pretended Vicar, and his Canonists will justify their Murdering
Heretics, and Burning their Cities, Ipsi viderint.

One place (I confess) they have in the Epistle to Titus* which (if the
ridiculous Monk may interpret it) will do their business. This place is Titus
3.10. where the words in their vulgar Latin being these; Haereticum devita,
(which we render Reject, or avoid an Heretic.) But the honest Monk (who
understood no Greek, and little Latin) by making two words of one, proves from
that Text, that Heretics must be killed; For (says he) it must be read thus;
Haereticum de Vita toll, etc.

I am, Sir, Your affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant, T. L.

A Letter to the Earl of Anglesey, of the Council of Trent, not being received
in France.
Right Honorable and my very good Lord.
I Understand by a Letter from my Ancient and Worthy Friend Sir Peter Pett,
that your Lordship (who may command) desires me to give you satisfaction, as to
this Question -- Whether the Trent Council be received in France. And though I
dare not undertake to give your Lordship satisfaction, yet (in obedience to
your Lordship's Command) I shall venture to say a few things: My great Age and
Infirmities, and my little time, disabling me to say more.

I say then,

1. That Father Paul of Venice (that great Scholar and Statesman) who had
intimate familiarity with the most eminent French Statesmen and Scholars, (both
at Venice and Paris;) Father Paul, I say, tells us in Vide Interdicti Veneti
Historiam, per Paulum Sarpium pas. 4. and 58.
Print; That the Trent Council was not received in France in the Year 1616.

2. The famous Peter de Marca, Archbishop of Paris, Marca de Concordia
Sacerdotii and Imperii. lib. 2. cap. 17.. 6. page 133. Col. 7.
tells us; That in the time the Trent Council sat; when it evidently appeared,
that by the Treaty of the Trent Council, the Liberty of the Gallican Church was
(in quam Pet. de Marca ibidem.
plurimis capitibus) in very many particulars destroyed: The Ambassadors of
Henry II. and Charles the IX. left the Synod, being called home by their Kings;
(and so did the French Bishops too, (as Father Paul in the Hist. of that
Council tells us) and complaining in the Council that the Liberty of the
Gallican Church, and regia dignitas erant imminutae, their recess from, and
leaving the Council, helped the French Pretenses, and was a good reason (as
Marca there proves) non admittendae Synodi, why they did not receive the
Council.

3. The same Marca (in the same places) tells us -- Marca, ibidem. page 133.
col. 1. Totius cleri Gallicani comventus, Concilii Tridentini promulgationem a
Regibus nostris supplicibus libellis postulaverit; ea lege, ut ea capita
exciperent, quae libertatibus Ecclesiae adversarentur. Quorum desideriis
principes, toto hoc negotio saepe in consilium prudentissimorum relato, se
accommodare non potuerunt.
That the whole Clergy of France in their Synods did most frequently petition
their Kings, that they would publish and receive the Trent- Council (excepting
those things which were repugnant to the Liberties of the Gallican can Church;)
yet their Kings (tho they consulted the wisest of men about that business)
would never grant their Petition, nor publish or receive the Trent Council,
with the exception; whence it is evident (if that great Archbishop say true)
that the Kings of France would never receive any of the Trent Council, no not
that part of it, which was not against the Liberties of their Church, or their
King's Regality.

4. And hence it evidently appears, that the Learned Marca does contradict
himself. For in the same Page 133. Col. 1. Concilii Tridentini Definitiones
fidei ad missae sunt, Edicto publico, quod ea de relatum est, Anno 1579.
page and Column, and the two first lines of it, he says; That the Definitions
of the Council of Trent, concerning Faith, were admitted in France by a public
Edict, Anno 1579. (which must be in the 6th year of Henry the III. of France)
and yet he tells us in the same page and Column; That although the whole Clergy of
France did most frequently petition their Kings to promulgate, and admit only
that part of the Trent Council, which was not against the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, (if these Words mean any thing, they must mean the Definitions
of Faith, which Marca says, were received by the Edict, 1579.) Yet their Kings
would never admit any of it.

And if their Kings would never admit any of it (tho the whole Clergy did
petition them to do it) then it was not admitted by any public Edict in the
6th year of Henry the III, that is, in the year 1579.

5. And that which makes this more certain and evident, that the Trent Council
was not received in France, Anno 1579. (which Marca says) appears by Thuanus (a
Witness beyond all exception) who assures us, that the Trent Council was not
received in France Anno Dom. 1588. (and therefore not in the Year 1579. as
Marca says.) For that Excellent and most Faithful Historian tells us; That at
Thuanus Hist. Tom. 4. lib. 94. page 361. Magno caloris aestu contentio de
Tridentina Synodo promulganda, toties agitata, denuorenovata est.
that time, (Anno 1588) The business of promulging and receiving of the Trent
Council in France was earnestly pressed; and tho it had been long desired, yet
the receiving of it had been always Novis difficultatibus subortis, promulgatio
Synodi tam diu expetita retardaretur. Ibidem.
hindered.

And how stoutly the promulgation of it was then opposed, the same Thuanus
there tells you.

But that the French do not now receive the Trent Council, not in rebus fidei,
may farther appear.

6. The whole Clergy of France declare 1. That In their Assembly, March 19.
1682.
a Council is above the Pope. 2. That he has no power in Temporals in any
Princes Dominions. 3. That he has no power to depose Princes. 4. Nor to absolve
Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. 5. That he is not Infallible: And tho
the Pope declare by his Bull that all those are Bulla data Romae 11 April,
1682. Improbamus, rescindimus, cassamus, etc.
null, yet the French King ratifies In an Edict registered in Parliament, 23
Marcb, 1682.
and confirms them all. Now these Five Propositions contradict many things in
the Trent Council, which are de fide at Rome.

7. There is a The Acts of the General Assembly of the French Clergy, in the
Year 1685, etc. That Is the Title of the Book.
Book lately made by the General Assembly of the French Clergy, and presented
to the King July 14, 1685. In which Book they cite (in the Margent) their new
Trent This Trent Creed in most of the Editions of the Trent Council, is at the
end of the Council; but in the Edition at Antuerp, 1633. (which is the best) it
is in the Body of the Council Sess. 24. page 450, 451.
Creed; that is, some part of it. For the last of it they cite is page 38. of
that Book; and leave out the last part of that Creed; which is contained in
these Words -- Caetera item omnia, a sacris Canonibus and oecumenicis
Conciliis, ac praecipue a sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita and
declarata, indubitanter recipio ac profiteor; simulque contraria omnia, and
Haereses quascunque ab Ecclesia damnatas, and rejectas, and anathematizatas ego
pariter damno, reiicio, and anathematizo: Hanc veram CATAOLICAM FIDEM, extra
quam nemo salvus esse potest, quam in presenti sponte profiteor, and veraciter
teneo, eandem integram, usque ad extremum vitae spiritum constantissime
retinere and confiteri, atque abillis quorum cura ad me in munere meo
spectabit, teneri, doceri and praedicari, quantum in me est, curaturum. Ego
idem, N. spondeo, voveo, juro, etc. These be the Words which the French Clergy
leave out, in their Book above mentioned: And great reason they had so to do;
for if they admitted this part of the Trent Creed, then goodnight to all the
Liberties of their Gallican Church For,

1. By this part of the Trent Creed, they are bound to believe and profess
OMNIA a concilio Tridentino tradita, definita, declarata etc. It Is not only
matters of Doctrine and definitions of Faith; but OMNIA definita and tradita:
And it is most certain that the Council intended both matters of Discipline and
Doctrine.

2. In the foresaid words of their Trent Creed, a firm belief is required to be
given, OMNIBUS in Conciliis Oecumenicis traditis: And then all their Liberties
of the Gallican Church are gone. For their Sanctio pragmatica, (which is the
authentic comprehension of them) is damned and abrogated by Leo In Bulla data
Romae, 14 Call. Jan. Anno 1526.
X. approbante Concilio; In their General Lateran Council.

3. By the words of this Creed they are to receive OMNIA in sacris canonibus
tradita; and then farewell to all their Gallican Churches Liberties: For their
Sanctio pragmatica, is expressly Extravagant. communes. lib. 1. Titulo. 9. De
Trig. and pace. cap. 1.
damned and abrogated in their Canon Law, by a Bull of Pope Sixtus quartus.

4. Again, the Words above mentioned, (which the French Clergy left out of
their Book) are a part Fidei Catholicae, extra quam non est salus: And
therefore, if the French do not receive (as questionless they do not) this part
of the Trent Creed; then it is evident, they do not receive (what P. de Marca
would have us believe) Definitiones fidei Concilii Tridentini.

Obj. But Sir P. Pett. mentions Cabassatius in his Letter, that the Trent
Council was received in France, Anno 16^5.

Sol. I confess he says, that it was received that year, in Generali convent^s
Gallicani Cleri, Notitia Conciliorum per Joh. Cabassutium Lugduni Anno 1672.
page 720.
sub Ludovico. 13. But 1. Father Paul of Venice (a far more credible Author)
says it was not received Anno 1616. and so it could not be received Anno 1615.
2. He says it was received that year, a Clero Gallicano sub Ludovico. 13. But
he does not say that the King received it, only the Clergy received it. And
Pet. de Marca (in the places above quoted) expressly says; That the Clergy very
frequently petitioned their Kings to receive that Council, but their Kings (as
Marca grants) would never give their consent; without which consent, it could
Decreta conciliorum legis Vim in Gallia non habent, nisi recepta a clero, and
regia authoritate munita. Marca de concord. Sacerd. and Imperii. lib. 2. cap.
17.. 7. page 133.
not be received in France.

That God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless your Lordship, your
Noble Family and Friends, is (and shall be) the Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged, Thankful, and Faithful Servant, Thomas
Lincoln.

Another Letter, to the same Person of the same Subject.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
SInce my last Letter, I have remembr'd, and found a passage in an excellent
French Historian, which will be of signal use; to make it appear, that the
Trent Council was never received in France.

The Historians Name is Barthol. Gramondus: The Title of his Book this --
Historiarum Galliae ab Excessu Hen. 4. libri 18. Authore G.B. Gramondo, in
sacro Regis Consistorio Senatore, and in Parliamento Tolosano Praeside:
Tolosae, 1643.

In this Book Gramondus tells us, that in the page 57.
Year, 1615. (the year in which Cressie, out of Cabassutius, says the Clergy
received the Trent Council;) There was a Convention of the three Estates. In
which the receiving and Promulgation of the Trent Council was Proposita a clero
Concilii Tridentini promulgatio; and molliendae invidiae, adjecta est haec
Clausala: Sine praejudicio Coronae Regiae, and libertatum Gallican e Ecclesiae,
etc. page 57, 58.
proposed by the Clergy; and to mollify the matter, and make it pass more
easily, they added this Clause; That the Council might be received only so far,
as it was not prejudicial to the Kings Royal Crown and dignity, and the
liberties of the Gallican Church. The Clergy were zealous for it to pass; and
(as Gramondus says) Cardinal Perron spoke elegantly, and learnedly for it.
After long debate about the reception of that Council, (especially between the
Clergy and the third Estate) the Issue was; That the third Estate carried it
against the Clergy; and the reception, and promulgation of the Trent Council,
was absolutely rejected; page 69.
Praevaluitque Clero populus, says Gramondus, who yet (as appears by his words
in the same, 69. page) that it might have been received, with that Clause which
was added.

Where it is evident,

1. That when Notitia Conciliorum page 720.
Cabassutius, names only a Anno 1615. in general conventu Gallicani Cleri
Ibidem page 720.
Convention of the Clergy, in that Year, 1615. (as though that had been all;)
yet it was Conventus trium regni Ordinum, a Convention of the three Estates,
which is the greatest and Supreme Convention of France, (equal to our
Parliament,) as is certain and in Gramondus page 58. etc.
evident.

2. When Cabassutius says, the Trent Council was received in that general
Convention of the Gallican Clergy; De Marca Archbishop of Paris (a person of
far more Learning and Authority, than that pitiful Monk) says, and evidently
proves, that no such Convention of the Gallican Clergy, had any Authority to
receive, or Promulgate the Trent Council; (or any other Council;) they might
approve and (as they did) desire the reception of that Council, but receive it
they could not.

3. Lastly, it was so far from being received (as Cabassutius dreams) by the
Convention of the French Clergy, that it was absolutely rejected, by the
supreme Convention of the three Estates, and that after a long and free debate.

It is true, and (from the best Historians) notoriously known, that not only in
France, but in England (while Popery prevailed here) the Clergy were generally
more for advancing the Popes; than maintaining the just Prerogatives of their
own Kings, or the Rights of the Laity. Because, as by the Clergies help and
assistance, the Pope grew greater, so their Jurisdiction and Revenues were
increased by the Pope: So Anselm and Beckett were zealous for the Pope, and
very Disobedient (if not Traitorous) to their King; therefore the Pope assists
them with his Power and Favors while they live, and Canonizes, and makes them
(what their virtues could not) Saints after their Death.

That God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless your Lordship, your
Noble Family, and your Friends, is the Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged, thankful, and faithful Servant. Thomas
Lincoln.

September, 1677. Received from the Bishop in a Letter, an account of the
Numbers of the Conformists, Nonconformists, Papists; of the Age of
Communicants: with the Proportions of their Numbers, to one another in the
several Diocesses, in the Province of Canterbury (which Survey of their
Numbers, was taken by the Bishops, in the Year, 1676. by direction from His
Majesty King Charles the Second) together with the nine Paragraphs of Remarks,
made by some employed in the Survey.
IN the taking of this Survey, or account, we find these things remarkable.

1. That many left the Church on the late indulgence, who before did frequent
it.

2. The sending forth these enquiries, has caused many to frequent the Church.

3. That they are Walloons chiefly, who make up the Number of Dissenters, in
Canterbury, Sandwich, and Dover.

4. That the Presbyterians are divided; some of them come sometimes to Church:
Therefore such are not wholly Dissenters upon the third Enquiry.

5. A Considerable part of Dissenters are not of any Sect whatsoever.

6. Of those who come to Church, very many do not receive the Sacrament.

7. At Ashford, and at other places, we find a new sort of Heretics; after the
Name of Muggleton, a London Tailor; in number Thirty.

8. The rest of the Dissenters are Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independants,
Quakers, about equal Numbers; only some few Self-willers professedly.

9. The Heads, and Preachers of the several Factions, are such, as had a great
share in the late Rebellion.

The Number of
Conformists. Non-conf. Papists. Canterbury 59596 6287 142 London 263385 20893
2069 Winchester 15^937 7904 968 Rochester 27886 1752 64 Norwich 168760 7934 671
Lincoln 215077 10001 1244 Ely 30917 1416 14 Chichester 49164 2452 385
Salisbury 103671 4075 548 Exceter 207570 5406 298 Bath and Wells 145464 5856
176 Worcester 37489 1325 719 Coven. and Litch. 155720 5042 1949 Hereford 65942
1076 714 Gloucester 64734 2363 128 Bristol 66200 2200 199 Peterborough 91444
2081 163 Oxford 38812 1122 358 St. David's 68242 2368 217 Landaffe 39248 719 551
Bangor 28016 247 19 St. Asaph 45088 635 275 Total 2123362 93154 11870 93154
11870 2228386

The proportion of the Numbers of
Nonc. to Conf. as 1. to Papists to Conf. as 1. to Both to Conf. as 1. to Pap.
to Non-conf. as 1. to Canter. 9. R. 3013 419 R. 98 9 r. 1735 44 r. 39 London
12. R. 12669 127 R. 622 11 r. 10803 10 r. 201 Winch. 19. R. 761 155 R. 823 17
r. 113 8 r. 160 Roch. 415. R. 1606 445 R. 46 15 r. 646 27 r. 24 Norw. 21. R.
2146 251 R. 339 19 r. 465 11 r. 553 Lincol. 21. R. 5056 172 R. 1109 19 r. 1422
8 r. 49 Ely 21. R. 1181 2208 R. 5 21 r. 887 20 r. 2 Chich. 20. R. 124 129 R.
399 17 r. 935 6 r. 142 Salisb. 25. R. 1796 189 R. 89 22 r. 1964 7 r. 239
Exceter 38. R. 2142 696 R. 162 36 r. 2326 18 r. 42 Bath and Wells 24. R. 4920
826 R. 88 24 r. 696 33 r. 48 Worces. 28. R. 389 52 R. 101 18 r. 697 1 r. 606
Covent. and Lich. 30. R. 4460 79 R. 1749 22 r. 1918 2 r. 1144 Heref. 61. R. 606
92 R. 254 36 r. 2602 1 r. 362 Glocest. 26. R. 296 505 R. 84 25 r. 2449 18 r. 59
Bristol 30. R. 200 332 R. 132 27 r. 1487 11 r. 11 Peterb. 43. R. 1961 591 R.
111 40 r. 1684 12 r. 125 Oxford 34. R. 664 108 R. 148 26 r. 1332 3 r. 48 St.
Dav. 28. R. 1938 314 R. 104 26 r. 1032 10 r. 198 Land. 54. R. 422 71 R. 147 30
r. 1148 1 r. 168 Bangor 113. R. 95 1474 R. 10 105 r. 86 13 St. Asa. 71. R. 3
163 R. 263 49 r. 498 2 r. 85 T. 22. R 73974 178 R. 10502 19 r. 1906 7 r. 10064

It is here thought fit to acquaint the Reader, that the Bishop having sent
this Copy of the Survey to Sir P.P. he making enquiry about it among some of
the King's Ministers, and among some of the persons employed in taking it,
found it was taken well as to the number of the Papists; but short as to the
number of the Non-conformists: and as to its being taken thus to the Number of
the Papists, the Reader may be referred to Dr. Glanvil the Author of the Book
called, The Zealous and Impartial Protestant: Showing some great, but less
heeded Dangers of Popery; Printed in London in the Year 1681. and wherein p.
46, he says, I shall consider one great Instance, which is men's multiplying
the numbers of Papists beyond all bounds of truth, etc. People are apt to talk
of the numbers and strengh of Papists, and no doubt design them not any service
by it, etc. whereas did they know how inconsiderable their real numbers are,
they must certainly sit down, and be quiet. They would then understand that
their business is unpracticable; Private Persons would be discouraged, and if
there should succeed a Prince of their Religion, in all probability, he also
would despond, and never think of attempting a thing, humanely speaking, so
impossible; a thing, the endeavoring which would certainly tear all in pieces,
Religion, Government, and all: And what the late Designs have done toward it,
we all sadly see. Therefore, that they may see their Designs are Madness, and
that they ought to despair of ever succeeding by their strength, we should let
them know that they have abused themselves, and others have abused them, by
false Musters.

In the year 1676/7. Orders came from the Archbishop to the several Bishops,
and from them to the respective Ministers and Churchwardens in the Province of
Canterbury, to enquire carefully, and to return an account of the distinct
numbers of Conformists, Protestant Nonconformists, and Papists in their several
Parishes, viz. of all such Men and Women that were of age to communicate. I
have by me the return from the whole Province; which contains all England and
Wales, excepting only what belongs to four of the 25 Bishoprics. The number of
Papists there returned, was but eleven thousand, eight hundred, and seventy,
Men and Women, old and young. Now though in this account Conformists, and other
Non-conformists were not so distinctly, could not so justly be reckoned; yet
for the Papists, they being so few in each Parish, and so notoriously
distinguished, as generally they are, the Ministers and Churchwardens could
easily give account of them; and there is no reason to suspect their
Partiality. We hear, I know, that in London alone, and in some particular
Parishes of that and the neighbor City, there are vastly great numbers. But
within the Walls they are known to be very few; comparatively scarce any such.
In the Suburbs they are said to be numerous, (still the great numbers are in
places remote, or where inquiry cannot be well made.) In St. Martins alone I
have heard of twenty or thirty thousand; but the Account was taken there, and
as exact a one as could be: And I am assured by some that should know, and had
no reason to misinform me, that the number returned upon the most careful
scrutiny, was about six hundred: Of Lodgers there might be more, but they are
supposed to be accounted elsewhere, in the several Parishes to which they
belong. I have found the like fallings short of the reputed number in diverse
other noted places. In one City talked of for Papists, as if half the
Inhabitants were such; I am assured there are not twenty Men and Women. In
another large and populous one, a Person of Quality living in it, told me,
there were at least six hundred; but when the enquiry was made by the Ministers
and Churchwardens of each Parish, that number was not found to be sixty. And
it is very probable such a disproportion would be met between the reputed and
real number in all other places, if scrutiny were made. In all the West, and
most populous parts of England they are very inconsiderable. I hear frequently
from Inhabitants of those places, that in Bristol (the second or third City of
England) there is but one; and in the City of Gloucester one more, or two at
most; In the other great Towns and Cities Westward scarce any; and those that
are in the Counties at large, are extremely few, thinly scattered, here one,
and at the distance of many Miles it may be another; some few decayed Gentry,
and here and there an inconsiderable Countryman, or Tradesman, very few of
Note or Riches of either sort. And if an exact account were taken of their
Number and Conditions from London to the Mount in Cornwell Westward, the
inconsiderableness of both would exceedingly surprise us: And I am very
confident, that of all sorts of men, differing from the Church of England, in
that Kingdom, the Papists are the fewest; and those that are, are so scattered,
and live so distantly from each other, that it is really very little they are
capable of doing, in opposition to the rest of the Nation; and the less,
because of the great jealousy and hatred that all universally have conceived
of, and against them.

We hear of vast numbers in the North; and there are more, no doubt, in those
parts than in the Western; but I believe they are much fewer than we hear, and
no way able by their numbers to make any kind of balance for the exceeding
disproportion in the West.

The truth is, people are mightily given, and generally so, to multiply the
number of Papists; and they do it in common Talk at least ten fold. Designs
have been, and I doubt are still carrying on, which this Pretense serves. A
chief thing to be done in order to public Mischief, is to affright the people
with the number and strength of Papists: And I believe if there were but ten of
that sort in the Nation, it would be the same thing. Thus far Dr. Glanvil.

But the Doctor's Notion of the inconsiderableness of the Papists power to
overthrow our Religion and Laws by force of Arms, may thus for the satisfaction
of the Reader be corroborated by Calculation.

There being every where as many under the Age of 16, as above it, it makes the
total of the Papists in the Province of Canterbury about 23000,

The Province of York bears a sixth part of the Taxes, and has in it a sixth
part of the people that the Province of Canterbury has.

A sixth part of 23000 is 3500, which added to 23000, the Papists in England
will be 27000.

Half of these is under the Age of sixteen, which may be supposed to be 14000.

A 7th part of these (which is 4000) are aged, and above 60.

So then taking out of their number 18000, there remains 9000, a third part of
their number, who are between 16 and 60; and of which one half are Women.

There remains therefore of Papists in England, fit to bear Arms 4500, quod
erat demonstrandum.

It is observed that in Glamorganshire, Radnor, Brecknock, there is but one
Popish Family, viz. the Turbervils. In Carmarthen not one. In Denbighshire but
one.

And it may be worthy the Readers knowledge, that Sir William Petty a great
Master of Numbers, and Calculations; having in the late Reign of King James,
enquired from some of his R. C. Bish^ps, what Numbers of Children they had
Confirmed throughout the Kingdom; gave his judgment that all the Papists in
England, Men Women and Children, were but 32000. And that George Fox, in 44
Years, has made more Quakers five times, than the Pope of Rome, and all his
Jesuits and other Emissaries have made Papists.

But as to the defectiveness of that Survey, as to the Non-conformists; the
following Memorial was given by Sir P. P. to one of King James's Ministers: viz.

Whereas in the Survey of the Numbers of several Religionary Persuasions,
within the Province of Canterbury, above the Age of Sixteen, returned in the
Year, 1676. the Total of the Nonconformists there returned, was 93154. (and
consequently the Nonconformists, under the Age of Sixteen, doubling the
aforesaid Number there, made the Total of all the Nonconformists there to be
but 186308.) The defectiveness of the said Survey does most plainly appear, by
the instance of the short return there, as to the Diocese of London.

For that Survey making the Conformists, above the Age of Sixteen in that
Diocese, to be 263385, and the Nonconformists there under that Age, to be
20893. and the Papists there, under that Age, to be 2069; makes by doubling
that Total, with those under the Age of Sixteen Years, to be but 286347.

Whereas Sir William Petty, by his late Printed Calculations, has made the
Number of the People of London to be in all, 696360.

But the Diocese of London, taking in all the other places in Middlesex, that
are without the Bills of Mortality; and taking in likewise all Essex, and part
of Darthfortshire; it appears thereby, how extremely defective the return of
the Total for the Diocese of London was. For the County of Essex, bearing a two
and twentieth part of the Taxes of this Kingdom; and supposing the whole
Kingdom to have but 7000000. the Number of People in Essex at that rate will
be, 318181.

And in Fine, as I have in another Paper set down the Total of the Burials, and
Christenings, for the Year, 1686; the Registered Christenings, being near one
Third part less than the Burials; it may be thence inferred that near a Third
part that Year were Nonconformists, and so if we should Account the People then
within the Bills of Mortality to have been but 600000, the Nonconformists there
then were about 200000.

The Reason of this Calculation of a third part, being then within the Bills of
Mortality Nonconformists is, that the Christenings do there in common Years,
revera exceed the Burials; the which appears out of the Amsterdam, and Paris
Bills of Mortality; and where Christenings are carefully Registered. But within
the London Bills, the Christenings of Nonconformists Children are not Registered.

SIR, P. Pett, judging it might tend to the public benefit of Mankind, to have
the Lord Secretary Falklands Works Published together in one Volume in Folio;
wrote to the late Bishop of Lincoln, a large Letter acquainting his Lordship
with his design about the same: and that in his Lordships Life, to be writ
before the Book, he intended a short Relation of some Memoirs, wherein the Lord
Falklands great Wit, and Moral Perfections were Conspicuous: And with the
materials of which he was supplied in Discourse, from the Lord Chief Justice
Vaughan, Mr. Robert Boil, and the Lady Ranalagh his Sister; and Mr. Abraham
Cowly and Mr. Edmund Waller; who all had the Honor of his Friendship and
frequent Conversation. The two latter Persons having Celebrated his Lordships
worth in their Immortal Poems; and Sir P. told the Bishop he intended to Print
their Verses before his Works.

And Sir P. Considering, that the Bishop had often mentioned to him his
frequent Conversation with my Lord Falkland, at his House at Tew; he thought
fit to engage the Bishop, to furnish him with some materials of Facts, relating
to his Lordship, that might be worthy of the knowledge of the World.

Sir P. further mentioned it in his Letter to the Bishop, that beside the great
Learning, Reasons and Judgment, expess'd in my Lord Falklands Printed Writings;
there is an incomparable happy mixture of so much of that Great, Beautiful,
Charming thing, called Wit; that the measures of Decorum would admit no more,
according to that known saying of Mr. Cowley, in his Ode of Wit, Rather than
all be Wit (i. e. in writings) let none be there: And therefore Sir P. thought
that the publication of that Lords writings would be serviceable to future
Writers, as a standard for their measures to be governed by. Sir P. further
took notice in his Letter with what great Honor to my Lord Falklands Memory,
Mr. Marvel in p. 387. of the second part of his Rehearsal Transprosed, refers to
two of his Lordships Speeches, in the Long Parliament; the first whereof
concerning Episcopacy (he says) begins thus; He is a great stranger in Israel,
who knows not, etc. and the other at the delivery of the Articles against my
Lord Keeper.

And Sir P. further observed, how in the Printed Papers that passed between the
late Earl of Clarendon, and Serenus Cressy, both the Antagonists agreed in
their Celebrations of my Lord Falklands, and how that Earl in p. 185. of his
Animadversions, on Cressys Book against Dr. Stillingfleet, mentions the Lord
Falkland to be a Nobleman of most prodigious Learning; of the most exemplary
manners, and singular good nature, of the most unblemished integrity; and the
greatest O nament of the Nation, that any Age has produced.

Whereupon the Bishop returned him the following Answer, and which he concludes
with, bearing his Testimony, (as I may say) to some former writers of Loyalty.

My Ancient and good Friend,
I Have received yours, and am very glad to hear (by any hand, especially your
own) of your health, which I pray God continue to his glory, your Countries
good, and the comfort of your Friends: I return my thanks for your long Letter,
though (being yours) it did not seem so to me: You are pleased to inquire after
many Books, and their Authors, and require me to give you my Judgment and
Character of both. For my Judgment, (quod so^o quam sit exiguum) I shall freely
give you my Opinion, sine ostentatione aut odio partium.

And here first, it seems that you are about publishing my Lord Viscount
Falkland's Life and Writings; I have none save what are published and in Print.

For his Person, you do (and truly) suppose that I was acquainted with his
Lordship in Oxford, when he was Secretary to his Majesty Charles I. and you
think that I may say something to his Honor.

Really, Sir Peter, I had the honor to be acquainted with that Illustrious
person, and did, and do know that both his natural and acquired parts were
exceeding great; he was (even in those ^^b^llio^s times) a Loyal Subject and
faithful Servant to his Prince, and a true Son of the Church of England, etc.
So that the commendation I can give him, (although it be great) will be ivtra
laudem, sed infra meritum

The old saying is still true, Cicerone opus est, ut digne laudetur Cicero. I
shall only name two passages, which concern my Lord, which show his ingenuity
and Learning.

Being with my Lord in Oxford, some time after Dr. Hoyle was by the Reb^llio^s
Parliament invited out of Ireland, and by them designed Regius Professor of
Divinity, (it seems that we had not then amongst all our English Dissenters,
any one who durst undertake that Office, although it was (both for dignity and
revenue) very considerable.) Now Dr. Hoyle (a known Rebel and Presbyterian)
being so exceedingly magnified in all our Mercuries and News-Books for a most
Learned Divine, I asked my Lord whether Dr. Hoyle was a person of such great
parts as was pretended? My good Lord presently told us, (only Dr. Morly (since
Bishop of Winton) and my self were present,) That he very well knew Dr. Hoyle
in Dublin, and had him many times at his Table, and that he was a person of
some few weak parts, but of very many strong infirmities. This Character which
my Lord gave of Dr. Hoyle, is (like himself) very ingenious, and the University
did find it true.

Another thing concerning that very ingenious and Learned Lord (and very well
known to me and many others) was this; When Mr. Chillingworth undertook the
Defense of Dr. Potter's Book against the Jesuit, he was almost continually at
Tew with my Lord, examining the Reasons of both Parties, pro and con, and their
invalidity or consequence, where Mr. Chillingworth had the benefit of my Lords
Company, and his good Library. The benefit he had by my Lord's Company, and
rational Discourse, was very great, as Mr. Chillingworth would modestly and
truly confess. But his Library, which was well furnished with choice Books (I
have several times been in it, and seen them) such as Mr. Chillingworth neither
had, nor ever heard of many of them, 'till my Lord showed him the Books and the
passages in them, which were significant and pertinent to the purpose. So that
it is certain that most of those Ancient Authorities which Mr. Chillingworth
makes use of, he owes, first to my Lord of Falkland s Learning, that he could
give him so good directions; and next to his civility and kindness, that he
would direct him.

But no more of this.

You desire to know some more Authors, who in the War between Charles the I.
and the Parliament, writ for the King; you name Dudly Diggs, Dr. Fern, Dr.
Hammond, (and you might have named many more,) all Ingenuous and Loyal persons,
and my Friends and Acquaintance; but I do not think their Reasons so cogent, or
their Authority so great, that we may safely rely upon them.

I shall rather commend unto you two Writers on this subject, both of them of
great Authority, and in several respects, of greater Judgment; I mean,

1. Archbishop Usher, whose judgment in Antiquity is far greater.

2. My Predecessor Bishop Sanderson, the best and most rational Casuist ever
England had, whose judgment will be confessed far greater.

1. First, Archbishop Usher, does expressly and data opera, make it his
business, to prove our King's Supremacy in all Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes,
against all Popes and Parliaments; and to the same purpose, does (amongst
others) cite Bp. Andrews, Hooker, Dr. Saravia; and (which is very considerable)
there is a long Preface to the Book of at least 20 pages in Quarto. The Book was
published by Dr. Bernard, Bishop Usher's Chaplain, Anno 1661. and Printed at
London, and Sold by Richard Mariott in St. Dunstan's Churchyard in
Fleetstreet. The Title of the Book is this, Clavi Trabales, confirming the
King's Supremacy, and the Subjects Duty, etc.

2. This second Author I mention, was Dr. Sanderson Bishop of Lincoln, in his
Tracts 1. De solemni Liga and Foedere. 2. De Juramento Negativo. 3. De
Ordinationibus Parliamenti circa disciplinam and cultum. And that which adds
honor and weight to these Tracts is this, that although Dr. Sanderson (then
Regius Professor of Divinity) composed them, yet they contain not his judgment,
but the judgment of the whole University of Oxford; for it is called in the
Title page, Judicium Vniversitatis Oxoniensis, in plena Convocatione Communibus
suffragijs, nemine contradicente, promulgatum, 1 Junii, 1647.

In the last and best Edition, (besides the 3. Tracts above mentioned) you have
his excellent Prelections, 1. De Obligatione Juramenti promissorii. 2. De
obligatione conscientiae. The last and best Edition I above mentioned, was at
London, Anno 1671. By Richard Royston in St. Paul's Churchyard.

For answering your other Questions, I must (as poor men do) crave some more
time. The Circumstances I am in, and the very many public businesses which at
this time trouble me, did disable me to return to you a speedier answer, with
my thanks for your kind Letter. I beg your pardon for the rude Scrible: and my
great Age, ( Anno 85. currente) and the Infirmities which accompany it
considered, I hope your goodness will grant it.

I shall only add; that God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless you
and your Studies, is the Prayer of

Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. Thomas Lincoln.

The Substance of a Letter Written by Dr. Barlow, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln,
to Mr. Isaac Walton, upon his design of Writing the Life of his Predecessor
Bishop Sanderson.
AFTER he has Congratulated Mr. Walton, upon his design to write the Life of
Bishop Sanderson; and that upon two accounts, viz. Because he was satisfied
both of his ability to know, and his Integrity to write Truth: And that he was
no less assured, that the Life of that Prelate would afford him matter enough
both for his commendation, and for the Imitation of Posterity; He next proceeds
to gratify his desires in assisting him toward the said intended Work, with
the Communication of such particular passages of that Prelates Life, as were
certainly known to him; and gives him a short Narration, of which this is the
substance.

First, he professes he had known him about twenty Years, and that in Oxford he
had enjoyed his Conversation, and Learned and Pious Instructions, when he was
Royal Professor of Divinity in that University; and that after he was by the
cross events that happened in the Civil Wars, in the time of King Charles the
First, forced to retire into the Country, he had the benefit of conversing with
him by Letters; wherein with great candor and affection, he answered all
doubts he proposed to him, and gave him more satisfaction than he ever had, or
expected from others.

But to proceed to particulars, he further says, that having happened in one of
his Letters to the said Dr. Sanderson, to mention two or three Books Written
professedly against the being of Original Sin; and asserting, that Adam by his
fall, transmitted no Sin, but some miseries and calamities only to his
posterity: The Good Old Man, was extremely troubled at it, and bewailing the
miserable effects of those licentious times seemed to worder, (but that a
second Consideration of the times he then was in, abated something of his
surprise,) how any should Write, or at least be suffered to publish an Error
so contrary to truth, and to the Doctrine of the Church of England, firmly
grounded, (as he justly affirmed) upon the clear Evidence of Scripture, and
Established by the Lawful Supreme Authority, both Sacred and Civil of this
Nation: But our Prelate names not the Books, nor their Authors; but rather
wishes neither of them had been ever known: and he adds, both the Doctrine, and
the unadvised Abet^ours of it are, and shall be, to me Apochryphal.

Next, for the proof of the Doctors Piety, and great Ability, and Judgment in
Casuistical Divinity; he inserts this Story: viz. That he the said Dr. Barlow,
Discoursing with an Honorable Person, who was as Pious, and Learned, as Noble
(which we are informed was the late Renowned Rob. Boil Esquire;) about a Case of
Conscience, relating to Oaths, and Vows, and their Nature and Obligation; and
in which for some particular Reasons, the said Mr. Boil desired at that time
more fully to be instructed; and having referred him for that point to Dr.
Sandersons's Book de Juramento; He accordingly perused it with great content:
which done, he asked Dr. Bar^ow, whether he thought Dr. Sanderson might not be
persuaded to write Cases of Conscience; if he might have an Honorary Pension,
and a convenient supply of Books; to enable him to go through that task: to
which our Author replied, he thought he would; and accordingly in a Letter to
Dr. Sanderson, after he had told him what satisfaction that Honorable Person,
and many others had found by his Book de Juramento, started the Proposal to
him; whether he would for the Churches Benefit, write some more Tracts of Cases
of Conscience? to which he replied, he was glad his Works had done any good;
and that if he thought any thing else he could do, would so much benefit any
body, as 'twas affirmed that his former had done, he would presently go about
the Work, though without a Pension: That upon this Answer, the said Honorable
Person, sent 50 l. to the said Doctor, by Dr. Barlows hands, as knowing him to
be then but in a low Condition: and that soon after, he Revised, finished, and
Published his Book of Conscience, little, says our Author, in Bulk, but not in
the benefit an understanding Reader may reap by it; there being so many general
propositions, about Conscience, and its Nature, and Obligation laid open; and
made good there with such forcible Evidence of Reason, that he who Reads,
Retains, and can with Discretion apply them; with respect to due time and
place, to particular Cases; may by their light, very Reasonably resolve a
Multitude of Doubts and Scruples of Conscience.

After this, he produces an Instance of the said Dr. Sanderson's Judgment,
concerning a Passage very pertinent, as he says, to his present purpose which
he thus relates: When the said Dr. acted as Royal Professor of Divinity in
Oxford, and in performing his public Lectures in the Schools, gave great
content to his Auditors, by the truth of his Positions; and uncommon Evidence,
and clearness of his Proofs; and especially in the Resolution of all
Casuistical Doubts, that occurred in the explication of the matter of his
Subject. A Person of Quality still living, privately asked him, What method was
best for a young Divine to take, to make himself an able Casuist? To which he
replied, That presupposing this young Student to be already furnished with a
sufficient Knowledge of the Arts and Sciences; and a convenient Understanding
at least of Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: There were two things more in Humane
Learning, the understanding of which would much conduce to make a man a
rational and able Casuist; which otherwise would be very hard, if not
impracticable: Which were

1. A competent Knowledge of Moral Philosophy, and particularly of that part of
it that treats of Human Actions, and teaches us to distinguish, What a
Human-Act is? (Spontaneous, Involuntary, and mixed;) from whence Human-Acts
derive their Moral Goodness or Badness? viz. Whether from their Genus and
Object, or from their Circumstances? And how the Goodness or Evil of Human
Acts, is varied by the difference of Circumstances? How far Ignorance or
Knowledge may augment or abate the good or evil of the same Actions? Because
that all Cases of Conscience including only these Questions, viz. Is this
Action good or evil? Is it lawful to do it, or not? He who knows not how, nor
whence Human Actions became morally good or evil, can never reasonably and
certainly determine, whether any particular Action, about which he shall be
questioned, be so or no.

And the second thing, which he said, would be of mighty advantage to a
Casuist, was a Competent Knowledge of the Nature and obligation of Laws in
general'; viz. to know, what a Law is, what a Natural, and what a Positive Law;
what is necessary for the Authentic passing of a Law, to a Dispensation with
it, and likewise to its Repeal and Abrogation? What publication, or
promulgation is requisite to give any positive Law the Force of obliging, and
what kind of Ignorance takes off that Obligation; or aggravates, excuses, or
diminishes the guilt of the transgression of any Law? For all Cases of
Conscience, as is above said, including only, Is this thing Lawful, or not? And
the Law, the only Rule by which we can judge of the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness
of any thing; it must needs follow, that he who (in these) is ignorant of the
Laws, and of their Nature and Obligation, can never reasonably assure himself,
or any Querist, of the Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness of any Actions in
particular. This was the Judgment and Advice of that Pious and Learned Prelate;
the truth and benefit of which, our Reverend Author, and his Worthy Successor,
having by a long and happy Experience found, he tells his Friend, That he
thought he could not without Ingratitude to him, and want of Charity to others,
conceal it. And so with a Compliment of Modesty he concludes his Letter; which
is dated,

London, May the 10th. 1678.
A Letter giving an account of the Bishop and his Clergy's Address to K. James.
Sir,
I Received yours, and (with my Love and Service) return my thanks. For our
Address (which you mention) many of the Clergy have been solicited by Letters
from your great Town, that they should not Subscribe it; and I have had two or
three Letters sent me incognito, no name subscribed to these Letters, wherein
they Zealously declame against that Address, and all Subscriptions to it; but
do bring nothing like a Reason to prove that such Subscriptions are either
unlawful, or (Circumstances considered) imprudent, or inconvenient. I was
lately informed (by a Person of Quality from London) that they report in your
great Town, that the Bishop of Lincoln had indeed Subscribed the Address, but
his Clergy refused to Subscribe.

But the truth is; that beside my self, and 3. Archdeacons, above 600 of my
Clergy have actually subscribed it, and their Subscriptions are now in my hand.
Sure I am, that his Sacred Majesty's gracious Promise to protect the Church of
England as by Law established, is such. (especially from a Roman Catholic
Prince) as deserves the utmost of our thanks and gratitude, and most worthy to
be acknowledged, in a most humble and hearty Address: and I fear, that the
obstinate denying to give him thanks in an Address, may give his Majesty some
reason to say. He had little reason to protect them, who would not thank him
for it. Sure I am, that it is a Rule, (and a rational one too) in your
Canon Law, That Concilium Lateranum sub Alexandro. 3. Anno 1180.
depactionibuslicitis and illictis. Can. 2.
Propter ingratitudinem, quod actum est revocatur.

For your Queries. 1. Whether our Oxford Statutes now in Print, be confirmed by
Act of Parliament? I answer, that they are not, but only by the King, and my
Lord Archbishop Laud, then our Chancellor.

2. To the second Query, whether our Chancellor or Convocation have or do
dispense with some of our Statutes? I answer, that the Statutes give them leave
to dispense with several things, and other things are by Statute (to which they
are sworn) declared to be indispensable. For there is a Statute with this
Title, De materia dispensabili; in which the particulars are set down, in which
they may dispense: And another Statute, de materia indispensabili, in which no
dispensation is allowed, which is an answer to your 3d. Query. I do remember,
(that before our new Statutes) the King has sent his Mandamus, (which has been
obeyed) to make some Doctors, who otherwise could not have got such Degrees. So
about 60 years ago, in King Charles the First's time, one Pierce had a Mandamus
to be Doctor; and the young Poets, (amongst other Rhimes) had these Verses.

That Blockhead Pierce, that Arch-Ignoramus,
He must be Dr. by the King 's Mandamus.
And in the last King's time, several Mandamuses came, and took effect.

4. As for your other Query, what Lateran Council it was which forbid Bastards
to be Ordained, and plurality of Benefices?

I answer, it was the Lateran Council before cited.

For 1. For Bastards, the words of the Councils are these. Dictum Concilium
Lateranum, De Depositione Clericorum Can. 19. apud Joverium de Council. page
117. Col. 4.
Neque servi neque spurii sunt ordinandi. 2. For plurality of Benefices, the
same Lateran Council has these words; In dicto Concilio apud Joverium. page
118. Col. 1.
Uni plura Ecclesiastica beneficia non sunt committenda.

For your 4 Querie, whether our College Statutes in Oxon, be confirmed by Act
of Parliament? I know not; and I believe few are; yet I have heard, that the
Statutes of All-Soul's have been confirmed by Act of Parliament.

For your last Query; Whether Colleges have some Charters from the Crown to
confirm their Founders Statutes? This is most certain, that all Colleges have,
and of necessity must have such Charters from the Kings; for without such
Charters, they neither are, nor can act as Corporations.

I am, Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant. T. Lincoln.

A Friend of the Bishop of Lincoln's writ a Letter to his Lordship for his
judgment about, wherein Mr. Chillingworth's peculiar excellency above other
Writers consisted. The Letter quoted a Book of Mr. Corbet mentioning him very
unworthily, viz. The Relation of the Siege of Gloucester, where in p. 12. he
says, we understood that the Enemy (i. e. the Army of King Charles the First)
had by the direction of the Jesuitical Doctor Chillingworth, provided great
store of Engines, after the manner of the Roman Testudines cum pluteis, with
which they intended to have assaulted the parts of the City, between the South
and West Gates, etc. The Bishop therein was acquainted how Mr. Corbet was a
Famous Presbyterian; and (as Mr. Baxter has Printed it in his Works) The
Author of the Relation of that Siege, and of a Discourse of the Religion of
England, asserting that reformed Christianity, settled in its due latitude, is
the stability and advancement of this Kingdom.

The Letter likewise mentioned Dr. Cheynel, another Famous Presbyterian, having
in a most vile and abominable manner insulted over Mr, Chillingworth's dead
Body, and his immortal Book at his Burial; and the Bishop was requested to send
an account of what he had heard of Mr. Chillingworth's being at that Siege, and
of the other outrageous extravag^nce of Dr. Cheynel; and as to which the Bishop
returned the following Answer, viz.

SIR,
I Received yours, and in the very troublesome Circumstances I now am, (my Love
and Service remembered) I shall give you a short answer to your particular
demands in your Letter.

1. For Mr. Chillingworth, none ever questioned this Loyalty to his King; what
Corbet (in his Book you mention) writes of him, that he was in the Siege of
Gloucester in the King's Army, assisting it to take the City, is a great
commendation of his Loyalty and Truth; for I know Mr. Chillingworth was there
in the Siege, (but whether as a Chaplain or Assistant, only I know not.) For
going thither to see Sir William Walter my good Friend, who was a Commander
there, I did also see Mr. Chillingworth amongst the Comanders there. And
further I know, that he dyed not by the Sword, but Sickness, and in the
Parliament Quarters; that Cheynell Buried him; and when he was put into his
Grave, Cheynell cast his Book in with him, saying dust to dust, earth to earth,
and corruption to corruption; afterward, when Cheynell drew near his death, he
was something Lunatic, and distracted, and spoke evil things; several of such
his wild Sayings were signified to us in Oxon; but being so long since, I have
forgot the very words. All these particulars concerning Cheynell, were
certainly known and believed in Oxon.

2. I send you my 5th Reason about the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, which
they would not License at Lambeth. I have a Tract finished almost, in
vindication of the 5th Reason, and in answer to the Objections of three or four
Divines of our Church against it; which (if the good God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, graciously grant me life and health) I purpose to publish; and
then you may expect to have two or three Copies, of the whole Tract.

Lastly, you desire to know, wherein Mr- Chillingworth's Excellency above other
Writers did consist? So that you seem to take it for granted, that he has an
Excellency (if not above all, yet) above many, or most Writers; and I think so
too.

But then the Case must be cautiously stated; for his excellency we speak of,
cannot consist in any extraordinary knowledge he had of Antiquity, (Sacred or
Civil,) of Councils and Fathers, or Learned Men's Animadversions upon them; nor
in any great Skill he had in several Tongues and Languages, etc.

But his Excellency wherein he excelled many (if not most) Writers, did arise
from, and consist in his Logic, both natural; and (by exceeding great
industry) acquired.

Natural Logic I call that natural Ability, which all men (except Lunaticks
and Mad Men) have to argue rationally, and prove conclusions from Principles
better known to them. For (...) is ratio, and whosoever argues so, is (...), a
Logician. Thus all Men, (even the poorest Country People, (who have no
Learning, Latin, nor any Language but their own) have a Natural Logic; and of
this Natural Logic our blessed Savior Math. 16.23.
speaks to the Jews, and approves it. But that Logic in which Mr.
Chillingworth's excellency did principally consist, was his acquired Logic; he
industriously Studied it, finding the exceeding great use of it, especially in
Controversies of Religion. Logic (and that only) makes a Man to write so, that
his Arguments shall be, 1. Consequent, 2. Evident: For that (and that only)
enables a Writer really to know, whether the premises do indeed infer the
Conclusion; or otherwise are false, or fallacious, and Sophistical, and not
truly Logical and concluding Arguments: And for this, Mr. Chillingworth,
(after an industrious and diligent reading Aristotle's and Crakanthorp's
Logic, who were best able to instruct him) was of greater ability to judge
truly, than most (if not all) the Writers I have yet met with.

Besides, Mr. Chillingworth in all his Disputes against Popery, draws his
Arguments not from Fathers or Councils, (though in several things they may be
of good use, though they be not Infallible) but from the Sacred Scriptures;
which being of Divine Authority, and Infallible, are a sure and just ground of
that confidence we are speaking of.

For the second thing above mentioned, to wit Evidence; it is to be considered
that Method is a part of Logic, and by it any Writing may become evident, if
the propositions be placed in that Method and Order of Nature in the Writings,
which they have one to another in relation to themselves; that so that
Proposition or Medium be placed first, which in its own Nature is first, and
that second which immediately depends upon it, and so the third, etc. For when
Propositions or Mediums are so placed, that their mutual dependence one upon
another does appear, this makes the reasons evident; and though orherwise they
may be consequent, yet they will be confused and inevident. I have known some
Learned Men, who sometime bring Reasons which are indeed consequent, yet for
want of a due Method and order of the Mediums and matter of those Reasons, are
confused, and inevident, and put the Reader to a great deal of trouble to find
out the Consequence. Pardon this rude Scribble; and (as I shall do for you)
pray for

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, Tho. Lincoln.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Have seen and read a Letter of yours, to one Mr. Hale, about the Validity of
a Marriage between Mr. P. and Mrs. C. wherein you have settled the Question much
better (I am sure) than I could have done. Your Reasons and your Learned
Quotations from the Law of Nature, and Nations, from the Civil, Canon and our
Common Law, I doubt not but they may satisfy those who are concerned in the
Case. I am of your Opinion, and long since was so, and now your Letter has
confirmed it.



BIshop Barlow, being so profoundly Learned, both in Divinity, and the Civil,
and Canon Law; that he was often applied to, as a Casuist, to resolve Cases of
Conscience about Marriage; and his Lordship having been by a Divine of his
Diocese, shown Sir P. P's. Letter to Mr. Hale, about the matter of Law and
Conscience, in the Case of the Marriage of Mr. P. and Mrs. C. and having shown
his Concurrence with Sir P. P's Opinion about it, and his Lordship having so
much declared his satisfaction about Sir P. P's. performance in the Resolution
of the Case, it is thought fit for the information of others, in Marriage Cases
of the like nature that may frequently arise; to set down the following Papers,
and which Conclude with the Bishops further thoughts about the whole matter.

A Question about the Case of the Marriage, between Mr. C. P. and Mrs. M. C.
MR. P. the Elder, hired part of Mrs. C's. the Elder's House, having with him
two Daughters; one Son, the said C. P. about 18 years of Age: Mrs. C. the Elder
had a Daughter about the same Age then from home.

Mr. P. the Elder, his Daughters having heard much in Commendation of Mrs. M.
C. the Younger, desired her Mother to send for her, that they might see her,
before they removed; which was intended soon after: whereupon her Mother sent
for her, and about a Fortnight before they went, she came home: The Young
Gentleman soon discovered a great liking of her, and applied himself very
kindly to her, and continued so to do; seeking all opportunities for her
Company, and saying many kind things to her, and of her to others; so that the
Family took notice thereof.

The third day following they Danced with his Sisters, and other Young
Gentlewomen and Gentlemen, till about two or three in the Morning; (the Old
People being all gone to Bed;) the Dancing being over, and one Mr. F. a Divine
in Orders, being of their Company; one of the Gentlemen took the Eldest Sister
by the hand, and said we have a Parson here, come now let us be Married; so
speaking to Mr. F. he began the Matrimonial words, which the Gentleman said
after him, but the Lady would not, saying, What do you think I Will have you?
Then Mr. P. the Younger taking Mrs. M. C. the Younger by the Hand, said, to F.
come Marry us, Mr. F. began the words to him, to wit, Will thou have this
Woman, etc. and then I P. take thee M. etc. Which Mr. P. said after him; and
she also in her turn, with much persuasion said her part, till the Ceremony of
the Ring, which they wanted, and then she endeavored to go from them: the door
being open, P. the Younger with the said F. pressed along with her into the
Hall (leaving the Sisters entertained by the Gentlemen in the Parlour) and
there held her, Mr. P. saying, We'll have it all over again, for now I have got
a Ring, (which it seems Mr. F. lent him:) and then Mr. F. said the words of
Matrimony again, Mr. P. following; and when it came to her turn, she repeated
all after him to the Ring, as before; which Mr. P. put upon her Finger, saying
the words after Mr. F. With this Ring I thee Wed, with my body I thee Worship,
and with all my Worldly Goods I thee endow; and ending there, Mr. F. clapped his
Hand upon his Breast, and said. Now by my Soul, you are as much Man and Wife
before God, as any two in England to which Mr. P. replied, I hope so, for so I
intended it.

Afterward he spoke to two Servant Maids that were by, to get their Bed ready;
they not moving, he offered them Money, Swearing she is my Wife, and I will go
to Bed to her; and so the next day, and continually as he got opportunity, to
speak to the Chambermaid, he several times pressed her to put them to Bed;
saying she was his Wife: Once Mrs. C. the Younger being by, she asked her where
it should be, she said in Mrs. Ks. Room; so the Maid went up thither, and they
followed her; but he was very angry, she had got no Sheets; she could not come
at them, her Mistress knowing nothing hereof; and pulled Mrs. M. to him, and as
they were laid upon the Bed, the Maid threw the Bed-cloths over them, saying, I
think this is putting you to Bed together, and so left them with the Door fast,
where they continued about two hours.

Another time they had Locked themselves into the Study, for about two hours
more, where his Sisters at last discovering them, complained to Mrs. M. C's.
Mother.

In fine, he would always get where she was, and alone with her when he could,
and perpetually solicited the Chamber Maid to put them to Bed, saying, You
know she is my Wife; once promising her a Guinea, another time threatening her
if she did not do it.

The Maid, and one Mrs. M. H. at several times heard him tell Mrs. M. that she
was his Wife, and if she Married any one else, he would Hang her; but she being
unwilling to let him lie with her, because he had told her it must be kept
secret from his Friends, for a time; which he thinking it proceeded from her
doubt that it was not a good Marriage, he sent Mr. F. who came to her in the
Folding Room (the said Maid being by) and calling her Madam P. said Mr. P. had
desired him to satisfy her that the Marriage was a good Marriage, and that she
was his Wife; and he did assure her that the Marriage was good; and afterward
Mr. P. told her himself, that he had desired Mr. F. to satisfy her that the
Marriage was good; saying, indeed it was a rash thing; but he was informed it
would stand good in Law, and was well satisfied; she answering she had no
reason to repent it, if he did not; he replied with an Oath, that he did not,
and if she was not fully satisfied, he would Marry her again.

There are diverse persons of good Credit to whom the next day after the
Marriage, Mr. P. said he was Married to Mrs. M. C. and seemed to be very well
pleased with it.

Sometime afterward, Mrs. M. C. seeing Mr. F. walking with him in the Garden,
and talking somewhat earnestly together, when he came in, she asked him what
they talked about; he said, about you: Me! said she, what did he say? he said
many good things of you, and commended my choice; and other times speaking of
the House his Father was Building, would tell her, they little think, You and I
must live there.

Many other things on occasion, Mr. P. said to Mrs. M. C. which perhaps (though
upon Oath) he may now deny, no body being by; but these Overt Acts, that can be
proved by Witnesses, do enough show that Mr. P. was at that time, in good
earnest in this matter, and that Mrs. M. C. had all the Reason in the World, to
believe him to be so, and that her Marriage was good; though excessive Modesty,
or desire to keep the matter as private as she could, for some time, might make
her not co^trive, or at least hel^ forward a more formal and solemn
consummation of it: She thinking, the Office repeated was binding enough
without i^.

But Mrs. M^s. Friends (whom she durst not acquaint with her proceedings, they
often chiding her upon Mr. P's. Sisters complaining of her being so much in
their Brothers company) being since better informed of the truth of this
matter; they are advised, they ought to prosecute the business, and assert the
Legality of this Marriage; which Mr. P's. Friend understanding, they have
gained Mr. F. boldly to assert all to be in jest.

They have by their Servants, been tampering with the Maid also, dissuading her
from giving Evidence, telling her, she ll bring her self into a praemunire;
what need she meddle? She may say, she knows nothing, etc. and giving her hopes
of a good place in their Family.

Mr. F. after his return from London, being blamed by some of Mrs. Ms. Friends
for his Carriage in this matter, said he must do it, for if the Marriage should
prove good, he should be ruined.

The Question hereupon is, what may be advisable in point of Law and
Conscience, for Mrs. M. the young Gentlewoman, so Married to Mr. P. to do?

This Question, with a Paper out of Bishop Tailors Cases of Conscience, was
first sent to Sir P. P. and afterward to the late Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Dr.
Thomas Barlow, for their Answers about the same.

That Paper out of Bishop Tailor was Biretti 's Case, in the Bishop 's Ductor
dubitantium, lib. 3. Chap. 1. Rule 4.
FRrancisco Biretti a Venetian Gent. full of Amors, and used to vain and
Wanton Addresses, courts Julia a Senators Daughter, but with secret intent to
abuse her, and so to leave her; Marco Medici the Father of Julia by Threats and
harsh Usages forces his Daughter Julia to consent to a Contract with Francisco;
who perceiving himself surpised, and that the matter was passed further than
he intended it, resolved to make the best of it, to make a Contract to lie with
her, and so to leave her.

He does so, surprises her in the careless Hours of the Day, and the nakedness
of her Soul, and with flatteries mingled with the affrightning Name of her
harsh Father, acts his Intention, and then pursues it till he was weary of her,
and then forsakes her.

She complains and desires remedy; The Law declares their Congress to be a
Marriage: But in the mean time Francisco passed into Sicily, and there married
Antonia Peronetta a Sicilian Lady; her he loved, intended to make his Wife, and
did so.

Now the Law presumes that after contract, their congress did declare a
Marriage: Cap. Is qui fidem, and Cap. Tuantos, de Sponsal. For it supposes and
presumes a consent, and yet withal says, If there was no consent, it was no
Marriage; here Francisco is condemned by the presumption, and relieved in
conscience; for if he did not lie with her affectu Maritali, but only intended
to abuse her, he was indeed extremely impious and unjust; but he made no
Marriage: For without mutual consent Marriages are not made.

Yet because of this the Law could no ways judge but by outward Significations;
and ut plurimum, for the most part it is so, That Contracts and Congress do
effect as well as signify a Marriage; the Law did well to declare in behalf of
Julia. But Francisco, who knew that which the Law could not know, was bound to
make amends to Julia as well as he could; but to pursue the Marriage of
Antonia, and dwell with her: For the Presumption upon which this Law was
founded, was false, the Congress did not prove a Marriage, for it was never
intended; the Presumption is probable, but failed in this Instance; and
therefore in this Case did not oblige the Conscience. Conscience is to be
guided by presumption, when it has no better Guide; but when it has certain
Truth to guide it, it is better than the best Presumption, or Probability.

Sir P. P. Returned his Answer to the Question and other Paper left by Mr. Hale
with him, in the following Letter.
Sir,
I Herewith return you your Case of the Fact of the Matrimonial Cause you left
with me, as likewise the quotation you transcribed out of Bishop Taylor's
Ductor dubitantium; you having desired my Opinion of your Case, and my advice
about what is fit to be done on the whole matter in your Kinswoman's behalf, be
pleased to take the same as follows.

According to the Common Rule that Consensus facit Nuptias, I doubt not in the
least but that if the matters of Fact in the Case be true, the Marriage is a
perfect Marriage; that is to say, I doubt not but the parties in the time of
the speaking the words of Matrimony, or some time of their intercourse and
conversing together since, did by words and Overt Acts express their mutual
consent to Marriage; and I believe that any indifferent observer of the course
of humane Nature, who shall read over your Case of the Fact, will judge that at
some of the times, at least, since the first speaking of the words of Marriage
by the Gentleman and your Kinswoman after the Minister, the Gentleman and your
Kinswoman were in earnest, and did revera consent to the Marriage; and if so,
then in the Court of Law and Conscience the measures of judging of the Fact of
the mutual consent must be much taken from the Rule that is allowed both in our
Common as well as the Civil and Canon Law, that Omnis ratihabitio retrotrahitur
and mandato aequiparatur. By means hereof subsequent consent is by all allowed
to legitimate a Marriage that was first made by fear and force.

Tho in many Cases it is true, that quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis
non convalescit, yet it is as true that Matrimonium vi vel metu initio
contractum, per subsequentem ratificationem convalescit, quia tunc praecedens
violentia vel justus metus in consensum transit and purgatur: And thus too tho
Contracts made by a drunken Man are void, yet if a matrimonial Contract made by
him in his drink be ratified by him when he is sober, he is not to be absolved
from that Contract for the want of consent to it at first: The like is to be
said in the Case of a Man who married at first in jest, and afterward by
reiterated acts ratifies his consent to the Marriage.

In the Case of Biretti referred to in Bishop Taylor's Ductor dubitantium, lib.
3 cap. 1. Rule 4. There is one thing that is properly applicable to the
Gentleman's Conscience, and fit upon occasion to be urged to him by those that
are the Directors of his Conscience, the which I shall mention by and by. But I
could wish he were sensible of some other thoughts of that Bishop expressed in
that Work of his, lib. 2. cap. 3. p. 336. where speaking against the Pope's
dispensing with a divine positive Law, he says; If a Man has vowed to a Woman
to Marry her, and contracted himself to her per verba de praesenti, she
according to her duty loves him passionately, has Married her very Soul to
him, and her heart is bound up in his, but he changes his mind, and enters
into Religion, but stops at the very gate, and asks who shall warrant him for
the breach of his faith and vows to his Spouse? The Pope answers, that he will,
etc.. The Gentleman may hereupon look on it as very unreasonable that he should
be allowed to recede from the Marriage with the Gentlewoman upon a Capricio,
and considering what your Case mentions of the Gentleman's putting her on the
Bed, and causing her to be on the Bed with him two hours with the Bed Clothes
thrown over them, and the door locked; I believe the strength of such a
presumption extending so far toward Copulation would withold any Pope from the
legitimating a Man's receding from such a Marriage, though on the account of his
desiring to enter into Religion.

I have not by me Menochius his large voluminous Work de praesumptionibus, to
consider the measures he takes of the efficacy of a Presumption of that kind.
But I have now before me a Tractate de jure Connubiorum by Joachimus a Beust, a
learned German Protestant Lawyer, who there in p. 166. 169. mentions the weight
of the Case of a single Man's being found in Bed with a single Woman, and being
thereupon by fear and threatenings from her kindred compelled to Marry her; and
he there cites some Authors who make such Marriage invalid, but then he
subjoyns what follows, Viz. Sunt tamen qui existimant juvenem in lecto repertum
cogi posse matrimonium metu contractum adimplere, per ea quae referuntur in C.
inter caetera 22. 9. 1. and gl. in c. majores. Item quaeritur in verb.
conditionali in Baptis. and quod tradit Dec. in L. velle de Reg. jur. gl. in C.
merito 15. 9. 2. and Bart in L. Si Mulier. Si metu ff. quod met. cause. Pro qua
sententia adducunt etiam text. Exodi Cap. 22. repetitum in Cap. 1. de adult. de
cujus Cap. 1. intellectu, vide Didac in Epitome de Sponsalib. and matrim. part
2. Cap. 6. tuc. 15. Autumant enim ipsi quando contra eum qui ita in lecto
repertus esset in uno aut altero casu exemplum Statueretur, quod hac ratione
effraena juventutis libido coerceri possit; neque Stupratori vim aut injuriam
sieri, cum hoc quod ipsi accidat ille sua culpa sentiat, and ideo sibi acceptum
serre debeat, L. quodvis de Regul. jur. quod tamen nunc non disputo, sed
discretioni judicis in facto contingente discutiendum relinquo.

I will suppose it possible that on the bed he might have no carnal knowledge
of her in all that time: But what the Law does suppose and presume in such a
Case is another thing. On the Laws supposing that two persons found in Bed
together have committed Adultery, I have known Penance often enjoined after
the only proof of that Circumstance, and without any thing of Carnal knowledge
sworn by the Witnesses.

You told me that a Dignitary of our Church (whose name you acquainted me not
with) in Friendship to the Gentleman's Father had been at Doctors-Commons; and
there fee'd one of the Doctors who is a Judge of one of those Courts where
Matrimonial Causes are conusable, and obtained his Opinion in Writing that the
Marriage as being in jest was void: You said the Divine had the character of
one who was very dextrous and prudent and successful in the management of
business. But if you think fit to lay the Scene of the Law Suit in that Court,
where the party consulted is Judge (as that you may do if you will) you will
have no cause to fear want of justice there, when matters of fact come to be
rightly stated in the Libel, and backed by proofs.

Every Proctor's Clerk can tell you that by the Style and constant practice of
the Court you will be sure to effect the Gentleman's being examined upon Oath
by the Judge himself, as to all the particulars of the Facts you showed me in
the Case by you drawn, after your Kinswomans Proctor has put them into the
Libell; and to effect the Judge his causing him to give a plain full and
Categorical answer on Oath as to each particular, and you will be sure to
effect the Sequestration of the Gentleman's person into some indifferent place
for some days; where being out of his Fathers Custody, she or you, or her
Proctor will be allowed to go to him, and discourse him privately of past
matters, and to read over to him the Facts as laid down in her Libell, and
advise him when he comes to be examined upon Oath by the Judge as to them, he
would not be aeternae suae salutis immemor. If at his Examination by the Judge
he shall confess the matters as laid down in the Libell, there will be no doubt
of her obtaining Sentence for the Marriage.

But on the whole matter, tho it should so happen that neither by the young
Gentleman's examination by the Judge, nor by the proofs arising from her
Witnesses, there could be sufficient ground for the Judge his giving Sentence
for the Marriage, (which latter may be feared if Mr. F. -- has been tampered
with as your Case mentions) yet if your proof shall extend so far as this,
namely, but to a kind of Semiplena probatio, and to what may make impressions
on the Judge his belief and private Conscience that the Gentleman did at the
Marriage, or some one (...) of the Acts of the Ratification of it, revera
intend a consent to the same; and that if Mr. F. had not been tampered with, he
would have sworn the truth about the Marriage, and what he knew of the
subsequent ratifications of it; tho he cannot give Sentence for the Marriage,
but shall give Sentence for the Defendant, yet you may expect that he will
condemn the Defendant in the Charges made by the Plaintiff; and under the
notion of Charges, order her a good round Sum of Money for the damage she
sustained by the Defendants means.

They at Doctors-Commons can tell you how in the famous Marriage Cause between
Mrs. Isabella Jones, and Sir Robert Carr in the Arches where Sir Robert was
claimed by her for her Husband, though for want of full proof of the Marriage Sir
Gyles Sweit the Dean of the Arches pronounced Sentence against the Marriage;
yet however he condemned Sir Robert Carr in 1500 l. Costs to Mrs. Jones, and
from which Sir Robert appealed not, but paid the Money.

Sir Gyles was in his Conscience convinced that Sir Robert, and Mrs. Jones had
been really married, tho by reason of one of the Witnesses to it having been
tampered with, the Marriage could not be fully proved by her.

I can at any time acquaint you with the Circumstances of that Cause, and give
you an account of the remarkable Judgments of God inflicted on the Persons who
tampered with the Witness in that Cause; whereby the Marriage between Sir
Robert Carr and Mrs. Jones failed of Sentence. But one Circumstance of hers I
shall not here omit; namely, that she was but a Servant, a Waiting Woman to Sir
Robert's Mother,; and your Kinswoman being the Daughter of an Archdeacon,
virtuous, and of good Education, her Case is thereby rendered more favorable in
the eye of the Law than Mrs. Jones was.

I know the Rule is, that Victus Victori condemnabitur in expensis: But all
Practitioners in the Ecclesiastical Courts know the exception from that Rule,
even in Common Causes: Si just am causam litigandi victus habuerat, and that
particularly in Matrimonial Causes ex justa Causa litigandi ipse Vincens in
expensis Condemnatur, ut si matrimonium allegans sponsalia prohaverit aut
tractatum; and other like Circumstaces: And that not only the ordinary expensae
litis are here to be allowed, but extraordinary ones.

I pray God direct your Kinswoman in this her weighty Concern: I doubt not but
some of the Clergy, who were her Father's Acquaintance, will not grudge their
pains in advising her what to do in point of Conscience. Perhaps after the
Citation has been served on the Gentleman, the result of it may be; that he
will not be able to master his Affection to her. If he had forsworn her love,
yet may Nature possibly overpower him; and thus according to the old Verse you
have met with; Jupiter e Caelis ridet perjuria amantum,

I am sorry for the Prospect you have of the great Charge in the Law, shortly
after you have entered into the Suit; but I have before mentioned your prospect
of this being returned to your Kinswoman again, tho Sentence should go against
the Marriage. We know the Saying of the Prophet; The liberal man devises
liberal things, etc. and the hearts of some good men may be inclined acco^ding
to the Tenor of a London Divine's good practical Discourse, called, Charity
Directed, printed in the Year 1676. to afford the Widow and Fatherless, your
Kinswomen, their help, whereby they may be enabled the better to bear the
Burden of the expenceful Suit at the present. But methinks, if the Father of
the young Gentleman (who is a wealthy man) be a man swayed by Principles of
Conscience, some wise and sober man of that Persuasion of Religion he
professes, might be found out to apply to him in a friendly serious manner,
and discourse to him of the particulars of the Facts mentioned in your Case,
whereby he will see how much your Kinswoman has been damnified by his Son.

The Case of Biretti before referred to in Bishop Taylor's Cases of Conscience,
mentions Biretti's being obliged to make a Compensation to the Gentlewoman he
first married, without his intending a Consent to the Marriage.

I know that regularly Compromissum contra matrimonium initum non valet. But if
on a Case of the Fact truly stated and laid before Divines, for their
consideration, and directing either Party what to do in point of Conscience,
thereupon they shall be of opinion that God never joined the Parties; and that
the young Gentleman bred at home, and in the Country here in England, having at
18 years of Age equalled Biretti the Italian in the Talents of Dissimulation,
after he had inveigled your virtuous young Kinswoman (according to the
forementioned Expressions of Bishop Tailor) to marry her very Soul to him, and
to have her Heart bound up in his; did in the Marriage by the Minister and all
the Subsequent Acts of the Ratifications of it, intend nothing of consent to
Marriage, and did throughout only intend to debauch her; I think a Compensation
for your Kinswoman's Damage ought to be made: For according to the Expression
used in some Declarations at Common Law, by a Woman suing for Damages there,
viz. Per quod Maritagium amisit: Your Kinswoman's being hindered in future
Marriage with another person, is obvious to any one's Thoughts; and because the
commencing a Suit, and exhibiting her Libell there, will bring the Facts before
mentioned, the more into the eyes, and ears, and tongues of the World, I
account that the weight of her Damages will not be so great before a Suit
begins, as it will be afterward.

This is all I have to say at present of this Matter. I remain

Sir, Your very Humble Servant, P. P.

A Divine in the Bishop of Lincoln's Dioces, afterward writing to his Lordship,
to request his Judgment in point of Conscience, about the Marriage of Mr. P.
and Mrs. C. the Bishop under his hand returned him the following Answer, viz.
Mr. Bewerrin,
I Received your Letter, with the Papers you sent with it; and this comes (with
my Love and Due Respects) to return my Thanks for your Kindness and Civility to
me, expressed in it. What you say of my willingness to assist my Brethren of
the Clergy, is true; I am, and (according to my Ability and Duty) ever shall be
willing to assist them in all their Concerns, Spiritual or Temporal; Concerning
the Case of Mr. Ps. Marriage, I am of Sir P. Petts Opinion: But if you, or any
of Mr. P.'s Friends, be of the contrary Opinion, If I may have their Reasons
for it, I shall (if they be cogent and conclusive) submit, and subscribe them:
But if not, I shall take them for Objections, and endeavor to answer them.

You (in your Letter) desire me to state the Case, which I cannot clearly and
fully do, (with satisfaction to my self, or others,) unless I have the Reasons
of both Parties concerned; which as yet I have not had. The very troublesome
Circumstances I am now in, will not permit me to study the Case with that
diligence it requires; but if I may have the Reasons against Sir P. Petts
Opinion, I shall take time to state the Case.

I can only add, That I am

Buckden, June. 6. 1691. Your loving Friend and Brother, Thomas Lincolniensis.

A Letter asserting the King's not being by Scripture, prohibited to pardon
Murder.
Sir,
I Have received yours, and for the Objection, Genesis 9.6. He that sheds Man's
Blood, by Man shall his blood be shed. I shall say a few things, and leave them
to your better judgment and consideration.

1. It is certain, that there were three Persons (and but three) which could
oblige all the World with positive Laws. 1. Adam, 2. Noah, (who were both
Capita, and (...), (as the Greek Fathers call them) Monarchs of the whole
World. 3. Our blessed Savior.

Those three persons had power to make Positive Laws to oblige the whole World.

2. What Laws Adam, or Noah made, (who in their times, were Fathers of the
whole World,) obliged all their posterity.

3. What ever positive Laws God gave to Adam, or Noah; those Laws did bind
them, and all the World.

4. That God did give any positive Law to Adam, to punish Murder with Death, we
read not; nay we read, but of two Murderers in the time before the Flood, (
Cain and Lamech;) and of Cain, it was Gods express Genesis 4.15.
will that he should not be put to Death, (though it was a most horrid Murder)
for killing Abel: and for Genesis 4.23.24.
Lamech, we have nothing in Scripture, that he was punished with Death; or that
God had then (before the Flood) given any positive Law, to make Murder Capital.

5. But to Noah, God did by a positive Law, make Death the punishment of
Murder, and this Law bound him and all his posterity, to whom it was
sufficiently published, as it is to us in Scripture.

6. So that he who sheds Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed: That Is the
punishment God has appointed for Murder, the Murderers blood shall be shed by
Man. But then,

1. Not by every Man, but by the Magistrate; No private Man has, or ever had
power to put any Man to Death (though he never so much deserved it;) that the
Magistrate only had power to do.

2. Nor could every Murderer be put to Death, by that Law given to Noah, (and
so to the World in him;) for if Noah, or any supreme power had committed
Murder, he could not be put to Death.

1. Because he had no superior, who had power to punish him.

2. Because he could not punish himself, by taking away his own Life; so that
all that this Text proves, is this: The Magistrate might, and regularly ought
to punish Murder with Death. But that the supreme power (who could not by that
Law, be punished himself) might not in some Cases (all Circumstances
considered) pardon a Murderer; this Law proves not, either in express terms,
or by any good Consequence.

And this I am the more apt to believe.

1. Because it is most certain, that there were circumstances and reasons, for
which our most just God pardoned Cain; (as to the punishment by Death;) so
there may be, (in some Cases) such Circumstances, which may be just reasons for
supreme powers (who are Gods Vicegerents) to pardon Murder.

2. Because I find in Scripture, that above 500. years after the giving that
Law to Noah, Simeon and Levi, Jacobs Sons, cruelly Genesis 34.25.
Murdered the Shechemites, and yet were pardoned; neither Jacob nor Isaac (who
was then Genesis 35.29.
living) those two excellent and most pious persons, executed that Law upon
them; which had they believed it obligatory, they would certainly have done.

As to what you say concerning the Opinions of our own and Foreign Divines in
this Case; I know there are different Opinions (as in other Cases there are)
and I shall neither trouble you, nor my self with them. It is not Opinions, but
Reason which should guide us, to the belief of any Conclusion; and I believe,
that there are evident Reasons for the truth I have asserted, and then if you
tell me of 20. who say otherwise, (unless they bring good Reason for what they
say) I shall not much regard them.

Buckden Jan. 29. 1684. Your most obliged, thankful and faithful Servant.
Thomas Lincoln.

An Account of Guymenius his Famous, or rather Infamous Book, apologizing for
the Jesuits Tenets about Morals.
Sir,
I Received yours, and (with my Love and Service) return my Thanks. For what
You inquire concerning Amadaeus Guymenius, whether he was a Jesuit or no? I
cannot resolve you as to that Question. Yet this is evident, that his whole
Book is a Defense of the Jesuits, against the Jansenists, and others, who have
writ against the Jesuits Morals; and shows, that the Jesuits are not to be
taxed for those Opinions, as tho they were the first Authors of them; when many
Catholic Authors (as he calls them,) Schoolmen and Casuists of great note,
held the same Opinions long before the Jesuits had a Being.

2. When you ask of what Authority he is, or a Quotation out of him? you must
know.

1. That his Book was condemned at Paris by the Sorbon; and the Form of their
condemnation you have at the end of the Pragmaetique Sanctio Pragmatica Caroli.
7. Edita Paris. 1666. page 1048. 1049.
Sanction of Charles the VI. King of France.

2. This Censure of the Sorbon is damned by no less man than Pope Alexander the
VII in his Vide Indicem Librorum Prohibitorum Alexandri 7. jussu Editum Romae.
1667. page 294. where you have that Bull.
Bull dated at Rome, 7 Call. Julii, Anno 1665.

So that it seems, Gyumenius was of no small esteem at Rome, when the Pope does
e Cathedra damn that Censure of the Sorbon, which damned Guymenius his Book.
For the Words of the Bull are -- Nos motu proprio, and ex certa scientia
nostra, deque Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, prefatam Censuram damnamus,
etc. So that it has no little Authority; as it seems to

Buckden, Feb. 21. 1684. Your Affectionate Friend and Servant, Tho. Lincoln

A Letter about the Papists founding Doninion in Grace.
Sir,
I Received yours, which was very welcome to me, because yours; I have this
week been in a hurry of business, (it being Ordination week;) so, till now, I
had no time (with my Love and Service) to return my thanks for your kind
Letter, and the Intelligence communicated in it. My humble Service to the Earl
of Anglesey, who was pleased to send me a Copy of the Popes Letter to the
French King; to encourage and commend him, for his impious and Barbarous
Persecution of his poor Protestant Subjects: I do believe it is true, what was
by the Earl Subscribed to the Popes Letter; Testor hunc Papam esse
praedecessoribus similem; though some cry him up for his moderation.

For your Query, whether the Papists affirm any where, Quod Dominium fundatur
in gratia: I have here enclosed, what I think is evidently true.

They do believe, and in their Authentic Writings profess, that Heretics, for
denying some Articles of the Popish Faith, forfeit all This does evidently
appear (to omit all other proofs by the Lateran Council, under Innocent III.
Can. 3. and especially Cap. Ad abolendum 9. and Cap. Excommunicamus. 13. Extra
de Hereticis.
Dominion and Right to any thing they possess, and their life too. And if this
were not sufficient, poor Heretics (in their sense,) of which number I am one,
(and by God's assistance ever shall be,) do forfeit not only right to Temporal
things here, but to Heaven hereafter; for they pronounce them eternally damned.

This is evident, not only in the Writings of private persons, but in their
public and most Authentic Records; you know that erroneous and most impious
Constitution of Pope Boniface the VIII. received into the Cap. Vnum Sanctum. 1.
De Majorit. and obedientia Extrab. Commun.
Body of their Law -- Subesse Romano Pontifici, omni humanae creaturae esse
omnino de necessitate salutis. And this is expressly confirmed by Pope Martin,
and the Council of Constance, where they damn the contrary Opinion, as an Error
in Wickliff, who said Articulus 41. Inter Articulos Wicklefi in Council.
Constant. damnatos.
Non est de necessitate salutis, credere Romanam Ecclesiam esse omnium
supremam. And (to say no more, Leo X. and his Lateran Sess. 11. Apud Binnium
Tom. 9.155.
Council approve and innovate that Constitution of Pope Boniface the III. I am
Sir.

Buckden Dec. 24. 1685. Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. T. L.

The Substance of a Preface made by the Right Reverend Dr. Barlow, Late Bishop
of Lincoln, to a Discourse concerning the Gunpowder-Treason, and the Manner of
its Discovery; together with the Speech of King James the I. upon that
occasion; and a Relation of the Proceedings against those Conspirators,
containing their Examinations, Trials and Condemnations. Reprinted 1679. To
which are added by way of Appendix, several Papers, or Letters of Sir. Everard
Digby, one of the Chief Criminals relating to the said Plot.
OUR Reverend Author begins by telling us, that the said Book was no new, but
an old approved Book, Reprinted by the Counsel and Authority of some Pious and
Learned men; that it is no lying Legend or Romance, nor any unlicenc'd seditious
Pamphlet, but an Authentic History of an Impious and Monstrous Roman Catholic
Conspiracy, or of a Popish; containing the Examination, Trial, Evident
Conviction, and just Condemnation of those Popish-powder-Traytors: Then
proceeding to open the hainousness of the Attempt, he tells us that it was a
Villainy so black and horrid, and not only unchristian, but so inhuman and
barbarous, as never had any Parallel in any Age or Nation, Jewish, Pagan, or
Turkish; nor indeed (adds he) could have before the Invention of Gunpowder, and
the cursed Institution of the Order of Jesuits, by the Fanatical maimed
Suoldier, Ignatius Loyola, the World being before both without such pernicious
Instruments, so set for such a mischief as Gunpowder, and without any Order of
men so impious as the Jesuits, to approve or design, and much less to attempt
to execute a Villainy so manifestly contrary to the Light of Reason, and all
Humanity, as well as to Scripture and Revelation.

For tho he confesses it true that the Pope and his Party in these last 600
Years, have murdered many thousand better Christians than themselves under the
mistaken notion of Heretics, by Armies raised purposely, and encouraged to
such bloody and unchristian Executions; as also by their more barbarous and
inhumane Inquisitions, and premeditated Assassinations, as sufficiently appears
by their own Authors: For that an eminent Writer, among which, viz: Math. Paris
in Hen. III. ad annum 1234. page 395. tells us of an infinite number of
Heretics, viz. Waldenses murdered; that our own Archbishop Usher proves out
of their Authors, that in the space of 36 Years in France only, 104747 of the
same Waldenses were cruelly slain upon the same account; that Dr. Crackanthorp
in his Book against the Archbishop of Spalata, cap. 18.. 19. etc. proves no
less evidently by their own Historians, that about 142990 of the same poor
harmless people, were in 60 years time murdered by the same bloody Party, and
in the same Country: And tho (to pass by a Cloud of other Witnesses) a prudent
and sober Roman Catholic, viz. Father Paul of Venice; Hist. Council Trent,
119, 120, tells us first of 4000 Waldenses, and then of 50000 Protestants
inhumanly slain in the same Country by the Authority and approbation of the
same Party, who were drunk with the Blood of the Saints: Yet notwithstanding
these were wicked and monstrous Popish Cruelties, they were not immediately and
absolutely destructive of poor persecuted Christians. Because

1. When Armies were raised against them, they had some time to fight, or flee.

2. That when they were caught, and brought to a seeming Legal Trial and the
Inquisition, they had some time to plead, or at least to pray, and make peace
with God.

3. And that the Execution of these Cruelties was only upon some particular
persons, in some one Province, City or Village.

But that the Hellish Gunpowder Treason, contrived chiefly by the devilish
subtilty of the Jesuits, and their Accomplices, would have been, if successful, a
far more private and sudden, and a more universal and compendious Villainy than
all those; because not only the King, but both Houses of Parliament were
designed to be blown up and murdered in a moment; and the whole Kingdom, as
'twere, assassinated, not in dead Effigy only (as Malefactors are hanged in
some Countries,) but really in its Living Representatives, the whole
Parliament. But referring his Reader to the Book it self, and the public Acts
of Parliament concerning it, for a more full Discovery of that matchless
Treason, he passes on to give them some Reasons for reprinting the following
Book: Which are:

1. That many Pious and Learned persons, since the happy discovery of the late
damnable and Hellish Conspiracy of 1678. ( as the Two Houses of Parliament,
says he, truly call it at a Conference of both Houses, November. 1st of the same
Year) being desirous to look back, and examine the Particulars of the Gunpowder
Plot, which was formed in the same Popish Forge; and by the same Jesuitical
Artificers, though they much sought, yet could not find this Book, which having
been printed above 70 Years before, was grown very scarce; for which reason
'twas thought convenient in that tottering condition of public Affairs,
occasioned at that time by Traitors of the same Stamp, to reprint it.

2. Because the Discovery of the Gunpowder Treason was such a Mercy, as was
both wonderful, as being wholly owing to Providence, and likewise public and
national, and in that tho hatched in Hell, and carried on in darkness, and with
all the secrecy which policy could invent, yet it was discovered by the
all-seeing eye of Providence, whose penetration no clouds can interrupt, and
whose Designs no Policy can baffle; and therefore as a miraculous and general
Mercy was worthy to be kept in perpetual remembrance by our whole Nation; as
was practiced in memory of all public deliverances, by the Churches of old,
both Jewish and Christian; and that by God's own command or approbation; as
appears by the Celebration of the Ex. 12.24, 26, 27.
Passover, to commemorate the deliverance from the Egyptian Slavery, of the
Feast of Esth. 9.18.
Purim for the delivery of the Jews from the cruel designs of Ambitious Haman;
and the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament by our 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
Lord himself, in commemoration of his delivering mankind from more than
Egyptian Bondage, viz. the slavery and punishment of Sin: All our Gracious God
requires or expects from us in such occasions being a grateful memory, and
acknowledgment of his Mercies; to which this Book, as containing an Authentic
History of the great mischief intended, and by Popish Adversaries prepared for
this Nation; and of the miraculous and inexpressible Interposition of Gods
mercy in preventing it, might much contribute.

3. Another Reason, why this Book was Reprinted; says our Author, was that all
Persons, both Roman Catholics, Foreigners, and others what have Authentic
Evidence, to refute the lies wherewith the Disciples of that baffled Plot,
would impose upon them; by persuading them, that it was no Popish Plot, but
only a trick of Cecils. Upon which occasion, in order to a brief Refutation of
them, even in this very Preface, he cites the most remarkable words to this
purpose, of a late Scribler of theirs, (though otherwise, a Man of some parts
and Quality) in a Book of his, called Calendarium Catholicum, or Universal
Almanac, Printed 1662, by which Title he means only a Popish, or Roman
Catholic Almanac; being Calculated only for Romes Meridian, and being not
Catholic in any other sense; the words our Author cites, are in page 2. Ad
Annum, 57. The first words cited are, That it was A HORRID PLOT; but yet, that
it was suspected to be politickly contrived by CECIL. The next Citation is
toward the end of the said Almanac; in Explication of Holy Days, set apart by
Act of Parliament, upon occasion of the solemnising the 5th of November; in
these words, viz. That the Gunpowder Treason, was more than suspected to be the
Contrivance of Cecil the Great Politician, to render Catholics Odious. In both
places (proceeds our R. Author) He confesses, That some Roman Catholics were
in that ^lot, but yet extenuates the matter, by adding, that though some Roman
Catholics were in that Plot, yet there were but few detected; and those but
desperado's too. So that this Popish Author would have it believed, that it was
no Popish, but only Cecils contrivance, who was a Protestant; and that those
pretended Popish Desperado's; who were detected in it, were drawn into that
Conspiracy by that cunning Politician, to make the Catholics Odious. Which
though it be so Groundless, and Impudent an Assertion; and containing such
evident untruths, in matter of Fact, against the sense of a whole Nation; and
the public Acts and Declarations of King, Lords and Commons, in a full
Parliament; that it is impossible any Man not resolved to believe a lie, or to
impose upon others, should publish any thing like them; yet our R. Author,
wonders not that they who are impious and impudent enough, to design and
attempt to act such prodigious Treasons against their King and Country, should
have as much Impudence to deny them, when for want of success, their
Unchristian, though miscalled Catholic Cause, is like to suffer by an Ingenious
Confession. And whereas that Popish Writer affirms, That there were only a few
Papists detected in that Popish Powder Plot: Our R. Prefacer, desires his
Readers impartially and fairly to consider,

1. That it appears by the following Book, that their Number was not so few, as
pretended.

2. And that since that wicked Plot was contrived and managed, with the
greatest sworn secrecy, made Hellishly sacred, and firm by solemn Oaths; and an
abuse of the Holy Sacrament, never intended for such unholy and horrid
purposes; that it is a greater wonder there were so many, than that there were
so few of them detected.

3. That admit but a few of them were detected in England; and punished, yet
that it was well known by the Jesuits, and their Confederates beyond the Seas,
long before its discovery here; our Prefacer affirms, may manifestly be made
appear, out of Delrio, and some others of their own Writers.

4. Whereas that Popish Calendar asserts, That the Papists in the Powder
Treason, and Conspiracy were Desperador's of a Religion, which detests such
Treasons: And that all sober Catholics utterly detest that, and all such
abominable Conspiracies: our Prefacer to that Answers,

1. That he easily grants those Gunpowder Traitors, to have been indeed
Desperado's, or Desperate Villains; because none but such could have been
capable of so Devilish an attempt, nor so Abominable Conspiracy, as the
Calendar truly terms it, against their King and Country. But then if those
concerned in that Plot, were only Desperado's, and not sober Catholics; he
would fain know, what those Great and Learned Popish Writers were; who in
writings approved by their whole party, so highly commend those Gunpowder
Traitors, and other of their Faction, justly Condemned and Executed for High
Treason, and who tell us, they lived like Saints, and died like Martyrs? And
was their renowned Father Parsons sober; when he says of Garnet, a Principal
Gunpowder Traitor; that he was an Innocent Man, who suffered injustly: That he
lived a Saints Life, and accomplished the same with a happy Death, dying in
Defense of Justice? And was not his Brother, Petrus de Ribadenira of the same
Society, a sober Man, as well as the approvers of his Book, Entitled a
Catalogue of the Writers of the Society of Jesus. Printed at Antwerp, 1613.
page 377. In the Index of the Martyrs, when in the said Book, he reckons
Garnet, Southwell, Oldcorne, etc. (Gunpowder Traitors) amongst the Martyrs of
the Jesuitical Society; as likewise Campian, who was justly Executed for
Cambdens Eliz. an. Reg. 24. lib. 3 page 239. 240.
High Treason; whom he ranks among The most Renowned and Famous Martyrs of
Christ? And not to trouble the Reader with more Testimonies, to prove a truth
notorious to all that will Read their most approved Authors, our Prefacer, out
of many, only adds what one Abraham Bzovius, in his Book of the Roman Pope, or
Pontif, written to prove the Popes Extravagant Power to Depose Kings, etc.
asserts; and how rarely well he proves his Doctrine, by the conformable
practice of his Popes; when he gives us a Catalogue of about Abraham ^^zo^ius,
de Pontifice Romano, cap. 46. p. 611.
30. Kings and Princes deposed, or by Solemn Anathema's Cursed and Damned by
the Pope, and cites about ^zovius ibid. page 619, 620.
200 of their most Learned and famous Authors, to prove and justify it; and
how passing from them, to Campian, and the Gunpowder Traitors, justly Executed
in England for their Treasons, he further boasts, That an Abraham (...) ^bi^.
(...) ^6 p^g. ^ ^^. ^ol. 1.
innumerable Company of English Martyrs following their Captain, Edmund
Campian, taught the same thing, that is, they taught the Popes unlimited
Supre^acy, and pretended Power; to damn and depose Kings, and authorize their
Subjects, to take Arms against them, they being alleged to no other end. So
that with them Treason and Innocence, Traitor and Martyr, seem to signify the
same thing; which premises considered, our R. Prefacer appeals to any sober and
unprejudiced Reader, whether such desperate and received Principles, viz. That
an Excommunicate, or Heretic; i. e. Non-popish King, is ipso Facto, divested
of Majesty and all Royal Authority; and vested with the Character of a Tyrant,
and Enemy to the Roman Catholic Cause; and consequently may be killed, etc.
And that such as engage in any such impious design, if they miscarry and suffer
for it, (as it is hoped they always will do, as they have done hitherto) are
Famous and Renowned Martyrs of Christ; and whether the certain assurance such
Resolute Villains have, that if they should change to suffer for any such
attempt instead of being branded for Traitors, they shall stand exalted in Red
Letters in their Calendar, and be magnified for Martyrs; whether all this can
be otherwise than a mighty encouragement to them, to any Plot or Conspiracy,
how black and impious soever; especially when they shall consider it not only
to be Glorious and Meritorious, thus to promote their Cause; but their bounden
duty so to do, when the Jesuits give the Word? And whether all this again can
be less incouragment to them to design and Execute any conspiracies; against
any whole Nations of Protestants, as well as their Princes, whom they look upon
as the worst of Heretics; and Prescribed Enemies of their Church, not worthy
to live in the World, as being Condemned by the Popes Supreme and Infallible
Sentence; to be Prosecuted More Romano, with Fire and Sword! Certainly such an
Opinion, says our Prefacer, true or false, must needs put them on with a
strange fury, to endeavor the utter Extirpation, and ruin of those they
believe to be such impious villains, and so hated of God and Man. And though
our Prefacer Confesses he knows some of that Party, and hopes there may be more
of a better temper, yet to show his Readers, what Opinion the Popish party have
generally of Protestants, both Prince and People, here in England; he inserts
their Character of us in the Words of a Popish Pamphlet, Published since the
late King Charles's Restoration; to Poison their deluded People with a hatred
of all Protestants, and of their Religion: In which Pamphlet, are these
Assertions; viz.

1. That the Protestant Religion is a Cheat, Heresy, and Heathenism. page 3.

2. That the Protestant Bible, is no more the Word of God, than the Alcoran of
the Turks. page 4.

3. That all Protestant Bishops, Ministers, etc. are Priests of Baal, Cheaters
and false Prophets, ibid.

4. That they are false Bishops, Pope Pius in his Bull 4. of Damnation, and
Excommunication, against Q. Elix. An. 1570.. 2. Calls them, Wicked Preachers,
and Ministers of Impiety.
Sons of Iniquity, and Fathers of Mischief, and Antichristian, ibid. page 16.

5. That the Protestant Religion, is Ridiculous, and Idolatrous.

6. Again, that all Protestant Bishops, and Ministers are Priests of Baal,
Ministers of Satan, and Enemies of God, and our Souls. page 32.

7. And lastly he adds, that the King and the Parliament were Sectaries, and
Heretics: ibid. page 32. Which Pamphlet has this Title, viz. Miracles not
Ceased. By A. S. London, 1663. And contains, as is pretended, in the Title
Page; The most Glorious Miracles, wrought by a Roman Catholic Priest, about
London, and Westminster; in 1663. in Confirmation of the Holy Roman Catholic
Faith; which Priest is there termed, a Holy Man of God, and is said page third,
to be sent by God, to do Miracles, in Confirmation of the Holy Roman Catholic
Church, and her Doctrine. page 15, 16.

Our Prefacer tells us, the words he has cited are that Popish Authors own
words; and the Articles of Impeachment, he brings against Protestants; and that
he pretends, he has clearly proved some of those Articles in another Book of
his, which he Intitules, The Reconciler of Religion; for so he calls it, page
3. of the above cited Book. So he boasts, and so, adds our Prefacer, it is
possible he may believe, though he can have but little Reason for it; because
it is impossible he should have any at all; and much less, any clear Reason to
prove positions so evidently untrue as those he advances: upon which occasion,
our R. Prefacer begs leave, by way of Reflection to say,

1. That he wonders not that all Popish Writers in general, should Rail so
Blasphemously against the Bible, and so bitterly against Protestants; because
it is manifest there are no Christians in the World, whose Doctrine is so
agreeable to that Holy Book, as theirs; nor any Book, when seriously Read and
believed, so contrary to, and destructive of Popish Principles, as that of the
Sacred Scriptures: for which Reason, those Politic Adversaries forbid them to
be Read in any Vulgar Tongue; by any Unlearned, or Unlicensed Person of their
Communion: the Sea the Rules drawn up by a Select Commit of Fathers of that
Council, about prohibited Books; and approved by Pope Pius IV. at Rule 4. at
the end of the Edition of that Council, set forth by Phil. L. Abb. at 1667.
page 233.
Trent Fathers with shameless Blasphemy, not sticking to Declare, that if those
Holy Writings (though inspired by the Holy Ghost, as says the Apostle John, 20.
v. 30, 31.) should be suffered to be Read Promiscuously, by the People in a
known Tongue, Being the true sense of the words, of the said IV. Rule.
they would do them more mischief than good; nay, adds he, it is plain, they
think the Reading of the Gospel in any Vulgar Tongue, would be more pernicious
to their Religion, than the Reading of the Alcoran, in the like Tongue, because
they allow the Reading of the Alcoran, but have lately and publicly damned not
only the Gospels, but even their own Missal in French; as very well knowing,
that Divine Truth, such as is contianed in the Gospel, and sparkles here and
there, even up and down among the Rubbish of their own Missal, as corrupt as
it is; is more destructive of Error, than any one Error is of another.

2. When he scurrilously Reviles the King and Parliament, by the abuseful Names
of Heretics, and Schismatics; our R. Prefacer, would fain know what warrant
he has from any Law, or from Reason, or Scripture, to Revile any Supreme, or
subordinate Power Ruling over the People: such a practice being Condemned, by
the Laws of England, which make it High Treason to call our Sovereign, 13.
Eliz. cap. 1.
Heretic, or else makes, it such a Crime, as Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 1. and
Crooks Reports part. 2. page 38.
incapacitates the offenders from holding any Place, Office, or Promotion,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military; besides rendering them liable to other
Punishments, by the said Laws provided. And contrary to the Divine Laws, as
appears, Exodus 22, 28. Where God by Moses, forbids us to Curse the Ruler of the
People; no not in our heart, adds Solomon, Eccles. 10.20. Which Mosaical Law
St. Paul cites, as a Natural and Moral Law, still in force under the Gospel,
Acts, 23.5. Which he renders there (...). Thou shale not speak Evil of the
Ruler of thy People, to show us that Moses's Expression of Cursing, extends of
all manner of Blaspheming, or Evil speaking: which is further confirmed by St.
Peter (though his pretended Vicar, has learnt to speak loftier Language) who
reckons them that speak Evil of Dignities, among Capital Sinners, 2. pet. 2.10.
as does also St. Jude, v. 8, 9. telling us, that even Michael the Archangel,
durst not bring a railing Accusation against the Devil himself: Whereas now not
only the Pope, but every Paultry Popish Pamphleter dares treat Christian Kings,
and the greatest Protestant Divines, worse than St. Michael durst the
Arch-Devil he had to deal with. As appears by the Excommunication of Hen. 8. by
Pope Paul 3. and of Q. Elizabeth, by Pius V. Where Luther is called the Foster
Son of Perdition; the English Clergy, Wicked Ministers of Impiety; and Henry
VIII. A Heretic, who by the Instigation of the Devil, committed Sacrilege;
for Alienating Abbey Lands: upon which occasion, our Prefacer asks, if Hen.
VIII. were Sacrilegious in Alienating those Lands, what was the perpetual
Alienation of them, confirmed by Pope Julius III. and Q. Mary, and her Popish
Parliament, and Convocation? Vid. Stat. 1. 2. Mariae, cap. 8.

And for one other Instance, of their skill in Railing Rhetoric, he cites the
Bull of the Canonization of Ignatius Loyola, Dated at Rome, 8th, of the Ides of
August, i. e. the 6th, of August, 1623. Sect. 1. Where Luther is called, a most
pernicious, and detestable, plaguey Monster, Monstrum Teterrimum, and
Detestabilis pestis, being the very words of that Bull.

Upon which our Prefacer proceeds to tell us, That though he thinks that none
but such who are hardened by strong delusion to believe a Lie, can possibly
believe, That the Protestant Religion is Heresy, or Heathenism, or that it is
Ridiculous or Idolatrous; or again, that the Protestant Clergy are
Antichristian Ministers of Satan, Enemies of God, and Ministers of Baal, as the
Popish Rabshakers pretend; yet he thinks, that those who can against all the
brightest Evidence of sense and reason, believe Transubstantiation, and swallow
Contradictions, may also by a strong Roman Catholic Faith, believe all the
abovesaid Falsities, and by that belief be animated with a blind fury to murder
all those whom they are taught so to miscall and esteem, as is abovesaid, and
to believe that action to be good and just, and to be warranted by the
Authority of Elijah, and the Example of the Jews, who in obedience to his
orders, slew all the Priests and Worshippers of Baal, to whom the Papists
compare the Protestant Clergy and People: And therefore that as the Authority
of Elijah, in quality of a Prophet Divinely inspired, was both Encouragement
and Warrant enough to those Jews, to do what they did, so the Authority of the
Pope and Council, being believed by the Papists, to be Infallible, and assisted
by the Holy Ghost, and being never wanting to incite them to the like bloody
Execution of those they shall please to brand for Heretics, as often as a
proper opportunity hpapens, What can restrain them from such attempts against
us? For what surer or greater warrants can Men of their Principles have of the
Justice of their Actings, than the Synodical Decree of their Pope and Council,
which they believe Supreme and Infallible, and to which they are taught to give
such an absolute Obedience, that they durst not do otherwise, but readily
execute them, without the least disputing, though never so repugnant to their
own sense and reason.

Which that our Prefacer may not seem to advance precariously, he manifestly
proves by the Rules and Directions given them, how they are taught exactly to
fulfill that grand Precept of their Church, viz. To believe as she believes, of
which he inserts two, cited out of the Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius Loyola,
Printed at Antwerp, 1635. page 238. to which are added some Rules to be
observed, in order to direct us the better to believe as the Church believes.

1. The first Rule is, That wholly laying aside our own proper Judgment, we are
always to have a mind entirely disposed to obey the True Church, page 128. Reg.
1.

2. The second is in these terms: And that we may be perfectly unanimous with
and conformable to the same Catholic Church, though she should define that
which appears to our Eyes to be White, to be Black; yet are we obliged like^ise
to pronounce with her, That it is Black, Reg. 13. page 141.

Which Rules and all other Contents of the said Spiritual Exercises, are
approved and received by the whole Body of Jesuits, and not only so, but
further most highly commended in these words, viz. That they were full of ^iety
and Sanctity, and very useful for promoting the Edification and Spiritual
proficiency of the Faithful being the Expressions used by the Pope himself, in
the aforesaid Bull of his Canonization of Ignatius Loyola, Page 5. Sect. 22.
Edit 8. of the Ides, or the 6th of Ang. 1623. And further no less commended by
the Cardinal of St. Clements, a Roman Inquisitour, the Vicar General, and the
Master of the Sacred Palace, to whose Inspection and Censure that Work was
committed by the Pope. And what is still more, the same Supreme, and, according
to the Jesuits and Canonists Infallible Judge, the Pope, gives this further
high Character and Approbation of that Book, and its Contents: We do Approve,
Commend, and Establish all and singular the Contents of them, of our own
certain knowledge; earnestly exhorting all and every faithful Believer, or
Believers in Christ, of both Sexes, and wheresoever inhabiting, to make use of
such pious Documents, and devoutly to be pleased to be instructed by them,
being the express terms of the above cited Bull, ibid. page 5.

Now this wicked and erroneous Doctrine, (pursues our Prefacer) being once
granted, and actually embraced for an Authentic Doctrine of their Church; as
actually it is; It is no wonder the Jesuits and the Popish Party should
securely study and use all means imaginable for the utter Extirpation of all
Protestant Princes or Subjects, by Fire, Sword, Gunpowder-Plots, or any other
Conspiracies, or Methods whatsoever: Because that though such attempts may justly
seem horrid to all sober Men, and even to honest Pagans; yet the Jesuits and
Popish Party are so far from esteeming them sinful, that when done out of Zeal
to their Cause, and with the approbation of their Superiors, which never fails
them at a dead lift, they are applauded as Virtuous, nay, and what is more, as
highly meritorious.

And 2dly, Though such actions in their own Judgments, should appear to be
indeed what they are, sinful, and black, and barbarous, yet what effect can
that have upon Men who have been taught to renounce all their own reason and
sense too, and submit to and obey with a blind obedience all the Dictates of
their Superiors, to call White Black, and Vice Virtue, whenever they bid them,
and to think all things lawful and just which are commanded by them? as may be
seen in the Constitutions, with a Declaration of the Society of Jesus, printed
at Antwerp 1635. part. 6. cap. 1. page 233. and ibid. part 3. cap. 1. sect. 23.
page 123. Nay, and that they are further enjoined to obey their Superior, as
if he were Christ Himself, is visible, ibid In the General Exam. with the
Declar. cap. 4. page 37.

And whereas the Jesuits endeavor to hide the odiousness of this impious
absolute obedience to any but God and his Christ, by a pretended qualification
of its sense, in thus explaining their Universal Obedience, viz. That they must
obey their Superiors in all Things in which there is no manifest sin As they
tell us in the above cited Book* part 6. cap. 1. page 233. and 234. Those (says
our Prefacer, are but Jesuitical Frauds and pitiful Shifts, sorry Fig Leaves
that may a little cover from unwary Eyes, but never justify their Doctrine of
Absolute Obedience from Impiety.

For (says he) of what use can that Restriction be, viz. Where there is no
manifest sin, to those who have before renounced all use of their own judgment
and senses, and who though they see and know a thing to be sinful and wicked
never so plainly, yet if they be told it is good and holy, are bound to think
it so; and if they are but commanded it, are bound to think that Command alone
is sufficient to make it lawful, just and meritorious; and that if they obey
not thus without any excuse or murmuring, their obedience cannot be perfect? As
they are taught in the above cited Book, page 233. and again, part 3. cap. 1.
page 123.

2. When he reflects upon that injunction of theirs, by which they are obliged
to respect their Superiors as Persons that are Ch^ist's Vicars, and that act
in his place and stead, as we find it in the above cited Book, page 123. and
152. and part 4 cap. 10. page 183. and Epist. 1. Ignat. of the Virtue of
Obedience, to the Portuguese Brethren, Sect. 4. and ibid. Sect. 3 and 11 our
Prefacer thinks this sort of Jesuitical Divinity, viz. that every little
^uperiour in that haughty Society must be obeyed a^ Christ himself, and to be
esteemed as his Vicar, that is the Pope himself, must needs be as dangerous to
the Pope's Authority, as to that of Princes, or others; and that, adds he, a
Learned Spaniard, and Zealous Papist, has both said, and by evident instances
proved, That Author's Name is Alphonsus de Vargas of Toledo, and the Title of
his Book runs thus: A Relation to Christian Kings and Princes of the
Stratagems, and politic Tricks and Quirks of the Society of Jesus, to ingross
the Monarchy of the World to themselves: In which, the Treachery of the Jesuits
against both Princes and their People, and their persidious and injurious
practices against even the Pope himself, and their unbridled Ambition to
Innovate in matters of Faith, is proved by manifest Examples. Printed first
Anno 1636, and afterward Anno 1642.

3. Neither do they only (says he) advance their Superiors to be God's
Vicegerents, and Vicars of Christ, but further affirm them to be the
Interpreters of the Divine Will, to whose Government they have wholly given up
themselves to obe^ their Commands, as the Commands of christ, and to make their
Superiors Wi^^^ the Rule of theirs, as appears in the above cited Epist. 1. of
Ignat. of the Virtue of Obedience, to the Portuguese Brethren, Sect. 11. And in
that other of the Constitut. of the Society of Jesus, with the Exam. and
Declar. Printed at Antwerp, 1635. cap. 4. Sect. 30 page 37. and in the Summary
of the Constitut. of the Society of Jesus, Printed at Antwerp, 1635, Sect. 31.
page 17. which Blind and Ab^olute Obedience, (pursues he) is highly approved
and commended to them by the same Ignatius in Sect. 3. page 13. of his
above cited Epistle, where he tells them, That they must not obey their
Superior upon the account of his being qualified with Divine Gfts, but only
because he acts in the place of God. And that if he be not so prudent as he
should be, yet they are not to abate a whit of their obedience for that,
because he represents his person whose Wisdom cannot be deceived, and who will
himself supply whatever shall be wanting in his Minister, whether he want
honesty, or any other Ornaments and Graces. So that by this Divinity, (says our
Prefacer) let their Superiors be as simple or as wicked as they will, yet they
may securely, and most readily and conscienciously be obeyed by their
Inferiors in whatsoever they command.

And then he proceeds to show us how Ignatius proves this Doctrine; and this
(says he) though no wise Man would, he pretends clearly to have proved by
express Scripture, viz. Matthew. 23.2, and 3. where our Savior enjoins his
Disciples to do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees said unto them, because
they sat in Moses Chair. And says our Prefacer thereupon, If the Jesuits
pretend themselves the Successors of those Scribes and Pharisees in Moses
Chair, then they might indeed (though without all sense and consequence) plead
for themselves* as they commonly do for the Pope, viz. The Pope sits in Peter
's Chair, and therefore is as infallible as he, and must be as absolutely
obeyed in all he says; for so (adds he) Pope Agatho argued, and his Argument is
accordingly Registered by Gratian, and confirmed by Pope Gregory the 13th for
Law, as appears in Can. sic omnes. 2. Did. 19. and in the Bull given at Rome,
July 1. 1580, and prefixed before the Canon Law: And so with equal reason,
though ridiculously, might the Society, as (says our Prefacer) Ignatius a brisk
Soldier, but a sorry Disputant, actually does, viz. Thus, We succeed the
Scribes and Pharisees, and sit in Moses Chair, therefore all we command must be
observed. But (pursues our Prefacer) I suppose they will hardly own they succeed
those Scribes and Pharisees whose impious and corrupt Doctrine and Manners our
Savior so severely censures, and pronounces so many Woes against, Matt. 16.6,
and 12. Matt. 23.16, 17, 18. Matt. 23.13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25, 27, 29.

And if they deny they succeed them, then their Founders reason will still
appear weaker, and more ridiculous if possible, being only this, viz. All that
those Scribes and Pharisees delivered sitting in Moses Chair, was to be
observed, therefore whatever the Jesuitical Superiors among Christians, who
sit not in Moses Chair, must be observed. Which is such paltry stuff as is not
worth the proposing, and much less deserves a serious confutation, (adds our
Prefacer;) nor had he troubled himself, as he tells us, to answer it, had it
not been so confidently urged by so great a Saint and Soldier as they esteem
Ignatius; and were not the Jesuits very apt to think and say, as sometimes they
do, that such Reasonings, though never so childish, could not be answered
because they were not.

But however it appears (continues he) that though Ignatius's Reasons were
weak, his Faith was strong; because though without any tolerable Reason, or
concluding Premises, he firmly believes, that all his Society are obliged to a
Blind Absolute Obedience to all the Commands of their Superiors, and most
eagerly presses it upon the belief and practice of all his Society, and
particularly in his above cited first Epistle; and because we find by
Experience, that since his Decease, his Society, whether for their own
interest, and out of Reverence to his Authority, or from any other Motive, have
right or wrong approved his Epistles, and his Spiritual Exercises, etc. in
their Institutes of the Society of Jesus, printed at Antwerp, 1635. and most
industriously vindicated; and I may add, but too mischievously practiced that
Blind and Pernicious Obedience. Having thus represented and explained their
Doctrine, he draws up a short sum of it, whereof this is the Substance, viz

1. That both Ignatius and his Successors agree, That to attain a perfect
Obedience, it is necessary Inferiors should renounce all use of their own
proper Wills, Senses, and Judgments, so far as to believe White Black, and
Black White, Virtue to be Vice, and Vice to be Virtue, upon their Superiors
bare word; Reg. 1, and 13. of the Summar. Constit. Sect. 31. page 17.

2. That, as their Ignatius says in his 2d Epistle of Religious Perfection,
printed at Rome, the 4th of the Nones, or the 12th of March 1547, they must not
only Renounce, but Mortify, and Slay, and Sacrifice, as a kind of Victime,
their own Wills and Judgments; for Mactate is his word: Nay, that they must
believe that Providence moves and rules them by their Superiors; and therefore
that they must be as so many dead Carcases, or Staves in their Superiors
hands, and let them tamely turn and wind them whithersoever they please, as
appears in Constitut. with the Declarat. part 6. Sect. 1. cap 1. page 234. and
that they must entirely and readily obey them without any excuse, or any trial
or examination, whether they be just, or lawful, or agreeable to God's Will, or
no: Summar. Constit. Sect. 31. page 17. and part 3. cap. 1. Sect. 23.

3. And that the Will of their Superiors is to be the Rule of their Wills and
Judgments: That if the Superior commands any thing, that is warrant enough to
oblige them to believe the thing well commanded, and to be not only just and
good, but so good, that nothing better, or more pleasing to God, could be done
proceeding from their own Will and Judgment; as may be seen in Constit. Sect.
31. page 17. Constitut. with Declarat. part 6. cap. 1. page 233, and 234.

4. And Lastly, concludes our Prefacer, it is all the reason in the World, were
their Principles true, they should pay this Absolute Obedience to their
Superiors, since they believe them to be as so many Vicegerents and Vicars of
God and Christ; and that their Commands are to be respected as the Commands of
Jesus Christ, as they teach in their Summar. Constitut. Sect. 34. page 18.

From the Consideration of which Premises, our Reverend, and Zealously
Protestant Prefacer, tells us, he thinks we have but too much reason to
believe, that while there are any Jesuits in England, or any such Superiors as
the Pope, or their General, or Provincials to Command, and any Inferiors to
Obey, it is impossible any Protestant King, or Subjects can be safe, unless they
could repent of their Wicked Principles, and Bloody Practices, which they
cannot do so long as they are so strongly bewitched to believe them just and
true; or unless God himself interposes, as he has hitherto done, by his
wonderful Providence, to detect and defeat their Mischievous Contrivances and
Attempts; for that, as it is but too notoriously known by many repeated
Instances, how unwearied their Attempts have been all along against Queen
Elizabeth, King James the First, King Charles the Martyr, and his Son King
Charles the Second, and their People and Religion, by War, Conspiracies, and
Plots of all sorts, and Poison, Pistol, Stabbing, and all sorts of Murdering
Methods: So (pursues he) we cannot reasonably doubt, but that as long as there
remain any Persons of such pernicious Principles, they will perpetually be
designing; and whenever they meet with power and opportunity, will ever be
ready to execute the like designs against our Country and Religion in all
Generations. And therefore though our Prefacer protests he would not, to save
his own Life, wrong the least Jesuit; yet that on the other hand, to save the
same Life, he would not so far betray his Religion, (which (says he) all Good
Men should ever value a thousand times beyond their own Lives) as to conceal
their Principles which are so eminently dangerous to his Country and Religion.
And besides what he has already said and proved of them, he begs leave to add,
what Desperate Resolutions themselves profess to have taken against us, and
what they further say of themselves.

1. Says he, Father Campian reputed a famous Martyr at Rome, though fairly
executed for High Treason at Tyburn, tells us plainly his mind, and the
resolution of his whole Society, viz. That all the Jesuits in the whole World,
have long ago entered into a Confederacy to cut off, by any method they can, all
Heretic Kings. And says the same Bold Jesuit again, As for what concerns our
Society, I would have you to know. That all we who are of the Society of Jesus,
and who are far and wide disper^sed throughout the whole World, have entered
into a Holy Confederation, that we shall easily surmount your Machines, and
shall never despair of it so long as one Jesuit is left alive. See Campian's
Letter to the Lords of the Queens Privy Council, Printed at Treves, Ann. 1583.
page 22. And Hospinian citing it in his History of the Jesuits, page 246. adds
what Creswel the Je^uit says in his Philopater, viz. That all Catholics are so
to be instructed, that whenever they meet with an opportunity to kill
Heretics, they should suffer no manner of Impediment to divert them from it;
so that even Kings, if they be Heretics, must be killed whenever opportunity
serves: This being the Jesuits express and avowed Doctrine in print

2. And this (says our Prefacer) is the more credible of them, because they
believe a thousand such Murders of Kings or Subjects, is no mortal sin; nay,
and what is more, to tempt young Boys into their Society, and make them believe
it excels all others in goodness, they pretend they cannot commit any Mortal
Sin, for that their Founder Ignatius procured them that privilege by his
Prayers, for 100 Years to be counted from the Day in which the Rules of their
Order were confirmed by the Pope; and that their other Great Saint Xavierus, by
the same means, procured the continuation of it for 200 Years longer; so that
according to that computation, from the Year 1540, in which their Order was
confirmed, to the Year 1840, the Jesuits never have committed, nor ever can
commit any Mortal sin, supposing it true, that they have obtained any such
privilege, as they have openly affirmed, not only to young Boys, and to the
Mobb, but even to Cardinal Borromeo; who was so disgusted at this fulsome Lie,
that he would never endure to see them, or hear of them afterward, as he
several times confessed to his Friends. All which is proved by a Learned and
Zealous Author of the Roman Catholiek Communion, viz the above cited Alphonsus
de Vargas, in his abovesaid Book, cap. 14. So that it will highly concern,
(says our Prefacer) all Protestant Princes, and their Good Subjects, truly to
consider, what encouragement such a belief may give to the killing of Heretics
of all Degrees and Qualities, when they shall think it is no Mortal sin, but for
their own interest, and the Catholic Cause, so to do.

3. But besides this pretended privilege of Exemption from falling into any
Mortal sin, there is another thing still, (says our Prefacer) that may give all
Protestants just occasion to fear, the Jesuits will be always ready to
contrive, and (when and wheresoever they shall find themselves able) to put in
Execution all manner of Plots, and bloody and violent Methods whatsoever, for
the Extirpation of all Heretics, and particularly Protestants, and that is,
the great Corruption of their Manners, and their personal Impieties, as they
are summed up, not by any Pr^testant Writers, but by that Zealous Spanish
Papist, De Vargas, who in his above cited Book, page 37, and 38. of the Edition
of 1642, and page 15. of the Edition of 1636, inserts this Character of them
out of a public Remonstrance, presented against them to the Catholic King of
Spain, in the Name of all the Universities of Spain. These are his words: The
Universities of Spain (says he) in a Remonstrance publicly printed, and sent
to the King, describe the Jesuits to be Men notoriously Covetous, Unsatiable,
Sharking Cheats, Stealers of the Royal Revenues, Arrogant, Ambitious,
Flatterers of Princes, Courtiers, and ever meddling in all manner of Secular
Affairs, Fraudulent, Liars, Perverters of Truth, Defamers of Virtue, Enemies to
a Religious Life, Lovers of pleasure. Impostours covered under the Veil of
Piety, Wolves in Sheeps clothing; Friends of Novelty, Contemners of the
Ancient Doctors, partakers with Luther and Calvin, and suspected of Heresy,
Disturbers of the public Peace, Men of a Devilish Industry, Serpents, and very
Cacodaemons, or Devils themselves; whom all are concerned to beware of, and
avoid.

This Character of the Jesuits is none of our Prefacers (as he tells us;) but,
as he has proved, a Spanish History, and no Calumny of his: And in case they be
guilty of all, or but some of this charge, (as he fears they are) he professes
that he did and would pray, that God would give them Repentance and Pardon too
for the same; but says, That he knows not of any answer they have given to this
heavy charge as yet; though it had been at the time of his writing, published
above 40 Years against them. However, he desires his Readers to consider the
Quality of the Witnesses that charge them with so many, and so heinous Crimes,
viz.

1. That they are no Protestants, nor any upon whom they dare fix the Name of
Heretics, but Zealous Spanish Papists.

2. And they not single Persons, but public Societies and Bodies of Men.

3. Nor they Lay-Townsmen, or Citizens, which according to the Gloss in their
Canon Law, Laici sunt Clericis oppido infesti, are always spiteful against the
Clergy, but considerable and Learned Bodies of Men, viz. Universities.

5. And not only some of them neither, but no fewer than all the Universities
of a great and famous Kingdom. And

5. That a most Catholic Kingdom, the most devoted to the Pope, and Popish
Religion, of any in Europe, viz. Spain.

6. And that not by way of a private Testimony in some particular inferior
Court of Justice, but presented publicly, first to their King, and then to the
rest of the World, in print.

7. And Lastly, That they Witness against Persons that lived among them, and
whose daily Conversation they could not but know, and be proper witnesses of;
and consequently that Protestants have no reason to doubt them to be really
such Persons, as by such Grave and Authentic Testimonies they are proved to be.

Upon consideration of which premises, and of the Principles, Persons, and
encouragements the Jesuits have to attempt the destruction of all Protestants,
both Princes and People, the Advice of the Spanish Universities seems very
reasonable to our Prefacer, viz. That all persons ought to beware of them, and
avoid them; to which he adds, and to banish and chase them too out of all
Protestant Countries; for that as mournful experience has shown, it is morally
impossible Protestants should enjoy any secure peace or safety, where any such
restless encouraged and resolute Malicious Spirits are suffered to harbor.

But besides these encouragements, peculiar to Jesuits, there are more and
greater encouragements still common to them and all of the Popish Communion, to
animate them to design and attempt the ruin and extirpation of all pretended
Heretics, especially Protestants, and their Religion, whom they esteem the
most dangerous Enemies of their mistaken and superstitious Novelties. For that
Pope Innocent III. with his General Council, promised those Soldiers who
taking up the Badge of the Cross, to fight against and utterly to destroy all
pretended Heretics like so many Amalekites, with Fire and Sword, were
therefore called Crusado's, or Cruce signati, the same Council Lateran. 4. Ann.
1215. Cap. 3. of Heretics.
Privileges before granted to those that went out against the Turk and
Saracens, to Re-Conquer the Holy Land, which were chiefly two, viz.

1 The Pope and the Council granted them a plenary Pardon and Indulgence of all
their Sins while they lived; as appears in the Bull of Innocent III. given at
Rome with the approbation of the Council, the 19th of the Calends of January,
or the 13th of December, inserted in a Collection of Bulls Printed at Lions,
1655. page 88. and Sect. 17. page 89. Tom. 1.

2. They promise the said Crusadoes, not only Heaven and its Glory, but a
greater portion in the rewards due to the Just, than other Men, as appears
Ibid. in the same Bull. Where our R. Prefacer again entreats his Readers to
consider the following particulars remarkable in the premises, viz. 1. The
Excellency of the Reward, which is no less than Grace here, and Glory
hereafter. 2. Who makes promise of all this? viz. The Pope, and a General
Council by them received. 3. The certainty they have of enjoying the effects of
those promises, which arise from the strong conceit they have of the Supreme
Authority and ^nfallibility of the Pope and Council who make them. 4. That
assurance they have that the Murdering of Heretics is at least Innocent and
Lawful, because so glorious a Reward is proposed for it, by such an Authority,
which they cannot think capable of so great an Error and Impiety, as to promise
Heaven to such Actions as deserve nothing but Hell and Damnation. 5. That though
many things are lawful which are not necessary, no nor at all expedient
neither, in some peculiar places and circumstances; yet this destroying of
Heretics with Fire and Sword, is according to the Principles of Papists, not
only Lawful, but a necessary duty, which they cannot omit to do when required,
upon pain of Excommunication, and of being delivered to the Swords of them who
will be more cruelly obedient than themselves; as appears by the Decree of the
said Pope Innocent, and his abovenamed General Council. See Council. Later. 4.
Dict. Can. 3. Whereby all Governors, whether Supreme or Subordinate,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, are obliged to take an Oath, to cut off all Heretics,
or at least all those that shall be marked out to them by the Church for such,
out of the places of their respective Dominions, and Jurisdictsons; and that if
they did not speedily put his Christian and Dovelike Decree in execution upon
the first admonition, that their Subjects should be discharged by the Pope from
all Obedience, and their Dominions given away to them that should promise to be
bloody enough, to obey the Pope and that Decree, to the fullest extent of
severity, as appears in the same Council. Can. 3.

So that by what has been said and proved, our Prefacer affirms that it appears
to him, and as he supposes will to many others very plain, that the Murdering
of Protestant Princes and Subjects, who are at Rome declared and reputed
Heretics, is not only, 1. A Lawful Action, but a Necessary Duty, in that
Churches Opinion, at least in some particular Cases and times, though it justly
appear to all others a Black and Damning Sin. 2. And such a meritorious Duty
deserves both Remission o^ Sins here, and increase of Glory ^fterwards. 3. And
that the Actors of such Holy Tragedies, are assured not to be branded for
Murders, but to be Canonised for Glorious Martyrs in their Romish Calendar, and
perhaps honored with Shrines and Incense in their Churches. And how powerful
incitements such Doctrines heartily belie^ed, may be to those that believe
them, to the contriving or executing of all sorts of Vilany against Protestant
^rinces, States, and People; he warmly tells us, past times have been, and
unless Providence prevent, future times may be Rueful witnesses. But be it how
it will, he concludes, that Gunpowder-Conspiracies, or any other Traitorous and
inhumane Methods of cutting off any Christians, and much less Princes, indicta
causa, can be no just means to obtain forgiveness of Sins, or the Glorious
Crown of Martyrdom; that Traitors may be Murderers, but can never be Martyrs,
and that such Hellish Actors as their Church encourages, and pretends to
sanctify, may be a Roman, but can never be a Christian way to Glory, whatever
Gloss the Pope and his Party put upon such barbarous Exploits. However, it is
not to be questioned, proceeds he, but that those who are possessed with a
delusion strong enough to believe the Pope and Council's Infallibility, as all
Papists truly so called, are obliged to do, will always be disposed to design
and attempt the destruction of all Heretics, and of Protestants above all,
whether Princes, or People, by Armies, open War and Rebellion, when they are
strong enough; or by private Conspiracies, by Gunpowder, Sword, Poison, or any
other pernicious means whatsoever, when they want a Military Power, as he hopes
they always will; and that God will likewise, as he has done hitherto,
continually detect and defeat all their private Plots, though never so darkly
contrived, and surely laid; and continue to his Church among us that
protection, and to its Enemies that confusion he has hitherto done; and that he
will not suffer us to be guilty of such ingratitude and stiffness in our Sins,
to provoke him to leave us to their Wills whose Mercies are so cruel, but that
he will give us Grace so thankfully to live under the sense of past favors, as
to make them sure pledges of future Mercies.

He concludes with an indication of the particular Motives which most probably
induced that Bloody ^arty to such a desperate and unheard of attempt as this
Gunpower-Treason, which he thus lays open. When that mischevious Party saw that
all the black Designs they had hatched ever since the Reformation, came to
nothing, that particularly all their wicked Contrivances against the Life of
the late Queen Elizabeth, in order to bring in the Queen of Scots, though they
had endeavored it by Poison, Stabbing, Pistol, open War, Rebellion, etc.
proved successless, and when they saw King James in quiet possession of the
Throne, and considered his great Learning and Zeal to the Protestant Religion
to be of invincible proof against all their deluding inticements to the
contrary, they lost all patience, and by a new and unparalled Villainy,
resolved to dispatch him, and his Kingdom too in some sense, with one single
blast of Hell bred Gunpowder: That since he would not favor their Religion,
he, not never a Patriot in his Great Council might be left alive to oppose it.
But that which added fuel to their Rage, and blew their fury to such a height,
that it could no longer forbear flashing out against that good Prince, their
lawful King, was, says our Prefacer, a public protestation he made before his
Principal Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and declared to all the Judges,
the Lord Chancellor, and all the Great Officers of State in the Star Chamber,
12 Feb. 2 Jacob. Ann. 1604. as appears by Judge Crook's Reports, Printed 1689.
Part 2. Ann. Jacob. 2. page 17. and by Sir Francis Moor's Reports, page 755.
expressed in Law-French: Both which attest as is abovesaid. The chief substance
of the said Protestation was to this purpose, viz. That he never intended to
give any Toleration to Popery; and that he would spend the last drop of his
blood in his body before he would do it, etc. The occasion of which, was a
scandalous Report which the Discontented Puritan Party had spread abroad of the
King, as if he meant to grant a Toleration to Popery; which so highly incensed
his Majesty, that both to contradict it and confute it, he made that pubiick
and solemn Protestation above cited, the substance of which, our Prefacer tells
us, he faithfully Transcribed out of our Authentic Records, as a thing worthy
of perpetual Memory, and the knowledge both of this present Age, and of all
posterity, though it be now almost forgot.

And thus as that Wise and Learned King sought to escape the scandal arising
from the Calumnies of the one, he had like to have fallen a Sacrifice to the
other Party, viz. the Romanists, whose fury and despair was raised to the
highest extremity, by that protestation, by which they were plainly convinced,
that as the King never intended to approve their Religion in his own person, so
he never designed to Tolerate it at all in others. So ends the matter of the
Preface of this Pious, Learned, and Zealous Champion of our Church against
those old and dangerous Adversaries of Rome, to which he adds nothing else but
a Loyal and hearty Prayer, that God would still preserve and bless his then
Majesty and whole Royal-Family, and continue to detect, and by his powerful
Providence to defeat all the impious Conspiracies of their Enemies. It is dated
at London on the first day of February, 1678. and subscribed thus,

Courteous Reader, thy faithful Friend and Servant, T. L.

The Substance of a Discourse, written by the Reverend and Learned Dr. Barlow,
Late Lord Bis^op of Lincoln; consulting Mr. R. Baxter's Tenet in his Saints
Everlasting Rest, that Common and special or saving Grace differ only gradually.
A Gentleman for whom our R. Author had no small consideration, having desired
his Opinion in that Question, viz. Whether the difference between ^ommon, and
Special or Saving Grace be Specifical, or only Gradual? as likewise his Sense
of Mr. Baxter's Discourse concerning that Point: he tells him, That though it
be of small consequence what his Opinion is, and though he be loath to censure
any man's Positions or Proofs of them, especially Mr. Baxters, whom he highly
esteems for his Learning and Industry, his Moderation and Ingenuity; yet in
obedience to his said Friend's, commands, without any further Apology, taking
the same liberty to judge of other Men's Discourses, which he freely gives all
men to judge of his, he declares to him,

1. That he believes the Difference to be more than Gradual.

2. That Mr. Baxter's Discourse does not concludingly prove the contrary.

Which that he may not seem to assert gratis, and precariously, he tells him he
will use this Method, viz.

1. He will fairly represent Mr. Baxter's Reasons.

Secondly, He will give such an Answer, as he thinks may pass for a just
Solution of them.

Obj. Mr. Baxter, to prove, That Common and Special Graee differ only gr^dually
thus argues in his Saints Everlasting Rest, page 225, etc. Is not common
Knowledge and special Knowledge, and common Belief and Special Belief all
Knowledge and Belief? Is not Belief the same thing in one and another though
but one saving? Our Understandings and Wills are Physically the same, of the
like substance; and an Act, and an Act are Accidents of the same kind; and we
suppose the Object the same: Common Love to God, and special Love to God are
both Acts of the same Will, etc.

Sol. To give a just Answer to which, and withal to state the Question, and
give the Reasons and Proofs of his former Positions, with the more evidence and
perspicuity, he considers.

Consi. I. That by Grace in this Question^ is understood somewhat inherent in
us, by what Name soever we please to call it; and not the Favor and Love of
God to his people, which is commonly called by the same Name of Grace in the
Scripture. 1. Because the Graces here meant, are properly (...), or the
Gracious, and Gratuitous effects of that Original Grace that bestows them,
which is the Love and Favor of God, and not that Original Grace it self; and
are such as are subjectively inherent in us; whereas the Love and Favor of God
is subjectively in God, and terminatively only in us, as it produces those
gracious effects in us, which are here meant by the word (Graces.) 2. Because
the Grace of God as it is taken only for his Love to us, admits of no degrees,
either of increase, or deminution, being as all other Acts are in God, like God
himself, absolutely simple, without the least Composition, either in Essence,
or Degree.

Consi. II. We are to understand by Grace in this Controversy, (...) something
superadded to a man already in being, and which he has by Grace or Favor, and
not by Nature. And therefore because all the Grace here spoken of, is a Gift
freely and frankly bestowed upon men, it cannot but be supposed such men must
have their Natural Being, before they can receive any such Graces: For John and
Peter must be supposed to be men, before they can be qualified with any (...)
or infused Graces, to make them Gracious men: All gifts necessary, presupposing
the persons to be first in being to whom they are given. From which Position it
necessarily follows, that none of our Natural Powers and Faculties, such as are
our Understanding and Will, and all the several Acts flowing from them, are,
nor can simply or properly be, or be called Graces, for that very reason,
because they are natural; and because by Grace in this Question all men
generally understand something superadded to Nature, and to our Natural
^erfections. The use of which consideration, he tells us, will more fully
appear in the Sequel of this Discourse.

Consi. III. Whereas Mr. Baxter asserts; That our Understandings and Wills are
Physical- the same; of the same substance; and that an Act and an Act are
Accidents of the same Kind.

To this our Author answers, 1. That this Assertion, as here expressed, is
manifestly false, they being so far from being the same in specie, that it is
the general Opinion of all Philosophers, as well as See Aquin Not. 1. Quaest.
771, 781, 791, 901. 82. and his Commentators and Followers.
School-Divines, That the Understanding and Will are Natural Faculties,
specifically distinct one from the other. 2. But if by this Expression (Our
Understandings and Wills are Physically the same) Mr. Baxter means, that the
Faculty of the Understanding as it is common to all men, so it is specifically
the same in all men, and likewise the Will in the same manner: This he grants
as true, for that both the Understanding Faculty in all men, and the Faculty of
the Will in all men, whether good or bad, wise or foolish Saints or Sinners,
Hypocrites or Regenerate Persons, whether they be alive here, or else in Heaven
or Hell, not excepting even the Understanding of our Blessed Savior himself,
are all of the same Species. 3. But yet that this makes nothing to prove, that
Common and saving Grace differ not specifically; Because 1. The Understanding
and Will being but Natural Faculties of the Soul, cannot with any good Sense be
called Graces; as is evident from the First Consideration 2. And because if
they were Graces, they would not be capable of any Degrees; because according
to that known Rule of the Schools, Natural Powers can admit of none.

Consi. IV. When Mr. Baxter says, Is not Common Belief and Special Belief,
Common Knowledge and Special Knowledge, all Knowledge and Belief? Is not Belief
the same thing in one and another, though but one Saving? To this he answers;
That he grants it true; But that it will not follow, that because all Belief is
Belief, and all Knowledge is Knowledge; therefore that all sorts of Knowledge,
and all sorts of Belief are specifically the same; since it is evident that tho
the demonstrative Knowledge of a Mathematician, the Artificial Knowledge of a
Mechanical Artificer, and the Supernatural Knowledge of God in Jesus Christ,
are all universally Knowledge, yet none can truly say, they are all
specifically the same Knowledge, and differ only in Degree. But if any shall
assert otherwise, our Author desires him to consider.

1. That the Knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, by a lively Faith wrought by the
Holy Ghost in the heart of a true Believer, is a Divine Knowledge, both in
respect of the Principle from whence it flows, and of the Object to which it
tends; whereas the other sort of Knowledge are but Humane; and he cannot think
that any one will say this sorts of Knowledge, and those others are only
different in degrees: Since 1. Not only their Objects, but their Principles
too, are as different as Heaven and Earth. 2. And that they have very different
Acts, viz. the one being a Gracious Sanctifying Act, and the other not; the one
being such as may be in any wicked man, nay, and in the Devil himself; who, for
all his ill Qualities, may be, and is a good Mathematician; and the other such
as is not to be found but in a Regenerate Person. 3. That were there only a
Gradual difference between them, it would follow, that Human or less Knowledge
might be improved into a Divine or Saving Knowledge, only by exalting it some
Degrees higher. But this, says our Author, is impossible; for let our Knowledge
in Mathematics, for instance, be exalted to the highest perfection, yet it is
evident it would never arrive to be a Divine, Sanctifying or Saving Knowledge,
but still remain a bare Human, Natural or Artificial Knowledge.

Consi. VI. To this Expression, viz. That the Understanding and the Will are
Physically the same, of the like Substance; and an Act and an Act are Accidents
of the same kind; and Common Love to God, and special Love to God, are Acts of
the same Will, etc.

Our Author answers

1. That these Expressions are very improper and incongruous. 1. Because the
Will and Understanding cannot in any proper, Logical or Philosophical Sense be
called like Substances, because they are no Substances at all, but Accidents.
2. Because though by Substances were meant only their Natures or Essences; yet
to say they are physically the same in Nature and Substance, and then presently
to add, They are of the like Substance, is a contradiction: For that if they be
of the same Substance, they cannot be of like Substance only, because according
to that old Rule in Logic, No Like is the Same with that to which it is like.
3. But it being granted (as it is) that the Understanding and Will in different
men, as in Hypocrites and Regenerate Persons, are specifically the same, yet it
does not follow, but that the Acts of them may be specifically distinct, and
that ^ven about the same Object. Thus the same man may, at different times,
Love God and hate him; where it is to be observed, that love and hate are Acts
of a Will both Specifically, and Numerically the same, and yet the Acs
themselves are not so, but specifically different, the one being an Act of
Virtue, and the other of Vice. 4, Our Author tells us, He is assured it is not
only a Gradual difference. 1. Because Acs of pursuing an object, and flying
from it, cannot but differ more than gradually. 2. Because those different Acts
may be in the same degree naturally considered; for that it is possible, St.
Paul for example, may love Christ now in the same degree in which he hated him
before; and therefore two Acts of the same Will, and in the same Degree, may
yet be specifically different; and consequently it will not follow, that
because the Will from whence they spring is specifically the same, therefore
its Acts are so too. 5. And the same, adds he, may be said of loving or hating
the same Sin at different times, in the very same Degree, or of any Volition or
Nolition of the same Object in the same persons, etc.

Consi. VI. Whereas Mr. Baxter asserts, That the Acts and Exercises of Common
and Special Grace differ only in degree, and so the difference between Common
and Special Grace is only g adual, and not specifical: our Author humbly
conceives this Position to be false, and inconsistent with the just and kown
Principles of both Divinity and true Philosophy: and that for the following
Reasons, viz.

1. He supposes that Actions Evangelically good and well pleasing to God, are
sometimes specifically different, as is an Act of true Charity from an Act of
Saving Faith; and sometimes only gradually different, as is the least degree of
Saving Faith, in a we^k, but true Believer, from a stronger and more perfect
Faith in a strong Believer: For good and good in the same Species, says he,
cannot possibly differ more than in degree. But Acts of Common Grace in
Hypocrites and Reprobates: must needs differ more than so, from Acts of special
Grace in the Regenerate. Because it is certain that good and good in the same
kind or species, neither do, nor can differ ^o much as good and evil, these
latter standing in a direct and formal opposition one to the other, and being
incompatible, and naturally destructive one of the other. And that Acts of
Common Grace in Hypocrites, and of Saving Grace in the Regenerate, are Acs as
far different as good and evil, he proves; in that it appears, that Acts of
Saving Grace are Evangelically good and well-pleasing to God; but that the Acts
of Common Grace in the Unregenerate are not so: For that how specious soever
they appear, when all their Circumstances are examined by the Touchstone of the
Law and Gospel, they are always found to be but as the Father calls them,
Splendida peccata; Splendid perhaps, but yet sins for all that false gloss that
shines upon them: Which, says he, seems further evident;

1. Because since without Faith, it is impossible to please God, those Acts in
the Unregenerate, which are confessedly done without Saving Faith, can neither
be Evangelically good, nor please God.

2. Because Hypocrites are not good Trees, but are compared to Thistles; and
therefore tho they may bring forth fair, yet can never produce good Fruit.

3. Because Hypocrites and Unregenerate persons are fleshly minded, enemies to
God, and in a deadly or damnable condition, in which they cannot please God,
Romans 8.5, 6, 7. Romans 8.8. And are spiritually dead in sins, and have no
spiritual life, and much less the Acts of it, which we can have only from
Christ and his Spirit. Col. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 5, 12. 1 John 5.12. Joh. 15.4,
5. From whence it seems to follow, that the Acts of common grace in such
persons cannot be Evangelically good, nor pleasing to God, and therefore must
needs differ more than gradually from the Acts of saving grace in the
Regenerate; which are confessed by all to be both Evangellically good, and
pleasing to God.

2. Our Author desires us to Consider, that it is upon evident Reason
confessed, even by Mr. Baxter himself, in his Saints Everlasting Rest, page
225. That the Acts of common and special Grace, as they are morally considered,
differ specifically, and not only gradually; from whence our Author infers,
that it follows, that whenever the Question is put; How common and special
Grace differ? It must be always answered in the Affirmative, that they differ
in Specie, and not in Degree only: And that because the Acts of our
Understanding, and Will, are saving Graces in a Moral Consideration only, and
in no other: And therefore that if in their Moral Consideration, they differ
specifically from common grace, it can never be said without Nonsense, that
they differ only gradually in any other Consideration: for that in a Physical,
or Natural Consideration, they are no saving graces at all; so that if in that
consideration, they should differ only gradually, it will not therefore follow,
that common and special graces differ only in degree, for the Reason abovesaid:
For, adds he, this argument, viz. Common and special belief Physically
considered, differ only gradually, therefore common and special graces differ
only gradually; means no more than, that things which are no graces at all,
differ only gradually, and therefore common and special graces differ only
gradually, Which being an illogical unconcluding inference; the former which is
but the same insence, must be so too. And that those particular Acts of the
Will and Understanding, viz. Saving Faith and Saving Love, as naturally
considered, are no saving graces at all; our Author pretends to prove thus, viz.

1. By the Contents of the second Consideration.

2. By Mr. Baxters own Confession, That saving Love and Belief, are graces only
in a Moral Consideration; who in his Saints Everlasting Rest. page 226. Tells
us, That they are graces and virtues formally, in respect to the Law only, and
their Conformity with it; and saving graces, with respect to the promise of
God, who has proposed Salvation upon such conditions; which is a Moral, and not
a Natural consideration of them; so that (concludes he) to say, that common and
saving graces are specifically distinct in their moral consideration; is to say
they are only and absolutely so distinguished; because they are saving graces in
no other Consideration but that.

Consid. 8. It is to be Considered, says our Author, That Common and Special
Graces consist not so Properly, and Originally in the Acts and Exercise of
Faith, Love, etc. As in the H^bits, and principle from whence they flow;
according to Suarez, and some others: As for Example, The Graciousness of our
Actual Faith, or Love, consists not so much in the Essence of the Act Naturally
considered, as it is the Natural product of the Natural Faculty, from whence it
flows; as in the Circumstance, Manner, and Measure of it, from whence its
Goodness and Conformity with the Law proceeds; which it has from the Habit, and
Principle from whence it flows; the Act being more or less intense or remiss,
perfect or imperfect proportionably, as is the Habit or Principle from whence
it springs.

2. And that as the Habits, whether Common or special Graces, are always in the
Order of Nature, and mostly in the Order of Time, before the Acts, which are
the Acts only of them, so they are much more lasting and permanent; the Acts
ceasing whilst we sleep, or are in a swoon, but the Habits always remaining in
us.

And that since Habits do most primarily and principally denominate us
Gracious, therefore they are most properly and principally to be esteemed those
Common or Special Graces, which are the subject of the present Dispute: And
consequently to proceed Rationally, in inquiring, Whether those Graces differ
specifically, or Gradually; we ought first to inquire into their Habits, and
then s^condarily, into their Acts. And that for these Reasons, viz.

1. Because the Acts derive their Graciousness from the Habits, and not e
contra, and that the Acts cannot be known distinctly, nor first before we know
the Habits from which, as from their Cause, those Acts proceed.

2. Because if it be proved, that the Habits differ specifically, it cannot but
follow without further proof, that the Acts do so too, which proceed from
Causes specifically different.

Consid. 9. So that now (says our Author) we are come to the main point or
hinge of this Controversy; which is, to inquire, how the Habits of saving
Grace differ from those called common Graces? In which, he proceeds in this
Method;

1. He lays down a position, viz. That the Habits of special and saving Grace,
are specifically different from the Habits, and Acts of all sorts of common
Graces. And

2. He proves it by the following Reasons.

1. The first principal Reason is, that there are many common Graces, or
Extraordinary Free Gifts, which are properly Corporeal, and inherent in the
Body; as Sampsons strength, Absoloms Beauty, etc. of which he supposes it
undeniably manifest, that they differ specifically, and not only in degree,
from the Habits of saving Faith, and Charity, etc.

Reas. 2. That there are likewise many common Graces of the Soul, which enlarge
our Understandings, and lead them to a more distinct Knowledge, and
Comprehension of Natural things, than they could otherwise attain to; which is
sometimes immediately, and miraculously infused by God, as was the vast Wisdom
of Solomon; and sometimes acquired by the help of Natural Ingenuity, Industry,
and the helps of an Uncommon Education; such as might be the great Natural
Knowledge of Aristotle, Pliny, etc. Now such Knowledge of either of these
sorts, though a common Grace, our Author takes to be so evidently more than
Gradually distinct from Saving and Sanctifying Knowledge, such as is produced
by a lively Faith enlivening, and sanctifying our Souls, that he supposes it
needs no proof, and that no Man will deny it.

Reas. 3. The Faith of Miracles is an instance of common Grace, that differs
more than in degree, from special and saving Grace; which our Author thinks,
cannot but appear, to be manifest to any Man that shall impartially consider
the following several ways, in which they differ. viz.

1. That they differ in their Principle; for that the Habit of saving Faith, is
always an effect of the Spirit of Christ working new Life, and Regeneration in
us, which the Faith of Miracles is not, as having been many times de facto
given to unregenerate, and Reprobate Persons; where, though our Author
confesses, that both these effects flow from the same Spirit materially and
absolutely considered, yet it is under a several reason, and formality, which
makes them several Formal Principles, and different enough to distinguish the
effects that flow from them, more than Gradually: So that the giving of saving
faith, is an Act of the Spirit inwardly Regenerating, and dwelling in the
Regenerate, in such a peculiar way as is not in a Wicked Man; as appears in
Romans 8.9. Joh. 14.16, 17. Whereas the Faith of Miracles, is an Act of the
Spirit only outwardly governing: again, says he, the giving of saving faith, is
an Act of Gods peculiar Love to that particular Soul to whom it is given;
whereas the Faith of Miracles, as the Schoolmen say, is one of those Graces
freely given to some, chiefly for the advantage, and Salvation of others. See
Becan. in his Sum. of Scholast. Divin. part. 2. Tract. 4. cap. 1. paragr. 4.
page 719. And Aquin. 2. 2. Quest. 178. Axiom. Artic. praefix. and Grotius upon
Matthew. 7.22.

2. That they differ in their Subjects: For that the Faith of Miracles, may be
in a Wicked Man, that continues so till Death, and is damned; as appears from
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. Matthew. 7.22, 23. and is confessed even by the Popish Writers,
though they make Miracles a mark of the true Church: As appears in Mart.
Delrio, Disput. Magic. lib. 2. Quaest. 7. Maldonat. in Matthew. cap. 7. v. 21.
Socrat. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 17. page 744. of Paul Novatian, Bishop Tolet.
Comment. in 3. Joh. Annot. 2. etc. Theophylact. in Matthew, 7. page 41. Whereas a
justifying faith can be only in Regenerate Christians, and is often and most
commonly where the Faith of Miracles never was, nor ever will be; for that the
major part of just persons never did, nor never will work Miracles, and
therefore these two sorts of Faith must differ more than gradually: because if
saving faith were only a faith in a greater degree, than the faith of Miracles;
it would necessarily include in it the faith of Miracles; as a heat six degrees
strong, includes a heat of four degrees; but it is plain, that saving faith
includes not miraculous faith; and therefore they must differ in Specie or
Kind, and not only in degree.

3. That they differ Ratione sui, and in themselves.

1. For that Saving Faith sanctifies and justifies the Person who has it,
whereas the Faith of Miracles does not so; for which Reason Aquinas calls it, A
Grace freely given which is common both to the good and bad, 2.2. Quest. 178.
in Axiom. Art. Praefix.

2. In that, Saving Faith is permanent and perpetual, but the Faith of Miracles
but Temporary,

4. That they differ in respect of their Adjunct. For that

1. Saving Faith is ahvays joined with true Charity, as its natural and
inseparable Effect, whereas Miraculous Faith may want it, as appears in Matthew.
7.22. where our Savior says, he never knew some such Miraculous Workers, no,
not even when they wrought those Miracles, that is, as says Theophylact on the
place, he never loved them, or owned them for his which is a mark they had no
true Charity (says our Author;) because had they loved him, he would have
expressed more love to them. See Theophylact in Matthew. 7. page 41. See Grotius on
the same place, as also Lyranus.

2. For that St. Paul, if he speak of a thing possible, as it is most likely he
does in 1 Cor. 13.2. plainly shows, That the highest degree of Miraculous Faith
may be without Charity, and therefore true and saving Love and Charity is no
necessary adjunct of Miraculous Faith, though it be strong enough to remove
Mountains. See Calv. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 2. par. 13. page 188. and Faust. Socin.
Epist. 3. ad Matt. Radec. page 121. and Lyvan. and Vorstus, 1 Cor. 3.2.

5. That they differ in respect of their Acts. For that

1. The Act of Saving Faith, justifies and sanctifies its Possessour, which the
Faith of Miracles does not.

2. Because the Act of Saving Faith is Immanent, and acts within the Subject in
which it is, and not all in any other Subject without it; whereas the Act of
Miraculous Faith is transient, as working Miraculous Effects in other Bodies
besides that in which it is, as healing the Sick, opening the Eyes and Ears of
the Blind and Deaf, etc.

6. That they differ in their Object; for that Justifying Faith is an entire
assent to the whole Gospel as far as it is sufficiently Revealed, whereby Men
believe Christ's Power, his Precepts and his Promises too, and acknowledge them
to be good, both in themselves, and in respect to our selves the best and only
means to conduct us to Heaven; so that their Understanding enlightened by Faith,
discerns such an Excellency in Christ, and in his Promises and Precepts, and
believes it so entirely, and without reserve, that it contemns all other
things, as the Apostle says, Phil. 3.9. from whence follows the Obedience of
Faith, which is always accompanied with sincerity, though not with perfect
integrity, which is desired and endeavored for in this Life, but attained only
in Heaven. See Mr. Baxter's Aphorisms of Justification, Aphorism 69. page 261
and 262, etc.

But, to the Faith of Miracles, he asserts it with Calvin, upon 1 Cor. 13.2.
That it does not comprehend whole Christ, but only his power in working
Miracles; so that it includes, says our Author, an assent to these three
Propositions, viz.

1. That God is of power to work Miracles.

2. That he will be ready to assist those who believe and rely upon him with
such a Miraculous Faith.

3. That he will particularly assist me, (if supposed to have such a Miraculous
Faith) in working such or such a Miracle.

The first of these all Christians, nay, and all Men, even by the Light of
Nature, know, that know and believe God to be Almighty.

And as for the second, Christians know it by the general promises to that
purpose in the Gospel, Matt. 17.20. Luke 17.6. John 14.13, etc.

But as for the third, viz. That he will particularly assist John, or Thomas,
or you, or me (says our Author) in working such and such Miracles, this depends
on particular Revelation, or Inspiration. See Jac. ad Port. Bernatem in def.
Fid Orthod. cont. Christ. Ostorrod. cap. 30. page 377. Now therefore as all
Faith must depend upon Authority, and Divine Faith such as Miraculous Faith is
upon Divine Authority, and because this Miraculous Faith was not a Gift common
to all Believers, but a particular Gift, and a particular sort of Faith, as
Gennadius apud Oecumen. in 1 Cor. 13.2. page 465. Edit. Graec. Veron. 1532.
Fred. Baldwin. in 1 Cor. 13. page 687. Philip Melanchton, Toleman Heshus,
Calvin, and other Protestant Divines tell us, as do likewise St. Chrysostom,
and the Greek Scholia; and a Faith particularly relying on the Revelation of
God's power and willingness to work such and such Miracles, by such and such
Persons, and at such and such times only; therefore this Faith must needs have
a far different object from a true Justifying Faith. And therefore being
different from it in so many several respects as is proved, and almost all the
ways it is possible for two habits to differ in, it cannot but be plain, that
they differ more than in degree.

But to proceed to other proofs; if saving faith, and that of other miracles
differ only in degree, or as a Disposition and Habit, our Author would demand,
which his Antagonist would have to be the habit, or higher degree? If it be
answered, That the faith of Miracles is the lower, and saving faith the Habit
or higher degree, then it must follow, that all that have saving faith, have
the faith of Miracles too; because all Philosophers and Divines agree, That
when two Qualities differ only in degree, the higher degree always includes the
lower, and consequently all the whole Virtue, and natural or moral Activity of
it; and therefore, that every Habit necessarily includes the Disposition
leading to it; from which it would follow, that all that believe with saving
faith, must needs have the faith of miracles; which being de facto false, the
premises must needs be so too.

2. That saving faith includes not the faith of miracles, he further proves by
our Savior's giving his Apostles the power of working miracles, a good while
after their calling to the Apostolical Function, and consequently after they
had already received saving Grace, as appears Matt. 10.1. Luke 9.1.

3. But if it be said, that faith of miracles is the higher degree, and
includes saving faith, then says he, it would follow, that all that hare the
faith of miracles, must needs have saving faith too. But that is contradicted
by our Savior, as he has above proved; as likewise by Aquinas, and all other
Sober Men, both Papists and Protestants, excepting only Becamus, and a few
other Servile Writers, sworn Slaves to the Pope. See Becan. in Sum. Theol.
Schol. and in Compend. Man. lib. 1. cap. 17. Page 336.

Reas. 4. Is drawn from the comparison of the Gift of Tongues and Prophesies,
which are acknowledged by the Schools, and other Divines, to be common Graces
given for the common advantage of the whole Church, and which yet differ so
widely from saving faith, that they have scarce any common Attribute in which
they agree.

Reas. 5. Here our Author being sensible, that the main difficulty in this
Question, seems to consist in clearing of this doubt, viz. Whether Temporary,
or Common Faith in Hypocrites, differ Specifically, or Gradually only from
Saving Faith in the Elect? Before he comes to the proof of his assertion, which
is, That they differ specifically, desires us to consider.

1. That by common Faith in Hypocrites he does not understand only a faith that
is wholly false, or dissembled, but a real faith that includes both a true
knowledge of, and true assent to several Divine and Gospel* Truths, such as
many Hypocrites have, though it be not such as it should be.

2. That this common faith, though by some Divines commenting on those parables
in Matt. 13.5, 6, 20, 21. Luke 8 6. Mar. 4.5, 16, 17. it is called Temporary,
and by others Historical Faith, as Zach. Vrsin. in Explic. par. 2. Quest. 21.
par. 2. Cat. palate. etc. and Grot. in Matt. 13.21. yet it is but one and the
same sort of faith, and means only a faith that wants a just and durable
foundation to preserve it against the assaults of strong Temptations and
Persecutions.

3. That he conceives this faith is not called Temporary, as supposing it never
endures till Death, because he believes it often accompanies such Believers to
the Grave, that live and die in times of the Churches Prosperity, but only
because it is of a temper which would not have been of proof against
Persecution had it happened, nor ever is when it does come. From these
Considerations, he passes first to his Position, which is; That this Common,
Temporary, or Historical faith, be they different, or but one and the same, do
differ more than gradually from saving faith, called in Scripture, the faith of
the Elect, unfeigned, and an Effect of Christ's Regenerating Spirit in his true
members. See Bishop Usher's Sum. Christian Relig. page 179. Zach. Ursin. par.
2. Cat. in Explicat. parag. 2. Quaest. 21. page 107. etc, Tit. 1.1. Primas.
Uticens. in Tit. 1.1. Dion. Carthus. in loc. 2 Timothy 1.5. Calvin. Instit. lib.
3. cap. 2. parag. 12. page 188. Gal. 5.22.

But before becomes to the proof of this, he confesses he has the Jesuits, and
some Remonstrants against him, such as Maldonat. in Joh. 9. etc. and Mart.
Becan. in Compend. Man. lib. 1. cap. 16. Quest. 3. page 335. and in Sum.
Theol. part 2. Quest. 8. page 802. and Pet. Bertius de Apostas. Sanct. page 42,
43. Act. Synod. Remonstr. in Defens. Artic. 5. de persever. Sanct. page 230,
231. who in order to establish a worse Error, viz. The final Apostasy of the
Saints, assert, That this common, or temporary faith, is not only specifically,
but even gradually the same with saving faith, and would justify if persevered
in; whose Arguments he passes by, as undeserving a confutation, being so
pitifully weak; and because his Learned and Ingenious Adversary Mr. Baxter,
proceeds not so far as to assert, That such a faith can justify. However, by
the by, he tells us, that he conceives, that it may be manifestly evinced
against those Adversaries, by many Circumstances of the Text, in Matt. 13.5, 6,
21, 22. (where common faith is described by four Conditions that cannot
possibly agree to a saving faith) that it must needs be more than gradually
different from it. Now, proceeds he, though this were sufficient to prove his
abovesaid position, yet he will still add some more distinct Confirmations of
it, which he does by the following additional Reasons, viz.

Reason 1. Drawn from the vast difference between the nature of the Causes, and
first Principles of these two sorts of Faith, because the one is Heaven-born
immediately from the Spirit of Christ, which sows in us an Immortal seed of
faith; which can never die, but must overcome sin in the Elect, and work
Regeneration: And the Other is only a Humane faith, wrought by Humane Means,
and assents to Divine Truths out of mere Humane Motives, and by mere Humane
Causes, as false Reasonings, or more forcible Temptations and Persecutions may
be overthrown and extinguished.

Reason 2. From the different Nature and proper acts of both Qualities; saving
belief being the first Spiritual Life by which a Christian lives, and is
justified, Heb. 10.38. whereas common belief is often in them who are dead in
Trespasses and Sins; and neither justifies, sanctifies, nor saves.

Reason 3. Because it is evident, common faith may be in a very high degree in
some Impious and Unregenerate Persons, who have acute parts, and are Learned
and Industrious, and thrive into a Radicated Habit, and a great measure of
knowledge of both speculative and practical Divine Truths; which by their
Learning, they may be able to demonstrate, and may really believe and assent
to, and yet never proceed to pay true obedience to, etc. And because though
there are many degrees of saving faith too, from the Child to the Strong Man in
Christ, which include far less knowledge than some degrees of common faith, yet
the weakest of them is saving; whereas the highest degree of common faith, can
neither justify nor save; a plain Evidence, these two faiths are of kinds as
different as Heaven and Earth.

Reason 4. Is because common Grace, as the knowledge of several Tongues, and of
many Divine Truths, as it is generally a Habit, or Disposition, acquired by our
Natural Faculties, improved by Industry, Education, etc. and so depending upon
mutable principles, as our Will and Understanding, so they may be lost again by
negligence, or malice; whereas saving faith being produced by the Eternal and
Immutable Spirit of Christ, is incorruptible, and can never die, nor be lost,
John 17.3. 1 Pet. 1.23. Heb. 10.38. John 6.47, 51, 54. See Aquin. 1. 2. Quaest.
51. Art. 4. in Corp. Artic. which he proves further by conferring 1 John 3.9,
5.1.4, 8. with 1 John 5.18.

Reason 5. Is, because, though common and saving faith may have the same
material object, viz. Divine Truths, revealed by God in the Gospel; as, that
Jesus is the Son of God, etc. yet these truths are embraced by these two
faiths, upon different Motives, and by far different means; the one being built
only upon Humane Mediums, and Arguments, such as Unregenerate Persons by their
natural parts helped with Learning, etc. may attain to which is an assent like
its Principles that begot it, humane and fallible; whereas saving faith
proceeding from Christ's Spirit, and built upon his immediate Illumination and
Testimony, which is Divine and Infallible, must of necessity be an assent
differing from the former more than in degree, and be like its cause, Divine
and Infallible likewise: which proof he further illustrates by comparing the
difference between Opinion and Science, with that between common and saving
faith, and by several Scriptural Arguments besides.

Reason 6. Is, because, if common, and saving faith were essentially the same,
then Irregenerate and Impious Persons, who have common Graces, may be as
gracious and as true Believers as the best Saints, though not in so high a
degree, as the smallest grain of Gold is as truly Gold as the whole Wedge; but
that this consequence is de facto false, Ergo, etc. And that it is really false
appears by this (says he) that it is as impossible for a Christian to have any
other Theological Virtues, or Graces without true faith, as it is for a Man,
according to the Moralists, to have any other Moral Virtues without Prudence,
which is the Root of them all: And further adds he, if it be true as Mr. Baxter
says in Exercit. de fid. etc. Art. 30. page 279. Rat. 7. and Aphoris. in
Explicat. These. 69. page 266, and 267. That the Essence of saving faith
consists in accepting Christ, and loving him as our Lord and Savior, then it
follows, that those who do not so accept and love him, have not the essence of
saving faith; and therefore that since it is evident, that no Irregenerate
Persons, though sometimes full fraught with common faith, yet do ever so accept
and love Christ; therefore it follows, their faith must needs be of a very
different kind from saving faith. Q.E.D.

Reason 7. And last is, Because, if common and saving grace be essentialiy the
same, then it would follow, that a Man who has an historical Faith, whilst
Unregenerate, by the help of Natural parts, Learning, etc. and afterward
should become Regenerate, would by the Spirit of Christ receive only a greater
degree of the same faith he had before, and consequently that saving Grace
would not be a Gift of God's as to its essence, but only as to its degree,
because we should owe the essence of it only to our natural parts, etc. and the
degree only to Christ's Spirit. But this Doctrine, (says he) is contrary to
express Scripture, and resolved to be so by the Ancient Church, and by her
expressly condemned in her Councils, as Pelagian and Heretical; and therefore it
follows, that the difference between common and saving faith must needs be
specifical, as appears in Council. Arausicann. 2 Can. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. apud Franc.
Jover. page 44, 45. Sect. 1. Class. 2. and Council. Carthag. Ann. 418. Imp.
Honor. 12. and Theod. Coss. Can. 112, 113. apud Justell in Cod. Can. Eccles.
Afric. page 294 and Hist. Pelag. Voss. part 2. lib. 3. These. etc.

And to each of these Reasons, he subjoyns ample and learned Illustrations, and
confirmatory proofs, and so after a short Reflection of Christian Commiseration
upon the unhappy condition of the Church in these latter times, in that such
Disputes as these should arise among any Christians, and especially among
Protestants; and a pious wish, that they were all laid asleep, he concludes
with this modest and generous Protestation, That if any person shall with that
meekness and civility that becomes a Man, and much more a Christian, heartily
and rationally answer that his Discourse, by evidently overthrowing his
Reasons, and firmly proving the truth of his own, he should be so far from
being angry with him, that he should thank God and him, for showing him his
Error, and publicly acknowledge himself to be his Disciple and Proselyte.

A Young Man being Converted from Popery to Protestancy, and being tempted by
some Romish Emissaries to return again to their Faith, by amusing him with many
Sophisticate notions of their Church having an Infallible Guide; Dr. Barlow
being about the Year 1673. applied to, to write somewhat that might Confirm the
young Man in his choice of the Protestant Religion, he wrote the following
Paper, by means whereof the Convert remained unmoved and unshaken in that
Religion.
THat the Romanists Position concerning their Infallibity is impious, and
(without any real ground) irrational. That such a pretended Infallible Guide is
not necessary, nor (since the Apostles death) ever was in the World.

1. Impious.
1. They make themselves the sole and una Ecclesia Romana vera duntaxat est
Ecclesia, una Fides. etc. Per honorat. Fabri. lib. 2. prop. 7. pa. 123.
only true Church in the World, and miscall themselves Ecclesia Romana errare
non potest, Ibid. page 120.
Infallible, and then (with a most unchristian and uncharitable censure) deny
Salvation to any but themselves) and so In Ecclesia duntaxat Romana homines
salvari possunt. Ib. p. 133.
damn the far greater part of the Christian World. Thus a late and learned
Jesuit (Honoratus Fabri) in a Book published with all the License and
Approbation their Church usually gives their best Books; and to make it sure,
that not only the Jesuits, but their Church also is of this uncharitable
Opinion, their Trent-Council has pronounced Haec est vera Catholica fides extra
quam n^mo salvus esse potest; Council. Trident. Sess. 24. In B^lla Pii Papae. 4.
Super forma Juramenti professionis fidei.
Damnation to all those, who do not believe their new Creed, which (themselves
excepted) no Christian Church in the World ever did, or (to this day) does
believe.

If any Man think otherwise, let him make it appear, that any Church in the
World (even Rome her self) before the Trent-Council (which was but 111 years
since) had, and believed that Creed, and I will become his Proselyte.

2. But further, 2. it is irrational I^rational.
to persuade or require us (or any body else) to believe an Infallible Guide,
when they themselves are not yet agreed who this Infallible Guide is.

For 1. the Jesuits and Canonists will have the Pope Infallible, nay, their
Canon Sic omnes Apostolicae sedis sanctiones accipiendae, sicut ipsius Divini
Petri voce firmatae. Gratianus Can. sic omnes Did. 9.
Law declares (and cites the Authority of a Pope for it) that the Pope's
Decrees are as infallible as St. Peter's; and if he succeed him in the
University of his Jurisdiction, (as they say,) he may (with as much reason)
challenge his Infallibility. But this no less than Council. Pisanum Anno 1409.
and Constantin. Anno 1414. and Basiliense. Ann. 1438. Vide Council. Pisanum
Sess. 14. Constani. Sess. 12. Basiliens. and Sess. 34.
three of their own General Councils (before Luther) peremptorily deny? and all
of them deposed Popes, as Simoniacal, Schismatical, Perjured, Heretical, etc.
The Fathers of those Councils were (it seems) well acquainted with their Holy
Fathers the Popes, and so could (and did) call them by their right names.

And the Church and State of France does likewise damn the Doctrine of the
Popes Infallibility; and not long since, did damn it publicly both in the May.
3. 1663. So Pope John the 2^th tells us, that the council of Constance was
Concilium Sanctissimum quod errare non potuit. vide Constant. Sess. 12.
Mediolani 1511. p. 11. Col. 2.
Sorbone, and Parliament of Paris, the King's Advocate Mr. Talon making a long
and Eloquent Speech to that purpose.

2. Many would have a General Council to be Supreme Judge, and so (if any be
so) Infallible: This the three General Councils, (but now named) unanimously
define; as all know, who knows them.

This the Canonists, the Jesuits, the Court of Rome, (the Pope and his
Parasites) universally deny, and think it (if not an Heresy, yet) a great
Error.

3. Others therefore will have the Pope and Council joined, to be the
Infallible Guide.

4 And lastly, others deny the Decrees of the Pope and Council to have any such
Infallible Certainty, 'till they be received by the Church diffusive.

France (notwithstanding any pretended Infallibility) never would nor did
receive all the Decrees of the Council of Basil, or Trent: and it is notorious,
that the Popish Writers tell us of General Councils, whereof 1. Long. a
Coriolano sex. Card. Bellarmino in Principio summae Coliorum. 1. Concilia genesis
approbata. 2. Reprobata 3. partim approbata, parti, reprobata. 4. nec
approbatum nec reprobatum Concilium Pisanum.
Some approved. 2. Some rejected. 3. Some partly approved, and partly rejected.
4. One (that at Pisanum 1409.) neither approved nor rejected.

If General Councils he infallible, why are any (or any part) of them rejected?
And if they be not Infallible, then it is evident, they cannot be an Infallible
Guide: hence I infer,

1. That it is Irrational to tell us they have an Infallibe Guide; when they
themselves are not agreed, nor do (nor can) tell us who it is: For admit some
of those named (the Pope or Council, or both together, or the Church Diffusive)
were Infallible, yet 'till I can be assured which of them it is, none of them
can be an Infallibe Guide to me; so that I may with certainty and safety rely
on the determination; for so long as I doubt of the Guide, (whether this be he
who is Infallible) so long I must necessarily doubt of his decree and
definition; it being impossible that I should yield an undoubted and infallible
assent to his Sentence, who (for ought I know) may be as fallible as my self;
or assent to any conclusion without doubting, when the premises, for which I
give that assent, are indeed dubious.

2. And further it is evident, that we neither have (nor without some new Divine
revelation, can have) any infallible means to know, that a General Council is
Infallible.

For 1. Scripture never so much as names a General Council, (much less says it
is Infallible.)

2. Nor does it legally tell us who can call it.

3. Nor who must choose Representatives, or how many, or what power they can
give them.

4. Nor when they are called, Commissioned, and come, whether all must concur
to make an Infallible Decree, or the Major part of Votes will be sufficient.

5. Nor what means they must use to make their Decree certain and infallible;
or whether they shall be infallible in their definitions, whether they be good,
or impious persons, whether they use good means to find out the truth, or none
at all.

I say it is evident, that neither our Blessed Savior nor his Apostles have
assured us of any of these in Scripture; nor any acknowledged General Council
since, ever defined Synodically, and declared a General Council to be
Infallible. And therefore we have just reason to say, that it is irrational to
persuade Men there is an Infallible Guide (and that a General Council) on whose
Judgment we may (with certainty and) undoubtedly rely; when there is neither
Scripture nor General Council, (and therefore no infallible means for universal
and uninterrupted Tradition neither is nor can be pretended to;) nor indeed any
thing else, to prove a General Council to be infallible. He who thinks
otherwise, let him show me any place in Scripture, or Canon of any legitimate
General Council to prove what he says, and if I cannot make it appear to any
impartial Judge, that it is impertinent, and his reason from it, inconsequent;
he shall have my hearty thanks, and subscription to his opinion, if so proved.
For I should count him no less then a Mad man (at least highly irrational) who
traveling toward Heaven, would refuse an infallible Guide to bring him
thither, if he could be assured there were such an one: And he is little wiser,
(who without such assurance) follows any, who pretends to what he cannot prove,

3. 3. Not necessary.
There is no necessity of such a pretended Eternal Guide. Our Blessed Savior,
who is the Rev. 15.3.
King of Saints, and Ephesians. 5.23.
head of his Church, governs and directs it with his Holy word (the Scriptures)
Extern^ per verbum interne per spiritum, Aquinas.
without, and his holy Spirit within; nor is there (or can be) any true Member
of his Church and Mystical Body, which has not his holy Romans 8.9.
Spirit, to direct and comfort it. His holy word is (fidei and morum Regula) an
Infallible Rule of our actions and belief; and his Spirit (where really it is,
and it is really in every Member of his Mystical Body) is an internal Principle
which enlightens the understanding of all in whom it is, and sanctifies their
will and affections, and enables them to believe and obey the truth: Whence it
is that every pious person, and Member of the true Church of Christ, is said to
be Joh. 6.45.
taught of God; and our Blessed Savior has promised that all such shall
understand and Joh. 7.17. and 8.32.
know the truth of the Scriptures. This means our blessed Savior, and his
Apostles left in the Church, and it was (and still is) sufficient for
Salvation, without any General Council for an infallible Guide.

That it was sufficient for 325 years after Christ, is undeniably evident thus.

1. It is certain, and (on all sides) confessed that there was no General
Council in the world 'till the first Nicene-Council, which was in the year 325.
I ask then were the Primitive Christians saved in that 325 years, when there
was no General Council to guide them infallibly; or were they not? If you say
they were not saved, then your Roman Martyrologie, all your Missals and
Breviaries are manifestly false, (and your Church errs;) in all which are
hundreds of Martys and Saints acknowledged; and (in your Sacred Offices)
Prayers made to them; which (if they were neither Saints nor Saved) were not
only erroneous, but highly impious.

And if you say, that they were saved in those 325 years (when they had no
General Council to guide them infallibly) as of necessity you ought and must
say; then say I that Christians might have had Salvation, if no General Council
had ever been. For there neither is any reason (nor can any be) given, why
Christians should have more need of an infallible Guide in the following, than
they had in the first Ages. And therefore, if there was no necessity of an
infallible Guide then, there will be none now; but as they were, so we may be
saved without one.

If i^ be said, that the many Heresies whi^^ arose in after Ages, made an
Infallible Guide (a General Council) more necessary; it will be replied (with
evident truth) that there were more wild Heresies in those first Ages, (we now
speak of,) than in any since; as will be manifest to any who seriously read,
and impartially consider the Writings of those Ancient Such as Iraeneus,
Epiphanius, Augustine, Theodoret, Phil^stinus, etc.
Fathers, who have given us just Catalogues of the Heretics and Heresies of
those first Ages. And therefore if those Primitive Christians, (for 325 years)
notwithstanding all the Heresies in their times, were (for Zeal and Piety)
excellent Persons, Saints, and Martyrs, without any infallible Guide; so might
we too, if we should do as they did; that is, diligently read the Scriptures,
believe and obey them, exercising all those acts of Piety toward God, and
Charity toward our Neighbors, which are there (clearly enough) required of
us; so that there is now no necessity of an infallible Guide, which (without
any proof) is vainly pretended to.

4. Nor ever was there any General Council.
4. And we say further, that there never was any Council in the World (such as
is pretended to be infallible) which was truly General, Ecumenical.

For 1. It is (and must be) confessed, that a General Council truly and
properly so called, (and none else is pretended to be infallible) must consist
of the Representatives of the whole Christian World.

2. It is also certain and evident that the Representatives of a very great (if
not the greater) part of the Christian World, were never called or sent, or
came to any Council, which has been held any where since the Apostles times. I
mean none out of Aethopia, Persia, India, etc. were either called or came to
any of those Councils which hitherto have been held, (as is manifest by their
Subscriptions;) and yet all Histories agree, that the Gospel was Preached, and
Christians planted in those Countries. So that the greatest Councils we have
yet had, are only Imperial (not truly General) called by the Roman Emperors,
and consisting of Bishops within their jurisdiction.

If it be said, that both Protestants and Papists call the Councils at Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, etc. Ecumenical or General Councils.

It Is granted, we commonly call them so. But then the word (...) (which
signifies the World) must be taken (as many times it is) not for the whole
World absolutely, nor for the whole Christian World; but (as it is in the Luke
2.1. (...).
Gospel) for the Roman World; there came a Decree (says Luke) from Augustus,
that all the World should be Taxed; that is, all the Empire, or Roman World,
(for he neither did, nor could Tax any out of his own Empire and Jurisdiction.)
And on this account, I take it for certain (and I am sure it is so,) that there
never was any Council more than Imperial, and so none truly Ecumenical; and
therefore none so much as pretended to be infallible. And hence it follows,
that the Christian Church never had any infallible Guide, because no such
Council as they pretend is their Guide.

5. The Church of Rome has has no just pretense io Infallibility.
5. And yet further, the Church of Rome (which only pretends to Infallibility)
has no (not so much as probable) ground for that pretense.

That this may appear, I say, 1. It is confessed, that no Church ( Rome
excepted) has any just ground to pretend to infallibility.

2. And I say, that the Church of Rome has no more reason or ground to pretend
to infallibility, than the Church at Jerusalem, Antioch, Smyrna, or
Philadelphia; nay, than the Church of Paris, Madrid, or Oxford. For,

1. It is certain that no Church is (per se and ex natura sua etc.) by its
natural Constitution, Infallible; and therefore the Infallibility of the Church
(if there be any) must necessarily proceed from the promises of God in Christ,
to give Grace and assistance to preserve her from error: So that such Promises
only, can be a just ground of such infallibility. Now the Church of Rome has no
more promise of such assistance, than the Churches abovenamed, or any other
Christian Church in the World. This will (I believe) seem strange to those who
have irrationally inslaved their understandings to believe (without and against
reason) that the Popish Church is infallible, only because she says so: However
it will concern them, to seek (and find) such promise made to Rome in
Scripture, (for it is in vain to seek it elsewhere;) and if they find no such
promise (as I say, and am sure they cannot) then they may be sure too, that
their Popish Church, (having no such promise) is not infallible. If any (who
thinks otherwise) can and will produce such promise of Infallibility, made to
Rome more than to any other Church; I (who should think my self happy to have
an Infallible Guide) shall with all gratitude and speed, become his Proselyte.
In the mean time, (...), it is best to continue Protestant, till better proofs
be produced for their pretended Infallibility, least otherwise we should
mistake a Planet for a fixed Star, and (which will neither warm or direct us)
an ignis fatuus for true fire; certainly no rational and considering person
(who has a due care of his Soul and Salvation) will follow Rome as an
Infallible Guide, till he be (which never can be) well assured that she is so.

2. It is certain, that (admitting a General Council to be a Guide infallible,
and the Trent-Synod to have been such a Council, both which are demonstratively
false) I say, both these admitted, the Church of Rome neither at present has,
nor for above an hundred years last past, had any more Infallible Guide than we
Protestants, nor (probably) is ever like to have. For it is certain the
Trent-Council ended Anno Vide Bullam Pii Papae 4. super declarat. temporis ad
observand. Decreta Council. Trident. dat. Romae 1564.
1563. and since that time there has been none, nor (the divided State of
Christendom considered is any like to be: Especially, if we consider (what all
know) that the Popes, (who pretend a sole right to call Councils) who most
needs Reformation, come to Councils, as an old Bear to a Stake, where they are
sure to be well pulled and baited.

Now is it not ridiculous, and irrational, to tell us, that we are in a
dangerous condition, wanting our Infallible Guide to end our Controversies,
when they have none to end their own? Some Differences and Controversies we
have (nor was the Church of God ever free from them) no not in the Apostles
times, when there were Judges indeed Infallible) but they have more and greater
witness: that See the Journal of Monsieur de S. Amor. concerning the
Propositions controverted between the Jansenists and Jesuits, etc.
great, and (notwithstanding the Pope's Definition) yet undecided Controversy
between the Jansenists and Molinists; that about the Immaculate Conception of
the Virgin Mary, not yet determined; nay, after two Kings of Spain Vide Legate.
Philipi. 4. and 4. Reg. Hispaniae ad Paul. 5. and Greg. 15. per Luc. Maddingum,
etc.
had (with great expense and solicitation) importuned two Popes to determine
it, yet neither they, nor the Trent-Council did, nor dared determine it.

Witness also, that greater Controversy between the Church and Kingdom of
France, and the Jesuits and Court of Rome, about the Pope's Supremacy,
Infallibility, etc. In all, six propositions believed at Rome, defended by the
Jesuits and Canonists, and derided Vide Arr^st de la (...) de Perl^ment du Mar,
163^.
at Paris, both by the Sorbone and Parliament there.

Once more, that great and fundamental Controversy in the Church of Rome, even
about this Infallible Guide (we are now speaking of) whether it be the Pope
alone, or the Council alone, or both together, etc. or who it is? I say, this
Controversy is not yet determined.

Now is it not ridiculous to tell us of our danger, and importune us to be of
your Church on pretense of an Infallible Guide, to solve and satisfy our
Doubts, and end our Differences; When we evidently see, that your own
Differences are greater, and more than ours: Whence we conclude, (as well we
may) that either you have no Infallible Guide; or if you have, then he does not
declare and give his Definition for truth; or if he do, you disobey it; because
we see your Differences continue. So that in this the Church of Rome is like
that pitiful Mountebank, who said, he had an excellent Remedy to cure a Cough,
and yet coughed himself grievously, even while he told it; for some he had (and
so may Rome) so simple and easy to believe him.

6. 6. The Council^ which ^^e Church of Rome approves, and calls General, in
many things erroneous and impious.
I say fa^ther, that some of those Councils, which the Church of Rome approves
and receives as General Councils, are so far from being Infallible, that they
are actually false, and in their Decrees and Definitions Erroneous and Impious;
for instance,

In the great Anno Christ. 1215.
Lateran Council under Pope Innocent the Third, in which were above 1200
Fathers (as your own Joverius Council. class. 1. p. 120.
Authors tells us,) and they Council. Lateranum sub Innocent 3. Can. 3. de
Haereticis.
declare, that for disobeying the Church in not banishing Heretics out of
their Dominions, Supreme Princes may be Excommunicated by their Subjects,
deposed by the Pope, their Subjects absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, and
their Kingdoms be given to what Catholics the Pope pleases. So England in
Queen Elizabeth's time, was by the Pope given to Philip the Second of Spain;
and if the Invincible Spanish Armado, or the Prodigious Impiety of the Pope
could have compassed it, he had ruined that Queen, and possessed her Kingdom.

But there is no power or policy against Providence; our most Gracious Good
God, did most miraculously preserve the Queen and her Kingdom from Spanish and
Popish Slavery and Tyranny: Sit nomen ejus in saecula benedictum. I shall not
endeavor to prove this Canon erroneous, for I am persuaded, there can be no
Christian who knows his Duty to God and his King, but would abhor it, not only
as Erroneous, but as highly Impious and Traitorous.

THe Bishop having long ago, when he was a young Master of Arts, Printed his
Exercitations in Latin, at the end of Scheibler's Metaphysics, and whereby he
acquired great ^ame, both in our Universities, and all the Protestant
Universities in Christendom; and there being one Exercitation on the Question,
Whether it is better not to be at all, than to be miserable? A Question, that
in his Account of the Arminian Tenants in this Volume, he refers to on that
head, and the Bishop's performance in the Exercitation, being incomparable, and
he having owned to his Friends that it cost him more pains than any of the
rest; it is thought fit for the Reader's Profit and Entertainment, here to
Print it as it is now Translated into English, viz.

EXERCITATION I. In Which that celebrated and famous Question, (Whether it be
more eligible to be annihilated, or not to be at all, than to be miserable?) is
discussed: As also Durandus his Reasons are considered; who asserts, That it is
better, and according to the Rules of right reason, more preferable to be
miserable, than to be reduced to a simple non-entitie.
I Must entreat the Candid Reader to pardon me, if here my Style should appear
rough, or harsh; for indeed it here savours more of Aristotle's Peripatum, than
of Tully's Tusculanum: Herein I act the part of a Philosopher, not of a
Rhetorician, designing only to present unto your view the truth, as it is in
its simple, and naked Colors, without the fucus of Rhetoric. Wherefore I
shall proceed to the discussion of the Question proposed; and in the first
place there are two things which offer themselves to be distinctly explicated.

1. If the simple (...) non esse be absolutely, and of it self good, or
comprehend any absolute bonity in it self; which, when unfolded, will give
clearer light to what is the principal quaesitum in the Question.

2. If (to speak comparatively) to be miserable, be preferable unto, and more
eligible than simply not to be.

For the Resolution of the first, I shall lay down this Conclusion.

Concl. I. That Annihilation, or (...) non esse, (to speak in absolute terms)
includes no goodness in it at all; nor taken by it self, (without rel^tion to
any other thing) can ever be the object of a Man's Appetite, nor move him to
the desire and prosecution of it self.

But that I may evince this more clearly, we are to know,

1. That I do not deny but Annihilation may be apparently and (...) good, which
is only an extrinsecal denomination infixed upon it by an erroneous Intellect.
So when one desires a thing that is impossible, that which he wishes for is not
any real entitie; yet when an erroneous Intellect represents it under the
notion of a possible, and withal, useful thing, it appears as good: Wherefore a
thing which is of it self impossible, and a mere non-entitie, may enjoy some
apparent goodness accruing unto it from the error of Intellect; as in the
Poet, though it be utterly impossible to retrieve the loss of time and years
past, yet the restitution of them is apprehended as good and desirable by
Evander. But the Question is not concerning this mere apparent bonity, since it
is acknowledged that non esse may thus be apparently good. Wherefore,

2. The Question in hand is, if (...) non esse be really and truly good, by a
real intrinsic bonity, whether we think of it and apprehend it as good, or
not; and abstracting from that, if it be so truly and by it self good, as that
it may reasonably be the object of a Man's desire or choice. And in this last
sense I deny it to be good; which I prove thus.

Reason I. Good does in its own nature include some positive perfection, as
Vasques forcibly evinces in 1 Aquin. q. 5. disp. 23. c. 5. and as may be easily
deduced from the most common and universally known Principles of right reason;
for all evil is the privation of a due perfection, and all evil is likewise the
privation of that which is good; from whence it necessarily follows, that good
is the due perfection of a thing, and consequently is a positive perfection;
for what is not positive cannot be the perfection of any thing: But to say that
(...) non esse includes in it self a positive perfection, is so absurd, as
deserves not to be confuted; for what positive perfection can be imagined, or
feigned in a mere negation, or non-entitie? From all which it manifestly
appears, that (...) non esse comprehends in it nothing of goodness or bonity.

Reason II. As evil does always presuppose a foundation, or something which it
must be evil unto, since it cannot be the privation of a due good, unless there
be some foundation to which the good is due; so by the same chain of reasoning
good must still presuppose something unto which it is to be good; for, since
goodness is the adjunct of that subject that is good, there is a necessity that
there should be some foundation or subject to which this goodness must be
adjoined; and the foundation or subject which upholds this goodness cannot be
of a lesser perfection than the goodness that depends upon it, and is upholden
by it; whence it evidently follows, that (...) non esse cannot be the
foundation, or subject of goodness, nor can goodness be the adjunct of a
non-entitie; and consequently (...) non esse cannot be good: which was to be
demonstrated,

Reason III. If goodness were competent not only to an ens, but even to its
contradictory opposite non ens, then would it follow that Contradictories are
not in the highest degree of opposition: the reason is, because those things
which really and actually agree in goodness, cannot be capable of the highest
disagreement, since agreement though in the least point, does necessarily
overthrow the greatest disagreement, or oppositio maxima. But this Thesis is
more evident than to need any strict probation, and is generally approved of
amongst the Schoolmen, as we may see in Aquar. Aquin. in addit. ad Capreol. in
4. did. 50. and in Bonav. Durand. Bassol. Francis. de Mayronis in eandem
distinctionem; and Ariminens. in 2 did. 34.

Having laid down these Premises, I proceed next to what I proposed to be
considered in the second place, viz. If (in a comparative sense) to be
Annihilated be better and more eligible than to be miserable? And this question
may be understood two ways.

1. With respect to the manifestation of God's Glory; if the one be better than
the other, or more eligible, in order to manifest the Glory of God; and then
the state of the Question runs thus, Whether more Glory redounds to God by the
Annihilation of a Creature, than by its Eternal Damnation and Misery?

2. With respect to it self; then the question is, Whether in an absolute and
abstracted sense, while considered by it self, without relation to any external
thing besides, it be not more eligible to endure the misery of punishment, than
to be Annihilated: For the better resolving of these we shall subjoyn the
Second Conclusion, which is,

Concl. II. In respect of the Manifestation of God's Glory, it is better, and
more eligible to be punished, than to be Annihilated; to be Miserable, than not
to be: or (which is the same thing) the Glory of God is more manifestly
declared in the inflicting just and deserved punishment on a sinful Creature,
than in reducing the same to its primitive nothing, by the interposition of his
Omnipotent Hand. The Reasons are,

Reas. I. Because Annihilation manifests no more, than that God is Omnipotent,
who can Annihilate; for, as by the general acknowledgment of all the Schoolmen,
no less than an Omnipotent Hand can create so by the same necessity,
Annihilation can only be compassed by the like power: but by inflicting just
punishment on a Creature, not only his Omnipotence is manifested in preserving
that same very Creature in its being; (for every Created Being must be upholden
by that power by which it was created) but also his Justice is declared in
giving unto a sinful Creature its deserved and condign punishment: Therefore
since the Eternal Damnation of a Creature, demonstrates not only God's
Omnipotency (beyond which Annihilation cannot reach) but his Justice also; it
contributes more to the declaration of God's Glory to be miserable by
punishment, than by Annihilation to be reduced to nothhg. For it necessarily
follows, that that which glorifies and declares more of God's Glorious
Attributes, should tend more to his Glory, at least extensively; and it adds a
greater weight of Glory, to have both the Omnipotence and Justice of God
manifested in the just Damnation of his Creature, than only his bare
Omnipotence to be exerted in annihilating the same.

Reas. II. In the Damnation of a Creature, God's Omnipotence and Justice are
not only manifested, but this manifestation is perpetual, and endures to all
Eternity; for since the Torments of the Damned are Eternal, the manifestation
of those Divine Attributes which are employed in the execution of them, must
likewise be eternal; but when a Creature is Annihilated, the manifestation of
God's Omnipotence cease together with the Creature upon which it was exerted.
Wherefore, if the question be understood in this sense, viz. in order to
manifest God's Glory, it is better and more eligible to be miserable, than to
be Annihilated.

Doubt 1. But, perhaps, some will think to avoid the pungency of this my last
reason, by saying, that the manifestation of God's Glory does not cease
together with the Creature annihilated, but remains fresh in the Memories of
Men, even after the Creature is gone; so that, though the act of Annihilating
may pass in a moment, yet the constant remembrance of the same, by the
successive Generations of Men may tend to the perpetual manifestation of God's
Gory: As Homer's Iliads and his Odysses were composed in a short space of time,
and all the great and Illustrious Achievements of Caesar or Alexander, were in
a little time accomplished; yet these same very works and doings have survived
their lost Authors, and the fresh and grateful remembrance of the same in the
Memories and Mouths of succeeding Generations, has erected Trophies to their
ever-living fame, while they themselves are possessed of the Region of
Darkness: In like manner may the Glory of God be manifested in the lasting
remembrance of so Glorious an action as Annihilation, though the Creature upon
whom the action was performed be gone.

Answer. In answer unto this, I confess indeed, that the glory of that action
(viz. Annihilation) may remain after the act it self is past; but when I have
granted all this, I am not at any loss in making good my assertion, That the
Glory of God is yet more manifested in the eternal and just punishment of a
Creature, since his Omnipotence is not only manifested by preserving it, but
his Justice likewise by punishing the same; and, which is yet more, that
manifestation is positively to endure for ever; and he who undergoes the
punishment remains for a living Monument, and positive example of both the
Omnipotence and Justice of God, which the annihilated Creature is not capable
of. For if a Man were afflicted by God with most exquisite Torments, though for
the space of one Day, it would manifest God's Glory as much as Annihilation:
For this would declare God's Omnipotence in preserving the afflicted person,
and likewise his Justice in thus punishing; and the memory of this Deed might
be continued for ever: But when these same very actions, viz. the preservation
of the Creature in its being, and the execution of Justice, do not only remain
in the Memories of Men, but are perpetually continued by a constant positive
existence in themselves, they cannot but contribute more to the demonstration
and showing forth of God's Glory, than if the Creature had been annihilated.

Doubt 2. But in the second place there is one, who is none of the meanest of
the Schoolmen, that thinks to invalidate my Reasons by questioning if there be
not a greater share of Glory detracted from God by the constantly repeated sins
of the Damned, than can accrue unto him by inflicting their due punishment upon
them? For, (as shall afterward be evinced) the tormented in Hell do sin
against God, even unto Blasphemy: So that it would not seem more eligible to be
miserable, than not to be, with respect to the manifestation of God's Glory, if
more be diminished from the Glory of God by the sins of the punished, then can
be added unto it by their just Punishments.

Answ. That I may briefly and clearly remove this Scruple, I fix upon this
Assertion; That the Glory of God is not so impaired by the sins of the damned,
as it is augmented by their condign punishment.

Reason. III. And the Reason that makes for this seems very convincing to me,
viz. Because the chief design, or the Vltimus finis that God proposes to
himself in punishing, is his own Glory; in the attainment of which he cannot be
disappointed: So that I assert it impossible for those who are punished with
Eternal Death to derogate more from God's Glory by their sinning, than they add
to it by enduring their deserved Torments; otherwise God would be disappointed
of his proposed end; Quod est absurd. and blasph. Who would say that, That Man
confers any Honor upon Caesar, who though he have some few Panegyrical Sayings
to his praise, yet subjoins many more to his dishonor and dispraise? Or who
would call that Water hot, which for every two degrees of heat has four
degrees of cold? For the Major part counterballancing the lesser, obliges the
whole to take its denomination from it; according to that trite axiom:
Denominatio semper sequitur majorem partem. In like manner who could reasonably
assert, that God has obtained his end, ( viz. the manifestation of his glory)
in punishing the Wicked with the Pains of Death Everlasting; if more detriment
should redound to his Glory by their Sins, than advantage by their being thus
punished?

We acknowledge therefore that with respect to the Manifestation of God's
Glory, it is better and more eligible to be miserable than not to be: that is,
the glory of God is more manifested in inflicting just punishment on a sinner,
than in reducing the same to nothing. And this is asserted by Bonav. in 4. d.
50. q. 2. Mart. Ledesma in 2. Quart. Quaest. 100. As also by the generality of
the Schoolmen in 4. did. ult. But this is not the true meaning and state of
the Question that is here intended; viz. if it be more eligible to be miserable
than not to be, in respect of God's Glory; But the Question is: if, while
considering the thing absolutely in it self, as abstracted from all forinsick
Considerations, it be more preferable to be miserable, than not to be. And the
Question thus stated may again undergo a twofold Sense,

Viz. 1. According to the judgment of the man himself, who is in misery; and
then the Question is, Whether the man who is oppressed, and in the highest
degree of ^^^ery, does not account it better for him to have no being at all,
than to enjoy it thus followed with such miserable conditions. 2. According to
the decision of rectified and impartial reason; whether it be really and truly
more eligible to be annihilated than to be miserable.


Concl. III. For the resolution of which we conclude 3ly. It is beyond all
controversy, that in the Judgment of the Miserable man himself, it seems
better to him to be annihilated, than to be eternally tormented with such
insupportable and exquisite Torments: And this will appear evident if we
consider these Reasons.

Reason I. That experience teaches us how many have done violence to
themselves, only upon the ac^ unt of the petty and less considerable Anxieties
of this Life, choosing rather not to be, than to endure the misery of their
condition, viz. Infamy, Penury, and such like: Thus the Usurer is recorded in
History to have strangled himself, because his Money was stolen from him.

Reason II. This is expressly proved by Aquar. in Addit. ad Capreol. in 4 di^t.
50. out of Aquinas, who cites that of the Apocalypse 9.6. And in those days
shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death
shall fly from them. This Conclusion is likewise proved by Bassol. in 4. d. 50.
q. 1. Note that Durandus in 4. did. 50. q. 2. and many others; and Bonav. ibid
quaest. 1. affirm that the Eternally Damned judge it better to be annihilated,
than to be in such misery: But this their Judgment is rather erroneous than
conform to the true nature of the thing it self, their Reason being biased
either by the violence of the present Pains; or being rendered disorderly,
prejudicated, and fantastical; as Bonaventur. says ibid.

But passing by all these Senses in which the Question may be taken, we shall
confine it only to this Sense; if in the nature of the things themselves it be
more eligible to be miserable, than to be annihilated? Or, if according to the
solid and judicious Dictate of rectified Reason, the enjoying the good of
existence, though accompanied with misery, be not preferable to ^nni^^^a^ion;
and consequently the being deprived of that existential good, viz the good both
of (...) esse, and (...) been esse; and all this only to be freed from some
misery that is entailed upon existence?

But here we are to remark that the bonity or goodness, which is competent to
the eternally damned, may be considered two ways,

Viz. 1. Absolutely and precisely, in it self, as the good of being, or bonum
essentiae. 2. Relatively, with respect to some evil, as a necessary Companion,
affecting those who are thus subject to Eternal Death.


Concl. IV. These things being premis^d, I conclude 4ly. It is certain and
undoubt^^ly true, that to enjoy the good^^ ^^f existence, or bonitas essentiae,
(which (...) eternally damned possess,) while taken by ^^^elf, and without
respect to any ann^xed evil, is better than to be annihilated.

Reason. The Reason is; because it is better to have some small degree of
goodness, than simply to have none at all; and therefore it is more eligible to
possess the bonum essentiae, as the damned do, than to be deprived of all
goodness by a total annihilation,

But neither is this the present State of the Question; wherefore we shall
consider it thus: If it be better and more eligible to enjoy the small goodness
of existence, or bonitas essentiae, though followed with eternal misery, than
to be totally bereaved of all goodness, only in order to be freed from that
evil? This is the only difficulty and main importance of the Question, viz. If,
when that eternal misery, which the damned are liable unto, is laid into the
balance with this bonitas essentiae; the bonitas do not preponderate, and over
balance the evil of misery? For if it do, then it is more eligible to be
punished with death eternal, and still to enjoy the good of existence though
clogged with that misery which is less valuable than the existence; but if the
evil should preponderate, then it is better to be annihilated, and be deprived
of all the goodness that can follow upon existence, that so freedom may be
purchased from that evil, which upon this last Supposition is more to be minded
than the good of existence.

Concl. V. Upon which I conclude in the 5th place: It is better, and in
conformity to right reason, more eligible to be annihilated, than to be
eternally tormented; notwithstanding that existential good that the Damned
possess. And this will seem very plausible, (if not infallibly true) if we
consider the following Reasons.

Reason I. That State or Condition must be the better, and in conformity to
right reason more eligible, in which there is no liableness to the Wrath and
Anger of God, than that which is inevitably followed with the everlasting wrath
and displeasure of the Almighty, for ever abiding upon those who are placed in
it. But he who is annihilated, cannot be the Object of God s wrath, since it
cannot display it self upon a non entitie: Whereas the Divine Wrath does for
ever abide upon those who are eternally tormented. Therefore annihilation is
preferable to Damnation. -- This Proposition will appear yet more evident, if
we remember, that as God's Love, and the enjoyment of him, the necessary
consequent of the former, are the greatest good that a Creature is capable of;
So the Wrath of God, and the want of that fruition, are the greatest evil that
a Rational Creature can be affected withal. Wherefore I form my argument thus;
If the Wrath of God and the being deprived of the enjoyment of him, which
necessarily follows on the former, be the highest degree of evil that a
Creature can be obnoxious unto; then it is better to be annihilated, than to be
liable to the eternal wrath of God: for there is no good that the Creature thus
Circumstantiated can possess, which should be equivalent to this evil: Since
the chiefest good (which only can counterpoise the greatest evil) is
incompatible with the highest evil, in one and the same subjec^. Since
therefore the damned are in perpetual subjection to the Wrath of God, and
consequently arrived at the highest pitch of misery; and since what go^d they
in this condition enjoy is mixed with so much evil, that it cannot be the
chiefest good, it is better to be annihilated and freed from that greatest evil
than to be ete^naly damned, and endure that extre^it^ o^ misery though
accompanied with a small and far less consid^rable good.

Reason. II. That State or condition which is sinless, is more reasonably to be
chosen than that in which the Creature is still spitefully blaspheming against
God, and maliciously hating him. But he who is annihilated sins not, neither
indeed can he, since he is subject to no Law, as being a n^n ens; for the Law
is obligatory upon none but such as are rational Creatures: and he who is
annihilated is not of that nature; Wherefore it is impossible that he should be
guilty of sin: Whereas the damned who undergo the eternal punishments are still
sinning against God in an hideous manner: As Aquarius does expressly prove out
of Aquinas in addit. ad Capreol. in 4. did. 50. and Bassol. ibid. q. 1. and
Bonav. art 1. q. 1, 2. and several others. Durandus in 4. did. ^6. q. 5.
proves plainly that according to the rules of right Reason it is more eligib^e
to be annihilated than sin. And Anselm. lib. ^ur Deus Homo: Debemus potius
v^lle mundum uni^ersum annihilari quam aliquid ^^eri contra voluntatem Dei; We
should rather wish that the whole universe were annihilated than any thing were
done contrary to the will of God.

Doubt. There is only one scruple against this proposition, which deserves our
consideration, and it is this: If it be better to be annihilated than to be
damned, because the annihilated are free from sinning against God, and the
damned are not; then, for the same reason, it shall be more eligible to be
annihilated than live here in this World, since the annihilated sin not, but
the inhabitants of this lower World are daily provoking God with their repeated
and heinous trespasses; So that it would seem better, after this method of
reasoning, to be annihilated, than to live upon Earth: But this is absurd: Ergo
and illud ex quo sequitur.

Answ. I shall endeavor to give a satisfactory answer to this Objection, in a
very few words; and 1. I deny that there is any parallel similitude of reason
betwixt the antecedent and consequent; for although it be most certain, that
while we live here, we are defiled with many sinful spots; yet does it not
follow that therefore it is better to be annihilated than to live here. The
reason is, because, though in this life we commit many trespasses against God,
yet sincere repentance for the same, which is our duty, can procure the the
restitution of God's lost favor and countenance; and so purge and cleanse us
from our polluting transgressions; that afterward we may live a life more
innocent and blameless, to the Glory of God, and the eternal welfare of our
own Souls. But the damned, who are already at their journeys end are in an
unchangeable and lasting condition; and their wills are immutably fixed upon
evil, and that continually: For, 1. As the Wills of the Glorified are immutably
good; so those of the damned are unchangeably evil. 2. Without the inabling
grace of God, no Man's Will can be morrally and properly Good; but the damned
neither have nor hope for Sanctifying Grace in their Hearts, each of them
outvying one another in spewing out their Venomous and spiteful malice against
their Creator. And this the Schoolmen generally approve, Aquin. cont. Gent.
lib. 4. cap. 93. ibid. Ferrariensis. And Aquin. in 4. did. 50. q. 2. art. 1.
Aquar. in Addit. ad Capre. in 4. did. 50. Concl. 1. Upon all which, I conclude
my last reason to be still firm, and valid for the proving my assertion, viz.
That condition is reasonably more eligible, in which there is nor can be no
sin; than that which in the mind of the Creature is so unchangeably bound up
to, and steadfastly established in exerting eternal malice against God, that it
cannot but Sin: But the Annihilated neither does, nor can sin, and the damned
cannot abstain from Sinning; therefore the state of the former is more eligible
than that of the Latter.

Reason. III. That being or Essence which the damned enjoy, is not indulged
them for any Good, but for a subject and foundation of eternal Torments: So
that in conformity to right reason, it is better to have no being at all, than
to possess it only in order to be thereby rendered capable subjects of infinite
and insupportable Tormnts; and fit objects of the eternal vengeance of the
Almighty. Who would not rather wish to have no Tongue at all, than to have it,
(as Dives in the Parable) for no other end than to be in everlasting tormenting
pains?

Reason. IV. That must be the greatest Evil which destroys the greatest Good,
(for the greatness of the evil must still be esteemed by the value of its
opposite Good) so blindness is a less evil than infidelity, because the good of
which infidelity is a privation, viz. Faith, is a greater good and more
valuable than seeing, which is the opposite of blindness; (this being but a
natural faculty, whereas the other is a supernatural and divine gift) but
damnation overthrows a greater good than annihilation does: for annihilation is
only opposed unto the finit and Created good of the Creature, which it is only
capable to destroy, but damnation is a privation of the greatest, chiefest, and
increated good; As,

1. It deprives the Creature of that Beatifical Vision, in which the fruition
of God consists.

2. It superadds a great evil, a malum culpae, even that eternal malice which
they are perpetually willing against God. And Consequently, since damnation
deprives the Creature of a greater good than annihilation, it must be an higher
evil of a more intense degree.

Doubt. But peradventure some may reply, that the annihilated is deprived of
the beatifical Vision of God as well as the damned; and therefore, since
annihilation destroys the good both of (...) esse and (...) been esse, the
Creature in that state cannot enjoy God, no more than the damned; and
consequently the annihilated are in a worse condition than the damned; for the
damned enjoy the good of existence, while the annihilated are deprived of the
same.

Answ. In Answer to which I say, that in those that are annihilated, there is
indeed a want of that Beatifical Vision, but no privation; it being only a
Negative kind of absence and not privative: And there is nothing more common in
Philosophy, than that the want of the Beatifical Vision is not accounted to be
evil, unless it be a privative want: As for example, there is a Negative want
of the beatifical Vision is a Stone, that is, the Stone does not enjoy that
Vision; but this is not evil in respect of the Stone; Because all evil is
Carentia boni in subjecto c^paci, the want or defect of Good in a subject that
is capable to enjoy the same; now a Stone is not a subject capable of this
Beatifical Vision. So in him that is annihilated, there is a Negation or
Negative absence and non-fruition of the chiefest Good; for he does not nor
cannot positively enjoy God; But there is not a privation, or privative
absence, which alone can be invested with the notion of Evil. The Reason of all
is clear; for the annihilated is a simple nonentity, incapable to be the
subject of Good; since bonum and ens, are convertible terms; so that where
there is no entity (as it is in the case of annihilation) it is impossible
there should be any good: And as for the consequent, that the absence of the
beatifical Vision in the annihilated is not evil, that is clearly deducible
from what has been said, since that absence is not privative (as all evil is)
but negative. Ergo, etc.

Reason. V. To prove yet further that Annihilation is not an evil worse than
damnation, I argue in the fifth place, thus: There can be no evil greater than
the greatest; (for it is a contradiction in terminis to say that, there can be
an evil worse than the worst of Evils; since that cannot be in a Superlative
degree the worst, than which there may be a worser assigned;) But in the case
of the damned there is the greatest evil that can be, viz. the privation of the
Beatifical Vision, and the non-fruition of the chiefest Good for the privation
of the chiefest and greatest good must be the greatest evil; since the
greatness of the evil (as I hinted before) must be estimated by the value of
its opposite object, of which it is a privation. So that if damnation be
followed with the highest and greatest evil, then annihilation cannot infer a
greater, and by consequence annihilation is not an evil worse than damnation:
quod erat demonstrandum.

Reason VI. I am now arrived at my sixth and last Argument; in managing which,
I shall observe this order.

1. I shall premise some few things necessary. and 2. I shall deduce my
Argument in Order.

Wherefore in the first place I say, That Evil wherewithal the Eternally Damned
are afflicted is in some measure infinite, and is of two kinds; for there is 1.
Malum culpae, the evil of sinning against God, and 2. Malum poenae, the evil of
punishment.

1. That evil of Sin which the damned undergo, or rather commit, is perpetual
blasphemy against God; (as some of the Sohool-men prove, from Rev. 16.11. And
blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their pains and their sores. Which
place though it be not properly applicable to the infernal pains, but to the
punishments inflicted on the Members of Antichrist; yet it may after an
analogical and proportional manner be not a little serviceable to the business
in hand; and I deduce it thus: If the pains and sores inflicted on Men in this
Life, do incite and move their polluted lips to utter blasphemies against God
himself, how much more shall the pains of Hell, and the exquisite torments of
the Infernal Lake produce the like effect? For if from pains and sores
blasphemies do arise (as this Text says they do) then the more intense and
exquisite these pains and torments be, the greater shall that blasphemy be
that springs from thence: But the highest pitch of painful misery, and the
most intense degree of Torment shall be in Hell; therefore the blasphemies
against God shall there be screwed up to the greatest height.) This perpetual
blasphemy (I say,) accompanied with eternal despair, and an inveterate
malicious hatred against God, is that in which this malum culpae consists. Vid.
Aquin. cont. Gent. lib. 4. cap. 93. ibid. Ferrar. and in 4. did. 50. q. 2.
art. 1. Aquar. in addit. ad Capreol. in 4. did. 50. concl. 1. etc.

2. The Malum poenae, or evil of punishment, which the damned undergo, is
twofold,

Viz. 1. The Evil of Sense, and this is the most intense positive degree of
torment, at least a very great one, and is still proportioned to the nature and
heinousness of the sin or sins for which the punishment is inflicted. 2. The
Evil of loss, and this is the non-fruition of the chiefest good, viz. the want
and privation of the Beatifical vision.


These premised, I assert that each of these Evils is in some measure infinite:
for

1. The Evil of Sin (being committed against an infinite God) is denominated
infinite from the extrinsecal relation it bears to its infinite object.

2. The Evil of punishment (viz. of Loss, not of Sense) is in like manner
infinite, since it consists in the privation of the Beatifical Vision, or the
non-fruition of an infinite good.

3. The Evil of punishnment ( viz. of Sense) though it is not positively infinite
in respect of its intensity or degrees, since the finite Creature is not a
subject capable; yet it is the most exquisite, intense, positive and
everlasting extremity of torment that the miserable creature can possibly
undergo.

4. All these abovementioned Evils are each of them infinite in duration,
since they shall never be at an end, but endure through all the Ages of
Eternity for ever and ever.

Now if we consider all these Evils as concentred in one and the same subject,
we may easily apprehend how vastly great and intolerable that punishment will
be, which shall torment the damned for ever.

Conclus. II. In the second place I premise this Conclusion, viz. In the state
of annihilation there is no Evil at all, but only a simple and bare negation of
good. And that we may understand this more fully, we are to observe all, That
all Evil is the want of some Good or Perfection: but there is a twofold want
of perfection.

1. Negative, which is only a mere negation or non existence of the perfection.
In a Lion there is the want of Reason, Faith, and Felicity, for these are not
in the Lion: but this want is not evil, because these are no perfections due or
requisite unto the Lion, and besides he is not a subject capable of them.

2. Privative, which is not promiscuously the want of any perfection
whatsoever, but only of that perfection which is due unto the subject: And this
want is only the proper evil of the Creature. So if a Man want his sight, this
is a privative want, and is evil to the Man, since seeing is a perfection
belonging to him; but, though a stone want sight likewise, yet it is not an evil
to the stone, since it is not any due perfection of a stone. In like manner in
the annihilated Creature there is a want of Good (for there is no good in that
state, neither indeed can be, since bonity and entity are reciprocal;) but this
want is only negative, not privative, and consequently no evil.

And this will appear more evident if we consider, 2dly, That every evil
necessarily presupposes a subject to which it should be evil; according to that
axiom of the Schoolmen, Omne Malum est in Bono; Every Evil resides in Good,
that is, in an entity which enjoys the Metaphysical good of existence. This is
also solidly demonstrated by Swarez Met. tom. 1. disp. 11. Aquin. 1. p q. 48.
Ariminens. Durand. Estius and Bassol. in 2. did. 34

I shall deduce some few inferences from these evident Premises; and,

1. If every evil presuppose the existence of a subject to which it should be
Evil, then annihilation is no evil at all, since in the state of annihilation
the subject remains not, but is actually destroyed.

Infer. II. 2. If the Annihilation of Peter (v. gr.) were evil, (since every
evil must be evil to some subject or other) it is either evil to himself or to
another: But not to himself, because Peter when annihilated is a simple
nonentity, and consequently not a subject capable of evil: and not to another;
for evil which is the privation of good, cannot be lodged in any other subject
than that in which the good was; as sight, it having its seat only in the eye,
blindness its opposite evil cannot be any where else than in the eye; so, if
bonity be an inseparable propriety of Ens, then evil cannot be entertained any
where but there. Or the Argument may run thus; If the annihilation of Peter
were evil to Peter himself, then it would either be such while he is Peter, or
while he is not Peter. But not while he is Peter, because while he is Peter he
is not annihilated, and therefore it is impossible that annihilation should be
evil to Peter, while he is Peter; since while he is Peter, there is no
annihilation, and consequently he is not subject to the evil of the same. And
neither can it be evil to him while he is not Peter, because Evil (as I said
before) cannot be lodged in a nonentity. And as for its being evil to another;
that relates not to the business in hand, for if it be not evil to himself, I
gain my point; since the Question is not whether it be better for another that
a damned person he annihilated, or that he continue in the state of damnation;
but which of them is better for the damned person himself.

3. That which is not at all, cannot be in an evil condition; (for to be
miserable, necessarily presupposes to be, Male esse necessario praesupponit
esse; as a Man cannot be in a good condition unless he exist or enjoy that
being which is good;) but Peter when annihilated is a pure nothing; therefore
he cannot be in an ill condition; and consequently annihilation cannot be an
evil unto him. Or the Reason may be conceived thus: That cannot constitute a
Man in an ill condition, which constitutes him a mere nothing: But Annihilation
constitutes the Creature a mere nothing, Ergo, etc. And this is confirmed by
Aquin. in Quodlib. q. 5. art. 3. Si omnia annihilarentur nullum esset malum,
sicut non erat ullum malum ante creationem. If all things were annihilated,
there would be no more evil in the World than there was before the Creation,
which was none at all.

Now I come to deduce my sixth Reason, and it is this.

Reason VI. That in which there is no Evil at all, is according to right reason
more eligible than that in which an infinite number of evils are contained; But
in the state of annihilation there is or can be no evil at all; and in the
state of damnation there is a combination of evils in some measure infinite;
(both parts of the minor are already demonstrated.) Therefore annihilation is
preferable to damnation, and consequently it is more eligible not to be, than
to be miserable. Quod erat demonstrandum.

There is one thing here to be remarked, that while we say it is more eligible
not to be, than to be miserable, this choosing of nonexistence, or wishing not
to be, may undergo a twofold meaning.

1. A man may be said to wish for nonexistence, so that he is ready to
effectuate it himself, and advance his own annihilation as much as in him lies;
and in this sense no Man should wish to be annihilated, viz. by his own
procuring. The Reason is because (...) or self- murder is a summum nefas, a
superlative Crime; which as we cannot do, so neither should we wish to be the
doers of it: So that in this no man should wish rather to be annihilated than
to be miserable.

2. A Man may be said to wish for annihilation, not as if he were to be the
doer of it himself, but (supposing God should leave him to his free choice) he
would consent unto it, and be passive while another is performing the action.

And in this sense we may say, it is more eligible not to be, than to be
miserable, if both were considered absolutely in themselves, and if God should
leave the damned Creature to its own free choice: But we do not assert that a
man can actually and de facto wish for it. Vid Johan. Major. in 4. Sent. did.
50. q. 2. and Bassol. in 4. did. 50. q. 1.

The next thing that follows in order, is to consider Durandus his Objections
to the contrary, which I shall 1. set down in their full force, and 2. shall
answer them with as much brevity and withal perspicuity as possibly I can:
and, to begin with the first, it is thss.

Obj. I. If the Will of Man could wish for annihilation as the more eligible,
then it would do it either as a natural appetite, or as a deliberative faculty;
but not as the former, because a natural appetite is unchangeably and naturally
bended to the preservation of its self; therefore it cannot wish for
annihilation, which should necessarily destroy it: Neither can it do it as a
deliberative faculty, because whatever a Man wishes for, as soon as he has
obtained his wish, he is in a better condition than before; but when a Man has
obtained his wish of annihilation he is in no better condition than before; for
by the possession of it he not only acquires no new bonity, but likewise loses
what he had before: Therefore none can reasonably account annihilation more
eligible than eternal tormenting punishments.

Answ. In Answer to which, I say, 1. That the Will as it is a natural faculty,
or as it is carried out toward its object by an innate appetite, cannot wish
for annihilation, for the Reasons specified in the Objection. And this is
acknowledged by Francis. de Mayron. in 4 did. 5^. q. 1. Although he be in this
matter of an Opinion contrary to Durandus. But the Will as a deliberative
faculty may very reasonably choose annihilation: and as to what is alleged to
the contrary ( viz. that a Man when annihilated is no better than he was
before, therefore he cannot deliberately wish for annihilation.) I Answer, that
the annihilated may be said to be in a better state than before, two ways, and
that,

1. Absolutely, and while considering annihilation abstractedly in it self, as
if by annihilation he acquired some positive adventitious good, which he had
not before; and in this sense, I confess the state of annihilation cannot be
called better than that of damnation; because by annihilation the Creature is
so far from purchasing to its self any new positive good, that it rather loses
what it had before.

2. Comparatively: and in this sense that state is best, which is followed with
the least evil, though it procure no new good; As I suppose a Man tormented with
the evil of exquisite torturing pains, if one or two degrees of that evil were
detracted, the Man would be in a better Condition than formerly, not absolutely
as if he gained any new positive good which he had not before, but
comparatively, his evil being diminished from what it was before. So we call a
Feather lighter than Iron, that is, less heavy; while in the mean time neither
the one nor the other has any absolute positive levity in themselves: In like
manner we assert that the Creature when annihilated is in a better condition
than in the state of damnation; not absolutely, as if any positive good were
superadded by annihilation; but comparatively by the removeal of the evil: for
the annihilated is subject to no evil at all, neither can he possibly be;
Whereas the Damned is afflicted with Punishments in some measure infinite; ut
supra dictum.

Obj. II. Durandus urges in the second place thus; That which destroys the
greatest good is the greatest evil; but annihilation destroys the greatest
good; for it destroys both the good of (...) been esse, and (...) esse, whereas
the greatest extremity of misery destroys only the good of (...) been esse, but
does not in the least impair the good of (...) esse; Ergo, etc. Besides every
thing that bereaves the Creature, tho of the least good, must be evil; and that
which destroys the greater good, must be the greater evil; and consequently it
is so in the Superlative Degree likewise, That which destroys the greatest
good, must be the greatest evil: but Annihilation destroys the greatest good;
therefore it is the greatest evil, and consequently is not worse than
damnation; since an evil greater than the greatest is a palpable contradiction.

Answ. This Argument is the only Achillaeum telum that Durandus lays his whole
force upon, as being an infallible demonstration of his Thesis; this he looks
upon as his (...); but though Ajax was stout, yet we know he was not endowed
with the greatest Wisdom; and though Achilles was a man of great magnanimity
and courage, yet he was not (...) (...); both the former and the latter were
obliged to succumb when their fatal hour was come. The same apprehension I have
of this Argument, viz. That if it were canvass'd to the bottom, it would easily
be discovered to be but a weak and tottering Foundation for him to build his
Opinion upon.

And that this may more fully appear, I answer, that, that is the greatest evil
which destroys the greatest good, upon the supposition that the subject be
still in being; but if the Subject be likewise destroyed, it is so far from
being a greater evil, that it is none at all: An this is very evident, and
founded upon solid Reason; for since all evil is a privation, it must
necessarily have some Foundation or Subject to which it should be a privation;
and this must be a positive, really, existent Subject; for good and evil are
circa idem Subjectum, as all Privatives are with their respective opposites;
But good cannot be lodged any where but in a real entitie, it being the
inseparable propriety of it: Therefore neither can evil be competent to any but
a real entitie.

2. Every evil is evil to some body or other; but when Peter is annihilated,
there is nothing unto which Annihilation should be evil, and consequently it is
not evil at all.

3. Evil is the privation of some due perfection, at that very same time that
it is due; but at that time that Peter is annihilated, there is no perfection
due to him; therefore at that time no evil can be competent to Peter, viz. when
annihilated. So that I acknowledge, that whatever destroys good is evil, and
whatever destroys the greater good, is the greater evil; and so forth, as long
as the Subject remains; but not if the Subject it self be destroyed. And
therefore it is that Capreol. in 2. d. 34. p. 1. and Bass. ibid assert, that
the essence of Plato (v. gr.) has not any evil for its opposite; and for this
cause annihilation cannot be evil unto him. And this I shall further illustrate
by an Example or two.

As (to use the Comparison of Ariminensis in 2. did. 34) we know that tarde,
tardius, tardissime, do still presuppose a motion, which is tardus, tardior,
tardissimus: I cannot say that one thing is slower than another, unless I
suppose them both to be moving; no more can I call one evil greater than
another, unless I presuppose something to which it should be a greater, of
greatest evil. For if I should say, that one who takes up a great while in
passing over a little parcel of Ground, moves but slowly; and that another who
takes up as much time in passing over a less piece of Ground, moves more
slowly; in this the consequence is good: But if I should infer, that therefore
he who passes over no ground at all, moves slowest of all, the consequence is
null; for he who passes over no space, moves not at all.

Again, if I should say, where there is a privation of a degree of light, there
is a Shadow; therefore where there is a privation of a greater degree, there is
a greater umbrage; in this I say right, because a Shadow is the privation of
light. But if I should infer that therefore where there is a privation of all
light whatsoever, there is the greatest Shadow; I should be justly censured
with a non-sequitur; because where there is no light at all, there is no shadow
neither, nor any thing but thick and perpetual darkness; for a shadow
presupposes also a secondary kind of light: In like manner, I say, the
privation of any good is evil; and the privation of any greater good is a
greater evil; but I cannot say that the privation of all and every good, is the
greatest evil of all; because all evil must be lodged in some good, or bonum
(viz. ens) as in its Subject or Foundation: So that if the Subject perish, it
cannot be an evil. This is confessed by Durand. ubi supra; and is forcibly
evinced by Suarez, Met. Tom. I. disp. 11. Aquin. 1. p. q. 48.

Object. 3. Durandus objects in the third place; Annihilation is no manner of
way eligible, therefore it cannot be more eligible than misery: The reason of
the antecedent is, because Annihilation has nothing of good in it, since all
good presupposes a subject to which it should be good, and in which it should
rest as on a foundation; and Annihilation, which is the adequate and total
destruction of the subject, cannot partake of any such thing.

Answ. I Answer first, If every good presuppose some subject to which it should
be good (quod and verissimum) then by the same Analogy of reason every evil
presupposes a subject to which it should be evil; so that since Annihilation
presupposes no subject, but on the contrary destroys it, then it cannot be
evil, and far less the greatest evil, which Durandus contends for.

I Answer secondly, A thing may be said to be good two ways.

1. Absolutely, or Positively.

2. Relatively or Comparitively, viz. with respect to some other thing.

As for the first, we call that absolutely good which contains in it self some
positive bonity; and in this sense Annihilation is not good, as the Objection
says true.

As to the second, we call a thing good, which, though it include no positive
bonity, yet in respect of another is a lesser evil: so Annihilation, though it
be not positively and by it self good, yet when compared to Damnation, which is
a greater evil, it is good, as being the lesser evil. In this sense we call the
middle Region of the Air the coldest, because it is least hot; and water is
said to be lighter than the Earth, or Lead than Gold; not as if either the Lead
or the Water were absolutely light, (for they are Bodies positively and in
themselves heavy;) but comparatively, that is, the Water is less heavy than the
Earth, and the Lead than the Gold; and upon this account only are they said to
be lighter After the same manner is Annihilation said to be better than
Damnation, not absolutely, as if there were any positive inherent bonity in
Annihilation; but only comparatively, that is, Annihilation, when compared to
Damnation, is a less evil, or not evil at all.

Object. 4. It is better to have some bonity, or perfection, than to have none
at all: But the Damned have some perfection (a substantial and real essence)
and the annihilated have none at all: Therefore it is better to be Miserable,
or Damned, than not to be.

Answ. I Answer, that the perfection, or bonity, which is competent to the
Damned, may be considered two ways, viz.

1. Absolutely and in it self, as a substantial and real perfection, and in
this I confess it is better to have that perfection, than to have none at all,
if ye consider it precisely by it self; but,

2. If it be considered comparatively, and with respect to its adjunctum, viz.
that evil which is conjoined to it as its inseparable Companion; then, I say,
it is better to want that goodness, than to enjoy it thus qualified with such
bitter Ingredients; efpecially since this their good, viz. existence is only
indulged them for this end, that it may be a foundation, or subject receptive
of eternal Torments and inexpressible Misery, which shall never have an end.

But Durandus, perhaps may reply, that there is a double evil which befalls the
Damned, viz. Malum culpae, and malum poenae. But the former, viz. malum culpae,
or sinning against God, does not properly belong to Damnation, but only
secundario and per accidens, as not depending effectively of God, nor yet
arising from the will of him who damns, but entirely owing its original to the
obstinate and perverse will of the Damned; so that the second only, viz. malum
poenae, or the evil of punishment properly, absolutely, and per se belongs to
the state of Damnation, as being justly inflicted by God himself, who is the
efficient cause, Author and original of the same.

Then Durandus argues thus: The misery which the Damned endure, as it includes
the complication both of malum culpae and poenae, is indeed worse than
Annihilation: But if it be considered properly, and as it is in it self, viz
merely penal, without respect to the criminal part of it, which is but an
occasional accessory, then it is better to undergo this misery than to be
annihilated.

1. In Answer to this I assert,

1. That this is truly Durandus's Opinion, though every one do not observe it,
as may easily be collected from himself in 4 did. 16. q. 1. where he proves,
that it is better to be annihilated than to sin.

2. But this seems to me rather a concession of, than an impugning the
question; for the state of the question is this: If it be better to be Damned,
(that is, undergo all the Miseries of that Life and Condition, that the Damned
are actually possessed of) than to be annihilated? So that, since all the Damned
must necessarily undergo the malum culpae, or poenae, it is a very natural
consequence, that it is better to be Annihilated than to be Damned; that is, to
sin against God, (which Durandus himself acknowledges) since no Creature can be
Damned, and in the mean time be excused from sin.

3. In the third place I argue thus, (and this is Argumentum ad hominem:) If it
be a greater evil to sin, than to be annihilated (as Durandus says it is) then
it shall either be such, because of the offense done to God, or because of the
Wrath of God that has followed thereupon, or because of the punishment of loss
or sense inflicted on the sinner for the same; or lastly, because of the sin it
self, which considered by it self is a greater evil than Annihilation. Now
which so ever of these Durandus chooses, he will be at a loss. For,

1. If he says, that it is a greater evil to sin, than to be Annihilated,
because of the offense done to God; then, say I, it is better to be Annihilated
than to be Damned, because God is offended at, and continually wroth with the
Damned; for if the offense done unto God make sin a greater evil than
Annihilation, then in like manner shall the offense done unto God by the sins
of the Damned, and the displeasure of God hanging perpetually over their Heads
for the same, make Damnation a greater evil than Annihilation; which according
to Durandus's Principles, is absurd.

2. If he say that sin is a greater evil than Annihilation, because of the
Wrath of God that has followed thereupon; then by the same analogy of reason,
it shall follow, that Damnation is a greater evil than Annihilation, because of
the burning hot Furnace of God's Wrath, which has already overtaken the Damned,
and shall for ever endure against them.

3. If he says that sin is a greater evil than Annihilation, because of the
punishment inflicted on the sinner for the same; then Damnation is for the same
very reason, a greater evil than Annihilation: For if any kind of punishment
make sin a greater evil than Annihilation, shall not that high degree of
Torment which the Damned endure for ever, much more oblige Damnation to be
worse than Annihilation?

4. And Lastly, If he say, that sin in it self is a greater evil than
Annihilation, I accord unto the same; but then I subsume, If sin it self be a
greater evil than Annihilation, then that punishment which the Damned are
afflicted with, being a greater evil than sin considered precisely in it self,
must be likewise a greater evil than Annihilation. Now I prove, that the
punishment of the Damned is a greater evil than sin, considered in it self;
because the greatness of the evil is estimated by the value of the opposite
good which it destroys; but the punishment of the wicked destroys a greater
good than sin does; for sin, considered formally in it self, is nothing else
but privatio rectitudinis debitae inesse Creaturae, the privation of that
rectitude which is due unto the Creature, which is but a finite good; whereas
the punishment of loss inflicted on the Damned (not to speak of the punishment
of sense) deprives the Creature of the chiefest and infinite good, viz. the
Love of God and the Enjoyment of him for ever; and consequently is a greater
evil to the Creature than sin considered in it self, which is only the
privation of a finite good. -- So that after all, it evidently appears, that if
Durandus can make his Assertion good, That to be guilty of sinning against God,
is a greater evil than Annihilation, he may easily perceive the truth of my
Assertion, That to be Damned, is a greater evil than to be Annihilated: Quod
erat demonstrandum.

And here, to satisfy Durandus's fancy, we shall abstract from the criminal
and sinful part of the eternal Punishments betiding the wicked, and shall only
fix our thoughts on that malum poenae, wherewithal God afflicts them. And then
the state of the Question shall be this; If that malum poenae (abstracted from
the malum culpae) which the wicked are liable unto, be so great a punishment,
that is were better to be Annihilated, than endure the same? So that the
Question hangs upon this; If malum poenae be a greater evil than bonum
essentiae is a good: For if it be then it is better to be Annihilated, and by
virtue thereof to be freed from the greater evil, than to be Damned, and enjoy
the smaller bonum essentiae, followed with a greater evil. Wherefore I here
subjoyn my last Conclusion.

Concl. 7. It is better, and in conformity to right reason, more eligible to be
Annihilated, than to undergo the evil of punishment, (though separated from the
evil of sin) that the Damned are Tormented withal.

I shall in the first place explain my Conclusion, and then prove it.

1. That evil of punishment which the wicked undergo, may be considered two
ways;

1. As it flows from the Will of God, justly ordaining the wicked to undergo
eternal Punishment: And in this sense it is certain, that the Damned person, if
he regulate his Will according to the Dictates of rectified reason, cannot wish
rather to be Annihilated; because he cannot reasonably wish the contrary of
what God justly wills and ordains: for if God, according to the rules of the
most exact Justice, will that they should undergo eternal punishment, they
cannot justly will to be Annihilated, and not to undergo this their just
retribution; as is proved by Bonav in 4. did. 50. q. 2. and Jo. Maj. in 4 As
also in did. 50. q. 2.

2. This evil of punishment may be considered precisely as it is in it self,
without respect to God's appointment; and in this sense it is more eligible to
be annihilated, than to endure such Inexpressible Torments.

Wherefore to gratify Durandus's Curiosity, we shall make the sta^e of the
question this viz. If the evil of punishment, (when abstracted both from the
malum culpae, and the Divine appointment about the undergoing of the same) be
of it self so intolerable, and hideously great, that it were better to be
Annihilated than undergo the same; upon the supposition that God should allow
the Creature its free choice -- I assert, That the evil of punishment is so
very great, that it were better for the person affected with the same to be
Annihilated, than to continue in the endurance of it.

And this I prove,

Reas. 1. Because Annihilation is the lesser evil, and therefore should be
preferred: I prove the Antecedent; because the bonum essentiae, which the Damned
enjoy, is a less good, or minus in ratione boni, than the evil of punishment is
in ratione mal^. The Reason is evident, viz. because every evil is estimated by
the value of the good, of which it is a privation; but the evil of eternal
punishment, is the privation of a greater good than bonum essentiae; therefore
the evil of eternal punishment, is a greater evil than the good of being is a
good. For the good of being is only a finite and created good; whereas the
good, whereof the malum poenae is a privation, is the fruition of God, who is
goodness in the abstract, being the highest, infinite, and increated good; and
since there can be no good so high as the highest, the good of essential being
cannot be so great. But if the good destroyed by the evil of punishment, be
greater than the bonum essentiae, then this evil is greater in genere mali,
than the bonum essentiae is in genere boni; and consequently Annihilation is
rather to be chosen than undergoing the evil of punishment: Quod erat
demonstrandum.

Reas. 2. If the good of being were a greater good than the Beatifical Vision,
and Enjoyment of God (of which the evil of punishment is a privation) then the
Devils themselves who are bound up in the eternal Chains of Darkness, should
enjoy a greater good than all the Glorified Saints, who are in Heaven; for if
the being of a Man be a good greater than the Enjoyment of God, much more the
nobler essence of an Angel, which the wretched Devils enjoy: and yet to say,
that they enjoy a greater good, than the Love of God, and the eternal Enjoyment
of him; such an Assertion as this, I say, is too blasphemous and absurd to be
refuted; Ergo, etc.

Reas. 3. If the good of existence, which the Damned possess, were a greater
good, then their evil of punishment is an evil, then they cannot be in the
greatest extremity of Misery, yea, they cannot be said to be in an ill
condition; for since the denomination takes its rise from the greater part, how
can we call that Creature miserable, or in an ill condition, which enjoys more
degrees of good than evil. As for example, I cannot denominate that water cold,
which has in it more degrees of heat than of cold; for it should rather be
denominated hot, from the major part, viz. the heat, which is more intense than
the cold. So in the case of the Damned, if the good they enjoy be greater than
the evil that is inflicted on them, they should rather be in a good condition
than an ill; because the good being greater than the evil, should impart its
denomination to the whole, as being the major part. But in the mean time we are
ascertained, that the Damned are in an evil and very miserable condition, so
that their evil is greater than their good; therefore it is more eligible to be
Annihilated, and thus be freed from this preponderating evil, than to enjoy the
lesser good of duration still followed with such insupportable misery: Quod
erat demonstrandum.

Now from all that has been said, we may evidently deduce these following
Conclusions.

1. That Annihilation, or (...) non esse, contains no positive, absolute bonity
in and by it self.

2. That if only the manifestation of God's Glory were respected, it were more
eligible to be condemned to eternal Misery, than to be reduced to nothing;
because there is more of God's Glory m^nifested in the just punishment of a
sinner, than in the simple Annihilation of the same.

3. That in the judgment of the Miserable Man himself, it shall seem to him
more eligible to be Annihilated, than thus to continue in everlasting misery.

4. That if we consider the essence and being of the Damned, precisely in it
self, and as abstracted from the evil that attends the same, it were more
eligible to enjoy that being, than to be Annihilated.

5. That if we consider that being, or existence as unavoidably clogged with
eternal Misery, it were better and more eligible to be Annihilated and want
that being, and by so doing be freed from their Misery, than to continue in the
perpetual endurance of the same: And for the proof of this, I have annexed six
pregnant Reasons to confirm my Assertion.

6. As also in the sixth place have answered the Objections proposed to the
contrary. And,

7. I have shown, That though Durandus may allege for the defense of his
assertion, That, if we consider only the penal evil of the Damned, it is more
eligible to be Damned than Annihilated; yet this subterfuge can afford him no
succor. For,

1. This is rather to concede the Question, than to state it more cautiously
for defending himself.

2. Though we should consider only the penal part of eternal Misery, yet it is
better to be Annihilated, than undergo it by it self, though separated from the
evil of sinning.

8. That with respect to the positive will of God, determining and allotting
the Creature to eternal Misery, it is not more eligible, nor to be desired by
the miserable Creature to be Annihilated, rather than undergo and suffer what
is the good and just Pleasure of God concerning it. But if in the second place
we should consider the evil of Damnation precisely in it self, and supposing
that God should leave the Creature to its free choice; then, and in that case,
I say, Annihilation is more rationally to be chosen than Damnation.

And thus at length have we happily extricated our selves from all the
Difficulties, Labyrinths, and Meanders, that the resolution of this intricate
Question has unavoidably engaged us in: If these our Conclusions laid down by
us, do after a serious and impartial Consideration appear to be grounded on a
sufficient and solid reason, i^ is well; if not, we impose upon none. I do not
pretend to be too positive in the resolution of the Question, but I have
adduced what Reasons seem most probable unto me, and those I submit to the
censure of my Reader. I am sensible enough that Durandus, and many others of
good note, have stood up for the contrary Opinion; and therefore I entertain
some jealousy of mine own assertion; because (...), and am obliged to say, (as
once Gonnadius on another occasion) I con^ess it is not probable that such
great Doctors have erred in this matter, yet nevertheless it is not impossible:
I shall not be positive in asserting whether they have erred, or no, but refer
all to the impartial and unbiased dijudication of the Judicious and
Intelligent Reader.

An ABSTRACT of EXERCITATION IV. viz. Concerning the Existence of God.
In which is demonstrated, that there is some knowlede of God attainable here
by the Light of Nature; as also the means and helps that are conducive to
assist and further us in this our Knowledge are plainly set down; together with
a full and satisfactory Answer to that Question; How far this Natural Knowlede
of God can possibly reach; or how much of him is cognoscible by the Light of
Nature?

Assertion First. THAT there is some knowledge of God attainable here in this
Life, by the Light of Nature: For the further understanding of which, we are to
observe.

Note 1. That by God here I understand the only true God, who is (...) and
(...) God, in opposition to the false, Idolatrous and Superstitious Gods of the
Gentiles.

Note 2. That by the Light of Nature here is excluded,

1. The Light of Glory, whereby the glorified Saints do know God as he is in
himself, and see him face to face, without any intervening Obstacle.

2. The Light of immediate infusion, or lumen gratiae; whereby God challenges
from men an assent unto, and firm belief of his Existence, from the immediate
operation of his Spirit on their hearts.

3. The Light of Revelation, which is acquired by the Book of the Scriptures,
in which God has been graciously pleased to discover himself unto men: And this
is competent to evil men also; but the former is appropriated to the godly
alone.

Note 3. That by the Light of Nature we do not mean any innate Light, which
follows us from the Womb, as if it were natural ratione subjecti, or respectu
modi inhaesionis in subjecto: For no knowledge either actual or habitual can be
natural in that sense; since man has not the actual exercise of Reason from his
Cradle, and so not capable of actual innate knowledge of God; and as for
Habitual it is evidently included in the formal Essence of all Habits (except
infused, such as this Natural Light is supposed not to be) that they are not
innate, but adventitious, and acquired by frequently repeated Acts. My
Assertion being thus explained, I proceed to the probation of the same: And
that by

Reason I. From Romans 1.19. Where the Apostle speaking of the Gentiles, argues
thus: Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has
showed it unto them. Now the Apostle plainly insinuates that something of God
is known unto the Gentiles, and that by the Light of Nature; for they could not
know it by the help of any Revelation; Since Scripture they had none; and as
for immediate Revelation, who did ever assert that God h^d immediately revealed
himself to all the Gentiles (of whom the Apostle here speaks?) So that it was
only by the Light of Nature that God was manifest in them. Besides, no Light of
Revelation could have made God manifest in them, (...): for fides revelata, (as
Estius well observes) carries not along with it that demonstrative evidence,
which (...) and (...) imports. But the Apostle hmself has put it beyond all
doubt, while he expresses in the next Verse the way and means whereby they came
to this Knowledge, viz. by the contemplation of the Creatures; For the
invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, etc. which infallibly determines the
Question; that it was only by the Light of Nature that the Gentiles knew God.

Reason 2. The general consent of all Nations in acknowledging a God, is an
infallible demonstration that they knew him by the Light of Nature; since it is
in it self evident (and I have already proved, that) they had no knowledge of
God imparted to them by the means of any supernatural Revelation. And this
their Universal Knowledge of God, yea, and of almost all his absolute
Attributes, is so fully attested by all Writers on that Subject, and so
evidently deducible from the Sayings and Writings of the Heathens themselves
(such as Tully, Homer, Hesiod, Plato, etc.) That it shall be needless here to
heap up Testimonies to that effect.

Reason III. There is nothing more evident from the Dictates of Right Reason
(which are nothing else but the immutable Law of Nature) than that God is to be
worshipped; and consequently that there is a God; since the one follows so
necessarily upon the other. That there is this general Principle in the minds
of all men, the most barbarous and unpolished Nations do abundantly attest, who
in every Age have had their Gods, and worshipped the same; as is evident from
the late Discoveries we have made, even in this our own Age, amongst the most
barbarous Indians. So that though the understanding of man be darkened by the
Fall, yet this General Principle, That God is, and is to be worshipped, (though
the true manner of the Worship of God be not discovered) is so firmly rooted in
his mind, and is as the primum principium, or prima veritas infix'd upon his
Understanding, that it still remains discernable amongst the Rubbish of decayed
Nature; yea, as long as the least spark of understanding is left him, he cannot
but conclude that God is, and is to be worshipped. For, as the sense of
touching, though much decayed, yet if the least degree of Sensibility be left,
it cannot but feel the heat of a hot Fire, when it approaches to the same,
because calor is objectum tactus fortissime motivum: So is it in the
understanding of man, with respect to this General Principle; which is its
prima veritas, and objectum fortissime motivum.

Obj. But the Atheists know no God; therefore that Principle is not so firmly
rooted in the heart of every man.

Answer I. This Objection (though true) would not invalidate my Assertion: For
I assert only, that there is some knowledge of God attainable by the Light of
Nature; which tho the Atheists (perhaps through their neglect of the means
appointed by Nature for that effect) have never attained unto, yet it may still
be attainable by others; or by them, if they apply themselves to it.

Answ. II. There are several kinds of Atheists.

1. Some are Atheists in practice only, who live as if there were not a God.

2. In practice and professed Principles too; who yet in their heart believe no
such thing.

3. In Practice, Profession and Desire or wishes; who wish that there were no
God; and yet their heart contrary to their Practice and Profession dictates
unto them that there is a God.

4. There is a kind of Atheists, who are called Speculative Atheists, who
really and in their heart judge that there is no God: And of these, I say, that
no man can by a constant, perpetual, imprejudicate, and uninterrupted
dijudication conclude that there is no God; for though he may for a time, or
while biased by prejudice or passion assert some such thing; yet some time or
other that (...) will discover it self, and the excusing and accusing
Conscience will stare him in the face. But we shall have occasion afterward to
discourse more at large concerning Atheists.

Reason IV. We while in the state of Innocence could know God by our Natural
Light: But by our Fall, though our Natural Light be much impaired, yet it is
not totally eradicated, but some glimmerings are still left us: Therefore some
knowledge of God, though imperfect, is likewise left us, as attainable by that
small degree of Natural Light which we still possess: For God being the
Principium primarium, and objectum intellectus fortissime motivum, as long as
there is any degree of light left, as that thereby we can discover any thing,
we cannot but see that there is a God: As if we should suppose any thing
endowed with a perfect clear sightedness, in order to view the Sun and the
Stars; and if all that sight were decayed, excepting only one degree, it might
perhaps n^^ perceive the lesser Stars, which have a weaker impression on the
Organ of seeing; but as for the Sun, which is the objectum visus fortissime
motivum, it could not but have some small and imperfect perception of it, as
long as the least degree of sight were left it. So it is with the understanding
of Man in relation to God; which though it cannot perceive many other lesser
truths; or though it cannot perceive God, who is the prima veritas, in as
perfect a manner as it did in the State of Innocence; yet having some small
degree of Natural Light still remaining, it possesses some imperfect perceptive
knowledge of that Sun of Righteousness, who is the objectum intellectualis
visus fortissime motivum.

Having thus dispatched my First Assertion, that there is a Natural Knowledge
of God, I come now to my Second, concerning the Quality and manner of this
Knowledge; and it is this,

Assertion II. This Knowledge which we have of God by the Light of Nature, is
not acquired by any Demonstration a priori and (...) as they call it: That is,
such a Demonstration as proves the Effect by its Natural Causes. -- This
Conclusion is so evident, that it needs no probation: For since God is the
first cause of all things, where can we find a principle or cause prior to him,
whereby to demontrate his Existence a priori? Besides, what kind of cause would
that be, which is demonstrative of God's Existence a priori? An Internal Cause
it cannot, because God, who is simplicity in the abstract admits of no Natural
or Formal Causes: Neither is it external; because God who is the first
efficient, and ultimate final cause of all things, can have none such prior to
himself: For he who is eternal, can have no principium prius to himself, else
he would not be eternal, since aeternitas dicit negationem principii. And if we
should assign him any prior cause, all his infnitude should quickly fall to the
ground; since it is inconsi^^ent that an Infinite Being should any manner of
way depend upon another.

Obj. Objicit Suarez: Though we cannot demonstrate God a priori by his
quidditie or essence as such; yet we may know him by his attributes: which
(though really identificate) are by our reason conceived as distinct from, and
in some manner prior to his Essence.

Answ. The proving of God by his Attributes, is so far from being a
demonstratio a priori, that it is rather a posteriori; for all Attributes are
posterior to the essence; neither can we feign an Attribute, unless we suppose
an Essence to which it should be an Attribute; so that if the attribute be only
ratione distinctum from its Essence, it is ratione posterius; if it be re
distinctum, it is a part rei posterius.

Assertion 3. That knowledge of God which is acquir"d by natural light, is not
so comprehensive or adequate, as to include all the perfections of the Godhead:
And that for these Reasons.

Reason I. Because a finite faculty or power (such as the understanding of Man
is) cannot comprehend an infinite being, there being no such proportion betwixt
finitum and infinitum, as could allow an adequate comprehension.

II. Adam in the state of innocence could not by his natural light adequately
comprehend God and all his perfections, (for the reason already assigned) much
less we the Poste^^ty of fallen Adam who have but a small remainder of that
light left us.

III. If the natural understanding of Man could comprehend God adequately, then
God could not know more of himself than Man does, who knows him adequately; sed
hoc est absurdum; Ergo and illud ex quo sequitur.

IV. Our natural knowledge of God is drawn from the Contemplation of the
Creature; but the Creature is not an effect adequate unto the power of God,
(for he could have created many more Worlds than this, if he would) Therefore
it cannot furnish us with an adequate knowledge of God.

V. We do not perfectly know the nature of the least Herb or pile of grass; how
can we therefore pretend to know and comprehend fully the infinite and
incomprehensible God?

Assertion 4. The knowledge of God by the light of Nature, being so imperfect,
as that it cannot comprehend, and be adequate unto the nature of God; is not of
it self sufficient to inform us of the way and manner of that Worship, which we
his Creatures owe unto him.

For the understanding of this we are to Observe

Note 1. That Natural light teaches us indeed in the general that God is to be
Worshipped: but, since it is God that requires, and is to be honored by this
Worship, it must depend upon his will what manner of worship we perform unto
him: for if we should worship God in any manner or way that he has not
prescribed, or wherewith he is not well pleased; it were better for us not to
worship him at all: because this is only the mere privation of the Worship due
by us to God; but the other is not only the privation of the due Worship, but
likewise a superaddition of an idolatrous and superstitious performance.

Note 2. That we cannot better know the will of God, concerning what worship he
requires at our hands; than by the Covenant he has made unto Mankind: Because
therein God has given promises unto Man, upon condition of his performance of
that Worship, which he justly required of him; and for which we stand indebted
to God, by virtue of that Covenant we have entered into with him.

Note 3. There being but two Covenants betwixt God and Man, viz. the Covenant
of Works or Nature, and the Covenant of Grace: I assert that the light of
fallen Nature is not sufficient fully and exactly to direct us in the complete
performance of that Worship, which is justly required of us by God in either of
these two Covenants: And that for these following Reasons.

Reason I. This Light of Nature is not sufficient to direct us in performing
that Worship which we owe to God, by virtue of the Covenant of Works or Nature:
because the Worship that is due unto God by the Covenant of Nature, is a full
and complete obedience to the Law of Nature; But our natural light cannot fully
discover unto us what the Law of Nature is, (without the knowledge of which we
cannot perfectly obey the same) for by the fall we have lost the greatest and
best part of our Natural Light, and so have lost our knowledge of the Law of
Nature; as cannot but be evident unto any that considers how the Heathen
Nations have erred in Worshipping God according to the Law of Nature; yea, the
most polished and civilized amongst them have run into the greatest depths of
Idolatry and Superstition in offering up Sacrifices even to the Devil himself;
and that not only the generality and commoner sort, but the (...) Men and Sages
amongst them, such (...) ^ristotle, Plato, Socrates, Pythagoras, (...) have
joined issue with the same ridiculous way of Worship, concluding that thereby
they performed acceptable service to the Gods.

Reason II. The light of Nature which Adam had in the state of innocence, was
no more than sufficient to direct him in the performance of that service he
often unto God; for the gifts wherewithal God endowed Adam were not supers^^^es
but necessary, and no more than sufficient for compassing their respective
end^: so that though he had performed all the service and obedience that (...) he
(...) of, it was no more than what was (...): Now since the Light of Nature
(...) perfect and in the state of innocence was no more than sufficient, what
can we imagine of our decayed, lapsed, and dim light, which comes so far short
of the former? Whereas if it could teach us how to obey perfectly the Law of
Nature, it should be fully equal unto, and run parallel with the same.

Reason III. This Natural light is much less capable to teach us the manner of
that Worship which we owe unto God by virtue of the Covenant of Grace: Because
the Worship required therein is obedience unto God through Faith in Christ
Jesus, taking hold of the promises tendered to us in his holy Gospel; which
Natural Reason can never conceive, being ignorant both of the Object of this
Gospel Worship, and the manner in which the same is to be performed; (as I
shall more fully evince afterward.)

Assertion Fifth. No Man by the sole light of Natural Reason without the help
of Revelation can ever discover or comprehend that Sacred Mystery of the Holy
Trinity, viz. the distinct Hypostases of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one
God.

Reason 1. Because, if this Sacred Mystery had been cognoscible by the light of
Nature, then Pythagoras, Plato, Homer, Aristotle, etc. would probably have
known it. But they have all past it over with a profound ignorant silence, and
where is the Man that has ever discovered it by the light of Nature?

Reason II. If the Mystery of the Trinity were cognoscible by the light of
Nature, then it would be such either as a principium unto which upon the first
proposal we assent without any further probation: or as a Proposition unto
which we assent upon sufficient and demonstrative probation. But to assert the
former, viz. that the Trinity is per se notum as a principium or axioma, is too
absurd and ridiculous to be refuted: Besides, many of the Schoolmen have denied
that Deum esse is per se notum; But we cannot assert Deum esse trinum, unless
we suppose Deum esse; Ergo, if the one be not of it self evident, far less the
other. As to the other membrum, viz. that it is cognoscible by us, as a
proposition which we assent unto upon sufficient and demonstrative probation;
Contra: All these propositions, though they be not so evident as on the first
proposal to gain an assent, yet they are such as Nature can furnish us with
sufficient media and praemissae, whereby to know and prove their certainty; as
for Example, This proposition, God is infinite, though i^ be not of it self
evident at the first proposal, yet it is said to be cognoscible by the light of
Nature, because Nature can furnish us with sufficient means whereby to prove
its certainty: But this Mystery of the Sacred Trinity of the Persons in the
Godhead, is so far from being such as Nature could furnish us with media to
prove its certainty, that if it do not seemingly contradict Nature, yet it far
transcends its power to conceive what it is: But 2. (to use Aquinas's argument)
There is no other mean whereby we can ascend to the knowledge of God but by the
Creature; and all the knowledge we have of God from the Creatures, is only
deduced per modum Causalitatis; as, because I see such an effect, therefore I
conclude there must be a Cause, endowed with Power, Wisdom, etc. Now how can
the Trinity be deduced from the Creatures per modum Casaulitatis? For God could
have Created all the Creatures, though he had not been trinus; because the
Divine Essence of the Father is a suppositum insinitae virtutis, though there
were no more persons in the Godhead than himself.

Assertion Sixth. No Man can by the Light of Nature know the Works of the
Second Person in the Trinity, viz. his Redemption of Mankind, his wonderful
Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection, etc.

Reason I. Because I have already proved, that the three Persons of the Godhead
cannot be known by Nature Light, and consequently not the Second Person, but if
the Second Person be not known, neither can the Works done by him be
discovered; that is, quoad (...), according to that special incommunicable
manner and way that they were performed in by Jesus Christ. It Is true indeed
that the Redemption of the World is an opus ad extra, and competent to all the
Persons of the Trinity; and so may in some sense seem to be known by the help
of Natural Light, without the distinct knowledge of the Person of Christ: But
the particular and special way in which it was accomplished by him, can never
be known naturally; for there were many things relating to that done in his
Humane Nature, such as his Death, Resurrection, etc. which cannot be known
without the knowledge of his Humane Nature; whereas the Humanity and Miraculous
Incarnation of one who is God, is above the reach of Natural Reason to know.

Reas. II. If any such thing had been cognoscible by Natural Reason, it is
probable the Heathens would have found it; but we find no such thing among
them: Ergo, etc.

Reas. III. It is not possible that the light of fallen Nature should know more
of God and Christ, than when it was in its Primitive Innocence; but then it did
not so much as Dream of the Death of Christ for the sins of the World: Ergo,
etc.

Reas. IV. The Redemption of the World by Christ depending upon and flowing
from the mere good Will and Pleasure of God, could never have naturally been
foreseen before it came, nor when accomplished understood by any, except those
unto whom God graciously revealed the same. For how can any thing depending on
God's free will be known by Natural Light, since all the natural knowledge we
have of God, is by way of causality from the Creatures? But the free Redemption
of the World by Jesus Christ, can never be deduced from the existence of the
Creature, by way of causality; as though it be naturally known, that Man is a
sinner and miserable, yet does it not follow that therefore God designs to
redeem him by Christ; no more than from the misery of some of the Angels, can
it be deduced that therefore God designs to redeem them by Christ.

Besides, Man is fallen into this Misery by his own fault, and it were just
with God to leave him to wallow in that Misery that he has purchased to
himself for ever; wherefore since God is no way obliged to Redeem Man, how can
we make the Misery of the Creature an Argument that he has or had any actual
design to redeem the same; yea, dato and non concesso, that our own Miseries
could demonstrate that God had a design to free us from it, yet it could never
discover that particular special way whereby our freedom is purchased, viz. by
the Blood of Christ; since the infinite Wisdom of God, (if so it had pleased
him) might have contrived many other ways and methods, whereby to relieve us
from our natural Slavery and Thraldom.

Reas. V. We are not capable to know the free and deliberate purposes of Men,
much less those purposes of God (all whose Counsels are unsearchable, (...))
which depend on his mere free Will and Pleasure, unless he graciously vouchsafe
to reveal the same unto us; for if we could by Natural Light discover this one
decree, or purpose of the Redemption of Man by Christ, then by the same
consequence we might naturally know all the hidden Decrees and Counsels of God:
Quod est absurdo absurdius, Er. etc.

Reas. VI. That the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the Redemption of the
World by his Blood, is a Mystery above the reach of Humane Knowledge to
perceive, is the constant echo of almost every Page in the N. Test. As St.
Paul while speaking to the Colossians concerning the same, Col. 1.16. says,
Even the Mystery which has been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made
manifest to his Saints: To whom God would make known what is the riches of the
Glory of this Mystery, among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of
Glory. And (according to St. Augustine) it is essential to a Mystery that it be
only cognoscible by Revelation. But what more evident Testimony can there be,
than the general contradiction these Doctrines met with from People of all
Ranks, even in the Apostles days, not only the commoner sort, but even the
greatest Doctors, and those who had most improved their Natural Reason, among
the Athenians, Romans, Jews, etc. who laughed and flouted at the Apostles for
Preaching such seemingly Irrational Doctrines. Vid. Acts 17.18, 19 20, 32.

Objection. Many of the Heathens (...) clearly printed at Christ by the mere
(...) of Nature; as may be seen by the Oracles of the Sibyllae, Zoroaster,
Trismegistus, Hydaspes, Orpheus, etc. where we find many things concerning the
Trinity of the Persons, the Redemption of the World by Christ, and many other
Gospel Truths.

Answ. 1. As to the Sybilline Oracles, there are a great many things go under
that Name which are not genuine and true; such as that Sibylla was in the Ark
with Noah in the time of the Deluge, (which is openly false, since Moses is
generally acknowledged to be the Ancientest Writer; which he could not be, if
Sibylla had been before him) that the Sibylline Oracles were written 500 Years
after the beginning of the Grecian Empire (which would make the Oracles to be
posteriour to the execution of the things themselves) though ye reckon the
beginning of the Grecian Empire from what Date ye will) and many other such
like palpable Errors; as Dionys. Halic. Cornelius Tacitus, and many others do
abundantly evince.

Nevertheless I acknowledge that there are many things concerning Christ which
are really the genuine Offspring of Sibylla; such as the Verses of Sibylla
Cumaea paraphrased by Virgil in his 4th Lelog. (the which though the Poet apply
to Pollio's Son, yet they are properly and roundly applicable to none but
Christ; as Eusebius shows at large in Orat. Constan. ad Sanct. Coel. cap. 20.)
the Acrostick Verses of Sibylla Erythraea, set down by Eusebius, and
demonstrated by him not to be spurious, which is likewise confessed by Dionys.
Halicarn. These Acrostick Verses do so plainly point at Christ, that the
Initial Letters make up these Words; (...). Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior,
Cross. But all this does in nothing infringe my Assertion; because though
Sibylla foretold Christ, yet it follows not that therefore she knew him by
Natural Light, but only by Revelation: Hence the Sibyllae were generally
accounted Prophetesses that spoke not according to their own Natural Light, but
as they were inspired by God; and were termed by the Ancients, foeminae numine
correptae, afflatae, (...), etc. as Lactantius, Just. l. 1. p. 23.
Eustathius, ad Homer. B. (...).
Strabo, Geogr. l. 14. p. 1614.
Suidas, Lib. 17. 171. (...), etc.
Mantacutius, Apparat. 3. Number. 28.
etc. do plainly testify.

Instatur. How comes it to pass, that Sibylla should speak more plainly of
Christ, than the Prophets in the Old Testament? For the Psalmist says, Psalm.
147.19, 20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto
Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments they
have not known them. And the Apostle to the Collossians, chapter 1. v. 26, 27.
calls the Incarnation of Christ, a Mystery hid from Ages.

Answ. 1. Perhaps she might pronounce many things which she did not understand
her self, as being designed for the future benefit of the Church, rather than
her own; of this Opinion was Justin. Mart. and Montacutius in this compares her
to Balaam's Ass: but Eusebius seems rather to incline unto this, that she spoke
these Oracles only for her own private comfort and benefit, as being picked out
by God for an Object, unto which he pleased to manifest himself, and impart the
knowledge of the truth: Either of these is consonant enough with the Analogy of
Faith, and the Justice of God, who discovers himself to whom he will, though
out of the visible Communion of the Church Militant.

2. When the Apostle says, the Incarnation of Christ was a Mystery hid from
Ages; it is not to be understood as if it absolutely excluded all knowledge of
that Mystery; for the Fathers under the Old Testament knew Christ, though
darkly; and as it is elegantly expressed by the Apostle in Heb. 11.13. (where
reckoning up a Catalogue of the Faithful Patriarchs, he subjoyns) These all
Died in the Faith, not having received the Promises; but having seen them afar
off, etc. that is; having had a weak, imperfect, and faint view of them, as we
see things afar off. Yea, not only they, but the Gentiles had this dark
knowledge of it, (as Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 2. Art. 7. ad tertium.
Aquinas evidently proves from that saying of Job's, chapter 19. I know that my
Redeemer lives, etc. So that the meaning of this saying of the Apostle must
be, that it was hid from Ages, with respect to the degree and manner of
knowledge; since this Mystery was never so fully revealed and perfectly known
till the coming of Christ, and was formerly kept secret; they saw it but very
darkly, whereas we now enjoy a far clearer Light, which dispels those Mystical
Clouds that formerly it was inveloped in.

3. As for that saying of the Psalmist it cannot be understood as if the
Nations were totally ignorant of the Divine Law, since they had the Law of
Nature, and Moral Law, written upon their Hearts by God's own Finger: And yet
still there is a sufficient difference betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles, which
might give the Psalmist occasion to say, He has not dealt so with any Nation,
etc. For

1. The Jews had a Judicial and Ceremonial Law given unto them immediately from
God, which the Gentiles had not.

2. They had not only a natural and inbred knowledge of the Moral Law, as the
Gentiles had; but besides, a relation from God distinctly explicating and
unfolding all the parts and dictates of the same, which blind and imperfect
Nature could not discover.

3. They had a Priesthood of God's own appointment, and Prophets of his
mission, who might constantly reveal the Will of God unto them, whereas the
Gentiles had no such thing; yea, these same very Oracles that they had from the
Sibyllae, were but once in an Age; so that few or none that heard of them
understood what they meant, as is evident from the Doctissimus Poeta Virgil his
mis-applying the Sibyllick Cumean Verses to Pollio's Son.

So much for the Sibyllae.

As for the other Instances of Trismegistus, Hydaspes, Orpheus, etc. I Answer.

3. That if time would allow me to examine their particular Writings, I should
find many things spurious and false especially in Trismegistus; but this I do
not stand upon: Wherefore, I say, that though they knew many things concerning
Christ, yet it follows not, that therefore they knew it by Natural Light, but
that they had it either from the immediate Revelation of God, who, (as Justinus
well observes) has so well provided for his Church, that out of the Heathens
their own Writings, there may be Weapons taken to discomfit and refute them; or
from the Jews, to whom they are beholden for many things. Clem. Alex. copies a
great many things out of Deuteronomy concerning. Go^; and says, that Plato did
the same. Basil. Magn. says, that they stole a great many things from the
Scripture, and adopted them for their own: Diodorus Siculus talks of Moses
having his Laws from (...); yea the Name (...) was so common among them, that
one time recourse being had to the Oracles of Apollo, to know who of the Gods
it was that was Named (...), it was answered them, (...).
Jao is the chiefest of all the Gods.


The Heathens did commonly borrow the Names of their Gods from the Hebrew, as
Bacchus was called (...) from the Hebrew word Jah, which with the Greek
Termination and Pronunciation added, is (...); and their exultation word at his
Feasts was (...), corresponding to the Jewish Hallelujah. Many such Instances
might be given, that the Gentiles borrowed many things from the Jews; so that
it is not probable they had the knowledge of these Divine Mysteries by Natural
Light (which I have already proved to be impossible) but either by immediate
Revelation from God, or by their knowledge of the Jewish Constitution and
Customs.

I come now to the Second thing proposed, viz. What are the Media whereby we
arise unto this knowledge of God? For the better resolving of which, we are to
know, that these Media are either inartificial, viz. such as depend upon no Art
of Man; or artificial, viz. such as are invented or found out by some Humane
Art, or Science: Wherefore

I Assert 1. God is naturally cognoscible by inartificial means: By
inartificial here I do not mean as they are proposed and made use of by
Metaphysicians; for they can propose inartificial things in an artificial
method; but in regard of an Ignorant Man, who though destitute of the knowledge
of Arts and Sciences, can yet make use of this medium inartificiale, by which
he attains to the natural knowledge of a God; and this Assertion is plain and
evident if we consider;

Reason. That the most Barbarous Nations, and unpolite People, (who knew no
Arts nor Sciences, and consequently no Artificial Media) have known,
acknowledged and Worshipped a God; As Tully in his lib. 1. de Not. Deorum. and
lib. de Legibus has sufficiently demonstrate^; But Acosta and Benzonius, de
rebus Indicis, have put this beyond all doubt; where, in the description of the
lately discovered West Indies, they show that this most Barbarous and rude
People (yea scarcely Men except in their Visage) had their Gods, Temples, and
^ests; and amongst their many Gods they had one, whom they imagined above all
the rest, who was omnipotent, and infinite; and unto whom all their Thoughts,
Words, and Actions, tendered the highest Reverence and Adoration imaginable.
Now since they were so rude and ignorant, and not capable of having Artificial
means; How came they to know a God, but by Inartificial means, competent even
to the most Illiterate and Ignorant sort?

Assertion. II. Since God is naturally cognoscible by Inartificial means, much
more by Artificial: For Arts are the improvement and perfecting of Nature; so
that what may be without Art, cannot but be more perfectly accomplished, where
the subsidiary help of Art is made use of. These Artificial Media, or Arguments
whereby the Learned Artists demonstrate the Natural Knowledge of God, and his
existence, are various and many: Yea, so great is the variety of these made use
of by the Ancients; that some of them seem rather suasory than cogent.
Wherefore I shall select only those that are most forcible and urgent, which
are.

Arg. I. All Entities in the World are either made or not made, (non datur
medium;) But all and every one of them cannot be made; because they must either
be made by themselves, or by another; but not by themselves, for then the cause
and the effect would be the same; and, as all causes are at least natura
priores, and praeexistent to the effect which they produce, so this which made
it self would be prior to it self; quod est absurdum. Wherefore those that are
made must be made by another; and that other which made them, if it be not made
at all, then there is a being increated independent, etc. Which we call God,
Ergo, etc. But if it be made too; it cannot be made by it self; (...) the
Reason above assigned) so it must be made by another; but if by another, then
the same difficulty arises about that other, and so forth in all the rest, till
at length ye come to one above the rest which is not made at all; the which if
there were not, there would be a progressus in infinitum.

Arg. II. If there be any Independent being, there is a God; (for whatever is
independent is simple, as wanting any internal cause, to depend upon for its
composition; and likewise eternal, as wanting an external cause upon which to
depend for its Original; and whatever is simple and eternal is God) (...) that
there is such a being, is evident: Because otherwise all things whatsoever
would be dependent; and that is impossible. For then there would be nothing
left upon which all these things should depen^; since whatever is dependent
depends upon another. For a thing dependent only upon it self is the same as
independent: and (...) dependent being depended upon another dependent being,
there would be (...) Pr^^ressus in Infinitum, (since no independent being can
be to stop at where (...) are dependent) or else a circular making (...) to
depend mutually upon one another; (...) by this means one being which is
dependent upon another is posterior to that other upon which it depends, and in
the mean time prior to that same other being which has likewise a mutual
dependence upon it. For whatever depends upon another is either an Accident or
a Substance, but (...) Ac^ident is naturally posterior to the ^^^stance upon
which alone it can depend, and one substance cannot depend upon another
substance except by way of causality, which plainly imports a natural priority
in the one, and posteriority in the other. So that these consequences (which
are both equally absurd) of a progress in Infinitum, and making one and the
same thing both prior and posterior in the same respect (since all the
dependence is either by the w y of accident, or substance, ut supra) do
necessarily follow upon this supposition that all things are dependent.
Wherefore an independent being must be acknowledged, and that is what We call
God.

Arg. III. There must be a supreme Cause of all things which is caused by none,
otherwise there would be a Progressus in Infinitum in the causes of things, as
is evident: but this progressus is absurd and impossible; Therefore there is an
independent Cause above all the rest, which is God.

Obj. 1. These arguments may perhaps prove that there is an increated,
independendent first cause of all things; yet they cannot prove that there is
but one only; and consequently cannot demonstrate the existence of the true
God, who is unus and solus, Ergo, etc.

Answ. I. Dato and non concesso, that they are not sufficient to prove the
unity of God, yet they are sufficient to infer the negatum, viz. That there is
some increated independent being cognoscible by the light of Nature, which is
called God. But

I Answ. II. By the same very force that they prove the existence of a Deity,
they likewise infer the unity of the same: for if there be a being omnimode
perfectum, it is impossible that there should be any more than one; because
there can be nothing to distinguish them one from another: (and distinct they
must be, else they could not be a plural, but all one and the same entity.) Now
what ground of distinction can there be betwixt two beings all perfect? It
cannot be any thing equally lodged in them both, for in that they both agree;
it cannot be any thing lodged in one and not in another; for that would destroy
the Hypothesis, viz. That they are two all-perfect beings by making one to
enjoy a perfection (an imperfection it is not a subject capable of) which the
other is deprived of, and consequently cannot be omnimode perfectum.

Obj. 2. God is a simple and uncompounded being; Therefore he cannot be known
by natural light. The Reason of the consequence is; Because God cannot be fully
comprehended and adequately known by natural light; and since he is a simple
being, indivisible and without parts, he cannot be known in part, for he has no
parts; so he must either be known adequately or not all. As it is in a point,
or punctum indivisibile, if it be touched, it cannot be touched in part,
because it has no parts, but must be touched all over, if touched at all: so in
our natural knowledge of God, since it is confessed that we cannot know him
adequately; neither can we know him at all; for God is a simple indivisible
being, tota indivisibilis entitas, and so cannot be known e^ part, or in
ordine ad unum, and non in o^ ine ad aliud, because there is not unum and aliud
in God.

Answ. I. It does not follow that because God is an Invisible being therefore
he must be known adquately and totally; yea rather the contrary seems to
follow; because what is simple and invisible cannot be known totally or
adequately; since God who wants parts cannot be considered as a totum, for this
has always a respect to parts, which God has not.

Answ. II. God may be known totally and adequately as to his existence, that
is, we may by the light Nature discover that there is a Being simple,
indivisible, etc. though we cannot know all the immense properties of that being,
what they are, and fully comprehend the nature of the same; as I may know that
there is such a Man as Plato, though in the mean time I cannot tell what he is,
nor what are all the truths that may be enuntiated concerning him: so I may
naturally know quod sit Deus, though not quid sit secundum se totum: for the
Creature which is the mean by which we arise to the knowledge of God, is not an
effect adequate to him an omnipotent Cause, who might have created many more if
he would; and therefore it cannot give us the adequate knowledge of him: yea,
our finite intellect can never by pure natural means comprehend an infinite
Being, either in Patria, or in Vi^ as Moses testifies, who though he was familiar
with God, yet could not see his foreparts; and St. Paul, who though ravished to
the third Heavens, yet could not fathom the unsearchable depths of the
incomprehensible God.

Answ. III. Our knowledge of God is not sensitive like that of touching a
point, but intellective: and by this intellective knowledge we do not know him
as he is in himself; but after the manner of Men, and by a conception suitable
to our Natures: so we must conceive the Mercy, Justice, Omnipotence, etc. of
God, as distinct attributes, while in the mean time there is no diversity of
perfections in God, but all are one and the same indivisible Entity: And so God
if considered in se, and as he is in himself, he is indivisible; but as the
object of our understanding he must be conceived in a divisible manner, by
forming inadequate apprehensions of him, prescinding from one thing, and
considering another: for though there be not unum and aliud in God a part rei
and as he is in himself; yet there is after the manner of our conceptions of
him.

Objection. III. God is neither cognoscible by the light of Nature, nor can the
bein of a God be believed by Faith: not cognoscible by the light of Nature,
because his existence is an Article of Faith, and so depends on Revelation, as
being a supernatural truth above the power of nature: And it cannot be believed
by Faith, because the Testimony of God is the only Motive and ratio formalis,
why I give the assent of my Faith unto any proposition or truth; so that all
Faith presupposes both that there is a God, and that he speaks true, for upon
the truth of his testimony I believe; and there cannot be any faith till the
existence of God be acknowledged, which it necessarily presupposes; and to
believe that there is a God, because God said so (whose existence is in the
mean time called in question) were ridiculous.

Answ. I. Though the Existence of God be an Article of Faith, yet it may likewise
be known by Natural light; since there are many things in the Scriptures,
(which we believe by Faith,) that can be demonstrated by natural light; such as
these known Principles, that God is to be honored, Parents obeyed, etc. And
the Reason is, because Faith and Natural Scientifick Knowledge do not formally
differ in their material Object; for both may have one and the same Object,
viz. one and the same proposition, both proved by natural demonstration, and
believed in by Faith, because of the testimony of God; but the main and
principle difference lies in that which they call Objectum formale, and the
formality of the Object is taken from the principal Motive or mean by virtue
whereof the proposition comes to gain an assent: as in Natural things the
motive of my assent is evident demonstration, and in supernatural things the
testimony of God; so that I may assent unto a proposition that is demonstrable
by natural light, because of the clear probation of the same, and this is
called assensus scientificus; and if God confirm it by Revelation, I assent
unto the same proposition because of the testimony of God, and this is called
assensus fidei, or supernaturalis; not as if the proposition it self were
supernatural, and incomprehensible by natural light; but because the medium or
motive upon which I ground my assent unto it is supernatural. So that one and
the same proposition may be in ordine ad diversa motiva, both the object of
Faith, and of a demonstrative Natural knowledge.

Instatur. The Object of Faith is inevident, for Faith is an inevident assent:
But if the Existence of God can be demonstratively proved by Natural Light,
then it cannot be inevident, Ergo, etc.

Answ. There be three things to be considered in giving an assent to a truth:

1. Firmitas, or the stedfastness of the person in his belief, not doubting of
any thing.

2. Certitudo, or the certainty of the truth it self; for some Men may be
firmly persuaded of a thing, which is not in it self a certain truth: as the
Heretics are of their Errors.

3. Evidentia: or a demonstrative perspicuous manifestation of the truth: For
many things, such as matters of Faith, are certainly true, and Men are firmly
persuaded of their truth; who yet cannot evidently show and demonstrate that it
is a truth, because they believe upon the Testimony of another. And of these
truths that are evident, some are more evident than others, as the prima
principia or (...) are more evident than the other conclusions that are deduced
(though with evidence too) by a longer series of consequences. Now whatever is an
Object of Faith is indeed ine^^^ent, yet there are some things more inevident
than others, such as the principal and cardinal truths of the Christian
Religion, viz. The Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the divinity and
inc^^^nation of Christ, and the whole Mystery of his Redemption of the World by
his bloo^ and these are ev^ry way inevident; whereas there are some other
truths which, though in so far as they are believed in by Faith, are justly
denominated inevident, because of the motive and medium of the Belief; yet may
be upon another occasional respect and per accidens called evident: of which
Nature is this of the Existence of a God; which is truly an object of Faith,
and in that respect inevident, viz. as assented unto upon the testimony of God:
But it is also upon another respect evident, because it per accidens so falls
out, that it is likewise demonstrable by natural knowledge.

Answ. 2. It does not foll^w that the Existence of God cannot be believed by
Faith, because Faith depends on the Testimony of God, which presupposes that
there is a God: for the contrary seems rather to be deducible from thence; viz.
That because all Faith is founded upon the Divine Testimony, and because no
Believer can give assent unto any truth, unless he know the Testimony given
unto the same to be divine; therefore by that same very act of Faith whereby he
believes this Testimony to come from God, he likewise believes there is a God
who sends it. For by the same individual act of seeing, I must of necessity see
the color and sensible species of a Wall, (as they call it) that I see the
Wall it self by: No more can I know the testimony to the truth to be divine,
unless by the same very act of Faith whereby I believe the testimony to be
God's, I likewise believe the existence of God who gives this Testimony: And
this Divine Testimony is the ground of all my belief, and the ratio a priori,
wherefore I give mine assent unto any thing: yet there can be no ratio a priori
given wherefore I believe the Testimony of God; as when I see a Wall, the ratio
is because of the species; but the species it self wants any ratio, and is only
^^en propter se; so in all the objects of my ^aith I believe them, because of
the Testimony of God; but I believe the Testimony of God propter se: So that
the Existence of God, though it be sufficiently demonstrable by the light of
Nature, and in that sense the Object of a scientifick as^^^ yet since God has
confirmed it by his revealed Testimony, it may well be stated as an Article of
our Creed; which we believe, because God has testified and revealed the same,
and that in a more clear manner, than bare Reason is capable to perform the
demonstration of it.

Objection 4. There is no other way of knowing God naturally, than by way of
causality from the Creatures, arising from the effect unto the cause; but that
we cannot do unless we can evidently know and demonstrate that the Creature is
really the effect and work of God; and this we cannot, since the greatest
Philosophers were ignorant of it, and th^ught the World to be eternal; which is
also confirmed by the Apostle, Heb. 11. By faith we know that the World was
created; intimating that the Creation of the World is a truth not comprehended
by Natural Light.

Answer. All the Philosophers have generally acknowledged, that God was the
Creator of the World: Hence Aristotle frequently calls God (...): And Plato in
Timaeo Tom. 2. page 31. asserts, that God made but one World not many: Plutarch
commends Alexander for saying, that God was the Father of all things; Plutarch
in Alex. Magn. page 681. What more ordinary amongst the Poets than (...); Ille
opisex rerum, etc? Anaxagoras, Hermotinus, Pythagoras, etc. were all asserters
of the same Doctrine; so that they knew and acknowledged the Creation of the
World in general, though they could not condescend to the particular
Circumstances which attended the same: And therefore is it that Galen scoffs
and stouts at Moses, for saying many things about the manner of the Creation of
the World, and proving nothing. And as to that saying of the Apostle, we have
sufficiently shown already, that one and the same material truth may both be
believed by faith, and assented unto by Natural Reason; and so may be invested
with different Denominations arising from the different motiva upon which they
are received: So that the Existence of God is an object of Natural Knowledge,
as it is demonstrated by reason; and is likewise an object of Faith, as being
witnessed by a Testimony clearer than Reason, even the Supernatural Testimony
of God: Upon which account it is said to be Supernatural, not as if the
Proposition it self did so far surpass the power of Nature, that it could not
be compassed and apprehended by the same; but because the mean, or motive by
which it gains an assent, is Supernatural, and the knowledge acquired by the
same is more distinct, and particularly circumstantiate, than what the more
general and confused Natural Reason can possibly furnish us withal.

Objection 5. If the Existence of a God, and the Knowledge thereof were so
naturally imprinted on the Spirits of all Men, then it could not be wholly
obliterated, nay, nor in the least diminished, either by long inveterate
custom, or any other violent force; for whatever is Natural, as descent is unto
a Stone, let it be never so often, or so customarily cast up, and put out of its
road, yet it still returns unto the same, and can never forget its Natural
Byas; whereas we see the Knowledge of a God in many Men's Breasts, if not quite
abolished, yet very much defaced, what by evil Company-keeping, and what by a
long contracted habit and custom of sinning: But if the Knowledge of God were
Natural, no such thing could fall out, Ergo, etc.

Answer. It is true indeed that Custom cannot change Nature, that is, the
natural inclination and propension of any thing, such as the descent of a stone
is; But it may change and alter the Natural Acts, or the particular Exertions
of the propensive Faculties; as though custom cannot bereave a stone of its
natural inclination and propensity to bend downwards, yet it may hinder the
execution of what it is naturally inclined unto; since a customary, and often
casting it up, hinders it to come down: And in this sense the Knowledge of God,
by the Light of Nature, which is an act of the Natural Understanding Faculty,
whereby it evidently sees, and is ascertained that there is a God, is often times
hindered likewise: But the hindrances that may occur unto these Acts,
executive of, and flowing from the Natural Inclination, are twofold;

1. External; and by these the Natural Acts are many times impeded: As that
Physical Act of the Natural Descent of a Stone is often times hindered by a
Supervenient physical Impediment; and the Moral Intellectual Act of knowing the
Existence of God, is often times hindered by a Moral Impediment, viz. sin, which
will some times so over-cloud and blind the Understanding, that it cannot see
or discern the clearest truth, even of the Existence of that God who is truth
it self.

2. Internal; or, when the Propensive Faculty and Inclination does of its own
accord pursue the contrary of what it inclined unto before. And in this sense,
the Natural, or Physical Inclinations cannot be controlled in following their
Natural Pondus; because they being naturally determined ad Vnum, can never be
obliged from any Intrinsic Principle to run in the contrary Channel. But as
for Moral Faculties, which are only swayed by Moral, not Physical Agents, they
are not endowed with any such freedom from Internal Alteratives; of which we
have too too palpable a Testimony in our sad experience; for though Adam in the
state of Innocence, was naturally bended toward Honestum and Verum, yet as
soon as sin got hold of him, he was not only hurried away by the violence of
the external stream, but did willingly, and by an internal consent go along
with the Current. And these Executive Acts may indeed for the Reasons, and in
the Cases above assigned, be changed by Custom, for Custom cannot alter Natural
Propensions, or Inclinations, especially where they are purely Natural; that
is, without any cognition; as the descent of a stone, though the stone be
hindered by external violence, from the act of descending, yet still it remains
as the Natural Pondus of it: But as for those Inclinations and Propensive
Faculties which are not so purely natural, as being endowed with Knowledge,
(and yet they are called Natural too, because it is as natural for the Will of
Man to incline unto that which is good, as for a stone to incline to its
center) in these, I say, this Axiom does not hold so extensively true, as in
the Physical and more Natural Inclinations: For we see that the casting up a
stone, though never so frequently, does not oblige it to forsake its Natural
Propensity to come downwards: But in the Moral and Ethical Inclinations of Men,
we find a Habit and Custom of sinning has so far prevailed upon us; that we do
not steer that course which naturally we were addicted unto. The Reason of the
disparity of Physical and Moral Inclinations, is, because the former are semper
ad unum determinatae, and so can never be altered in their Inclination; but the
latter, viz. Moral Inclinations, are more easily overcome because they are
indulged a greater Liberty, and are not by any necessitas naturae (like the
other) bound up to any particular Object. Indeed their general Object is as
invariable as that of a Natural Necessity; for the Will cannot, by any Custom
whatsoever, incline unto that which is not in general Good, nor can the
Intellect be persuaded to assent unto that which is not in general true: But in
the more particular circumstances of their Object, they are often times prevailed
upon by Custom; as the Will may by a long and inveterate Habit follow after
that which is indebitum bonum; and the Intellect by prejudice, or the imperium
of the Will, etc. may be obliged to give its assent unto that which is not in
it self true: But in the general the Will must still follow what is apparently
good, and the Intellect assent unto what is seemingly true, for voluntas non
potest appetere malum qua malum, nor Intellectus assentire falso qua falso. --
And if it should here be questioned, Why the Understanding should be so often
deceived in these practical primary Principles, That there is a God, and that
he is to be Worshipped; whereas it is never deceived in in its Speculative
Principles; for no Man ever doubted that, Totum est majus sua part, and
Impossible est idem esse and non esse; how comes it therefore that they should
be so readily and frequently imposed upon by false practical Principles? I say,
if any such thing should happen to be questioned we may quickly return this
obvious Answer, viz. that while we are here in, in via, all our knowledge does
originally depend upon our Senses; and those Truths which are most evidently
testified by them, are best received: For our Senses discover unto us, that
Omne totum est majus sua part, because we see that a whole Lion is bigger than
a part of the same: But as for practical Principles, they are confined within
the Sphere of our Reason, and are of a higher pitch than what our low creeping
Senses can ever aspire after; and therefore allow us no other Natural Guide to
conduct us unto them, but our Reason: Which is so blind, imperfect, and
miserably obfuscated, especially as to such Men in whom Vice, Prejudice, Sloth,
and neglect of the useful and necessary means does predominate) that it is no
wonder if it should embrace Error instead of Truth.

Now from all that has been said we may safely conclude, that it is abundantly
demonstrable by Natural Light that there is a God, and that he is the first
cause of all things. From whence these Inferences are plainly deducible.

1. That God is Eternal; for the first Cause is not capable to receive its
production either from it self, or from another.

2. That he is a most simple Being; for the first Cause as it excludes all
external, so likewise all internal constitutive Causes.

3. That he is independent; for what is first can admit of no prior thing
whereupon to depend: (all which has been largely insisted upon already.) So
that not only the Existence of God, but many of his Attributes deducible from
thence by undoubted and natural consequence, may be evidently demonstrated by
the Light of Nature. Quod erat demonstrandum.

Some time after the Year 1650, Dr. Barlow being engaged by Dr. Langbain, the
Provost of Queens College in Oxford, to Moderate for him in the
Divinity-Disputations in the Chapel; and the Custom of the Moderator then
being after the performance of the Disputations was over, to state the Question
Disputed of, and to give his Determination concerning the same; and the Copies
of several such Determinations concerning many Arduous and Momentous Questions
in Theology, being transcribed from the Latin Original of Doctor Barlow's own
Writing, it is thought fit for the Information and Entertainment of those whose
Studies are Conversant in Divinity, to publish some Translated Extracts, or the
substance of some of those Determinations, the Printing of the whole being
likely too much to swell the bulk of this Volume: And here various of the
Latin Expressions referring to Terms of Art, Distinctions and Quotations, and
some particularly emphatical, are thought fit to be retained.

Praesc^entia Divina a Rebus praevisis non tollit Contingentiam.
First. HERE I shall explain the Terms, and state the Question; and secondly
lay down certain Theses.

First, By Prescience we mean that Act of Divine Understanding whereby God from
all Eternity knew most certainly in himself, things that were to come to pass
in time.

Secondly, I shall say that this prescience of God is not distinguish d from
his Science, re ipsa, sed respectu relativo ad Objectum cognitum terminato. For
we call it Scientia, as it perceives all things present, past, and to come; and
Praescientia, as it does rerum temporalium actualem existentiam praecurrere,
and is referred to things future. I call them future, not only in Ordine ad res
alias quibus succedant in eadem temporis mensura, but also in ordine ad Deum.

I know that the Schoolmen generally, on 1 par. Q. 14. art. 13. in 1 Sent.
Did. 38. and after them our Learned Davenant Quaest. 35. may think otherwise;
namely, that things are not called future; in ordine ad Deum and modum
intuitionis Divinae, because the ordo Divinae Cognitionis ad rem quamcunque, is
tanquam praesentis ad praesens; where, by the presence of future things in
ordine ad Scientiam Divinam, some may either understand praesentiam objectivam;
and this we grant; or realem per proprias existentias; and this we deny,
because it is impossible that futurum Contingens, scientiae (etiam) Divinae,
praesens sit actu, antequam actu sit: Since first, alicujus praesens esse
supponit esse ex part Rei.

And Secondly, Ex part modi, praesentia actualis per existentiam actualem
supponit essentiam actualem quae praesens esse possit. When therefore God did
foreknow future Contingencies from Eternity, it is necessary that they should
be to him even future; namely in respect of actual existence. The reason is,
because they were not futura Contingentia ab aeterno; and therefore from
Eternity they could not be present with God.

The Knowledge therefore of God is twofold.

First, Simplicis intelligentiae. Secondly, Visionis.
First, The Scientia Simplicis intelligentiae is called the Scientia naturalis
and necessaria, and is founded in the power of God, by which he does certainly
and naturally know all things past, present, or to come, or those things which
are only possible, and necessarily so that he cannot but know. For this is that
we call his Omniscience; nor is it possible that any thing can lie hid from it.

Secondly, The Scientia Visionis is said to be the Scientia libera, as founded
in decreto voluntatis suae libero. And this Knowledge does know all, and only
those things which his Will has decreed, either efficiendo, so as to produce
them; or permittendo, so as not to hinder them. And this Knowledge does know
all things past, present, and future. But those things which are only possible,
and never to come to pass, are not the object of this Knowledge. Therefore the
Question is concerning this Science of Vision: For if this be referred to
future things, it is called prescience.

In the next place, that we may know what Contingentia is, let us see what is
Contingens in the Concrete. Aristotle tells us that Contingens is, (...) quod
potest aliter se habere: and necessarium, (...) quod non potest aliter se
habere. Contingency therefore in the abstract is possibilitas aliter se
habendi, as necessity is an impossibility aliter se habendi.

Moreover, Contingency is twofold.

First, Intrinsical, Cum res possit aliter sed habere ab intra per principium
suum internum: So the Actions of free will are said to be intrinsically
contingent ratione principii, because it is in the power of the will, from its
intrinsical and innate liberty to act in this way, or another, or in none at
all.

Secondly, Extrinsical by reason of Impediment; whence it comes to pass that a
cause otherwise acting in a natural way and necessary, is hindered from its
effect. Thus fire does necessarily and naturally burn ex part sui; but ratione
impedimenti interpositi, it is possible that it may not burn. So in Dan. 3.27.
The Three Children were thrown into the Fiery Furnace, and yet not burnt, God
commanding and ordering things so that the Fire should not burn them.

Now our Question is to be understood chiefly of the intrinsical contingency,
namely about the Motions, Acts and Properties of the Free Will

To this therefore our Position comes, that the Divine prescience does not take
away Contingency, seu possibilitatem aliter se habendi; that is to say, The
Divine prescience does not change, determine or necessitate the Object known.

And here we assert these Two Theses.

First, That God knows future Contingencies.

Secondly, That this Knowledge does not take away the Contingency of things.

First, That God knows future Contingencies: And that this is so, none can
doubt, who believes the Scriptures; See Matt. 1 21, 22, 23. The Angel there
spoke to Joseph of Mary his Wife; And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou
shall call his name Jesus. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled,
which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet; Saying, Behold a Virgin shall be
with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel.

Now this was many years foretold by the Prophet, Isa* 7.14. Behold a Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Emmanuel.

She might have been no Virgin, she might not have been brought forth, the
Child might have died in her Womb. They might have given the Child some other
Name than Emmanuel. For these were Free Acts expressly foretold by God.
Therefore they were distinctly known by God; that God who is (...) and ens
perfectissimum cannot be deceived.

And then it was foretold, that not a Bone of Christ should be broken on the
Cross, and many Circumstances were verified according to the Prophecys of old
therein.

This foreknowledge in Scripture God assumes to himself, and upbraids the
false Gods, because they did not know things to come, Isa, 44. Dan. 2.

Now this Truth in all Ages has had its Enemies. God's Providence and
Prescience of future things was flatly denied by Epicurus; and Cicero concurred
with him. And of late the Socinians have denied it. They do not deny God's
Omnisciency: But do thus argue;

Futura contingentia non sunt omnino Cognoscibilia, ergo nec a Deo sunt
Cognita. Neither do they think that any prejudice is hereby done to the Divine
Omnipotency For say they, God is omnipotent, and tamen repugnat illum facere
impossibilia: and so he is omniscius, and tamen repugnat illum Cognoscere
incognoscibilia; and such they account future Contingencies. They say God has
only a Conjectural Knowledge of future things, and not a certain one. So they
answer to that of Genesis 18.19. For I know that Abraham will command his
children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
etc.

And so says Crellius in his Book before Volkelius l. 1. Cap. 24.

But now we shall proceed to enquire whether this Contingency of future things
be not taken away by God's Prescience.

I assert the Negative, and prove it by some Reasons.

First then I suppose Prescience to be an Act of the Understanding (as likewise
all Science) which alone is Cognoscitive.

Secondly, I suppose that the Intellect only knows its Object, but does not
transmit to it an efficient power, by which it works any thing in the object,
For there appears this great difference inter scientem and efficientem, that no
effects proceed a Solo sciente, but mediante voluntate per modum inducentis,
and potentia per modum exequentis. These things being laid down, I thus deduce
my Argument.

Quod nihil omnino agit, Contingentiam non tollit ab objecto Contingenti, At
praescientia nihil omnino agit, Ergo, etc. The Major is plain, because it is
necessary that that should do somewhat which takes away contingency from the
Object; and therefore it will be manifest that prescience (if it does nothing)
takes not away Contingency.

But Prescience does nothing, since it is a thing confessed that, Vis omis
effectiva in objectum derivata est opus potentiae divinae, non scientiae.

Secondly, I suppose it as a thing certain and manifest in it self, that omne
objectum Cognoscendum est prius natura actu Scientiae per quem est Cognitum,
ita ut futurum Contingens more suo subsistat necesse est, priusquam quis illud
tale esse Cognoscat. I ask therefore if Prescience takes away Contingency;
whether it does it before it knows the future Contingent, or while it knows
it? Not before it knows it; For it is impossible ut Actus objectum destruat,
priusquam ad illud terminetur. Not while it does Cognoscere,

First, Because to know a future Contingent, is objecum prout est apprehendere;
that is, to apprehend that it is Contingent and future. But to apprehend that a
future thing is contingent, is not to take away Contingency: Since it is
impossible that he who truly judges that there is now contingency in such an
Object, that he should take away the contingency* by so judging. For thus
proportionem inter se and objectum actus ille destrueret, and thus falsum
inducat necesse est, etiam dum verum judicat.

But Secondly, The Science of God does not take away Contingency from a present
object; therefore not from a future one.

The Reason is, because the Infallibility of the Divine Prescience is the Cause
(according to their Tenets) which we now impugn) why Contingency is taken away
from a future Object. But the Divine Science of the Object present is equally
infallible. Therefore if it does not take away Contingency from the present
Object, then it does not from the future. But the Infallibility of the Divine
Science does not take away Contingency from the present Object; Nam si Deus
videt Socratem ambulantem, non ideo contingenter and libere non ambulat, quia
Deus infallibiliter hoc Cognoscat.

Christ tells Peter, Before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice; where
Christ foretells this sin of St. Peter certainly and infallibly. Now I ask if
this Prescience of Christ did take away the Contingency of the Act? If it did
not, I have what I would; namely, that Prescience does not take away
Contingency. If it did take away Contingency, then Peter did not sin in denying
Christ. For omne peccatum est voluntarium. And if he did not sin, he wept in
vain. Some Books that treat of this, are Spanhemius among his Dubia Evangelica,
Dub. 33. Boethius de Consol. Philosoph. lib. 5. prop. 6.

An electio ad Salutem sit ex fide praevisa?
IN the stating the Question he says, Election is twofold.

1. Humane, when Man.

2. Divine, when God chooses, and of this only it is disputed. And this
Election is twofold.

First, Of a thing, when a thing not a person is chosen. So God is often said
to choose Jerusalem and Mount Sion, and Isaiah, 58.6. eligere jejunium. But of
this we enquire not.

Second, Election is of a Person, which likewise is twofold.

1. Of Christ as Man. For so he was in the Number of the Elect. Math. 12.18.

2. Of those United with Christ: namely of the Angels, who persevered in their
Obedience; and of Men, God ordained, and Elected some Men to Offices and Honor
in this World; as Saul to the Government. Others he Elected to Salvation and
Glory in Heaven; and of these our Question is.

Now here we say that this Divine Election, by which God chooses Certain Men
from Eternity to Salvation, is not an Act of the Divine Intellect or Knowledge
by which he knows; but of his Will by which according to his good pleasure he
determines of us.

The Reason is because the Divine Knowledge is Natural and necessary; so that
it is impossible that God should not know every object that could be known; but
Election is a free Act; since it is a thing confessed, p^tuisse Deum vel nullos
Condidisse, vel Conditos non elegisse, vel plures, vel pauciores, vel alios
p^o^suo ben^placito, and jure absoluto quo in Creaturas utitur.

The Divine Knowledge does equally look at all objects possible or future, but
not so his Election; which is a Discretive Act, and passes by some to perish
for ever, while it prepares Grace and Glory for others.

Now when it is asked, if Election be from Faith foreseen?

First, We do not deny that Faith was foreseen from Eternity, since it is
manifest that the Knowledge of God is equally Eternal with his Will. For sicut
quicquid est futurum erat ab aeterno futurum, ita etiam ab ae^erno Cognitum. But

Secondly, We enquire of the habitude that the f^reseeing of Faith has to
Election. This habitude for foreseen Faith in order to Election is threefold,
and may have the Notion,

First, Antecedentis, so that God chooses none to Heaven, in whom he had not
seen Faith to come, or did see that Faith would come before they were actually
Elected.

Secondly, It may have the Notion Conditionis, and so Faith may be considered
as a Condition necessarily required in Election.

Thirdly, Foreseen Faith may further have the Notion of a Cause, and so not to
be only an Antecedent and a Condition of Election, but to have the Notion of a
Cause from whence Election follows as the Effect.

Now when it is enquired, if Election be of Faith foreseen, Historical Faith is
not meant, nor a Faith of Miracles; the which Unregenerate Men may have; but
the meaning is of justifying Faith which is proper only to the Regenerate.

These matters being thus settled, Our Principal Conclusion is this; viz. In
illis qui Eliguntur and Praedestinantur ad gloriam, non datur aliquis Actus aut
qualitas a Deo praevisa, aut aliud quodcunque quod sit meritum, causa, ratio,
aut Conditio, vel antecedens, quolibet modo ita Praesuppositum Decreto
Electionis, ut ex positione talis Praecedanei in Praevisione divina ponatur
Electio, and ex negatione negetur; Or you may take the Conclusion thus, viz.
Nulla datur ex part nostra Causa* ratio, vel Conditio sine qua non
Praedestinatio^is seu Electionis Divinae.

The first Reason of this Conclusion, is; If Election be from Faith foreseen,
then Faith foreseen is some way a Cause of Election: the which Consequence
though the Remonstrants will sometimes deny and seem not to allow foreseen
Faith as the Cause of Gods Electing, as may be seen in the Collatio Hagiensis,
p. 103. Yet elsewhere they speak it out plainly in Writings held by them most
Authentical, namely in Actis Synodalibus Part. 2. p. 6. where they tell us,
Fidem and Perseverationem in Electione Cons^derari ut Conditionem ab bomine
praestitam, ac proinde tanquam Causam. They add this Reason, Because the
Condition prescribed and performed does necessario alicujus Causae rationem
induere.

And indeed they must needs be forced to Confess this: For, if we ask them why
God chose Peter and not Judas, they say, because God foresaw that Peter would
believe. So that from their Hypothesis, it must needs be that foreseen Faith
was the Cause that Peter was chosen before Judas.

Now I do subsume, that foreseen Faith is not the Cause, nor Reason, nor Motive
any way of Election.

First, Because the Scripture allows of no Cause of Election extra Deum ipsum:
but refers it altogether to his (...) and beneplacitum. For this Consult Ephesians.
1.11. and Romans 9.11.

On the other hand, If you will believe, you shall be Elected, is no where to
be found in Holy Writ, either expressly, or by equi valence. There is I confess
this proposition in Scripture, He that believes shall be saved, but not he that
believes shall be predestined; because God never required Faith as
antecedaneous to his decree.

Secondly, If Faith be an effect and Consequent of Election, then is it not the
Cause of it, or antecedaneous motive; because it is altogether impossible, and
implies a manifest Contradiction, ut idem respectu ejusdem sit antecedens and
consequens, causa and effectus But Faith is an effect or Consequent of
Election, therefore it is not a Cause, or antecedent motive of it.

The minor I prove out of Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us before the
Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy, etc. And v. 5th shows that
God did predestinate those whom he would adopt for Sons, not such as were Sons.
But if he had chosen such as believed, then he would have chosen Holy Men and
Sons. But Sanctity, and our Sonship are not the Cause, nor Antecedent Motive of
Election. For, Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be Conformed to the Image of his Son: not as if they were then so.

Again if Election were of Works, then the Apostle might have had an Answer to
his Objection in a readiness, as to what he mentions in the 9th of the Romans
about the Children neither having done any good or evil, and in vain had the
instance there been brought of the Potters power over the Clay, of the same
lump, to make one Vessel unto Honor and another to dishonor. Whereas if
Election had been from foreseen Faith, he had spoke more aptly thus, Has not
the Potter the art to know the difference in several parts of Clay, and to
separate the good from the bad? But the Apostles similitude is exactly
pertinent, if we suppose Election to be absolute, and all Creatures to be in an
equal State.

The Bishop ends his determination with another Reason for his Conclusion,
Namely that Infants are Eleoted, but not from Faith and perseverance; for they
are not capable thereof.

Parts sub antiquo saedere per Christi Mortem salutem sunt Consecuti.
TO begin with the s^^tin^ of the Question.

1. By Fathers here we do not understand the Patriarchs and Prophets, but all
the Faithful under the Old Testament: All the Children of Abraham; I mean not
of the beg^tting, but believing Abraham. For to all, and only these were the
promises made, Gal. 3.16, 29. And all these are called the Fathers, Romans 15.8.
to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers. Acts. 26.6. There is mention of
the Gospel or promise made (...) i. e. to Abraham and his Seed.

2. The Question speaks of these Fathers under the Old Covenant; As to the
Nature of a Covenant, the word in the Hebrew is Benith, coming from a word that
signifies not as properly to create, but to order and institute. Its Nature is
Artificially explained by Schielder, and others; and especially Buxtorfe, in
that Learned Work of his of Thirty Years. And so what (...) is among the
Hellenists, and Faedus, or Pactum among the Latinists, Calvin the Lawyer, and
Schardius, and Nebrissensis, may be Consulted in their juridical Glossarys, on
the words Pactum, and Faedus: and Mynsinger, and Sckneidwin, on Instit. lib. 3.
Tit. 14. De Obligationibus, may be usefully applied to for the Nature of
Pactions: and especially Grotius (to name no more) on the 1 of Mat. p. 1, 2.

This then is the thing we say, that the Fathers or the Faithful, who lived
under the Economy of the Law, obtained the Salvation of their Souls by means
of our Saviors Death.

Now here we shall demonstrate it distinctly, in thesi and ex part Rei, that
the Fathers had Salvation by Christ's means, and likewise in Hypothesi and ex
part modi, how they had it.

Now when we say the Fathers had Salvation by means of Christ, it is confessed
by all that they went to Heaven after their Deaths: but whether by the Mercy of
God, or his absolute benignity their Sins were forgiven; or for the merits of
Christ, is not so clear to all: neither among all those Christians who have
given up their names to Christ is it looked on as a piece of Catholic truth,
for it appears out of the Racovian Catechism, that the Socinians deny it, and
the Socinians argue from Isaiah, 43.25. I even I am he that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for mine own sake, etc. that therefore they had forgiveness only
on the account of the Divine benignity without any respect to the Death of
Christ.

But to show that they obtained forgiveness by Christ's means, we may refer to
Acts, 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other: for there is none other
Name under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved. But they will tell
us, That was true from the time the Apostle said so: But I shall mind them of
the foregoing Verse, this is the Stone which was set at naught of you Builders,
which is become the Head of the Corner: and that the Church in Scripture is
compared to a Building, and of which Christ being the Corner Stone, both Jews
and Gentiles meet in him; and that according to Ephesians. 2.20, 21. they come under
the notion of Fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, and
are built on the Foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the Corner Stone, in whom all the Building fittly framed together,
grows unto an Holy Temple in the Lord.

But yet to make it more clear (if it be possible) If the Death of Christ did
give Redemption and Remission of Sins, in the Old Testament, then the People of
God had Salvation by this means. But they had the (...), and Redemption as
says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 9.15. And for this Cause he is
the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of Death for the Redemption
of the Transgressions that were under the First Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of Eternal Inheritance. Two things are very
clear from this place of Scripture.

First, That Christ did procure for the Fathers that lived under the Old
Testament Redemption from their Sins.

Secondly, That he did procure an Eternal Inheritance for them, which was the
thing to be proved.

Now as to the place out of Isaiah, of Gods blotting out Transgressions for his
own names sake, and therefore not for Christ's; I deny the Consequence. For
that does not exclude Christ's merits, but the persons whose Sins are there
forgiven. And thus God may be still said in the New Testament to pardon our
Sins for his names sake. And so it is said Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? God now (...), Omnia nobis gratificatur. i. e. gratis dat,
scilicet ex part nostri, non Christi qui pretio numerato captos nos e
captivitate liberaverat. For this you may see Lud. Lucium contra Michael.
Gittichium de Satisfact. Christi in solutione arg. 3. p. 27.

Having shown that the Fathers were saved by Christ, ex part Rei, we shall now
show it in Hypothesis, and by the special means, by which the Fathers did gain
Salvation by Christ. And here we say,

1. That they might gain Salvation by Christ.

First, By being purely passive in receiving it without exerting any Act of
Faith, as Infants are saved by Christ. But

Secondly, We say the Fathers under the Law, were active in obtaining Salvation
by Christ, and that they did believe on Christ, and did apply to themselves
what Christ should merit. The Socinians say they were justified by Faith, but
by Faith in God, and not in his Son.

But that the truth may more plainly appear, I shall lay down this Conclusion
and prove it; That the Saints under the Law did obtain Salvation by Faith in
Christ. Here we may Consider the Saints as such, who were notae eminentioris,
as Abraham, David and the Prophets, or notae inferioris, ut e plebe indocti and
literarum rudes: and we may likewise Consider Faith as twofold (I mean Faith in
Christ.)

First, Explicit, by which Christ is directly known in himself, and is expressly
believed.

Second* Implicit, by which Christ is not expressly known and believed, but only
implicitly, and by Consequence: Cum ex uno in thesi and direct cognito
creditoque, sequitur Christum in hyyothesi and implicit esse creditum: So he
who believes that God will by means disposed by his Providence procure his
Salvation (though he knows not what those means are) may be said implicitly to
believe on Christ, as the primary of those means.

Now here we say, that the Saints of more eminent note did explicitly believe
on Christ as their Redeemer. This is asserted both by Papists and Protestants:
As we may see out of Canus Relect. part 2. p. 753. Becanus Tractat. de Analog.
V. and N. Testamenti, cap. 2. Q. 7. Lombard. L. Sent. 3. Did. 25. Hooperus
Glocestrensis in Symbolum Art. 69. Rivet. in Isag. ad Sacram Script. cap. 27.
Cunaeus de Repub. Judaeor. lib. 3. c. 9.

I shall now show, that those Holy Men of Eminent note, under the Old
Testament, did know Christ, and believe on him, and were by Faith Justified and
Saved. This is manifest out of Scripture, either by express Words, or
Consequences clearly deduced from it. For this you may consult Acts 10.43. To
him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in
him, shall obtain Remission of Sins. Now it must necessarily follow, That the
Prophets did know him of whom they gave that Testimony. For this, you may see
what St. Paul says, Acts 26 22. Having therefore obtained help of God, I
continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other
things than those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. And if you
ask whence they knew this, the first of St. Peter 1.10, 11. abundantly shows;
Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently who
Prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you; searching what or what
manner of time the Spirit which was in them did signify, when it testified
beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow. For this
likewise you may consult St. Luke 24.25, 26, 27. Then he said to them, O Fools,
and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken, ought not
Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his Glory? And beginning
at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the
things concerning himself.

It being thus clear that they did know Christ, it remains to be proved, that
they did believe on him; and I shall urge this Argument for it, viz. Those who
by Christ did gain the Life that is opposed to Spiritual Death, they were
justified by Faith in Christ (for Faith in Christ is our Spiritual Life and
Righteousness) but the Fathers and Prophets, under the Old Testament, did
through Christ gain the Life, that is opposed to Spiritual Death, Ergo, etc.
For this see 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
made alive. And Romans 5. from the 12th Verse to the end of the Chapter, the
Apostle does by an accurate and long kind of Argumentation, show, that
Spiritual Death came from Adam to all his Posterity, and Spiritual Life by
Christ to all his Seed and Servants, v. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one,
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all Men unto Justification of Life. So that as
Death came from Adam to all who were obnoxious to Death under any Covenant
whatsoever, so Life came by Christ to all who were Born again under what
Covenant soever: The which appears from the 3d. Chapter of the Romans, v. 21,
22, 23. But now the Righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets: Even the Righteousness of God, which is
by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, for there is
no difference: For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God: Here he
applys the Righteousness of Christ to all that are Justified, whether they
lived under the Law, or under the Gospel. He speaks there expressly of Abraham,
and the Jews, as well as of the Holy Men then in being.

This might be more largely showed from innumerable places of Scripture.

But it remains now, that we should speak of those of inferior note, or the
plebs.

And here first the Mster of the Sentences, l. 3. did. 25. (as likewise all
his followers, of whom a Catalogue is to be found in Johannes Martinez de
Repalda ad dict. did. Qu. 4.) does thus conclude the thing; Simplices and
indocti e plebe homines sub antiquo foedere in Christum credebant fide solum
implicita. Nam quia ex se minus capaces erant, ideo majoribus credendo
inhaerebant, quibus fidem suam quasi committebant: But for this he brings a
ridiculous Argument out of the 1st of Job, The Oxen were ploughing, and the
Asses feeding besides them. By the Asses he tells us are meant the simplices
and indocti; and so with him the Clergymen are taken for Oxes, and the Layety
for Asses.

But Secondly we say, that the Common People of old, in the Days of the Old
Testament, did live Religiously, and did believe on Christ fide explicita: I
here call it fidem explicitam, but not distinctam. For they knew, that Christ,
or the Messiah would come to redeem the House of Israel some time or other; but
in what Age, or how, or by what means, they did not guess. And of many other
Circumstances that did concern Christ's Person and Office, they were ignorant.
All such things the Prophets themselves did not know distinctly, and much less
the Layety.

That the generality of the People had an expectation of Christ, we see out of
St. John the 4th, where the Woman of Samaria says, I know that the Messiah
will come, and when he is come, he will tell us all things. She was an ordinary
kind of Woman, a Samaritan, and an Adulteress, and yet she says, (...), and
knew the Messiah would come: And v. 29. she says, Come see a Man which told me
all things that ever I did. Is not this the Christ? Speaking of Christ, as a
thing known among them. And not only the Jews who lived in Christ's Age, did
entertain general Notions of a Christ, but they did so in antienter Ages,
whence Malachy the 3d and the 1st, about 100 Years before Christ was born,
mention is made of the Angel of the Covenant, which Angel the Jews did
Interpret to be Christ. So Rabbi David Kimchi, cited by Grotius on this place;
where Grotius does subjoyn this, That the Messiah would come, all the Jews
before Christ's time did firmly believe: The which Grotius does show out of the
2d of Haggai, and in his Annotations on St. Matthew more at large. And Holy Men
before Christ's time were Christians, though not called so. Consult Genebrard's
Chronologia Hebraeorum, Paris 1600. where p. 59. there is a Tract de Christo,
cui titulus; Scripturae in quibus Chaldaeus Paraphrastes interjecit Nomen
Messiae, etc. There is there in p. 75. Explicatio Symboli Judaici per
doctissimum R. Mosem Maimonidem, where in the 12th Article it is said, Jubemur
credere tempus dierum Messiae, illumque amare extollere juxta id quod nuntiatum
est per Prophetas omnes. Quicunque autem de eo dubitat insimulat universam
legem, quae Messiam sperare jubet.

See more concerning this in Eusebius. Demonsir. Evangelic. l. 1. c. 5.

Ecclesia Authoritatem habet in Controversiis fidei.
I shall here first explain the terms, and then deduce and prove some Theses.

First, for the word Ecclesia, it does signify, 1st. Congregationem, Concionem
seu Conventum, eumque duplicem, 1. Civilem, 2. Sacrum. In the former
signification we do not only find it used by Thucydides, Halicarnasceus, and
other such Writers, but even by Sacred Writers, and especially by Moses and the
Prophets, among whom therefore the Septuagint finding the Hebrew words Katial
and Heda to denote a Civil Convention, did interpret them by (...), and (...).
And moreover the word Ecclesia is used more than once in the New Testament for
such a Convention. So in the 19th of the Acts, when Demetrius the Silver-smith
had stirred up the People against St. Paul, that tumultuary Concourse of the
People is called (...), see verses the 32d. 39th. 40th. But of a Church as it
signifies such a Convention, we do not dispute.

But, Secondly, Ecclesia is taken more especially not for every Caetus, but for
a certain Company of certain Men called by God and his holy Spirit out of the
rest of the dreggs of Mankind; and this is the most usual interpretation of the
word in the New Testament. And though there has been a long Custom of calling
Christians by the name of Ecclesia, and Jews by that of Synagoga, yet the
Ancients did call them otherwise. For the 70 Interpreters do 70 times apply the
world (...) to the Jews, and Synagoga not so often.

But we enquire not here of the Jewish Church of Synagogue, but concerning the
Christian Church only: and that is twofold,

First, Invisible,

As both the Reformed and the Romanists use to speak.

Secondly, Visible.

First, the Church Invisible is a Company of Men called not only by the
external Preaching of the Gospel, but the internal working of the Spirit, and
this is called Christ's Mystical Body, Col. 1.24. And concerning the Church in
this sense we do not here speak, as if the Church invisible had any Authority
in Controversies of Faith.

For First, No Company of Men can be said to have any Authority which they
neither do nor can exercise. For in vain is Authority given to any multitudes
of Men, if it be impossible they should meet and ordain any thing
Authoritatively. But it is impossible that the invisible Church of Christ, that
is to say Christ's Mystical Body should meet: since ordinarily and without some
special divine Revelation it is impossible that any Man should know who are
truly Godly, and planted into Christ. Since therefore the Members of the
invisible Church do not mutually know each other, it is impossible that they
should deliberately meet and ordain any thing.

Secondly, It belongs to Authority to bind some men to be obedient. But the
invisible Church can oblige none to obedience, since it is impossible that any
man should justly be obliged to obey him, that he is in a constant incapacity
of knowing. We do not here therefore make any Question about the Church
invisible, and confine it only to the Church visible.

And all do agree that the Church visible, that is, the Congregation of
faithful Men who have given their Names to Christ, has Authority in
Controversies of Faith. All do admit the Authority of this Church in Thesi, but
many do doubt of it in Hypothesi, and do dispute 1. Concerning the Subject
thereof, 2. of the Modus and Measure.

First there is a Dispute about the Subject of this Authority, in whom it is to
be found, whether in a Pope, or general Council, or in both, or whether in a
Council of Bishops only; or whether inferior Clergymen are to be in the
number of the Council, and partake of its Authority: or whether this Authority
be only vested in Clergymen; and be not Communicated to Laymen; So that in
Synods Laymen may have Authority, as at Geneva: or whether this Authority be
not originally in the People; for so some have said that all Civil and
Ecclesiastical Authorriry is originally in them.

Secondly, it is disputed about the modus and measure of this Authority which is
attributed to the Church, whether it be the Authority of a Witness, or of a
Judge; directive only, or coactive? The more Modern sort of Papists, especially
the Jesuits do ascribe to the Pope supreme and infallible Authority in
determining matters of Faith; as out of Baronius, Suarez, Bellarmine, might be
clearly shown.

Now here we further say that the Visible Church does occur under a double
Notion.

First, as it is taken collectively for all Christians comprehended in the
visible Church, whether Pastors or Sheep, Clergy or Layety, and so we deny that
it has this Authority. Because what is in the hands of the Clergy, to whom
alone all Spiritual Authority is consigned by Christ, cannot be transferr d to
others.

Secondly, the Church is taken representatively for the sitting of Bishops in
Councils and Synods; which Nation of the Church is not to be found in Holy
Writ. For although the word (...) be found in the Old Testament as Translated
by the 70 Interpreters, and in the New Testament by a just account about 88
times, yet it never signifies the Church assembled in a representative Synod,
as is manifest. But this signification is introduced by Ecclesiastical use and
custom.

Yet here we say that this Church has the Authority not only of a Teacher, but
of a Judge.

First, This Church does Authoritatively Teach, Secondly Judge. Thirdly
Command. Fourthly Punish those who disobey. Yet I do not say that the Church
has any Coactive power properly so called, so as foro externo delinquentes ad
obedientiam Cogere, either by Imprisonment or pecuniary mulcts, the ordering
whereof belongs to the Civil Magistrate. But though the Church cannot compel Men
in foro externo, it may in foro interno. 1. ligando peccatorem. 2.
excommunicando. So that here the Church shall be a Judge as well as a Teacher.

In the next place we say that the Church is a Judge; and the judgment of
matters of Faith is twofold. First Private; Secondly Public.

As to the First, Every private Christian has the judgment of matters of
Faith. 1 These. 5.21. Private Christians are to prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good. And 1 Cor. 14.29. 1 John 4.1. may be consulted for this
purpose.

But Secondly, there is a public judgment, and this properly belongs to the
Church. The Reason is because Pastors of Churches judge not only for their
selves judicio privato, but judge for all by a public judgment. And therefore
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, c. 13. v. 1. obliges us to obey
those that are set over us, for they which for our Souls in the Lord.

But, further we say, that this public judgment of the Church is not what the
Papists assert with relation to General Councils.

For First, there was a time when there was no general Council, namely for the
first 300 years after Christ.

And Secondly, those Councils are not infallible; for if they were so, they
would be infallible either, 1st. Ratione partium; but all parts of Councils are
fallible; or Secondly, in respect of some Gospel-Promise made concerning the
un-erring of General Councils. But concerning any such promise in Scripture
there is (...), nec vola nec vestigium.

But, say they if the Church be not infallible, we need not obey it. I answer,
that does not follow. Parents are not infallibe in their Commands, yet Children
are to obey them. And under the Law the High Priest was to be obeyed, though but
fallible.

An fides sola justificat?
FAith is vocabulum (...).

First, It Is taken objectively, pro fide quae creditur; namely, for the
Doctrine of the Gospel revealed to us, to which we assent; Acts 6.7. Some are
said there (...), doctrinae evangelicae obedire. Thus we say, symbolum fidei,
by which we understand the Doctrinal Articles of Faith.

Secondly, Faith is taken subjectively pro fide qua creditur: namely, for that
Quality or Action inherent in us. And it is threefold; a Faith Historical, a
Faith of Miracles, and Saving Faith. A Faith Temporary is falsely put in, and
impertinently added in Catechisms. For it is not distinguished from the other
kinds of Faith. And an Historical, and Faith of Miracles, if they end, are
temporary. Wicked men may believe the History of the Scripture to be true, and
may be able to do Wonders, as many shall say at that day, Lord in thy name we
have cast out Devils.

Thirdly, as to Saving Faith, most of our Divines since Luther's Days have made
it to be certa fiducia, qua certo apud se statuit quis Christum pro se esse
mortuum, peccata sibi esse remissa, Deumque placatum. Thus the Palatine
Catechism, part 2. Question 21. Where true Faith is defined to be non solum
certa notitia qua verbo divino assentior, sed Certa siducia qua statuo non
solum aliis, sed mihi remissionem peccatorum, aeternam justitiam and vitam
donatam esse. Thus Vrsin in notis Catecheticis ibidem. Thus Hier. Zanch. tom.
1. Cap. 1. l. 13. Thus Calvin, Beza, and others generally, and the Church of
England in the Homily of Faith Part 1. page 22. And thus John Lord Bishop of
Worcester in his late Controversiarum fasciculus. De Redemptione. Question 6.
p. 269. But if this Certitude of a present Righteousness be essential to faith,
then faith cannot be without it.

And again this fiducia and Plerophory of assurance is an effect and Consequent
of Faith.

And moreover this Opinion is against manifest Reason; for a man must be first
justified, and his sins done away before he can certainly know it. For every
finite Act presupposes an Object to which it must tend. So it is necessary there
should be a visible color before Eye can see, and that there should be
objectum cognoscibile before the understanding can know any thing, and that
sins should be remitted before any man can know they are so.

And Justifying Faith must be precedent to this certa fiducia. Nor is this
fiducia intrinsical to Justifying Faith, nor a necessary adjunct of it. For
there is an (...), and it is by many reslex Acts of Faith that this siducia or
assurance is at last acquired.

We say then that illud in desinitione fidei male ponitur quod non omni
co^^e^i^: But this certa siducia does not omni fidei Competere. Matt. 14.31.
(...) cur^^dubitaveras?

Now Justifying Faith does therefore not consist in believing that Christ has
pardoned my Sins: For that which supposes a man just already, cannot make him
just. For every intellectual assent does necessarily presuppose that the
Proposition is true that is assented to; and so it is necessary that the Sins
of Sempronius should be forgiven, before Sempronius can believe any such thing.

But now to speak more distinctly, there are three things in fide Salvifica.

First, The Knowledge of the Gospel, that Christ was promised by the Father,
and sent to be vas, sponsor and (...) nostrum.

Secondly, The Assent to the Promises of this kind

Thirdly, That fiducia qua anima multis peccati debitis Deo obnoxia, Christum
tanquam Vadem suum and sponsorem patri loco nostro obligatum apprehendit; in
eoque (pro solutione debiti a se contracto) requiescit, recumbit and innititur.

The two former things, namely, notitia and assensus are as it were the
materiale respectu fidei justificantis: But the 3d. viz. that fiducia is quasi
formale fidei, and most proper to it. For tho Saving Faith has diverse
Actings, about diverse Objects, yet as it justifies it looks at Christ alone and
him crucified. As the Eye of a Jew under the Old Testament, who was stung by
Fiery Serpents, did look at many things beside the Braz^n Serpent, yet he grew
well only by looking on that Serpent: So the Eye of Saving Faith looks at many
things besides Christ (namely all Gospel Truths) but does heal us only as it
applies Christ as a Medicine to the sick Soul.

In the next place we say, though this faith be subjective only in the
Understanding, yet it is effective in the Will and Affections: and does in a
moral, yet efficacious way determine them to love God, and to obey him: whence
it is called Faith that works by love. And therefore this Faiih is no
speculative Virtue in the head only, but it is also practical in the heart: Non
tamen ratione inhaerentiae, sed influentiae.

Now this Faith is said alone to justify, not in respect of its being without
the company of good works, but only in regard of its efficiency. For though
good works be in the same subject with this Faith, yet they do not effectively
concur with Faith in the business of Justification, for Faith does that alone,
that only applying Christ.

Moreover, that does justify us not formaliter; for so the Righteousness of
Christ does justify us: For he is made unto us of God righteousness; 1 Cor.
1.30. but effective: Non tamen quod justitiam illam efficiat, vel effective
nobis imputet. For it is God who thus justifies, Romans 8.33. but only because
justitiam a Christo oblatam animae peccatrici applicat.

And this is that which the Divines of the Reformed Religion do so often
inculcate in their Writings, that this Faith does justify, not as it is
absolutely considered in it self, and ratione actus, sed objective and relative
in ordine ad objectum suum, Christum Scilicet, whom it accepts of: So the hand
of a man which receives a Plaster from the hand of a Chyrurgion, is said to
heal: Not that it does that formaliter and effectively, but because it applies
it to the Wound which it heals. So a Window enlightens the House, yet neither
effectively (if we speak properly) nor formally: but because it transmits
light, which does properly enlighten.

Some Popish Writers tell us, that the Apostle when he speaks against
Justification by Works, means Ceremonial Works. But that is impertinently urged
by them. For Works are in the same manner excluded in our justification, as
they were in the justification of Abraham the Father of the faithful: and all
his Sons are justified in his likeness. The Works of the Ceremonia and Judicial
Law were in his Justification excluded; for there was then neither of those
Laws. But the Apostle in Romans 3. does exclude the works of the Moral Law in the
Business of Justification: Yet in ver. 31. of that Chapter, it is said, Do we
then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid, Yea we establish the Law; But
now the Ceremonial Law is not established by Faith, for it is abrogated.

Moreover, others of those Writers tell us, That our first Justification is by
Faith; but our second Justification is by Works. But what they call by that
Second, is Sanctification, and not Justification.

And some of them say, we are justified by the Works of the Moral Law; but not
by those Works' which go before Faith, but those which follow it, and spring
out of it.

But we say, That Believers sin afterward, and so cannot be justified by any
Works afterward. Their Good Works after Faith are imperfect: And if we should
suppose they were not; yet those Good Works which follow Faith, cannot satisfy
God for any sins committed before it. And for one Sin committed before Faith,
God may justly condemn a Man, though he be holy afterward. For every man does
owe God full Obedience to the utmost of his power in every moment of his time.

See Pauli Testardi Synopsin naturae and gratiae, who acutely and well handles
the Doctrine of Justification by Faith. Thesi 194.

Imperium pot st^tis Supremae non sol^m civilia sed and sacra Complectitur.
POtestas here is not taken for power in the Abstract, but in the Concrete, for
the Person who has this power vested in him. Thus the word is used in Lucan,
Discubuere Reges, Majorque Potestas Caesar adest. So St. Austin uses it; De
verbis Domini, in Matthew. Sermon. 6. Si aliud Imperator, aliud Deus jubeat: Major
potestas est Deus. So S. Paul takes it in the 13th of the Romans, where the
Persons are clearly brought in claiming obedience as the higher powers.

Now as to these Persons having power in things Sacred, we are to consider
things as Sacred in a double manner.

1. Ex Natura sua: So God, and every Person in the Trinity is Holy: Not by the
force of any Law, or Institution, but of themselves and their own Nature: And
of such Sacred things we do not speak.

2. Some things are Sacred ex Instituto Divino. So under the Law, the Priests
Tabernacle and first Fruits were Holy, and things Consecrated to God.

3. Some things are Sacred, ex instituto humano, and these are things which are
not so in their own Nature, but are so by the intervening of Authority.

And such things according to the Civil and Canon Law, are,

1. Tempora Sacra, as dies fasti and solemn Seasons for some weighty Causes
Consecrated to God.

2. Holy places, as Temples.

3. Personae Sacrae, as Ministers of the Gospel.

4. Res Sacrae: As Holy Vessels, Vestments, the Revenues of the Church, and
things Dedicated to God. Things are said to be Sacred, if they are separated
from a Profane to a Sacred use. So R. David Kimchi on Isa. 56.2. Diem
Sanctificare est a profanis usibus separare. And the Holiness of any thing is
effectively, as from its productive Principle, by the Action of him who did
separate it from a profane use to the use of the Church, and by giving it
transferred his Propriety to God. But formally it consists in the Habitude and
Relation which it has to God its Possessor, and to Holy Uses, namely of the
Church; and to Holy ends, the Glory of God, and good of Men. So that these
things have no absolute or inherent Holiness in them, but only a relative one.

Now we say, that the Supreme Power does intra ambitum suum, take in these
things. This is proved by Grotius in a Book by him Writ for that purpose, which
may be consulted; as likewise Hooker in the 8th Book of his Ecclesiastical
Policy, and Paraeus on the 13th of the Romans.

And here we affirm first, that Sacra Tempora are subject to the higher Powers.
But Times are Holy in respect either of Divine, or Humane Institution.

1. Of Divine, as the Sabbath, and such Days were appointed by God under the
Old Testament. And the Magistrate had no power to alter such Times, nor suffer
any so to do. This is clear out of Eusebius on the Life of Constantine the
Great, the Theodosian Code, and the Novels. And so as to other Festivals. The
Maccabees made some solemn Festivals to be observed: At the Observation of
which Christ was present, St. John 10.22.

And as to things given to God, they cannot be alienated. The expression of
giving things to God is used 1 Chronicles. 29.

And in the Charters where the Religious use of things is specified, the Style
is, Concessimus Deo. Now the propriety by such Donations is in a special manner
transmitted to God. So Sacerdos is called in Scripture a Man of God. And the
Temple set apart for him, the House of God. And Christ calls it so, My House is
called the House of Prayer. And the Sabbath is called the Lord's Sabbath; the
first Day of the Week, the Lord's Day. The Propriety is according to all Laws
transferred to the Donatarius. See for this the 167th Rule of Law in the Digests
de Regulis Juris; non videntur data quae eo tempore quo dantur accipientis non
^iunt.

And here we say, that the Chief Magistrate has no power to alter things
wherein God is the Proprietary. Quod meum est sine facto meo ad alium
transferri non potest, says the Rule of Law.

But yet we say, that Imperium potestatis supremae sacras personas and actiones
sacras Complectitur. For

First, Sacred Persons may be considered as Members of the Commonwealth, and so
they are all subject to the higher Powers. And

Secondly, As Members of a Church, and so they are subject too to those Powers,
even in Ecclesiastical things: However the Papists deny this, to prop up the
Supreme power of their Popes.

But here we must consider, that in Ecclesiastical Persons there is a twofold
Power.

1. The Power of Order, which by their Function they have to Preach God's Word,
Administer the Sacraments, and confer Orders. And this Power is wholly
Spiritual, and derived to Holy Persons from Christ independently on any Secular
Power. This Power Christ gave to his Apostles, and they to others, whether
Secular Powers would or no: So that the Secular Magistrate cannot be said to
Confer this Power, nor to exercise the proper Acts of it. Nor can he Ordain a
Presbyter, or give the Sacrament.

But yet even as to this Power, Sacred Persons may be said thus, Magistratui
subjacere.

First, As he may compel them to do their Duties, and to execute their
Spiritual Functions if they are remiss.

Secondly, As he may make Laws to oblige them to do such and such particular
things as Christ has Commanded them.

Thirdly, As he may punish them for not doing so. Thus much of the potestas
ordinis in Ecclesiastical Persons.

But Secondly there may be considered in them the Power of Jurisdiction; and
that

1. In foro interno; and this Power they have from Christ, and not from
Magistrates.

2. In foro externo, and Coactive; and this Jurisdiction is wholly borrowed
from the Civil Power, and is directly subject to it.

Sacro fungi Ministerio nisi legitime vocatus nullus jure potest.
IN the explaining the terms of the Question in order to the stating of it, we
shall

First, Take notice that the mentioning of the word Ministerium makes it
obvious to us to distinguish it by Civil and Sacrum.

The Civil Ministry is generally taken for a public Office or Trust, committed
to any by a Prince or State: And so you may find it in the Imperial Laws, l. 1.
ff. ad L. Jul. Repetund. And this name of Ministers, was given to the most
Honorable Officers in the Roman Commonwealth.

But the Ministerium Sacrum is Munus alicui a Deo demandatum, quo ipsi
immediatius famulamur, and which does not look so much at the Political and
External good of a State, as Men's Ecclesiastical and inward concerns; and at
the Glory of God, and at the Eternal Salvation of the Souls of Men. But

Secondly, This Ministry is not said to be Sacred in respect of its Principium
a quo, namely God: Because although absolute loquendo, the Ecclesiastical
Ministry may be called Sacred, respectu principii a quo namely God, yet
Comparative loquendo, it is not more Sacred in order to God as the Principium a
quo, than the Civil Ministry; for both of them do meet in this that they are a
Deo. And so they are both Sacred on this account.

For Kings in respect of their Authority delivered from God are Sacred Persons,
and were so called in all Ages and by all People. So Sacra Majestas Caesarea,
Sacra Majestas Regia, are the most known Epitheti of Supreme Power.

But the Ecclesiastical Ministry is said to be Sacred in respect of its object,
and the matter in which it Converseth, of the Management of Holy things
Committed to a Man by God; whereas the Civil Ministry handles not things
Sacred, but Civil.

This Sacred Ministry we affirm to have been committed by God to some certain
Persons. And that

First, Immediately in the time of the Gospel, as when Christ chose the
Apostles and 70. Disciples, and employed them in the Ministry of the Gospel.

Secondly, Mediately. Thus the Apostles, and their Successors did commit this
Ministry to others by them chosen and ordained. For this see S. Matthew, 28.18,
19, 20. Jesus came and spoke to them saying, All power is given to me in Heaven
and Earth, go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; etc.

There he committs to them the Authority given him by his Father. And this is
more clear out of St. John, c. 20. 21. As my Father has sent me, so send I you.

Christ was sent by his Father, they by Christ, and others by them: you may
further consult Acts, 20.28, Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers: etc.

The Spirit of God did make them Bishops, but not immediately: for we know they
were Constituted mediately by Man.

The Question therefore is, whether any may perform the acts of this Ministry,
who are not Lawfully called to it? We deny it, and do distinguish of a double
calling.

First, Extraordinary, when God does call some Men immediately and having
endowed them with gifts, sends them into the Vineyard So we know the Prophets
and Apostles were called to the work of the Ministry, and we believe that
others by them were in ipsis nascentis Ecclesiae primordiis so called.

Secondly, I do not doubt but that God by his infinite power may sometime call
Men thus to it even at this Day. But that he has actually called any Men so
extraordinarily and immediately (the Church having been settled for so many
years) I deny. Nor shall I believe it, unless by manifest criterions they make
it appear to us to be so. But suppose it that Sempronius comes to me, and
Preaches to me many new unheard of things, and tells me that he was sent from
God to declare them to me, I say in this Case no Man is bound to believe
Sempronius, unless by some cogent demonstration, he proves himself to have been
thus sent by God. But

Secondly, This calling is ordinary: to wit, that which is not immediately from
God, but mediately by the intervention of men's will and authority derived from
God: and this calling is twofold.

First, Internal, which consists in this, that he who desires to be chosen, or
admitted into this Holy and Religious Negotiation, should seriously and
sincerely examine himself and his Talents, and look into the most inward
recesses of his mind, and at last determine himself to have this inward
aptitude, all things considered, for the work of the Ministry, so that he may
Spontaneously offer himself up to God: for no Man ought to be admitted into
Holy Orders against his will.

Secondly, This calling is external made by those who preside over the Church,
which consists in this.

First, That the Overseers of the Church should approve the Man's gifts and
qualifications for the work publicly.

Secondly, After they have according to the Apostolical Canons, and Rules
delivered in the Scripture, known and approved such a Man to be fit for the
Ministry; that they then impose hands on him in a Solemn manner; initiate him
in Holy Orders, and Communicate to him the Spiritual Authority first given them
by Christ. For we say that without such a calling as this, no Man can be a
Lawful Minister.

And as for the necessity of this calling, none of the Ancient Heretics of the
Primitive Church ever denied it: and the Anabaptists born in High Germany, were
the first who denied it; as is clear out of Sleidans Commentarys. And for this
you may see the Gangraena Theologiae Anabaptisticae per Johan. Cl^ppenburgium.

This opinion of theirs was afterward owned by Socinus, as appears out of his
Epistola tertia ad Math. Raderium, where he says p. 126. Jam vero verbi Dei
Administratio quae ad Ecclesiam Colligendam, Constituendamque requiritur, nulli
certae Familiae, nulli eligendi rationi, aut Successioni alligata e^t. And he
gives his judgment in the like manner concerning the Lords Supper, that it is
not necessary to be given by a Minister.

But many Arguments might be brought from the Scripture, to support the
contrary truth. I shall here refer to the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
c. 5. v. 4. And no Man takes this honor to him, but he that is called of God
as was Aaron. Now this is to be meant of every Priesthood, and not only of the
Levitical one. For Christ's Priesthood was no Levitical one, yet he was called
to it.

But they will say, no Man is now called as Aaron was, and therefore by that
Rule there should be now no Priest: For no Man is now called immediately by God
as Aaron was.

I Answer; those words, Sicut Aaron, do note the Principium vocationis respectu
Substantiae, namely, that every calling that was Lawful should be made by God
as the calling of Aaron was; not in respect of the manner of the calling in
every Circumstance. For

First, Christ himself was not so called.

Secondly, Not every Successor of Aaron was so called. For it is manifest that
his Successors had not an immediate call from God as he had. Thus therefore
the place may be understood; As the Successors of Aaron were called as truly
by God as Aaron was, so the Ministers of the Gospel at this day, are called by
God as truly as the Apostles were, though they are not called immediately by
God as were the Apostles.

Moreover Ministers are styled the Ambassadors of Christ, and therefore must
have a call to that Office. And it is impossible that all Men should be
Ambassadors. For to whom should they be sent?

An (...) sit licita?
A Thing is said to be Lawful two ways.

First, Ex imperio Legis and mandato: and so that may be said to be Lawful,
which is Commanded, as to Love God, and our Neighbor, etc.

Secondly, Ex permissa legis. So that is Lawful which is not prohibited. The
Stoics were of Opinion, that they were permitted by Law to kill themselves, as
appears out of the Writings of Seneca and Epictetus. They looked on Life as a
banquet, from which any Man might rise when he had his fill, and go his way.

Nor is killing one's self held absolutely Unlawful, by the Canon Law. For thus
we have it in Gratian Decr. part. 2. cau^. 23. Q. 5. Can. placuit. Placuit ut
qui sibi ipsis vo untarie quolibet modo mortem violentam inferrent, nulla
prorsus pro ipsis in oblatione Commemoratio fiat, neque cum Psalmis eorum
Cadavera ad sepulturam deducantur. For this was by way of punishment imposed on
them, Canone 34. Concilii Bacharensis from whence Gratian borrowed it. But
(...) was not in all Cases held unlawful by Gratian. For thus he tells us there
Canone, non est nostrum, and referring to Hierom on the 1. Chapter of Jonah Non
est nostrum mortem arripere, sed allatam ab aliis libenter far. Vnde in
Persecutionibus non licet propria perire manu (absque eo ubi Castitas
periclitatur) sed percutienti colla submittere.

By the Civil Law, (...) is forbidden. L. Siquis. ff. De poenis. miles. Miles
qui sibi manus intulit, nec factum peregit, nisi impatientia doloris aut morbi,
luctusve alicujus, vel alia causa fecerit, capite pumendus est: Alias cum
ignominia mittendus est. So that the endeavor to kill one's self is punishable
by the Civil Law.

But in the next place, I shall say, that the Question is not whether Killing
one's self be forbidden by the positive Laws of God and Man, but whether it be
intrinsically evil, as forbidden by the Law of Nature, as well as Scripture?

And first we say, it is forbidden by the Law of God, Genesis 9.5, 6. And surely
your blood of your Lives will I require, at the hand of every Beast will I
require it, and at the hand of Man, etc. whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man
shall his Blood be shed, etc.

So that Homicide is only lawful for those who are vested with Authority. And
all Men are either Subjects, or such who have Supreme Authority. But to neither
of these is power granted to Kill themselves.

First, Not to Subjects. For the power of Life and Death is vested alone in the
Chief Magistrate: and that Men should be subjects and entrusted with the jus
vitae and necis, are (...).

Secondly, Subjects cannot justly Kill another: Therefore a fortiori they
cannot Kill themselves. Thou may not Kill thy Brother, because Natural
Charity does oblige thee to Love him. But the same Charity does oblige thee
more strongly to Love thy self. For the Law of Nature and right Reason permit
thee to take away thy Brother's Life, while thou do necessarily defend thy
own. But

Thirdly, We say that the Supreme Magistrate has not power to kill himself. He
has the power of Life and Death over his Subjects, but not over himself. For
dominans and is in quem dominatur are relata, and dominium is the relation
between those terms. And it is naturally impossible that one and the same
person should supply the place of the relatum and Correlatum, and be dominans
and Dominatus, ille qui habet, and ille in quem habet Authoritatem, especially
since the party governing must needs be supposed to have an Authority over the
party governed. And so it is absurd that one and the same person should be
superior and inferior to himself, and yet be subject to himself. But

Fourthly, We say that no case can happen in which any Man can be supposed to
have Authority to kill himself.

For at the time that any one does violence to himself, either he is innocent,
or guilty of Death. If a Man be innocent, then no power, no not the Supreme,
can justly put him to Death. If he be guilty of Death, he may be killed, but
not by himself. For who Constituted him a Judge thus over himself? Let him show
his diploma for any such authority. Moreover Natural Reason does not allow that
any one Man should be Judge, Witness, and Executioner.

But further in the next place, that Self-killing is not lawful, may be thus
proved. Quod meum non est (eousque quo meum non est) usurpare, vel de co
di^ponere non possum sine consensu ejus cujus interest. But my Life is not ex
ass, and absolutely my own. For according to Tully, partem parents in me
vendicant. The Commonwealth, and whoever is Supreme in it have a concern in the
Lives and Fortunes of their Subjects; Interest Reipublicae ne quis re sua male
utatur; and especially his Life. Aristotle therefore in the 5th Book of his
Ethics, cap. 11. observes, that by Self-homicide, Men injure the
Commonwealth, and therefore no marvel that Punishments are appointed to deter
men from it.

We are in this Life as in an Army, and must not forsake the Camp without
allowance from our General.

You may consult on this Subject Bartholinus Salon, and Ludovicus Molina de
Justitia and jure; Tract. de homicidio: and Balthazar Gomesius
Juris-consultus-Toletanus.

Omne Mendacium est peccatum.
EVery one has heard of the common distinction of Lies, and the Socinians
affirm that mendacium Officiosum is lawful; as appears out of Volkelius De Vera
Religione, l. 4. c. 14. And Albericus Gentilis a Learned Civilian asserts and
endeavors to prove the same in his Book de Abusu mendacii: And so Grotius
holds in his Book de jure belli and pacis. And indeed some of the Fathers held
so, and so does Dr. Jeremy Tailor in his Grand Exemplar.

But the Schoolmen, and all Divines both Popish and Reformed, do condemn all
kind of lying as unlawful both by the light of Nature and Scripture, and as
appears out of Suarez De Legibus.

I shall here make use of the definition of a Lie that is most generally
received among Philosophers, Divines, and Lawyers, which is, Mendacium est
significatio falsi cum intention fallendi.

First, I say it is significatio, sive per vocem, sive per notas, or nutus;
still (as Grotius says) it is significatio falsi. A Lie may be not only in
dictis, but in factis: as if Titius be to go to Rome and asks Sempronius the
way thither, and Sempronius says nothing, but points him the wrong way with
his finger on purpose, he does digito mentiri. And so a Dumb Man may be a Liar,
if by any sign he does point out that which is false, knowing it to be so.

Secondly, Therefore mendacium is significatio falsi. Now a thing may be said
to be false two ways;

First, (...) and ex part rei. So Genesis 3. Satan told a Lie when he said, ye
shall not surely die: and in this sense it is not necessary that to make up a
Lie it should be always significatio falsi.

And Secondly, (...), as that which seems false to us though it may be true in it
self. The signification of falseness in this sense is always necessary to make
up a Lie. So that if Caius signifies the truth, and thinks it to be false, he
Lies: and signifying that which is false, believing it to be true, he does not
Lie. Thus necessary is it to make up a Lie, that he who Lies should know that
to be false which he asserts; and that either,

First, Cognitione actuali, when he at present knows that to be false which he
asserts to another; or,

Secondly, Cognitione potentiali, which knowledge though he has not at present,
yet he might have had it, and ought to have had it. Paria sunt scire and scire
debere. So some Heretics though at present they think their blasphemous Opinions
true, and so are not formally Liars in one sense yet they are Liars
interpretatively, because they might have known their Opinions to be false and
ought to have known them to be so. False Prophets therefore, and false Teachers
are justly in the Scripture called Liars: and of such the Apostle speaks, 2
These. 2.11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they
should believe a Lie.

But Thirdly, to a Lie there is not only required significatio falsi, but
intentio fallendi: for an intention of deceiving is intrinsically included in
the nature of a Lie. And this intention of deceiving or cheating is twofold.

First, If I intend to deceive or cheat at first when I make a Contract or
Bargain, then am I a Liar.

Secondly, If I did not intend it at first, and afterward intended it, it is
the same thing; as if I promising to pay a Man Money at the end of a Month,
intending at the time of the promise so to do, but afterward intend and do the
contrary, though it were in my power to do it, I make my self a Liar.

And from the intention of the Liar a Lie is called sometimes 1. Jocosum. 2.
Officiosum. 3. Perniciosum, that is hurtful to my Neighbor.

But I do in general conclude that every Lie is morally evil and sinful, Rev.
21.8. Whoremongers, Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with Fire and Brimstone. And the Devil is in Scripture called a
Liar.

But to prove a Lie to be sinful by nature, it is sufficient to urge that every
Act morally defective is sinful, but so is a Lie; it is defective in its end,
for the end of every Lie is to deceive; and to wish that any man may be
deceived, is to wish a thing against natural Charity; and the Rule of malum ex
quolibet defectu is obvious.

Now for the particular kinds of a Lie; all do agree that mendacium perniciosum
is sinful, and likewise that mendacium jocosum is sinful, though some deny the
mendacium officiosum to be so. Volkelius who allows of this, yet condemns that.
The Apostle condemns the (...), that is, without this jesting Lying, and
therefore the Lying mixed with it is the more condemned.

The great Controversy is about an officious Lie, and some will say that it is
sinful to fright Children with fancies, and to cheat melancholy People by
fantastic affirmations into the taking of Physic, etc. But in such Cases the
mendacium officiosum is allowable, but not in Serious Cases.

Vim Institutionum Divinarum non tollit malitia, neque non intentio Ministrorum.
THE Romanists never determined for the Validity of the Sacrament depending on
the intention of the Priest, till it was done by the Florentine Synod, Anno
1439. as is to be seen in Caranz. p. 867, 868, and afterward by the Council of
Trent, in the Year 1545. Council. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 4.

Now this Question contains in it a double Assertion.

First, That the Malitia Ministrorum, in respect of Sins of Commission does not
make the Sacrament invalid. And

Secondly, That the Omission of the Priests, or their not intending things
aright, does not render the Sacrament invalid.

Now as Institution may be taken for a Law, it may be two ways considered.

First, In ratione legis prout obligat. And the Law of God binding immutably,
no Impiety of Men can take away the Obligatory Power of it.

Secondly, In ratione regulae prout dirigit. And so the force of the
Institution being intrinsical in ratione regulae, no Impiety of Men can take
away the directive power of it. The wickedness of the Minister does hinder
himself from receiving benefit by the S^crament, but not the Persons to whom it
was given. And the Papists themselves say, that a Sin of Commission does not
invalidate the Sacrament, as appears out of a Synodical Decree, a Petro
Archiepiscopo Moguntino edito in Concilio Provinciali Ashaffemburg^nsi, apud
Petrum Crabb. To. 3. p. 825. Statuimus (says he) si quis doceat, teneatve quod
Sacerdos in peccato mortali existens, non possit Corpus Christi Conficere,
subditos ligare, and a peccato solvere, pro haeretico habeatur. Cum constat
Scripturae Sacrae Authoritate, quod sive bonus sive malus sit minister, per
utrumque Deus effectum gratiae suae confert. Non enim quae Sancta sunt
Coinquinari possunt, nec ipsa Sacramenta potest hominum malitia prophanare:
Vnde Sacerdos quantumcunque pollu^^ existat, divina non potest polluere
Sacramenta, quae purgatoria cunctorum pollutionum exiscunt.

The Sons of Eli the High Priest, are called Sons of Belial, and such as knew
not the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. yet it is not to be doubted, but that their
Administration of the Holy things was useful and profitable to God's People.

Yet this we must say, that though the sinfulness and profaneness of Ministers
cannot direct and per se make the Sacrament invalid, it may indirectly and per
accidens occasion the Sacraments not doing the People so much good, as might
otherwise have happened. And thus the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.17. are said to
have made some abhor the offerings of the Lord, and v. 24. to make the Lord's
People transgress.

I shall now proceed to show, that the Validity of the Sacrament depends not on
the intention of the Priest.

The Papists say, first in general, that the intention of the Priest is
required: And that

Secondly, By Intention they understand Voluntatem faciendi quod facit
ecclesia. Bellarmine takes a great deal of pains to clear this Tenet of the
Church of Rome from absurdity. But Omnia cum fecit Thaida Thais olet.

God, as the King of all, sends his Ministers of the Gospel as his Ambassadors.
Now what matter is it what the Ambassador intends if he delivers his King's
Message well? If a Man gives a Gift, and sends it by another, the intention of
the Giver is only considered, and not that of the Messenger.

But to urge the matter more closely, if the efficacy of the Sacrament depends
on the intention of the Priest, then according to the Papists, will it be in
his power to deprive the People of that, and even of Salvation it self.

And then again, none but the Priests themselves can tell whether Idolatry be
committed, or no. For Papists are bound to ^orship the Consecrated Bread, Cultu
lat^^^; and they all grant, that if after Consecration, the Bread should not be
Transubstan^^ated, they are gross Idolaters. Now who can tell what the Priest
intends in Consecration?

Moreover since Order is a Sacrament with the Romanists, that they cannot know
the intention of the Priest, it must necessarily follow, that instead of their
being able to know that their Pope is Infallible, they are not able to know
that he is a Pope at all. For he cannot be a Pope, unless he was made a Bishop:
But whether he was ever made a Bishop; or whether he, or any else in the
Church, was ever Baptized, and made a Christian, none but the searcher of
Hearts knows. And so it must necessarily follow, that all Papists while such,
must perpetuae incertitudinis vertigine acti in aeternum dubitare.

But so absurd is this Tenet of the intention of the Priest, as essential to
the validity of the Sacrament, and the ill Consequences of it so very many,
that we are told it out of the History of the Council of Trent, a Bishop in
that Council Disputing largely against it, the Historian says of him, Tantae
erant rations a se adductae, ut caeteros Theologos in stuporem dederant. Vide
fis Historiam Tridentinam, lib. 2. p. 276. Leidae ^editam, Anno 1622.

Of a Presbyterian Divine reporting publicly, That Bishop Sanderso^ died an
Approver of that Sect; and of a Paper attested by Bishop Barlow to the
contrary; and of the contrary likewise appearing out of Bishop Sanderson's last
Will and Test^ment.
OF the shameful Calumnies of Papists in reporting that some of the Fathers of
our Church died Papists, though they had been the greatest Zealots against
Popery; an Instance is given by one who was a Convert from the Church of Rome
to that of England, and Author of a Book, called, The Foot out of the Snare:
Printed at London Anno 1624. and where in page 18. he mentions how Dr. King
Bishop of London, in a Sermon on the 5th of November, had represented the
Jesuits, and Jesuited Papists as notorious Architects of Fraud and Cousenage,
and says, that the Bishop spoke those words prophetically, as by a kind of
fore-instinct, how he should in his memory, suffer by their Forgeries; the
which he did by their lying Book, called, The Bishop of London's Legacy, making
him die a Papist; and which Book, as he says, was writ by one Musket a Jesuit;
and ^^lates in p. 80. how a Priest of the Church of Rome told him, He was sorry
that ever their Superiors should suffer such a Book, for that it would do the
Romanists more hurt than any Book they ever wrote.

And he might well say so, it being most true what the Lord Bacon said, That
Frost and Fraud have always foul ends. And as Bishop King was thus in his
Memory basely attacked by a Papist, so our great Bishop Sander^on was by a
Presbyterian Divine, who shall not be named out of honor to a Noble Lord his
Patron.

And it is not to be doubted but that Dr. Sanderson, who had been ordained
Deacon and Priest, by that Bishop King (as Walton tells us in the Doctor's
Life) had been sufficiently informed of that Popish Calumny, designed to blast
Bishop King's Reputation; and therefore Bishop Sanderson did take care that
Posterity should be sufficiently apprised of the Faith he intended to live and
die in, by his giving the world a notification thereof in his last Will and
Testament; the which was by him perfected on the 6th day of January, 1662. some
few Weeks before his Death; for he died on the 26th day of that Month; and his
Will was proved in the Prer^gative Court at London, on the 28th of March 1663.
The Witnesses Names to the Will are Josiah ^u^len, Ja. Thornton, Edw Foxley.

Bishop Barlow, who since succeeded Bishop Sanderson in the Dioces of Lincoln,
did while he was Provost of Queens College in Oxford, sign an Attestation of
the factum of Bishop Sanderson's dying as he had lived, a true Son of the
Church of England; and of a Presbiterian Divine calumniating him for the
contrary: and delivered the following Paper to the late Minister of Buckden for
his information in the Matter of that Factum.

There was one of Bishop Sanderson's Sermons preached on this Text;

-- But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
men, Mat. 15.9.

This Posthumous Sermon was printed on this occasion; Mr. Roswel B. of D. and
Fellow of Christ Church College in Oxon, meeting with Dr. Tho. Sanderson the
Bishop's Son, he shows him a Copy of this Sermon fairly writ with the Bishop's
own hand; Mr. Roswell read, liked, and desired it might be printed; but the Dr.
denied, because the Bishop had commanded none of his Papers to be printed after
his Death. Mr. Reynel Fellow of C. Christi, being in Lancashire, found that a
Presbyterian Minister had possessed many of that Country with a belief that
Bishop Sanderson before his death repented of what he writ against the
Presbyterians, and on his death bed would suffer no Hierarchical Ministers to
come or pray with him, but desired and had only Presbyterians about him.

Mr. Reynel signifying this to Mr. Roswel, desires him to enquire the truth of
this, and signify it to him; whereupon he consults Mr. Pullen of Magdalen
Hall, who was my Lord's Household Chaplain with him in all his Sickness, and at
his Death; and he assured him that the said Bishop as he lived, so he died a
true Son of the Church of England; that no Presbyterian came near him in all
his Sickness; that besides his own Prayers private to himself, there were in
his Family no Prayers save those of the Church, nor any but his own Chaplain to
read them.

Besides Mr. Pullen gave him a part of the Bishop's last Will; wherein within
less than a Month before he died he gives an account of his thoughts, in
opposition to Papists and Puritans; and this Sermon being the last which the
Bishop writ with his own hand, at the importunity of Mr. Roswel Dr. Sanderson
permitted it to be printed, to vindicate his Father's Honor and Judgment, and
to confute that lying Report; and so that lie occasioned the publishing this
Truth. A^iquisque Malo fuit usus in illo. Ita est Tho. Barlow Collegii
Reginalis Praeses.

BUT partly because it may sufficiently confound the before mentioned Calumny
against Bishop Sanderson, and partly because his Religionary Professions in his
last Will and Testaments contains somewhat like Prophetical matter in his
mentioning his belief of the happy future state of our Church in a Conditional
manner, it is thought fit to print that part of his Will that concerns the
same, as the same was lately faithfully transcribed out of his Will now
remaining in the Registry of the Prerogative Court in London, viz.

AND here I do profess that as I have lived so I do desire, and (by the grace
of God) resolve to die in the Communion of the Catholic Church of Christ, and
a true Son of the Church of England; which as it stands by Law established,
to be both in Doctrine and Worship agreeable to the word of God, is in the most
Material points of both, conformable to the Faith and Practice of the Godly
Churches of Christ in the Primitive and purer times. I do firmly believe this,
led so to do, not so much from the force of Custom and Education, (to which the
greatest part of Mankind owe their particular different persuasions in point of
Religion) as upon the clear evidence of truth and Reason, after a serious and
impartial examination of the grounds as well of Popery as Puritanism, according
to that measure of understanding and those opportunities which God has
afforded me.

And herein I am abundantly satisfied that the Schism which the Papists on the
one hand, and the superstition which the Puritans on the other hand lay to our
charge, are very justly chargeable upon themselves respectively. Wherefore I
humbly beseech Almighty God the Father of Mercies to preserve this Church by
his Power and Providence, in Truth, Peace, and Godliness evermore unto the
Worlds end: Which doubtless he will do, if the wickedness and security of a
sinful People (and particularly those Sins that are so rife and seem daily to
increase among us, of Unthankfulness, Riot, and Sacrilege) do not tempt his
Patience to the contrary.

And I also humbly further beseech him that it would please him to give unto
our Gracious Sovereign, the Reverend Bishops, and the Parliament, timely to
consider the great dangers that visibly threaten this Church in point of
Religion, by the late great increase of Popery, and in point of Revenue by
Sacrilegious Enclosures; and to provide such wholesome and effectual Remedies as
may prevent the same before it be too late.

The Substance of a Letter written by the same late Pious and Learned Prelate
Bishop Barlow, to the Clergy of his Di^cess, upon occasion of an Order of the
Quarter Sessions for the County of Bedford, held at Ampthill in the said
County, in the 36th Year of the Reign of the late King Charles the Second,
Annoque Dom. 1684. For the prosecution of the Laws against Dissenters.
ALL the Compliance our moderate Spirited Prelate could be brought to in
reference to that sharp Order, was only in this Letter, to represent to his
Clergy;

That since it is an evident Truth that all Subjects both by the indispensable
Law of Nature and Scripture, are obliged to obey the power established over
them by God, and that most particularly in things more immediately relating to
the great and important Concerns of God's Glory, and the Salvation of their own
Souls; and that by the Prudent and Pious Care of our Government, a Godly Form
and Liturgy of God's Public Worship had been provided and established both by
our Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, which accordingly require all people to
resort to their respective Parish Churches, and to communicate there with the
Congregation in Prayers, Receiving the Sacrament, and hearing the word. And
since the said Liturgy had not only been for many years received by our Church
with little or no opposition, till the late unfortunate times of Rebellion and
Confusion, but had been likewise approved and commended by the most Learned and
Pious Divines in Foreign Protestant Churches, and so religiously prized and
esteemed by the Renowned Protestant Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, that one of
their greatest Complaints was that they were deprived of the Benefit of that
Liturgy-Book; and that since the rejection of it, and the disobeying the Laws
that enjoin it, makes our Dissenters evidently Schismatical, in their
separation from our Church Communion, as shall (says he, if God please) be in
convenient time made further to appear; and that for those Reasons it was not
only convenient but necessary that our good Laws should be executed both for
the preservation of the public Peace and Unity, and the Benefit even of the
Dissenters themselves, for that afflictio dat intellectum; and it was probable
their Sufferings by the execution of our just Laws, and the bl^ssing of God
upon them, might bring them to a sense of their duty, and a desire to perform
it: Therefore for the attaining of those good ends, he requires all his said
Clergy of his Diocese within the abovesaid County, to publish the above
mentioned Order the next Sunday after it should be tendered them, and diligently
to advance the design of it, according to the several particular Directions in
the said Order prescribed; and both by Preaching and Catechizing (to take away
all excuses for their ignorance) to instruct their People in their Duty to God
and their King; with his Prayer for a Blessing upon their Endeavors, in which
he concludes this Letter, signing himself

Their Affectionate Friend, Brother, and Diocesan, Thomas Lincoln.

FINIS.
Books newly published, printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
THe History of the Famous Edist of Nantes, containing an account of all the
Persecutions which in France have befallen those Protestants, who for these
last four score and ten Years have lived in that Kingdom under the Reign of Hen
III. Hen. IV. Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. faithfully extracted from all the
public and secret Memoirs that could possibly be procured, by that Learned and
Eminent Divine Mounsieur Bennoit. To complete this Elaborate Work, (which has
already born a second Impression in Holland) the Reverend Author had not only
great assistance from remote parts, but had also the help of many curious
persons in his Neighborhood, public and private Liberaries, the Cabinets and
Studies of the more exacter sort, where Fugitive Pieces secure themselves. The
several Manuscripts of the Learned and Ingenious Mouns^eur Tester Eau which he
left at his death, with many other helps, which will best appear in the work it
self. This Book was printed first in French by the Authority of the States of
Holland and West-Friesland, and is now translated into English, with Her
Majestys Royal Privilege. Bishop Barlow's Remains. Liturgia Tigurina: Or the
Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacrament, and other
Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies usually practiced, and solemnly performed
in the Churches and Chapels of the City and Canton of Zurick in Switzerland,
and in some other adjacent Countries, as by their Canons and Ecclesiastical
Laws they are appointed, and as by the Supreme Power of the Right Honorable
the Senate of Zurick, they are authorized, with the Orders of that Church;
Published with the approbation of several Bishops. Memoirs of the Right
Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Late Lord Privy Seal; intermixed with
Moral, Political, and Historical Obsevations; to which is prefixed a Letter
written by his Lordship, during his retirement from Court in the Year 1683.
published by Sir Peter Pett Knight Advocate-General for the Kingdom of Ireland.
Casuistical Morning Exercises, the Fourth Volume, by several Ministers, in and
about London. The Life of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand, by Dr. Samuel
Annesley. Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery in several Sermons, as
they were lately preached in a Congregation in London by Timothy Rogers M. A.
after his Recovery of a Sickness of near two years continuance. The Life and
Death of the Reverend Mr. Eliot, the first Preacher of the Gospel to the
Indians in America. The Tragedies of Sin, by Stephen Jay, late Rector of
Chinner in Oxfordshire. A Treatise of Fornication: To which is added a
Penitentiary Sermon upon John 8.11. By William Barlow, Rector of Chalgrave.
Infant Baptism, stated in an Essay to evidence its Lawfulness from the
Testimony of Holy Scripture; by J. Rothwel, M. A. a Presbyter of the Church of
England. The Mourners Companion; or Funeral Discourses on several Texts, by
John Shower. Mensalia Sacra; Or Meditations on the Lord's Supper: Wherein the
nature of the Holy Sacrament is explained, and the most weighty Cases of
Conscience about it are resolved by the Reverend Mr. Francis Crow: To which is
prefixed a Brief Account of the Author's Life and Death by Mr. Henry Cuts.
Books now in the Press, and going to it; Printed for John Dunton at the Raven
in the Poultry.
THe 2d. 3d. and 4th. Volumns of the History of the Famous Edict of Nantes,
containing an account of all the Persecutions that have been in France during
the Reigns of Lewis XIII. and Lew. XIV. faithfully extracted from all the
Public and Secret Memoirs that could possibly be produced by that Learned and
Eminent Divine Monsieur Bennoit; Printed first in French by the Authority of
the States of Holland and West-Friezland, and now to be translated into
English, with Her Majesty's Royal Privilege. The Lord Faulkland's Works,
Secretary of State to King Charles the I. collected all together into one
Volume; To which will be prefixed Memoirs of his Lordship's Life and Death;
never printed before. Written by a Person of Honor. A Methodical and
Comparative Description of all the Religions in the World, with their
Subd^visions; in two Parts: The one in Parallel Columns, containing their
Theory; and the other relating their Practices, as distinguished unto the
several Religions of Jew, Christian, Mohammedan and Heathen, By a Dignitary of
the Church of England. Mr. William Leybourn's New Mathematical Tractates in
Fol. Entitled, Pleasure with Profit, (lately proposed by way of Subscription)
having met with good Encouragement, are now put to several Presses, and will be
ready to be delivered to Subscribers the next Term: In this Work will be
inserted, (above what was at first proposed) a New Systerm of Algebra,
according to the last Improvements and Discoveries that have been made in that
Art; As also several great Curiosities in Cryptography, Horometria, etc. which
Additions will inhance each Book to 16. s. in Quires to those that do not
subscribe, and those that do, are desired to send in their first Payment ( viz.
6. s. before the 26th. instant;) after which no Subscriptions will be taken in.

