A TREATISE OF Fornication: Showing
What the Sin is. How to flee it. Motives and Directions to shun it.


Upon 1 COR. VI. XVIII.

Also, A Penitentiary SERMON Upon JOHN viii. 11.

By W. B. M. A.

Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

Heb. 13.4. LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey. 1690.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Sermons being Occasional, and evident by Matter of Fact that some were
guilty in the Matter whereof this Book treats, I thought good to Discourse of
this Sin of Fornication, opening the Nature of the Sin, and displaying the
greatness of its Guilt, to the intent that those who are guilty of it may be
brought to Repent, and those that are not guilty may take Warning and avoid it:
In doing which I had no other Design but that of the greatest Charity to their
Souls, and the Discharge of my own Duty and Conscience, as not willing to have
the Blood of any upon my Head, nor their Souls required at my Hand; for I dread
that Threatening of God, Ezekiel. 33.8. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked Man,
thou shall surely dye; if thou do not speak to warn the wicked Man from his
way, that wicked Man shall dye in his iniquity, but his Blood will I require at
thine Hands. And this Sin being so common and general throughout this Kingdom,
I thought these Discourses might be necessary to be published for the benefit
of the poorer sort and vulgar Capacities, especially because I knew of none
that had published any thing of this Nature, since his Sacred Majesty's Letter
to the Bishop of London; where this Sin of Fornication amongst other particular
Vices are ordered to be Preached against by the Clergy. And I heartily pray to
God this Discourse may be effectual for the turning of many Souls unto Holiness
of Life that have been guilty of this Sin of Fornication; and that they may
keep themselves clean and undefiled Members of Christ's Body, is the hearty
Prayer of

Thy Servant in Christ.

THE CONTENTS.
SPiritual Fornication, its unlawfulness and sinfulness discoursed, from p. 2.
to 10. Corporal Fornication what, p. 10, 11. We are to avoid it in Action and
Affection, p. 12, 13. Motives for the flying this sin, are, 1. The sinfulness
of it, as being charged with many aggravations, p. 14. (1) It is a sin against
the Dictates of right Reason, Humane Charity, Christian Purity, p. 15. (2)
Against a man's own Body as another, p. 18 (3) Against all the Persons of the
Sacred Trinity, p. 17 (4) And is punished with the Judgment of God,
Excommunication out of the Church Militant and Triumphant, and Condemnation to
Hell Torments, p. 19, 20.
2. The shamefulness of this sin in every Circumstance of it, p. 20, 21, 22 3.
The Slavery of it, p. 23, 24 4. The Chargeableness of it in many respects, p.
25, 26 5. The Vnprofitableness of it, p. 26, 27 6. It is Mischievous unto the
Fornicator, and others also, ibid.
First, Unto the Fornicator himself: It cuts him off from the favor of God, p.
27. Outs him of the Protection of Angels, p. 28. Dispossesses him of the Spirit
and Grace of God, p. 29, 30. Wounds his Conscience, p. 31. Distracts him in
Religious Duties, bereaving him of Judgment and Spirit, and Freedom, p. 32, 33.
Deprives him of his Peace and Quiet, p. 35. Blasts his Credit, Ruins his
Estate, Destroys his Body, p. 36, 37, 38. Turns him out of the Church Militant
and Triumphant, and damns to Hell, p. 39, 40, 41. Secondly, It is mischievous
to the Woman with whom the sin is committed, involving her into the same Guilt,
Shame, and Punishment, p. 42, 43 Thirdly, To the Child unlawfully begot being
murdered or starved, and incapable of Inheritance, p. 44.45 Fourthly, Unto
Christian Religion, the Church of Christ Universal throughout the World, and
this particular Church, and Kingdom, p. 46, 47, 48, 49 Directions for the
flying this sin. p. 50 First, Is to marry. p. 53. Secondly, Quench the first
Motions of Lust, p. 54. Thirdly, Avoid temptation, p. 55. Fourthly, All
occasions to this sin, p. 57. Fifthly, All Vices that incite to Lust, as Pride,
Anger, etc. from p. 59, to 65. Sixthly, Exercise Mortifications of the Body, as
Fastings, etc. p. 65. Seventhly, Meditate on such things as may withhold you
from the Commission of this Sin, as the Falls of some, and Constancy of others,
p. 67. Consider what the thing is you lust after, p. 68. Think that the Eye of
God, the Presence of Satan, the Angels of God see you, p. 70, 71, 72, 73. and
your own Conscience will condemn you. ibid. Meditate on what is behind, Death,
Judgment, Heaven and Hell, p. 74, 75, 76. Meditate on the Purity, Passion, and
Love of Christ, p. 77, 78. Lastly, Prayer, p. 79
A TREATISE OF FORNICATION, UPON
1 Cor. VI. xviii. Flee Fornication.


THESE Words are the Apostle Saint Paul's Exhortation to the Christians of
Corinth, to avoid unlawful carnal Copulation, and have in them two things, I. A
Sin to be avoided, and that is, (...), Fornication. II. A Precept for the
avoiding of that Sin, (...), flee it.


From whence we observe this point of Doctrine, That it is the Duty of all Men,
but especially of all Christians, to flee Fornication.

Upon which I purpose, with Gods Assistance, to do these things: 1. To show
what the Sin is, which we are to fly. 2. How it is that we are to fly that Sin.
3. To present you with some Considerations by way of Motive to press on the
flying of this Sin. 4. To prescribe you some Directions for the flying of it.


1. I begin with the first, What the Sin is, which the Apostle here exhorts to
fly, and that is Fornication. And here before we define the Thing to be
avoided, it may not be amiss to distinguish of the Name of the Sin which we are
to avoid.

There is a twofold Fornication, a Spiritual, and a Corporal Fornication.

The first, Spiritual Fornication, St. Bernard defines thus, Spiritue,
fornicatio est, desecto Deo, adhaerere Diabolo, Spiritual Fornication, is a
forsaking of God, and an adhering to the Devil. As they do that worship not the
true God, but Stocks and Stones, Images of Wood and Stone, yea, or of Gold and
Silver, or whatever other Materials: and in short, it is the same with that,
and all one with the Sin of Idolatry.

Hence it is said of Jerusalem (that is, the People and Inhabitants of it) in
Jerem. 3.9. that through the lightness of her whoredom she defiled the land,
and committed adultery with stocks and stones; that is, had worshipped Images
and Idols: in which sense also we are to understand her playing of the harlot,
spoken of, v. 6, 8. So in Ezekiel. 16. Thou have also taken the fair Jewels of my
gold, and of my silver, which I had given thee, and made to thy self images
of men, and did commit whoredom with them; that is, thou did fall down and
worship them, commit Idolatry with them: which doing is again called opening of
the feet, and committing fornication, and playing the whore and harlot, v. 25,
26, 27, 28. etc. And so when heathen Rome is called the great whore, Rev. 17.1.
with whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, v. 2. the meaning
is, That it was a very idolatrous City, a City very much given to the Worship
of Heathenish Gods, Images and Idols; and that from thence many other Kingdoms
had been confirmed in their idolatrous courses, if they had not also had
something of their Idolatry, false and superstitious Worship propagated to them
from thence. In this Notion I do not conceave this Word to be taken in the
Text. Yet forasmuch as it is the Duty of Christians, and of all Men, to flee
this Fornication also as well as the other, namely, that of the Body; and being
it lies so pat in my way, I will speak somewhat, though very little of what
might be, of this Fornication also.

Now touching this, the Unlawfulness of it, and so ours, and all Men's necessity
of avoiding it, may appear from the Scripture directly forbidding it, and
commanding our abstaining from it, or our avoiding of it. Such is that in
Levit. 26.1. Ye shall make you no idols, nor graven image, neither rear you up
a standing image, neither shall you set up any image of stone in your land, to
bow down unto it. Such again is that in Exodus 20.45. Thou shall not make unto
thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. Thou
shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. So that Gods People were
to make no Idols, nor Images for themselves to worship and serve.

But what if they found such things ready made to their hands, by others in the
Country whither they were to come, might they not then worship and serve them?

No such matter: There is a direct Prohibition of this too, in Exodus 23.24.
Thou shall not how down to their Gods, (i.e. the Gods of the Amorites,
Hittites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hivites, and Jebusites, whose Land they were
to come into, and take to themselves in Possession; to them they were not to
bow down) nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shall utterly
overthrow them, and quite break down their images. Thus is spiritual
Fornication the Sin of Adultery, or the worshipping of Idols, that is, Images
of true of supposed Men or Gods, forbidden in the Old Testament.

And accordingly in the New Testament we meet with Prohibition of it, and
Dehortation from it. So the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.6, 7. having spoken of
the Israelites of old, and touched of their evil doings, and sufferings too for
their doing so ill, in order, by the example of their Sufferings, to deter us
from their doings; these things (says he) were our examples, to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted, v. 6. he comes in, v.
7. to dehort particularly from Idolatry, and not to be followers of them in
that Sin, lest we should follow them in their Sufferings for it; Neither be ye
idolaters, as were some of them. And again in v. 14. Wherefore my dearly
beloved, flee from idolatry. And so St. John contual Fornication, Little
Children, says he, keep your selves from idols. Amen.

And in the steps of these Apostles of Christ did the Primitive Saints and
Fathers of the Church walk. Hence St. Cyprian, Quid te ad falsos Deos humilias
and inclinas? Quid ante inepta simulachra and figmenta terrena captivum corpus
incurvas? Why do thou humble, and bow down thy self unto false Gods? Why do
thou bend thy captive body before foolish Images, and earthly figments?
Relinque idola, quae humanus error invenit: Ad Deum converte, quem si
imploraveris, subvenit; Leave the Idols which human error has invented, and
turn thy self to God, who will assist thee, if thou implore his aid for help.
And so St. Austin, Nulla imago Dei coli debet, nisi illa quae hoc est and ipse;
No Image, no not of God himself, to be worshipped, but that which is the same
with himself, that is Jesus Christ the Son of God, who is not only (...), the
brightness of his glory, but (...), the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3.

Thus both Scriptures and Fathers are against committing this Spiritual
Fornication, which stands in the worshipping of Idols and Images. They that are
guilty of this kind of Idolatry, do with God, as Whores do with their Husbands,
forsake him, and follow, and serve other loves: they give the Glory of the
Creator to the Creature, and worship and serve the Creature more than the
Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. This is a just cause and sufficient
reason for us to stand off from Communion with any Church (be it Roman, or
other) where this spiritual Fornication, the worshipping of Idols and Images is
made to be a part of the Religion of that Church. And we may well look upon any
solicitations with such a Church, as on so many Allurements and Enticements to
the committing of spiritual Fornication and Adultery.

We have great cause to bless God for his Mercy to us, in delivering us from an
idolatrous Community, and continuing in the Communion of a Society of pure
Worshippers of God. As the Case stands with us in respect of the Object of our
Worship, we have nothing proposed to be adored by us, but what every body
acknowledges to be worthy of all Adoration, that is, the One only true God,
and the ever blessed Son of God, who is one with the Father, the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. No Idols, no Images, no Pictures, are prescribed, or
proposed unto us, to worship, or bow down unto. Nothing of that spiritual
Idolatry are we enjoined as part of our Worship, or so much as invited unto in
our worshipping. All that is said to us, is that which was said unto us by the
Angel unto St. John, Rev. 22. Worship God. So that in this respect the Members
of our Church can worship God with a clear Conscience, without any regret of
Mind, or rising of Heart at what we worship, as there must needs be in those
who are compelled to worship that which they cannot but know is no God; yea, is
that which they may revile and spit upon, offer any Affronts and Indignation
unto, without any prejudice at all unto themselves. God give us Eyes to see the
greatness of his Mercy, and Hearts to value it according to the greatness of it.

I shall give some Considerations to persuade all to flee this Idolatry, and to
abstain from this kind of spiritual Fornication.

First, It is a Great Vanity: for it is a doing of service to that from which
can come no good; neither protection from evil, nor acquisition of good. For
what is the Idol or Image that is worshipped? A very nothing as to any thing of
Deity supposed to be in it. We know (says St. Paul) that an Idol is nothing in
the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. Now of nothing, what but nothing is it that can come?
Hence that Sarcasm used by the Lord to the Idols of Israel, Isa. 41.23, 24.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods:
yea, do good or evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. Behold,
ye are of nothing, and your works of naught. Lactantius gives three Accounts of
the vanity of Idolatry.

1. The Idols that are worshipped are the Images of dead men. Est autem
perversum (says he) and incongruum, ut simulachrum hominis a simulachro Dei
colatur: But it is a perverse and unseemly thing, that the Image of the living
God, should worship the Image of a dead man.

2. Those sacred Images (imagines sacrae quibus vanissimi homines serviunt,
omni sensu carent, quoniam terra sunt) which those vain men that worship Idols,
do their service to, are senseless things, as being nothing in the world but
Earth. Quis autem non intelligat nefas esse rectum animal cervari ut adoret
terram? And who can but think it a ridiculous at least, if not a very wicked
thing, for a man that was made upright, to bow himself to worship earth? which
was therefore put under our Feet, ut calcanda a nobis, non adoranda sit; to the
intent we should tread on it, and not be Worshippers of it.

3. Those Spirits, the Devils, which are worshipped and served in the
worshipping and serving of Idols, are base abject things, thrown down by God
from Heaven to Earth, and below that, even to Hell, and are both unable to do
any thing of good for those that serve them, because the power of disposing of
all things in the World that are good, is Gods: So that as St. James says,
Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
lights, (Jam. 1.17.) and are willing to do them all the hurt they can, and to
that end, mortiferis eos illecebris and erroribus perdent, they work their
undoing by drawing them into, and entangling them in deadly Errors, whereby
they are led away from the seeking after the true God. Besides, to those that
serve the true God in holiness and righteousness, those Spirits are so bruised
under their Feet, that they are subject to them, and not able to abide in any
place or person, whence they will expel them, as was evidenced by infinite of
Instances in the primitive times, and even in times of late date. So that it is
a great incongruity, yea, a very vanity for a man to make himself a Vassal to
that which God has put in subjection unto himself; and that so for to worship
an Image consecrated it, which yet had been no Image, had not himself made it
one; and which when made, he may unmake again at his pleasure, and in the mean
time use or abuse as he pleases, without any Prejudice to himself by any
Indignity put upon it. So that from hence Idolworship appears to be a very
great Vanity. But that is not all. For,

Secondly, It is a great Impiety, a crimson Sin, a Sin of a deep guilt, of a
heinous nature, (...), a Sin exceeding sinful. And that may dissuade from the
commission of it. He that considers it will be apt to say, when tempted to this
spiritual Fornication, what Joseph said when tempted by his Mistress to carnal
Fornication, How can I do this great evil, and so sin against God? The
greatness of which Sin will appear in these following accounts.

1. It is a Work of the Flesh, and ranked among the foulest of Sins, such as
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Witchcraft, Gal. 5.19. if
like its Companions, is bad enough.

2. It is made the measure whereby to judge of the sinfulness of Rebellion, and
stubbornness against God; and so must be a Sin as great as that is. And who but
thinks that a Sin exceeding sinful? For Rebellion (says Samuel unto Saul, 1 Samuel 15.23. is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and
idolatry. A clear evidence of its being a great Sin.

3. It is accounted Whoring, and that after Devils ( Levit. 17.7.) and called
by the name of Whoredom, and Fornication, and playing the harlot, as is showed
above, it is no less Sin than carnal Whoredom and Fornication.

4. It is a Sin wherein is great unfaithfulness, and that with God. Hence it is
said of Israel in Ps. 78.57, 58. That they dealt unfaithfully like their
Fathers, that is, with God: For they provoked him to anger with their high
places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.

5. It is a hating of God. Hence in the second Commandment, those that break
that Commandment which is the direct Prohibition of Idol-worship, are said to
hate God. For God visits the iniquities of the Father unto the third generation
of them that hate me, that is, that repel and refuse him, and worship Idols
instead of him. To be an Idolater is an horrible Sin, it is to hate God, that
is, a Hater of him that is all Goodness it self.

6. It is a robbing of God. For it is a giving of Gods Honor unto that which
is not God; he gives Gods honor away to an empty, earthly, dunghill Deity, to
a thing that is nothing. By all which, this Sin of Idolatry or spiritual
Fornication appears to be a great Sin.

Thirdly, It is a great Abomination unto God, an abominable thing that he
hates, Jer. 44.4. Hence in St. Peter (1 Pet. 4.3.) we read of abominable
Idolaters. And in 2 Chronicles. 15.8 of abominable Idols. The Image it self is
called Abomination unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 27.15. And so is he that chooses it for
the Object of his Worship, Is. 41.24. And very abominably is King Ahab said to
have done in following idols, 1 King. 21.26.

Lastly, It is a thing abhorred by the Saints of God. Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego would rather be cast into a burning fiery Furnace, than at the command
of a King do worship to a golden Image, Dan. 3.17, 18. Yea, in Ps. 97.7. there
is a severe Imprecation made by the Psalmist against the Servers of such
senseless Deities, Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of Idols. Thus it was with the Saints under the Old Testament: And
to tell how it was with the Saints under the New, were an endless Task. What
was that that made all those primitive Saints, whom we call Martyrs, embrace
Prisons, Banishments, Famine, Whips, Scourges, Rackings, Burnings, and all the
other Tortures and Punishments so much talked of in Ecclesiastical History, but
an abhorrency of Idolatry? Would they but have been Idol and Image-worshippers,
they might have escaped those Cruelties, and have lived in Wealth and Honor.
And should we who believed what they believed, ever do that which they so
abhorred, as that they would die any the cruellest Death in the World over and
over rather than once do. O far be it from us ever to do any such thing.

I may add here the Punishments that spiritual Fornicators are liable unto; for
it excludes them from Communion with the Church Militant and Triumphant, and
exposes them to temporal Destruction, and eternal Condemnation.

1. It shuts out from Communion with the Church Militant here on Earth. If a
Christian became guilty of it, if he were an Idolater in the Apostles days,
Christians were to have no Communion with him, not to keep company with him,
not so much as to eat with him, but to avoid all Commerce and Converse, not
only sacred but civil, with him, 1 Cor. 5.11. Neither were Christians to join
with Idolaters in their Worship, but to come out from among them, and to be
separate: the Temple of God having no agreement with the Temple of Idols, 2
Cor. 16.17. Nor were Idolaters to join with Christians in their Worship (whilst
they continued Idolaters) but were to be without, not suffered to be in the
holy City, the new Jerusalem, the Church to Christ on Earth, as Members of it,
or Communicants in it. So the state of that City or Church is described, Rev.
22.15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and idolaters,
and whoever loves and makes a lie. This spiritual Fornication keeps from
coming into the Church, and turns out of it also such as are in, are guilty of
it; and therefore there is great reason for our avoiding it. But further, it
excludes from Communion with the Church Triumphant in Heaven. Idolaters are of
those sorts of Sinners that shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Gal. 5.20. Ephesians. 5.5. No Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God for
spiritual Fornicators, for Worshippers of Images and Idols. And who would make
himself a Slave to a piece of painted or graven Earth, to lose thereby a solid
Inheritance in Heaven?

2. It exposes to temporal Destruction, and eternal Condemnation. First, to
temporal Destruction in this present World. Thus Ahaz and all Israel was ruined
by this sin, 2 Chronicles. 28.2. They, the false Gods, the Idols of Damascus, which
that idolatrous King did serve, and sacrifice unto, they were the ruin of him
and all Israel; that is, he and all Israel were ruined, brought to destruction
by, and for that Idolatry of his and theirs. Long before that, whilst Israel
was in the Wilderness, three or four and twenty thousand lost their lives in
one day about it, 1 Cor. 10.7. Numb. 25.9. and no marvel; for before that, at
the very time of the giving of the Law, there is a direct menace of utter
Destruction to any one that should be guilty of this kind of Fornication. He
that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord only, he shall utterly be
destroyed, Exodus 22.20.

But further, it renders liable to Eternal Condemnation in the World to come:
It damns even to the Pit of Hell. To prove this, it were enough to say, it
shuts out of Heaven; and if so, then it must needs thrust down into Hell. For
after this Life, duo sunt loca, non est tertius ullis, there are but two
Receptacles for them, Heaven and Hell; and there is no third place for any, at
least in St. Augustine's Judgment. And as in Mat. 25.31, etc. the whole race of
Mankind at the day of Judgment, are cast but into two sorts, Sheep and Goats;
that is, Elect and Reprobates: so no disposing of any, but into two Sorts and
Conditions, Everlasting Life, or Everlasting Death; the one whereof is the
state of those in Heaven, the other of those in Hell. So that what shuts out of
Heaven, shuts into Hell. But in Rev. 22.8. it is expressly said, that Idolaters,
with other like wicked Creatures, shall have their portion in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the ssecond death. Which what other
can it mean, but that they shall be cast into Hell, into those regions of
Darkness and Horror, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth;
where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.

In consideration therefore of these things, let us abstain from all idolatrous
Actions, and flee from all Acts of this spiritual Fornication. And as God is
jealous of having any of his Honor given to any but himself, so we must
abstain from all appearance of every thing that may provoke him to jealousy.
Have we a care of harkening to any that may seduce us, or of obeying any that
may go about to enforce us to Idolatry, to be of that Religion which allows
of it at least, if it do not command and enjoin the worshipping of Images. Time
may show more need of such an Exhortation, than at present some think there
seems to be; in the mean time, if ever such occasion be, remember I have warned
you.

And this is all, which by occasion of the Text, I shall think good to speak of
this first Notion, in which Fornication is sometimes taken and spoken of,
namely, Spiritual Fornication, or Idolatry, and the Worshipping of Idols and
Images.

I now come to speak of Fornication in the second Notion of it, and as it
denotes that Sin which is also called Corporal Fornication.

Now in this Sense also it is taken sometimes more strictly, and sometimes more
largely.

In the strict Notion of it, as it is called simple Fornication, so it is
defined to be concubitus soluti cum soluta, the lying together, or the carnal
Copulation of two single Persons out of the state of Matrimony.

In the large Notion of it, so it is defined more generally to be humanus
illicitus concubitus, the unlawful Copulation of a man in any kind or respect.

Hence Adultery, which is a distinct Sin from Fornication, and so see Gal.
5.19. (where the Apostle reckoning up the Works of the Flesh, begins with
Adultery, Fornication, etc.) yet is sometimes understood by the word
Fornication. Whence our Savior says, Matthew. 5.32. Whosoever shall put away
his Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery;
where by Fornication, in probability, is to be understood Adultery; and so in
Matthew. 19.9.

Hence the word Fornication is sometimes put to signify the Sin of Incest, as
in 1 Cor. 5.1. It is reported commonly, that there is Fornication among you,
and such Fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles. What is
that? why the incestuous Marriage of a Son with the Wife of his Father; that
one should have his Fathers Wife.

And so when the Apostle tells us, 1 These. 4.3. that it is the will of God that
we should abstain from Fornication; it is evident by the opposing
Sanctification, that thereby is meant all Uncleanness in general. Suitably
whereunto it is said, v. 7. that God has not called us unto uncleanness, but
unto holiness: So that as by Sanctification in v. 3. we are to understand
universal holiness, so by Fornication in the former Verse we are to understand
universal uncleanness.

The Question now is, in what Sense the Word is to be taken in the Text,
whether in the stricter, or larger acceptance of it; as it means simple
Fornication, or any Uncleanness in general.

And to that I answer, That according to my apprehension, the Apostle does
direct his Discourse against simple, or properly so called, Fornication; and
that in that Sense we are to understand it.

Not as if the Apostle were not against all Acts of uncleanness, and had not as
much mind to forbid them as this; but because, whereas other acts of
Uncleanness, as Adultery, Increst, Sodomy, and even Rapes, were accounted Sins
by the Heathens themselves, and unlawful; yet this simple Fornication, or the
carnal Copulation of two single persons, was not looked upon by them as
unlawful, or any Sin; and even the Christians of those times were by the
Gnostick Heretics, then rife in the Church, attempted to be abused into the
like apprehension of it. And this was the reason as Aquinas gives it, why
Fornication was particularly forbidden the Gentiles in that Canon framed by the
Council of the Apostles assembled at Jerusalem, Act. 15.29. because the
Gentiles did not think that to be any Sin. Fornicatio autem prohibetur
specialiter, quia Gentes non reputabant eam esse peceatum. (as. q. 103. a. 4.
ad 3.) So that the Apostle is to be understood here, as if he had said, Such
Cleanness and Holiness ought to be in your Conversation, that ye ought to
abstain, not only from those higher, and most gross acts of Uncleanness which
ye do condemn, as Incest, Adultery, Buggery, etc. but even from that lower and
most simple act of it, which is known by the name of Fornication, and which ye
do allow of. It is not enough that ye be not incestuous Persons, Sodomists,
buggerers, or Adulterers, but ye must not so much as be Fornicators, ye must
flee this too, as well as them.

Now hence will follow, that if Fornication the lowest sort of Uncleanness,
that wherein there was thought to be no Sin, if that must be avoided, if not so
much as that may be allowed to men, or indulged to Christians, then much less
may any of the other Sins of a deeper guilt, and of a more heinous nature, be
dared to be committed, but must be utterly declined and abstained from.

So that the Apostle in requiring to flee Fornication, though in the strict Sense
of the Word, has spoken as fully and effectually, as if he had either
particularly required to flee every other Act of uncleanness, or had in general
commanded to flee and abstain from them all. And thus we have shown what the
Sin is which we are here by the Apostle required to flee, which was the first
part of our Undertaking.

II. Proceed we now to the second, which is to show how it is that we are to
flee this Sin.

And to this I answer, That we are to flee it two ways; in Action, and in
Affection.

First, We are to flee it in Action; that is, we are neither to act it, nor any
thing of it in our Bodies, but we are to preserve our whole Bodies, and every
Member of them pure and chaste, free from all desilement by any uncleanness
whatsoever; not thinking it enough that we do not commit uncleanness with our
Bodies in the Act it self of carnal Copulation, unless we do also abstain from
all filthy acting with any part of our Bodies, as our Eyes, Tongues, Ears, or
Hands.

We must flee Fornication with our Eyes. We must have chaste Eyes, not sill our
Eyes with Adultery, like those in 2 Pet. 2.14. nor so much as look upon a Woman
to lust after her, Mat. 5.28. rather plucking out our right Eyes, than being so
far scandalized by them, as be brought by them to offend in this way. No
rolling looks, no wanton glances must be cast out to entice unto Lust.

We must flee Fornication with our Tongues, abstaining from all tempting of
others of sin by any stattering blandishments, from speaking any obscene,
filthy, bawdy words. So the Apostle charges the Ephesians, chap. 5. v. 3, and
4. Fornication, and all other uncleanness, or covetousness, (that is, of acting
inordinate Lusts) let it not once be named among you as becomes Saints;
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting. Obscene speech, bawdy
talk, which some use by way of jest to move Laughter with; these by the
Apostles Rule, are things that do not become Saints; and so are a kind of
Fornication, one degree of it which Christians are to fly.

We must flee Fornication with our Ears also. We must not hearken and give ear
to others that would tempt us to uncleanness; not so much as hear them any such
thing, but turn away our Ears from, and be deaf unto any such motion. We must
not take any delight to hear the obscene, filthy, bawdy, wanton Words and Songs
of others, by which the Coals of Lust are kindled in the Mind, and all the
Body, as it were, blown up into a flame of unchaste desires. In this as well as
in other Cases, we ought to have regard to that Premonition of our Saviors in
Mark 4.24. Take heed what you hear.

And as we are fly it with our Ears, so with our Hands. We must act nothing of
Unchastity with them, but must abstain from all filthy application of them to
the Member of any other, and from making any filthy signs by them, of any
unclean Desires in our selves, or unclean Deeds we would have acted by others.
As our Hands must not be defiled with Blood, so neither our Fingers with
Iniquity, If. 59.3. But if our right hand shall scandalize us in this way, we
are rather to cut it off, and cast it from us, than be brought so to offend by
it, Mat. 5.20 In a word, in every Member, and in every Gestury whereby we may
act, or allure, or entice, or any way stir up and inflame Concupiscence, we are
to observe Chastity, and to act such Mortification in all our Members, that our
whole Body as well as our Soul and Spirit, and be perserved blameless, kept
pure and spotless from all uncleanness. And this is the first way wherein we
are to flee Fornication, viz. in Action.

Secondly, We are to flee it in Affection. As we are not to act it, so we are
not so much as to affect it. They that are after the Spirit, must not mind the
things of the Flesh, Romans 8.5, 6. They that have rightly learned Christ, must
not give themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness, Ephesians.
4.19, 20. Those Members of ours which are upon the earth, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, or greedy desire
after unnatural or unlawful Enjoyments; that is, those earthly Affections of
ours unto these things (such as are in earthly-minded men, who mind nothing of
Heaven, but like bruit Beasts, have their minds all on Earth, and set their
Affections only on earthly things, earthly Enjoyments, earthly, brutish,
carnal Pleasures) whereby we are incited, stirred up, and provoked to filthy
actings, these are to be mortified, Col. 3.5. to be subdued, and brought under,
and not suffered to reign in our mortal bodies, so as that we should obey them
in the lusts thereof, and in obedience thereto yield our members servants to
uncleauness, Romans 6.12, 19. But as being Strangers and Pilgrims in this World,
we must abstain from fleshly Lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11. yea, as being Christ's, that
is, Christians, Members of Christ, we must crucisie the flesh, with its
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. In this not so much as thought is free, nor
desire lawful, but every unclean affection is sinful, which therefore is to be
abhorred, detested, and avoided by us.

And this is the second way wherein we are to flee Fornication, viz. as in
Action, so in Affection. And this is all I shall say concerning the second part
of our Undertaking, How we are to fly this Sin.

III. We now proceed to the third, where we are to present you with some
Considerations, pressing you on by way of Motive to fly this Sin of Fornication.

And the first is, The sinfulness of it. That any thing is a Sin, is Motive
enough to dissuade from the acting of it, how delightful, or how gainful soever
otherwise it might be. The least of Sins is not to be committed for the
obtaining of the greatest Goods; for even of those who say, Let us do evil that
good may come thereof, the Apostles tells us, that their damnatoin is just. And
the more Aggravations that any Sin is capable of, still more reason there is to
abstain from the commission of it. The greater Sin brings upon the Sinner the
greater guilt, that is an obligation unto the greater Punishment. So that
whereas some Offenders shall be beaten but with few stripes, others shall be
beaten with many.

Now Fornication taken in the simplest Sense of it, is a Sin, and that a great
one: A Sin it is, for it is the Transgression of Gods Law, as being specially
forbidden, not only by our Apostle in this Text, but also by a whole Council of
the Apostles assembled and acting by Divine Authority at Jerusalem, Act. 15.29.
And so, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your sanctificiation, that
ye should abstain from Fornication: Yea, and the Law of Man too it is a Sin;
lor thereby it is strictly forbidden to be committed, and thereby Punishment is
ordained for, and inflicted upon the Committers of it, so that it is a Sin; and
a great Sin it is too, as being chargeable with many Aggravations.

As first, it is an acting against right Reason: so Aquinas, Fornicatio dicitur
esse peccatum in quantum est contra rationem rectam. Then Reason is right when
it acts according to the Will of God, which is the first Law, and highest Rule.
Inasmuch therefore as the Will of God is our Sanctification, and our abstaining
from Fornication, therefore this Sin is a Sin against right Reason, which in
conformity to the Will of God dictates the quite contrary hereunto. so that it
seems no man commits this Sin, who has nor first debauched his Reason, and so
far turned himself into a beast, or worse.

Secondly, It is an acting against Charity: inasmuch as that due care which
ought to be taken for the Issue of the begotten, is not attended unto, the
satisfaction of a present Lust, not the Propagation of a future holy Race,
being the thing intended therein. Whence so many base-got Children are either
murdered as soon as born, or neglected, or starved not long after their Birth,
and commonly smally cared for all their life, as to either Education or
Maintenance, prefent Instruction, or future Salvation. Whence the Schools
determine Fornication to be no less than a mortal Sin. Fornication simplex, cum
contra bonum educendae prolis sit, illicita est, ut etiam sit lethale crimen;
so Aquin. 25, q. 154. conclus. 3. And our Church praying in her Litany to be
delivered from Fornication, and all other deadly Sin, intimates Fornication in
her account to be also a deadly Sin. And by the Canon Law the like Penance was
imposed upon the Committers of this Sin, as was upon those that were guilty of
Perjury, Adultery, Murder, and other like deadly Sins. [ib.]

And as against human Charity, so also it is a Sin against Christian Purity; as
being contrary to that Purity that was exemplified in the Life of Christ, and
contrary to that Purity that is in the Law of Christ; contrary tog that Purity
that in obedience to the Law, and in consormity to the Life of Christ, should
be practiced by all that are Christians. Christ himself lived a life of exact
Purity, never guilty of the least Inchastity in Act, in Gesture, in Word, in
Thought. And his Will is our Sanclification, that we should abstain from
Fornication, and possess our vessel, that it, our Body, in sanctification and
honor, nhot in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not
God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4, 5. And that we may know his Will, his grace that brings
Salvation to all men, has appeared, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World, Tit. 2.11, 12. So that by the Gospel we are called to be Romans 1.7.
Saints, that is, holy Persons. And we are initiated into our Christianity by a
purifying Sacrament, the holy Sacrament of Baptism, where by the outward
cleansing of our bodies from their Filth by Water at their Birth, or entrance
into Christianity, is signified what Purity there ought to be in all our lives,
whereof there is a beginning also wrought inwardly in us by the sanctifying
Grace of Gods Spirit accompanying the outward Ordinance for the taking away of
the filth of our Nature, and the enduing us with inherent Holiness: Whence that
Sacrament is called, not only the washing of regeneration, but also the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, and the sanctification of the Spirit, Tit. 3.5. 1
Pet. 1.2. Whereupon, as he which has called us is holy, so it is our duty to
be boly in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. To cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. to hate every garment
spotted by the flesh, Jude 23. and not (having escaped the corruption and
pollution that is in the world through lust) to be again entangled therein, and
overcome, 2 Pet. 1.4. and 2.20. The divine power has given unto us all things
that appertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has
called us to glory and virtue, whereby are given unto us exceeding precious
promises, that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature,2 Pet. 1.3,
4. Now what can be more contrary to this Purity, than this beastly 2 Pet. 4.
and 2.19, 20. romans 6.19. 2 Cor. 7.1. Jud. 8.18, 23. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
Sin, which is so far from Purity, that it is the direct contrary thereto, and
called by the name of corruption, uncleanness, pollution, filthiness, the lust
of uncleanness, ungodly lust, a spotting, and defiling thing. And what indeed
is in the whole story and business of it, but nastiness and beastliness,
filthiness and uncleanness, not to be seen by Christian Eye, not to be spoken
by Christian Mouths, not to be heard by Christian Ears: Whence the Apostle
would not have it once named among Saints, and says, it is a shame even to
speak of those things, Ephesians. 5.3, 12.

And thirdly, It is a Sin against all the Persons in the sacred Trinity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

1. Against the Father, in that it is a dishonouring of his Creature; abusing
that to vileness, and baseness, and bruitishness, which he made for himself,
and for his own Honor and Glory. Whence the Apostle cells us above, v. 13:
that the Body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord: and helow, v. 20. bids
that we should glorify God in our Body, as being that which is his upon a
double right; first of Creation, and after of Redemption; and therefore is only
to be used according to his Will in all Purity, and not to be abused according
to our Lust in any Uncleanness.

2. Against the Son: for it is a Dishonouring, and a defiling of a Member of
him, even so far as to make it a Member of a Harlot. Know ye not, says our
Apostle, v. 15. that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take
the members of Christ, and make them members of an harlot? God forbid. As by
Marriage the two Parties become one in Body, so by Religion, which imports a
holy tie of a Christian unto Christ, Christ and the Christian become one in
Spirit, there is a spiritual Union betwixt them, as a civil Union betwixt
married couples. But then Fornication is the breaking of this Union; for by a
man's joining himself to another, to a Harlot, he becomes one body with a Whore,
which is a high disloyalty against Christ, and a breaking off from Union with
Christ, a forsaking of him to follow after, and be joined with a Whore, which
is a strong Argument against this Sin; Memento quia Christo sacrata sunt menbra
tua, nou misceantur membris meretricis, Chrysostom. O remember that your Members
are consecrated unto Christ, and that is reason enough why you should not
commit Fornication, inasmuch as that it is the making of your Members to become
the Members of an Harlot or Whore.

3. Against the Holy Ghost: For it is a dishonouring and a defiling of his
Temple, and a turning it into a Stve, or rather a Den of Uncleanness. What,
says the Apostle here v. 19. know you not that your body is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost which is in you. So that this defiling of the Body, is the defiling
of the Temple of the Hold ghost, and to a doing of despite unto that Spirit of
Grace, a forcing him with our nastiness to forsake his Habitation, which is
also a sure way to bring on our Destruction. For, says our Apostle, 1 Cor.
3.16, 17. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy:
for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple are ye. Now this Consideration
raises up this Sin to so exceeding an height of sinfulness, as that it seems
not needful to add any thing more to show the sinfulness of it: And yet more
may be said to show it.

For it is a Sin against a man's own Body, and abusing of a man's self, a doing a
Dishonor, and Despite to their own bodies, Romans 1.24. And our Apostle argues
by way of Motive to dissuade from this Sin in the following members of the
Text: Flee Fornication. Every Sin that a man does, is without the Body: but he
that commits Fornication, sins against his own body. The meaning is, That
whereas most other Sins are against others, God or our Neighbor, this is a Sin
against a man's own self, whereby he defiles that part of himself into filthy
abuse, which was sanctified by God to an use of holiness, even to be the Temple
of his most holy Spirit. It is a robbing of a man's self of so great an Honor,
and so great an Happiness, as to have his Body to be the Temple of Gods Spirit;
than which, what worse Discourtesy, what greater Mischief can a man do unto
himself?

And not only against himself, but it is a Sin also against the body of
Another, the Body of her with whom Fornication is committed, as well as his own
Body: It is a doing to her as much mischief as to himself, bringing as great a
Sin upon her, and involving her into as great a share of Punishment as himself.
For this is a Sin that cannot be committed by one; there must ever be two at
it. A man may commit Murder or Thiest alone; he may forswear and lie alone; he
may gluttonize, and be drunken himself alone, but he cannot play the fornicator
alone by himself, he must have a Partner with him in his Sin, whereby he
doubles his Sin; as being guilty not only of his own act, but others also, whom
he tempted to the consenting to him in the acting of that filthiness, which is
a great aggravation to the sinsulness of it. And yet neither is this all. For,

In the next place, it is a Sin committed against clear light and knowledge,
and so cannot but be against Conscience. For the Scripture has clear and plain
Prohibitions and Dehortations from it, and Denunciations, or Threatenings
against the Committers of it; which none can be ignorant of, that knows any
thing of the Scriptures of God. Prohibitions and Dehortations we have mentioned
before; and such is this in my text, Flee Fornication: Such is that in Act
15.29. where abstaining from Fornication is made a necessary Injunction upon
all that would be Christians. Such again that in 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. where it is
declared to be the will of God, that we should abstain from Fornication.

And for Denunciations or Threatenings, they are plain, and clear, and full:
Such is that of the Apostle, Hib. 13.4. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
judge. Such that of his again in Ephesians. 5.5. No Whoremonger, nor unclean Person
has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. So v. 6 For these
things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. And to name
no more, such is that Rev. 21.8. where Whoremongers are of that number that
shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which
is the second Death.

Are not these clear and plain Prohibitions and Denunciations? And do these lie
fair and clear in our Books to read? And are they not frequently read in our
Churches, and published in our Congregations? Who then can plead ignorance of
them, unless it be to excuse one Sin with another, which nothing mitigates the
faust, but rather greatens the guilt? So that this must needs be acknowledged a
very great Sin, which is committed against so many, so clear, so known
Declarations of the Will of God against it, and Denunciations of the Wrath of
God against the Commuters of it. And yet neither is this all. For,

Lastly, The Considerations of the Punishments threatened, and assuredly
inflicted, unless prevented by a timely repenting, do as it were with a beam of
the Sun, point out unto, declare and display the greatness of the Crime, the
blackness of the Sin. Great Punishments are ordained for great Sins; so that in
the greatness of the Punishment denounced, we may read the greatness of the Sin
committed

Now what is the Punishment denounced against this Sin? Why, first in general,
the Judgment of God; That God will judge the Committers of it, Heb. 13.4.
Which, how far that may extend, God knows; being that remporal and eternal
Judgments, all Curses and Plagues both in this lise, and in the lise (or rather
death) that is to come, may lie infolded within the arms of its Comprehension.

Secondly, Excommunication out of the Church Militant. With a Foruicator
Christians are not to eat, not so much as the ordinary Food of the Body, much
less the Sacramental Food of our Souls; no, not so much as keep compamy with
him, 1 Cor. 5.10. I know not what some may think of this, but sure in the
Primitive Times it was accounted a heavy Punishment; insomuch that they upon
whom it fell, were reckoned of as Persons delivered up unto Satan. 1 Cor. 5.5.
As indeed he must uceds be put under the Dominion of Satan, who is expelled the
Kingdom of Christ.

Thirdly, Exclusion out of the Church Triumphant. Neither Fornicators, nor
Adnlterers, nor effeminate Persons, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, are
admitted to an Inheritance in Heaven; such it is expersly said shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. And so again, Epb. 5.5. No Whoremonger, nor
unclean' Person, nor covetous Man (which Expression relates to matters of
Uncleanness) has any inheritance in the Kigdom of God.

Fourthly, Condemnation unto the Torments of Hell. Whoremongers, among the rest
of these wicked ones, are threatened to have their part in the Lake which
burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.8.

All which laid together, do show the Punishment denounced against Fornicators,
to be a very grievous Punishment; and that is Proof abundantly enough, that the
Sin that it threatened with that Punishment, is a very grievous Sin, a heinous
Offense, a Sin that is exceeding sinful. And though we may flatter our selves
with a hope of escaping for leffer Sins, and so out of that hope venture the
more boldly upon the commission of them; yet for such grand Offenses, mortal
Sins, deadly Crimes as this, we cannot but be hugely afraid of suffering the
deserved Punishment. And therefore this may be one weighty Consideration to
press on by way of Motive to abstain from this Sin, and to flee Fornication.

A second may be the shamefulness of it. Things that are honest, pure, and
lovely, and of good report, virtuous, and praiseworthy, those are thing; for
Christians to think of, to have their Minds and Hearts upon; ( Phil. 4.8.) But
things of dishonesty, things that are shameful, and of evil report, these
Christians should with the greatest care that can be, avoid. And indeed if we
consider this Sin of Fornication in every Circumstance of it, it is a very
shameful Sin.

1. The Actors of it are ashamed to be seen in it, and therefore choose darkness
and secrecy to act it in: In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and
dark night, as the Wise Man observed, Prove. 7.9. Whence this, and the like Sins
are called the Works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. done in secret, in private and
close Chambers; (whence Chambering and wantonness go well together, Romans
13.13.) or other places of convenience for privacy and secrecy, as furthest
removed from Observation and Discovery: which, why need it be, if it were a
thing of honesty, if it were not a shameful thing.

2. The Parts and Members of the Body wherewith the Sin is acted, are things
which were a Shame to see or name. Whence the Greeks call them (...), and the
Latins, pudenda, shameful things; things which People that have any thing of
Modesty in them, are ashamed to look upon. Shem and Japhet, when the Father so
lay, that his nakedness appeared, took a Garment, and laid it upon both their
Shoulders, and went backward, and covered it, without seeing of it; and for
that Modesty of theirs got their Father's Blessing; whenas Cham for his
Immodesty, looking upon it, had his Father's Curse, Genesis 9.22, etc. The Fall of
our first Parents into Sin, was not so great as to take away from them all
Shame: But as soon as they perceived themselves naked, they had so much remains
of Modesty left them, as to make themselves A prons, though but of Figleaves, to
cover themselves withal, Genesis 3.7. which God himself did after change into a
better covering of Coats made of Skins, v. 21. God would not have an Altar with
steps made up to it, lest that ascent should be an occasion of discovering of
the nakedness of such as should sacrifice thereon, Genesis 20.26. and gave special
order, that for prevention of the like discovery in the Priests, they should
have linen Breeches made them, reaching down from the loins to the thighs,
Exodus 28.42. Hence (by was of allusion) Raiment is counseled to be bought by
the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, that the Sbame of his nakedness
might not appear, Rev. 3.18, and he is pronounced blessed, that watches and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his Shame, Rev. 16.15.
Throughout the whole Scripture those Parts are never found mentioned by name,
but by some other modest way of Expression. Neither amongst the Heathens would
the People of Modesty have any of those words in their Mouth: The more shame
for those Christians, whose delight it is, upon every occasion, to mouth them
in most immodest sort. Of these People may it be truly said, what St. Paul
spoke of some in his times, That they glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19. or as
St. Jude expresses it, they foam out their own Shame, v. 13.

3. The Act if self, wherein this Sin is committed, is so shameful, as that it
cannot be mentioned in greatest privacy without Shame; and therefore the
Apostle speaks of it as a thing not to be named among Saints, Ephesians. 5.3. and
says, it is a sham to speak of those things, v. 12. And well he might, as
being a thing fitter for Bruits, as Dogs and Bitches, to delight in, rather
than for Men. Whence Epist. 50. ad Ocean.
St. Hierome calls the acts of Fornication, Caninas Nuptias, the nuptical
Weddings or Marriages of Dogs. And being a thing much delighted in by the Devil
himself, so far as not only to make it a part of his Service, (in the
performances whereof stood much of the Mysteries of his Worship) but also to
practice himself, together with Men and Women, in assumed human Shapes and
Bodies, as is ordinary among Witches.

And if the Act it self cannot be named without Shame, how shameful must we
needs think the commission of it? How can not only their Faces outwardly, but
their Hearts inwardly burn and glow within them, whilst they are acting so
shameful a thing; a thing that can neither be seen, nor spoken, nor heard by
others, who are no way guilty of it, without blushing at it,

4. The tempooral Punishment consequent to this Act, is a shameful Punishment.
Among the Grecians in many places of Greece, as Camerarius observes, the
Punishment for Fornicators was, That the Fornicator should have his Beard chopped
off with a keen Ax, and so to be sent away, which to him was a Mark of Infamy.
Amongst us the Punishment is for Offenders in that kind, to stand in the places
of most public notice (the Church during Divine Service, or some Market Town
in the time of throngest concourse of People) with a white Sheet upon them, to
be a publickSpectacle for all People to behold, and gaze upon, and so be the
Town or Countries talk, that I say not their Scoffs and Scorns; a thing greatly
shameful to those that have any remains in them either of Grace, or good Nature.

Now all these things laid together, the shamefulness of this Sin appears to be
very great; and the consideration of that, may be one other weighty Motive to
abstain from the Commission of it, and to flee Fornication.

A third may be the Toilesomness of it. Christians are called to Liberty and
Freedom; and the greatest Liberty in the World consists in Virtue and Piety:
For the more virtuous and pious, the more free from Sin and Wickedness; to be
Servant to which, is the greatest Slavery in the World: no Tyranny like to that
where Sin reigns. But as all Sin in general is tyrannous, and so the serving of
it Slavery; so all Lust in particular is very tyrannical, and the serving of it
very drudgery: The Slave to that Tyrant is never at rest, no not so much as in
the Night, when other Slaves, tired with the Toil of the forepassed day, take
their ease. And therefore when the Apostle says, Flee Fornication, Lib. 1. de
Cain and Abel, cap, 5.
St. Ambrose tells us he said it, ut veloci fuga tanquam furiosae dominae
declinare saevitiam, and tetro exitio exire possemus; that we might be moved
thereby to do our endeavor by a swift flight to avoid the Cruelty of a raging
Tyranness, as it were, and get out of a most base Service: Sad is the Toil,
heavy is the Drudgery of a Slave to this Lust, Savus criminum stimulus, libido
est, quae nunquam quietum patitur affectum; Lust, the Lust of uncleanness, is a
cruel stinger on unto Wickedness, it never lets the Affection be in quiet.
Nocte fervet, die anhelat, a negotio abducit; as he goes on; it burns in the
Night, and pants in the Day, it awakes from sleep, and takes off from business;
gives no rest to its Slave, but ever inflames with enjoyment, and becomes more
raging by use.

How does it busy the Head with thousands of thoughts about the obtaining of
its desire? What Plots, what Contrivances, what Arts, what Stratagems, what
Tricks, what Policies, what Ways, what Means does it devise and frame for the
compassing of its end? Eating, drinking, resting, waking, sleeping, still the
mind is kept in action with musing and meditating, pondering and studying how
to be made Master of its so longed-for Wish. How does it fill the Heart with
Crowds of Cares to put its Projects into practice, and with throngs of Fears of
Disappointments in its Designs, and multitudes of Jealousies of being defeated
by any other counter plotting Competitor.

What Watchings must there be of the Inamorates for opportunity to open their
minds, and discover their Passions? What soliciting, courting Complements with
the Paramour to woo and win her to a Compliance with them in their Desires?
What promising, what vowing, what swearing of love to the attempted Mistress,
when there is no more of Love in them to her, but a brutish, unruly, longing
Desire to satisfy their Lust only?

What a waiting must there be? What attendance must many times be given before
their Suit can have its accomplishment, if they have to do with a Person that
is proud and coy, or covetous and conning; who for pleasing of her humor, or
for the advancing of her gain, will exercise them with a thousand delays, and
keep them in hand with variety of Shifts and Put-offs, as tedious and wearisom
as those meet withal that go to Law; this Evening, or that Morning; this
Afternoon, or that Midnight must be waited for, and attended on, and over and
over, and all to no purpose through some accidental or contrived disappointment.

O, who is able to endure such Drudgery as this! One seeing a Harlot going in
her Gaiety to the Theater, wept to think what pains the Wicked took to go to
Hell, whereas himself took no near that pains to get to Heaven. Were those
Thoughts and Cares to be-spent in making our peace with God, which these People
spend in gaining a Whore to their minds; were there to be that watching and
waiting for the saving of our Souls, which these Persons undergo for the
satisfaction of their Lusts, we should think the price of Salvation
intollerably too dear. Weight but how wearisome a thing it is to most men but
to say a few short Prayers Morning and Evening, or to read a Chapter or two
once in a day, or to attend once or twice on Gods Day in Gods House at the
Service of God; how long the Prayers are thought? how tedious the Sermon? how
tiresome the whole Duty? Some have not patience to sit it out, and therefore
either come not at all to it, or else come short of much of it, or sleep and
drowze away most of their time whilst they are at it. Oh, what would they
think, what would they say, if they were to wait hour after hour, day after
day, night after night upon Gods Service? Oh, how toilsome then must be the
Service of Lust? how tiresome the Sin of Fornication, which exacts these
Drudgeries from its Servants? that they must spend Nights and Days about it;
busy their Wits, and break their Sleeps with it, take little or no rest Day or
Night for it.

This, with considering persons, cannot but be very weighty to stop them from
going into, or turn them back from going on in so troublesome a way, so
toilsome a travail, so wearisome a drudgery in the Service of so base a Lust.

A fourth is the Expensiveness of this Sin. A man cannot be a Whoremaster at a
small Charge: He that drives that Trade, had need to have a good Stock to set
up withal; for he shall find it a costly Sin, a Sin that will waste him to the
Bones, if he follow it any thing hard, whereof we have infinite Examples in our
Times and Countries to assure us.

What a deal of Expense goes in the Price of Whoredoms, especially where the
Whore drives a Trade with their Bodies. Flora the Harlot got by that Trade such
an Estate, as the City of Rome disdained not to become Heir unto. Lais, the
Harlot of Corinth, had such a rate for a Nights lodging with her, as men of
great Estates were afraid to give: Ten thousand Drachms (a great Sum, if it
were but so many of our Groats) did she demand of (...).
Demosthenes for the pleasure of her Company for one Night, though he had the
wit not to buy Repentance, as he said, at so dear a rate. And no doubt but the
Fornicators of our days pay dear enough in this way for their vain Pleasure and
lewd Enjoyment.

What a great deal of Expense must go in Treatments, and Entertainments of the
Whore? What in Plays and Revels, Feasts and Banquets, Wine and Presents, to
allure and oblige her? What in Gifts and Bounties to those about her? What in
Pay to, or Expenses on Pimps to procure her? What in Bribes to Privadoes for
Opportunities of access to her, and for secrecy of Converse with her? The Hand
is never out of the Purse almost, for fetching out one Expense or other in
these things of this Nature.

What a great deal again goes in high Diet, provokative Drinks, Confectionary
Philters, and all manner of Incentives and Incendiaries unto Lust? What again
in Charges for Cure of the French Diseases gotten by those ways of filthiness?
And that (to name no more) must go in Fees by way of Commutation, to buy off
that shameful Punishment, which by the Law is to pass on those who are guilty
in this kind, where the Fault is known, and the Offender prosecuted against?

How many fair Estates do we see daily melted and mouldred away to nothing by
these means? Men of good Abilities, Heirs of five Lands, are in a small time
brought to Penury and Beggary by this way! He that is now rich, may in a little
space whore away all he has, and be brought, like the Prodigal in the Gospel,
to be glad to eat Husks with the Swine for Hunger, if he knew how to get them.
So vastly, so vainly expensive a Sin this is.

Now this Consideration to persons that have any thing of Wit or Understanding,
may be a very pressing Motive to restrain them from following so base ways as
these. When they shall consider how expensive those ways are, and at what rate
they must buy Repentance, they cannot but think these are no ways for them to
go on in, unless they design to ruin and undo themselves for ever.

A fifth Consideration to hinder or withdraw so vicious a Course, may be, that
it is an unprofitable Lust, a fruitless Sin. Ambition gets Honor, Covetousness
gets Wealth; Gluttony, good Cheer; Drunkenness, good Liquor; but what gets the
Fornicator? nothing that I know that is good. It is a Sin that brings in o
Profit, unless it be to the Whores that make a Trade of it. (...), so the
Apostle asks to Question of the Romans, having spoken but newly before of their
yielding their members Servants to uncleanness; What fruit had ye then in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed? What can the Fornicator say he has gotten
after all his Thought, and Care, and Time, and Trouble, and Money spent in
obtaining satisfaction to his Lust? What can he say he has gotten, unless it
be somewhat that he is afraid to own, or ashamed to speak of? For, as for that
Pleasure that is fancied, rather than found to be in carnal Enjoyments, it is
in that case so very little, or rather none, as that it can in no sort come in
comparison with all that Trouble and Charge that is undergone and spent for the
obtaining of it. But then when with all it is considered, what inward Fears and
Cares solicit the mind, whilst the Fornicator is indulging those outward
Pleasures to the Body, (what is the Amazement of Discovery, and what is the
Terror that the Apprehension of it brings) the Fornicator's forbidden Fruit,
whereof he is so greedy, that he eats and surfeits to the destroying of Body
and Soul, is but like the Apples of Sodom, how well-colored and lovely soever
without, nothing but Cinders and Ashes within, utterly void of all real
Pleasure and Contentment. Such a fruitless Sin is this Sin of Fornication, so
nothing at all of good comes on it; which also may be another pressing
Consideration to dissuade from the committing of it. And if that were all, that
nothing of Good came of it, it were the less matter: but yet that is not all
neither; for besides that there comes no Good of it, there also comes a great
deal of Mischief and Evil of it. And, which is

Our sixth Consideration, it is a mischievous Sin. There comes a great deal of
Mischief from, and by it, as we shall show in sundry respects.

First, It is mischievous unto the Fornicator himself.

Secondly, It is mischievous unto Others.

First, It is mischievous unto the Fornicator himself; and that many ways.

1. It cuts him out of the Favor of God, and brings him under his Displeasure.
God is angry (as the Psalmist tells us, Ps. 7.11.) with the wicked every day:
and if so, then he is no day well-pleased with the Fornicator, who every day in
the disposition of his Heart, if not by the action of his Body, is offending
God in a most contumelious way. For he prefers that Delight which is taken in
giving Satisfaction to the Lusts of his filthy and shameful Members, before
that Pleasure which is had in Communion with the holy and pure God. When the
basest Member about him requires the contrary to that which God commands, he
chooses rather to rebel against God, than not to give obedience to the Lust of
it; so in effect, chooses that rather than God to be his Lord: Whereas he should
glorify God in his Body (first created after the Image of God (according to
the capacity of it) and then redeemed with the Blood of God) by preferring so
precious a Vessel in Holiness and Honor, he dshonours God, in abusing his Body
to be the Instrument of base Actions, and the Subject of base Enjoyments,
submitting it to brutish lowness and vileness, and defiling it with nasty
Pollution, and thereby provoking God to bring Destruction on him; for if any
man defile the Temple of God, that is, his Body, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor.
3.17. Noble Men think it a high Contumely and Reproach to them, when any of
their Daughters prove guilty of this lewdness, or any of their Spouses commit
this filthiness: Oh, how can God then but be inflamed with Anger, and burn with
Jealousy, when the Soul of Man, the Daughter of God, and the Spouse of Christ,
becomes guilty of this Harlotry, and gives her self to his Uncleanness, as that
of corporal Fornication is in the most literal Sense of that Word. No marvel if
God will judge Whoremongers and Adulterers; no marvel if he have provided a
Lake of Fire and Brimstone to wash, or rather burn away the filthiness of
Fornicators.

2. As it renders him odious to God, so it outs him of the Protection of
Angels. God sends forth his Angels to be ministering spirits to them who shall
be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. And gives them charge over them to keep them
in all their ways, Ps. 91.11. But now the Fornicator, by acting that which
disinherits him of Salvation (for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor effeminate Persons, shall inherit the Kingdom
of God) he acts that by which he is disinterested in the Angelical Protection.
And besides, how can the Fornicator but be odious to the Angel that was deputed
to the Guardianship over him, when he immerses and soaks himself into nastiness
and filthiness, so utterly contrary to the Angelical Nature and Purity. Angels
are Beings of a pure and spiritual Nature, and the Fornicator swills himself in
bodily filthiness and uncleanness, so odious to the Angelical Fineness and
Purity, that an Angel in Representation (and to show their detestableness of
this Sin unto their Nature) is (in the Lives of the Fathers) reported to have
stopped his Nose at the sight of a Fornicator, as not able to endure the noisome
Savor and Stench of so polluted and unclean Person. And when once the good
Angels of God have withdrawn from any man their Protection, who can we think
but the evil Angels of Satan do take him into Possession? Now this cannot but
be thought a great mischief to a man to be forsaken of his Defense, and
invested by his Enemies; to be outed of the Protection of Angels, and put into
Subjection to Devils.

3. It dspossesses him of the Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit of God will not
dwell but in a holy Temple: thereupon the Body of a Fornicator can be no Temple
for him to inhabit; it is too nasty and filthy, polluted and defiled a place for
him to abide in; it is a Sink of Uncleanness, and therefore can be no suitable
Mansion for the Spirit of holiness. For the Temple of God (that is, that Temple
which God by his Spirit will dwell in) is holy, 1 Cor. 3.17. That Body which is
defiled with Pollution of Lust and Uncleanness, is no Temple of his, none that
he will dwell in. Uncleanness chaseth him out of his Habitation, outs him of
his Temple, dispossesses him of his Dwelling, which he will no longer abide in,
than it continues to be holy. And therefore St. Chrysostom says, Non polluas
Templum sacratum Domino, ne fias a Spiritu ejus alienum; take heed ye defile
not that Temple of your Body which is consecrated unto the Lord, lest thereby
ye become a Stranger to his Spirit, i.e. lest his Spirit be withdrawn from you,
and forsake you. Our Church in her Morning Service suitably hereunto (as to me
it seems) first prays that God would make clean our Hearts within us, and then
not to take his Holy Spirit from us; intimating, that unless our Herarts be
clean within us, God will not suffer his Holy Spirit to abide with us. What a
Mischief is this that the Fornicator does himself? He deprives himself of the
Presence, of the Assistance, of the Comfort, of the Counsel of Gods Spirit, and
has no fellowship with the Holy Ghost. He tears off his Seal of Adoption, and
throws away the Farnest of eternal Salvation, and so has now neither Right to
Heaven, nor Evidence for it. Yea, when the good Spirit is once departed out of
its Habitation, the evil Spirit will he ready to enter into, and take it up for
his own Possession, and then the end of that Man is worse than his beginning.
Devils dwell in him now for a time, and he must dwell hereafter with Devils to
all eternity in the World to come.

And, which is consequent to his, it disfurnisheth him of the Grace of God. For
that which deprives a man of the Grace of the Spirit, must divest him of the
Spirit of Grace. When the Spring is withdrawn, no wonder if the Streams dry up
and fail. But besides, Grace is a work of the Sprit, and Fornication (as all
other Sins of Uncleanness are) is a Work of the Flesh. Now the Flesh and the
Spirit, as the Apostle says, Gal. 5.17. are contrary the one to the other. And
therefere as the Principles of these Works, the Flesh and the Spirit, are
contrary each to other; so these Works which flow from these Principles, are
contrary the one to the other. This (and so any) Sin of Uncleanness is not
privatively only, but positively also, even contrariantly opposite unto Grace;
there is in it not only a want of Holiness, but something of positive
filthiness. Now as Logicians say, Contraria se mutuo destruunt, alterumque
alterius contractione remittitur; Contraries do destroy each other, and the
presence of the one is abated by the access of the other. So that this Sin when
it is admitted, diminishes and destroys Grace; the Act of it is a Diminution,
and the Habit of it a Destruction to it. Now surely the Destruction of Grace in
a man, is a great Mischief to him; it is the defacing of his Evidence for, and
a destroying of his Title to Heaven. For as the pure in heart shall see God, so
without holiness shall no man see the Lord, mat. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. It is the
depriving him of every thing of Divine nature in him, and the stripping him of
all, so much as likeness unto God. It is the rereturning of him into a state of
corrupted nature, to a state of Damnation, a Condition far worse than that of
Beasts which perish; which, whatever they suffer, yet they do not sin, and find
at once an end of their lives and of their miseries; whereas the end of an
ungracious man's life is but the beginning of an endless Death. yea further, it
is the makingway for the Image and Nature of the Devil to enter upon, and
overspread the man; for as the Divine Nature and Image stands in Purity and
Holiness, so the Diabolical Image and Nature consists in Impurity and
Uncleanness: So that, in effect, it is the making of a man, who was before the
Child of God, to become the Child of the Devil. Whereupon St. Ambrose says our
Apostle did well to warn Christians to flee Fornication, per quam filii Dei
fiunt silii Diaboli; inasmuch as by that, the Children of God did become the
Children of the Davil. A greater Mischief is hard to say.

4. It wounds, and wastes, and destroys his Conscience. This is a Sin that is
done with Knowledge most an end, (for it is tare that a man should be so far
gone from himself through Drink, or any other Course, as that, like Lot, he
should not know hedoth commit the sin when he does commit it.) It is a Sin that
requires much study in most Cases, how to contrive and compass the commission
of it; and therefore, especially in such Cases, is a Sin of knowledge, a Sin
committed with deliberation, and therefore is a wilful Sin; and such Sins are
wounding Sins to the Soul, wasting Sins to the Conscience; the first Act
wounds, the second wastes, and the Habit of it when it grows to that, quite
destroys the Conscience; the custom of sinning takes away all both Sense and
Conscience of Sin; like those Gentiles spoken of by St. Paul, Ephesians. 4.17, 18,
19. who walked in the vanity of their mind, having their understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in them,
because of the blindness, or rather, hardness of their heart, who being past
feeling, gave themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. Which blindness and hardness, senselesness and stupidity of Mind
and Heart, when men once have through continued custom of sinning in this way,
brought upon themselves, then it is but just, that God should give them up (in
a Judicial way) unto Uncleanness, and unto vile Affections, and even give them
over unto a reprobate mind, a mind void of Judgment, as he did those Romas St.
Paul speaks of, Romans 1.24, 26, 28. And this to be given over to a reprobate
sense, to have the Conscience cauterized, to be under a benummedness of mind,
and a brawniness of heart, to be without Sense and Conscience of sin, is to be
under a most dismal Judgment, the high Road to, and the very Gate into, and
month of Hell. For when once a man is past seeling or sin, he is the past
sorrowing for sin, and past repenting of it, (without an extraordinary and
miraculous Work of Conviction wrought upon him) and without Repentance there
can be no Salvation. And therefore that sin which brings a man into this
desperate Condition, is a sin that is mischievous with a Witness; it blinds the
mind, perverts the judgment, benumbs the heart, sears the Conscience; leaving
the mind under stupefaction and senselesness, hardness and impenitency.

5. It distracts him in those Duties to God, whereby he should obtain the Grace
of God, and preserve and increase it when it is obtained. This fleshly Lust
will not suffer him rightly to attend to any spiritual Duty: it will not suffer
him to have any Communion with God, either by hearing God speak to him in his
Word, or speaking to God himself in Prayer: it so takes up all his Thoughts,
that he can mind nothing of the Worship and Service of of God as he ought. When
he should be thinking of God, he is thinking of his Whore; and instead of
praying for Grace to abstain from his sin, and to mortify his Lust, he is
plotting how to fulfill his Lust, and commit his sin. So true is that of St.
Ambrose, Nullus peccandi modus, and inexplexibilis scelerum sitis, nisi morte
amantis, extingui non potest; This sin is unmeasurable, unsatiable, the burning
Thirst whereof never quenched by any thing but Death. Now surely it is a very
great mischief to be so distracted in ones Duty to God; that is a plaguey Lust
that will not let a man be quiet till he has said his Prayers, but be as ill,
or worse a Tempter to a man than the Devil himself. And yet such a mischievous
sin Lust, is that whereby the Fornicator is swayed, and governed in his Course
of Uncleanness.

And no marvel: for it besots and fools him, so that he neither minds, nor
regards what he is about, unless it be when he is getting satisfaction to his
Lust. It dispirits and unmans the man, and turns him all into Beast well nigh,
saving what he is in show and shape. Who could think any other that should find
Hercules, the only Worthy and Wonder in his time for strength and Valor,
stooping to the meanness of being a Servant to Omphale, and in the quality of a
Wench working at the Rock and Spindle? And what other can we think was meant by
the ancient Poets when they tell us of the strange Transformations of Jupiter
and other Gods into a Bull, a Swan, and the like brutish Creatures, for the
love of, and to satisfy his lust with this or that admired Beauty, but that
lust, this lust of Fornication transforms and turns men, even the greatest of
them into very Beasts, makes them do brutish things, as if they had no more of
the Heart of a man in them, than Nebuchadnezzar had when he was turned to
Grass, than the Beasts of the Field have. And this probably was meant by the
Prophet Hosea, when in his fourth Chapter and cleventh Verse, he makes
Fornication to be one of those things that take away the Heart; Whoredom and
wine, and new wine take away the Heart, do turn a man into a very beast. and
suitably the Prophet Jeremy compares these unclean sinners to Horses, lustful
Creatures, Jer. 5.8. They were as fed horses, says he, every one neighed after
his Neighbors Wife. And so the Apostle St. Peter speaking of those that walk
after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, compares them to natural bruit
beasts made to be taken and destroyed; and even to Dogs, and Swine, two most
unclean Creatures, and more irrational than any other Creatures in their lusts,
(2 Pet. 2.10, 12, 22.) which is a great mischief to a man, as being the turning
of him out of himself, and the degrading of him into a Beast, rendering him
unfit for any manly acting, and dissolving him all into softness and folly.

And having bereft him of Judgment and Spirit, the less marvel is it, if it do
also bereave him of his Freedom, and make a very Slave of him. It is an
imperious lust this; it makes them in whom it reigns, very Servants and Slaves
to it. Hence these kind of people are by the Apostle St. Peter called (...),
servants of corruption; adding this for the reason of his so calling them,
because that of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage,
2 Pet. 2.19. And so the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 6.16. Know ye not to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey;
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? And after v. 19.
speaks of their having yielded their members servanos to uncleanness. So that
this sin of Uncleanness is a tyrannous lust, it bereaves its Subjects of their
Liberty and Freedom, and brings them under bondage and slavery. A fornicator
and a Freeman, are two terms that cannot be said of the same Man: He that is a
worker of Uncleanness is in a state of very servitude; and a base, a wretched
servitude is it that he serves. He is made a Servant to the most servile part
of himself, his corrupt flesh, and to the basest part of his flesh, the vilest
member of his Body. And that is base that is inglorious, Nil vilius quam a
carne vinci; to be conquered by, and enslaved to the flesh, is so vile and
base, as nothing can be more. And yet what is much less vile and inglorious, he
is a servant to a Woman, and must be subject to her pleasures and displeasures,
frowned on, and talked to, yea to be boxed and knocked about the Ears with her
Slipper, as of old they used to do, taking their Example from Omphales so using
Hercules. Touching which, notable is that saying of the Roman Orator, Illum ego
non liberum dico, cui mulier imperat, leges imponit; I cannot call him a free
man, whom a Woman bears rule over, and gives Laws unto: so that if she call, he
must come; if she bid be gone, he must away; if she demand, he must give; if
she threaten, he must stand in awe. Hunc ergo non t^^^tummodo servum, sed
nequissimum servum ego judico, as he goes on; such a Man as this I account not
only a servant, but a very sorry servant, a vile, base, abject Slave. Now, in
as much as Freedom is a thing of high value, not only in the mind of any
generous Grecian or Roman Heathen, but in the mind of every true Christian, who
are redeemed from Slavery to Liberty by the Son of God himself; and that with
the price of his own Blood, who became himself a Servant that they might be
made Freemen, in so much is the bereaving a Man of his Freedom a pernicious
mischief; and the rather in that the loss of his Freedom does commence into a
base and sordid, cruel and intolerable, easeless and endless slavery and
drudgery, as that of this Lust of Uncleanness is, which with the most merciless
fury rages in, and tyrannizeth over the Fornicator, making a very Ass, and
Drudge, and Beast, and Slave of him. He would think so, and say so, that upon
any other account were obliged to submit to those meannesses, and act those
basenesses, which at the command of this Lust he humbles himself to the doing
and enduring of: Enough this to affright any one from ever giving himself over
to it. But because there are diverse Tempers of men, and some are persuaded by
one means, and some by another, I will proceed to some other Considerations,
which will show it still more and more mischievous.

Sixthly therefore, It deprives a Man very much of his Quiet. I have showed
before how it keeps him continually busied, filling Head and Heart with
thoughts and fears, and making him watch, and pray as I may say, and promise,
and vow, attend and wait for the satisfaction of his Lust. But that is not all,
it engages him in various jangles and brawls, and quarrels, and strifes, and
fightings about the Whore with other Men. Either they would both have her, and
quarrel and fight about that, or else one preferrs his Whore above the others,
and then they quarrel and fight about that; or else some of her Relations are
not able to endure such abuse to one of their Family, and then they quarrel and
light about that. This St. Chrysostom well observed, and thereupon concludes,
((...):) That if any Man love pleasure, and would live his Life in quietness of
mind, he must fly the converse of Whores, for they fill the souls of their
Lovers with infinite Wars and Troubles, and are continually putting them upon
Fights and Contentions in all their words, in all their deeds. Who is able to
reckon up, not the little brawls and brangles, quarrels and cuffings, but the
most desperate Weapon-fights in extemporary, or premeditated Duels, that have
been upon these occasions? The World has several times been made but as it
were one great Cockpit, wherein Blood and Wounds, and Deaths have been dealt
upon the occasion of Lust. The quarrel between Greece and Troy of old, which
ended in the Destruction of that fair and famous City, began in that. The War
betwixt the Spaniards and the Saracens, which ended in the destruction of
Spain, and the overrunning of much of Christendom, with those Mohammedan Enemies
thereof, began also in that. So high sometimes flies the Contention betwixt
Persons engaged in quarrel upon the score of this Lust of Fornication, and
Uncleanness. And therefore by this it appears how mischievous a sin it is in
this respect. He that devotes himself a Servant to that Mistress, must expect
as many real turmoils and Disquiets, Brawls and Contentions, Duels and Fights
about her, as our Romantic Writers fancy their Knights Errant at every turn to
be engaged in for their airy Amors, and the imaginary Ladies of their
Affections. But this is not all the Mischief yet. For,

Seventhly, It blasts his Credit, ruins his Estate, and destroys his Body. It
blasts his Credit, stains his Reputation, and takes away his good Name. How
shameful a sin this is in all the Circumstances of it, is already shown. Now
what but Shame and Disgrace can be the Fruit of so shameful a Root? Whereupon
no doubt it is, that Solomon counsels his Son to remove his way from her, and
come not nigh the door, lest he should give his honor unto others; that is,
run himself into Shame and Disgrace, Prove. 5.8, 9. The Names by which Persons
addicted to this Vice, are spoken of, and mentioned, carry the Disgrace of the
Person along with them in the Front thereof. Such in these our days of
looseness and lasciviousness is the name of Gallant, not to name the more
grossly, shameful Names of Whoremaster and Wheremongers, and the like. Persons
of modesty know not well how to mention them, but with some brand of Infamy
affixed to their Names. How are their Crimes made the talk of the Country! And
that which they think they act in secret, not whispered, but openly spoken of
in the Housetop. How are their Miscarriages, Discoveries, Quarrels, made the
Subject of common Discourse! And, if upon Conviction they be brought to undergo
that Shame which the Law inflicts upon such shameless Offenders, there needs no
more be added to so public a Disgrace. And sure the taking away of a man's
good Name, the spoiling of his Credit, the soiling of his Reputation, is a
great Mischief; else there would not be so many Suits and Quarrels as there
happens every day about Reputation and point of Honor. It has been used to be
said, Actum est de homine, si actum est de nomine; A man had as good be half
hanged, as, in an ill Name. And no doubt but it is a great hinderance to many a
ones rise to Preferment, that he is in an ill Name for this Vice: For what
Person of Quality or Honor will come within the Embraces of those Arms that
are used to hug a Whore? Or what credit can she give to the Promises and Vows,
Protestations and Oaths of that Tongue that is used to make the like Courtship
to a common Strumpet?

But it does not only stab and wound a man's Honor and Reputation, but also
ruins his Estate. Solomon tells, in Prove. 29 3. He that keeps company with
Harlots; spends his substance. And in Prove. 6.26. That by means of a whorish
Woman a man is brought to a piece of bread. And in consideration of that, in
Prove. 5.10. he exhorts to avoid keeping Company with a strange Woman, that is,
an Whose or Harlot, lest strangers be filled with thy Wealth, and thy labors
be in the house of the Stranger; that is, lest thou ruin thy Estate, and bring
thy self to Poverty thereby, whilst others in the mean time run away with thy
Estate. A Proof whereof we have in the Prodigal Son, Luke 15. who having
gathered all his Substance together, took his journey into a far Country, and
there wasted his Substance with riotous living, v. 13. that is, he spent all
upon Whores. Whence it is, that in v. 30. his elder Brother tells his Father,
that his Son had devoured his living, (...), with Harlots, or Whores. And if we
had not this Instance, we have deplorable Example enough in our Times and
Countries, every day almost, before our Eyes: But of this we made mention
before in our Discourse upon the Expensiveness of this sin, and therefore shall
not here much enlarge thereon; only we shall note, that besides all those ways
of Expense, whereon we touched before, as the Hire of Whores, and the
Treatments of them, Gifts and Presents to them, and Bribes to those about them,
Expense in Diet and Drink, Physic or Fees, even that carelessness of ones own
Estate and Affairs, which the following of this sin causes and occasions, is
enough and enough again to ruin and undo one. When the Master attends not to
his own Concerns, but leaves all at sixes and sevens, and is abroad day by day,
and night by night, perhaps Week by Week, following his pleasure of
Whore-hunting; besides that few will regard to preserve his Estate, there will
be enough ready to counsel, and forward to help on that which will tend to his
undoing. Now to be ruined and undone, to be brought from Wealth to Want, from
Plenty to Poverty, is a misery so great in it self, (and yet so much greater,
in that the Wickedness by which it is procured, renders a man no Object of
Pity, whilst he is in misery) that the sin that brings all this upon a man, may
well be said to be a mischievous sin, it is so ruinous, and so undoing.

But which is more, it destroys his Body too, it weakens his Strength, impairs
his Health, shortens his Life, and hastens his Death. How many are suddenly cut
off in the midst of their days, and in the strength of their years, being
killed in Dueis, or other Quarrels about Whores, or in Suppritals with them, as
Pope John the Thirteenth was by the Husband of a Woman, with whom he was found
by him in the Act of Adultery; and as Zimri was, being taken by Phineas in the
Act of Fornication with Cozbi, (Numb. 25.8.) or by close Stratagems by them or
others, as Pope John the Eleventh was stiffed with a Pillow by his Strumpet
Marozia, that her Son might obtain the Popedom. In reference to which, that of
Solomon may be interpreted to be spoken, when he tells us of a young Man void
of Understanding, whom a Harlot with much fair speeches, caused to yield to
her, and forced with the flattering of her Lips; and of whom he says, he goes
after her straightway, as an Ox to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the
correction of the Stocks: Till a dart strike through his Liver, as a Bird, he
hastes to the Snare, and knows not that it is for his life, Prove. 7.6, to
24. And of those that escape such sudden Death, yet how many are brought by
their filthy doings to filthy Diseases, shameful to name, loathsome to behold,
tormenting to endure, deadly, if not cured in time, and both troublesome and
chargeable to be cured (if a Cure be got) so they rot alive, and stink
aboveground; and if they die not upon Dung-hills (as some have done) yet whilst
they live, they are but as Dung upon the Earth. For, besides the Infection
which they are apt to take from the diseased, pocky Bodies of Whores, even
their own Lasciviousness and immoderate use of Venery is apt to wast their
Spirits, and dry up their radical moisture, and extinguish natural heat,
whereby they are brought to Consumptive Diseases, which wear them away to
untimely Deaths. And the fear of something of this nature See Dr. Patrick'
Paraph. upon the place.
Solomon thought fit to interpose as an Argument to dissuade from this sin,
when he counsels, to avoid the Company of an Harlot, lest thou mourn at the
last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, Prove. 5.12. And by which
destroying it, as well as defiling it, the Fornicator sins against his own
Body, as our Apostle may well be thought to mean in the latter end of the Text,
the Argument by which he strengthens his Exhortation in the beginning of it,
to flee Fornication. Now certainly that which brings upon a man so much evil,
as in the burning of Diseases, or sudden Deaths of Fornication, who, if not
killed by others, which is ill, yet are generally killed by themselves, which
is worse, that must needs be judged by every rational person to be a very
mischievous thing: No man sure will ever follow it, that has not a mind to
ruin and destroy his own Body, to shorten the time of his own Life, and
procure and hasten on his own Death. But this is not all the Mischief it does:
For,

Eighthly, It turns him out of the Church Militant and Triumphant. First, It
turns the Fornicator out of the Communion of the Church of Christ on Earth. A
Fornicator is such as Christ will not have to be a Member of so much as his
outward visible Church; he will not have such a Person to have any external
Communion with him, or Relation to him; he allows not those that are his
Members so much as to have Civil Converse with them, if after their having
given up their Names to Christ, they shall addict themselves to this
hearthenish Sin. And therefore St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5.9, 11. wrote unto the
Corinthians not to keep company with Fornicators; and if any man that is called
a Brother, should be a Fornicator, with such a one no not to eat; that is, to
have no, either sacred, or so much as civil Converse withal. D. Ambros. in loc.
Cum fratre in quo hoc vitia reperiuntur, non sacramenta edenda, sed ne
communem escam docet, ut erubescat cum vitiatur, and se corrigat. And in all
the new Jerusalem (in that Vision which St. John had of the Church of Christ
under that notion, ( Rev. 21, and 22.) or Representation) the Evangelist could
not espy one Fornicator. They were with Companions like themselves, Dogs,
Sorcerers, Murderers, and Idolaters, in another place without that City, ( Rev.
22.15.) that being a place into which there was not in any wise to enter any
thing that defiles, (Rev. 21.27.) And Fornication is one of the things that
our Savior declares to be defiling things, ( Mat. 15.19, 20.) and so there is
no coming for such Persons to, nor continuing of such Persons in that Place.
Now cortainly to be cut off from Communion with the Church of Christ, is a
mischief great in it self, whatever thought of by profane Worldlings: For they
upon whom the Churches Censure falls in that kind and measure, are excluded
from the Benefit of the Churches Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments, the Food
of their Souls; they are excluded from communicating with the Churches Prayers,
and having any share in the Blessings sought and obtained by those Prayers;
they are excluded from inward Union and Fellowship with Christ, outed of all
relation as Members unto him, and so are deprived of the influence of his
Spirit into them: In a word, they are delivered up unto Satan, and their Sins
so bound on Earth, that they are bound also in Heaven, not to be loosed either
here or there, without Repentance, and a Desire at least, and Endeavor to have
Absolution: Which Mischief was so dreaded by Offenders in the primitive Times,
that rather than not to be readmitted into the Communion again, they would
continue in the state of Penance, and do the Penance of Offenders a long
time, many years, standing at the Church-door, and lying prostrate on the
ground, with Prayers and Tears beseeching and begging the Prayers of those that
went into the Church. And besides all this, I might add, that even upon Persons
that continue obstinate Despisers of this Ecclesiastical Censure, and will not
be reduced to obedience, and brought to Reformation by this Chastisement; the
Civil Law has used to fall very heavily in Fines and Imprisonments, or both.
But without and besides this, the Church's Censure or Excommunication, even
allow it, and of it self, is enough to make any afraid of doing any thing
whereby to deserve and incurr it, to abstain from, and flee Fornication.

But this is not all, for it not only ejects out of the Church of Christ, but
also excludes out of the Kingdom of God. What earthly Possessions soever the
Fornicator has on Earth, he is never like to have any Inheritance in Heaven.
For this ye know (says St. Paul to the Ephesians 5.5.) no Whoremonger has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. D. Ambros. in loc.
Qui talis fuerit, partem in regnum coelorum non habebit, quod est Patris and
Filii. Has not, does he say? no, nor shall have. And he says expressly in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 6. v. 9, 10. Neither Fornicators, nor
Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And so again to the Galatians,
They who do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and Fornication
is one of these things, Gal. 5, 19, 20. Now if the Punishment of Loss be
greater than the Punishment of Sense, as Casuists conclude, then inasmuch as
the loss of Heaven, is the loss of the greatest Good, that which brings upon a
man that loss, does him the greatest mischief that possibly can be done. O, who
is able to imagine what mischief it is to be shut out of Heaven! It imports to
be shut out from the Enjoyment of the greatest Good that can be desired or
imagined; from Society with God, and Christ, and Angels, and Saints; from all
those Joys and Pleasures, Delights and Felicities wherewith the Souls of
emparadised Persons are bathed, and blissed, and filled, and ravished, even
into Ecstasies of most delightful Admiration. Now this may be a weighty
Consideration to induce the Fornicator, if he has any regard in the least to
his own Souls eternal Good, to abstain from that Wickedness, by the commission
whereof, he shall forfeit and lose so great a Happiness.

But this is not the height of this sins mischief, for it not only debarrs from
Heaven, but it damns to Hell, plunges the Fornicator into that Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, which burns to Eternity. So our Apostle in Rev. 21.8.
Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters, Liars, shall have their part in the Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death. So deep, it
seems, is the silth of this sin, that nothing else but Floods of Fire and
Brimstone can wash it out, and nothing less than Eternity can be time enough,
even for that to wash it out in. Now when to the mischief of Heavens loss, is
added the mischief of Hells Pain; there is nothing, that I know, that can be
added to make it more mischievous: And yet such is this sin of Fornication to
the Fornicator, it debars him from Heaven, it damns him to Hell; it sends him
to those Regions where is Darkness without light, Torment without ease, Sorrow
without end; where his Bed he must lie down on, shall be a fiery Pile of
unconsumable Fuel; and the Sheets wherewith he must be inwrapped, shall be
scorching Flames of that inextinguishable Fire. The Consideration of this
tremendous Catastrophe of the Fornicator's play, this dreadful Punishment which
he is like to be condemned to, should (as any reasonable man would think) be
enough, if any thing can be enough to work with him, and persuade him to
abstain from the commission of so mischievous a sin, and to flee Fornication.

And yet is not this neither all the Mischief that it does; for hitherto we
have spoken only of the Mischief that it does to the Fornicator himself.

Secondly, There is still a Mischief that it does to Others besides himself.
And,

First, It is mischievous to the Woman with whom the sin is committed. For,
first, it involves her in the same Guilt of sin with the Fornicator. It is not
his Temptation that will acquit her from the Guilt of so sinful a Commission:
To be tempted, is no sin; but to yield to Temptation, to consent to the
Tempter, to act the thing tempted to, that is sinful. And indeed the Law of
Fornication lay not against the Man only, but against the Woman also; for it is
expressly said, Deuteronomy. 23.17. There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of the
Children of Israel. The Fornicator therefore cannot commit this sin alone, but
he must draw sin by that Act upon another too, as well as upon himself, and so
aggravate still his own more, as not having only sinned himself, but made
another sin too, by consenting to, and acting that filthiness with him;
inasmuch as there ought to be no consenting unto the Enticement of Sinners unto
Wickedness, ( Prove. 1.10.) no partaking with Adulterers, ( Ps. 50.18.) no
having fellowship with the unfruitful Works of darkness, ( Ephesians. 5.11.) And the
Woman that has to do with such Persons in such Actions, is called (...), a
Sinner, a Person eminently, and highly sinful, Luke 7.37. And how can she but
be a great Sinner, who is an Actor in that which in the Scripture is called a
great Wickedness, Genesis 39.9.

And after this sin committed, it brings upon her Shame; if a Maid, it robs her
of her Glory, which was her Virginity; if a Widow, it robs her of her Honor,
which was her Integrity. In Levit. 19.29. it is said, Do not prostitute thy
Daughter, to cause her to be a Whore. What in the Text is read prostitute, in
the Margent is profane. So Lev. 21.17. the Priest was not to take a Wife that
was a Whore, or profane; so also, v. 9. so that to be a Whore, is to be a
profane Woman, her Whoredom is a Profanation to her. When Tamar had a mind to
deceive her Father-in-law, she covered her self with a vail, and wrapped her
self, and sat in an open place. And when Judah saw her, he thought her to be
an Harlot, because she had covered her face, Genesis 38.14, 15. The thing (as it
would seem by this) was in those days so shameful, that she that acted it, was
ashamed to show her face when she did it, both before, and after the doing of
it. In our Laws the shame of the Fact lights on the Woman as well as the Man,
who is to be a public Spectacle to all Beholders, whether in Church or Market,
as well as the Man. The very Name of a Whore, which she gets unto her self
thereby, has so much of Shamefulness and Reproach, Dishonor and Disgrace in
it, as nothing can have more. No greater filth can be thrown upon any, than
what is comprehended in that Name; worse cannot well be said of a Woman, than
that she is a Whore; it is all Shame in one Word: And therefore mischief
abundance he does to a Woman that brings her under that Shame.

And which is consequent to her Shame, it brings upon her Punishment, (or if
you will, other Punishment besides the Shame.) If the Daughter of any Priest
profaned her self by playing the whore, she was to be burned with Fire, Lev.
21.9. If the Daughter of any other person did it, she was to be stoned to
death. Thus runs the Law in that Case, Deuteronomy. 22.21. They shall bring out the
Damosel to the door of her Fathers house, and the men of the City shall stone
her with Stones, that she die, because she has wrought folly in Israel, to
play the whore in her Fathers house.

The Adulteress as well as the Adulterer, was surely to be put to death, Lev.
20.10. If a Bond-maid were found guilty in this Case, tho she was not to be put
to death, because she was not free, yet she was to be scourged, Lev. 19.20. So
sharp Punishment was the female Offender in this kind to undergo by the Law;
and there is no exemption from Punishment for them in the Gospel: but
Fornicators of what Sex soever, are to be thrown out of the Church, to be shut
out of Heaven, and to be turned into Hell, as we have already shown in the
former part of this Discourse. This sin is as mischievous to the Woman with
whom it is committed, as well as to the Man that commits it with her.

Secondly, It is mischievous to the Child that is (if any be) got by such
sinful Copulation. The Schoolmen make this sin of Fornication, simple
Fornication, to be a deadly sin; and that in such measure, that Tom. 2. sol.
11. c. 7.
Peraldus, a Papist, concludes, That if one who had never before sinned in
Thought, Word, or Deed, but had done all the good that could be imagined,
should once, and but once commit this sin, ex necessitate damnabitur, he must
of necessity be damned, if he die without Repentance: Insomuch that if all the
Masses that ever shall be said by the Church to the Worlds end, should be said
for him, non liberarent eum a morte eterna, they could not deliver him from
eternal Death; which they may do well (by the way) to take notice of, that make
so light a matter of this deadly sin, as is commonly made of it.

Now if we enquire into the ground of the deadliness of this sin, we shall find
it placed by them in the mischievousness of it to the Children of Fornication.
22 dae. q. 159. a. 3.
Fornicatio simplex cum contra bonum educendae prolis sit, its illicit a est,
ut etiam sit ^^thale crimen: This is the Conclusion of Aquinas in the Case;
Simple Fornication, inasmuch as it is against the good of the Offspring to be
brought forth, is so unlawful, as that it is a deadly sin. There is not that
care ordinarily in Fornicators for the preserving, and providing for their
Children begotten in, and born of Fornication, that Nature obliges all Parents
to take, and have of their Offspring, and then does this sin become unto the
Committers of it, a deadly sin.

And to look a little nearlier into this business, How many Children so
begotten, are by one means or other stifled in their Mother's Womb, and
murdered before they are born, or expelled thence before the time to bring
forth, and so killed in their very Birth!

Again, How many of them (to hide the Infamy and Shame of their Birth) are by
the Hands of the very Mothers of them, strangled, or drowned, or otherwise
destroyed as soon as they are born! We need not go so far for instance as to
the Popes Ponds, out of which six thousand murdered Infants Skulls were taken.
How seldom is there an Assize with us, wherein there are not some or other
arraigned for such Facts as these, the Murders of Bastards!

Again, how many of them are, if not at first violently strangled to death, yet
afterward leisurely starved to death, and quite lost for want of looking
after! Tho some do, yet not very many of them live to be Men and Women. The
Mother is ashamed of it, and tho she has not a Heart outright to kill it, or
has no mind to be hanged for killing of it, yet wishes it dead, and is wanting
in affording it means of Health and Life. And the Father, as not being certain
that it is his, (for she that is false with one, may be so with another; and so
none that has to do with her, can be assured that it is his more than
another) he has no affection for it, takes little or no care for the
Maintenance and Education of it, and so it seldom thrives and comes to good.

The sight of it is the remembrance of its Parents sin, and a renewal of the
shame, and therefore they ordinarily have neither that love to it, nor care of
it that Parents have, or ought to have to, and for the Fruit of their Bodies;
so that wanting the Effects of that Love and Care, it commonly dwindles away
until it die.

Yet again, if it live, it becomes incapable of Inheritance, until it be
legitimated by Act of Parliament, and so is disinherited before it be born.

And lastly, What care soever be taken for it to preserve it in Life, and
provide it of Estate (for not all are so wicked, as to be so cruel to, or
careless of it) yet the baseness of its Birth is such a Blot to its Name, such
a stain to its Honor, such a Disgrace to its Person, as it is never able to
wipe off. It is disgracefully spoken of upon every occasion; and especially in
any Quarrel shall be sure to hear it self called by the usual ignominious
Names. The bye Blows even of Kings and Princes seldom have their Names in
Chronicles transmitted to Posterity, but with a Brand of the Infamy of their
Birth set upon them, being remembered as the base Sons of such or such a Prince.
So mischievous in point of Life, Estate, and Honor, is this Sin of Fornication
to the Child of the Fornicator.

Thirdly, It is mischievous unto Religion: It brings a Scandal upon
Christianity, as if that were a Religion that either taught, or at least, did
tolerate Fornication. And of those that follow that sin, may that of Salvian
truly be said ( de Gub. l. 4. Per flagitia ac turpitudines suas, nomen
Religionis infamant; By their Wickednesses and Filthinesses they defame the
Name of Religion. For what would a Civil Heathen, Turk, or Jew say other, but
that the Religion it self could not be good, whose Professors they saw to be so
bad. Si enim bona discerent, boni essent; For did they learn that which was
good, they themselves could not but be good. Talis prosecto Secta est, quales
and Sectatores; Such verily is the way they follow, as the Followers of that
way are. Hoc sunt absque dubio quod docentur; That undoubtedly they are, which
they are taught to be. It appears therefore that their Prophets which they
have, do teach them filthiness; That the Apostles which they read, do teach
them uncleanness; and that the Gospels wherein they are instructed, do preach
those things which themselves do practice. Thus do our Fornicators cause the
way of Truth to be ill-spoken of, and that Doctrine which is according unto
Godliness, to be accounted an Instruction unto Filthiness; than which no
greater Mischief can be done to Religion, no fouler Scandal can be brought on
Christianity.

And as it is mischievous unto Religion, so in the next place also unto the
Catholic Church; for it brings a scandal upon that, makes that be ill-thought
of, and ill-spoken of too: We may give an Instance in the Gnostick Heretics of
old; these wretched Miscreants taught all manner of filthiness of Manners, made
Wickedness to be a Religion. These Practices of theirs gave great occasion to
the Enemies of the Lord (both the unbelieving Jews, and infidel Heathens) to
blaspheme. Their beastly Practices were laid to the charge of the Orthodox
Christians, who were all judged such as they were. And the like befell the
Church again from the Debaucheries of the Carpocratians, who, as Contra Here Is.
Carpocrat. l. 1. To. 2. c. 27.
Epiphanius says, were fitted, and sent forth by Satan, (...), to the Reproach
and Scandal of the Church of God.

Their filthy Actings brought a base Report on the Professors of Christianity,
as if they were all such as those Heretics were, none among them better than
they. And truly when the Whoredoms, with the other Wickednesses of Christendom,
are known (as known they are) to Jews, Turks, and Pagans, what can they think,
but that the Church of Christ is a wicked Company of Reprobates, rather than
any holy Communities of Saints; and out of detestation of their viciousness,
abstain from joining with them in their Communion; as if it were as unlawful
now for Infidels to join with Believers, as formerly it was for Believers to
have fellowship with Infidels.

Thus it is mischievous to the Catholic Church, in respect of Infidels and
Unbelievers abroad.

And to this particular Church it is no less mischievous in respect of
Separatists and Schismatics at home.

For that (especially when so many) Members of our Church do act such
filthiness, gives them occasion to censure hardly of us, as if we were a
Company of carnal Creatures, had none of the Spirit of Christ abiding in us,
and were not true Members (and so no true Church) of Christ, and thereupon to
stand off from our Communion, and rather live and die in Separation from us,
than return to Union with us; and especially when they see such Wickedness
tolerated among us, or at least connived at by us, so that the Actors of it
pass uncensured and unpunished for what they do, being admitted not only into
Civil Commerce with us in worldly matters, but unto sacred Communion with us in
heavenly Ordinances, the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. The serious
Consideration of this, were enough to make a pious Heart not weep, but even
bleed again with Gries. O, the heavy Reproach that lies upon this Church upon
this account! O, the sad mischief that is brought upon it by this means!

And even the Remedy of this, if the Church shall go about in earnest to remedy
it, will not be without mischief to the Church: For, O how many, O how great
Persons must be cut off from the Church for this thing! Of whose returning
after such Excommunication, the Church could have but little hope; and for
whose not returning after it, it could not but have great Sorrow. And thus the
Church of Christ, both the Catholic throughout all Christendom, and the
Particular within this Kingdom, suffer by this Sin of Fornication.

Neither does it end here, but lastly, it is also mischievous to the Kingdom,
in respect of the Persons in it, and Destruction upon it. First, it defiles the
Persons that are in it. Among the things that defile a man, Fornication is
reckoned up for one, Marth. 15.18. and accordingly Fornication and Uncleanness
go together in Gal. 5.19. and Ephesians. 5.3. And so Whoremonger and unclean Person,
Ephesians. 5.5. It defiles the Person that acts this Uncleanness by that Pollution
that flows from it unto their own persons; for upon the commission of this
also, as of every other sin, the Actor does not only become a guilty person,
but also a filthy Person; filthy in the sight of God's Eye, as well as guilty
of the breach of God's Law; such a Person God hates to see, as well as is
resolved to judge.

And it defiles the Persons of others that converse with them, by the Contagion
that it spreads by their filthy Conversations, and Examples, into the Lives and
Manners of others; one scabbed Sheep, as it is said by way of Proverb, deriving
Infection into the whole Flock. O, it is a most infectious Vice this! the
converse of Fornicators is contagious, their very Breath is pestilential, their
evil Word but too to powerful to corrupt other men's good manners.

Secondly, It brings Destruction upon it. For when the Inhabitants are defiled
upon the Land, then is the Earth defiled under the Inhabitants thereof, (Is.
24.5.) and that is a time both for God to visit upon the Inhabitants their
Iniquity, and for the Earth also, because of their Iniquity, to vomit and spue
out the Inhabitants, Lev. 18.25, 28.

A smart instance there is of Gods Wrath against a Nation for this sin, in
Numb. 25.1, etc. Israel began to commit Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab,
and they called the people unto the Sacrifices of their Gods, (wherein all
filthiness and lewdness was committed, and even as a part of the Religion;) and
thereupon all the Heads of the people are commanded to be taken and hanged up
before the Lord by Moses; and the Judges of Israel are commanded to slay every
one his men that were joined to Baal-peor; so that there were form and twenty
thousand that died of that Plague, which beak in upon them upon that occasion,
which was stayed by the Execution of Zimri and Cozbi, slain by Phineas in his
Zeal, thrusting him and her thorough the Belly with his Javelin, as they lay
together in the Tent. Oh, it is a Nation ruining, a Land destroying (because a
Land defiling) sin, this sin of Fornication. And no doubt but the many
Judgments that have been long and heavy upon us, whereby we have been brought
to great desolation, and even to the brink of the Pit of utter Destruction,
have fallen upon us, in a very great measure, for this impudent beastly sin of
Fornication, which has spread it self throughout the whole Land, so that there
is scarce a a Town in the Kingdom that has not been more or less defiled with
it: And, oh, not how many only, but how great Persons also are notoriously
known to be guilty of it! who make that to be their Glory, which should be
their Shame, sinning like Absalom on the top of the House, and in the sight of
the Sun, with a Face of Brass, and Heart of Flint, being neither sorry for it,
nor ashamed of it: God in mercy in his due time convince them of it, and
convert them from it.

By this now, it appears how mischievous this sin, even of simple Fornication
is, even unto others also, besides the Fornicator himself.

But now where the Fornication is not simple, but is committed with Persons
that live in Wedlock, there, besides all the mischiefs, and those in a higher
measure and degree (as the sin is in a higher measure and degree more sinful)
there are other Mischiefs also that come thereby. O, the vexation of that Man
or Woman, who is possessed with the Spirit of They that would see the terrible
effects of Jealousy, let them read St. Chrysoftom. (...) 25.
Jealousy upon such occasions! What Brawls! what Quarrels! what fightings
betwixt Man and Wife, and betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor, and betwixt Rival
and Rival, are occasioned hereby! Yea, how much sin is this many times the
occasion of! what lying, and swearing, and cursing, and railing, is there about
it! Here one hangs himself for grief at his Wive's Disloyalty; there another
poisons her Husband, or drowns her self, out of rage for her Husband's
Dishonesty. Here a Husband turns Whoremaster to cry quit with his Wife; and
there a Wife turns Whore to cry quit with her Husband; I know not whether more
foolishly, or more wickedly, choosing rather to hazard the Damnation of their
own Souls, than not to be revenged on the other for their unfaithfulness with
their Bodies. It were small to say how ready a way this makes, and what a wide
Sluice it opens for the Estate and Livelihood to run out at, and for Ruin and
Destruction to run in; Grace and Glory, Heaven and Happiness are forfeited by
it; Sin and Misery, Hell and Damnation are incurred through it.

Now when unto the Sin, and Shamefulness, and Toilsomness, and Expensiveness of
this sin, there is yet further added this Consideration of the great
Mischievousness of it, and that so many ways, not only to the Fornicator
himself, but to the Wife and Child of Fornication; yea, to Christian Religion
it self, and the Church of Christ, both the Universal throughout the World, and
this Particular within this Kingdom, and even to the whole Nation and Kingdom
it self; what can be said? what can be thought, that may be added to beget in a
man a greater Detestation of this sin, and stronglier incline him to obey this
Command of God given by his Apostle in the Text, which is to flee Fornication:
God bless what has hitherto been done, that it may be effectual to that, in
those that shall read it.

And thus I have dispatched the third thing designed by me to be done upon this
Point, which was to give you some Considerations by way of Motive to press on
to the flying of this Sin.

IV. I shall now proceed to the fourth and last thing, which is, To give you
some Directions for the flying of it.

But before I begin with my Directions, it may not be amiss by the way to
consider, whether that which the Directions tend to, the flying of Fornication,
be a thing feasible, that it may be done or no; if it be a thing that a man may
fly, then it may be to purpose to give Directions for the flying of it. But if
it be a thing that a man cannot fly, then all the Directions that can be given,
will be in vain, and it will be but lost-labour to speak of them. And it is no
needless Inquiry this, because there are Persons that seek to justify their
Commission of this sin, by the impossibility of their abstaining from its
Commission.

Now in the first place, I cannot understand why our Apostle should enjoin the
Corinthians here to flee Fornication, if it were a thing a man cannot flee.
Does the Spirit of God give any unnecessary Prescriptions? or Christ impose any
impossible Injunctions? How then is Christ's yoke easy, and his burden light?
Yea, how are his Commandments any other but grievous? What choosing can there be
to keep, or not keep an impossible Precept? And what sin can there be in the
Act, where there is no choice in the Will? Nemo peccat in eo quod vitare non
potest; No man sins in doing that which he cannot possibly but do, if we
believe St. Augustine.

It is ttrue, by the mere strength of our own Freewill, we can neither keep
this, nor any other Precept of Gods; for without me (says our Savior, John
15.5.) ye can do nothing: Neither (as the Apostle says) are we sufficient of
our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. but our
sufficiency is of God. Yet by the sufficiency which we have from God, we may be
enabled to keep this, or any other Precept: Tho our Free Will be not, yet his
grace is sufficient for us, to enable us thereto. If he work in us to will and
to do of his good pleasure, then through his good pleasure we can both will and
do. Then says St. Paid, I can do all things through Christ, which strengthens
me, Phil. 4.13. And as God cannot be overcome of evil, so neither will he
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, if we seek to him for strength,
but will with the temptation make way to escape, that we may be able to bear
it, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thence our Savior taught its to pray, not to be led into
(that is, not to be left to our selves in, and overcome by any) Temptation.

And let us a little consider whence it is that our Fornicator, who complains
of his Unableness to contain, is enforced and constrained to this sin? Is it
from God, or from the Devil, or from the Woman, or from his own flesh? From God
it cannot be, for he only permits it, he does not necessitate to it by any
Impulse or Decree of his. From the Devil it cannot be, for he commonly tempts,
he cannot enforce to sin. From the Woman it cannot be, for she can only allure,
she cannot compel. (Not to say that the greatest Complainers, that they cannot
forbear this sin, are the greatest Tempters of Women to it.) And from his own
Flesh it cannot be, because that may dispose him to a Desire, but it cannot
constrain him to the Act, both because God has given him Reason to bridle his
Will, if he will make use of it, and will give him grace to subdue his Passion,
if he will but seek for it.

The Plea of Cannot, is a mere pretense, and that a groundless one; it is the
Will not that is in fault. If poison be offered them in Meat or Drink, they can
forbear that, if they know of it; and can they not as well forbear Fornication,
which is as destructive to the Soul, as Poison to the Body? When their Lust is
never so hot, they can forbear while any body is by; and can they not then
forbear at all times, since God himself is always by them, and his holy Angels
never from them? What they have a mind to save (their Wine, or any thing else
they affect) they can keep well enough, and why not their Chastity? Undoubtedly
as well that as any thing else, so the same care be used to keep that which is
used to keep other things.

No doubt, but in the height of their Lust, a good consideration, as a great
Sum of Money, or the offer of a Crown or Kingdom, would hire them to contain
themselves; or a great Danger would fright them into Chastity, as if they saw
that after the Fact committed, they should forthwith drop into a flaming
Furnace; or if they saw that there were no place to commit it in, but a Bed of
Fire, why then cannot Heaven allure them to continence? Why cannot Hell
affright them from Incontinency? Heaven, which for Wealth and Glory, exceeds
all Rewards; Hell, which for Horror and Torment, transcends all Pains.

The most passionately amorous can contain for a time, upon Promise or hope of
Enjoyment of his Pleasure: And cannot he then, if he will, contain for always,
when better Pleasures and Enjoyments are assured to him upon his Continency,
unto all Eternity? If upon any Consideration he can contain for a Day, a Week,
or for a Month, then why not for a longer time, even all his life long, upon a
better Consideration than any that can be made to him of things on Earth, even
the but using to forbear for a while, will the better enable him for a total
Forbearance; for as vicious, so virtuous Habits get strength by use, and
increase by continuance. Nor is it to be doubted, but where God sees the Heart
sincerely set upon a good purpose, he will there set in with his Grace, and
furnish with Ability, and strengthen unto performance.

And how knows he that pleads the Impossibility of Continence, but that he may
be chaste, if he will? Did he ever take right Advice about it? Did he ever make
a true Trial of that Advice? Undoubtedly never any man made that Plea, that
took right Advice, and made a Trial. The Plea of Impossibility, is only made
out of cunning to prevent Advice, and supersede all Trial, and is the highest
piece of Sophistry that the Devil can cheat any man withal; for let him once
work a man into a persuasion of that, and then the next News is, that the Reins
of his Lust are thrown into the Neck of him, and he rides full drive, without
stop or stay, in a high Career to Hell and Damnation.

And now having blown away that thin Cob-web, pretense of Impossibility of
keeping this Precept of our Apostle, I shall go on with my intended Work, and
give those Directions, which, if faithfully and carefully observed, will
sufficiently qualify any man to be Continent, and enable him to flee
Fornication.

And, first, Not to direct you to that course, which yet our Savior tells us
that some have taken for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, and of which he also
says, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it, Mat. 19.12. which
Origin also in the primitive Times did, and made himself an Eunuch, because
there is no Virtue in, no Praise for abstaining from that sin which one is not
able to commit, (tho the but bare freedom from so impetuous a Lust, and so
troublesome a Temptation, might be worth all the Paln and Trouble of either a
Physical Emasculation, or a Mechanical Eviration,) I say, not to advise any to
make an Eunuch of himself, I shall in the first place, to those that are
Unmarried, in order to their abstaining from Fornication, if otherwise they are
not able to contain themselves, give that Advice which the Apostle St. Paul
gives in 1 Cor. 7.9. and that is, to marry. Having before, v. 8. acknowledged
it good for them, if they did abide as he did; that is, keep themselves
unmarried; notwithstanding he adds an Advice to marry, if they cannot otherwise
keep themselves chaste: But (says he) if they cannot contain, let them marry;
for it is better to marry than to burn. As if he had said, Tho single Life may
in some respect; be to be preferred before the married Condition, yet if any
find not in themselves ability and strength to abstain, and preserve Chastity,
let them marry in God's Name; it is infinitely better than so to do, and
preserve Conjugal Chastity, than by rejecting the use of that Remedy, to be
inflamed with vehement burning Desire, and perhaps break out into unnatural
Practices. And hence our Church declaring the Causes for which Matrimony was
ordained, tells us, that it was ordained (among other things) for a remedy
against sin, and to avoid Fornication, that such persons as have not the gift
of continency, might marry, and keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's
Body. Thus De Abrah. Patriarch. l. 1. c. 7.
St. Ambrose, Ideo conjugii tibi datum est jus, ne in laequeum incidas, and cum
aliera muliere delinquas; Marriage is allowed you to prevent your falling into
a Snare, and committing Fornication. And to this purpose is that advice of
Plutarch, touching young Men, (de Educ. lib.) Danda est opera, ut matrimonio
vinciantur, quod est tutissimem juventutis vinculum; That care be taken to get
them married, as the safest way to keep them chaste. Here now for the
satisfaction of Natural Desires, and for the prevention of unlawful Practices,
here, I say, is one Remedy for the Unmarried, ordained by God, approved by man
both Christian and Heathen; if they cannot otherwise contain, let them marry.

But because neither can all, at least, not at all times, make use of this
Remedy; and because even this Remedy alone where it is had, is not enough with
with some to keep them chaste, I shall therefore go on to give you other
Directions, and those such as will indifferently concern all, whether married
or unmarried.

Secondly, Therefore in order to the flying of Fornication, watch and quench
the first Motins of the Spirit of Impurity within your selves; suppress and
stifle the first Desires and Thoughts of Uncleanness that arise in your Hearts.
It Is easier to deal with a spark than with a flame, to crush an Egg, than kill
a Cockatrice: A spark, if it get vent to quicken it, will rage to a flame; and
the Cockatrice Egg, if it get warmth to hatch it, will break out into a
Serpent; give no way to that which will ruin you, no life to that which will
destroy you: Principis obsta; keep down the first risings of the Flesh, smother
the first breathings of Lust; choke the first Imaginations of Uncleanness;
strangle the first desires of Impurity: Cut the throat of your Lusts in the
Infancy of them, or dash the brains of them against the Stones, any way get rid
of them, and as soon as you can; let not a vain Thought have any lodging in
your Bosom, not a carnal Desire have any abiding in your Breast. The beginning
of a Temptation is the time to show our greatest Valor and Vigilance in. And
therefore run the Sword of the Spirit to the Heart of Lust in the very first
appearance of it. Say to thy self, the Law has said, Thou shall not covet,
thou shall not lust, and shall I give way to carnal Desires, to fleshly Lusts?
I will not do it; avaunt, be gone away from me, ye vain Thoughts, yet unclean
Motions, ye impure Imaginations, I will neither act, nor think of any such
thing. If with this Vigilance you shall attend, with this Resolution oppose,
with this Courage set upon, design, and endeavor the destruction of Lust in
its first motions and apperances, you will, no doubt, have a noble and cheap
Victory over it! you will overcome it, and subdue it with ease and certainty:
But give it time, and it will soon grow too hard to be over-mastered by you.

Thirdly, Hold no dispute against any Temptations to Uncleanness: To dispute
with it, is the way to be overcome by it, or highly endangered through it:
Arguments against it do but inrage it to come upon us with a sharp point, or
the keen edge of a more vigorous Reply. They will leave an ill relish upon the
Tongue, and a bad smack upon the Fancy. Hear the Temptation but speak for it
self, and before you are aware, it insinuates it self into the Bosom of you,
and is in your Heart before you can think it got into your Head, with an unseen
Fire, and unsensible Power, it melts you into softness, and dissolves you into
yielding. Good therefore in this case is the advice of St. Augustine: Contra
libidinis impetum apprehende fugam, si vis obtinere victoriam. So St. Ambrose:
Cum aliis vitiis potest expectari conflictus, hanc fugite ne approximetis, quia
non potest aliter melius vinci. Against a Temptation to Uncleanness, sight is
not so good as flight for the obtaining of Victory. He that would conquer
Fornication, must, (as our Apostle says) flee Fornication; that is, fly the
Temptation to it, stand no dispute with it, maintain no contest against it, but
wholly throw it off, and lay it aside; give it no consideration, but run away
from it, as Joseph did from his tempting Mistress. Non fugatur, nisi fugiatur;
The only way to put it to flight, is to flee away from it. Had our Great
Grandmother Eve done so at the first with the Devil's Temptation, had she given
no ear to his Words, set no eye upon the Fruit, held no dispute with him, had
no consideration of that, but turned her self, and gone away from him and it,
she had not been the Mother of so much Sin and Misery, as she has been to her
Posterity. In Genesis 3.17. the ground is cursed, and Adam condemned to eat in
sorrow of it all the days of his Life. What Is the cause? why, because he had
hearkened unto the voice of his Wife, tempting him to eat of the forbidden
Fruit. He should not have hearkened to any Temptation to that, nay, (according
to the Septuagints Version) he should not have heard any Temptation to it. It Is
there (...), because thou have, not hearkened, as we read, but heard the voice
of thy Wife. In order therefore to the avoiding of this sin, neither hearken to
the Persuasion, nor so much as hear the voice of Temptation to it, but reject
it; and (as Hercules did from the Monsters of Lybia, that had the faces of
beautiful Women, but the Claws and Tails of cruel Serpents) run away from it,
by turning your self to sober Thoughts, or betaking your self to laudable
business; as he said in the Comedy, Aliquid agam, ne hoc agam; so do you, do
something, do any thing that you may not do this; that you may have no leisure
to act, or think of any such thing.

And if you be alone when the Temptation begins its assault upon you, abide no
longer in that solitariness, abandon the place, and quit the field, as I may
say, get into Company forthwith, but that such, as by the gravity of it may awe
you into Chastity; or by the cheerfulness of it, may divert your Thoughts, and
put the Temptation quite out of your mind. In this case we may say by the
Tempted, as God said by Adam before Eve was created, ( Genesis 2.18.) It is not
good for man to be alone. Yea, as Solomon says, Eccles. 4.10. Woe to him that
is alone when be falls, viz. into this temptation, if he seek not to get
other Company to himself, to get himself into the Company of Men, or however to
get God into Company with himself. Indeed to run to Men and God both, is best
in such cases, to God for strength against, and to Men for diversion from the
Temptation.

Fourthly, Avoid all occasions of Temptation to this sin, all things that may
externally provoke to lust, or put in mind of it, instruct, or encourage to it:
They are many, and some I shall mention.

1. Avoid Society and Converse with men that are given that way, and especially
at times and places, when and where they are to act their filthiness, or but
design to do it: Their Actions, their Words, their Gestures have Mischief in
them, and are mighty to corrupt. If a Man touch Pitch, he shall be defiled
therewith. Ye may sooner hope to converse with Persons that have the Plague,
and not be infected by them, than to converse with persons given to
lascivicusness, and escape being corrupted and debauched among them; their evil
Words will corrupt your good Manners. (...), says Menander: To converse with
those that are naught, is the way for you to become naught your self. For as
Seneca says, Malignas comes, quamvis candido and fimplici rubiginem suam
affricat; An ugly-condition'd Companion rubs the Rust of his own Malignity upon
him that is otherwise fair-condition'd, and plain-hearted, and infects him with
it. With Wolves a man shall become to howl, and with Cripples to halt; such
Company, such Companions: But of all ill Companions, lascivious ones are the
worst; like People that have the Plague on them, they desire and delight, love
and long to draw in others into the same Puddle and Sink of filthiness with
themselves, to infect and poison them with the Venom of their own Vice, to
debauch and corrupt them into the same lewdness of manners that themselves are
guilty of. Therefore as you would avoid the sin of Fornication, so avoid
society with Fornicators.

2. Avoid all Communication and Commerce with Women of wanton Carriage and
Conversation: No Danger more dangerous than that. Women (however accounted the
weaker Vessel) overthrew Sampson the strongest, and Solomon the wisest, Mars
and Jupiter the highest and strongest of Heathen Gods. Their Arts to seduce are
powerful and prevailing; their Temptations subtle and piercing; their
Blandishments delicate and melting; their Words are charming, their Looks
enchanting, their Kisses killing, their Hairs are Snares to take, their (...)
are Fetters to hold, and their Glancings are Darts to destroy their Prey; their
very niceness, and shiness, and coyness, are inflaming: What then are their
direct and downright inticings, courtings, and tempting, but enraging and
undoing? And therefore if you preserve your Christity, you must avoid such
venerous female Society. Prudent and exemplary was the carriage of Joseph in
this case, as it is set down in Genesis 39.10. whenno saying of his wanton
tempting Mistress nay, would serve her turn, he then avoided her presence, and
hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her: So must you do, if
you mean to escape being ruined by them. Chastity among such persons, is as a
Ship among Rocks; the first it touches upon, it splits. Have therefore no
unnecessary Commerce with them, no private Talks and Whispers in the Company of
others; no close Communications alone by your selves; touch them not with Lip
or Hand, as you mean not to be taken and defiled with them; there is Pitch and
Birdlime in their Lips and Fingers, and Itch of Amorousness of Skin all over;
and ye may as well hope to take Fire in your Bosom, and hug a Flame without
being burnt, as to admit a rude Woman within your Embraces, and not be all on
fire within with the heat of Lust. ( Omnibus igitur modis lascivae mulieris
vitandus occursus est, D. Ambros. in Apolog. Dand.) In a word, neither in
presence, nor at distance, by speaking or writing, either make Courtship or
Complement to them, or have any Converse, or hold any Correspondence with them,
but utterly fly them, and avoid them as Dragons in the Shapes, or rather, as
Devils in the Bodies of Women, and with the Tongues and Faces of Virgins: In
that shape, as Be^^ fancies, the Old Serpent deceived our first Parents, and
with that shape he continues to this day to destroy their Posterity: For as
Solomon in his Proverbs, c. 5. v. 3, etc. says, The lips of a strange Woman
drop as a Honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than Oil: But her end is bitter
as Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword: Her feet go down to Death, her steps
take hold of Hell: Thither at last she goes her self, and thither she sends and
carries many more Fesides her.

To put many things together for brevity sake, avoid the speaking of any wanton
Words, and (if possible) the hearing of any spoken; also the reading of any
lascivious Books or Verses, singing, or hearing sung any filthy, obscene
Ballads and Songs; also the beholding of any impure Sights, either of shameful
Parts, and Actions themselves, or the Pictures of them; and to be an Actor in,
or a Spectator of any wanton Plays or Shows Salvian. l. 6.
, Balls or Dances, or other lascivious Revels, which by the garish Dresses,
amorous Words, and wanton Gestures used therein, do not only instruct, but stir
up to Uncleanness. Cato, tho a wise Man, yet a mere Heathen, would not endure
to be a Beholder of such Wantonries in the Floral Plays, but rather chose to
avoid the Theater. O, these things that I have now mentioned, are the great and
common Bane of Modesty, the Ruin of Chastity, the Debauch and Corruption of
the Manners of all both Gentry and Commonalty; they are Satan's Artillery which
he levels at, and shoots against, and batters down our Integrity withal; or
rather, they are Matches dipped in the Brimstone of the Fire of Hell, for the
enkindling and enflaming us with Lust, to the consuming and destroying of our
Chastity. In a word, they are those sweet Baits with which the Devil baits his
Hooks, and takes the precious Souls of men captive; first drawing them by those
Pleasures to sin, and then dragging them, for their sin, to damnation. Have you
beheld an ugly Spider spin a fine and curious Web, and take his Prey, and draw
it into his Hole, and then devour it? Ye have seen an Image of the foul Devils
laying these pleasing and delightful Snares, and catching Souls therein, and
haling them to Hell, and there destroying of them. And if ye like not the end
of that Sport, then have nothing to do in the beginning of the Play; as ye
would preserve your Bodies pure from unchaste Defilements, and both Souls and
Bodies safe from the Damnation of Hell for being defiled, so avoid these
Occasions of Provocation to lust after strange Flesh, and to commit the sin of
Fornication.

Fifthly, Avoid those Vices, and subdue those Passions, which inwardly dispose
to lustfulness, and incite to Vid. D. Patrick's Paraph. upon the place.
Fornication, such as Pride, Anger, Covetousness, Idleness, Curiosity,
Drunkenness, and Gluttony, for which see Prove. 23.

1. Pride, that disposes a man to think very goodly of himself, that he
deserves to be the Object of all Eyes and Hearts, and so that he has a
commanding Power over all Women's Affections, so that he can but ask their good
Wills, and have their Consents, as if it were an Honor to be his Whore, and a
happiness to them, that they may have the fruition of such an Enjoyment; and
this puts him first upon tempting others, and then betrays him to be tempted
and overcome by others himself.

And besides, Dr. Tailor.
Lust is observed many times to be the Punishment of a proud Man, to tame the
Vanity of his pride by the Shame and Affronts of Unchastity.

2. Fly Anger. The irascible and concupiscible Appetite, or (if you will) Anger
and Lust are but the same Affection under several Considerations, and do
cohabit and dwell together in the same place, even in the Heart of Man, as our
Moralists say. And the same intemperate heat that makes Anger, does enkindle
Lust: And therefore that ye may avoid the one, avoid the other; overcome your
Anger, that you may not be overcome of Lust, and so commit Fornication.

3. Flee Covetousness. The love of money (the Apostle tells us) is the root of
all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. of this Evil, no doubt, it is in many the very Root. Of
old the Poets described this in their fiction of Jupiter's raining himself into
Danae's Lap in a shower of Gold; as meaning thereby to show what a Power there
is in Gold to corrupt Chastity, and that the love of Money is the Root, as of
other Vices, so also of this of Fornication. And we see the Practice of it
every day, infinite almost every where, being dissolved (through the love of
Money) into a willingness to consent to the Act of Uncleanness, with much less
than a shower of Gold rained into their Laps, even with a handful of Gold or
Silver, and perhaps a less quantity of either put into their Hands. How many
Women do, for love of Money (like Flora of old among the Romans, or Thais among
the Grecians) prostitute their Bodies to all Comers, that will go to, or give
the Price of their Whoredoms! Yea, (which is a shame to speak) how many men are
there, that for love of the same, do, as it were, let themselves out to hire
for Stallions to satisfy the inordinate Lusts of insatiable, lascivious,
brutish Wantons! Covetousness then is a mighty Factor of Lust, and therefore
subdue that, if you mean not to be subdued by this; which are so near akin,
that one word, (...), is made use of in Scripture to signify both, and as
intimating that he that is given to one, may easily be drawn into the other;
whereupon it follows, that ye must fly the one, if you mean not to follow the
other; that ye must avoid Covetousness, if ye purpose to fly Fornication.

4. Fly Idleness. The Soul of man is a busy thing, cannot but be doing; it
must, it will have some Employment, and if it have no good, it will have evil.
The idle man therefore that finds his Soul nothing of good to employ it self
about, gives it leisure, and opportunity, and a temptation to let it self loose
unto Vanity, and to give Entertainment unto wanton Imaginations, lascivious and
lustful Thoughts, upon the first, and every occasion of such thinking.

And again, the Body of man, by the labor of business and exercise, is freed
much from the superfluity of those Humors, which are the Fomes and Fuel of
Lust. But where this is wanting, there the superfluity of that naughtiness is
so great, as that like a Coal-mine that is fired within it self by the
abundance of sulphurous and bituminous matter immixed with it, it heats and
kindles in the Entrails, and rages within the Breast and Bosom, and burns
throughtout the whole Body.

As therefore a man of Business and Labors is seldom much given, if any thing
inclined to this sin, so on the other side it is observed, that no easy,
healthful, and idle person ever was chaste, if he could be tempted. For Lust,
(as a Dr. Taylor's Holy Living, p. 96.
learned Bishop once said) usually creeps in at those emptinesses where the
Soul is unimployed, and the Body at ease. And the witty Epigrammatist well
observed this Saying: Quaeritur Aegysthus quare sit factus adulter,
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
Wherein he gives the Idleness of Aegysthus to be the cause of his being an
Adulterer: And above all Idleness, the Idleness of the Bed and Couch is most
pernicious; the soft Bed is the source of unclean Thoughts, and the Mother of
wanton Desires. The time when David fell a lusting after Bathsheba, seems to
have been such an idle time as this with him; it was an Eventide, after he had
been lolling on his Bed, and was risen thence, and was walking on the Roof of
his House, 1 Samuel 11.2. Idleness we see, especially of the Bed, disposes to
lasciviousness, and is an Enemy to Chastity; for as the Poet said, Otia si
tollas, periere Cupidinis arts. Take away Idleness, and all Cupid's Arts and
Darts lose their Efficacy and Force; Dispositions to Uncleanness wast away, and
Temptations to it are ineffective: And therefore as you would not be given to
Lasciviousness, be not given unto Idleness, but fill up your time with fevere
and useful Employment of both Mind and Body in concerning Business, and
significant Labor, and follow that as ye would flee Fornication.

5. Flee Curiosity; that especially which lies in the Eye, (...), from looking
comes lusting, was an old Etymological Observation. Oculis excitatur libido,
the Eye is a great inflamer of Lust. (...)! Ut vidi, ut perii, ut me malus
abstulit error! So the Greek and Latin Eclogists; As soon as I began to look, I
began to lust, and to be inflamed with filthy Desires; to be mad on her I had
seen. In Mat. 5.28. first comes looking on a Woman, and then lusting after, and
then committing Adultery already with her in his Heart. So in 2 Pet. 2.14. we
read of Eyes full of Adultery: There, at the Eye sin begins. St. Ambros.
Fenestra oculus est, the Eye is the Window by which Lust finds entrance into
the Heart. Joseph's Mistress first cast her Eye upon Joseph, and then she said,
Lie with me, Genesis 39.7. First she looked, and then she lusted.

And therefore if you would avoid this sin of Fornication, stop that passage of
it especially, that of the Window, that of the Eye. St. Ambros.
Cave ne per fenestra introeat amore, libido penetret; Take heed Lust get not
into you. Heart by the Window of your Eye. Non vis amore capi, noli in speciem
mulieris intendere; Would you not be taken by, then do not look upon a Woman;
take heed of curious eyeing and viewing of her, so as to consider her Beauty,
and study her Perfections; gaze not upon her, you may as well face a Basilisk
as her: But above all, take heed of prying into, or looking upon any naked part
of her more than what is seemly, and civil to behold. Eye no secret part of
her, whether purposely discovered, or accidentally unbared. Remember what a
mischief David got by such a casual Look; from the roof of his house he saw a
Woman washing her self, and then no way, but he must have her to lie with him,
1 Samuel 11.2, 4. Do therefore as holy Job did, Job 31.1. and make a Covenant
with your Eyes; that is the way neither to look, or think on Maid or Wife so as
to lust after her, and so one proper Expedient for the flying of Fornication.

6. Flee Drunkenness: This is an Apostolical Advice, Be not drunk with Wine,
(so our Apostle, Ephesians. 5.18.) for therein is excess, (...), as if he had said,
Thence springs all manner of lewdness and filthiness, it debauches to all
manner of lasciviousness and lewdness. Ibid.
Oculis excitatur libido, sed ebrietate succenditur; The Eye stirs up Lust, but
Drunkenness sets it on fire. Valor. Maximus.
Proximus a Libero patre ad inconcessam Venerem gradus est; There is but one
step from excessive Wine to unlawful Lust. Drunkards and Whoremasters go
together;and it is rare who is one, is not the other. Vino accenditur libido,
ebrietate inflammatur, said Eric. Putecinus, Wine kindles Lust, Drunkenness
inflames it. Immoderate Wine puts the Body into excessive heat, and the excess
sof that heat inrages it with untamed Lust: And therefore wittily (to note thus
much unto us) did the ancient Poets match Vulcan and Venus, i. e. Heat and Lust
together. Lot's Daughters made their Father drunk with Wine, and the next news
you hear of him, is, That in his Drunkenness he lay with, and committed Incest
with his own Daughter, ( Genesis 19.33. etc.) Et quem Sodoma non vicerat, vina
vicerunt, D. Hier. ad Ocean. Solomon dissuading from the love of Wine, by
reason of the mischiefs of Drunkenness, amongst other mischiefs named to
dissuade therefrom, mentions this as one, that it would incline to Fornication:
Thine Eyes, says he, Prove. 23.33. shall behold strange Women; as if he had
said, 'Twill set thee a working, and lusting after strange Women. And every
days experience does so confirm this, that I spare further labor to prove it;
only mentioning to you one Example, which I chiefly choose to speak of, because
it is so notorious: It is recorded by St. Augustine in his 33 Sermon. ad Fr. in
Er. of the Son of one Cyril, a noble Citizen of Hippo, who had a Son whom he
loved even above his Maker, not contradicting him in any Desire, nor correcting
him for any Fault. This riotous youngster, not content to roar it abroad, and
spend his Father's Estate, comes home drunk, and (now mark and remember all,
especially fondly indulgent Parents) he villanously ravished his own Mother big
with Child; one of his Sisters he endeavored to deflower, two of them he
wounded that they died; and for his Father, him he killed outright. A terrible
Example to all Drunkards, and enough sure to wound any Heart that is not
cauterized, to a serious abomination of so exceedingly sinful a sin as
Drunkenness is. Avoid Drunkenness therefore, if you would not be guilty of
Whoredom; and follow not that, as ye would flee Fornication.

Lastly, Flee Gluttony. Gluttony and Drunkenness were ancient Companions, and
grow too much to be again so in these days: And well might they go so, inasmuch
as the one as well as the other, is an incentive to lasciviousness. Jesurun
waxed fat and kicked, that is, waxed wanton upon his high feeding, Deuteronomy. 35.15.
it is a Metaphor taken from fat wanton Horses. So Jer. 5.8. They were as fed
Horses in the morning: every one neighed after his Neighbors Wife. High
feeding is a great Incendiary unto hot lusting; it fills the Body with
superfluous Nutriment, Spirits, and Moisture, which are the suel of Lust.
Whence St. Hieron. says, Difficile inter Epulas ervatur pudicitia: And St.
Bernard, Periclitatur castitas in deliciis: It is a hard thing to feed high,
and keep chastity, which is in great danger by the delicatest fare. For as
Ericius Putecinus says, Pascitur libido convitiis, nutritur deliciis; Lnst is
fed with Feasts, and nourished with Dainties. In Genesis 32.6. it is said of the
Israelites, that they sat down to eat, and to drink, and rose up to play, i.
e. to play the Wantons, to play the Whoremasters, to commit Fornication, and to
act unnatural Uncleanness, as were usual for Idol-worshippers to commit, and
act at, and after their Idol-feasts. They did so then, and they do not much
otherwise now; they eat, and drink and rise up to play, and too much of their
Play is of this kind, even playing the Whores and Woremasters, and committing
filthiness one with another. And therefore if you would not be given to Lust,
be not given to Gluttony; avoid not only the use of all salacious Food, and
lustful Meat, but all inordinate, excessive, intemperate feeding on any Meat.
Nunquam vidi continentem, quem non vidi abstinentem; He is never continent,
that has not been abstinent. And therefore follow not Gluttony, if ye would
flee Fornication. And thus much for my fifth Direction.

Sixthly, Exercise Mortifications upon your Body, in order to the subduing of
your Flesh: This is an old, and approved Remedy, the success whereof, upon
trial, has worthily been recommended to Posterity.

Use frequent Fastings, not from some kind of Food only, but from all, either
Meat or Drink, and those of some strength and continuance, and that not when we
are unable to eat, but are desirous of Meat, like the Fasts we read of kept by
the Saints in the Scripture, which were continued for some days, in which they
did neither eat nor drink, that is, not until Night, and that which they took
then, was very little, and of mean quality, a bit of Bread, course Bread, and a
draught of Water, though some, I suppose, did even forbear from that too, neither
eating Bread, nor drinking Water. This is a way that will bring the Body low
enough in time, and humble the Flesh, and quench Lust. Sine Cerere and Libero
friget Venus, so the Comaedian observed, Take away Diet and Drink, the Fuel of
Lust, and the Heat of it will abate, and the Fire of it goes out.

But because the Body cannot be maintained either in Health or Life without
some Food, and so there is a necessity of eating, let your ordinary and
constant feeding be for the quantity of it, very sparing, and for the quality
of it, mean and course; no matter how unpleasant, so it be not unhealthful.
Sumenda sunt alimenta tanquam medicamenta; We must in this case take Meat like
Medicines, as St. Augustine said; no more than needs must to keep us alive, and
preserve us in health. S. Bernard.
Sufficit ut comestabilia sint non concupiscibilia; It Is enough, that what we
eat be wholesome, though it be not toothsom. Thus by often forbearances to eat at
all, and a constant thin Diet, little and mean when we eat, we shall starve
Lust, and subdue our Flesh, and bring that Enemy of ours, (like a Town pined
out with a long Siege) to our own terms. And that none may think this
Prescription unpreacticable, this was the way of Eremitical Living in former
Ages, whereof infinite Instances, besides that of Antonius the Institutor of
that kind of life, might be given, if it would not swell this part too much.

And if yet the stubborn Rebel Lust lift up his head, and make opposition, then
use some sharpness to him, handle him with severity, put him to pain, cause him
to feel smart; either by long lyings on the ground, or by praying in painful
Postures, as on hard stones with bare Knees and extended Arms; or else by
wearing Sackcloth, or Hair-shirts upon their Flesh, or by inflicting of heavy
stripes on the Body with the Rod, or Whip, or the like.

This is a Course which St. Paul is said to take with himself; and indeed so
says he himself in 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection; the Greek is, (...), I strike my Body, and get it under me; strike
it, and that with severity, like as a Cuffer strikes his Adversary, till I make
it black and blew again; yea, till I wound it so, that the Wounds do rot again,
as our Critics descant on the Text: S. Benedictus.
One for this end tumbled himself among Thorns; S. Martiniamus.
Another burned his Face and Hands: S. Johannes cognomento Bonus.
A third ran sharp prickles up his Fingers between the flesh and he nails. And
it we a thousand times better that we did by any, though never so afflicting a
Course, subdue our Flesh, conquer our Lust, and preserve our Chastity, than
that we did pamper our Bodies, yield to our Lust, and commit Fornication, and
for such commission to be condemned to lie under Satan's lash for ever in Hell,
to be torn and tormented with his fiery Whips, and flaming Scourges to all
Eternity. Better forbear any thing, do any thing, suffer any thing to avoid
this sin, than for not avoiding it now, go to Hell hereafter, and lie, and
live, or rather die in Torments for it for evermore. And thus much for my sixth
Direction.

Seventhly, Meditate upon such things as may by the Consideration of them, be
apt to withhold you from the Commission of that sin. Want of due Consideration
is in many the Cause of this, and many other sinful Commissions. To preserve
you therefore from committing this sin, meditate and consider: You may ask,
What? and I shall answer, that there be many things to be thought of, in order
to this end, and some of the chiefest I will offer to your Consideration.

First, Call to mind and consider of the Falls of others that have miscarried
in this way; as of Sampson, and David, and Solomon, men famous in their
Generation, for Strength, Valor, Wisdom, and see to what weakness of Body, and
poorness of Spirit, and foolishness of Mind they were brought to by this sin,
and be afraid of that which was too hard for them; avoid that which was the
overthrow of them. Optimum est aliena frui insania; It is a sine thing to get
good by others hurt, to learn wisdom from other men's folly, to grow careful for
our own standings by the consideration of other men's fallings; let us make this
use of their Examples, and get this good by their harms, to fly that through which
they fell: Let us look upon their falls, as so many Beacons set up upon Rocks
in the Sea, as so many Marks of Cautions for us to avoid that sin which was
their overthrow: And let us not add to the Triumphs of sin, nor to the Trophies
of Lust, and be made such Spectacles for others to look on and loath, as others
have made themselves to be to us.

Secondly, Consider and meditate upon the Constancy of others that have held
out unconquered by this Lust, notwithstanding their Temptations to it. The most
notable one that we can mention, is that of Joseph, recorded in Genesis 39.7, to
13. He was tempted to it by his Mistress, who had some Power to command him,
and many ways to oblige him, yet he consented not. He was tempted to it, not by
Looks and Glances, Hints and Intimations, (any of which were enough with too
many in these our days, to draw them to it) but with downright words, she
plainly and boldly said to him, Lie with me; and yet he consented not. He was
tempted to it by her, not once or twice only, (for trial of him, as might be
thought) but many times, to show she was in earnest; she was often at it with
him, tempting him, she spoke to Joseph day by day, and yet he confented not, He
was tempted to it by her, not at unseasonable times only, while Company was at
home, whereby they might be discovered and descryed, but at a time of greatest
seasonableness and opportunity, when he might act the thing with greatest
secrecy and security, when he had business to do within the House, and there
was none of the men of the house there within; and yet he consented not. He was
tempted to it by her, not only by winning Speech, but by enforcing Action; she
not only used Speech to him, but laid hand on him, she caught him by his
Garment, saying, Lie with me, and yet he consented not. Here Is a noble Example
of Constancy and Chastity, as well worthy of our Imitation, as deserving our
Admiration. Let this be ever in our Memories and Minds, whenever our Chastity
is assaulted, and endangered by any such Temptation. Not much unlike was that
which St. Hierome reports of a Son of a King of Nicomedia, who being tempted
upon Flowers, and a perfumed Bed whereon he was tied, by an impure Curtesan
with all the Arts, and Circumstances of Luxury, lest the ease of his posture
should abuse him to a yielding to her Temptations, bit off his Tongue, and spit
it in her Face. If such noble Examples as these be made familiar to your mind
by freqeunt Meditation on them, they will come in as Auxiliaries upon occasion,
to help you toward the Victory over every Temptation that may be offered to you
to commit Fornication.

Thirdly, Consider of, and meditate, What that thing is, whose Enjoyment is so
lusted after; and how lovely soever it appear; to the Eye, there is enough in
it, if well considered of, to make it loathsome to the mind. I will give you
this Consideration in the Sense of St. Chrysosom's Words: Says he, When thou
see a fair Woman that has a twinkling Eye, and a smiling Face, a Look
pleasant, attractive and amiable, such as puts thy Heart into a heat, and
sets thy Desires all on fire, think with thy self, that that thing which so
ravisheth thee, is nothing else but Earth; and that the fire wherewith thou art
burned, is nothing else but Dung; and then the heat of thy fury will be
assuaged. Unmask her of the skin of her Face, and look under, or within that,
and thou shall see all the vileness of that goodly show. Gaze not with the Eye
of thy Body upon the outside of her, but pierce with the Eye of thy Mind upon
that which is within, and what else shall thou see there, but Bones, Sinews,
and Veins? And yet is not this enough? Remember that Beauty changes, grows
old, and withers; that the quickness of the Eyes wax dim and dead, that the
Cheeks grow hollow, and all that fair Flower passes away. See what that is,
that, as it were, makes a Beast of thee: It is Ashes, Dust, and Filth that
thou art burned with. For of this Beauty which thou see, what is it but Snot,
Spittle, corrupt Blood, and the juice of rotten Nourishment? What comes there
else out of the Ears, Eyes, Nose or Mouth? And if these Vacuations, and
ordinary Defluxions of Excrements shall cease, and the Breast, Liver, and Brain
cease to be purged that way, all this goodly show declineth, and goes to decay;
the Skin shrivels, and the Eyes sink down into the Head. Whereupon if thou
consider what is in the bottom of these goodly Eyes, what is within that fair
and straight Nose, what within the Mouth, and under the Cheeks, thou will
confess, that this so amiable a Body is nothing else but a whited Sepulcher,
wherein all is full of filthiness, and of rottenness, and of stink. He
therefore that is so taken with the outward Beauty, that upon sight of a fair
Woman, he becomes fond, and is like a Body without a Soul, would he but
consider that which so transporteth him, he would find the foulness of it to be
such indeed, as he would not endure another should name to him in word. Many,
as air as she, when once dead, within a few hours stink, and rot, and are the
Food of Lice and Worms. Therefore bethink with thy self a while, when thou art
under Temptation to Uncleanness, what a business that Beauty is, which thou so
doatest upon, and the consideration thereof, will very much allay thy heat, and
cool thy desire, and even dash thee out of Countenance. For there is nothing
certainly that so much mastereth the desire of the Flesh, as to think what that
which one loves, is, after once it be dead. And the Experience hereof, we have
in that Hermit, who understanding that a Woman, whom he was too too much
enamoured on, was dead, went by night to her Grave, and having opened it, with
the lap of his Mantle wiped away some of the filth of the dead Corpse, being
half rotten, and when afterward he found himself pricked with any unlawful
desires, he laid abroad his foul and stinking Mantle, he said thus to himself;
Go to now, see what it is that thou do desire, and take thy fill of it. By
which means his Heart was cooled, his Desire damped, and his Lust quenched. And
no doubt but this Consideration will be found again (what it has proved
heretofore) to those that shall make trial of it, very significant toward the
enabling any so considering Person to keep the Apostolical Precept, and to flee
Fornication.

Fourthly, Consider that you cannot act this sin, but there will be Eyes upon
you.

1. The Eye of God is upon you: The Eye of the Allseeing and Almighty, the Eye
of the most holy, and most just God is ever uon you; and if you shall commit
Fornication at any time, you cannot commit it any where, but in his Presence.
Should you ascend up into Heaven he is there; shouldyou make your Bed in Hell,
behold, he is there; should you take the wings of the morning, and flee to th
uttermost parts of the Sea, even there will his Eye be uon you to behold you;
should you say, surely the darkness shall cover us, even the night shall be
light about you. Yea, the darkness hides not from God, but the Night shines
as the Day, the darkness and light are both alike to him, (as it is said, Psalm.
139.8, 9.10, 11, 12. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place, as Solomon tells
us, Prove. 15.3.) beholding the evil and the good; no possibility of escaping
his sight, if ye should attempt the committing of any such fact. And who that
has seriously considered of this, could ever have the considence to do any
such thing? Would he not be afraid to act such filthiness in the sight of that
great God that is mighty and terrible? to uncover the nakedness of his Body in
the presence of that holy God, in whose presence the Seraphims cover their
Faces? Sure he would.

In a Fury, or in a Frolic, or for some politic purpose, such a like thing as
this may be acted in the presence of a man; as it once happened in Alexandria,
where a Tarlaquin transported with beastly fury ran at a Woman as she came out
of the Stove, laid hold of her, threw her on the ground, and notwithstanding
all the resistance she made, had carnal knowledge of her in the presence of
many Spectators. And so we read in 2 Samuel 16.22. how to make the breach
irreparable between Absalom and his Father David; Absalom spread a tent upon
the top of the House, and went in unto his Father's Concubines in the sight of
all Israel. The like Wickedness has been said in these days of impudent
sinning to have been committed in the light of the Day, and in the sight of
men, and upon the top of an house, even in England, that no Age or Place might
outdo the present for abominable Wickedness, and for shameless Debauch.

Yet generally in men that have not utteriy defaced all the common Notices of
God, which Nature's hand has written in the Heart of man, secrecy for time, and
for place, is sought out for the acting of this sin, and the greatest care
imaginable is taken, that no Eye may see, that no Ear may hear, that no Person
may know: It will not be acted in the view, even of those Pimps and Privadoe's,
who are the most instrumental to bring the Actors of it together.

Now surely, if the Eye of man be not to be endured in the commission of this
sin, much less should any be able to endure the Eye of God upon him whilst he
commits this sin. To think then that it is impossible to act it in any place,
but where the Eye of God must look full and broad upon you, whilst you are in
the Act, must needs be an amazing, and a terrifying Consideration, enough to
stop and hinder you from the doing, of any so abominable thing, and which God
so hates.

And indeed the experience of this Consideration's effectualness, I have heard
made by one, who being wearied with the Solicitations of a tempting Dalilah,
at last consented to the Act, provided it might be committed where they might
not be seen.Whereupon being brought into one room, he alleged they might be
seen from this place, and in another, that they might be seen in that place;
and still found some exception upon that account; but at last being brought
into such a place where could be no reason for such Plea, yet he alleged, that
it was not so secret, but that the Eye of God would be upon them even there,
and that unless his Eye too, as well as all others, could be shut out, he durst
not do it; by which means he preserved his Integrity from violation. So
effectual is this Consideration toward the preventing of the Commission of
this sin.

And therefore St. Ambrose was pleased himself to take notice of it: Putas te
solum esse cum fornicaris, and non recordans, quia oculi Domini vident orbem
terrarum? Do you think you are alone, all in secret, when you are committing
Fornication? And do you not call to mind, and remember, that the Eyes of the
Lord have this World, and all the things contained therein, within the view and
prospect of them? Which is, as if he had said, to remember, and consider that
the Eye of God will be upon you in the commission, is enough to persuade you to
fly Fornication. O, remember therefore, if ever you be under Temptation to this
sin, that ye cannot do it but in the sight of God; and that Thought will, no
doubt, be mightily prevailing with you to forbear so sinful an Act; you will
not dare to do such filthiness in the sight of his divine Purity; you will not
be so impudent as to put so high an Affront upon his sacred Majesty, as to act
Whoredom in his presence.

2. Beside the Eye of God upon you, who is to be your Judge, you have also the
presence of Satan with you, who does mean to be your Accuser. The Devil is Pimp
Paramount to the World, not a piece of filthiness is committed, not an act of
Fornication done in it, but he is as one at it by his Enticements and Pimperies
helping to it. Ipse suggerit and ministrat fomenta luxuriae; He finds and
furnishes with fuel for Lust. And as he knows all ye do now, so he will tell
all ye have done hereafter, both where, and when, and with whom, and how often ye
have committed that sin. As therefore you would not have him accuse you of it
hereafter, so dread to commit it in his presence here. As he now tempts you to
it, so he will be with you at the doing of it, and afterward accuse you for it.

3. Even the Angels of God, who loath to behold you in it, yet do, and will
take so much notice of you at it, as that they will be Witnesses against you,
when you shall come to be judged for it: They will with Grief and Detestation
declare, how that, whereas they were deputed to guard you from Temptation, you
refused to hearken to their Perswadings of you to the contrary; and by the
nastiness and filthiness of your Conversation, drove them to forsake their
Station, and relinquish their Charge, and leave you to your selves, to be made
a Slave to Satan and Lust, and to commit Fornication.

4. Besides the Eyes of all without you, there is the Eye of your Conscience
within you, which will also be one day a thousand Witnesses against you. The
Apprehension of which, were there nothing else, were enough to deterr from so
foul a fact. Your own Conscience, without other Accuser, Witness, or Judge,
will accuse, convict, and condemn you: Nay more, it will not only be Accuser,
Witness, and Judge, but Executioner too. O, how it will lash and scourge you
both now and hereafter! the gripings of it for present, are very terrible, but
the gnawings of it for future, will be intolerable. It makes a Hell of your
Heart here, and will be another Hell to your Heart in the midst of Hell
hereafter; for there the Worm does no more die, than the Fire is quenched. This
the purblind Heathens were sensible of, and represented under the Mythological
Fictions of the Livers of Titius and Prometheus, continually gnawed upon, and
eaten up, yet without consumption thereof, by an Eagle and Vultur. Scelerati,
conscientia obstrepente, condormire non possunt, agitant eos furiae, says
Philotas in Curtius; Wicked Men cannot sleep in quiet for their Conscience,
which haunts and terrifies them like Furies. In consideration whereof,
doubtless it was, that Pythagoras gave that good and wise Counsel of his,

-- (...)
(...)
That no man should commit any filthiness either with another, or alone by
himself; and that above all others, he should stand in awe of himself; that is,
dread and fear his own Conscience, which will be privy to all you do, (...),
(as Isocrates observes) how privately soever you act your Wickedness, and out
of the Eye and Knowledge of others. No more running away from Conscience, than
from God, which lindeed with Menander, is (...), a kind of God to all men; that
is, Gods Viceroy and Deputy, as it were, placed by him in, and over men, to see
and censure, correct and condemn men for their Vices and Wickedness. Having
then Eyes, such, and so many, as well within you, as without you, all upon you
in every act of filthiness you commit, how can you, if you but take it into any
Consideration, be able to do a thing of so much loathsomness in the sight and
presence, in the view and beholding of so many, and those such Eyes! Think but
of this, and think of it well, and by the thought of it, with the Concurrence
of God's Grace, you will be able to overcome all Temptations to Lust, and to
flee Fornication.

Fifthly, Consider of, and meditate upon what is behind. Let the last Things
come into your Thoughts, when you are under any Temptation to sin, and
especially to the sin of Uncleanness of any sort; and the thought of them will
be mightily conducing toward your preservation from that, or any other sin.
What are they? Why, they are four, Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; and the
serious Thought of any one of these, is enough to give a stop to the Course of
any Sinner in the height of his most eager Pursuit and Career to sin.

Fornicator, Adulterer, unclean person of any sort, Death is behind. Thou caust
not live for ever here, thou must die; and die thou may thou know not how
soon, even in the very act of thy Uncleanness thou may expire, and be cut
off; and, O how dismal would thy Condition be, if that should befall thee! What
can befall a man more woeful and dreadful, than to be caught, and cut off by
Death in the very Act of sin? And yet how many have been so surprised, and
seized upon, taken and carried away by Death! And what has befaln any, may
justly be feared by all. Remember thy end therefore, and be afraid of such an
end as this, to be cut off at once both for sin, and in sin; and this will much
conduce to a making thee fearful to commit this, or any other sin.

But, secondly, not Death only, but Judgment also is behind. Thou Adulterer,
Fornicator, unclean Person, thou must not only die, but be judged too for thy
filthiness and uncleanness after Death: For Whoemongers and Adulterers God will
judge, Heb. 13.4. Death will not so hit thee as to make an end of thee; it will
but seize on thee like a Sergeant, and imprison thee until the general
Goaldelivery at the end of the World, and then it will bring thee forth to
Trial, and so, and in such a case as it found thee, it will bring thee forth to
the great Tribunal, and present thee to be judged by the great God, and
righteous Judge of quick and dead, in the sight of Men and Angels. Who would
not tremble, and be amazed to think of it, that he should be brought forth, and
made appear in such an Assembly as will be at that great Assize at the end of
the World, in that Condition that he is in, when he is in the act of his
lewdness, and in all the Circumstances of his filthiness? O, think of it, that
in such condition you may be brought into that Assembly, and cannot possibly be
assured, but that in that Condition you shall be brought into it: And such a
Thought, if well ruminated upon, may be highly conducible to the prevailing
with men to flee Fornication.

Yet, thirdly, there is Heaven behind. And, Oh, what have I said, when I said
Heaven! Why, I said a Place, and a State of Pleasure, Joy, Glory, and Happiness
beyond all that the World has, or ever had, or was so much as said, or
thought, fancied, or imagined by any man in it: As it is written in 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. The Poets Elysian
Fields, the Garden of Aloadine, the Paradise of Mahomet, are, yea, the Eden of
God in this World was nothing to it. The sum of it is full enjoyment of
highest Blessedness, without interruption or abatement, to all Eternity. But
who is this for? Why, for the Godly, and amongst them, for those that possess
their Vessel unto Sanctification, and in Honor, that defile not themselves
with Women: For neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Idolaters, nor
effeminate Persons, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And therefore think of this, when at any time
you are tempted to Uncleanness, and say, Shall I, for the love of a Whore, lose
my Heaven? lose my Happiness? Can the pleasure of all the Beauties in the World
(had I the Enjoyment of them all) countervail the loss of Heaven? Is not one
days fruition of Heavens Joys, beyond a Year, yea, a life spent it brutish
Pleasures? If ye would but remember, and show your selves men, and act
according to right reason, you would conclude Heaven too good to be forfeited
upon so silly a Consideration as the Pleasure which Bruits have one with
another; and so would by that Consideration, be mightily fortified against the
Temptations, which you may be assaulted with to uncleanness, and much enabled
to abstain from all the sins of the flesh, and to flee Fornication.

Lastly, There is Hell behind. O, what is that! Why, a Place and State of
perfect Misery, where is an utter deprivation of all Comfort, and an exquisite
infliction of bitterest Torment; where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing to
Teeth; where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched; where the damned
are implunged into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone that burns to Eternity, for
ever living in the Extremities of the most dolorous and tormenting Pains. And
who are to be turned into this? Why, the Wicked, and amongst the rest,
Fornicators, Adulterers, and such like Defilers of the Image of God, and
Members of Christ, and Temple of the Holy Ghost. There in that Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone, is their part set out to be. ( Rev. 21.7.) And this
shall they have at Gods hand for their Wickedness, that they shall lie down in
Sorrow, and burn in the Sparks of their own kindling for evermore. Now
certainly if this were well thought of, and considered by any man that were
under Temptation to uncleanness, he would never be so far overcome with the
Lust, so as to commit the sin. What? shall I go to Hell for a Whore? Have I a
mind to be damned for a Doxie? Shall I plunge my self into Fire and Brimstone,
there to lie and burn, and roar to all Eternity, for the little, short, nasty
Pleasure, which is had in the Embraces of a Strumpet? Thus, thus at any time
when you come under the Temptations of Lust, call to mind, and meditate a while
upon this, and all the other three last things, Death, and Judgment, and
Heaven, and you will (by Gods Grace) be so wrought on in that Meditation and
Consideration, that you will both fly the Acts, and detest the Thought of any
such thing, and abstain from all appearance of that evil.

Sixthly, Consider and meditate upon the Purity, Passion, and Love of Christ:
There is Argument in all to persuade to Continency and Chastity.

It was a life of Purity that Christ led; there was not the least Unchastity
either acted, syllabled, or imagined, done, said, or thought by him. And his
Life is that great Exemplar which we are to copy out in our Conversation. He
that says he ahideth in him, ought himself to walk as he walked. When
therefore you are at any time under Temptation to this sin, thus say with, and
to your selves, And is this to be Partaker of Christ's Holiness? Is this to be
conformable to Christ's Purity? Did he ever any thing of, or like to this kind
of acting? Was he either a Deflowerer of Maids, or a Corrupter of Wives? an
Actor of, or a Tempter to Uncleanness? Where read ye any thing of his
gallanting it to Ladies? or so much as amorous courting, or be-complementing of
Women? To think then how unsuitable such acting is unto the Conversation of
Christ, and how disagreeing with his Purity all manner of filthiness is, may be
one good Consideration to restrain us from all Impurity, and to persuade to
retain our Chastity.

Again, Bitter was the Passion that Christ suffered; Scoffs and Scorns, Staves
and Whips, Nails and Thorns; in one word, the Cross; the ignominious, cruel,
and accursed Death on that, he endured. But what was all this for? Why to
redeem us from the guilt of sin, that we might not be damned after our
Repentance, for what had passed before our repenting; and not that only, but to
redeem us also from the filth of sin, that being made whole by his Stripes, we
should sin no more. So the Apostle expressly, He gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purisie unto himself a peculiar People
zealous of good Works, Tit. 3.14. And now did Christ suffer for all, and so for
this sin of ours, and shall we again do that that he suffered for? Shall we
bring upon our selves that Guilt and Filth which he shed his precious Blood to
cleanse us from? How shall we not only render his Passion fruitless, and in
vain, as to any good to our selves by it, but also show our selves most
unworthy, and ungrateful toward him in crucifying him afresh, and putting him
over again unto an open Shame, and trampling his Blood even under our Feet, as
an insignificant thing. When therefore we are under any Temptation to this sin,
to think a while calmly and cooly with our selves, if we can get but so much
time to think thus; This that I am a going to act, is that which brought Jesus
to his Death; that which God was so much angered with, that he was no way to be
appeased for it, but by the Death of his Son: This is that that Jesus died to
redeem me from, that I might not act it, but preserving my Vessel in
Sanctification and Honor, and shall I be so wicked, and so unworthy, as
notwithstanding all this, to act it? Thus to meditate on his Passion, might b e
a means so to crucify our Lust, mortify our Flesh, and subdue our Passions,
that we should remain in our Integrity, and persevere in our Chastity, abhor,
and flee from Fornication.

Lastly, Infinite was the Love of Christ that brought him, being so pure in
Life, to undergo such a Passion at his Death; and to undergo it not for any
Offense of his own, but all for love of us, to save us from our sins, to redeem
us from our Iniquities, to deliver us from the Guilt of them in our
Justification, and to deliver us from the filth of them in our Sanctification;
and so to make us Members of himself, to join us to his own Body, that being
Partakers of his Holiness here, we might be Partakers of his Happiness
hereafter. Has he had, has he showed such Love to us? and shall we then act
that which is so hateful to him? Cannot all the Love that he has shown us,
engage us to abstain from that which he so much abhors? Shall we violate the
Temple of his Spirit? Shall we take the members of Christ, (as the Apostle
speaks) and make them the members of an Harlot? Shall we prefer the enjoyment
of a Lust before Communion with Christ? and love a Whore better than Jesus?
better than Jesus that so loved us, as not to love himself even to the Death
for us, but give his Life for us? God forbid. If we thus would meditate on the
Love of Christ, when we are under Temptation to uncleanness, the Love of Christ
would damp and dead all other Love, subdue, and cruecifie, and kill all carnal
Lust. We should never be able to love any thing in competition with him, much
less lust after any thing in Contradiction to him, and so abstain from all
uncleanness, detest and flee Fornication. And thus much for my seventh
Direction.

There is but one thing more that I know of, requisite to give you for a
Direction, and that is Prayer. Prayer! O, what will not that do! It has a kind
of Omnipotency in it; it can do any thing, even with God himself; he cannot,
because he will not resist it. Fervent and effectual Prayer, O, it Avails
much! as St. James tells us, c. 5. v. 16. To this means therefore betake your
selves for Preservation of your Chastity, and for Protection against Temptation
to Incontinency. It Is our Saviou'rs own Direction, Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation, Mat. 26.11. Nothing so forcible for the overcoming
of this Temptation, as Prayer. Surely never was any man foiled with it, that
used this Weapon against it, and did not first forsake his Weapon, and give
over his Defense. Whatever therefore else ye do, be sure to betake your self to
Prayer. Prayer will interest, and concern God himself in your Preservation, and
engage his Omnipotency in your Quarrel. It will obtain Grace to subdue Lust,
strength to withstand Satan, Constancy to continue chaste, and in one word,
conquest in, and over every Temptation. To this weapon therefore betake your
selves, and doubt not of Success in every Encounter. He was never finally
overcome by Lust, who continued praying sincerely.

And now I have given you my Directions to preserve you from falling into the
Sin of Fornication, I must now leave the Readers to the Trial of them. and my
Prayer is, That God would so bring these Directions into your Minds, and so
incline your Hearts to the using of them, and so bless your Endeavors in their
Use, that they prove as so many powerful Antidotes against Lust, strong
Remedies against Uncleanness, and effectual Preservatives against Fornication.
So shall God have Glory, so shall you have Profit, and I shall have the and I
propounded to my self in this Discourse.

And all this, and much more the Lord be pleased to do for you and me, and all
for the Son of his Love's sake, our ever blessed Lord, and only Savior Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory, and
Power, ascribed now and for evermore. Amen.

The END of the Treatise of Fornication.

