HEARTS-EASE IN HEART-TROUBLE. OR, A Sovereign Remedy against all Trouble of
Heart that Christ's Disciples are subject to, under all kinds of Afflictions in
this Life. Prescribed by the great Physician the Lord Jesus Christ, which has
never failed those that have used it, or ever will, to the End of the World.

Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now have I kept thy
Word.

By J. B. a Servant of Jesus Christ. The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1691.

An EPISTLE to the Meek and Lowly-Hearted Readers, who have learned of their
dear Lord so to be, who himself will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax.
Charitable Reader,
CHarity (which is the Bond of Perfectness, and the greatest Rarity now in the
World, and in the Church too, the more is the pity) thou must put on, who
read this, the plainest and most unpolished Piece that ever thou saw,
(for the Author never had skill in dressing) if thou meanest to profit any
thing by it, which is the only thing, God knows, is aimed at by the Author, who
always prays and studies to speak (and write) rather to Men's Hearts than Ears,
his own and others; and by God's Word, to work Faith, rather than feed Fancy:
Charity, I say, thou must have, for that will cover a multitude of Sins, much
more of Infirmities, which here thou must expect to meet: Charity bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor.
13. 7. If thou will but exercise thy Charity in reading, and join therewith thy
fervent Prayers for a Blessing, thou may attain thine End and mine also, to
wit, thy Edification; for Charity edifieth.

In hope of gaining thy Charity, suffer me to give a short (but true) Account
of the ensuing Treatise, viz. I being about three Years since, for some
Reasons, retired from my Family and place of Abode; and by Sickness, and other
things, confined; during which time, many of my dear Friends and Relations in
Christ were called home to their Father's House; whereupon I thought it my Duty
to write some Lines to their surviving Relations, as I was by them desired to
do; and after seeking God for Counsel and Assistance, I thought on this Text
spoken to in the following Discourse; (for it was not at the least in my
Thoughts ever to publish this, or any other, knowing my own inability) I wrote
in my homely Style what thou will here find (all except the Title Page, This,
and the Postscript) calculating it to the Capacities of the plainest
Christians; to whom I then sent it, and with whom it lodged; until about six
months since it pleased the only Wise God to bring me to a trial of my Faith
and Patience; so deep a stroke it was, that I used all means for my support;
and it came into my Mind, that such a thing I had written so long before, to
help in such Cases, and that several had found benefit by it, I made enquiry
after it, and at last found it; and in reading of it, as the Word of God, and
begging God's Blessing on it, I found much Relief and Comfort thereby, (all
Praise and Thanks to God) and thereupon had some small Inclinations to
communicate the same to others; and after many struglings and reluctancies in
my self, and with Prayers and Tears I besought the Lord to direct me: At last I
considered, I must shortly put off this my earthly Tabernacle, and having for
many Years been lain aside like a broken Vessel of no use, and compassed with
many bodily Infirmities, I was willing to leave behind me a little scrap of my
Labors to my Children and Friends, to put them in mind of what I had taught
them for above thirty Years together, that they might be fortified against all
the Troubles of this Life, and by Faith in God and Christ, hold fast and not
lose their Crown.

But why so mean a thing as this among the learned Labors of so many eminent
Writers on the like Subject?

I Answer, That our Lord took special notice of the Widows Mites; and he will
not despise the day of small things, Zech. 4. 10.

But what can you aim at? may be said.

Answ. Not Applause to be sure, being conscious of my Weakness; nor Profit or
Gain, expecting but Acceptance: But this, God and my Conscience bear me
witness, this is my Aim, my most humble and fervent Prayer, that some of
Christ's poor little Flock (my Children and others, whose Souls are precious to
me, and whom I dearly love in the Lord) may receive some advantage; and
chiefly, that God may have all the Glory, who has chosen the weak things of
this World, etc. and who accepts the Will for the Deed, etc. Such as will not
make use of it, let them do better, and I will be glad.

None may be afraid to buy or read it, for there is not a word of the State, or
Church Matters in it; I daily pray for the Prosperity of both, but think it not
my Duty to meddle with either, but in subjection.

Two Requests I have to thee, loving Reader:

1. Pray for a Blessing upon as much as you find to be the express Will of God.

2. Pray for me, that I may more and more find and feel the Life and Power of
those, and all the Truths of God in mine own Heart, and may express more of the
Life of Faith in my whole Conversation, and I will also pray for thee, that
thou may find as much (and much more) benefit in reading this, as I have in
composing and perusing it; all praise to the God of all Grace. If you find some
Passages* (in your Opinion) too often repeated, be not offended, till you find
them too powerful on your Hearts.

Thus committing this poor Essay to the Blessing of him who is the Father of
Mercies, and can teach us to profit, by his Word and Rod, and thy self to his
Love and Favor in Jesus Christ; in him I remain for thy Soul's good,

Thy humble Servant, J. B.

HEARTS-EASE IN HEART-TROUBLE.
JOHN 14. 1, 2, 3. Ver. 1. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye believe in God,
believe also in me.
THese Words are a part of our Blessed Savior's last Sermon upon Earth just
before his Passion, which begins (as is probable) at the 13th Verse of the 13th
Chapter of this Gospel, and ends at the last Verse of the 16th Chapter; in
which Verse our Lord tells his Disciples, (how dear soever they were to him,
yet) in the World they should have Persecution, Tribulation; of which he had
often told them before in effect; that they should not expect their Heaven
here, but his Cross they must bear, if they would wear his Crown: Tribulations
of all kinds, Outward and Inward, you must endure: It is your Portion here, you
are thereunto appointed. Man is naturally born to trouble, as the Sparks
naturally fly upwards, and newborn to trouble also, and commonly to new and
more Troubles, Act. 14. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 18. All that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer Persecution; of Hand, or Tongue, one way or other. Indeed,
such as can be content with a profession of a Godliness that may suit with the
Times; that can please themselves with any kind of Godliness, or with a Form,
any Form of Godliness, and that can change their Forms when they please, such
may avoid Persecution; but all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, in the
Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and resolve to live up to the Example and
Rule of Christ Jesus, they shall have Persecution, no avoiding of it. No
entering into the Kingdom of God but by Tribulation. But notwithstanding this,
our Lord lays this positive Command on his Disciples* Let not your Hearts be
troubled.

These poor Disciples were like shortly to sustain an heavy Loss, of their
dearest Lord; he was now a going away from them, a greater Loss they could not
have; and yet, says Christ, Let not your Hearts be troubled. Which Command is
repeated and explained in the 27th Verse; Let not your Heart be troubled, nor
let it be afraid.

What! might they say, Must we not be troubled at all? Must nothing trouble us?
No, we must not be troubled for any outward Loss, for any outward Tribulation,
for parting with the nearest and dearest Relation, we must not be troubled. Yet
we are not forbidden to be troubled for Zion. It is a grievous Sin, not to be
grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph: Surely, we must be troubled for God's
Dishonor, because Men break God's Commandments. Trouble of Heart, except for
Sin, is sinful Trouble. Where Sin lies heavy, Affliction lies light. Isa. 33.
24. They shall not say, I am sick; for their Iniquities shall be forgiven them.
Sense of Pardon to those Souls that have felt the burden of Sin, much
alleviates and lightens the burden of Affliction, Strike, Lord, (said Luther)
now I am absolved from my Sin.

We are always too prone to fall into Extremes, to sin either in Excess or in
Defect; too much, or too little; we are faulty both ways. As for Sin, which is
the worst of Evils, we are apt to be troubled too little. How few fail here in
the Excess, tho it is possible so to do; and some have, that refuse to be
comforted by all the sweet Promises of Christ in the Gospel: But there are but
few of those; most of us fail in the Defect. We are not troubled for Sin so
much as we should; our Sins do not lie so hard and heavy upon as they should;
our Hearts do seldom feel the weight of Sin pressing us down: many Sins lie
light on us; our ^^in Thoughts, our Omissions, careless performance of Holy
Duties, misspending precious Time, idle Talk, etc. and such like Evils, which
should trouble us most, they trouble us least.

But our Afflictions, which, comparatively, are but light, lie too heavy upon
us, and press us down even to the Dust. So, in resp^ct of Afflictions
themselves, we are apt to ran into Extremes, against which the Holy Ghost gives
caution as to both Extremes. Prove. 3. 11, 12. My Son, despise not thou the
chastning of the Lord; neither be weary of his Chastisements; the Apostle
explains it, neither faint when thou art corrected of him, Heb. 12. 5, 6.
Adding a most powerful Argument against those Extremes; Ver. 6. For whom the
Lord loves, he corrects, even as a Father the Son in whom he delights; and
therefore despise not his Chastisements and fatherly Corrections, slight them
not, for they come from a loving Father, a wise Father, and should not be
despised by his Children, they are the Fruits of his Love. Also, you must not
be weary of them, nor faint under them, for the same reason, viz. because they
shall not hurt you, they flow from your Father's Love, from a Father they come,
who delights in you, and therefore ye ought not to faint under them; or, as
it is in the Text, Whatever Affliction befalls you, let not your Heart be
troubled.

It is Heart-trouble you see that is here forbidden; not a filial sense of
God's Hand, nor a Child-like acknowledgment of God's Rod: God's Rod has a
Voice, and its Voice must be heard. When his Hand is ^i^ted up to strike, to
say on any blows on us, or on any of our Relations, or earthly Comforts, we
must observe it, and him, and acknowledge the same; but, not to acknowledge, and
observe the Hand of God; not to consider in the Day of Adversity, not to humble
our selves under his mighty Hand, not to stoop and yield to God, but to think,
or say, of our Affliction, that it cannot be helped, there is no Remedy, it is
common and ordinary, and the like; this is to despise the chastning of the
Lord, take heed of this. But yet, we must take heed too, that under the
pretense of being sensible of the Hand of God, and of his strokes upon us, that
we do not fall into the other Extreme, of being weary of his Chastisements, and
of Despondency, and fainting under his Corrections, we must be careful that we
do not let our Hearts be troubled.

Quest. But is it possible that we should be afflicted, deprived of Liberty, of
Estate, of loving Relations, of the Desire of our Eyes, and of the Delight of
our Hearts, (for such in a most eminent manner was Jesus Christ to his
Disciples, He was the Desire of all Nations) and not be troubled at our very
Hearts? Can we behold our Benjamin's, our Sarah's, or Rebekah's, our Joseph's,
etc. taken away, our dear Husbands, or loving, faithful, tender Wives snatched
away from us with a Stroke, with a sudden Stroke, to be in a moment deprived of
such Comforts, and in such a Time too, in an Evil Time, in a sad and suffering
Time, when such Helpers would sweeten our Sufferings, and help bear our
Burdens, would give us sweet Counsel, and uphold us in the Way of God? What, is
it possible such Knots should be untied, and so suddenly, such Flowers cropped
off, cut down; such sweet Friends removed from us, as lay once in our Bosoms,
and sent to the Chambers of Darkness, sealed up in the Dust, made silent in the
Grave, to see their sweet Faces no more, till the Heavens be no more? Is it
possible I say, in such cases, not to be troubled? or if it be possible, Is it
necessary, or is it attainable? May we arrive to such a Temper, may we get such
a calm, quiet, tranquil, and submissive frame of Spirit? It is Admirable, but
is it Attainable?

I answer, We must not despise the Chastning of the Lord, as was noted before,
we must not be as Stocks or Stones, altogether insensible of the Hand of God
upon us: No, we must be sensible, we must lay those things to our Hearts, and
consider the Work of God: Such losses, and of Such, are to be lamented, they
will be found wanting, their Relations will find them Wanting, their Families
will find them Wanting, the Poor will find them Wanting, and the Church also.
David lamented the loss of Jonathan; And the Disciples the loss of Lazarus.
Lawful it is then, to be affected with the Deaths and Departures of our dear
Relations and Friends, and moderately to Mourn for them; but our care must be,
that we suffer not Nature to work alone without Grace, for then it will soon go
beyond its bounds: Nature must be restrained and bounded. It is moderate
Mourning that is lawful. Mourn we may, but not as those that have no Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13, 1^. For, those that sleep in Jesus, they being safe and happy;
for, If we believe that Jesus died, and rose again; even so they that sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. Troubled w^ cannot choose but be ^n such (...),
and under (...) stroke^, but we must not let our Hearts be troubled, ^aith ou^
Lord. And what this imports, you shall s^e by and by. It is trouble of Heart,
that is here forbidden: But, what is it, that will preve^t, or cure this Heart
trouble? Our Savior answers in the next Words; Ye believe in God, believe also
in me: In my Father's House are many Mansions* etc. In which, we may observe
these Parts, viz.

1. An Evil Disease, or Spiritual Distemper; intimated and prohibited, to which
the Disciples of Christ are incident and prone in time of Affliction; and that
is Trouble of Heart: This may seize you, but take heed of it, labor against
it. As if the Lord had said, I know it will be a cutting, a killing thing to
you to part with me, your dear and loving Lord and Master: but part with me you
must, and take heed of this undecent Distemper of Heart-trouble: Let not your
Hearts be troubled, says our Lord Jesus.

2. The best Preventive of, or Remedy for this Spiritual Distemper proposed and
enjoined: Ye believe in God, believe also in Me. As if our Lord had said,
Surely you believe in God, why then are your Hearts troubled? Cannot your Faith
in God support you, if you act it upon him? But if that cannot, then act your
Faith also on me: Believe also in me. Set your Faith on work on me. Believe,
that I love you, that when I leave you, I will not leave you Comfortless; I
will send the Comforter unto you, and he shall abide with you for ever, John
14. 16, 17. Therefore let not your Hearts be troubled. Believe in me; I must
leave you, and I and you must part; but, believe where I am going, and let the
consideration of that quiet you, and comfort you: In my Father's House are many
Mansions: There is a better, a far better condition for you above, than that
you are in here; for, here you are tossed up and down from place to place, and
are exposed to many straits. I my self here on Earth, have not an House wherein
to lay my head; but in my Father's House are many Manons. There is an House
above, not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. When once you
come thither, you shall remove no more; there are many Mansions, room enough
for you all, and for all the innumerable company of Angels and Saints:
therefore, Believe in me; for, these things are most true that I tell you. And
believe also, That I go to prepare a place for you: I go to take Possession of
those C^lestial Mansions, of those everlasting Habitations for you, in your
Name and Stead: While you are here on Earth, I shall prepare you for those
Mansions; and when I go from you, I will prepare them for you: Therefore, to
^revent those Heart-Troubles which you are subject to, because of my Departure
from you, and to fortify you against them, (for I am sollicitous for you;) This
is the Remedy that I propose you, and enjoin you to practice; That seeing you
Believe in God, Believe also in me. Act your Faith on me.

From which Words thus explained, I commend to your Christian Consideration
this Gospel-Doctrine, viz.

Doct. That the lively Acting of True Faith upon God and Christ, or upon God in
Christ, is the best Preventive of, and Remedy against Heart-Trouble, under the
greatest Loss whatsoever. Or,

Faith acted on God in Christ, is the Sovereign Cure of Heart-Trouble.

Our Lord Jesus is very tender over his poor Disciples, and having foretold
them of the hard usage, and bad entertainment they should meet with in the
World, Losses and Crosses, Tribulations and Persecutions; He now leaves with
them some Antidotes against Distempers of M^^d: some C^rdials against those
faintings of Spirit, and troubles of Heart, to which he knew, they, being Flesh
and Blood* were subject. And this in the Text, is Chief and Principal: Let not
your Heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also i^ me. This your Faith
will be your b^st Cure, your best Remedy.

Poor Believers are but Princes in Disguise here in this World: Princes they
are, Christ has made them all so; but while here below, they are in a foreign
Land, under a Veil. It does not now appear what they shall be, 1 John 3. 2.
They have a large Patrimony, but it lies indeed in a Land unknown to the World,
it is in Terra incognita, if the expression can be born. The holy, the great
God himself is their Portion, their Heritage; God is their Sure, their Full,
their Lasting their Everlasting Portion. They are Heirs of a Kingdom, Jam. 2.
5. Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 2. last. Heirs of God, Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.
17. Yea, All things of this World are theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 21. All things are
Blessed, and Sanctified to them, and shall conduce to their Spiritual and
eternal Welfare, Romans 8. 28. Yet notwithstanding all this, and although Heaven
and Earth lies at the feet (as it were) of Godliness, and of those that profess
it, in the Power of it; (Godliness having the Promise of this Life, and of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.) and, notwithstanding Believers have a true
Title to all the Good of both Worlds; yet, may those poor (but blessed) Saints
be exposed to manifold Temptations and Tribulations in this World; they may
have a dark, and sad, and stormy way of it to their Father's House; they may be
stripped of all their earthly Comforts, may be deprived of their Liberty, Estate,
nearest Friends and Relations, as we read in Scripture, that such has been the
Portion of the best Saints: And upon this the People of God have been dejected,
and disquieted; they have desponded, their Hearts have been troubled, and have
thereby displeased their heavenly Father, who would have them believe, That all
things shall work together for their good.

Now, our Lord, in this Text, fo^bids this Distemper of Mind, and would not
have his Disciples, who had God f^ their Father, and Himself for their
R^deemer, and who had Title to such Ha^piness in the other World, to Despon^
and to be Disquieted; therefore he la^ this Charge on them, Let not your Hea^
be troubled: adding, the proper mea^ to prevent this sinful malady of Hear^
Trouble, that it might not seize o^ them; or if it had, to cure them ^^ it,
viz. Ye Believe in God Believe also in m^

The lively Acting of true Faith upon God in Christ, it is the best Preventive
o^ and Remedy against Heart-Trouble, und^^ the greatest loss whatsoever. Which
Proposition I shall prosecute, in the Assistance of God's Spirit, and accordin^
to the measure of Light and Grace I have received, after this manner and metho^
following.

First, by way of Demonstration. 2ly. O Confirmation: And then to Apply, and
make Improvement of it for our use.

1. By way of Demonstration. Endeavoring to show,

First, That God's choicest Saints, are in this World subject to all kinds of
Troubles, Losses, and Afflictions; and whence it is, and why so.

Secondly, That under those Losses and Afflictions, they are subject to
Despond, to be Dejected, and to be Troubled in their Hearts.

Thirdly, What this Heart-Trouble is, that Christ forbids here.

Fourthly, How, that Believing in God and Christ, is the best means to prevent,
and cure this Heart-Trouble.

First, That God's choicest Saints are liable to all kinds of Troubles, Losses,
and Afflictions; even the greatest, heaviest, and sorest: as we read of Job,
David, Heman, and others.

God had but one Son without Sin, but no Son without Suffering. His only
begotten Son was a Man of Sorrows; and the Holy Ghost assures us, that if ye be
without chastning, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards and not
Sons, Heb. 8. 12.

God's Children are liable to Sufferings, whether we consider them as Men, or
as Christians: as Men, Job 14. 1. Man that is born of a Woman, is full of
Trouble. As our Relations and Comforts increase, so do the Occasions of
Trouble. God never appointed this World to be the place of Man's Rest, but of
our Exercise, and only a Passage to another World: And in this our Passage we
must look for Storms and Tempests: If we can through Mercy obtain a tolerable
Passage through this World, and a comfortable Passage out of it into that better
above, we shall have cause to bless the Lord to all Eternity.

And much more, as Christians, must we expect Troubles: for a Man is no sooner
brought home to God, but he must expect to be hated by the World, assaulte^ by
Satan, chastned by the Lord; our ow^ corrupt Hearts will be always vexing the
old Man, the Flesh, thwarting all the Motions of the new Nature, lusting
against the Spirit. The Lusts of the Flesh, will be as Pricks in our Eyes, and
as Thorns i^ our Sides: We shall have Enemies in ou^ own Houses.

But this Truth is so manifest in all the Scripture, that I shall insist no
longer o^ it, only shall add this by way of Use; Le^ all Christians prepare for
Affliction, by getting an Interest in God through Christ by getting Sin
pardoned and purged, by getting Peace with God and Conscience, by getting
Hearts crucified to the World; and then, when Troubles come, let us bear them
as Christians, not murmur, not repine, but in patience possess our Souls: not
desponding nor fainting; remembering that our Troubles are no more, but
infinitely less than we have deserved. Job 34. 23. He will not lay upon Man
more than right. God perfectly understands our Need, and knows our Strength: 1
Pet. 1. 6. If need be, ye are in heaviness. He is faithful, who will not suffer
you to be tempted above that ye are able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. It is the Wise, Just,
and Gracious God, and our Father that tempers our Cup for us. Many Earthly
Parents do not correct their Children in measure, being ignorant of their
Nature and Disposition; and therefore their Correction does them no good. Many
Physicians mistake the Constitutions of their Patients, and therefore may do
them more hurt than good: But God knows our Need, and our Strength, and so
suits all his Remedies accordingly; therefore let us be patient, bearing our
Troubles with an equal Mind, not suffering as per-force, but willingly. It is
said, Dan. 3. 28. That they yielded their Bodies, that is, cheerfully, to the
Fire. In our Affliction, let us search our Hearts, and try our Ways; let us fly
to God by Prayer, and resign up our selves to him, and trust in him, casting
our Cares and Burdens on him: Psalm. 55. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 7.

Moreover, it is our Wisdom, that while we are at ease, have our Comforts about
us, let us look for Troubles; Afflictions from God, as well as for God, are
part of our Cross which we must take up daily. Sickness, death of Friends, loss
of Estate, etc. we must look for them, that we may not be surprised.

He that builds an House, or a Ship does not make this his Work and Care,
that it should not rain upon it; or that it should have no Storms or Tempests,
for this cannot be prevented by any care of ours, but that the House or Ship
may be made able to endure all without prejudice. So, must it be our care, to
provide for Afflictions; for to prevent them altogether, we cannot; but prepare
for them we may, and must, as was hinted before; to treasure up God's Promises,
and store our Souls with Graces, and spiritual Comforts, and firm Resolutions
in God's strength, to bear up and hold on: We had need be well shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.

Most Christians are not mortified and crucified to the World, not acquainted
with God and the Promises, as they ought to be, nor so resolved to follow God
fully, as they ought, and therefore are so dejected and discontented when
Affliction comes. O that we did count the Cost, when we first begin to make
Profession of Christ; and that we had had such full Persuasions of the
incomparable Worth and Excellencies of the Lord Jesus, as that we could
willingly part with all things for his sake! O that we had such believing
Apprehensions of the Wisdom, Faithfulness, Righteousness and Mercy of God, such
sights of his reconciled Face, and such tastes of his fatherly Love to us in
Christ, as that we could quietly submit to his holy Will, and be well satisfied
with all his Dispensations toward us. So much of this first Particular.

Secondly, The Disciples of Christ, under the Afflictions which they meet with
in this World, are apt to be troubled in their Hearts, to be disquieted in
their Minds, to be dejected and discouraged. It was so with holy David, Psalm.
42. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? why art thou disquieted within me? He
was sensible of his Afflictions, and that disquieted him, and cast him down.
God's People are subject to such disquietments, because they are Flesh and
Blood, subject to the same Passions, made of the same Mould, subject to the
same Impressions from without as other Men, and their Natures are upheld with
the same Supports and Refreshments as others, the withdrawing and want of which
affects them as well as others. And besides those Troubles they suffer in
common with others, by reason of their being called out of the World, the World
hates them, and they are therefore more exposed to Tribulation than others, and
so are apt to be cast down and discouraged: This our Lord foresaw would befall
his Disciples after his departure from them; and therefore he counsels them
against the same: Let not your Hearts be troubled.

Quest. But it may be demanded, Whence arises this Heart-trouble, and
disquietment of Mind under Affliction?

Answ. There are many Causes of it, which is necessary for us to know, that so,
knowing the Causes, we may the better find the Cure. There are outward and
inward Causes.

First, Outward Causes. And the first may be God himself. He sometimes
withdraws the Beams of his Countenance, withholds the sense of his Love, hides
his Face from his Children: (which the Saints in Scripture so bitterly complain
of, and so earnestly pray against). Whereupon the Souls, even of the strongest
Christians are disquieted. This caused trouble to the Soul of Jesus Christ
himself, Joh. 12. 37. When a poor Child of God, together with his Affliction,
apprehends God to be his Enemy, and that his Troubles are mixed with God's
Displeasure; and it may be his Conscience tells him, that God has a just
Quarrel against him, because he has not walked so holily, so humbly, so evenly
and so strictly with God as he might, had he been more watchful, careful, and
circumspect; and that he has not renewed and kept his Peace with God as he
should, and might have done; and this sense of God's Displeasure, puts a Sting
into all his Afflictions, and this causes trouble of Heart, and disquietment
of Mind. And justly may such a Soul be troubled that has ever felt the Joys of
God's Salvation, the sweet Influences of his Love, that has tasted that the
Lord is gracious, seeing, that in his Favor is Life, and his Loving Kindness
is better than Life; Psalm. 30. 5. and 63. 3.

Secondly, The Devil is the Cause sometimes of the Heart-trouble of God's
Children. For he being a cursed Spirit, cast out of Heaven, full of
Disquietment and Discontent himself, labors all he can to trouble and disquiet
others, to bring others (as much as in him lies) into the same cursed Condition
with himself: He being cast out of Paradise himself, envie^ us the Paradise of
a good and quiet Conscience; for that is our Paradise until we come to Heaven:
And this Paradise a poor Child of God may possess in a Prison, in a Dungeon, on
a Dunghill.

Two main Designs the Devil has upon Men; the one is, if possibly, by all
imaginable Slights, Temptations, and Inticements, he may keep Men in a course
of Ungodliness, to hinder them from coming to Christ by Faith and Repentance,
to deter them from his holy Ways. And when he cannot prosper in this, but that
unsearchable rich and free Grace takes hold of some poor Souls, and they are
snatched out of his Hands, their Captivity led captive by that mighty Redeemer;
then all the Devil's labor is, to hinder their Comfort, and to interrupt their
Peace, and to make their way to Heaven as hard and uncomfortable to them as
possible, pursuing them with all dejecting and Heart-troubling Temptations.

Thirdly, Wicked Men are also active in the troubling of God's People; they are
indeed the true Troublers of God's Israel. They load God's People with
Reproaches: And there is nothing that the Nature of Man is more impatient of,
than Reproaches, for there is no Man so mean, but thinks himself worthy of some
Respect; now a reproachful Scorn shows an utter disrespect of a Man, which
flows from the very superfluity of Malice. Reproach has broken my Heart, says
David, Psalm. 69. 20. and nothing more does he complain of than Reproach, and
nothing more are God's People liable to than this. These are the Causes from
without.

Secondly, There are Inward Causes also of Heart-trouble and Despondency: When
God's People are in Affliction, most time that black Cloud of Melancholy also
surrounds them, and Darkness makes Men fearful and dejected.

There are many Causes within our selves. As ignorance of God, and of Christ,
of the Govenant of Grace, of the Name of God. They that know God's Name, will
trust in him, and not be dejected. Also, forgetfulness of God, and of what he
has done for us. We forget God, when we are afraid of Man. Our overlooking,
and passing by the many Comforts we enjoy, even while we are under Affliction,
taking little notice of our Mercies, ^ut let them be all swallowed up in our
Miseries; as Abraham, because he had no Heir: and Rachel, who said, Give me
Children, or I die; though she had all other earthly Comforts, yet the want of
this one so troubled her, that all the rest seemed nothing.

It is an evil thing for us to be wedded to our own Wills. None more subject to
Discontent, than those who would have all things after their own way, and are
mere Strangers to Self-denial. Likewise, false apprehensions of things cause
Heart-trouble; to think God hates us, because he corrects us; and when he takes
from us, that it is all in Wrath. Another common Cause, is our own
Watchlessness and Carelessness, our neglect of keeping our Hearts and
Consciences pure and clean; and in time of Affliction, these former neglects of
Duty come to our Minds, then Conscience awakes, and tells us our former Faults,
and this brings trouble of Heart. 1 King. 17. 18.

Moreover, unnecessary Scruples cause Disquietness, Solitariness, Idleness;
when Persons will not do what is needful, they are troubled with that which is
needless; and Idleness tempts the Devil to tempt us and trouble us: If we
cannot find work for our selves, the Devil will make work for us.

Also when we are guilty of neglecting doing good to others, as to our
Relations, not reproving, admonishing, or encouraging them as we ought, or have
neglected to receive that good from them that we might, but now they are dead
and gone, and we can no more do any good to them, nor receive any from them;
this has troubled many on their Sick and Deathbeds.

Inconstancy, wavering in the Ways of God, will also breed disquiet. And our
inordinate love of Creature Comforts, our setting of our Hearts on Friends,
Estates, and the like, letting out our Hearts on Husbands, Wives, Children,
etc. this is to build Castles in the Air, expecting Contentment in and from
those things that cannot yield it. Also multitude of worldly Business, and too
much poring on our Afflictions, and fore-casting the Events of things. You see
what a crowd of Causes here be within our selves of Disquiet and Heart-trouble.

The third Particular proposed is, What is this Heart-trouble which Christ here
forbids his People, and that he would fortify them against?

A. This Heart-trouble is such a sense of Evils felt or feared, as creates to
us Heart-disquietment, Dejection, Despondency, depriving us of that
Tranquillity, Peace and Comfort which we had in our selves, or otherwise might
have: It is such a disturbance of our Passions, such a storm and tempest in our
Spirits, as causes inward Motions, Emotions and Commotions of Mind, putting
all things in the Soul out of order: and it carries in it several Evil Things,
as follow.

First, Sinful Sorrow, worldly Sorrow. When Christ had told his Disciples that
he would leave them; and that after he was gone, they should be exposed to hard
and heavy things from the World, bitter Persecution for his Namesake; then
sorrow filled their Hearts, John 16. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

God's own Servants, Christ's own Disciples may have their Hearts filled with
Sorrow; against this, our Lord commands many Preservatives in this Sermon. The
ground of this Sorrow is from our selves, from our own Hearts, though Satan will
have a hand in it; and it comes not from Humility, but from Pride; because we
cannot have our Wills, therefore we are discontented. We may thank our selves,
not only for our Troubles, but for our overmuch troubling of our selves in our
Troubles. If we ward and guard against this worldly Sorrow, our Troubles would
not lie so heavy on us as they do: for, as the Joy of the Lord does raise and
strengthen the Soul, so does Sorrow deject and weaken it: Sorrow and Grief does
lie like Lead to the Heart, cold and heavy, and sinks it downward still: Sorrow
contracteth and draws the Soul into it self, from that Communion and Comfort
it might have with God and Man; and it weakneth the execution of the Offices of
it, because it drinks up the Spirits, it melts the Soul, it causes it to
drop away. Yea, in this kind of Heart-trouble, God's own People are many times
more excessive than others.

1. Because, many times their Burdens are greater, their Temptations,
Desertions, Trouble for Sin greater: As their Joys are unspeakable and
glorious, so their Sorrows are sometimes above expression. Common natural
Courage will carry a Man through other single Afflictions: But Sin is a heavier
burden than Affliction, and the Wrath of God than the Wrath of Man.

2. They have a greater sense than others, their Hearts being made tender by
Religion, they have also a clearer Judgment than others, and see more into the
nature of things than others; they see a greater Evil in Sin, and in the
displeasure of God, than others: They value God's Favor more than others,
therefore when he hides his Face, they cannot but be troubled. They observe
more of the displeasure of God in afflictive Providence than others do, and
therefore they have more Sorrow.

3. They have more tender Affections than others; the new Heart is a soft
Heart. A Stamp is sooner set upon Wax than upon a Stone. A wicked Man has more
cause to be troubled than a godly Man; but he is not a Man of that tenderness
and sense, and therefore is not so affected, either with God's dealings with
him, or with his dealings with God.

Thus we find often in Scripture good Souls depressed with Sorrow. David said,
he was like a Skin-bottle in the Smoke all wrinkled and dried up. Read Psalm.
38. and Psalm. 39. 11. When thou with Rebukes do correct Man for Sin, (that
is, by Sicknesses, death of Relations, and other Losses) thou make his Beauty
(that is, of his outward Man) to consume away like a Moth. Whereas the Beauty
of the Soul grows fair by Affliction, but that of the Body is blasted. Age,
Sickness, Losses, will make the Beauty of the Body to fade, but of the Soul to
shine. 2 Cor. 4. 14. Though our outward Man does decay and perish, our inward
Man is renewed day by day. But for worldly Sorrow; that, too often, not only
weakneth the Body, but also causes Heart-trouble. A merry Heart does goe^ like
a Medicine, but a broken Spirit dries the bones, Prove. 17. 22.

Quest. But is this worldly Sorrow lawful and commendable?

Answ. No surely, for there are many Evils in it, which we should avoid. As,

1st. Impatience and Murmuring against God, that is an effect of immoderate
Sorrow: when our Wills are crossed, we cannot bear it, for want of Self-denial.

2ly. Quarrelling at Instruments.

3ly. Using indirect means for our Relief. It is better to pine away in our
Afflictions, than to be freed from them b^ sinning.

4ly. Desponding and distrustful though^ of God. Is his Mercy clean gone? wi^
he be favorable no more? Psalm. 77. 7, 8.

5ly. Questioning our Interest in God* merely because of the Affliction upon
us* Judge. 6. 13. If God be with us, why is a^ this befallen us? Not considering
how har^ soever God deals with his People, ye^ he loves them, Heb. 12. 6.

6ly. Sometimes Atheistical Thoughts do arise, as if there were no God, no
Providence, Psalm. 73. 13. as if it were in vain to serve the Lord.

7ly. This worldly Sorrow indisposeth to all good Duties; it makes a Man like
an Instrument out of Tune, or a Bone out of Joint; which makes the Body move
both uncomely and painfully: it unfits for Duty to God and Man.

8ly. It makes a Man forget former Mercies, and overlook present Mercies; all
is nothing under present Sufferings; Give me Children, or else I dye.

9ly. It makes us unfit to receive Mercies, and to embrace the best Counsels;
such Plasters will not stick, they refuse to be comforted. Psalm. 77. 2.

10ly. It disposes us to receive any Temptation: Satan has never more
advantage than upon Discontent.

11ly. It hinders Beginners from coming into the Ways of God.

12ly. It rejoiceth and hardneth the Wicked, and it grieves and damps the
Spirits of our Friends. All these, and many more Evils are in worldly Sorrow.

Therefore, this Evil Temper we must labor against, and not suffer our selves
to be dej^cted in Sickness, contempt in the World, loss of Friends and
Relations, loss of Honor, and Earthly Interest. May we only think to be
exempted from Chastisements, whereof all God's Children are partakers? Heb. 12.
8. And must God make a new way to Heaven for us? Or, do we think it best for us
to live here for ever, in Ease, and Plenty, and Honor, and never see a Change?
No, surely, it is in vain to think so: It becomes us betimes, to prepare for
Crosses. None so strong, lively, and brisk now, but they shall shortly wither
and decay. None hold their Heads so high now, but they must shortly lay them
down in the Dust. We, and our dearest Relations must part.

It would be our wisdom, to turn the stream of our Sorrow for Losses and
Crosses, into godly Sorrow for Sin, then it will run in its right Channel. Let
our Sins lie heavy upon us, and then our Afflictions will lie light: Let us
grow weary of our Sins, not of our Sufferings. God does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3. 33. Let us consider also, the real
spiritual benefit of Afflictions: God aims at our Profit; and in good time, in
the best time he will send Deliverance. And be sure, those that are not
unmindful of their Duty, God will not be unmindful of their Safety.

But that which should mostly affect us, and make us take heed of immoderate
worldly Sorrow, is, to consider, that this kind of Sorrow of Heart, is God's
Curse, imprecated on God's Enemies; Lament. 3. 65. Give them Sorrow of Heart,
thy Curse. As godly Sorrow is God's Blessing, a Grace of God's Spirit, a Fruit
of the Covenant of Grace, and a Fruit of Faith, Zech. 12. 10. So worldly Sorrow
is God's Curse, and a bitter Fruit of Unbelief. They that sorrow for Sin shall
be comforted, Matthew. 5. 4. but, they that mourn immoderately for outward
Losses, there shall be none to comfort them. This is the first piece of
Heart-Trouble which Jesus Christ has forbidden, Let not your Hearts be
troubled, that is, not filled, and overcome with worldly Sorrow: what ever your
Losses and Crosses be, let not your Sorrow go beyond its lawful bounds; take
heed, Let not your Hearts be troubled.

Secondly, Another piece of Heart-Trouble is Sinful Fear. And against this
Distemper also Christ counsels his Disciples, Let not your Heart be
troubled, nor let it be afraid, as ver. 27. As if he had said, Let not that
distemper of base slavish Fear seize your Hearts.

This Fear is a Passion, or rather a Perturbation of Mind, whereby, upon the
sense of approaching Evils, the Mind is discomposed and disordered, and the
Heart troubled and dejected.

This Fear is a Tyrant where it comes, and it tyrannizeth where it prevails, as
Job 4. 14, 15. We read how it prevailed over that famous Believer, the Father
of Believers, Abraham, to his prejudice, and to the Discredit of his Religion,
who for Fear denied his Wife once and again, Genesis 12. and Genesis 20. And good
Isaa^ was taken in the same Fault, Genesis 26. This Fear troubles Men's Peace, and
disquiets their Minds, that they are sai^ sometimes to be like the Leaves of
the Forest; and this Fear is often forbidder to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. And to
Isaac, Genesis 26. 24. And when Israel was in the greatest Dangers that ever Men
were, they were forbid to Fear; Exodus 14. 13. Isa. 8. 12. And in the New
Testament, our Lord strongly cautions against this Fear, Luke 12. 4, 32. Rev.
2. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Slavish Fear troubles
the Heart more than any thing.

Object. But may we not fear God's Judgments? Did not good Josiah tremble at
them? And did not holy David say in Psalm. 119. 120. I am afraid of thy
Judgments?

Answ. Doubtless, it is our Duties so to do: When we see the same Sins abound,
for which God has executed his Judgments in former times, we ought to lay them
to heart, and to be affected, Jer. 7. 12. Luke 17. 26, etc. Remember Lots Wife,
said our Lord. So, 1 Cor. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 6. Romans 1. 18. Zeph. 3. 6, 7. a
remakable Scripture.

Although it went well with Nehemiah himself, yet had he a sad Resentment of the
State of Jerusalem, Nehem. 1.

God's People have tender Hearts. Wicked Men have Hearts of Stone; when God
smites them, they are not grieved, Jer. 5. 3.

But we must distinguish of Fear.

1. There is a Natural Lawful Fear, when Evils are approaching to our Bodies,
or Names, or Friends, or the like, Dangers are apparent, it is natural to fear.
This was in the best Men in the World; it was in Christ himself, Mark 12. 14,
15. Also it is said, He feared, and was sore amazed, Mar. 14. 33. ye^ without
Sin.

Secondly, There is a lawful filial Fear of God's Judgments, which arises from
the consideration of the Evil of Sin, and of God's Righteousness, of his hatred
of Sin, and his wrath against it; which Fear produces, Repentance,
Self-examination, a turning to God with our whole Hearts, through Reformation,
and an endeavor to secure our selves in God's Covenant, and to hide our
Selves. Prove. 22. 3. A prudent Man foreseeth the Evil* and hides himself. A
striving to get into Christ, and to get clear Evidences ^^ God's Love to us in
Christ: I say, such ^ Fear, that works these Effects, is a great Duty.

Thirdly, There is a base slavish Fear of approaching Evils, arising from our
Misapprehensions of God; producing in us unworthy Thoughts, sinking into
Despondency, and inciting to Murmuring and Impatience, and putting us upon
sinful Shifts, the use of unlawful means to prevent or escape Dangers; a Fear
of Despondency, a vexatious, distracting Fear, that drives from God, and unfits
for Service: A tormenting, disquieting Fear, that unsettles, and discomposeth
our Minds, disturbs our Peace, suspends our Acts of Faith, and disposes us to
diffidence, distrust, and impatience; This is the Fear that Christ would not
have his Peoples Heart troubled with.

Thirdly, Another piece of Heart trouble is Care, vexatious distracting Care,
which our Lord would not have his Disciples trouble themselves with, and
therefore he uses so many powerful Arguments to dissuade them from it, Matthew.
6. from ver. 25. onward. 1st. He assures us, it is God that takes care for our
bodily Life, we trust him with that, how much more should we for Food and
Raiment. 2ly. Says he, Your Father takes care for the Fowls, and provides for
them, Are ye not much better than they? 3ly. He clotheth the Lillies, And will
he not clothe you? 4ly. You cannot by all your care make your condition better
than God has appointed it shall be, ver. 27. 5ly. Your heavenly Father knows
you want all these things. 6ly. They that are ignorant of God, and of his
Fatherly Care and good Providence, that have no God to care for them, they
trouble themselves with those Cares; therefore you should not do so, who have
an heavenly Father that dearly loves you, and looks after you. 7ly. Yo^ have
the Promise of the faithful God, to have all Necessaries provided for you while
you make it your care to Serve, and Please, and Trust him. Ver. 23. All these
things shall be added unto you. 8ly. We have no cause to be thoughtful for time
to come, because every day brings evil enough with it; and, therefore it is no
wisdom to perplex our selves with Cares ver. last. So again, Luke 21. 34. Phil.
4* 6. Be careful in nothing: Our Lord als^ shows us how prejudicial such Cares
ar^ to our Profiting by the Word. Mat. 13. 2^ And, expressly commands us, To
cast o^ Cares upon him, for he cares for us, 1 Pe^ 5. 7.

Fourthly, Despondency of Spirit, Dejectedness, Distrust, Discouragement, are
other pieces of Heart-trouble. Such as was in David, Psalm. 142. 3, 4, 5. and
143. 4* and Psalm. 42. 5. Casting down, breed* Disquietment, because it springs
from Pride, which is a turbulent Passion; an^ every thing that crosses and
disappoint it, causes a Combustion in the Mind When a Man cannot come down,
an^ stoop to that condition that God casts him into, then is he discontented;
and this comes from his Pride.

A Christian should be very careful to keep up his Spirits, when his condition
in the World falls down. Could we but bring our Minds to our Conditions, to
like and be pleased with our Conditions, as being certainly persuaded that our
present condition is best for us: It would be all as good, all as well, all as
comfortable to us, as if we could bring our Conditions to our Minds; for one of
these must be done, or else we shall never be free from Heart-trouble while we
live: Either our Minds must be brought just even to, and suited and compliant to
our Conditions, be it Sickness, Poverty, Shame, Prison, etc. or, our Conditions
must be suited just even to our Minds. We have a mind to Health, to Liberty,
etc. we must have them, or we are troubled. Now, this latter is wholly and
altogether out of our Power, we cannot add a Cubit to our Stature. It is the
Lord that appoints all our Conditions for us; we cannot make our Conditions
Happy, Honorable, etc. of our selves, and without God: But the former is in
our Power, by the help of God's Spirit of Grace, we may bring our Minds to our
Conditions: it is an holy Art, attainable in the use of God's means.
Contentment in, and with our Condition, is the bringing of our Minds to our
Conditions to lie even, and suitable, and square on^ with the other; and this
is, as I said, a^ holy Art, attainable by Christians, Phil* 4. 11. Saint Paul
had learned it, and s^ may other Christians. It is the sutableness between our
Minds, and our Conditions, that breeds quiet and content: an^ if we have not
quiet in our own Minds, a^ outward Comforts will do no more good than a silken
Stocken to a scabbed Leg or, a golden Slipper, to a gouty Foot.

Now, it is only God that can, but never will (except in wrath) bring an^ Man's
Condition to his Mind; for the^ his Condition should be changed almo^^ every
moment; so mutable is Man'^ Mind: God will not bring the condition of the
Wicked to their mind, (except i^ Wrath, as was said;) for, as their ou^ ward
Prosperity does increase, so do their desires after more: Cressit amor Nummi,
etc. And the wise Man tells us, T^^ Eye is never satisfied with seeing. And the
more they have, the more they crave. The^ can never have enough. And for the
God^ themselves, they are not so free from Covetousness, as they should be, but
still need to learn this Lesson of Contentment, and to be learning of it all
their days. And most commonly, if not always, God by his Grace brings their
Minds to their Conditions, and not their Conditions to their Minds. And for
this, wise Agur prays, Prove. 30. 9. Two dangerous Extremes he prays against,
the one is Poverty, that would breed Discontent, in that his Mind would be
below his Condition, debased to vile and sinful Practices, as Stealing, etc.
The other is Riches, that would breed Discontent, in that his Mind would be
above his Condition, and that would lift him up to base Pride, and
forgetfulness of God; therefore he begs a sutableness and convenience between
his Mind and his Condition: Feed me with food Convenient.

Certainly we shall never be free from Heart-trouble, till our Minds be brought
suitable to our Conditions, and such a frame would prevent Casting-down in time
of Affliction. To like our Condition, to be pleased and satisfied with it, and
with the holy Will of God in it; that is, to be content, content with Sickness,
Poverty, Shame, Prison, loss of Relations and Friends, etc. In a word, when our
Wills lie even with God's Will, (as in all reason they should,) and our Minds
lie even with our Conditions, then have we inward Peace and Tranquillity,
Quietness and Contentment, and never till then: and then Sickness is as good as
Health* and Poverty as good as Riches; and ^ Prison, etc. And this is that
blessed Frame of Spirit we must labor for, and we our selves shall have the
sweetness o^ it: otherwise, it is in a Man's Mind, as i^ is with the Body when
Bones are out o^ Joint, there is nothing but pain and trouble; but this
bringing of our Minds t^ our Conditions, is as the Setting of the Bone again.
Casting down our selves Despondency, Discouragement, which arise from
Discontent, are great pieces o^ Heart-trouble.

This distrust of God's Providence is ^ grand Evil; when we think we cannon
live, unless we have a greater portion o^ earthly things, and this sets us upon
ca^ king Cares, we know not how we an^ ours shall be provided for, etc. Now
this we may cure, by casting our selve^ upon God's Promises. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Psalm.
34. 10. and 84. 11. Heb. 13. 5. Let us cast our selves on God's Providence:
Will he provide for Ravens, and clothe Lillies, and neglect his own Children?
It cannot be imagined.

Earthly things are but a vain show, they can give us no joy of Heart, nor
Peace of Conscience; they cannot add one Cubit to our Stature, nor one moment
to our Lives.

Moreover, this happy state of Mind is attainable. Eli had it, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
and David, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
Therefore let us labor for such a Spirit; such a contented frame of Mind is
worth a Kingdom: without it, Godliness it self is not great Gain: It must be
labored for; Paul said, he had learned it; it was a hard Lesson, but sweet
when learned.

Fifthly; Persecution may cause Heart-trouble; when Men are offended. Mat. 13.
21. when Peter was an offense to Christ, he was a trouble to him. Our Lord did
on purpose foretell his Disciples what Persecutions they should undergo, that
they might not be offended, Joh. 16. 1. fore-warned, fore-arm'd. It is a
blessed thing not to be offended at Persecution for Christ. He foretold his
Disciples, the Night before his Passion, that all of them should be offended at
him that Night, Mat. 26. 31, 56. Which came to pass, for one of them openly
denied him, and the rest forsook him and fled. To be troubled at Persecution
for Christ's sake, is to be offended at the Cross of Christ; and that he would
not have his Disciples to be by any means; Mark 8. last.

Object. But is it not said, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they that love
thy Law, and nothing shall offend them? How the^ come the People of God to be
offended?

I answer; They that truly love God* Law, because they love God, such shall
have Peace with God, and with their ow^ Consciences, and that is great Peace,
an^ nothing shall offend them; that is, much trouble them, since they have
peace wit^ God, and with their own Consciences* Outward Losses and Crosses are
easil^ born, they shall make no breach upon their inward Peace. They that have
this Character of God's Children, will not be stumbled at God's Dispensations
let them be never so cross to their Desires, because they have a God to fly
unto in all their Troubles, and a sure Covenant to rest upon: Therefore the
Reproaches cast on them, and on the Ways of God, do not scandalize them, for
they have found God in that very way which others speak evil of; they are not
so offended by any thing that attends the Way of God, as to dislike or forsake
that Way. Nevertheless we must take heed that we be not offended.

Sixthly; Temptations from Satan may cause Heart-trouble and Vexation: Satan's
Suggestions, his fiery Darts, these tormenting Thoughts which he casts into the
Minds of Christ's Disciples, create to them much Disturbance and Heart-trouble.
So soon as any Man is plucked out of the Devil's Hands, by the mighty Power of
Christ's Spirit, he falls upon him speedily with all his force, to trouble such
a Soul and vex it; so that he shall enjoy little peace if Satan can hinder it.
So long as the Devil keeps possession in the Soul, he keeps all in peace, (a
sad Peace!) But when a stronger than he comes, and casts out this strong Man
armed, then Satan rages, to recover his lost Captive Soul, and vexes that
Soul with all his Temptations. But let not this break your Peace, nor cause
Heart-trouble. As Christ has overcome the World, and therefore bids his
Disciples to be of good cheer, Joh. 16. 20. So has he also overcome the Devil,
he has trodden this Serpent under his Feet already, and this Prince of Peace
will tread him under your feet also shortly: Therefore, Let not your Hearts be
troubled.

Seventhly; Desertion, another (and not the least) piece of Heart-trouble; this
may be the case of Christ's Disciples. We read of the Saints complaining that
God had forsaken them; and when he hides his Face, they cannot but be troubled.

Sometimes God does but seem to hide his Face, Isa. 49. 14, 15. When God takes
away their earthly Comforts from them, and suffers sharp and bitter
Afflictions to befall them; and though they cry unto him, he does not remove
them, then they think that God has forsaken them.

Sometimes God does really forsake his People, as to the sense of his Favor:
Isa. 54. 7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee. In a little Wrath I hid
my Face from thee for a moment. And this is, either by withholding comfort from
them which they cry for; or by withdrawing that Comfort from them which they
had; Psalm. 51. 11. and Psalm. 77. 1, 2, 3, 23. compared. Yet here God supported
and sustained his Servant's Soul with Grace many times. When God's People have
least Comfort, they have most Grace, most Humility, Patience, Self-denial,
thirstings after God, Heavenly-mindedness, etc. God's People may lose the sense
of his Love, but never lose his Love, for that is everlasting. But to lose the
sense of his Love, is a grievous trouble to a gracious Soul, that has tasted
and felt the Love of God and his Favor; for their great Happiness is to have
the Favor of God; In his Favor is Life, and his Loving Kindness is better
than Life. This is the Joy of their Lives (Psalm. 119. 135.) which David so
earnestly prayed for. Now such as have found this, must needs be troubled when
they lose it.

Two things chiefly cause God to hide his Face from his People.

1. When their Hearts are too much set upon, and carried out after earthly
Comforts, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Fleshly Delight, and Confidence in earthly Things,
provokes God to hide his Face: When a Man smiles so much on the World, and
gives it so much room in his Heart, God frowns, and is offended, that the Gift
should be so much loved, and the Giver so neglected and forgotten.

2. When their Hearts are let out too little after God, and there grows a
strangeness between God and them, and they begin to grow cold, dull and dead in
Duty, then God withdraws and hides himself, Cant. 2. 3, 5, 6. compared. But no
Affliction like this, this disquieteth and dejecteth the People of God indeed.
And as all the Candles in the World cannot make it Day when the Sun is set; so
all the Comforts in the World cannot rejoice such a Soul, nor can there be any
Day in such a Soul, until the Sun of Righteousness arise there with healing in
his Wings, Mal. 4. 2.

So much for this Third Particular, showing what this Heart-Trouble is, which
our Lord here sorbids his Disciples, namely, Wordly-Sorrow, sinful slavish
Fear, distracting Care, Despondency, dejectedness of Spirit, Distrust, Offense
at Persecution for Christ's sake, Satan's Temptations and Spiritual Desertions,
all which may either be the Causes, or the parts and pieces of Heart-Trouble,
which must be avoided.

The Fourth Particular to be opened, is to show how that believing in God, and
in Christ, is the best Antidote against this sinful Heart-Trouble: Christ
proposes it as a special Remedy.

Q. But how is it so?

A. To answer this, I shall endeavor to show these three Things.

1. What this believing in God is, which our Savior here grants that they had:
Ye believe in God. 2. What it is to believe in Christ: Believe also in me. 3.
That this Faith acted on God and Christ, is the best Remedy to prevent and cure
Heart-Trouble, in all those several parts of it I have mentioned.
1. What this Faith in God is? Briefly, the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11. 6. it is
to believe that God is, that there is a God, an infinite first and best Being;
to believe that God is that, All that, which he has revealed himself in his
Word to be: viz. That he is an All-sufficient, Almighty, Only-wise God; a
righteous, gracious, merciful God; an holy God, a loving God. He proclaims his
Name himself, Exodus 34. 6, ^ The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, etc. To believe that he is
wonderful in Counsel, and excellent i^ Working, Isa. 28. last. That he is the
Father of Mercies, the true and faithfu^ God, the God of all Grace, and of a^
Consolation; with many more admirabl^ Attributes of God does the Scripture
furnish us, that we may build our Faith and place our Trust in him, to preve^^
Heart-trouble, and to cure it when i^ has seized on us. Whatsoever is revealed
of God in his Word, that tr^^ Faith believes.

Also this Faith in God, is, to belie^^ that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligen^ seek him.

That he being God All-sufficient, he^ able to support, to supply, to delive^
his People out of all their Troubles; an^ that he is willing so to do, as well
as able, for he has promised; and he is Rewarder, a God that will abundantly
plentifully reward all his suffering Ones Great shall be their Reward in Heaven
Mat. 5. 12. And to believe God to be ^ Rewarder, is to lay hold on his Covenan^
wherein he promises so to be: I will be thy God, thy Shield, and thy exceeding
great Reward, Genesis 15. 1. The Sum of the Covenant is, I will be thy God: What
is that but this, I will be All that to thee, and I will do All that for thee,
which a God can be to thee, and do for thee. I will be a Sun and a Shield to
thee, Psalm. 84. last. I will give thee Grace and Glory, and will withhold no
good thing from thee. I that am the infinite first and best Being of all
Things, the living Fountain of all Mercy, the Original of all Power and
Goodness; I will be a God to thee, thy God, thy Father, if thou will take me
for thy God, and place all thy Happiness in me, and wilt become my Servant, and
give up thy self sincerely to me, to serve and obey, to love and fear, and
trust me only. This is to believe in God, to accept of God for our God, and to
yield up our selves to him to be his People, Isa. 56. 46. to choose the things
that please him; to give him our Hearts, and become his Servants, a^ Deuteronomy. 26.
17, 18. And so God proposed himself to Abraham, when he called him, Genesis 12. 1,
2, 3. as a Rewarder; and more fully, Genesis 15. 1. I am thy Shield, and they
exceeding great Reward; and so Abraham's Faith was to act on God, so
manifested: And, Genesis 17. 1. I am God All-sufficient; all-sufficient to support
thee in thy Way, and Work, and All-sufficient to reward thee in the end;
therefore, be thou upright and faithful; let not thy Heart be troubled,
whatever Dangers and Difficulties thou meetest with in my Way and Work, and
what Losses soever thou sustainest for my sake, believe, I am God
All-sufficient; I will sufficiently reward thee, thou shall be no loser by
following and serving me. Also Moses his Faith had an eye to the Recompense of
Reward, Heb. 11. 26. And that you may see that this is not legal and mercinary,
our Lord Jesus proposes this as an encouragement to his People, Matthew. 5. 12.
Great is your Reward in Heaven. And he himself took encouragement from it, as
Heb. 12. 1, 2. for the Joy that was set before him, etc.

So that this is to believe in God, to believe that God is really and truly, He
is All that which he has revealed himself to be, and to believe that He is a
Rewarder, etc. This Faith in God, Christ took for granted that his Disciples
had; Ye believe in God; Ye believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. And if ye believe this, let not your Hearts be
troubled; be not afraid nor dejected, but act your Faith in God, and seriously
consider what God that is in whom you believe; and believing also your Interest
in that God, that He is your God, this God All-sufficient is your God, you will
have no cause to be troubled: Your acting of Faith on God, your God, will
prevent and cure your Heart-trouble, and that these several ways.

First, more generally.

He that believes in God as his God, believes God is always present with him,
according to his Promises. In the worst Times God is present with his People.
And can there be any cause of Heart-trouble to such Souls as have always the
presence of God with them, whose Presence makes Heaven, and in whose Presence
is fullness of Joy, and at whose right Hand are Pleasures for evermore? Psalm.
16. 11. Surely, Beloved, this will prevent Heart-trouble, when a Soul can act
his Faith, and firmly believe it. God is always present with his People, and
that for gracious Purposes, (and not as a ba^ Spectator); as to proportion and
measur^ out their Afflictions to them, that the^ may not be above their
strength, nor mo^ than need, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 6. A^ the Afflictions of
God's People are mesured by the Hand of a most wise, mo^ merciful and gracious
God: all the M^lice of Men and Devils cannot add a drac^ to the Weight, nor a
drop to the Measur^ beyond God's appointment. He is pr^sent to order and fix
the Time of our Su^ferings, it is an Hour of Temptation, Re^ 2. 10. It is our
loving Father that sets t^ the Glass of the Time of our Trouble^ he appoints
their Beginning, their Lration, their End; he holds the Glass* his own Hand.
All the Powers on Ear^ cannot bring trouble on us, till the H^^ come, till the
appointed Time, nor continue our Troubles longer than his Tim^* The Rod of the
Wicked shall not rest on t^ Lot of the Righteous, Psalm. 125. 3. G^^ is present,
to mix some Comforts with t^ Cross, thereby to allay the bitterness ^^ it,
present to support the Soul with i^ward strength; Psalm. 138. 3. Thou strengt^
nest me with strength in my Soul: present ^^ sanctify Afflictions for Good, and
at lengt^ in his good Time, which is the best Time, when he has perfected his
own Work in his People, he is present for their full Deliverance.

A true Believer in God has always a God to go unto: O what a Comfort, what an
happiness is that! He dwells in the Love of God as well in Affliction, as out
of it; he may be cast out of his happy Condition in the World, but never out of
the favor of his God: This believed by us, will cure Heart-sorrow, Heart-fear,
Heart-care, all Despondency, Dejectedness, Disquietments and Distractions
whatever. Faith acted on God, the Almighty, All-sufficient God, and our God,
always present with us, is the Sovereign Antidote against, and the best Cure of
all Heart-trouble, Psalm. 142. 1, 2, 3, 4. there are the Psalmist's Troubles;
and, Ver. 5. there is his Cure; I cried unto thee, O Lord, Thou art my Refuge,
and my Portion in the Land of the Living. So, Psalm. 143. 4, 6, 8. his Spirit
was overwhelmed with trouble; but he cried to God, and trusted in him, and that
was his Relief: His trusting in God was an high exercise of his Faith. This
kept David from sinking under his great distress; 1 Samuel 30. 6. He encouraged
himself in the Lord his God.

Thus in general.

More particularly, I shall endeavor ^ show what there is in God that a
Beli^ver's Faith fetches virtue from to cu^ his Heart-trouble in his greatest
distres^ even under the loss of the personal Pr^sence of his best and dearest
Friends o^ Earth; for such was like to be the Ca^ of the Disciples in the Text.

First, That in God which Faith loo^ unto, and fetches Comfort from, is, h^
sweet and gracious Nature. God is Lov^ the very Element of Love, 1 John 4. 1^
and his gracious Name, which discove^ his Nature; Exodus 34. 6. The Lord,
gr^cious and merciful. When he gives to h^ People, he gives in love; when he
taken he takes in love. Now when a Soul b^lieves that all is from Love, and all
i^ Love, he is supported. When a Man ca^ believe that all his Troubles come to
hi^ from the Father of Mercies, and his Father in Christ, he cannot but bear
the^ patiently. Ye believe in God, says Christ^ ye believe that God loves you,
therefore let not your Hearts be troubled.

Q. But how shall I know that God loves me when he afflicts me?

I answer; When we can discern that we have received any Spiritual Benefit by
any Affliction, we may certainly conclude, that the Love of God was in that
Affliction. Fury is not in God toward his People, Isa. 27. 4. And he intends
nothing ^ut our profit; all his ends are for our good: to purge away our Sins,
to wean us from the World, to draw us nearer to himself, to humble us, to try
us, to conform us to Christ, to prepare us for Glory* etc. Now seeing God's
Ends are ^o much for our good, we must conclude, That all our Afflictions
proceed from his Love, and when we find any of those Ends accomplished in us,
and on us; and that we have received real spiritual good by them, we ought to
be strengthened in ^ur Belief, that God has corrected us in Love; so that Faith
acted on the love of God in our Affliction, will prevent or ^ure our
Heart-trouble. Our Lord told ^is Disciples, That the Father had loved them,
John 16. 27.

Secondly, Faith acted upon God's Glori^us Attributes, will fortify against
Heart^rouble.

First, upon his All*sufficiency. Ye b^lieve, that God is All-sufficient, in,
a^ of himself alone; every way able to s^ply all Wants, to make up, and repair
^ Losses, to satisfy all Desires, to susta^ under all Burdens, and that without
^ earthly Comforts: for, how else are t^ Saints in Heaven happy, who have no^
of these Earthly Enjoyments? Ye belie^ this, act your Faith on it. He must nee^
be All-sufficient who made the Worl^ and all things in it, and upholds it to t^
day; He that owns all things, and Possessor of Heaven and Earth, He i^ that is
your God, your Father; act y^ Faith on him, and be comforted.

Secondly. He is All-mighty; you belie^ this. So Christ has told his Discipl^
All things are possible to God. He can bre^ the hardest Heart, and can bind up
^ most broken Spirit: He can make up ^ greatest Loss. We are kept by the mig^
Power of God, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Oh, how s^ is that Man, that is in the Love and
C^venant, and that lies in the Arms a^ Bosom of the Almighty God, Deuteronomy. 33. ^
He can bring Light out of Darkness, a^ make the greatest Loss, to prove t^
greatest Gain. He has the Keys of t^ Grave, to him belong the issues from
Death. All Power belongs to him; nothing is too hard for him.

Thirdly. His absolute Sovereignty and Supremacy: All Souls are his, Ezekiel. 18.
4. He gives, he takes, who can hinder him? May he not do with his own what
pleases him? Ye believe this. Has he not a Right in all the Works of his
hands, and may he not dispose of all as he will?

Fourthly. His Unchangeableness. God is in one mind, Job. 23. 13, 14. The
thoughts of his Heart stand to all Generations. He sets bounds to the Sea, to
the Life of Man, and to all the Comforts of Life; the number of his Months is
with God, Job 14. 5. Believe this.

Fifthly. His Wisdom. God is only wise, the Fountain of Wisdom; he does all he
does in infinite Wisdom. He is wise in Heart, and works all things according
to the counsel of his Will. He knows what is best for us; when to give, when to
take, and what will do us most good. Believe this, And let not your Hearts be
troubled.

Sixthly. His Righteousness. All his Ways are just and equal: Yea, when Clouds
and Darkness are round about him, (his Providence toward us dark,) yet the^
Righteousness and Judgment are the habit^tion of his Throne. God, the Judge of
t^^ World, can do no wrong: believe this ^ God, and it will quiet your minds.

Lastly, His Faithfulness. In faithfuln^ thou have afflicted me, says holy
Davi^ Psalm. 119. 75. He has promised, he w^ withhold no good thing from his
Peop^ Now he sees and knows that Affliction are good for them, good for their
Soul^ his daily Rod as good for their Souls, his daily Bread is for their
Bodies. Therefore he brings Afflictions on them, and makes good his Promise to
them. O ^lieve this, and let not your Hearts be tr^bled. Certainly, Faith acted
on Go^ Attributes will support under the great^ Strokes, and most grievous
Losses.

Thirdly, Faith acted on the Covenan^ Grace. God's everlasting Covenant ^^ help
to support under Trouble. Ye b^lieve in God, that God has made a C^venant with
you, to become your Go^ Jerem. 31. 33. I will be your God, and shall be my
People. This is infinitely mo^^ for God to become our God, to give hi^ self to
us, than if he had said, I will gi^ you Crowns and Kingdoms, Sons and
Daughters: when God says, I will be your God, he says, I will be All that to
you, and I will do All that for you, and bestow All that upon you, which a God
can be, or do, and which shall make you most happy for ever. I will pardon your
Sins; I will give you new Hearts, give you my Spirit; I will give you Grace
here, and Glory hereafter. This Acting of Faith in God's Covenant supported
David in his greatest Troubles; 2 Samuel 23. 5. a nota^le Text: When the Lord had
made ^reach upon breach in his Family, this Comforted him, that God had made
with him an everlasting Covenant. That he was in Covenant with God; that God
was his God in Covenant: this balanced all his Losses, and repaired all the
Breaches made in his Relations: tho his Family was wasted and blasted, this
answered all, that he was in Covenant with God.

This is the Language of Faith; If God be my God, if I be his Child, born of
him, reconciled to him, pardoned, justified, sanctified, in Covenant with him;
Why am I troubled, though he give me neither Health, nor Wealth, nor Friends,
nor Relations? Have I not enough, in having God to be my God? Is not God mo^
than All? But if God be not my God, ^ have cause enough to be troubled the^
considering the Danger I am in; and ^ Trouble for this should swallow up all
there Trouble. For surely, either God mine in Covenant, or he is not; if he mine
in Covenant, then, tho he break ^ Family, make breaches upon all my ear^ly
Comforts; yet, he will not break ^ Covenant, Psalm. 89. 32. and so long I ^ well
enough. If he leave me neither S^ nor Daughter, if he strip me of Frien^
Estate, Liberty, Health, etc. yet he ^ mains my God still; and so long it is ^
enough; it cannot be ill with a Man long as God is his; ye believe this.

Fourthly, Faith acted upon the Wor^ God, will support the Soul; Ye beli^ God's
Word, the Word of Truth, Ps^ 119. 50. This is my Comfort in my Afflicti^ thy
Word has quickened me. So ver. 92. ^ not thy Law been my Delight, I had peris^
in my Affliction.

First, Consider the Word of Prece^ as in the Text, it is Christ's Comma^ Let
not your Hearts be troubled. Man such Commands we have in Scripture, ^ not to
fear, not to be cast down: sorrow not as those that have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
13, 14. and such like. Now Faith applies such Commands to the Soul; I must not
be troubled in my Heart, God forbids it. Why, must we not profane the Sabbath,
nor Swear, nor Lie, etc. but because God has forbidden these Evils? So here,
God has forbidden us to be troubled, and commanded us to be quiet, patient,
contented, submissive to hi^ Will in all his dealings; thus we should urge
God's command on our Souls: Yea, we are commanded to be so far from troubling
our selves when Afflictions befall us, as that we must count it all joy when we
fall into diverse Temptations, Jam. 1. 2. And to rejoice in Sufferings; for
Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, Jam. 1. 12.

Secondly, Consider the Word of Promise: Many exceeding great and precious
Promises are in the Word of God, which are as a full Feast for Faith to feed
upon. God promises to be our God, to be with us in the Fire, and in the Water,
Isa. 41. 10. and 43. 2. to support and sustain us, to lay no more upon us, than
he will enable us to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13. That all things shall work together
for our good, Romans 8. 28. And, what can we desire more? The is no trouule that
can befall us, but ^ may find a Promise suitable to it: A^ faithful is he that
has promised, who a^ will do it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And why h^ the great God so
wonderfully condesceded to poor Creatures, as to make many sweet Promises which
are record in the Holy Scriptures, but for this, T^ the Heirs of Promise might
have strong C^solation, Heb. 6. 17. And that their Hea^ might not be troubled?

Thirdly, The Word of Threatni^ Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves Father* Mother,
Son or Daughter, (so Husban^ Wife) more than me, is not worthy of ^ says
Christ. Now by our immode^ Sorrow for the loss of these, we mani^ our
immoderate Love of these; should consider, that when these are ^ moved, that
Christ remains ours s^ and with us still; our Relation to hi^ not broken: and
Christ will be instead all, and better than all to us, and ^ should keep us
from Heart-Trouble.

Fourthly, The Examples of God's Sai^ in the Word. We should consider al^ what
a famous Example is Abraham, w^ was content to part with his Isaac, at ^
Command of God, his only Son, the Son of his Old Age, the Son of the Promise,
in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed; yea, content to lay
his own Hands upon him, to slay him, and burn him: but when he was tried, God
spared him, Genesis 22. 12. The way to keep our earthly Comforts, is to be willing
to part with them, when God calls for them. So Eli, when very sad Tidings was
told him, It is the Lord, said he, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.
18. So Aaron when that heavy stroke fell upon him, That both his Sons were
struck dead upon the Place for their Sin, and it may be in their Sin too; it is
said, Aaron held his peace, Levit. 10. 3. So Job stripped of all his Friends at
once, The Breath of his Wife was strange to him. And David complained, That
Lover and Friend was put far from him. Now we should consider these Examples,
and set Faith a-work on them, and know, That it is our Duty to be followers of
them who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, Heb. 6. 12.

Fifthly, The Word of Experience. David tells us his Experience, and says, It
was good for him that he had been afflicted. And many Christians living, can,
and do bless God for their Affliction; and tha^ God, by taking away of their
Relation^ from them, he made more room in their Hearts for himself, and
communicate^ more of himself to their Souls: Thus b^ acting of Faith upon the
Word of God we may gain support, and be preserve from Heart-Trouble.

Fifthly, Faith acted upon the Work ^ God, will support under Heart-Trouble
Eccles. 7. 13. Consider the Work of Go^ Faith looks to the Work of God; wh^ it
is that kills, who it is that takes ^ way: who can stop, or mend, or hind
his Work? This quieted David's Hear^ when the stroke of God was heavy upon him,
I opened not my Mouth, because the did it, Psalm. 39. 9. It is the Lord, ^
has done it. It is he that does whats^ever he pleases.

Sixthly, Faith acted on the Will ^ God. Faith resigns up all to the go^ and
holy Will of God: So did our Lo^ himself, Not my will, but thine be do^ Luke
22. 42. and so we pray continual Thy will be done: and therefore when it ^
done, our Hearts must not be troubled.

Lastly, Faith acted on the gracious Ends and Designs of God in afflicting us,
and removing our earthly Comforts from us, will prevent Heart-trouble. God has
holy and good Ends which Faith looks unto: God aims at our Profit: as Heb. 12.
10. Such Ends as these,

1. God's End is, to discover and purge away our Sins, Isa. 27. 9. By this
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, this is all the fruit, to take away his
Sin.

2. To try and exercise our Graces, Job 23. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.

3. To crucify our Hearts unto, and to estrange our Affections from the things
of this World.

4. To draw our Hearts nearer to himself: Therefore many times God takes away
our earthly Comforts from us, because they had too much of our Hearts, and
because they lay between God, and our Hearts, and kept us at a distance from
him.

5. To bestow greater, and better Mercies upon us. God never takes away any
Darling-Comfort from his People, but his Design is, to give a better in the
room o^ it; as in the Text, Christ leaves his Di^ciples, in regard of his
Bodily Presence because he would send the Comforter ^^ them, which should abide
with them for ever, John 14. 16.

6. To make them partakers of his H^liness, Heb. 12. 10.

7. To fit and prepare them for that f^ more exceeding and eternal weight ^
Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. These are God's h^ly and good Ends in afflicting his
People unto which Faith looks, and so suppor^ the Heart.

Thus you see how Faith acted on G^ in these Particulars, will prevent or c^
all our Heart-troubles: Faith acted on t^ sweet and gracious Nature of God; He
Love, all Love; on his glorious Attribut^ his All Sufficiency, his Omnipotency,
his asolute Sovereignty, his Vnchangeablen^ his Wisdom, his Righteousness, his
Faithf^ness, Faith acted on God's gracious evelasting Covenant; on the Word of
God, ^ the Word of Precept, of Promise, of Thre^ning, of Example, of
Experience. A^ Faith acted on the Work of God, on t^ Will of God, and on his
holy Ends in ^ his Chastisements. I say, Faith thus act^ on God, will
exceedingly support under all Trouble. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye
believe in God. So much of this first Particular. And before I enter upon the
second, I shall make some short Application of this.

First, It follows hence, that Hearttrouble under the afflicting Hand of God,
argues the weakness, if not the want of Faith. All those sorts of
Heart-trouble, and the parts of it which I have mentioned, as Heart-Sorrow,
worldly Sorrow, immoderate Mourning, sinful Fear, vexatious Care, despondency
of Spirit, being offended; disturbance of Mind, Distraction, Dejection,
Discouragement, and the like, all these slow from the want of Faith, or, at
least, from the weakness of Faith in God. We do not believe in God; we see the
Causes of our Troubles, they are mostly in our selves, even our Unbelief.
Whatever we profess, we do not believe in God: If we could but believe in God,
our Hearts would not be troubled. O our want of Faith; let us heartily lament
it, and cry to God for Pardon through the Blood of Christ. If our Hearts be
troubled, where is our Faith in God? What does God, and all that is in God,
signif^ to us? What are we the better for a that infinite All sufficiency and
Goodne^ that is in God, if we do not act Faith upon it? Our Heart-troubles
would be ^red, could we act Faith on God as ^ ought to do.

Immoderate Sorrow then is very u^ becoming Believers in God. If we wi^ prove
our selves Believers in God, let ^ discharge our selves from Heart-troubl^ and
let us draw out Consolation for o^ Hearts by Faith, from all those comfort^ble
Considerations of God, and from ^ those abundant Excellencies that are ^ God: O
let us labor for Faith, and a^ it; let us live in the exercise of it, at then
surely we shall find comfort.

Secondly; Let us all labor to get an I^terest in God, by Faith in Jesus Chri^
that so we may be able to look upon God as our God, and then we may clai^ an
Interest in All that God is, and in ^ that God has, and so shall we have ^
cause of Heart-trouble in any Condition For if God be ours, All his Attributes
a^ ours, his gracious Covenant is ours, h^ Word and Promises are ours: All is
ours Therefore should we labor in this abo^ all things, spending all our
Thoughts, Affections and Spirits upon this. O let us lay hold on God and his
Covenant; let us choose him for our Portion, and resign up our whole selves
unfeignedly to him, terminating and centring all our Desires, Hope, Love,
Delight in him alone, placing all our Happiness in him, and then commit all to
him. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee, Psalm. 73. 23.

The Second Question.
Secondly; What is it to believe in Christ? For, says he in the Text, Believe
also in me. It is God in Christ that we must believe in; not in God without
Christ, not in God out of Christ, but believe in God in Christ.

Now what this believing in Christ is, I shall endeavor to show; looking up to
the Father of Lights, and to the Author and Finisher of our Faith for Light and
Assistance.

In general; It is to believe all that which is revealed in the Holy Scriptures
concerning Christ; to believe the Record that God has given of him in his
Word, as 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12, 13. T^ believe that Jesus Christ is the eternal
S^ of God, Joh. 1. 18. That he came o^ from the Father; was made Flesh; to^
upon him our Nature; was born of Virgin; lived on Earth in the form of Servant,
a poor despicable Life; preac^ed the Gospel, working Miracles, and That he
suffered upon the Cross, with ^ the Sins of his People upon his Soul at Body;
that he bore the Curse of the La^ the Wrath of God, which was due to Man for
Sin: That he died a most painf^ shameful, and cruel Death, dying as Sacrifice,
to satisfy God's Justice, to at^ and pacify his Wrath, to make our Pea^ and to
reconcile us to God: That he ro^ again from the Dead, ascended into He^ven, to
prepare a Place there for ^ People; That he sits at the right Ha^ of God
everlasting, to make continu^ Intercession for us: And that he shall co^ to
judge the World at the last Day: A^ while he is absent from us in Person he^ on
Earth, he promised to send his Spir^ the Comforter into the World, to co^vince
and convert all those which h^ Father has given him, to call them b^ his Word,
to quicken, strengthen, sta^lish, comfort and confirm them until he come again,
to take them to himself, that where he is, there they may be also, John 16. 1,
2. This is the Record that God has given of his Son; That whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3. 16, 36. Now, to
believe in Christ, is to believe all this Testimony of him. And also, out of a
deep sense of our Sin and Misery, and sight of Christ's infinite Excellency,
All Sufficiency, and Willingness to save Sinners; and upon his Call to us in
the Gospel, to come unto him weary and heavy laden with our Sins, heartily
willing to accept of the Lord Jesus upon his own Terms, to take him for our
only Lord, to give up our whole Selves, Souls and Bodies, to his blessed
Government by his Word and Spirit in all things, and unfeignedly and
unreservedly to enter into Covenant with him, to become his, and his alone, and
his for ever; and to rely upon him for Life, for Grace and Salvation; this is
to believe in Christ. Thus believe in Christ, and let not your Hearts be
troubled. The acting of this Faith on blessed Jesus, is a singular means to
prevent and cure all Heart-Trouble, all Heart-Sorrows, Cares, Fears, Vexations,
Despondencies, Dejections and Distractions whatsoever, the may arise in our
Hearts, by reason of a^ Loss, Cross, Disappointment, Distress ^ Affliction that
may befall us. If we ^^ but thus believe in Christ, and rest a^ rely upon him,
and trust in him, ^ Hearts shall not be troubled.

Q. But what is that in Christ whi^ Faith must act upon, to effect this Cu^ of
Heart-Trouble when Afflictions co^ upon us?

A. Suchlike things (as I showed before as are in God for Faith to act upon,
whi^ are these that follow.

First, Faith must be acted upon ^^ loving gracious sweet Nature of Jes^
Christ. Our Lord Jesus is of a most l^ving and sweet Nature, he is Love indee^
the Son of his Father's Love, and alt^gether lovely. His Thoughts of us w^
believe in him, were Thoughts of Lo^ from Everlasting. All his Words a^ sweet,
his Mouth is most sweet. O wh^ sweet Language does he give his Church My Dove,
my Love, my fair One, my S^ster, my Spouse, etc. Cant. 5. 16. H^ loved us, and
gave himself for us: Lov^ us, and washed us in his Blood, Rev. 1. 6* He is one
of our Nature, our Kinsman, our Husband, our Father, our Elder Brother, etc. So
that, if there be any Love in the Head to the Members, if any in the Father to
the Child, if any in the Husband to the Wife, or in any near and dear Relation,
then sure there is Love, strong Love in Jesus Christ to all Believers; for in
him is the Love of all Relations, and therefore he expresses it under all
these Relations. He calls us his Friends. He is of a most tender, a most
merciful Nature, full of Bowels of Compassion, and of tender Mercies. It would
be endless to express the loving Nature of Jesus Christ to poor Believers;
which when a Believer duly considers, ponders upon, and acts Faith upon, it
cannot but support him under all Heart-Trouble.

Act your Faith on Christ as yours; your Jesus, he that died for you, he that
sweated great drops of Blood for you in the Garden, wrestling and grapling with
his Father's Wrath for you, in your Name and stead, there, and upon the Cross,
Consider, that this your dearest Jesus now in Glory, knows your Souls in
Adversity; he sees all the Troubles of your Hearts, he sympathizeth with you
in all your Afflictions; his Heart, now in Heaven, ^ touched with the feeling
of your Infirmi^^ on Earth, Heb. 4. 15. He has Huma^ Nature still, though
glorified. He feels o^ Losses, Crosses, Griefs, Pains, Sorrow his Heart, his
most tender Heart is ^fected. O that we could but believe thi^ and thus
consider with our selves: Her sit solitary as a Widow, or a Widow^ or
Childless, or Fatherless, or Motherle^ or Friendless; my Family is broken, feel
Pains and Sicknesses; I am depriv^ of my Liberty, my sweet Relations a^
comfortable Friends are laid in the Dust I have none about me to counsel or
comfort me; I am brought low in the Wo^ my Estate is diminished, my Honor a^
Reputation lost, my Pleasure gone, ^^ Flesh fails me, my Strength faile^
Lovers and Friends fail me, etc. S^ Complaints we are apt enough to mak^ and it
may be worse than these: My G^ has forsaken me, he hides his Face fr^ me; I am
compassed about with Tem^tations, sad dejecting and distracti^ Thoughts; I am
persecuted, banishe^ from House and Home, all my outward a^ inward Comforts
sail me. These ha^ been the Cases and Conditions of God^ dearest Servants, as
Job, David, Heman, and others; But yet let not your Hearts be troubled for all
this; Ye believe in God; act your Faith on God, yea, and act it on Christ also:
Believe in Jesus, look up by Faith unto Jesus your dear Lord; whatsoever,
whomsoever you have lost, you have not lost your Jesus, your best Friend, your
Heavenly Husband; you have his Heart, his Bowels toward you still; you have
his Eye, his tender watchful provident Eye upon you still; you have his Ear
open to your Cries still; yea, you have his everlasting Arms underneath you to
sustain you still, for else you would sink. Oh then, act Faith upon the sweet
Nature of Christ as your Head and Husband. Can a Mother forget her sucking
Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? Isa. 49. 14.
possibly she may: But can Jesus forget those whom he died for, and tra^elled
for? No, no, he will not hide his Face for ever, he will never forget his
People. Your Maker is your Husband; and he is the Father of Mercies.

If we read these things, or hear the^ read, and do not apply them to ou^ own
Souls by Faith; if we do not m^ditate on them, and let them sink dow^ into our
Hearts, if we do not pr^ earnestly that the Holy Spirit wou^ bring them home,
and lay them cl^ to, and fix them on our Hearts, the will do us no good, yield
us no Comfor^ therefore meditate on them, apply the^ and act Faith upon them.

Secondly; We must act Faith up^ the many precious Attributes of Jes^ Christ;
all which will afford to Fai^ much matter of support under all ^^
Heart-Troubles whatever. And the are exceeding many, I shall mention o^ some.

First, Jesus Christ is our Advoca^ with the Father, 1 John 2. 1, 2. O^ that
undertaketh for us to plead o^ Cause, in that highest Court of He^ven. If a Man
be sued in Law, or ^ accused of any Crime in any Court, is a great privilege to
have a Sollicit^ there for him, that is skilful and fa^t^ful, and powerful with
the Judge in the Court. Jesus Christ is such an Advocat^ or Solicitor, for us
in Heaven, he wi^ plead our Cause; and he is Wise, he is the Wisdom of the
Father; he is a Great Counselor, and the only Counselor, none else can plead
in that High Court; and he is most Faithful, he is a merciful and faithful
High Priest in all things pertaining to God, Heb. 2. 17. He appears for us in
Heaven, Heb. 9. 24. When a Man is indicted in a Court, and has none to appear
for him there, he is in a bad Case: But all poor Believers are in a better
Case, they have a blessed Advocate to appear in the Presence of God for them:
He continually presents his Blood, his Sacrifice to the Father for them, Heb.
10. 10. And it is his Will, to have that Sacrifice accepted for our
Justification and Sanctification. Christ prevails so with his Father, that he
always hears him, John 11. 42. Now, if we can act Faith on this Blessed
Advocate in Heaven, who is there always pleading for us, ever-living to make
continual Intercession for us, Romans 3. 25. presenting himself before God as our
Sacrifice and Propitiation; when Men accuse us, and our own Consciences too;
when we are deprived of our near and dear Relations, distressed with Pains and
Sicknesses, pinched wi^ Wants and Necessities: I say, then i^ us to act our
Faith on this precio^ Advocate at the Right Hand of G^ for us, interceding
there for us, ^^ who knows and feels all our Miser it must needs be a great
support a^ relief to us, and the best Remedy against our Heart-Troubles: O that
^ could act Faith strongly on this o^ Advocate.

To have a Friend in Heaven, a^ such a Friend, so wise, so powerf^ so faithful,
so merciful, so sensibly ^fected with all our Misery, so tender, able, and so
willing to hear and h^ us; I say, this is infinitely better the all the Friends
that ever we had, ^ could have on Earth: And this Frie^ ever lives, and makes
continual Intecession for us. And as this is matt^ of Comfort in case of
Suffering, so case of Sin too. If any Man sin, have an Advocate with the
Father, Je^ Christ the Righteous; and he is the Pr^pitiation for our Sins, 1
John 2. 1, ^ Faith acted on this blessed Advocate, the best Remedy against
Heart-Troubl^ in case both of Sin and Suffering.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is Bread from Heaven; the true Bread for Souls, the
Bread of Life, the Water of Life, John 6. 35, 48, 51. Now when poor Saints are
fed with the Bread of Affliction, and with the Water of Adversity, let them
look up to Christ, and act Faith upon him, he will be living Bread, Life-giving
Bread, living Waters to their Souls, to revive their drooping, and to refresh
their fainting Spirits. By acting Faith on this blessed Jesus the Fountain of
living Waters, their Souls shall be so satisfied, as that they shall never
hunger more, never thirst more (that is, inordinately) after the things of this
World. When your Souls want strength to bear your Burdens, want comfort in your
Distresses, act Faith on this Jesus, this Bread of Life, thi^ Water of Life,
and you shall be refreshed; you shall have Joy and Peace in believing, Romans 15.
13.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness, and the bright
Morning Star, Mal. 4. 3. Rev. 22. 16. He is the Fountain of Righteousness and
Life, as the Sun is of Light; he has healing in his Wings, He was wounded for
our Transgressions, that by his Strip^ we might be healed, Isa. 53. 4, 5. an^
61. 1, 2. He was appointed to heal the brokenhearted, Luke 4. He will heal o^
backslidings, Hos. 14. 4. He is the great Physician, he can heal all our
Spiritua^ and Corporal Diseases. His Blood, i^ an healing Blood; his Spirit, an
hea^ing Spirit; his Word, an healing Word his Promises, healing Promises. H^
has all healing Virtue in him: H^ is the true brazen Serpent; could w^ but act
Faith on this Jesus, we should be healed of all our Diseases. He i^ the bright
Morning Star. We are in Darkness, Clouds and Darkness upon our Spirits; many
dark Providence befall us, we see not our way man^ times, know not what to do:
Now let us act Faith on Jesus, he will brin^ Light out of Darkness: We are
under black Fears and Sorrows, and a^ dark Night sometimes with us; bu^ if we
can look up to this bright Morning Star, he will enlighten our Darkness, he
will shine in upon our Hearts and scatter all those Clouds, and giv^ us a
joyful Morning.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is called the Captain of the Lord's Hosts, and the
Captain of our Salvation, Josh. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 10. He has the command of
all the Creatures, for he is Head over all Things, Ephesians. 1. 22. over Men and
Devils; All Power in Heaven and Earth is his, Matthew. 28. 18. O if we could act
Faith on this Almighty Jesus, our Hearts would not be troubled for any thing:
What can hurt us? What should we fear? Our Blessed Jesus, our Savior, our
Husband, commands all Things; he rules, and overrules all Things: No Creature,
no Man, no Devil, can act any thing against us without our Lord's leave:
Believe in this Captain, and let not your Hearts be troubled. He will tread
Satan under your Feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. He will make all his and our
Enemies his Footstool. Let us look by Faith unto our Captain, and keep our Eye
on him, and follow him wheresoever he goes: Let us make him our Leader, and by
Faith in him we shall be more than Conquerors. He has overcome the Devil and
the World for us, and he will overcome all our Corruptions, Fears and Sorrows
in us, and wi^ shortly set his Crown upon our Heads Christ is the Captain of
our Salvation; and in bringing of many Sons to Glory, he was made perfect
through Suffering Heb. 2. 14. John 16. last. Act Faith i^ him who has
perfected our Salvation for us; that Work is done, and i^ was through
Suffering, to teach us t^ be willing to suffer also, to walk i^ his Steps; for
in the way of Suffering he entered into his Glory; and the very same way will he
bring all his Sons and Daughters unto Glory: So that while we are suffering for
him, or from him, if we be his Children, (which we may know if we have his
Spirit we are in the right and ready way t^ Glory. And then have we any cause
to let our Hearts be troubled with sinful Fears, Cares and Sorrows? Have we any
cause to be cast down and discouraged, while we are following ou^ Captain, are
making conformable t^ him, traveling the same way to Heaven that he went
thither, the same wa^ to Glory, the way of Reproach, Shame* Grief, Sorrow,
Fear, Poverty, Persecution, Tribulation, Desertion, the same Steps that our
Lord went to Glory? O that we could but still keep our Eye on Jesus, and often
consider what way he went to Heaven; and being our Captain, we should show our
selves his good Soldiers, and be content to go the same way.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ is called the Consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 25. A sweet
Name indeed. He is the only Person that brings true Comfort, being the Fountain
and Spring of all Consolation; that One of a Thousand, who gave himself a
Ransom for us. He it is that comfort his People in all their Tribulations, 2
Cor. 1. 3, 4. He it is that speaks and gives his Peace to his People; and
when he gives Peace, none can cause Trouble. And it is his Promise, that when
he has brought his People into the Wilderness of Fears and Troubles, that they
know not which way to turn, that then he will speak comfortably to them, will
speak to their Hearts, as the Word in the Original signifies, Hos. 2. 14.

I might largely show here, that Jesus Christ is the Consolation of his People
many ways; as by his coming from his Father into the World, to become our
Surety, to undertake for us, to take our Sins upon him, and to make his Soul an
Offering for our Sins; and by his Blood to purchase our Remission, Ephesians. 1. 7.
O how comfortable is a Surety to one that is Arrested Indicted, and Arraigned!
How comfortable is a Redeemer to a poor miserable Captive! How comfortable i^ a
Pardon to a condemned Malefactor All this is Jesus to his People, and
infinitely more. He is Gold to make u^ rich, white Raiment to cover our
nakedness, Eye Salve to make us see, Rev. 3. 17, 18. He is Light, John 5. 12.
the Light of Life, the Fountain of Life, of Spiritual and Eternal Life; no Life
but by him. And he has assured us. That whosoever comes to him, and believes
in him, shall have everlasting Life and shall not come in Condemnation, Joh^ 3.
16, 36. He is afflicted in all our Afflictions, Isa. 63. 9. And is not this ^
comfortable Consideration? All his Promises are as so many Breasts of
Consolation, all his Ordinances, means o^ Consolation; his Word, a Word o^
Consolation; yea, his Rod of Affliction, as well as his Staff, is blessed for
the Comfort of his People, Psalm. 23. He has also promised to send his Spirit,
the Comforter, to his People, to abide with them for ever, John 16. 7. Yea,
Christ himself makes this his own special Work also, to comfort them that
mourn, Isa. 61. 2. and has blessed those that mourn, Matthew. 5. 4. that is,
with godly Sorrow, for, says he, they shall be comforted.

How greatly then does it concern us to believe in this Jesus, the Consolation
of Israel, to look by Faith to this Fountain of Comfort, look to his Office,
look to his Word and Promises; beg him earnestly to send the Spirit, the
Comforter, into your Hearts: Look to Jesus alone for all Comfort, and draw from
this Spring by Prayer, Faith and Meditation, all supplies of Comfort; and let
not your Hearts be troubled.

Sixthly, Jesus Christ is called a Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. He is most wise; he
is the Wisdom of the Father: In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, Col. 2. 3. Yea, he is made of God our Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. S^ that
when we are in Doubts and Darkness, perplexed with Temptations, an^ know not
what to do; when we a^ under sad and dark Providence, a^ know not how to
interpret them; when we are under various Exercises, an^ know not how to answer
God's En^ in them, nor how to improve them when we are in the Dark, and kno^
not the meaning of God's Dispensatons, nor the Design of God in them Now are
our Hearts troubled in a^ such Cases; but here is our Remed^ this is the Course
we must take: A^ Faith now upon Jesus, he is Wisdom, he is a most wise and
faithful Counselor, we may freely open all our Cases and Conditions to him; he
will n^^ betray us, nor bewray us, we may safely trust him with all the Secrets
of o^ Hearts; and let us labor by Faith t^ trust him for Counsel in all Cases;
l^^ us wait for his Counsel, trust to it, a^ let not our Hearts be troubled.

Seventhly, Jesus is a Redeemer, the is his Name; he came into the Wor^ on this
very Business, to redeem his People, to redeem them from all Iniquit^ Tit. 2.
14. from this present evil World: from our vain Conversations. He has shed his
precious Blood to purchase us, we are bought with a Price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. We are
none of our own, we are his, the purchase of his Blood; and we may be confident
that he dearly loves us, for he dearly bought us; and if he had not dearly
loved us, he would never have given himself for us, Gal. 2. 20. That was the
highest Testimony of his Love; He loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his
Blood, Rev. 1. 6. He will redeem us from the Wrath to come. O then let us act
Faith on our sweet Redeemer, as Job did in the midst of all his Troubles; I
know, says he, that my Redeemer lives, etc. So may every Believer say,
Although my Friends and dearest Relations die, my Credit and Estate dies;
though my outward Comforts all die, this supports me, that my Redeemer lives,
and this our Redeemer is mighty, mighty to save, able to save to the uttermost,
Heb. 7. 25.

Therefore let us act Faith on our dear Redeemer, and upon his Redemption; and
let us believe, that shortly the day of our full Redemption will come, when we
shall be delivered fully and for ever from Sin, Satan, the World; from all our
Burdens, Fears and Sorrows, Temptations and Tribulations.

I might mention many other swee^ Names and Titles of Jesus Christ, which would
be Food for Faith t^ feed upon; as, that He is the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.
6. he has pit^ and compassion for all his poor Children, and Power to help
them, being the Father Almighty, and has a Portion for them too; He is their
Portion, and has provided for them an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4* He is the Prince of Peace, he gives his
Peace to his People, even tha^ Peace that the World can neithe^ give to them,
nor take from them When he speaks Peace, none ca^ cause Trouble. He is our
Peace, an^ has made our Peace with God; an^ it is he alone that speaks Peace
and creates the Fruit of the Lips, Peace Isa. 57. 19. He is also our Shepher^
therefore (said David) I shall want nothing, Psalm. 23. 1. He is a Fountain
opened, a Fountain of Light, Life, Love, Grace and Truth. He is the Head of his
Body the Church. The Husband, the Bridegroom, his People are his Members, his
Spouse. He is the Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. In him dwells all Fullness.
He is the King of Saints, the Rock of Ages. Yea, He is All, and in All. O
Beloved, had we but Faith to act on this Blessed Jesus, and on these his most
sweet Names and gracious Attributes, our Hearts would not be troubled into what
Condition soever we were brought. Could we act Faith on Jesus as our Head,
Husband, and Father, who is All Fullness, All in All, could we doubt of having
all seasonable Supplies from him? Let our Faith but apprehend, apply and
appropriate Jesus as our blessed Head, our most dear Husband, and then consider
in earnest who he is, and what he is; how mighty, how full, how loving,
pitiful, compassionate, tenderhearted and kind; how ready to help, how
engaged to us by many Promises, and can we then take up such unworthy thoughts
of him, as to think he has forgotten us? Will he not timely support and supply
us? Has he shed his Blood for us, and will he forget us, ca^ he forget us? Are
not all his People as dear to him as the Apple of his Ey^^ Zech. 2. 8. Surely
it is our want, o^ the weakness of our Faith, that causes all our
Heart-Trouble. O my poor Soul, how comfortably might thou live* if thou
could live by Faith? Lord, believe, help, strengthen my Faith. Could we but
apply and appropriate Christ to our Souls, and act Faith upon those precious
Names of Christ, which a^ not as so many empty Titles which are sometimes given
to Men, but the^ are real Representations of that mos^ dear Love and tender
Affection, of tha^ special Care, Mercy, and Loving Kindness that is in Jesus
toward a^ his poor Children, that they might draw out the same for their
stron^ Consolation; and that they might tru^ in him, and not despond nor be
dejected. Thus, if we can believe in Jesus, our Hearts shall not be troubled.

Thirdly; Faith acted on the Covenant of Grace, whereof Christ is the Mediator,
and upon all his exceeding great and precious Promises, will prevent and cure
all Heart-Trouble. Believe in the blessed Mediator of the New Covenant, who
has undertaken, not only on God's part, to see that his Part be performed to
us, but also is become our Surety; undertaking for us, and by himself, to
fulfill the whole Law of God both actively and passively; to fulfill all
Righteousness for us, and by his Spirit to enable us to fulfill the Conditions
of the Covenant, working in us Faith, Love, Obedience, and all Grace.

In this Sense, God has given Christ to be a Covenant to us, Isa. 42. 6. and
his Blood is the Blood of the Covenant, by which he rescueth poor Souls that
were Prisoners to Sin and Satan, out of the Pit of Destruction, Zech. 9. 11. By
this Covenant, upon Christ's shedding of his Blood as a Sacrifice for Sin, and
his performing all the work of Mediation, and upon our receiving of him, and
believing in him, as he is offered to us in the Gospel, God is pleased to
promise to become our God, our Reconciled Father, to pardon all our Sins, to
give us his Spirit, and all Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Now, Christ our
blessed Mediator, has perfectly fulfilled all that God required for us, and in
our room and stead; that is most certain, for he finished the work that his
Father gave him to do; and he has made many sweet Promises to us, That he will
send the Spirit into our Hearts to work Faith in us, to receive him and to
apply the Merit of his Blood to us, to sanctify, and renew us thereby: and has
promised, That whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out, Matthew.
11. 28. And all that come unto him, shall find rest to their Souls. That
whosoever believes in him, shall be saved; that he will keep them, and non^
shall pluck them out of his Hand. Tha^ he will raise them up at the last Day*
John 10. 28. Assuring us, That he i^ gone to Heaven, as our Forerunner, t^
prepare a place for us there, and that h^ will come again, and take us to
himself that where he is, we may be also. Now* if we can but act Faith on this
Jesus and on the Covenant, whereof he is the Mediator, and on his Promises,
applying them, and relying on them, our Hearts shall not be troubled.

Besides; Let us consider, there is not a passage of Providence from God to us,
but it comes through the Hand of this Mediator. 1 Cor. 8. 6. All things are by
him: Put what you will in the Hand of a Mediator, and in his Power, it must
needs turn to the good of him for whom he is a Mediator. Now to support and
comfort us in all our Troubles, let us consider two things.

1. This Mediator steps in between God's Wrath, and us, in all our Afflictions;
that no Fury, or Effects of it, may break forth from God on his People, for
whom he is the Mediator, that nothing but Fatherly Love may be in the
Chastisement; and if Love send the Affliction, whatever it be, to try and
purge, etc. there can be no hurt in that Affliction. Again, our Mediator
interposeth, either to hold off the Smart, or to allay and mitigate it, that it
shall not distract, Dan. 3. 25. no nor hurt.

2. He steps in to uphold us, and to strengthen our Weakness, enabling us to
endure. Phil. 4. 4, 12, 13. It was the Mediator that did strengthen Paul; The
Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, said he: Faith acted on this Blessed
Mediator, eying him, and believing that our Afflictions come through his Hands,
even his who loved us, and died for us, our dearest Friend, and who has all
Power in Heaven and Earth, must be a mighty support to us in all our Troubles.

Fourthly; Let Faith be acted as the Word of Christ also; Ye believe the Word
of God, believe the Word of Christ also; His Mouth is most sweet. None but
gracious Words proceed out of his Mouth. Grace was poured into his Lips; Psalm.
45. 2. and he poured out Grace in all his Words: His whole Gospel is a Gospel
of Grace, Words of Peace and Salvation. Hear him speaking most sweetly, Matthew.
11. 28. Come unto me, all that are weary and heavyladen, and I will give you
rest. O what sweet Words are these! Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters and drink, without Money and without Price, Isa. 55. 1, 2. I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, Joh. 14. 6. Behold, I stand at the Door and
knock; if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in and sup with
him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 18. This is but a taste of those sweet Clusters of
most refreshing Grapes which hang upon the Boughs of the Gospel; let us take
frequent view of what lies upon Record in the Evangelists, and often read over
the manifold Promises of Grace that fell from the sweet Mouth of our Blessed
Lord, and meditate, and ponder, and consider of them, and act our Faith upon
them, and we shall find comfort in them; his Words drop as an Honeycomb; his
Words are Spirit and Life. More particularly,

First; Our Faith must be acted upon Christ's Word of Precept, his Word of
Command in time of Trouble; Fear not him that can kill the Body, but (...) that
can cast both Soul and Body into ^^^ll, Luke 12. 4, 32. Fear none of those
things which thou shall suffer. Let not your Heart be troubled, nor let it be
afraid. Rejoice when Men shall persecute you, etc. Luke 21. 19. In patience
posses ye your Souls: with many such Now Christians must yield up the Obedience
of Faith to such Commands and urge them upon their Hearts, charging themselves
to obey the^ saying, O my Soul, my Lord has forbidden me to fear, to be
troubled, t^ be thoughtful, to be dejected, etc. ^^ has commanded me to be
patien^ yea, to rejoice in my Suffering: He^ my Lord, and I must obey him, I
mu^^ keep his Commandments, else I cannon love him; I must keep his Sayings* or
else I cannot be his Disciple; ^^ I keep his Commandments, he wi^ manifest
himself to my Soul, his Father will love me, and he will love me, and they both
will make their abode with me; for it is his Promise, John 14. 21, 23. Say
thus, ^ my Soul, Jesus Christ is my King an^ my Lawgiver, I must obey him; h^
is my Prophet also, and I must he^^ him in all things whatsoever he sha^ say
unto me. I have taken him for my Lord as well as for my Savior: for my King to
rule me, as well as for my Jesus to save me; for my Prophet to teach me, as
well as for my Priest to satisfy for me. O my Soul, consider, He is the Author
of Eternal Salvation only to those that obey him. Thus applying the Commands of
Christ to our selves, and urging his Authority upon our Hearts, it will help us
to bear up under our Troubles.

2dly. Act Faith upon the Promises of Christ, of which somewhat was said
before. He has promised to be always with us, to send the Comforter, to
manifest himself unto us, that he will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench
the smoking Flax, Mat. 19. 29. That he will give us an hundredfold for all
our Losses for his sake. That he will gather us with his Arm, carry us in his
Bosom; that he will hear our Prayers; that he will give us a Crown, a Kingdom,
Everlasting Life, with many more. O, could we act our Faith upon his precious
Promises, and lie sucking by Faith on those full Breasts of Consolation, and
draw by Faith, Prayer, and Meditation, from these Wells of Salvation, we should
find sweet support under all our Troubles.

3dly. Faith acted on the Word ^ Threatening, may put a stop to Hear Trouble:
Jesus Christ has drea^ fully threatened those that love Father or Mother, Son
or Daughter, mo^ than him, or their own Lives; a^ those that are ashamed of
him, ^ his Word; and those that fall from him, and those that hear his Saying
and do them not; and those that a^ fruitless Branches, etc. Mat. 10. 3* Luke
14. 26. Mark 8. last. Joh. 15.

Faith acted on the Examples in the Word of Christ, especially his o^ Example,
Learn of me, says he, I ^ meck and lowly in Heart, Matthew. 11. ^* He was as a
Lamb, dumb before ^ Shearers, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and we m^^ follow his steps. We
have also ^ Cloud of Witnesses, the Example of the Primitive Christians, who
bo^ all their Troubles with Patience, a^ Holy Courage; and we are expres^
commanded to be Followers of the^ who through Faith and Patience inher^ the
Promise, Heb. 6. 12. Thus Fai^ acted on the Word of Christ, wi^ help against
all Heart-Trouble.

Fifthly; Faith acted on the Work of Christ, will either prevent or cure
Heart-Trouble. And that again, if Faith be acted upon the Work he has done for
us already, and upon the Work he is now doing for us in Heaven, and upon the
Work he is now doing in us on Earth, and upon the Work he will do for us, and
in us, and upon us at the last Day. All which Works of Christ, if we act our
Faith on them, we shall not be much troubled in our Hearts. Believe also in
Christ; Believe me (says he) for the Work's sake, John 14. 11.

1. Faith must be acted upon that great and glorious Work of Christ for us when
he was upon Earth, that Work which his Father gave him to do in the Days of his
Flesh, as our Redeemer, and that in doing and in suffering; for he came to do
the Will of God by his Obedience, as well as to suffer it by his Sat^^faction,
and this is his state of Humi^iation. He assume^ Humane Nature, entered the
Virgin*s Womb was b^rn of her, yet without Sin. He lived on Earth a time, doing
Good, and healing all manner of Diseases; spent most of his time in Preaching,
Praying, Fasting, and revealing to Men the whole Will of God for their
Salvation, and fulfilling all Righteousness. He professed he came not to do his
own Will, but the Will of him that sent him John 6. 38, 39. And, says he, This
is the Father's Will which sent me, th^^ of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up a^ the last Day. A comfortable
Consideration indeed, and a Cure for our Heart-Trouble: That our Lord Jesus
will raise up all our dead dear Relations and Friends, now rotting in their
Graves: All that died in Jesus, will Jesus bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17.
And this also is the Father's Will, That every one that sees the Son, that is,
every one that by Faith receives and believes in the Son, shall have
Everlasting Life. Now, to accomplish and finish this Will of the Father, was
the whole Work o^ Christ upon Earth, even to draw poor Souls unt him, to work
Faith in them by his Word and Spirit, to fulfill the whole Law of God for them
and in them, Romans 8. 4. And to begin and finish the whole Work of our
Redemption. Faith acted on this Work of Christ upon Earth for us, in the
several parts of it, He being partaker of Flesh and Blood with us, to deliver
us from him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil; and to free us
from the fear of Death, by which we were always subject to Bondage, Heb. 2. I
say, if we can (...) Faith on these Works of Christ for us, we shall have no
cause of Heart-Trouble.

Let us consider, that our Blessed Lord denied himself on Earth, and was
well-pleased not to have his own Will, nor to do his own Will, but referred
himself entirely to his Father's, what reason have we, poor Worms, to be
troubled, when our Wills are crossed? Let us in Heart and Life say as we pray,
Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, Mat. 6. 10. And when the Will of
God is done upon our Families and Relations, let not our Hearts be troubled,
but let us imitate Jesus Christ, in our submission to the Will of God, making
it our Work on Earth to be doing ^ the good we can, and so to put hi^ on, and
walking as he walked, a^ not be troubled.

Secondly, Faith acted on Christ Suffering-Work on Earth, will greatl^
contribute to our Support; He wa^ a Man of Sorrows, Isa. 53. 1, 2. i^ that if
we meet with Sorrows ^ Earth, we do but drink of our Master own Cup, and that
should quiet us.

Christ's Suffe^^^gs on Earth were ^ two kinds, viz. ^^r our Imitation, a^ for
Satisfaction for our Sins.

(1.) For our Imitation. His pati^^^ suffering of Reproaches, Scorns,
i^vilings, Contradiction of Sinne^^ Temptations, Persecutions, Bond* Poverty,
Shame, loss of Friends, and ^ suffering all with invincible Patien^ and
Meekness, without the least mu^muring, repining, disquiet or disco^tent,
without any Retaliation; f^^ when he was reviled, he reviled not again he
prayed for his Enemies, etc. a^ all this as our Example, that we sho^^ follow
his steps, 1 Pet. ^. 21, ^^* ^* And if our Lord, the Lord of He^ven and Earth,
suffered such things what reason or cause have we to be troubled in our Hearts
when we are persecuted, reviled, forsaken of all our Friends, impoverished,
exposed to Shame and Sorrow, seeing our Blessed Lord was so exposed, and so
exercised upon Earth? Is it not enough for the Servant to be as his Master?
Shall we think to fare better than him? His Sufferings were to teach us to bear
ours with Christian Patience, and to sanctify ours to us; yea, in all our
Sufferings he sympathizeth with us.

Let us then act our Faith upon Christ's Sufferings on Earth; his whole Life
being a Life of Suffering, he knew what Trouble meant, he was acquainted with
Grief, he knew what it was to lose a Friend; for in his greatest Trouble, all
his Disciples (whom he calls his Friends) forsook him and fled; and being
tempted himself, he knows how to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. and
4. 15. He has a feeling of all our Infirmities. Let us labor to act Faith on
Jesus, and our Hearts will not be troubled.

(2.) But his great Suffering-Wor^ for us, ^as his Work of Satisfaction All our
Sins being laid on him, it please^ the Lord to bruise him, and to put him ^
grief, and to make his Soul an Offerin^ for Sin: He poured out his Soul un^
Death, was numbered among Transgressor. Isa. 53. 6, 10, 12. Was made Sin for ^^
He bare our Sins on his own Body on t^ Tree; was made a Curse for us, 2 Cor. ^
20. Gal. 3. 10. suffered the Wrath ^ God for us, to deliver us from the Wrath
to come. O blessed Jesus ^ when our Sins were upon him, he w^^ sore amazed,
groaned, was exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death; He was ^^ a bloody Sweat, in
a bitter Agony in the Garden; He was falsely accused, u^ justly condemned, and
then barbarousl^ crucified, suffering that cursed an^ cruel, shameful and
painful Death o^ the Cross, and all as our Surety, and ^^ a Sacrifice to God
for our Sins. Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor* 5. 7. to make
Atonement and Sati^f^ction to the Law and Justice of Go^ for us, Romans 3. 25.

This was the great Work of the Transcendent Love of Jesus Christ when he was
upon Earth, when he traveled in Soul, drank of the Brook in the way, Psalm.
110. 7. that black Torrent of Wrath and Curses that lay in the way betwixt our
Souls and Heaven, which stopped up our Passage thitherward, and made it utterly
impassable for us: But Jesus made a Passage by his Blood, that his Redeemed
might pass through. So great were his Sufferings in this World for us, that they
made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? offering up strong
Cries with Tears, Mat. 27. 46. Heb. 5. 7.

Now then, let us act our Faith on the Sufferings of Christ here on Earth, and
believe that he suffered all those hard and heavy, those bitter and grievous
things for us, and in our Names; that he bore our Sins to satisfy God's Justice
for them, to purchase and procure our Pardon. O that we could but believe in
this Jesus, that he sweated great drops of Blood for us, and that he shed his
very Heart-blood upon the Cross for us, and by Faith apply and appropiate all
this to our own Souls, believing that he was wounded for our Transgressions,
smitten for ^ Sins; that the chastisement of our Pe^ was upon him, Isa. 53.
that by ^ Blood of his Cross he has made o^ Peace, and has purchased for us
Et^^nal Life. Believe this, and then ^ what little cause you have to have y^
Hearts troubled for any Loss or Cr^ whatsoever. The consideration, i^ way of
believing of what Christ h^ done for us, and of what he has s^fered for us,
should make us patien^ do or suffer any thing for him and fr^ him. Believe also
in me.

Secondly; Our Faith must be (...) upon the Work of Christ, which he ^ now
doing for us in Heaven. He is ^^ idle there, although he be set down ^ the
Right Hand of the Majesty on Hig^ but he is at work for his People ther^ there
he he makes continual interces^^ for us, Romans 8. 34. He is there ^ our
Advocate to plead our Cause, a^ manage all our Businesses there, p^^senting his
Blood in the Virtue of to his Father for our Pardon, presen^ing our Persons and
Services perfume^ with the Incense of his own Righteou^ness, and by his Spirit
applying the ^^^tue of all to our Souls. He is able ^ save to the uttermost all
that come unto ^od by him, seeing he ever lives to make ^tercession for us,
Heb. 7. 25. Of this ^ have spoken before. Now if we ^an act our Faith upon the
Intercession ^f Christ, who knows all our Wants, ^urdens, Cares and Fears, and
whose ^ffice it is to plead and intercede for ^s in Heaven, (tho we may scarce
have any to plead or speak a word for us on ^arth, yet) we should have no cause
^o have our Hearts troubled: We ^ave a faithful Friend, to whom we ^ay commit
our Cause.

Thirdly; Christ is doing a Work ^n us on Earth, while he himself is in Heaven:
He is humbling us, purging ^s, teaching us, mortifying our Cor^uptions,
crucifying our inordinate Affections, sanctifying us, and so preparing us for
Heaven: He is making ^s meet for the Kingdom; He is fit^ing us for his Father's
House, by all ^is Ordinances, and by all his Provi^ences, by every Loss and
Cross; by ^ll our Afflictions, as, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our ^ight Afflictions which
are but for a mo^ent, work for us (that is, by way of preparation) a far more
exceeding an^ eternal weight of Glory. Jesus Christ is in the Word, and in the
Rod, he ^ All in All: He is still forming, squ^ring, fashioning and working by
h^ Spirit, Word and Rod, upon his People, to make them more and mo^ conformable
to himself, to square the^ as Stones for his Building, to ma^^ them Habitations
for himself, Templ^ for the holy God to dwell in, and the he himself may
delight to dwell i^ them here, and to make them fit ^^ dwell with him for ever
in Glory Now, let us labor to act our Fait^ on those blessed Works of Christ
in u^ and believe that he is thus working i^ us, even in and by all our
Affliction and labor to feel and find these gr^cious Works carrying on in us,
and ^^ shall have no cause to be troubled.

Moreover, our Faith should be act^ upon the Work that Christ is now ^^ing for
us in Heaven; besides his ^^tercession for us there, he is preparing Place for
us in Heaven, as he told ^^ Disciples, to comfort them: In ^^ Father's House
are many Mansions; I ^ to prepare a Place for you. A Place ^ Heaven is
infinitely better, and more to be desired than the best Place on Earth. A Place
in the Father's House, ^n the highest Heavens, in that glorious Paradise above,
that is the Place of all Places, there the great and glorious God dwells, there
blessed Jesus dwells; O that New Jerusalem, the City of the ^iving God, that is
the Place indeed, that House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2
Cor. 5. 1, 2. Some think that Jesus went locally into Hell, but we are sure he
went locally into Heaven; and we know for what he went there, for he has told
us, it was to prepare a Place for us there. Here below all Places are full of
Darkness, Snares, Temptations, Fears, Dangers, Persecutions; but that is a
Place of perfect Peace, perfect Rest, of Light, Comfort, Joy and Consolation.
Here we are Pilgrims and Strangers, there is our Home, our Father's House. Here
we have no continuing City, 1 Cor. 4. 11. no abiding Place. Christ's People
here in this World, many times, have no certain dewlling place, but are driven
from House and Home, forced to fly from one City to another, from Town to
Country, from one Kingdom to another; constrained to wander from Place to
Place; while others abide i^ their Habitations, they must seek their Quarters
where they can find them, ^ while under one Friend's Roof, a while under
another's; which is no small Affliction to them that feel it, tho others lay it
not to heart. Now what should comfort us in this our Pilgrimage an^
Wilderness-condition; what should support us in this our wandering and desolate
State, but that it was eve^ thus with our blessed Lord himself upon Earth, who
had not an House to put his Head in? And so it was with his Disciples, and with
many choice Saints as Heb. 11. 37, 38. What should bear up our Spirits, but
this comfortable Consideration, that our Lord went to Heaven on purpose to
prepare a Place for us there? If the Earth cast us out, Heaven will receive us:
If Men say to us, Remove, be gone hence, depart away, here is no Place, no
abiding for you; our dear Lord will call to us out of Heaven, and say, Come up
hither, Rev. 11. 12. Come up to me, I have prepared a Place for you here. There
is room enough in our Father's House, there are many Mansions, and from thence
there shall be no remove for ever, no more any changing Houses for ever, when
once we are lodged in our Father's House. There is our Forerunner for us
entered, Heb. 6. 20. The hope we have through Grace of getting into that blessed
Place, by that new and living Way, to rest there after all our weary wanderings
here, and never to remove more, is that which comforts us in these our
troublesome removes here: O that Place, and that blessed State in that Place,
to see God, and to be ever with the Lord, to see our lovely Lord Jesus as he
is, and to be made like unto him. Could we fix our Hearts and Eyes more
steadfastly upon those invisible and eternal things, we should more quietly and
comfortably bear our present Troubles, yea, and rejoice in them. And when we
can act our Faith upon that Place and State above, and conclude our Title to
it, by our Interest in Christ, then our Hearts will not be troubled.

Also this Consideration should preserve us from Heart-trouble and Sorrow for
the loss of our dear Relations which died in Jesus, for that they are gone home
to their Father's House* they are arrived at their Harbor, they are safely
housed, they are where the^ would be, they are gone to the Place that their
beloved Lord went to prepare for them, to that City of God, ^^ the general
Assembly of the First-bor^ whose Names are written in Heaven, etc* Heb. 12. 23.
They would not exchang^ their Place now for the most stately and most
magnificent Place in all the World. O could we but realize by Faith that most
happy State and Plac^ where our deceased pious Friends are gone, our Hearts
would not be trou^led for them.

And this may comfort us also under all our present Sufferings and Sadnesses,
that e're long we also shall go t^ that Place, to that City above, which God
has prepared for us. Our Lord assures us, that he will come again, and take us
to himself, that where he is, ^^ may be also: O could we believe this* we
should say, Come, Lord Jesus, co^ quickly.

Fourthly; Our Faith must be acted upon the Work that Christ will do for us,
and in us, and upon us in Heaven at the last. It is above all our
Understandings to conceive what glorious Works Christ will do for us, and in us
at the last day. It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3. 2. There
shall be a day of the Manifestation of the Sons of God. The poor despised
Saints, all black and cloudy here, covered with Shame and Reproach now, shall
then be manifested to be the Lord's Jewels: That will be a Day of their full
Redemption, both of Soul and Body, their Wedding and their solemn
Coronation-day; Then their blessed Redeemer shall publicly own them, and bid
them welcome to his Father's House, saying, Come ye Blessed of my Father, etc.
Mat. 25. 34. Then will Jesus put the Crown of Glory, of Righteousness, and of
Life, upon their Heads. Then will Jesus present them to his Father without
Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. Then will he make their (now)
vile Bodies (subject now to vile Corruptions, to vile Diseases, to vile Abuses,
and to a vile dissolution at Death) like unto his own gloriou^ Body: and their
Souls shall be like to his, to their full satisfaction. The^ the poor Disciples
of Christ shall have a full End put to all their Heart-Tro^bles, Sorrows, Fears
and Cares Then their Hearts shall rejoice, and the^ Joy no Man (nor Devil)
shall take from them. Sorrow and sighing shall flee away and they shall enter
in, into Everlasting Rest; and into that unspeakable blessed State which was
purchased by the precious Blood of Jesus, and by him prepared and possessed in
ou^ Names and Steads. All our dear Relations that died in Jesus are already
entered, Christ their dearest Lord has wrought this glorious Work on their
Souls already; they are triumphing singing Hallelujahs in the highest Heavens:
While we are fighting, sighing and sobbing here below, they are with blessed
Jesus above, according to his Prayer for them, seeing his Glory and
participating of it. Thus much for the Work of Christ, upon which our Faith
must act, that our Heart^ may not be troubled.

Sixthly; Our Faith must act upon the Will of Christ, in order to the
preventing and curing our Heart-Troubles, Fears and Sorrows. What is the Will
of Christ? It is his Will that his Peoples Hearts should not be troubled nor
afraid, as in the Text; It is his Will, that in the World they should have
Tribulation, but yet, that they should be of good cheer. It is his Will, that
in their Patience they should possess their Souls, and not faint nor be
discouraged. It is his Will they should be sanctified, and that all their
Afflictions should promote their Sanctification. It is his Will, that although
he love them, yet to rebuke and chasten them: And when he does so, that they
should be zealous and repent. It is his Will, that they should deny themselves,
and take up their Cross daily and follow him. That they should fear none of
those things that they should suffer. That they should walk in his steps, hold
fast to the End, be faithful unto Death. That they should overcome. It is his
Will, that they should not love Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, more than
himself; no, nor their Lives, but be willing to part with all for his sake*
Yea, it is his Will, his last Will, tha^ all his poor Disciples, after they
have suffered a while, may be with him who^ he is, to behold his Glory. Thus if
w^ act Faith upon the Will of Christ, an^ labor to yield to it, and acquiesce
i^ it, we shall procure much freedom from Heart-trouble.

Lastly; Our Faith must be acte^ upon the Ends and Designs of Chri^ in all his
afflictive Providence toward us; and these his Ends are all very good and
gracious. With thi^ Argument he himself used to cure the Heart-Troubles of his
Disciples for his departure from them, viz. tha^ he had good Ends in his going
away from them; his End was, to prepare a Place for them, a better Place than
any to be found here, a Place i^ Heaven, in the Father's House: And his End was
to send the Spirit, the Comforter unto them, which would not come if he did not
go away. John 16. 6, 7. He had told them of his going away from them, upon
which Sorrow had filled their Hearts* (and it is even so with ^s, when ou^
earthly Comforts leave us, Sorrow fills our Hearts) but to cure this, our Lord
answers them, that it was expedient for them, (good and necessary for them)
that he should go away, showing them his End in going away, to wit, that he
might send them the Comforter; he would remove from them a great Mercy, the
greatest earthly Mercy that ever they enjoyed, which was his personal Presence;
they must part with so dear and near, so sweet, so loving, so faithful a Friend
as himself was to them: And could there be a greater loss? for this Sorrow had
filled their Hearts? But he tells them, it was to make way for a greater Mercy,
which was, to send them the Comforter, in all the saving and miraculous Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, by which they should be able to do greater Works than he
himself did, John 14. 12. which was a greater Mercy than his bodily Presence
with them, and with this he calms and quiets their Minds. Now, if we can act
Faith upon the Blessed Ends of Christ, in removing our earthly Comforts from
us, which are, to bestow upon us better Mercies, to give us more of his Spirit,
and of the Grace and Comforts of it, our Hearts would not be troubled; could we
believe, that Christ's End in all his Chastisements, is, to prepare us for that
Place in his Father's House, it would comfort and support us. His Ends are very
good, and that should quiet us. So long as the People of Christ enjoy most of
the Comforts of this World, (I speak it by sad experience) commonly they enjoy
least of God, and of his Spirit; and usually when Christ takes away their
earthly Comforts, then he manifests most of Himself, and of his tender Love to
them: He brings them into the Wilderness, and then speaks comfortably to them,
Hos. 2. 14. then he speaks to their Hearts, and not to their Ears only, as in
time of Prosperity, then he gives out most of the Graces and Comforts of his
Spirit. Christ never takes away these outward Mercies from his People, but with
design to bestow better, if our Discontent and Unbelief do not hinder. When the
Lord took away from his Servant David the young Child begotten in Adultery, it
was to give him a Solomon.

Thus I have endeavored to show what it is also to believe in Christ, that
thereby we may prevent and cure our Heart-trouble.

The last thing I have to do is, to show how Faith acted thus on God and
Christ, or, on God in Christ, is the best Preventive of, and Remedy to cure all
our Heart-troubles, which has indeed been shown, partly in the two former
Particulars, and will serve for the confirmation of the Point also.

Two ways principally Faith acted on God and Christ, does effect this great
Cure of Heart-trouble, and procure Hearts-Ease.

First, By way of Application and Appropriation.

Secondly, By way of Holy Confidence and Reliance.

First, By Applying and Apropriating God* and Christ to the Soul, and All that
God is, and All that Christ is, and all that God has, and all that Christ
has, and All that God and Christ has promised: Faith applies and
appropriates All this to the Soul; Faith gives the Soul Right, Title, Claim*
Propriety and Interest to, and in God and Christ; Faith makes All the
Believer's own. Believe, and All is thine. This is the Language of Faith, My
God, my Lord, my Christ, my Savior, my Redeemer; and this quiets and satisfies
the Soul fully, or nothing in Heaven or Earth can do it; when it can thus act
its Faith on God and Christ. So was David cured of his great Troubles, 1 Samuel
30. 6. He encouraged himself in the Lord his God, ^^ God, his God in Christ; so
in that pregnant Text, 2 Samuel 23. 5. His Interest in God's Everlasting Covenant
(whereby God was become his God it Christ) he acted his Faith upon, and that
satisfied him: So, Mich. 7. 7. Ps^* 73. 25, 26.

Either God is ours, or he is not; either Christ is ours, or he is not: li^^
God and Christ be not ours, we have cause enough of Heart-trouble, cause enough
to mind our Danger, and to be troubled at our very Hearts, that we are in such
a woeful case; and should now above all things labor after an Interest in God
and in Christ; whatever our Losses in the World be, this dangerous State of our
Souls should be most minded, and speedily looked after above all things.

But if God be ours, and if Christ be ours; if we have chosen God for our
Portion in Christ; and if we have rightly and truly received Jesus Christ the
Lord, for our only Lord and Savior, and have unfainedly given up our whole
selves to him; then may we act our Faith upon God, as our God, and upon Jesus
Christ as ours, and may claim our Right in God and in Christ, and in All that
God and Christ is and has, as our own; and then, what cause of any
Heart-trouble? If God be ours, if Christ be ours, All is ours, Life ours, Death
ours: What if we want Relations and Friends, Honor, Wealth and Health, is not
the All-sufficient God enough? Is not Jesus, in whom dwells all Fullness, enough
to supply the want of all? This God proposed to Abraham, I am thy God; and to
Israel, Isa. 41. 10. Jesus Christ is All and in All; and if Christ be yours,
al^ is yours; God is yours, and all the Good of both Worlds are yours; and what
can you desire more.

Secondly, Faith exercised in Holy Confidence in, and Reliance upon God, and
Christ, and the Promises, will prevent or cure all our Heart-trouble* David was
cured both these ways, Psalm. 31. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. viz. by appropriating God
to himself, and by trusting in him: I trusted in thee, O Lord; I said, thou art
my God, Psalm. 43. 5. for God is pleased to engage himself, to discharge those
Souls from Heart-trouble and sinful Fear, who trust in him; Psalm. 37. 40.
Trouble does disorder the Heart, and discompose the Mind; but Faith in this
exercise of it, trusting in the Lord, does fix and settle the Heart; so that
then no evil Tidings shall make such a Person afraid, for his Heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 1 12. 7. God has promised to keep them in perfect
peace, whose Minds are stayed on him, because they trust in him, Isa. 26. 3.

Diffidence is the cause of all Disquiet; no true Rest can be had, nor Quiet to
our Minds, but by Confidence in God, Psalm. 2. last. O the blessedness of those
that trust in Christ. God in Christ is the only fit Object of our Confidence in
all our Extremities. A Believer has a God to go to in all his Troubles, an
All-mighty and loving Father in Christ; and this should be our Comfort, that we
are in Covenant with him that rules the World, and has committed the
Government of all things to his Son, our dear Redeemer, who has bought us with
his Blood; and we may be sure that no hurt shall befall us that he can hinder;
and what cannot he hinder, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, and that
has the Keys of Hell and Death, unto whom we are so near, that he carries our
Names on his Heart, and who will in his due time make all the World know, that
his People are as dear to him as the Apple of his Eye.

Trust then, depend and rely upon God in Christ, and by an holy Confidence,
resign up your Wills to his Will, to do what he would have us do; to be, what
he would have us be; to suffer, what he would have us suffer; and then
Heart-trouble will cease, and sweet Peace comes: when having trusted all with
God, we can in heart say, Lord, if thou will have me poor, disgraced,
imprisoned, diseased, deprived of my dearest Friends; I am content to be so, I
trust all my Concerns with Thee: O the sweet peace and quiet that will be in
that Soul.

There is the Almightiness, the Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Mercy, and Faithfulness
of God in Christ for us to trust in, and to rely upon, a Bottom and Foundation
strong enough to build our Confidence upon, in all Storms and Streights: God
has also made many exceeding great and precious Promises in his Word, and not
a naked Promise, but he has entered into Covenant with us, founded upon full
satisfaction by the Blood of Jesus, and confirmed it with an Oath, Heb. 6. 17.
and to this Covenant, sealed by the Blood of his Son, he has added the Seals
of the Sacraments; and all this, that the Heirs of the Promises, namely, All
true Believers, night have strong Consolation, and be cured of all their
Heart-troubles.

Upon this sure Foundation then must our Faith act in an holy Confidence in
God, and in Christ: the Soul being taken off from all other Objects, carried
out of Self, unto God and Christ; who presently (as soon as trusted in)
communicate themselves, and their love, and goodness to the Soul, filling it
with peace, strength, and settlement. By this trusting in God, we honor God
most, and best provide for our own safety.

The way then, whereby Faith quieteth the Soul, and cures it of its Troubles,
is, by raising it above all Disquietments, and pitching it solely upon God in
Christ; and thereby uniting it to God in Christ; from whence it draws Virtue
and Strength, to subdue what ever troubles its Peace. For the Soul is made for
God, and never finds Rest, till it return unto, and settle and center it self
upon him again. And that we may thus place our Confidence in God and Christ for
all supplies, we must most earnestly beg* cry, and seek to God for Grace and
Strength so to do; we must trust in God alone^ for all things, and at all
times: and thus by appropriating God to us, and Christ to us, and placing our
Confidence in them, we may be cured of al^ our Heart-troubles.

The Application.
1. For Information. These Inferences follow.

First, If Faith acted upon God in Christ be such a Remedy against
Heart-trouble; then surely, Faith is a very precious, a very excellent thing; a
Grace of very great worth and value, and of great use and efficacy: It is
precious Faith indeed, the very Trial of it is more precious than Gold, 1 Pet.
1. 7. Precious for its Author, the Lord Jesus; for its Object, precious Jesus,
and all the exceeding great and precious Promises, the purchased Inheritance:
For its Offices, it unites to us Christ, gives us Title to eternal Life; it
supports under all Afflictions; prevents, or cures all Heart-troubles; and
precious for its End, which is the Salvation of our Souls, Ephesians. 3. 17. Heb. 11.
39. 1 Pet. 1. 9.

This Grace of Faith is of a transforming, spiritual Nature; and the Soul of a
Believer, by acting it on God and Christ, and on Divine, Heavenly and Spiritual
things, becomes Divine, Heavenly and Spiritual. Faith unfastneth the Heart from
the Creature, showing the Soul the Vanity of it, and carries the Soul unto God
and Christ, showing it God's All Sufficiency, and Christ's All-fulness; for
Faith believes, what God in his Word has revealed of both. It is the great
Design of God, in all the Troubles he sends upon his People, effectually to
teach them the exceeding Vanity of the Creature, to imbitter the things of this
World to them, to wean their Hearts from them, to bring earthly things out of
Request with them, to make them see, that there is no true Contentment, nor
solid Satisfaction for the Soul to be found in them, and to make them see where
true Happiness and Contentment is to be had; even in God and in Christ alone,
for whom their Souls were Created, Redeemed, and Sanctified. Now the great Work
of Faith is, to take off the Soul from the Creature, and fix and settle it upon
God and Christ the true Foundation. Naturally our Hearts hang loose from God,
and cleave to the Creature, and when the Creature fails, our Hearts are
troubled; but Faith takes off the Heart from the Creature, and settles it upon
God in Christ, where it finds Rest; and this is the great Service it does us.
All the great and famous things which those Worthies did, and all the hard and
heavy things they suffered, mentioned in Heb. 11. were all done and suffered by
the Power of Faith, ver. 37, etc. The settling of our Hearts upon God in Christ;
trusting all there, is the best means to cure our Heart-trouble; and this Faith
does, and therefore it is precious.

Secondly. It follows from the Premises, That the want of Faith in God, and in
Christ, is the Great Cause of all our Heart-Troubles, Despondencies and
Disquietness. Could we but act our Faith strongly on God and Christ, as our God
in Christ, our Troubles would be prevented or cured: For by Faith the Soul
looks up to God in Christ, through the Promises, looking off from all other
Supports, unto God for all Supplies, for the removing of all Evil felt or
feared, and for the obtaining of all Good promised and needed; and by this
exercise of Faith, the Soul is raised up above all Discouragements and
Disquietments: but where this Faith is wanting, or the lively exercise of it
suspended, there the Soul sinks under Heart-Troubles. But of this somewhat was
said before.

Thirdly. Hence also we may clearly see the absolute Necessity of getting Faith
in God, and in Christ; and of acting it, and living by it: There is no living
quietly and comfortably without it, no standing under our Burdens, no bearing
with Patience and Cheerfulness our Losses and Crosses without this Faith; no
Joy and Peace, but by believing; by Faith we stand.

Fourthly. Then the Things of the World are not to be trusted to, nor trusted
in, for Comfort in time of Trouble. Nothing but God and Christ to be trusted
in, and trusted to, and there is enough in them to support and comfort us, as
has been showed: but no confidence to be put in the Creature; there is a Curse
upon such Confidence, but a Blessing on them that trust in God: No trusting in
Friends, Riches, Gifts, or any thing; for so to do, is Idolatry, to give that
to the Creature, which is due to God alone.

Fifthly. Hence we see the Reason why so many faint in the Day of Adversity,
and sink under Trouble; and others use unlawful means to prevent Trouble, or to
get out of it: It is, because they want this Faith in God and Christ; and for
want of it, too many miscarry under Affliction.

The Second Use is, by way of Exhortation to all the Disciples of Christ, in
the Words of the Text; Let not your Hearts be troubled, but Believe in God, and
Believe in Christ: You must get and act Faith in God and Christ, this is the
only Preventive, the only Remedy against Heart-Trouble. Our Lord in this Text
commands it, and commends it: we must needs get Faith above all gettings; next
to Christ, we must get Faith, for we cannot have Christ without Faith: Go to
God for it, it is his Work, his Gift, yea, it is his Operation; yea, the same
Power that raised up Jesus from the Dead, must be put forth upon a Soul to work
Faith, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. The exceeding great and mighty working of the Power of
God, to raise up the Soul to God and Christ, and to enable it to lay hold on
God and Christ: for such is our natural proneness to live by Sense and Carnal
Reason; and such is the most transcendent Excellency of God and Christ, and of
Divine Things, which Faith looks unto; and so great an Inclination we have to
Self-sufficiency, and so much rooted in Self-Love, and inordinate Love of the
Creature, and so hard to take off the Soul from false bottoms; and because we
are such Strangers to God naturally; and because there is so much Guilt of Sin
still remaining on us, by our renewed Provocations, that we are afraid to
entertain serious Thoughts of God: and because of that infinite Distance
between God and us, we can never come to believe in him, and rely upon him,
until our Hearts be renewed by the Power of Grace, and this Divine Grace of
Faith infused into them: Therefore must we go to God and Christ, and put up
strong Cries and Prayers to God to work Faith in us, and never give over, until
it be wrought in us.

And having got Faith, we must act and exercise it upon God in Christ; upon
God, I say, He only is the Object of Faith, and is worthy of it; for a Man can
be in no condition, in which God is at a loss, and cannot help him: If Comforts
and means of Deliverance be wanting, God can create Comforts, and command
Deliverance, Isa. 57. 19. He can bring Light out of Darkness, to him all things
are possible.

1. Then, Faith assents to, and is persuaded that there is a God, the Infinite
First, and Best Being of all things, and who gives Being to all Things, Hebr.
11. 6.

2. That in this Blessed Being are Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and all the Object of our Faith.

3. Faith must always act on God in Christ, and not otherwise; for in Christ
God reconciles the World. In Christ, God becomes our Friend, is at peace with
us; by Christ, the Enmity between God and us is taken away; in Christ, God
becomes our Father, John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26.

4. Faith is acted by Meditating on, Considering of, and Applying, and
Appropriating of God in Christ to the Soul, laying claim to all that God is,
and to all that God has as its own.

5. It must also act upon the Promises of God in his Word, and upon God and
Christ in them: God has opened all his Heart to us in his Word, making many
sweet Promises, exceeding great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and also,
He has made a Covenant of Grace with us, to bestow himself and all good things
upon us, upon which we must live, until Promises e^^ in Performances. These
Promises, a^^ our Spiritual Treasury: Promises (...) Pardon of Sin, upon
Repentance and Faith; Promises of renewing sanctifying Grace; Promises of the
Spirit of Heaven, of Eternal Life and Glory, of Mansions in the Father's House,
and of all things needful it the way to the Kingdom, that we shall want no good
thing, and that all things shall work together for our good, etc.

Lastly, That our Hearts may not be troubled, but fully satisfied and
comforted, we must by Faith lay hold on God, take hold of God's Strength, which
is his Mercy in Christ; and most solemnly, most considerately, and most
sincerely take God for our God in Christ, and actually enter into Covenant with
him: This Covenant is founded upon Jesus Christ, his Satisfaction and
Righteousness; and therefore we must also believe in Christ, taking him for our
only Lord and Savior, receiving him by Faith as he is offered to us in the
Gospel, to be All in All to us.

As God offers, so Faith receives; God offers himself in Christ, and so Faith
receives him. God does, as it were, say in the Gospel, O poor lost Sinner, come
to my Son Jesus, take him for thy only Lord and Savior; and by him come to me,
and take me for thy God and Father: and by Faith the poor Believer ecchoeth
back, My Lord and my God, I humbly and heartily come to thee, accept of thee,
close with thee: and so by Faith the believing Soul becomes one with God and
Christ; and hereupon the Soul by Faith cleaves to God and Christ, and
unfeignedly, and unreservedly, resigns and gives up its whole self to God in
Christ, taking God in Christ for his, and entirely surrenders up it self to be
the Lord's. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Now Faith thus acted, will
certainly cure all our Heart-Troubles.

In order then to obtain solid Comfort in all our Distresses, let us carefully
look whether these Acts of Faith have really passed upon our Souls Have we thus
actually, understandingly, and sincerely believed in God, a^^ in Christ? Have
we unfeignedly e^tred into Covenant with God ^^ Christ? Can we conclude that
G^^ is our God in Christ, by our bei^^ his? If we be entirely his, he is (...)
for certain, 1 John 4. 19. Cant. 2. 1^* If we place all our Happiness in hi^
Psalm. 73. 25. If we give him t^^ Throne in our Hearts, subjecting o^ whole
selves to his Government, making God in Christ all our Love, ^^ Trust, Joy,
Desire, Delight, Fea^ our All, cleaving to him alone and above all, depending
upon him as o^^ chief Good; contenting our sel^^ with him as All-sufficient for
us, ^signing up our selves to his go^^ Will, to be, to do, and suffer wh^^ he
will: If we can and do engag^ our selves to sincere Obedience, th^^ none of his
Commandments be gri^vous to us: If in all things we gi^^ Christ the
pre-eminence; if we ha^^ received the Spirit of Christ, as R^^ 8. 9. Gal. 4. 6.
which joins us him, and makes us one Spirit with hi^ and which is a Spirit of
Adoption, whereby the Soul seeing his Interest in God as his Father, can freely
go to God in all its straits. If we have the Graces of the Spirit, as Love,
Meekness, Patience, Humility, etc. If we have a Resemblance of our Father in
us, a Likeness of Disposition to God and Christ, the Image of God, the Life of
Christ manifest in us: If we do side with God, and his Cause, in evil Times, so
that we are willing to part with any thing, with all things for Christ's sake,
and at his Call; If it be thus with us in the main Bent and constant Frame of
our Hearts, and in the Sincerity and Integrity of our Souls, our Consciences in
the sight of God bearing us witness that thus it is with us, then may we upon
good grounds conclude, that God, the All-sufficient God, is ours, and Christ
Jesus who is all Fullness, is ours, and then our Hearts should not be troubled.
And to prevent and cure all our Heart-trouble, we must act Faith on all these
things, in God and in Christ, which I mentioned before, and which would be too
long to repeat again here; therefore I earnestly desire you to look back an^
view over those several particular things considerable in God and i^ Christ,
and believe in God and i^ Christ, applying and appropriation them to our
selves, and we shall se^ we have no cause of Heart-trouble If the great God be
ours, and the Lord Jesus be ours; if we have ^^ Husbands, nor Wives, nor Sons,
no^ Daughters, nor Health, nor Wealth we have enough to content and satisf^ our
Souls for ever.

But to draw to a Conclusion, that there may be an effectual cure of all our
Heart-trouble whatever our distress may be, let us labor to act Faith o^
Christ, in considering and believing:

1. What he is. 2. Where he is. 3. What he has declared. 4. What he has
promised; and a^^ within the Confines of this Text Ver. 2, 3.
First, Let Christ's Disciples labor to believe what Christ is, and who he is.
He himself asked his Disciples this Question, Mat. 16. 16. Whom say ^^ that I
am? Peter answered, Thou a^^ Christ, the Son of the living God. I know in whom
I have believed, says the Apostle; and that supported him: and for this
knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord, he counted all things but Dung and Dross,
Phil. 3. 9. To believe all things that are written of Christ, is not enough;
but to believe in him, is by Faith to receive him for our only Lord and
Savior, John 1. 12. Col. 2. 6. and actually, unreservedly, unfeignedly and
heartily, to give up our whole selves unto him, taking him for our absolute
Lord, our Head, our Treasure, and our All; and believing He is all that to us
that he is. That he was made Sin for us, made Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption to us. That he is indeed our Husband, our Head,
our High Priest, our Surety, our Ransom, our Redeemer. That he has loved us,
and washed us in his Blood. That he was delivered up to Death for our Offenses,
and rose again for our Justification. That he has made our Peace with God by
the Blood of his Cross; and purchased our Pardon, and an Inheritance for us
with the Saints in Light: and that by believing in him we shall have
everlasting Life, John 3. 16, 36. I say, this is to believe in Christ: and such
as thus believe in him, have no cause of Heart-trouble. And thu^ we must
believe in him, and it is the great Commandment of God to believe in him, 1
John 3. 23. and the positive Command of Christ himself in the Text, Belive also
in me. And he that has this Faith, has Christ. 1 John 5. 10, 12. and has
Life, Eternal Life. John 6. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, (says Christ,
the Eternal Truth himself) He that believes on me, has Everlasting Life. He
has it in Pretio, in the Price of it, that was punctually paid down upon the
Cross* therefore called the Purchased Possession* He has Eternal Life in
Promissis, i^ the Promises of it; it is promised to every one that believed,
God that cannot lie has promised it, Tit. 1. 1, 2. and he has it in
Primitiis, in the first Fruits of it, the saving Graces of the Spirit, which in
some measure every true Believer has, 2 Cor. 5. 5. Ephesians* 1. 13, 14.

Now, he that thus believes in Christ Christ is his; and all that Christ ha^^
done, and suffered, and merited, is his, he has Right and Title to it; for by
Faith he is become the Child of God. Gal. 3. 26. We are all the Children of God
by Faith in Jesus Christ. And if we be Christ's, then are we the Heirs of the
Promise, Gal. 3. 29. Yea, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.
17. Yea, then, all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. All is ours, if we be
Christ's, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. All the Gifts, Graces, Labors,
Prayers of all Gospel Ministers, all Gospel Ordinances are ordained and
designed for our Good, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. for the gathering of us in, and
for the perfecting and building of us up in Christ Jesus, until we all come to
Heaven. The World is ours; the Good and Evil of it, the Bitter and the Sweet of
it, the Comforts and the Crosses of it, the Gains and the Losses of it, the
Love and the Hate of it, the Smiles and the Frowns, the Friends and Foes in it;
All is designed for, and shall further and promote our Spiritual and Eternal
Welfare. Life is ours. All the Troubles, Sicknesses, Pains, evil Tidings,
Persecutions, Disappointments, Losses of Relations, Shame, Reproach, or
whatever attends this Mortal Life, shall be sanctified and blessed to us for
our Good. Yea, Death is ours, that shall be our Advantage, our Gain, that shall
put a full end and period to all our Sin and Suffering, and be a Door of
Entrance for us into Glory in our Father's House. Or things present, our
present Fears, Sorrows, Miseries, Infirmities, etc. shall be so ordered and
overruled by the Wisdom and Love of our Father, that they shall all help us
onward to Heaven. And things to come are ours, all that Glory to be revealed,
that Saints Everlasting Rest that is prepared for the People of God, that Crown
of Righteousness, of Glory, and of Life; that Kingdom of Glory, that
unspeakable, that inconceivable State of Happiness and Blessedness which Christ
our Lord has purchased by his Blood, all this is ours also. But how come we to
have a Right and Title to all this? Why, says the Apostle, thus, Ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's. As sure as Christ is God's, so sure, if you be
Christ's, All is yours: and, as I have proved, if we be true Believers in
Christ, then we are Christ's, we are his Members, his Spouse, his Children; and
then, what cause have we to be troubled at any thing, or in any Condition? What
cause has such a Soul to be dejected, whatever Crosses or Losses do befall him?
Is there not enough in Christ, in the Promises, in the Purchase of Christ? Is
there not enough in Heaven, in all that Glory, to quiet, content and fully to
satisfy our Souls? O my Beloved, (and O my base and faithless Heart) it is our
base Unbelief that does us all the mischief, that spoils our Peace, that
hinders our Comfort, and makes us walk so heavily. O let us bewail this
God-dishonouring Sin, this Peace-destroying Sin; and let us, who have received
Jesus for our Lord and Savior, believe that he is ours indeed, and that we are
his indeed, and then act our Faith upon him, and our Hearts shall not be
troubled.

Q. But may some say, It Is true, if Christ be ours, all is ours, we believe
that; But how shall we know that Christ is ours?

A. Briefly thus: If we be Christ's entirely, and sincerely Christ's, the^
Christ is ours: I am my Beloved's, an^ my Beloved is mine, Cant. 2. 16. and 6.
3. Her being Christ's, was a sure evidence to her that Christ was hers. Now it
is not very hard to know whose we are, whether we be Christ's or our own*
Christ's or the World's, Christ's o^ the Devil's: Let us take a little pai^^ in
trying and searching our selves, the Matter requires it; Whose are we? Put this
Question seriously to our Hearts, in the sight of God: Whose am I? whose Image
do I bear? by whose Spirit am I acted? who has my Heart, my chief Love and
Delight? Have we unfeignedly given up our selves to Christ? Have we actually
entered into Covenant with him, and taken him for our Head and Husband? Have we
passed over and surrendered up our whole selves to Christ, our Souls, Bodies,
all our Concerns? Have we given up our Hearts, Heads, Tongues, Time, Talents,
Estates, Libe^ties, Relations, and all to Christ? Have we done this sincerely?
Then we have received Christ upon his Terms. If we be Christ's, and not our
own, and live unto Christ, and not to our selves, Romans 14. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
Gal. 2. 20. and are content that Christ should dispose of us and ours as he
pleases; and are always laboring to be more and more like him, and still
longing for more and more Communion with him, etc. Then may we, upon good
Grounds, conclude that Christ is ours: If we be his, he is ours.

Again, if we truly believe in Christ, then he is ours, for it is by Faith that
we receive him, and are united to him, and made one with him, John 1. 12, 13.
and are by his Spirit and Word regenerated, and made new Creatures, and are
enabled to walk after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans
8. 1, 2. He that believes, has the Witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10. he need
not go far to seek: Make sure thy believing in Christ, and thou have the
Witness in thy self that he is thine, and that thou art his.

Q. But how shall we know that we have true Faith, and that we do truly believe
in Christ?

A. Briefly, thus: If we have been made sensible of our lost Condition by
Nature, of our misery by Sin, of our Unbelief; if we have found it an hard Work
to believe; if we have been made weary and heavy-laden with Sin, so as to be
truly willing to part with all Sin; if we have been convinced of our absolute
need of Christ, and of his incomparable Excellency, of his All Sufficiency, and
willingness to save us; if Christ be most precious to us; if these Convictions
have been powerful in us, to drive us from our Selves, and the Creature, and
Sin; if we have hereupon been persuaded and enabled sincerely to come unto
Christ upon his Call in the Gospel, to accept of him upon his Terms, and to
receive him, as he is offered to us in the Gospel; if our whole Hearts have
opened to him, and closed with him, and we have given up our whole selves
entirely to him, and taken him for our only Lord and Savior, as the only way
to God, and do most sincerely resign up our selves to his Government, trusting
in him alone, and relying upon him for Life and Righteousness, for Grace and
Glory; then we do believe in him, then have we this true Faith: which is
further to be known thus, that it works in us true sincere Love to him, and
to all that is his, his Word, his People; your Hearts will run out after him,
all your Affections will center in him. This true Faith draws Virtue from
Christ to purify the Heart, and works Sanctification and Holiness; it does
crucify your Affections to the World, it works true Repentance, and enables you
to overcome the World, and to realize the Glory of Heaven, and to bear us up
under all the Troubles in our way thither, as in that 11th to the Hebrews,
enabling us to trust and betrust our selves, our Souls and Bodies, and all our
Concernments with Christ; by this Faith we shall stand, by it we walk, by it we
live, and hold on, and hold out in following the Lamb to the end of of our
Life, Heb. 10. 38, etc.

Now certainly he that thus believes in Christ, has no cause of Heart-trouble,
but quietly submits to the good Will of his God in Christ, under all the
Dispensations of his Providence, while he is here in this Vale of Tears, until
he come home to his Father's House in Peace, where he shall meet his dearest
Lord, and an hearty welcome. O this Faith, this precious Faith in Christ will
conquer all our base Fears, moderate all our worldly Sorrows, ease our Minds
perplexed with earthly Cares, and quiet our disturbed and distracted Thoughts
about our outward Losses and Troubles: By this Faith we shall find all our
Losses made up in God and in Christ. O then labor for it, cry mightily to God
for this great Gift; cry to Jesus for it, he is the Author and Finisher of it;
and labor to act it upon him continually, and your Hearts shall not be
troubled.

I dare affirm, That if any thing bring Hearts-Ease in Heart-Trouble, this will
do it. So long as our Faith holds up in Act and Exercise upon Christ, we shall
be free from Heart-trouble; but when our Faith fails, our Heart troubles
prevail: As when Moses lifted up his Hands, (and his Heart too by Faith) Israel
prevailed; but when his Hands were down, Amalek prevailed. Faith and
Heart-trouble are like a pair of Balances, when one goes up, the other goes
down: Faith is the Counter-poize of Trouble of Heart. Believe then in Jesus,
act Faith on him, and that will prevent or cure Heart-trouble. Continue in the
Faith, and your Heart-troubles will cease; believe what Christ is, and what he
is to us.

Secondly, Let us believe in Christ, and believe where he is. As to his
Essential Presence, he is in Heaven, at the Father's right Hand, making
continual intercession for us to the Father, Heb. 12. 2, 3. Heb. 7. 25. He is
our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1, 2. pleading our Cause, presenting
all our Services, perfumed with his own Righteousness, and resenting and
feeling our Infirmities, Sorrows and Sufferings, sympathising with us; In all
our Afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. He knows all our Troubles, Trials,
Temptations, Sicknesses, Losses and Miseries. Jesus himself knew, when he was
on Earth, what it was to lose a Friend; He wept when his Friend Lazarus was
dead. He is a most tenderhearted Savior, a most merciful High Priest: He sees
and feels now in Heaven all the Miseries of his People upon Earth, and pleads
for them there; believe this, and let not your Hearts be troubled.

And as to his Spiritual and Providential Presence, he is always with his
People on Earth: He is in his People, Christ in you the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.
27. He is in his Word and Ordinances by his Spirit, to bless them to his
People. Christ is All, Col. 3. 11. and in All. He is All, that is, instead of
All, of Father, Mother, Husband, Wife; of Son and Daughter; instead of Health,
Wealth, Liberty, and All to his People; In him dwells all Fullness, Ephesians. 1.
23. and 3. 17. And he is also in All, he fills all in all. In all his People,
he dwells in their Hearts by Faith. All our fresh Springs are in him: All the
Strength, Support, and Comfort we have, comes from him: He is in all
Providence, be they never so bitter, so afflictive, never so smarting, so
destructive to our Earthly Comforts, Christ is in them all; his Love, his
Wisdom, his Mercy, his Pity and Compassion is in them all, every Cup is of his
preparing; it is Jesus your best Friend, (O ye poor Believers) who most dearly
loves you; It is he that died for you, that appoints all those Providence,
orders them all, overrules, moderates and sanctifies them all, and will sweeten
them all; and in his due time will make them All profitable unto you, that you
shall have cause one day to praise and bless his Name for them all. O that we
could but believe all this, and could by Faith look unto our Jesus in all dark
Providence, and by Faith behold this Jesus managing of them, and believe his
Love, Wisdom, Tenderness and Faithfulness in all; in our Sicknesses, Losses,
Prisons, Restraints, etc. then surely our Hearts should not be troubled.

Thirdly, Believe in Christ, Believe what he has told us; In my Father's House
are many Mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a
place for you, John 14. 3. Let us act Faith upon these true sweet sayings of
our dear Lord, who is Truth it self; In my Father's House are many Mansions. In
my Father's House; my Father's, and your Father's House, one House must hold us
all. John 20. 17. I ascend to my Father, and your Father; to my God, and your
God; and it is in that House which is far above all Heavens, all visible
Elementary Heavens, the third Heaven; that is, the Father's House, That House
not made with hands, whose builder and maker is God, and is Eternal, 2 Cor. 5.
1, 2. This City of the living God, this New Jerusalem; there, says Christ, are
many Mansions, many Dwellings, many fixed, abiding, lasting, everlasting
Habitations: Not Tents and Tabernacles, such as we live in here on Earth, but
Mansions, abiding-places. Is not this a most comfortable Consideration to such
poor Saints, as have here on Earth no certain dwelling-places, not an House of
their own wherein to lay their Heads, but are forced to remove from place to
place, still seeking an Habitation, banished from Family and Friends, from
Relations and Acquaintance; some cast into Prisons, (while others dwell safely
in their own Houses, and none to make them afraid,) and others exposed to much
hardship and danger; I say, this is good news to them, That in their Father's
House are many Mansions; there are everlasting Habitations ready to receive
them, made ready for them; from which, when once they are entered, they shall
never be cast out more: from whence there shall be no more any remove for ever.
When once their earthly House of this Tabernacle is broken down, they shall
possess that House, not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Let us then by
Faith often look into the Father's House, and view, and review those many
Mansions that are there; and let us act Hope also, that shortly we shall
possess that Place, and enjoy that blessed State: The believing frequent
Prospects of that place, will prevent our Heart-trouble, or cure it.

If it were not so, I would have told you, says our Lord: If there were not
such a blessed State, and glorious Place for you my Disciples in the other
World, after all your Sufferings in this, I would have told you so: For I have
told of the many Troubles you must endure in this World; and for your support
and comfort, I am now telling you, what good things you shall shortly enjoy
above in my Father's House; where is all Joy, Peace, Re^ and Consolation: There
are many Mansions, no Prisons, Chains, nor Fetters, but glorious Dwellings,
enough to hold all the Saints that ever were and that ever shall be in the
World where they shall enjoy full and free Communion with the Blessed Trinity,
and with one another; perfect Liberty, without any Restraint or remove for
ever: Believe this, and let not your Hearts be troubled.

I go to prepare a Place for you. I have purchased this most glorious Place for
you, by my Blood; I have promised it to you; now I go away to take Possession
of it for you, in your Name and Stead: O what an Heart-comforting, and
Heart-easing Consideration should this be to us poor Believers, That our Lord
went from Earth to Heaven, o^ purpose to prepare a Place in Heaven for us, to
possess it in our Name and stead; and in the mean time, he is preparing us by
his Word and Spirit, by Afflictions and Deliverances for that glorious Place!
Hence he is called, ou^ Forerunner, who is for us entered into that within the
Vail, Heb. 6. 20. So that, as sure as Christ himself ascended, and went into
the Highest Heavens, so sure shall all his Disciples, all true Believers
ascend, and enter into Heaven also; because he went thither himself, to prepare
Heaven for them, by taking Possession of it in his Humane Nature for us, as our
Head and Savior. God has prepared for them a City, Heb. 11. Heaven and
heavenly Glory is said to be prepared: A Kingdom prepared from the Foundation
of the World, Matthew. 25. 34. If we could believe, that Christ has prepared a
Place in Heaven for us, and that Heaven will make amends for all our Sufferings
in the way thither; and if we could keep the Eye of our Faith upon that
Recompense of Reward, that far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2
Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. we should bear up bravely under all our Sufferings, and not
have our Hearts troubled.

Let us then look more Heavenward, more to our Father's House; Let us have our
Conversations more in Heaven, and set our Affections more upon things above;
upon that blessed State and Place above; and know, That when Christ, who is our
Life, shall appear, we shall appear with him in Glory, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Believe
this, and be comforted.

Certainly we are too much taker up with, and too sollicitous about our earthly
Tabernacles, these Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dustcrushed
before the Moth: We are always minding the Diseases, Distempers and Dangers of
our Bodies, those old crazy tottering Houses, the Prisons of our Souls: we mind
earthly Places too much, but too little those Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2. 6. where we shall shortly sit with him. Were we more heavenly-minded,
we should be more free from Heart-trouble and disquietness of mind.

Lastly; To prevent and cure all our Heart-trouble; Let us labor to believe,
what Christ has promise here in the Text: Verse 3. I will come again, and
receive you to my self, that where I am, ye may be also. Most swee^ and
comfortable Promises!

I will come again. So ver. 18. I w^^ come again; I will not leave you
comfortless: For when I am absent from you, in respect of my bodily Presence, I
will send the Comforter to you, that shall abide with you for ever. And I my
self will come again unto you: you shall not long be without my Company. Though
Christ seems to withdraw and hide his Face from his People, it shall be but a
little moment. Isa. 54. 7, 8. He will return again and have Mercy; yea, with
everlasting kindness will he return. I will come again; I will not stay long
from you, my Heart is still toward you while I am absent, therefore I will
come quickly, Rev. 3. 11. I will come to you with my Messenger Death; though it
be the King of Terrors in it self, and a grim Porter; yet, by my coming with
it, it shall be to you the King of Comforts: I will come with it, by my Spirit,
to strengthen you to look it in the Face, to apply to you the virtue of my
Death, and thereby to take out the Sting of it; and I will come to you by my
Angels, to secure your Souls through the Region of Devils, into my Father's
House. If Death did come alone to us, it would be terrible to us indeed, it is
ghastly Countenance would affright us; but here is the Comfort, That Christ our
dearest Lord, will come with Death, to sweeten it to us, and support us under
it. This prevented David's Fear, Psa^ 23. 4. When I walk through the valley o^
the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me. O welcom^
Death! when Christ comes with i^ This bitter Cup, of which we must a^ drink, is
brought to us by the hand o^ our dearest Lord: This last stroke i^ given by the
hand of Love; it is ^ taking us home to our Father's House; This last Enemy
has Christ conquered for us; because his Children are Partakers of Flesh and
Blood, He likewise took part of the same, that through Death (that is, his own
Death) ^^ might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil,
and deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their Life time subject
to Bondage, Heb. 2. 14. Jesus knew what Death was, he himself had the Pangs of
Death upon him: Sin the Sting of Death was laid on him; and the La^ which is
the strength of Sin, the Curs^ of the Law was upon him: but now for us, who
believe in Jesus, the sting and strength of Death is taken out, and when we
die, we shall die in the Lord, Sleep in Jesus; in Union and Communion with
Jesus; we shall fall ^sleep in the Blessed Arms of our dear Redeemer. He will
come then to keep as Company, through that dark En^ry (Death), into the
Father's House: His Angels shall carry our Souls into Abraham's Bosom, yea,
into the Father's Bosom. O that we would make ^^re of our Union with Christ;
and ^^en let us believe, that he will come ^ith Death, to transl^^^ our Souls
out ^f these Earthly Tabernacles, these ^rison-Houses, these Houses of Bon^age
(wherein our poor Souls have ^een fettered and chained, cloyed and ^og'd with
Corruptions and Tempta^^ons, kept at a distance, and absent ^^om the Lord, and
in which they ^ave been groaning for deliverance) ^ to the glorious Liberty of
the Sons ^^ God, in their Father's, House, and ^all ever be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. ^. ^7.

Secondly, I will receive you to my self: ^ sweet Promise. This is a^l the
Hope, all the Desire, all the Longing, Thir^ing, Breathing of poor Believers,
^^ that Christ would take them to hi^ self. This is the Sum of all the Prayers
and Labors, that they m^ be fitted for Christ, and then t^^ Christ would take
them to himse^ Well, says Christ, work and wait little longer; do, and suffer
a li^^ more; act your Faith and Patience little longer, and I will come to y^^
and take you home to my self, when your Souls shall be at Rest for e^^ The
Saints, while they are here, ^ home in the Body, they are absent from the Lord;
they see but in part, darkl^ and know but in part, very imperfe^ly, and enjoy
but a little, a very l^tle of God and Christ. O how sw^ are a few Drops, a few
Glimpses a^ Glances of Divine Love now to a po^ Soul; the least Cast of
Christ's Ey^ the least Beam of his Loving-kindne^ the least Intimation of his
Favor, ^^ least hint of his Goodness, how r^freshing to a poor Believer? But
wh^ Christ shall receive them to himse^ they shall then see him as he is, shall
^ like him, and shall he satisfied with his L^^ ^^ss, 1 John 3. 2, 3. Psalm. 17.
15. Then ^^all they see him, whom their Souls love, Face to Face: and then will
Jesus open to them all the Treasures of his Love and Grace, to their
everlast^ng Consolation. They shall then be admitted into the glorious Presence
of ^he great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, in whose Presence is fullness of
Joy, and at whose right Hand are Pleasures for ever-more, Psalm. 16. ult. When
the World shall cast them out, and their Habitations shall cast them out, and
shall know them no more; yea, when their Houses of Clay shall be broken down
and dissolved, and can hold them no longer, then will Jesus, blessed Jesus,
receive them to himself: Then shall they be solemnly married to their glorious
Bridegroom, the King of Heaven's Son, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; he
will receive them to himself, he will take them for ^is Bride, embrace them in
his everlasting Arms, and lay them in his blessed Bosom for ever and ever. I
will receive you to my self, into the nearest Union and Communion with my self;
and therefore be not u^willing to part with your dear Relations; be not afraid
to be sep^rated from your Bodies, your o^ Friends; for when these earth^
Tabernacles are dissolved, immed^ately I will receive you to my sel^ which is
best of all. You shall the enjoy the Fruits of all my Suffering Death,
Resurrection, Ascension a^^ Intercession, and the Fruits of ^^ your own
Labors, Prayers, Tear^ and Sufferings; and shall find that am faithful in
making good all m^ Promises, and that your Labou^ was not in vain in the Lord;
the^ shall there be no more any distanc^ between you and me for ever. Comfort
your selves, and comfort o^^ another with these words; Belie^^ this, and let
not your Hearts be tr^^bled.

Thirdly, That where I am, ye may be also: And what more can be de^^red? Where
is Christ, but at the rig^^ Hand of the Majesty on high, far abo^^ all
Principalities and Powers, far ab^^ al Heavens, Heb. 12. 2. there shall you be
also. O admirable, astonishing Dignity, that blessed Jesus will advance his
poor Saints unto at that Day! This high and wonderful Honor shall all his
Saints have; they shall now receive the Kingdom prepared for them, and that
Crown of Glory, of Righteousness and of Life, which Christ has purchased for
them, perfectly freed now from all Sin and Sorrow, and stated in an
unchangeable state of Happiness and Blessedness. What cause have we then to
grieve for our dear Relations, whom Christ has taken to himself, and placed in
the Father's House, who are now sitting at his right Hand in Glory, and singing
Hallelujahs? And could we but firmly believe these Promises of our Lord, and
act our Faith in meditating ^^xedly on them, and on Jesus in them, applying and
appropriating them, and Christ in them, to our own Souls, considering and
pondering on them, until our Hearts be warmed, and our Affections stirred and
kindled with them, acting also Hope, Love, Joy, Desire, Delight, Hunger,
Thirst, Panting* Breathing; pouring out our Heart* in Prayer to God for his
Spirit, ^^ bring home these Promises to o^ Souls in Power, fixing them upon o^
Hearts, and helping us to lay hold o^ them, and upon Christ in them, a^
resigning up our whole Souls to Christ in them, steadfastly relying on ^^
Goodness and Faithfulness, and tru^^ing in him; I say, could we but do s^ and
in the strength of God betrust o^^ whole selves, and all our Concerns* thus
with Christ, and live in the lively Exercises of Faith thus on God, and on
Christ, we should find this to be Hearts-Ease to us in all our Heart-Trouble.
Behold, I lay in Sion a chie^ Cornerstone, Elect, Precious; and ^^ that
believes in him, shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6.

Let all Heart-Trouble cease,
Let naught disturb your Peace,
Who Faith in God profess,
And in his Son no less.
For in the Father's House
Are many Mansions sweet,
Christ has prepared for us,
When we are for them made meet.
THE END.
Appendix.
Quest. IT may be demanded, That having heard the Excellency a^^ usefulness of
this Sovereign Medicine ^^ cure Heart-Trouble, namely, Faith i^ God and in
Christ; Can you tell us ho^ we may get this Faith? and what mea^* we shall use
to obtain it?

Answ. I shall endeavor, by the help of God's Spirit, and Scripture Light, to
direct you herein, and a^ briefly as I may.

Direct. I. First, You must be convinced of your Unbelief, of the greatness of
the Sin of Unbelief, and of your absolute need of Faith. Of these three things
you must be fully convinced.

1. Of your Unbelief; for most People think they have Faith, and tha^ they
never were without it, and therefore labor not for it. Pray earnestly
therefore that the Holy Spirit may be sent into your Hearts to work this
Conviction in you, for it is his proper Work, John 16. 8. to convince the World
of Sin, because they believe not on me, says our Lord: this is the great Sin,
the damning Sin of the World, their not believing on Christ. Now that we may be
convinced, that by Nature we have no Faith, let us consider these Scriptures,
Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 12. and that until we are regenerate and born again, we have no
Faith, is evident from John 1. 12, 13. there, believing in Christ, and
Regeneration, are inseparably joined together; Acts 15. 9. and 26. 18. and 20,
21. From which Scriptures it is most evident, that such as are Strangers to the
Heart-purifying, the Heart-sanctifying Work of Faith, have no Faith; if we have
not truly repented, nor know any saving Ch^nge wrought ^n us, and upon us, by
the Spirit of God; for certain, whatever we think, we have no true
Saving-Faith, it is but a Fancy: of this then we must be fully convinced, and
must most heartily beg the help of the Spirit to convince us.

2. Of the greatness of the Sin of Unbelief; it binds the Guilt of all other
Sins upon us; it is Disobedience and Rebellion against the great God; for he
commands us to believe, 1 John. 3. 21. and by our Unbelief, we make God a Liar,
1 John 5. 10. O horrible Wickedness! And,

3. We must be convinced also of our absolute need of Faith; we must needs have
it, or we must perish. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.
6. without it we cannot be the Children of God, John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26. without
it we can have no pardon of Sin, Acts 10. 43 Romans 3. 25. John 8. 24. And in
what a dangerous Case are we, so long as we lie under the guilt of all our
Sins? Without Faith we are not reconciled to God, nor justified, Romans 3. 22.
and 5. 1. Nor can we be sanctified, Acts 26. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. No access to
God but by Faith, Romans 5. 2 Ephesians. 2. 18. No living the Life of Religion, nor
bearing up under Affliction, nor holding out to the End without Faith, Heb. 11.
No Salvation, nor Eternal Life without it, Ephesians. 2. 18. Joh. 3. 16, 36. Heb.
10. last. Of all these things we must be convinced, if ever we will have Faith.

Direct. II. Secondly; If we would have Faith, we must diligently search the
Scriptures, read the Gospel, attend on the reading and preaching of the Gospel
for this very end, that we may get Faith by it: I say, for this very end,
certainly, that should be our End in reading and in hearing the Word, which was
God's End in publishing of it; now this was his End in publishing of it, John
20. 21. Romans 16. 25, 26. Romans 10. 17. Acts 13. 48. Ephesians. 1. 13. This is the
ordinary Means appointed by God, to work Faith in the Souls of Men, as appears
by Acts 2. 42. and 4. 4. and 11. 20, 21. and many more. There are few that
read, and hear the Word for this End, and therefore get no Faith by it.

Now that the Word read, and heard, may be effectual to work this precious,
this most necessary Grace of Faith in us, there are some things Antecedent,
some Concomitant, and some Consequent upon our attendance on the Word, and our
use of it.

First; Some things Antecedent, a^^ necessary.

(1.) Preparation; For want of th^^ the Word most times proves ineffect^al. It
is the empty, hungry-Soul tha^ relisheth and takes in this Food Jam. 1. 21. 1
Pet. 2. 1. Mat. 13. 22* usually our Success is according to ou^ preparation; as
in Prayer, Psalm. 10* 17. compare 2 Chronicles. 12. 14. with 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. make
Conscience the^ of preparation.

(2.) Prayer: Pour out your Hear^ to God in Prayer for a Blessing o^ the Word,
that you read or hea^ O, lift up a Cry to God, and say, Lord make this Word
effectual to wor^ Faith in my Soul, etc.

(3.) Earnest Desire and Expectatis: of meeting God in the Word, and o^ his
blessing on it: if we expect nothing from it, no wonder if we receive nothing:
there is a fullness of Blessing in the Gospel, Romans 15. 29. We should bring
hungry and thirsty Souls after God, the Living God, as Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3. and
84. 1, 2. God fills the Hungry with good things, Luke 1. 53.

Secondly; Some things are Concomitant. As,

(1.) We must read and hear it as the Word of God, and not as the Word of Man,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Acts 10. 33. and we must acknowledge God's Authority in it.

(2.) Receive it with Meekness, opening our Hearts to it, and give it the most
tender entertainment, Jam. 1. 21.

(3.) With Love, readiness of Mind, and gladness of Heart, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Acts
2. 41.

(4.) With Faith, giving credit to it, believing it to be the Word of God, Heb.
4. 2.

(5.) We must be careful to remember it: See what great stress is laid upon our
remembering, 1 Cor. 15. 2. Our Salvation lies upon it, Psalm. 119. 11. Love the
Word, for Love is the Act of Memory.

(6.) Prayer must be added again for a Blessing.

Thirdly; Some things must be done afterward also. As,

(1.) Meditation upon what you have heard and read; for want of this usually
all is lost. I am persuaded, this is one great Reason why most profit so little
by the Word, because they make no Conscience of Meditation; they hear and read,
but never think more on it afterward: So Preaching, Hearing, Reading, and all
lost; and Souls, and Heaven, and all lost. For God's sake then, whose Word you
read and hear, and for your own Souls sake, if you are not willing they should
perish for want of Faith, make Conscience of Meditation on the Word, Psalm. 1.
2. and 119. 97. if ever you get good by the Word, meditate upon it.

(2.) Application of it; take it home to your selves, Job 5. 27. Let it sink
down into your Hearts, says Christ; it must be an ingrafted Word, you must
receive it into your Hearts, and not into your Heads only, 2. Cor. 4. 6. your
Hearts must be joined to it, and mixed with it.

(3.) Practice: Yielding up our selves to the Government of it, making it the
Standard and Rule of your whole Conversation. We must be doers of the Word, and
not hearers only, lest we deceive our own Souls, Jam. 1. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Mat.
7. 22, 24. And in observing these Scripture-Rules here laid down, in the
careful and conscientious use of God's Word after this manner, you may not
doubt but the Holy Spirit of God will work with the Word of God, to make it
effectual to work this most precious Grace of Faith in us, whereby to believe
in God and in Christ, to the Consolation and eternal Salvation of our Souls:
But if we neglect the Means God has ordained to get Faith, and for want of it,
die in our Sins, and perish eternally, our Destruction will be of our selves.

Direct. III. Thirdly; Would we have Faith? Let us engage our whole Souls in
the deep and serious consideration of the infinite, unspeakable, unconceivable
Love of God the Father in this, the highest and fullest demonstration of it, in
giving his Son, his only begotten Son, to be a Sin-Offering, a Sacrifice, a
Ransom for poor Sinners, and that for this very end and purpose, that we poor
Sinners might believe in him, and by believing, might not perish, but might
have Eternal Life. I pray read and ponder upon the following Texts, and let
your most serious Thoughts fix on them, and meditate on them, Isa. 53.
throughout; John 3. 16, 17. Romans 3. 25. Romans 5. 8. 10. Prove. 8. 30. Col. 1. 12,
13. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. Romans 8. 3. and 8. 32. with many other, which for
brevity sake I cannot transcribe. If we can but believe this wonderful Love of
God the Father, in giving his dear Son to be a Surety, a Sin-Offering, to lay
all our Iniquities on him; that he was pleased to bruise him, and put him to
Grief for us; and consider and meditate upon the Height and Depth, the Breadth
and Length of this immense, imcomprehensible Love of God, in giving his Son,
and that on purpose, that we might believe in him, and by beleiving might have
Eternal Life; I say, it will greatly help us to believe in his Son, to accept
of this his unspeakable Gift, and to receive him as he is offered to us in the
Gospel.

Moreover, let us also consider of, and deeply meditate upon the transcendent
Love of the Son of God himself; who, though he were the Delight of his Father,
and lay in the Bosom of his Father, even then his Delights were with the Sons
of Men, then was his Heart full of Love to poor Sinners; and his Love brought
him down from Heaven to Earth, to assume Humane Nature, to take upon him all
the Sins of his People, to bear them on his Soul and Body in the Garden, there
sweating great drops of Blood, and on the Cross, there pouring out his
Heart-Blood, made a Curse, endured the full measure of the Wrath of God due for
Sin, and became the Ransom of Souls, Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8. Luke 22. 44. Gal. 2.
20. He loved us, and gave himself for us: Loved us and washed us from our Sins
in his Blood, Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Gal. 3. 13. Tit. 2. 14.

But while I am writing these things, I cannot but conceive an Indignation
against my self, and heartily wish, I were filled with Shame, Sorrow, and Grief
of Spirit, that having read and heard so often of the surpassing Love of God
the Father, in giving his Son; and so often of the unspeakable Love of Jesus,
and to be no more affected with it, no more sensible of it; to have my
Affections no more stirred and moved, no more quickened and warmed: Alas, my
dead Heart, my Adamantine Heart! Lord, sprinkle it with that Blood, Lord, shed
abroad that Love of thine upon my Heart abundantly by the holy Ghost; Lord
Jesus, manifest thy Love to me, that I may love thee. I am ashamed and pained
for want of Love to God, to Jesus; O that I could believe thy Love to my Soul,
then I should not choose but love thee. Lord, I believe, help my Unbelief. The
consideration of this Love of God, and of Christ, is a means to work Faith; try
it, I pray you, and you will find it so.

Direct. IV. Fourthly; Improve and act the Historical Faith you have, on the
Doctrines, Promises, and Threatenings in the Gospel, which you profess you do
believe. Act the Faith you have on the Doctrines of the Gospel, the Promises of
Rest for your Souls, Pardon for your Sins, Life and Righteousness, Grace and
Glory, made to those that believe in Christ, and to none else. Believe and
think what Heaven is, that state of infinite Blessedness, in the seeing and
enjoying the Blessed God to all Eternity: Believe what Eternal Life is, Eternal
Glory; and believe also what Hell is, Separation from God; Go ye Cursed into
Everlasting Fire; Lakes of Fire and Brimstone, everlasting Death, the Wrath of
God, Damnation. And seeing you profess that you believe all this, then believe
also and consider it well, that neither is Heaven's infinite Happiness to be
attained, nor Hell's unspeakable Misery to be avoided, but only by believing in
the Lord Jesus Christ, John 3. 16, 17, 36. John 8. 24.

Direct. V. Fifthly; Would yo^ have Faith; then seek it diligently: pray, O
pray for it as for your Lives cry mightily to God for it; pour out your Hearts
to God in Prayer for it; pray continually for Faith* pray without ceasing, be
importuna^^ ^ith God for it, go all Day and ^^ght panting and breathing after
i^, O that God would give me Faith! Go to Jesus also for it, cry to him, for he
is the Author as well as the Object of it, Heb. 12. 1, 2. It is the Gift of
God, O pray for it.

Direct. VI. Lastly; Consider seriously, and often, how wonderful willing God
is that you should believe in Christ, as you have heard: and how much he is
displeased with those that will not believe in him and how dreadfully he has
threatened them, as Rev. 21. 8. Also consider how exceeding willing Jesus Christ
himself is, that poor Sinners should come to him, and believe i^ him; how
sweetly he calls them, how freely he offers himself, and All he is, to them, be
they never so bad, never so vile and wicked: He, every one that thirsts, Isa.
55. 1. they that have no worthiness in them, nothing but Sin and Misery, John
6. 37. and 7. 37. Rev. 3. 18. and 21. 11. O set your Hearts to the
consideration of the incomparable unparalled Love of Jesus, in dying that
cursed Death of the Cross for Sinners: Consider and meditate, hold your Hearts
to it, until your Hearts be affected with his Love, his Love that passes the
Love of Women, Love passing Understanding; and consider how well he deserves,
and how much he challenges your Love. Consider once again, what a most lovely
Person Jesus is, who is altogether lovely, the Brightness of his Father's
Glory, in whom dwells all Fullness, Heb. 1. 3. and in whom is all Power in
Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. and labor to affect your Hearts with his most
admirable Excellencies, and then come unto him weary and heavy laden with your
Sins, willing to part with them all; give up your whole selves to him, give him
your whole Hearts, and take him for your Head and Husband, for your only Lord
and Savior; enter actually into Covenant with him, to become his, and his
alone, and his for ever. Thus work out your Salvation, and you^ Consolation, by
believing in Jesus* in Blessed, All-sufficient Jesus, trusting to him,
betrusting all with him* and God will work in you both to will and to do, Phil.
2. 12, 13. Use these Means in the strength of God* and doubt not, but in the
use of them, you shall obtain this precious Faith; which having, and acting,
you shall find it to be your Hearts* Ease in all your Heart-Trouble.

Laus Soli Deo.
FINIS.
Some Books printed for, and sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in
St. Paul 's Churchyard.
THe Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New: with Annotations and
Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony of the Gospels: As also
the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures to our English
Standard: And a Table to the Promises in Scripture, by Mr. Samuel Clark.

-- His Holy History in brief: Or, an Abridgment of the Historical Parts of the
Old and New Testament.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin's Works: In two Volumes, in Folio, viz. on the Ephesians,
Revelations, The Knowledge of God the Father, Election, etc.

-- His Treatise of the Punishment of Sin in Hell: In 8o.

Dr. Bates's Works, viz. The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the
Contrivance and Accomplishment of our Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. Or
Discourses, wherein is showed how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power,
and Truth of God are glorified in that Great and Blessed Work.

-- His three Sermons, at the Funeral of Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Clarkson, and Mr.
Ashurst.

-- His Sure Trial of Uprightness, etc.

Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery. By T. Rogers, M. A.

A Discourse of Closet-Prayer. By M. Slater.

Mr. Pearse's Preparation for Death

-- His Best Match: Or, The Souls Espousal to Christ.

-- Last Legacy: Or Beam of Divine Glory, etc. 12o;.

An Explanation of the Assembly shorter Catechism. Price 6 d.

Mr. Case's Treatise of Afflictions.

The Epitome of the Bible in English Verse, useful for Children; Price 6 d
Bound.

A Present for Children. Being a brief, but faithful Account of many Remarkable
and Excellent Things uttered by three young Children, to the wonder of all that
heard them. To which is added, A Seasonable Exhortation to Parents for the
Education of their Children. Published by William Bidbanck, M. A. Price 6 d.
Bound.

The Barren Fig Tree: Or, The Doom and Downfall of the Fruitless Professor. By
John Bunyan.


