THE SACRIFICE.

A SHORT SERMON Upon PSALM. 51. 17. at St. Mary's in Oxford, Sept. 3. 1637.

By CLEMENT BARKSDALE, (then) of Gloucester Hall.



LONDON, Printed by T. W. for W. Lee, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Turks-head in Fleet Street. M. DC. LV.

THE SACRIFICE.
A SERMON UPON PSALM. 51. 17.
The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God,
shall thou not despise. BOnaventure compares this Psalm, the fiftieth in the
vulgar Latin, to the year of Jubilee; as in that year servants were restored to
themselves, and Lands to their ancient possessors: so in this Psalm we may
behold a Man captivated by sin, recovering his liberty by repentance, and
restored again to the possession of Gods favor, which his high offense had
forfeited David is the Man: one of so firm and sublime a station in the Church
of God, that we cannot behold his fall without some horror. Cum dolor quidem
dicimus, etc. I speak of holy David's sin with sorrow and trembling, says St.
Austin, but yet I must speak of it: for it was not written, that it should be
buried in silence, 'twas written at first, and it is now remembered, not for
imitation, but for caution. For, as God out of his wisdom has suffered his
strongest servants to fall, that he might preserve them from pride, and make
them know by whose hand they are upheld: so has he caused their falls to be
set upon record, that others by their remembrance might fear to presume. If a
Peter, the forward'st among the Apostles, deny his Master; a David, the Man
after Gods own heart, prefer his lust before his God; if these Hero's so
grievously fall, what circumspection and heed to my standing should I poor
weakling have? And on the other side, if he that renounced Christ, and he that
added Murder to Adultery; if these heinous offenders are received again into
favor, why should I despair of mercy? Thus from the height of the persons that
fell, we may argue against presumption; from the depth of the Sins whence they
rose, we may take comfort against despair. Audiant qui ceciderunt, ut surgant:
audiant qui non ceciderunt, ne cadant; nor is it easy to say, from which of the
two, whether from the infirmities of the Saints, or their virtues registered for
our use in the Book of God, the Church receives more good. But, alas! as the
Father complains, multi cadere volunt cum David, and nolunt surgere cum David;
such is humane, whether weakness or perverseness, that among the great number of
those that accompany David in his Sin, few there are that follow him in his
Repentance.

Not to detein you too long from the Text: upon the Prophets admonition, our
Penitent addresses himself to his Psalm of mercy: Miserere Domine! Have mercy
upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions: and so he goes on, like a
pitiful suppliant, until toward the conclusion of the Psalm, (which is
observable also in many other Psalms, that begin in a sad tune, in heaviness
and distress, but conclude in rejoicing and assurance: to teach us, that
Humiliation is the only true way to comfort:) I say, toward the conclusion of
the Psalm, feeling in himself, and tasting as it were, what he prayed for, the
joy of the Holy Spirit, he no sooner receives the benefit, but is full of
thankfulness: in token whereof he voweth to serve and glorify the God of his
salvation; but his zeal is not suffered to outrun his discretion: for whereas
Gods service is either moral, or ceremonial: the ceremonial consisting in
legal rites and sacrifices, wherein God delights not: not at all, as they are
considerd by themselves, without respect to the end of them; so as the sign and
thing signified are separated, Moses and Christ opposed; or else, not so much,
nothing in comparison of the moral service. David therefore discreetly passes
over the ceremonial service, in the precedent verse, and comes to the moral,
consisting in spiritual Sacrifices and Oblations, fittest for him to give, and
most delightful for God to receive.

The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, etc.

In which words you may be pleased to observe these three parts: 1. The matter
of the Sacrifice, the thing to be offered, expressed in two words: Spirit and
heart: 2. The qualification or requisite conditions of the matter in the words,
broken and contrite: 3. Gods gracious acceptance, in the first and last words
of the verse: these are the Sacrifices of God; these he will not despise. What
the meaness of the speaker cannot hope for, in so grave and learned an
Assembly, let the ever honored name of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus
challenge your patience and attention to that which by Gods assistance, and
with a sincere aim at his glory, shall from the mouth of his servant plainly
be delivered; and first of the first part.

I. Spirit and Heart.
The Soul of Man is signified by both words: and it is the ^^se of Scripture
thus to multiply words of the same signification, either propter emphasin, or
propter exegesin: to show the earnestness of the Speaker, or to help the
understanding of the Hearer. If we will distinguish them, then by Spirit may be
understood the superior part and faculties, the faculties which are
inorganical, and depend not on corporeal instruments: by Heart we may conceive
the inferior powers, so called from that principal member of the Body, the
chief seat and original of life and affection. Well then, the Soul, and the
whole Soul is to be sacrificed.

As in the Mosaical Law God reserved the Inwards for himself, so in our
Evangelical service he requires especially our inward Man; nay, without it, the
Jewish Sacrifices were not accepted. All their Ceremonies before Christ; and
our outward performances since Christ, are of none account, unless the heart
concur and give value to them. Flavius Josephus calls the Polity of the Jews
(...), God himself was immediately the Author of it; he gave them Laws both
Civil and Ceremonial, and so could not but be pleased with what himself
commanded: nevertheless when the Jews preferred those outward signs and
ceremonies, before inward and moral duties; when they came once to this pass,
that they placed all Religion and holiness in them, how sharply does the Lord
upbraid them by his Prophets? Let me call to your remembrance two remarkable
places to this purpose, which do fully show how God stands affected. In the
first of Esaias ver. 10. the Prophet calls for audience, and in the following
words, he expostulateth with the superstious Jews: To what purpose is the
multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I am full of the burnt of
Rams, and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks. If
the Lord delight not in these, what then would he have? that the Prophet
signifies, v. 16. Wash you, make you clean, cease to do evil, learn to do well;
and then come, says the Lord, v. 18. though your sins be as Scarlet, they
shall be as white as Snow. In the sixth of Micah, v. 6. a question is proposed,
Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? will
the Lord be pleased with thousand of Rams, or ten thousand of Rivers of Oil?
This is much, and who is there that can repent at so dear a rate? but there is
more yet: shall I give my first Born for my transgression, and the fruit of my
Body for the sin of my Soul? The Answer's Negative: none of this will do; no,
the Lord has not required it. Why, what then has the Lord required? that
follows at the 8. v. and I pray you mark it well: He has showed thee, O Man,
what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? there is the top of all, the
humiliation of the Soul, to walk humbly with thy God.

If the Prophets in the Old Testament, by such pathetical passages endeavored
to lessen the esteem of outward ceremonial worship, and press upon the Jews the
inward and moral, what may we expect from Christ and his Apostles in the New,
when Types and shadows are vanished, and have given place to the substance now
exhibited? Christ has denounced no less then eight woes in one Chapter against
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, that appear beautiful outwardly, and cleanse
only the outside of the Cup: and St. Paul has set it down for a rule to
Timothy, Bodily exercise is of little profit.

Wherefore if I were to speak to such as are superstitiously addicted to the
outward form of Godliness, denying the power thereof (that there would be such,
the Apostle has foretold) such would I beseech to remember Esay's Quis
requisivit? who has required these things at your hands? and that frustra
colunt, which our Savior urges, Mar. 7. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. The aim of my Speech is not to co^demn
any humane Ordinance, for the better ordering of the Church, not repugnable to
Gods word: but this is my drift, that we would all employ our chiefest care to
serve God with that, which he most cares for; and therefore I beseech you,
Fathers and Brethren, that you present your Souls a living Sacrifice, holy and
acceptable unto God.

A living Sacrifice. Behold here a main difference between this and the legal
offering; the Beast was slain; the Soul then truly begins to live, when she is
offered up to God; for as the Soul is the life of the Body, so is God the life
of the Soul; ye^ somewhat in the Soul is slain; Lust and Wantonness are slain,
and then as it were, a Goat is offered: Wrath and Anger are slain, and then as
it were, a Bull is offered: but these are enemies of the Soul, by whose death
she lives the better; And hence from the benefit accrewing to the Soul by this
oblation, may be taken an incentive to the performance of it; perform it we
shall the rather, if we consider, that all the rest we can possibly do in Gods
service, without this, is but mere simulation, no more but the acting of a
Religious part upon a Stage. Could we pray unto God, till our Tongues are
weary, and our Knees cleave to the dust; could we fast as long as Moses and
Elias; could we feed the hungry, and cloth the naked of the whole world;
whatsoever can be imagined to be done, and there be wanting an humble and
religious heart, all is to little purpose in Gods esteem, it is not piety, but
hypocrisy; not Religion, but ostentation.

Nor do I mean that the business of Religion is to be dispatched privately
between God and our own Souls only: that is the other extreme. The Soul indeed
has the first and choicest place, both because it has the greatest share in
sin, the rest being but instruments of sin, and fuel for sin abused by the
Soul, and so the Soul in point of justice is to bear the greatest pain in the
exercise of Humiliation; and also, because it is the best thing we have, and
most peecious in Gods account, and so in point of gratitude to be chiefly
offered. Now as the Scripture says of God, Having given us his Son, how shall
he not give us all things? so may it be said of us; offering up to God our
Soul, that which is in our Bosom and dearest to us, how shall we choose but
give him all things else? Our Bodies, formed into reverent gestures at the
performance of Religious exercises, and chastned with those too much neglected
works of mortification, whereby the Soul as it were setting Foot upon the Body
raises her self higher for Divine contemplation: Our Estates too, extending
them to pious uses, works of mercy: wherein, as God himself to our great
comfort is principally exercised, so when we resemble him therein, he is in us
most delighted. Thus a broken Body is required, and a broken Estate too, but
above all, a broken Soul.

And here see the goodness of God in requiring that Sacrifice which the poorest
Man may offer as freely as the richest. Under the Law, when a Lamb was wanting,
God accepted of a pair of turtle Doves. Thou poor Soul, that have nothing, do
thou ask me, Quid retribuam? What shall I render, what shall I offer unto God?
Habes in te quod offer as. August. Hearken, I will tell thee how thou may be
as liberal as the best; Give him thy self: give him a broken and a contrite
Heart. If there be any advantage, it seems to be on the poor Man's side; for
there is a certain thing that the Apostle mentions, 1 Timothy 6. (...), pride and
high-mindedness usually waits upon rich Men, quite contrary to this humbling of
our selves: and besides, dant sua non se: because they give unto God somewhat
of their Estates, they are the more apt to withhold, and make the bolder to
keep back from him somewhat of themselves: but Men of a poor and of a broken
Estate are more easily brought to that poorness and brokenness of Spirit, which
is of so high esteem with God, and being able to give little else, will give
themselves wholly.

Wholly, I say; for the Soul, and the whole Soul is to be offered. God has
employment for every part and faculty of it. To the understanding he is truth:
to the will goodness it self: our fear has his wonderful judgments to work
upon; our love cannot but take flame from his loving kindness: what greater
joy, then in his presence? what better things can be hoped for, then his
promises? He has enemies of his glory for our anger and indignation to spend
themselves upon, especially those domestic enemies in our own Bosom, our sins,
the proper object of our sorrow too; this anger and sorrow are the busiest
Agents in the work of Humiliation; they will not leave, till the whole Soul be
broken; that as the hard and impenitent heart kept out God, so the broken heart
may give him entrance: and as sin has overspread the whole, so there may be a
gracious work wrought upon every part. When the Soul is thus whole, that is, no
part withheld from God, and thus broken that is, truly humbled for her
offenses, then have we our offering ready: the former wholeness does not
exclude this breach of contrition. So from the matter it self, the Heart and
Spirit, let us with your patience proceed to the qualification or requisite
conditions of the matter, in the words, broken and contrite:

The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, etc.

II. Broken and contrite.
I will not be curious in the terms, only tell you this from a learned hand,
that they seem to be borrowed from the manner of Sacrificing among the Jews.
Their Sacrifices were first cut in pieces, not mangled but joynted, as is
observed out of the Jewish Rituals; that was their breaking: then were they
burnt to ashes, that was their contrition. A breaking and contrition which does
not unfitly represent the breaking and contrition required in true repentance.
Wherein we must after a sort take asunder every part and faculty of the Soul,
and examine the particular defects; not the greater defects only, but piercing
into the closest corruptions, in recessus animi; searching the most retired
Corners of this Labyrinth.

A necessary piece of work, this breaking and contrition; but hard and
ungrateful to most Men: to such, as frame to themselves a new pleasing
Divinity agreeable to their own lusts and ends: such as think to gain Heaven
and Earth together: who, not remembering that Christ himself wore a Crown of
thorns before that of glory, and bore the Cross before the Scepter, hope to
walk to Heaven on Roses, to live in all the delights and pleasures of this
world, and be never the further off from that eternal happiness of the world to
come. Scrupulous they are, in the judgment of these, and unpolitick, that
require in a Christian life, such mourning in private, such breaking of the
Heart, such contrition of the Spirit. Yet they will in the end appear the wiser
sort, that are content to forgo the pleasures of this life, for the joys of
that hereafter. And indeed we must all be content, unless we can find a
smoother way to Heaven, then God has showed us, then Christ and all the Saints
have led us, we must be content I say; notwithstanding the tenderness of the
Flesh, that prompts every Man, with propitius esto tibi, to take seriously in
hand this work so necessary. Let the Flesh reclaim and deter us from setting
upon it: or when we are about it, let it move us to do it slightly, yet for all
this we must do it, and we must do it thoroughly.

Now for the through performance of this work let us take a view of the means.
It is true, there is a Tribunal within us, and a witness also within us, and an
executioner also to torment us sur do verbere; but neither is this torment so
effectual, nor the witness so faithful, nor the judge so incorrupt, that the
business can be completed without any further help. Our natural knowledge of
the principles of good and evil is but weak: in the application of which
principles to our particular actions we are not skillful. The Copy of the Law
was written in our Hearts exactly at the first, when we had Hearts of Flesh,
and capeable of a fair Impression; but since our hearts became stony, the
Characters are much defaced, and we have need to repair to the authentic Copy,
thereby to correct our errors and supply our defects. I mean the Law written in
the Holy Bible, of which the Psalmist has a fit Elogium: The Law of the Lord
is perfect, converting the Soul. Psalm. 19. God that can out of stones raise up
Children unto Abraham, and draw water out of the hard Rock, can as well by the
power of his word melt these Rocky Hearts of ours into tears of penitence, and
of these stones make us new Hearts. Vox Domini confringens Cedros, Ps. 29. The
voice of the Lord is mighty in operation; and although as it proceeds from the
mouth of his weak Minister it be but wind, yet this wind accompanied with the
virtue of his Holy Spirit, is strong enough, not only to shake the top
branches, but even to rend up the bottom root of the tallest Cedar. The Sword
of the Spirit has a sharp point and a keen edge; when it is managed by a Paul
or Apollos, Men mighty in the Scriptures, and such as have boldness equal to
their skill, it will pierce and cut deep, even to the dividing asunder of the
Heart and Spirit.

Besides a powerful application of the Law unto a sinners conscience, it
pleases God many times to further this gracious work by joining with it some
affliction. Affliction sanctified has a special influence to that effect.
Worldly Crosses drive the Soul inward, and put us into a serious meditation of
their Original: Omnis paena propter culpam: All the evil of pain is for the
evil of sin; the consideration whereof brings a fresh report of Gods anger to
the guilty conscience, and makes the wound wider. And withal, it may be noted,
Men are usually punished in the same kind wherein they have offended. The
punishment so answers the offense, that the one serves to renew the memory of
the other; and thus is the Book of conscience like unto some secret Letters,
most plainly read by the fire of tribulation. These briefly I take to be the
means, whereby a hard heart is broken, Conscience awaked and informed by the
Law soundly applied, the Law backed by Affliction.

The Sinner being arrested by the terrors of a natural Conscience, the
threats of the Law, and some present tokens of Gods anger; although like a
malefactor he be ready to try all shifts before he will fly to the mercy of the
Judge, cannot hold against so strong impressions: to stand out, he sees, were
but to make God redouble his strokes; now at length he understands, by his own
feeling, the malignant quality of sin: he melts into sorrow one while, other
while he is cut to the Heart with a holy indignation: Oh, says he, in the
detestation of his sins, that I should ever so ingratefully forget God, and so
desperately neglect my own safety: that being a Man, I should lead a life so
brutish: that without care so much as of common honesty, I should commit acts
so shameful! What madness was it to pretend to happiness, and venture upon
such pernicious enterprises: so greedily to swallow poison, and to hug my own
damnation! Oh, how am I am bashed and confounded, that for a trifle, a matter
of nothing, a few ounces of gain, a little breath of applause, some minutes of
delight, I should so, and so often, by such and such sins, offend so
presumptuously against so glorious a God, so undutifully against so kind a
Father, so ungratefully against so gracious a Redeemer!

The case of our penitent, whilst he has one eye fixed on Gods Majesty, the
other on his own guilt, is pitiful beyond expression. Da Christianum, and
scit quod dico. The intercourse between God and the Soul is truly known only
to the experienced Christian. He alone conceives what it is to receive the word
with fear and trembling: with what affectionate longing, and thirsty desires
the Soul pants and gaspeth after mercy, choosing rather to hear of mercy then
a Kingdom. He that has felt the smart of sin, knows what detestation is due
unto it, and that there is no sorrow like unto that sorrow. Ruben principium
doloris mei: as some read it. Genesis 49. 3. Jacob calls Ruben the beginning of
his sorrow, non quod in nullo, etc. because all his former griefs were
swallowed up in that which the Sin of Ruben brought him. If another sin were
so grievous, how much more ones own. So heavy is the burden of this sorrow,
that it presses down the Soul well nigh to desperation; it may be truly said,
that a penitents way to Heaven lies near the Gates of Hell: and Satan, that at
first plays the Serpent, by fly temptation, turns Lion in our distress, and
endeavors by open force to draw us in. But our comfort is, that when we are
cast down, God has not cast us off: when we walk through this shady vale, he
shall lead us forth to the Streams of comfort; when our Heart and Spirit is
broken and contrite, then are we his Sacrifices, then he does not despise us.
So from the qualification of this Sacrifice in the words broken and contrite,
we are fallen upon Gods acceptance and esteem of it, in the first and last
words, these are the Sacrifices of God, these he will not despise.

III. The Sacrifices of God.
Sacrifices in the Plural, to signify, pro omnibus unum sufficere, as Calvin
notes: that this one Sacrifice of a broken Heart is worth all Sacrifices of
God: not because he is the giver of what we offer: although that's very true;
for what have we worth a giving, which we have not first received? but that's
not the meaning here; the addition of God to Sacrifices is a mark of special
excellency. Thy righteousness is like the Mountains of God, Psalm. 36. So the
Margin has expressed the Hebrew, which the Text Interprets, like the great
Mountains; so here, the Sacrifices of God are the greatest and most excellent
Sacrifices. The latter words, Thou shall not despise, are spoken (...), a
figure very frequent: Bethlehem not the least, (...), which indeed for our
Saviors Birth in it, was the greatest of all Cities. And Saint Paul would have
us most highly to esteem prophesying, when he bids us not despise it, (...),
the very same word here used by the Seventy; by which we must understand, that
God is so far from despising or setting at naught the Sacrifice of a contrite
Heart, that nothing can be more acceptable or precious in his sight.

God Almighty glories not in any Title so much as that of merciful and
gractous: a Father of mercies, and God of comfort: and the Church could not
possibly style him better, then, a God whose nature and property is ever to
have mercy and to forgive. This is his proper work, but vengeance is called
opus non suum, Esaias 28. a strange work and not his own. Behold here the true
ground and reason of that Acceptance I speak of. It Is Gods goodness, not the
dignity of our Contrition that so commends it. To talk of merit and
satisfaction with the presumptuous Papist is no less unreverent, then unsafe.
Let them beware (said judicious Hooker) who challenge to themselves a strength
which they have not, least they loose the comfortable support of that weakness
which indeed they have. By the power of Grace, say we our hard Hearts are
broken, and by the gentleness of grace they are so favorably accepted.

Yea, such is Gods goodness, that he would bring us whole and sound to Heaven,
if it might be: for he delights not, in the death; no, nor in any pain or
trouble of his creature: not, as it is absolutely considered, but in regard of
the end thereof, so he is much pleased with it. As the Physician is glad to see
the working of his Physic, not that he desires the pain of his Patient, but
his recovery: or as a loving Husband desires his Wifes travel, not for the pain
she must endure, but for the Births sake: So is God affected, as I may say, in
the travel of his Spouse, the Christian Soul, the pangs whereof he wills not
for their own sake, but for the new Births sake that cannot be produced nor
revived without them.

Well, to return, that the contrite Soul is an acceptable Sacrifice to God, we
cannot doubt. My Dove that mournest in the Clifts of the Rock, let me see thy
Face, Cant. 2. Our Face is never so fair in Gods Eye, as when it is washed with
the tears of a Penitent Heart; these Penitent tears Satan cannot endure: nay,
it is the conceit of one, tolerabilius sustinet flammam suam quam lacrymam
nostram. Satan can as little abide this Water of Repentance, as the fire of
Hell: but God so much values and loves our tears, that he has a Bottle on
purpose to preserve them in. When we are least in our own eyes, then are we
most precious in his. To this Man will I look, even to him that is poor and of
a contrite Heart, Esaias, 66. 2. Nor does he only cast a favorable look upon
that Man, but vouchsafes to make him his dwelling place: For thus says the
high and holy one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the
high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to
revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite. Es:
57: 15:

What comfort, what glory is this to an humble Soul, that she is chosen out for
an habitation of the most high! sure, where God dwells by his gracious
presence, that place must needs be Heavenly; so indeed is the penitent Soul,
what ere she seems: God that dwells there does not so hide his countenance, but
that the beams of comfort either mingle with the most bitter complaints of a
broken Heart, or at least in due time succeed them. No better instance then
David. See him in the first of his Penitentials, Psalm. 6. My Soul is sore
vexed, ver. 3. I am weary with my groaning, ver. 6. Mine eye is consumed for
very grief, ver. 7. There is sorrow, plenty; But has the Lord no pity? in the
next verses, The Lord, says he, has heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord
has heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer. Here is comfort.
Thus as I grounded Gods acceptance of our Repentance, upon his Mercy: so have
I now settled our Comfort upon his Acceptance Because he is merciful,
therefore he accepts us; and because he does accept us, therefore shall we
find certain comfort.

These are, for whose sakes this point is to be carefully handled; weak
Christians: whose minds the extremity of grief has so overclouded, that they
find not themselves in themselves: they complain most bitterly of the hardness
of their Hearts, when their very complaints are a comfortable Argument that
they are already broken: they grieve for the total want of grace, when the
presence of it in some measure is proved by their unfeigned desire and longing
after it. Such poor souls must be made to understand, that Grace may work in
the Heart, which for the present perceives it not. God like the Sun scatters
his influence further then his light: and the Penitent Soul, like the Moon in
Conjunction, has the fairest side toward Heaven.

In Spiritual conflicts nothing is of power sufficient to uphold the fainting
Soul, but the Hand of Divine mercy. Mercy can find no way unto us, but through
the wounds of Christ, and the streams of our Saviors Blood. O wretched Man
that I am, cries out the Apostle: Who shall deliver me! and in the next verse;
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Our Lord is of a gracious and sweet
disposition: he underwent most grievous conflicts in his own person, in the
days of his Humiliation; he knows the better how to succor us; and he chose
such to preach mercy to others, as had themselves found most mercy: namely,
Paul and Peter: to the end that their examples as well as their Doctrine might
speak comfort to distressed consciences. When we consider the first fruits of
those that came unto Christ, the Publican, the Harlot, the Thief and the
Blasphemer: when we consider the comfortable Titles he has assumed; of a Head,
that suffers in the lowest member; of a Shepherd, that has care of his
weakest Lambs; of a Husband, indulgent to his Spouse; of a Physician, good at
all diseases, but especially the binding up of a broken Heart: these things
when we consider, we cannot want Arguments to raise up the dejected Heart, and
assure the distrustful, that in the lowest degree of Humiliation he shall
never be forgotten, never be despised.

To draw to an end, with a word or two of Exhortation.

1. To all. St. Peter has honored us with the title of Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.
Priests you know should not be without their Sacrifices: we cannot offer a more
acceptable Sacrifice then this of a broken Heart. Whether it be a morning
Sacrifice offered in our Youth, or an Evening Sacrifice offered in our Age,
God, we are sure, will not despise it. Let us perform this Office of our
Priesthood, or never look to be partakers of the Kingdom. It is indeed a hard
piece of service and unpleasing; such is the untowardness of our Hearts, and
such power have sensual pleasures over us: but difficulty is not a curb but a
spur to generous minds: and remember, Qui instat praecepto, praecurrit auxilio,
He that urges us with his command, leads us by his grace. What should deter
us, when the Almighty is our aid? Many oppositions and discouragements must the
tenderhearted Man expect from this wicked world, but let the Devil and the
world conspire, this is a faithful saying, The Heart that is in Gods hand
cannot miscarry. Memorable is that speech of Adherbal in Salust to the Senators
of Rome, Ego sic existimabum P. C. uti Patrem saepe meum, etc. We may justly
apply it to our case: Our Fathers and Prophets, our Lord and Master has
foretold, by long experience we have found it true; as many as have, with
humble and Penitent hearts, entered into a Covenant with God, eos maximum
laborem suscipere, they have undertaken a laboursome and painful profession;
sed omnium maxim tutus esse, but they have safety for their pains, no Man's
security like to theirs.

2. To the Clergy. St. Paul, Romans 15. calls the Gentiles his oblation.
Ministers are Priests in an especial manner: neither can we do better service,
then to offer unto God the broken hearts of our people. God has put fire into
our Mouths to kindle those Sacrifices. He has put a Sword into our hands to
pierce and cut the hardest heart. Verily, such is the temper of these times,
that piercing and cutting Scriptures seem most seasonable; in the handling
whereof we must endeavor to stir up in our hearers, as St. Hierom speaks, non
clamorem, sed genitum, the sighs and tears of the Auditors best commend the
Preachers eloquence; nevertheless we must remember, that the Holy Spirit
descended as well in the shape of a Dove, as in the likeness of fire, and
Spiritual Men must be no less meek then vehement. Nil tam Spiritualem virum
indicat, quam alieni peccati tractatio: the discreet handling of a sinner is
the Ministers Masterpiece; Men are prone to Sin, the conscience must be
awakened by the Law: Men are prone to despair for Sin, the conscience must be
comforted by the Gospel. We must so prudently mix and administer both Law and
Gospel, that hard hearts may be broken, and broken hearts may be bound up.

To close up all: The custom of the Ancients was to begin their Feasts with
Sacrifice: Our Spiritual Sacrifice of a broken heart, what is it else but the
introduction to a Feast? the Feast of a good Conscience, our only comfort in
this vale of tears, and that other Feast at Gods Heavenly Table, the
consummation of our bliss, in the life to come.

God of his mercy grant, that we may all offer up this Sacrifice, that we may
be partakers of that Feast. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
An Advertisement.
WHereas one Master Collins in a Preface to a late Book of his pretends to
answer some Arguments contained in a Letter of Master Barksdales, published
with the Dispute at Winchcomb, the Reader is entreated to compare the places,
and judge whether Mr. C. has not much mistaken Mr. B. and perverted his
Reasons. For Mr. B. says not, That the ignorant and scandalous are to be
admitted to the Sacrament. No: He has declared sufficiently in that Book his
love of knowledge and of piety: and of Christian Discipline: But thus: That
Ministers are not to be condemned for administering the Sacrament in their
Congregations, though mixed. [That is: though, after all the Ministers care and
pains in exhorting, instructing, admonishing all, and keeping back those whom
he certainly knows to be notorious evil livers; though, I say, after all his
care, some unworthy persons do partake of the Sacrament.] To this purpose the
Reasons in that Letter are offered to his friend: and much more is set down in
those Papers. Wherein He has imprinted such marks of his desire and endeavor
of true Reformation, that he deserved not thus to be traduced by Mr. Collins,
as a maintainer of ignorance and scandal. Let such writers hereafter use more
candor and fidelity in reciting the opinions and reasons of other Men, and sure
we shall have more Truth and Charity amongst us. As to the words (...) and
(...), let the eminent Doctor's Annotation, Jo. 13. 26. be considered. And for
polluting the Ordinance, it is clear that the guilty pollute it only to
themselves, not to the innocent, either Minister or people. Let this suffice
(at present) for a return to Mr. Collins.

A CATALOGUE of what Books this AUTHOR has published.
OBitus and Elogia Doctorum virorum ex Historii Thuani, Land. 1640.

The Authority of the Highest powers in matters of Religion, out of Hugo
Grotius. Lon. 1651.

Adagialia Sacra Novi Test: ex Andraea Schotto. Ox. 1651.

Two Discourses, of God, and of Christ, out of Hugo Grotius. Land. 1652.

The Commonwealth of the Hebrews, out of P. Cunaeus. Land. 1653.

The Dispute at Winchcomb in Gloc. Land. 1654.

The Law of War and Peace, out of Hugo Grotius. Land. 1654.

And sundry little pieces for the use of young Scholars.

FINIS.

