Truth Triumphant Through the SPIRITUAL WARFARE, Christian Labors AND WRITINGS
Of that Able and Faithful SERVANT of JESUS CHRIST

ROBERT BARCLAY.

Who Deceased at his own House at Vrie, in the Kingdom of Scotland, the 3 Day
of the 8 Month 1690.

Heb. xi. 4. He being Dead, yet speaks.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lombard Street, MDCXCII.

THE Preface to the Reader.
WHen the Son of God had wrought that mighty Miracle of feeding 5000. persons
with only five Loaves and two small Fishes, he said to his Disciples; Gather up
the Fragments that Remain, Joh. 6.12.
that Nothing be Lost. This Preface no sooner fell to my share, than this
Passage was brought to my Mind; and very aptly to the Occasion. For our Blessed
Lord having also Effectually Gathered and Fed his People by his Disciples in
this Generation, it is a Duty we Owe to God and our selves, as well as to them,
That we Gather up the Remainder of their Testimonies of Love and Service, that
so nothing be Lost. To God we Owe it for his Unspeakable Benefit; to our
selves, for our Example and Instruction; and to the Memories of such Deceased
Brethren, as their Just but Fairer and more lasting Monuments, than those of
Engraven Tables of Marble, or Statues of Brass: As their Works look beyond this
World, so their Praise will outlive it. There is an Vnfading Glory in the
Labors of Good Men: And though Death is permitted to draw a Dark Shadow over
their Persons, they will Live in the Just Reputation of their Good Works; the
lively Characters of their Vndying, Pious Minds: It cannot wither their Fame,
or obliviate their Names; On the contrary, Death often silences Envy, and
augments their deserved Praise.

The Author of these Collected Labors was one of them; and as he has left us,
so has he left These to us for his Legacy; the Better Part doubtless of his
Estate, as befitted the Divine Nature of our Kindred. Not therefore for
Ostentation, or to Indulge a Worldly Custom, but to the Glory of the Invisible
God, the Edification of his Church, the Benefit of all People, and as a
Testimony of our Respect to the Deceased Author, and of his Fidelity and
Service to the Truth, This Ensuing Volume, Reader, is published, as thou see:
Which brings me to the Nature of it; and the several Parts, that do Compile it.

Divinity; Plain, Sound, Christian Divinity, the most Glorious and Entertaining
Object of the Soul of Man is the Subject Matter of this following Book;
Divinity, I say, in all the right Senses of the Word: In its first and stricter
Sense, to wit, the Divine Nature or Godhead, this is Humbly and Reverently
Considered; but more especially in its larger Acceptance, viz. Of the
Knowledge of God, and those Doctrines of Truth and Order, that immediately
relate to the Duty we Owe to God and Man, both in and out of Society. In short,
Faith and Practice (which is the Course Mankind should steer through this World
to the Haven of Everlasting Rest) as we cannot find a better Subject, so it
will be hard to find it better treated and followed; not because he was more of
a Scholar, than some others, but in that he was more Gifted, than many others.
For this Knowledge of Divinity comes not by the Means of Vniversity-Learning;
but that of the School of Christ by the Illumination of his Light and Spirit,
and the Holy Doctrine and Discipline of his Cross; in one great but true Word,
Regeneration: which is an Experimental Science, and to be had without Money and
without Price, and that both by Gentle and Simple, Rich and Poor, etc. but not
without Labor, Pain and Travail. Which made our Blessed Lord say, Labor not
for the Bread that perishes; but for that which endures to Everlasting Life.
Joh. 6.27. Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.10.
And the Apostle tells us, We must work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, and give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. It
consists of diverse Operations, but all by the same Light and Spirit; 1 Cor.
12.4, 5, 6.
and because all have need of it, all partake of it, that they may profit by
it. Joh. 1.9.
It Enlightens all that come into the World, says the Beloved Disciple; and
whatsoever may be known of God, his Mind and Will, is manifested in them, for
God (by the Revelation of this Light) has shown it unto them, Romans 1.19.
says the Apostle to the Romans. And again; Whatsoever is Reproved, Ephesians. 5.13.
is made manifest by it; It is made the Touchstone of our Lives and
Conversation, for we are to bring our Deeds to it. Joh. 3.20, 21. 1 John 1.5,
6, 7.
It leads to the Benefit of the Blood of Jesus, That cleanses from all Sin,
and gives us fellowship with God and one with another, as his Children and
People. It is our Armor also against all the Fiery Darts, Romans 13.12. Rev.
21.23, 24.
and Furious Assaults and Crafty Workings of Satan, our great and common Enemy:
Nay, the Nations of them that are saved, must walk in this Light. Yea, it is
the Light of the Soul on Earth, and the Light of the Spirit of the Just made
perfect in Heaven too in the diverse Degrees of it: And Man is Darkness, as to
Divine Matters, till he turns to this Blessed Light in him: which is the true
Manifestation of the Son of God to and in the Soul and Mind of Man; the Real
Seed and Root of all Divine Knowledge and Life in Man, which only gives him a
Sight, Sense and Savior of Divine things, and of that Immortality he otherways
vainly talks of, i and hopes for. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord
indeed, when it is lighted by this Glorious Light: Prove. 20.27.
but in the Wicked it is said to be often put out; not the Light it self, but
Man's Spirit, which becomes a Dark Candle again, (as it was, before it was
enlightened by this true Light) through his Disobedience to it. It is called
Light, because of that Discovery it makes, and sure Evidence it gives of God's
Mind, and Man's Duty and Ways. That which is called Light, is also called
Spirit, because of the Life and Sense it begets in the Soul of its Condition:
It Quickens Man, that was dead in Sins and Trespasses; for Sin hardens the
Heart, as well as darkens the Understanding: And this Glorious Principle by its
Spiritual Efficacy makes it Sensible, Soft and Tender; so that the least Sin is
felt, as well as discerned. Not an Evil Thought passes, or a Temptation to it,
but this Living Heart turns against it: An Antipathy shows it self, and Get
thee behind me Satan, is the determined Sentence of the Enlivened Soul. It is
of this Spirit the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians, and it makes almost an
Entire Chapter. He tells us, that it searches the deep things of God; 1 Cor. 2.
and without which Man cannot discern Spiritual things: And he gives a Reason
for it too, grounded on his own Experience, the just Authority of his
Confidence; because The natural Man perceives not the things of God, neither
can he (as such) because they are spiritually discerned. The Natural Man may
talk of them, of God, his Nature and Attributes; of Christ, his Relation,
Natures and Offices; of Regeneration, which is the Great Work of the Son of God
in and upon Man: But Alas! that is all the Natural Man with all his Natural
Powers and Skill is Capable of; he can go no deeper: It Is all Hearsay and
Imagination. For they are a Mystery shut up close from all Unsanctified Hearts
and Heads: Yea, they are all wrapped up, and strongly enclosed in this Holy Seed
of Light and Spirit, that shines in the dark Hearts of Men, and through the
Power of that Darkness they cannot Comprehend it. The Ground of which Darkness
is Disobedience: Which made Christ say to the Jews; If you will do the will of
God, you shall know of my doctrine, Joh. 7.17.
if it be of God or not. I say, the Mystery, Power and Virtue of Christianity
is shut up in this Divine Seed: And if thou, O Reader! know it not, but art
only speculatively a Christian, open thy Heart, and let it into the good
Ground; and thou shall quickly find the Efficacy and Excellency of it in the
Fruits, that will spring from it: The Increase will be very great, and the Taste
thereof sweeter much than the Honey or the Honeycomb. Psalm. 19.10.
She is a Tree of Life (said a Wise and a great King of old Time) to all them
that lay hold upon her; Prove. 3.18. chapter 8.19.
and happy is every one, that retains her: for her fruit is better than gold,
and her revenue, than choice silver. It was by him styled Wisdom, because it
made him Wise; and will make every one, that is Taught by it: Chapter 9.10. Job.
28.111. Psalm. 10.
For it makes People Wise to Salvation by teaching them the Fear of the Lord,
and to depart from Iniquity, and every evil way: All such are said to have a
good Understanding. The Apostle Paul also calls it the Grace of God, Tit.
2.11, 12, 13.
that brings Salvation, that has appeared to all men, etc. Grace, because it
is God's Free Gift, not our Merit or Purchase. God so loved the World, Joh.
3.16. Chapter 1.14.16
he gave his only begotten Son to save it; who was full of Grace and Truth: And
of his fullness we receive grace for grace in order to Salvation. In which
Saying of the Apostle Five things are to be seriously remarked, as
Comprehensive of the very Body of our Christian Divinity. First, the Principle,
Talent or Gift, which God gives to Man; and that is his Grace, The Grace of
God, etc. Secondly, This Grace, Talent, Gift or Principle is sufficient to the
End, for which it is given, viz. It brings Salvation: God bestows it for that
purpose. Paul might well say so, that had tried the Power and Virtue of it
under the greatest Temptation: As God told him, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.
his Grace was sufficient for him; so he found it to his exceeding great Joy.
Thirdly, The Universality of God's Bounty; It appears to all Men, more or less.
It is so intended; Christ died for all, and distributes Grace to all, that all
might come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4.
as it is in Jesus, and be saved. Fourthly, The way, by which the Sufficiency
and Universality of it is demonstrated, and that is, The Teaching Quality and
Virtue of it. v. 12. Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously and Godly in this present World. This every
one feels in his own Bosom at Times, and that of all Religions and of all
Nations; A Just Monitor, a Secret Reprover, and a Faithful Witness: Blessed are
they, that give heed thereunto, and learn of it what to Leave, and what to Do;
what to shun, and what to Embrace: Prove. 8.20. Mich. 6.8.
For it Leads in the Ways of Righteousness, and in the midst of the Paths of
Judgment. It is by this, God shows Man his Thoughts, and what he does require
of him: This it is, that Man has made an Adversary by his Iniquities; which he
must make Peace with, lest he bring him before the Judge, Matt. 5.25.
and he cast him into Prison, and he come not out, till he has paid the
uttermost Farthing. This Inward Teaching, Reproving, Exhorting Light, Spirit or
Grace of God Learns us Two Lessons, which make up the holy Order of our
Conversion and Salvation. 1. What we are to Deny: 2. What we are to Do. We are
to Deny Ungodliness and wordly Lusts; and it will show us, what they are both
within and without, in Thought as well as in Word and Deed, if we will attend
to it, and Watch and Wait upon it. And though the grosser Evils, that carry the
largest Characters of Impiety, are easily seen and observed; yet there are
Lusts, that lie near, and stick close, that are less perceptible; and it may
be, are hardly by some thought Evil neither: As in Relation to Extremes in
Food, Apparel, Furniture, Discourse, Converse, Gain, Honor, Revenge,
Emulation, etc. And there is an Ungodliness in a Mystery too, which utterly
mistakes and overthrows the true Nature and End of Religion, as well as
palpable Enormities: Such is; setting up the Form above the Power of Godliness,
Humane Traditions above the Scripture, and Opposing that to the Spirit of God,
which it Testifies of and so often Refers unto, and making, and pressing Civil
Edicts about Matters of Faith, and suffering none to Live and Enjoy what is
their own, and prosecute their Lawful Callings for the Maintenance of their
Families; unless they will forgo Convictions, play the Hypocrite, be of their
Creed, and receive their Mark in their Forehead, Rev. 13.16. c. 14.9.
or at least in their Right hand; by which means they have made a Worldly
Interest and Empire of the Church, and of Religion (that should be the Purity
and Peace of the World) a mere Step and Test to Temporal Preferment. These are
the Things, under which Religion, and indeed Civil Society, and true, Civil
Policy groan, as well as other Impieties; though by Worldly Men, and some, that
would be thought Religious too, this is as little seen, as the more sensual
Ungodliness is amended. For all which the Eternal God is come by many
Judgments, and coming in Flames of Fire to Execute Vengeance upon the Wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
whatever Carnal and Secure Minds think: And it is not the least of our
Miseries; that we are but too Insensible of it.

Thus we see, what we are Taught by the Grace to deny: Let us next consider the
other part of our Duty, which the Grace teaches us; and that is, What we are
to do? Teaching us, says the Great and Zealous Apostle, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in
this present World. This is also a most Comprehensive Expression; a plain and
easy Compend of our Active Duty to God and Man, yea, to ourselves.

Soberly, That is, with Moderation, Temper, Government of our Passions and
Affections: Let your Moderation be known unto all Men, Phil. 4.5.
said the same Apostle; His Reason was pressing and unanswerable, For the Lord
is at hand. So be Sober, for the Lord's at hand; and let Men see, that we are
so. Though the Exhortation chiefly regards Ourselves, that we may not Abuse or
Disorder our selves, Overdo or Act in reference to our own Persons and Affairs:
As if he had said; be sober and moderate in thy Giving, Getting, Conversing; in
thy Pains and Pleasures, in Thoughts, Words and Deeds; in thy whole Man and
Life.

Righteously, Refers to our Neighbor, to do as we would be done to: To defraud
none, oppress none; 1 Cor. 6.7, 8, 9. Ephesians. 6.1 -- 10. Col. 3.20 -- 25. Prove.
20.10 Chapter 22.28.
but Discharge all Relations and Conditions uprightly, to Parents, Magistrates,
Husband, Wife, Children, Servants, Neighbors, Strangers, Enemies: Just
Weights and Measures, Old Landmarks, and an Even Balance; These are
well-pleasing to God in all Ranks and Relations.

Godly in this present World, relates chiefly to God, the Faith, Worship and
Obedience we owe to him: Obedience, by a pious Life; For this is the will of
God, even our Sanctification: without Holiness none shall see him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3
So that to be Godly, is to Live after God, not the World; and after his
Spirit, not our Flesh; but to Crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, Romans
13.12 -- 14. Gal. 5.22 -- 25.
and put on the Lord Jesus Christ (his Meekness, his Patience, Humility, Mercy,
Forgiveness, Love, Temperance and Righteousness) and make no more provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: No more be in pain, Matt. 6.31 -- 33.
what we should eat or drink, or put on, or how we may make our selves Wealthy
or Mighty in the Earth, after the way of the Old Gentiles, that knew not God;
as is the Custom of almost the whole Christian World (so called) at this very
day, (which General Declension shows, that a General Judgment, and an
Overflowing Scourge of God is at hand:) but to seek the Kingdom of God first,
and deny our selves, Job 14.14.
and watch and pray; waiting all the Days of our appointed Time, until our
Great and Last Change shall come. So that Godliness is God-likeness;
Translation, Renewing, yea, the First Resurrection, that those who Attain to
it, the Second Death shall have no Power over them. This Godliness with
Contentment is the greatest Gain, 1 Timothy 4.8. Chapter 6.6. 1 John 3.5, 8.
and profitable in all things; the Sum and Substance of Religion and of all
God's Dispensations in the World; yea, the very End of Christ's coming, and the
blessed Fruit of his Victory over Hell, Death and the Grave; that Sin might
have an end,, the Devil's Works in Man and Woman be destroyed, and Man made an
holy Temple and Tabernacle for God to dwell in. This is Godliness, and this
Godliness is the way to please God; 2 Cor. 6.16. Matt. 6.20. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.
to lay up Treasure in Heaven, to be fruitful in Grace, rich in Faith and good
Works, and to lay hold on Eternal Life, and become Heirs of an Inheritance
Incorruptible.

Which brings me to the Fifth and Last thing observable from this Comprehensive
Passage, viz. The Comfortable Reward and End of this Life and Grace, in verse.
13. Looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ: That is, Looking for the Fulfilling of that
blessed Hope; to Have, what they Hoped for: An Hope, that does not make Ashamed
those that have it; but is an Anchor to the Soul in the greatest Storms, that
Attend Men on their Way to Blessedness. It is for the Accomplishment of this
Hope, the gracious Livers have a Title to Expect and Wait. They that have been
Taught by the Grace, what to deny, and what to do, and to look and live above
the World, and by an Eye of Faith to pierce through the dark Clouds of Time,
and steadfastly to look into the things that are Eternal, they are but
Travelers and Pilgrims, as were all the Godly Fathers of old Time; and expect
with them a City, Heb. 11.10.
whose Builder and Maker is God. These wait for the Glorious Appearing of the
great God, and their Savior Jesus Christ, as the Blessed End of their Hope;
and to them he will certainly come, as the Glorious and Faithful Rewarder of
the Faith, Obedience and Perseverance of his poor Disciples and Servants: They
shall Reign with him a Thousand Years, and for ever. Their Obedience and
Sufferings are but Temporal, but the Recompense Everlasting: Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, Isa. 64.4. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Psalm. 84.1, 10.
nor has the Heart of man been able to perceive the good things, that God has
laid up in store for those that love him; But in the Heavens, that do not wax
Old, and which will never pass away, those holy Courts of God, the true
Followers of Jesus, the Children of Light and Disciples of the Cross, that come
through the many Tribulations (from Conviction to Conversion, from Conversion
to Consummation, the End of all) shall Understand, Taste and Enjoy those Hidden
and Divine Pleasures, that are as Ineffable, as they are Eternal.

This, Reader, is the Old Divinity, that of Christ and his blessed Apostles
Time and Teaching, renewed in our Days by the fresh Breaking-forth of the same
Light, Spirit and Grace, that brought this Doctrine of Immortality to Light in
those Primitive and Happy Ages; yea, Immortality it self, a Divine, Never-dying
Life into the Soul, that which quickens it out of the sleepy and dead Estate,
Sin brings it into, by which it loses all Savor or Relish of Spiritual
Things. I say, this is the Divinity God has Renewed among us, an Experimental
Work or Operation of his Light, Spirit and Grace in our Souls: This ( Light) is
the great Luminary of the Intellectual World, that expels the Darkness, and
scatters the Mists of Sin and Death, that the Souls of Men labor under, where
it is Received and Obeyed. This is the Day of God, in which the whole World has
a Visitation; that by which we are to see our Way to God, and Duty to him and
all Men, as the outward Sun is the Means, by which we see our outward Ways, and
the Difference of outward Things. This was the Principle, that divinely endued
the Author of the ensuing Volume, and has enabled him to Write of God and his
Attributes by the Power and Truth of them upon his own Soul: He felt his
Justice in himself for his Disobedience; His Mercy by the Forgiveness of his
Sins, through Faith and Repentance; His Holiness by the Sanctification of his
Grace through Obedience to the Teachings of it; That God is a Spirit, by the
Spiritual Operations upon his own Soul, the Spiritual Part of himself; And
Omnipresent, because he felt his Presence, or him present as a Reprover, or a
Comforter, wherever he was or went: Omniscient, for the same Reason; because
he could not think amiss, but he was sensible in himself, that God knew and saw
it, by the Reproof that followed it: Omnipotent, because he Experienced that
Power, by which the Soul is Redeemed from Death, and Sinners are made Saints;
the most excellent and self-evident Proof of God's Omnipotency or
All Sufficiency. For nothing can Regenerate, but that which Made; nor Renew,
but that which Created: And as the Heavens are nobler than the Earth, so is the
Soul, than the Body; Renovation and Redemption, than Creation; And
Resurrection, than our former Life. This, Reader, thou shall come to know to be
true, as any Demonstration, that can be made to thy outward Senses, if thou will but Turn in thy Mind to this Teacher, and wilt become the humble Scholar
of this Divine Master, and Learn of him in true Silence and with Diligence.
Ponder, what I say: Would thou know God, and be fitted for his Heavenly
Mansions, seek him in his Image, and thou will know the Original by it. Be thou
but as Clay is in the Hands of the Potter, Pliable, and he will Form and
Fashion thee aright: He will make thee a Vessel of Honor for his own House and
Use; and by the Self-denial, Love, Purity, Patience, Righteousness, etc. that
he will work in thee, or work thee into, thou shall be able to pronounce truly
and knowingly, God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that fear him. Surely,
there is a God in all the Earth: Then will thou be able to say with holy David
and Mary; Ps. 103.1.
O my Soul, bless the Lord, and all that is within me, Luke 1.46, 47.
praise his Holy Name: My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoiceth
in God my Savior; for he is good: for his Mercy endures for ever! Amen, Lord
Jesus! Amen.

I am now come to the Labors of our Author; and shall mention them according
to their respective Times, with the Nature of their Subjects in brief, to
Inform and Excite the Reader to their Perusal.

The First of them in Order of Place, was so in Order of Time; it is called,
Truth Cleared of Calumnies: He writ it, at least published it 1670. The
Occasion of it was a Book, Entitled, A Dialogue between a Quaker, and a stable
Christian: the Invention (it is supposed) of one W. Mitchel, a Preacher near
Aberdeen; the Disingenuous Fruit of a long Controversy between him, and some
other bitter Sticklers, and the People called Quakers, who as well by that
Discourse, as in the Pulpits of those Times, were Represented (as was our Lord
Jesus and his Followers) the Worst of Men, possessed of the Devil, and
Blasphemers, under Pretense of being Led by the Spirit: And for their
Principles, that they denied the True Christ, Angels, Heaven and Hell; That
they held no sort of Resurrection of the Body, nor Final Judgment; were Enemies
to Magistrates and Ministry; Comparing them with the worst of Heretics, to
Inflame the People against them: A Field large enough for this Zealous Young
Soldier to Engage his Adversary in, and where one of a less Capacity, than God
had blessed him with, might, without any Praesumption, have comforted himself
with an Assured Success; which with much Ease and Plainness he has obtained
against the Goliah-like Vanity and Praesumption of the Author of the said
Dialogue: And in which he has Detected the Power and Evil Effects both of
Ignorance and Malice, and shown and defended the Innocence of his Friends; and
above all, the Soundness and Scripture-Verity of their Principles. It is
written with Strength and Moderation.

His next Public Service of this kind was published in the same Year, called,
Queries to the Inhabitants of Aberdeen: It is the most eminent Place in the
North of Scotland, and near his Father's Seat, then alive, and many Years
after. They contain the Principles and Practices of the Children of Error and
Truth, wherein the Inhabitants of that Place especially might see themselves,
What they were, and what they should be; and remember some of them what they
once pretended to Seek for, and Enjoyed, and were fallen from: writ as an
Appendix to the former Discourse.

His Third Book was writ in the Year following 1671. upon the same Controversy,
and against the same Opposer, namely W. Mitchel, Entitled; William Mitchel
Unmasked: Being a Rejoinder to that Persons Reply to his Truth Cleared from
Calumnies. In which the Dispute rises High, and the Contest seems Sharp and
Close; but to every Impartial Reader the Advantage evidently runs upon our
Author's side: Who appears rather Zealous, than Heated, and sharp on his
Enemy's Matter, than Person: For he rather pities his Enemy, than Triumphs over
his Weakness and Envy. Here, as in an Exact Draught, the Reader has an Account
of the fabulous Principles given under our Names, and those that we really
profess; and the Pleasure, even Men pretending to Religion take, to render a
poor self-denying People that, which they are not: As if they feared, we should
be in the right, or hold Principles nearer, to what they profess themselves to
believe, than is convenient for their Interest with the People to allow; lest
that together with the Sobriety, their worst Enemies confess to be so
Conspicuous among them, should give them too great a Credit with their Hearers.

The next Year 1672. he writ A Seasonable Warning and Exhortation to and
Expostulation with the Inhabitants of Aberdeen, concerning this present
Dispensation and Day of God's Living Visitation toward them: A serious Title
and Dedication, and a serious Discourse; they are deeply indebted to his Love,
Labor and Memory. I pray God, it may be as Bread cast upon the Waters to the
Inhabitants of that Northern City of this Famous Isle of Britain, and that they
and theirs after these many Days that have past, may find it to their Spiritual
Edification; that they may know, there was a Servant and Prophet of God among
them, with the Testimony of the Everlasting Gospel, which is the Power of God
revealed in Man, to Regenerate him: May it never rise up in Judgment against
that People!

His Fifth Book was his Catechism writ in 1673. the Title, A Catechism and
Confession of Faith, Approved of and Agreed unto by the General Assembly of the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself Chief Speaker in and among
them: Which contains a True and Faithful Account of the Principles and
Doctrines, which are most surely believed by the Churches of Christ in Great
Britain and Ireland, who are reproachfully called by the Name of Quakers; yet
are found in the one Faith with the Primitive Church and Saints; as is most
Clearly Demonstrated by some plain Scripture-Testimonies (without Consequences
or Commentaries) which are here Collected and Inserted by way of Answer to a
few Weighty, yet Easy and Familiar Questions, fitted as well for the Wisest
and Largest, as for the Weakest and Lowest Capacities: And Expostulation with
and Appeal to all other Professors (of Religion.) It was a Scripture-Essay in
the Heat of diverse Controversies then on foot; and as of very good Use, so it
has past Three Impressions before this. That at which the Author Aimed, was,
giving the Clear and Native Sense and Authority of the Holy Ghost in Scripture
upon every Point of Faith and Practice, especially those that were
Controverted; suggesting the Points successively in Questions from Head to
Head, and giving Answer by proper Scriptures without any Consequences; leaving
it to every Reader to judge, how far the Question and Answer Agreed, and what
Sense the Holy Ghost expressed as to the Point stated in the Question: Be it (for
Exampe) of Faith, Works, Grace, Revelation, Justification, Sanctification, etc.
And indeed, it were greatly to be Desired, that where Men cannot Agree in their
Comment, who yet Agree in the Text, they would strive to Improve Piety and
Charity under Generalities, where they do and can Meet, and would study to be
quiet, and follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, Romans 12.10 18. Col. 3.14,
15.
without which no Man shall see the Lord. It was a great Unhappiness to Men, as
well as an Injury to Religion it self, that it has been branched and broken
into so many Parts and Points; and more, that some Men have so boldly and
critically Super-fined upon them; but worst of all, that Governments have
troubled themselves to give them Authority, and make them the Current Creeds of
their Countries; and to deny and put down as Base and Adulterate, all
Principles or Doctrines of a Differing Sense, though they have an Intrinsic
Worth, and the Exemplary Virtue of their Professors to Recommend them. But I
must Remember, I am writing a Preface, and not a Book: And yet before I leave
this, I must say, that I very much value the Simplicity of this Catechism, and
the Design of the Writer in it; and wish, That those who seek a Satisfaction by
Reading of Points in Religion, would seriously Read it: For the Collection that
is made out of the Srciptures to every Head suggested by way of Question, carry
that Clarity, Unity and Authority with them, that I would think should Satisfy
the Serious, and Silence the Curious Inquirer.

The Sixth Book of the Ensuing Volume came out in the Year 1674. It is called,
The Anarchy of the Ranters and other Libertines, the Hierarchy of the Romanists
and other pretended Churches, equally Refused and Refuted, in a Twofold Apology
for the Church and People of God called Quakers, etc. The Purpose of this Book
was, as the rest of the Title shows, to Justify his Friends from Disorder
against the Charge of one Sort of People; and Imposition and Tyranny over
Conscience against the Mistakes and Insinuations of another Sort of People:
Showing farther, That as the Ancient Gospel is in this Age Restored in its
Purity by their Testimony; so the Apostolical Order of the Church of Christ is
the Practice and Ornament of their Christian Society, and settled upon its only
Right Foundation, viz. the Love and Unity of the Spirit of Wisdom.

This Discourse touching the tender Place, both of those that Exercise a
Coercive Authority over Conscience on the one hand, and of those, that to Avoid
the Extreme, run into an Absolute, Personal Independency in point of Order and
Government, on the other hand, both Sorts were not a little Disgusted; but the
latter more especially, that thought themselves Chiefly concerned in the
Author's Intentions and Labor. And indeed, the Rise and Ground of the
Discourse was the Dissatisfaction of some, that professed to be of the same
Society, about the Methods of Proceeding, as a Christian Community for the
Honor of our Holy Profession. Some Mistook him; others too designedly
Inveighed against him: The Animosity rise so high in some few Leading Persons
of that Dissent, as to question his Sincerity to the Profession he made of
Religion in general, whispering him to be Popishly Affected, if not a Papist;
and perhaps a Graduated one too: And why? First, because he was Bred in France
at School, under an Uncle, that was a Papist, if not a Priest: Secondly,
because he Maintained Church Authority at as high a Rate, at least upon the
same Principles. But for the First, his Father, who was always a Zealous
Protestant, coming heartily to Embrace the Communion of the Despised Quakers,
and showing himself an Exemplary Member of their Society, Commanded his Son
over, being yet a Child, and only sent thither for the Advantage of a Relation,
and of Learning French and Latin together; and that upon the pressing
Importunity of his Fathers own Brother, that was President of the Scotch
College, where the Learning Common at our Schools, as well as at Universities,
is daily taught.

To the Second Reason; It flows from Weakness or something worse. For first, If
he defends the Necessity and Service of Order by any Arguments the Church of
Rome has used to support her power, it cannot conclude him of the same
Principle or Spirit, unless it were to Carry it to the same End and Extremity;
which is denied. Next: Church Government must no more be denied, because the
Church of Rome pleads for it, then any other Truth, that she Asserts: There are
Principles held by Jews and Turks in Common with Christians, must Christians
therefore Renounce these Common Truths, or be branded with Judaism or Turcism?
Nor is the Abuse of a Principle or Practice by any Society a Reason, why
another Communion should be Abused for retaining or Using it. The Power we
Claim and Use, differs both in its Nature and Object from the Power used by the
Roman and other Churches too: In Nature, for ours is not Coercive and Penal
upon the Persons or Estates of such as Dissent; and that not because we want
Power, but because we believe it to be Evil to do so: But Theirs is Coercive
and Penal either by themselves, or their Proxy, the Civil Magistrate, who is a
Member of their Church. In Object they differ, because their Authority regards
Matters of Faith and Worship; but that we use, only Order, and the Government
of Society. And here I must beseech those few, that are under any
Dissatisfaction, into whose Hands this may come, to stop a while, and ponder
with the Spirit of Meekness and Wisdom upon this Distinction, where I conceive
the Stress Lies; and the Matter in Controversy may receive a Satisfactory Issue.

The Protestants accuse the Church of Rome with the Addition of Articles of
Faith, and Institutions in Worship that are Foreign to the Scripture, and the
First Centuries or more Primitive Ages of the Church; and Charge their Dissent
from her Communion upon that Head. The Protestant Dissenters Impeach Protestant
National Churches in some Sense about Articles of Faith, but plainly and
strenuously with the Innovation and Imposition of diverse Institutions and
Ceremonies in Worship, that are not found in Scripture; which is the best and
truest Tradition of the Belief and Practice of those purer Times, in which they
were written; and they lay their Separation upon this: Which has been followed
with an Age of Severity on one hand, as Zealous of Church Discipline, and on
the other Hand of great Sufferings both in Person and Estate out of Conscience
and Zeal for the Simplicity, Purity and Example of Scripture-Worship against
Humane Inventions. But this is neither our Case, nor our Dissenters Pretense;
for we never Assumed to our selves a Faith or Worship-Making-Power, nor did any
one of the most scrupulous of them ever Charge it upon us. We pretend not to
Introduce fresh Points of Faith or other Methods of Worship, than it pleased
God by his Heavenly Light and Spirit to lead us into at the beginning of our
blessed Dispensation. There are no Forms of Words, set Gestures or peculiar
Garments Dedicated and Injoined among us, or any Novelties, as to our Places of
Worship Introduced, in which we Symbolize with others we Condemned, or Differ
from our selves, in what we once owned. Our Case is plain Order, not Articles
of Faith; and the Discipline of Government, not of Worship: We are a a Society,
and therefore cannot be longer Independent one of another. We believe indeed
for our selves, and ought to do so, and came Voluntarily into this Communion;
the Ground of it being the Inward Persuasion of our own Minds, from a Spiritual
Liking of Principles and Practice, and above all, that Divine Sense and Power,
which we felt to Unite our Hearts in the Communion of Worship (without which
Primitive Sense and Integrity, the best part of the Fellowship will be Lost,
and the rest be but as a Body without a Spirit:) But being hereby drawn and
engaged in Society, there is an Outward, a Civil and Temporal Part, that must
be Considered and Discharged; though in Comparison of the Inmost Motives of our
Fellowship, it is but as a Body to the Soul. And in this Sense we are not our
own Masters; We are in Subjection, and must be in Subjection, a Kin one to
another, and Answerable one to another, and in some sense one for another, at
least to those that are without. For which Cause we cannot say as Cain Answered
God, when he asked him, Where his Brother was, I am not my Brother's Keeper:
But as the Apostle said, We are not our own in Reference to the Title God has
to us, and that not only by Creation, but by Redemption also; and that Faith,
Worship and Obedience we therefore owe to him: So in Society we are not our
own, but Christ's and the Church's, to Good Works and Services, yet all in
Love. For Example: All Societies have Poor, Sick, Aged, Widows, Orphans, etc.
These cannot be duly regarded and supplied, but by the Care of the Whole; nor
that Care so effectually taken without Method; nor that Method settled without
the Concurrence of the Communion: Here then is Power, and here is Order; What
must he be called, that Opposes this? But yet further: All Societies Marry,
Trade and Converse promiscuously, and have one Time or other some that are
Unjust, Litigious, Licentious, and others; that though they may not fall under
the Censure of those without, yet deviate from their First Testimony and
Principles, upon which they Joined themselves in Fellowship. What is to be done
in this Case? Has this Society no Power to Establish such wholesome Methods, as
may prevent Disorder and Scandal both to those within, and those without? And
is she not the proper Judge as well as Authorizer, of what is fittest to be
done in such Cases? Remembering all along, that it is not about things relating
to Faith and Worship, or such a Sort of Exercise of Conscience toward God; but
about such things, as immediately refer to Conversation and Practice among Men,
(wherein nevertheless we ought to have the Fear of God before our Eyes, that as
the Apostle says, We may do all things to the Praise and Glory of God) I say,
here is no need of such an Exercise of Conscience in these things, as if it had
Faith for an Object. Nor would it sound Congruous to Common Sense, that because
we may reasonably plead Conscience against acknowledging such an Article of
Belief, or practicing such an Institution of Worship, which has God for the
Object, where Conscience is not satisfied; therefore I may say, It is against
my Conscience to Comply with such Orders, as tend to support the Poor, visit
the Sick, help the Aged, End Differences, Reprove the Licentious, Comfort the
Tempted, Reclaim the Back-slider: Or if I should say, It is against my
Conscience to Ask my Relations Leave, or the Woman's I intend to Marry, before
I propound my Design to her, or to give them, or the Society I am of, any
Satisfaction of my Clearness from all others, by staying, before I marry, such
a due Time for Inquiry, as they think Safe and Decent, both for my Credit and
their own; and which is at the same Time the General Practice of that Society,
of which I am a Member; This I say, has no Consequence or Coherence with the
other Just Plea of Conscience, that has Faith and Worship for Objects. It must
be therefore at least a Fruit of Inadvertency and Weakness, not to Distinguish
rightly between the Discipline of Worship, where Conformity is Free, and the
Discipline of Conversation and Society, where it is certainly Obligatory; or
Society Ceases. For what is Society, but a Voluntary Compound of Independent
Persons, or the Resignation of Singles into Community? And what is every
Member's Doing as it Lists, but a Dissolution of that Society, and reducing
it again into so many Singles or Personal Independencies? And this is the
Mischievous Consequence of Liberty Misunderstood, and Challenged in the wrong
Place. I beseech God to make Those sensible of it, that are concerned in the
Mistake, of whom I hope, and for whom I heartily wish the best; that they may
see, we mean not any thing against the Truth, but for the Truth, nor to Enthral
their Minds, but to Adorn their Conversation, and that of the whole Society:
And that what we plead for, does not subject their Consciences, but their
Conveniences only ^o the General Good, which every private Person of Course
delivers up to the Benefit of Society, whenever he Joins himself to it; and
has what is better, in the Room of it, the Sweetness of Civil or Christian
Fellowship. For if he serves others, which he was not equally obliged to
before, he is also served of others, that formerly owed him no Obligation: For
the rest, it is a good Life, which is a Duty incumbent; and so no Tyranny in
Society to Require it, and Censure the Contrary. See then the Upshot, pray, of
this whole Matter: Conscience is God's, therefore not our's to give, nor any
Man's or Society's to take or Usurp: Conveniences are our's, and those we
submit to the Benefit of Society, when we enter into it, for the Advantages we
receive from it. And a Just and Sober Life is a General Duty; and therefore is
not only no Error in the Church to Expect from every Member, but a Duty in her
to Look after: As it is her particular Interest to see, that we walk faithfully
up to the special Principles of Communion; and wherein we are Deficient, she
may Exhort; and if Refractory, Rebuke; and if Incorrigible, Censure, according
to Christ's Rule and Command in that Case long ago provided. Mat. 18.17.


I know, it is Objected, That most of those Methods of Proceeding, that are
amongst us, as a Religious Society, came first from one or other of the
Brethren, and had not a formal Settlement. But with all Humility let me Answer,
That First, if it were so, they were Elders and Fathers, that were approved
through many Trials, and Worthy of double Honor. Next, They were such, as at
the first we received gladly; and we could even have plucked out our very Eyes
to have shown our true Value and great Affection for them, as those of old
expressed for Paul: And if we received joyfully the greater things, that concern
our Salvation, through their Ministry, are they Unworthy or Unfit to Convey and
Communicate in the Love of God, good and wholesome Advice about the Outward
Things of our Fellowship? But, besides all that might be said upon this Head,
to render our Compliance Reasonable or Christian, it is plain, that the Church
of God, Gathered by the Ministration of his Spirit through his Servants, has
almost Universally received, and with Comfort and Godly Profit practiced that
good Order so Recommended unto them by diverse Elders and Brethren; particularly
our Ever-honourable Elder Brother, George Fox, that Faithful Minister of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and Eminent Apostle of our Time and Day, whom the Lord sent
forth with the Testimony of the True Light within, Enlightening every Man that
comes into the World, and that in great Dread and Authority, who proved a
Fruitful Branch, yielding much Fruit to him that had called him; living to see
many Thousands Gathered to and settled in that Testimony. He preached the Light
by Word and VVriting; he VValked in the Light, and he suffered for it, and
Departed in it; in which he Lives and Reigns for ever! And whoever Reads those
Papers he writ to the Church of God in reference to these Things, will find, he
uses very sparingly his Authority of Eldership; and whatever he might have
said, that he has said nothing, which did not Consist with the most Exemplary
Sweetness and Humility, far short of that Power the Apostle Paul used to the
Corinthians, Philippians, 1 Cor 6. to 13. Chapter 11.16. Chapter 14. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
Phil. 3.17. Col. 4.10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Chapter 3.4, 6, 7, 12. 1 Timothy 1.6. Chapter 5.21. 2 Timothy 2.14, 15. Chapter 4.1, 2.
Colossians, Thessalonians and Timothy, where, as well as in diverse other
Places, he Commands and Charges them over and over, as well in Matters of Order
relating to the Well-Governing of their Christian Society, as Matters of Faith
and Worship. And no Wonder; for he that had allowedly Injoined the greater,
needed no Earthly Dispensation to Require the Lesser. So that I must beseech
such as are dissatisfied, to Look into the way of God's Spirit in all
Dispensations, more especially that of the Primitive Church, and Compare them
with the Testimony of God's Servants in our Dispensation, and Weigh, in the
Spirit of Love and Meekness, with a good Understanding the Treatise we are now
upon (and another in Defense of it) in the following Volume, with the Liberty I
have taken in a Preface upon this Occasion, to Open my self unto them for their
better Understanding and Satisfaction, as to the Nature of those things, and of
that Power, which they take Offense at; and the Mind and End of their Friends,
that Recommended, and so generally practice them. O that a Divine Sense and
Savor may fall upon them, and that the Ancient Kindness may spring! For if
Love can Cover Real Faults, surely it can Overcome Imaginary ones, and Restore
those, that have Misapprehended Persons or Things, to the Ancient, Blessed
Unity they once Enjoyed. Here it is, that deep Saying of the Apostle may be
Applied; To the Pure all things are pure. Read this Discourse of the Anarchy of
the Ranters, Tit. 1.15.
with such a Mind, and what is pure, will Appear so to the Right Mind; for that
is the pure Mind, blessed are they that have it. A Right Spirit was, Ps. 51.10.
what David prayed for, as well as a Clean Heart. Consider First; If ever God
varied his Dispensations in the Lifetime of them, that were his Chiefest
Instruments in them? Secondly, If he ever suffered them to fall away from them?
Thirdly, If some Gathered by them, have not Turned against them under such
Pretense, or because their Exercise of Power or Rule in the Church? Fourthly,
If such have not often come to Naught, and been manifested in time to the
World, and at last gone visibly, in some Degree, back into the World; and so
proved, that they have gone out from those Sons of the Morning, because they
were not of them, as John writes. Therefore let all that be Concerned, Hear, 1 John 2.19.
and Fear and Beware; Remembering, who smote at Moses, and who grieved Paul, and
who it was, 3 John v.10.
that John says, Prated against him and the Brethren, in his Third Epistle,
such as Insinuated, They took too much upon them; but were themselves found out
of their Places. And let us all Remember, That if Obedience be supposed to live
near to Bondage, so does Liberty to Licentiousness: And that both Obedience and
Liberty are Excellent in their proper Places, and make a due and preserving
Temper to one another in Civil and Religious Bodies; as does the Balance of
Elements to all Bodies Natural. The Fear and Love of God dwell richly among us,
that brings to and keeps in the most precious Unity!

Our Author's Seventh Discourse in order of Place (because of the same Subject,
and wrote in Defense of it) but not in Order of Time, is called, A Vindication
of the Book Entitled, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. Refuted. It was writ in
the Year 1679. drawn from the Author to Clear his former Discourse from the
Mistakes and Scruples of such, as did not Understand it, or seemed however
Offended both with him and it. It is Dedicated to the Communion in general he
was of; written with a Serious and Clear Mind, and Love to those that were his
Opposers.

I am now come to his Elaborate Apology published in 1675. Entitled: An
Apology for the True Christian Divinity, as the same is held forth and preached
by the People called in scorn Quakers, etc. (...) to King Charles the Second.
It was the most Comprehensive of all his Pieces, published in Latin, Dutch and
English, and at least twice Printed in our own Tongue: It came out at the Close
of a long and sharp Engagement between us of this Kingdom, and a Confederacy of
Adversaries of almost all Persuasions. It was his Happiness both to live in a
more Retired Corner, and to Enjoy, at that Time, a Space of Quiet above his
Brethren: Which, with the Consideration of their Three or Four Years Toil, and
a Sense of Service in himself, put him upon Undertaking and Publishing this
Discourse, as an Essay toward the Prevention of Future Controversy. It First
lays down our A vowed Principles of Belief and Practice, distinguished, from
what our Enemies are pleased to say in our Names, who by making us Erroneous,
give themselves the Easier Task to Confute us; and then Triumph. After he has
Stated our Principles, he has put the Objections, which he had Collected out of
our Adversaries Books, or that he did Apprehend might be made to those
Principles; and Answers them: And lastly Cites diverse Author's both Ancient and
Modern, especially some of the Primitive Ages, for further Illustration and
Confirmation of our said Belief and Practice.

The Method and Style of the Book may be somewhat Singular, and like a Scholar;
for we make that Sort of Learning no part of our Divine Science. But that was
not to show himself; but out of his Tenderness to Scholars, and as far as the
Simplicity and Purity of the Truth would permit, in Condescension to their
Education and Way of Treating of those Points herein handled; Observing the
Apostle's Example of Becoming all unto all (where there was nothing in himself
to forbid it) that he might Win some. In fine, the Book says so much for us and
itself too, that I need say the less; but Recommend it to thy serious perusal,
Reader, as that which may be Instrumental with God's Blessing, to Inform thy
Understanding, Confirm thy Belief, and Comfort thy Mind about the Excellent
Things of God's Kingdom To be sure, thou will meet with the Abused and
Disguised Quaker in his own Shape, Complexion and proper Dress; so that if thou
art not one of them, thou need not longer follow Common Fame or Prejudice
against a People, though Afflicted from the first, yet not Forsaken to this
Day: Ever blessed be the Name of the most High God, for he is Good, for his
Mercy endures for ever!

A Dispute follows this Apology, and in the same Year: It is Entitled, A
Dispute between some Students of Divinity (so called) of Aberdeen, and the
People called Quakers, held in Aberdeen, etc. Opponents or Students, Job.
Lesly, Al. Sheriff, P. Gellie: Defendents, our Author R. Barclay, and George
Keith, (who is a very Learned Man) and they both behaved themselves in Meekness
and Christianity. The Success I leave the Reader to Observe: Only this I must
say to him, it ended in the Convincement of diverse Students of our Principles.

The next Year produced the Tenth Treatise of this Volume, being 1676. It is
called Quakerism Confirmed: A Vindication of the Chief Doctrines and Principles
of the Quakers from the Objections of the Students of Divinity (so called) of
Aberdeen, in their Book, called, Quakerism Canvased. This we see is
Controversial, and therefore I will say the less; only the Reader must needs
observe the Anger and Prejudice, that followed the good Success of the last
Dispute, and to what a Pitch they Carry Men, when Pride or Interest has
kindled them. It was well prayed of David indeed, Create in me a Clean Heart,
and Renew a right Spirit within me; For a Right Frame of Spirit will Govern the
Will and Affections, keep from Mistakes, and hurtful Transports; yea, a Man of
Conversation may want it sometimes, and be in Danger of Disorder. This
Discerns, this Judges, this Directs: Blessed is the Man, that possesses it; he
will not Judge before his Time, nor Judge wrongly; nor be partial, nor peevish,
nor unstable: Which had those Students known, they would not have Resisted the
Lowly Truth, and so Unlearnedly Wrested the Words of it; and it would have been
a better Tutor of Divinity to them, than all the Colleges in the World can
yield. O ye Students and Professors of Divinity! Seek God, where he may be
found, in Christ, and Christ in you by his Light and Spirit: Look not out, for
the Kingdom is there, within you; read plain Scripture: In that Seed, Luke
17.20.
Talent and Leaven it lies Virtually, though as yet not Actively. Your
Obedience to the Holy Manifestations of it in your selves will open its Power
to you; and if you follow on to know, through Obeying, you shall have the End
of that blessed Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is
in Heaven. Spend not your Time in vain, your precious, your most-pretious Time!
Let me a Stranger, but a Well-wishing one, beseech you not to strain your
Brains, break your Rest, and wander far, and gather nothing, but Empty Notions;
Husks indeed. Alas! what do you Overcome? What do you Enjoy by them? One Day in
the Courts of God is more worth than it all; which Obedience to the Light of
Christ in your Hearts brings you to: And there you will Hear, See and Taste of
Divine Things; to which your Studies are but as Bread in a Picture to Real
Bread. Then will your Souls live, and you will have the Key of Holy Scripture,
and know the Meaning of the Holy Men, and the Spirit, by which they Spoke and
Writ (which are Aenigma's to the World) and that without the help of your
Costly and Tedious Commentators, who for the most part do but write by guess
themselves. Then will you possess the Treasures of the holy Ancients, and know,
what the Blessings of the Everlasting Hills mean. This is Nectar and Ambrosia
indeed, the River of God! And here is the Olympus of the Sons of Light, the
Mount Zion of David's Seed, the true Jews, where the Morning-Stars are seen,
and heard to sing together for Joy! -- But I must stop; I thought not of this
Flight of Soul to Aberdeen: But God put it into my Heart thus to Visit you in
particular, the Chief Place of our Author's Labor of Love; and methinks, I
hope and feel, That it shall not be in vain, nor this Remembrance of you, O
Students and Inhabitants of that City and University!

This Holy Spirit of Love, that filled my Pen in the last Paragraph, has
seasoned me for this following Piece, writ in the Year 1677. and honored with
the best of Titles, viz. Universal Love, etc. The Occasion of it, to prevent
the Abuse of it on one hand, and recommend the Use and Practice of it on the
other Hand. There are Two great Extremes, this Discourse observes, and
moderates in the Spirit of Love and Wisdom. Those that suffer their Zeal to
flame so Inordinately, as to burn up all Appearances of Love and Tenderness to
those, that are not of the same Judgment and Interest; which is a
most-Pernicious Work of Satan, that Common Enemy of Mankind, that turns the
Zeal of Man upon his Fellow Creature, that ought to be turned against him only,
the Father of Wickedness. Nor is this done without great Subtilty; for he
Transforms himself into an Angelical Appearance to Compass it: It must be all
called a Zeal for the House of God; which if it only Ate up those that had it,
would be less Mischievous to the World; but it Eats up other Folks: It breaks
Society, violates Relation, Invades Property, Robs God, and destroys Man, a
Fire of Hell, not of Heaven (for truly and excellently Speaking, that is Love.)
This Spirit Destroys instead of Informing: Christ's Spirit Entreats, Informs,
and finally Saves both Body and Soul. People tinctured with this Religious (or
rather Irreligious) Venom, are the worse for their Religion; their Natures are
more Sowred, their Dispositions more Testy; less Bowels, less Humility, a worse
Neighbor: The good Samaritan is of more Worth, than a whole Synagogue of them.
Reader, beware of this Leaven of the Circumcision, the Pharisee, the spiteful
Formalist, that vexed Paul everywhere, and were the great Enemies and Sticklers
against the Truth in Power and Life: Their Generation is yet living, and sown
too much about the World, and seem to be the Lords of it. But for all their
Wisdom and Power, and the fair Show they make in the Flesh, some after one
Fashion, and some after another, Know Reader, that Great is the Truth, and it
shall prevail: The Lamb shall have the Victory, who is the Light; Rev. 21.
and in the Despised Light of the Lamb must the Nations of them that are saved,
Walk.

The other Extreme is quite the Contrary, as all Extremes are, but not so
hurtful to the Concerns of this Life, though perhaps not less pernicious to the
Inward Man, and in which Satan Acts a part for the most part out of Sight, by
which he Craftily Deceives and Ensnares some, that are Simple-hearted, and
Commendable Livers, viz. Loving all equally without due Distinction, whatever
their Persuasions be; and standing loose of all as to a Formal Communion, yet
by their Latitude are (in a sort) of all, and Entitle themselves both by their
Indifferency and their Love, to an Interest in them all, and all to an Interest
in them. Our Author is weighty upon this Head; he shows, what Love is, its
Excellency in its Root and Fruit: What Distinctions and Limitations true Love
observes; and what People and Principles now Extant in the World, have the
Rightfullest Claim to this Universal Love from their Universality and
Gentleness: To which I Recommend the Reader; taking this along with him, That
true Love from Man springs from God's Love to Man. They that have Tasted of
God's Goodness, and have had their own Hearts softened by it, have an
Extraordinary Tenderness to Mankind: It is a most engaging Virtue; It Covers,
Forgives, Excuses, Conquers all; nothing can stand before it. They that have
known the Power of it, feel all Peoples Infirmities, and Sympathise with every
one's Condition: They hate nothing but Sin; they love all, can help and serve
all; but especially the Household of Faith.

But it is speculating this Love too far, to Love all alike, as these
Vniversalists tell us: For in Nature People do Love their Parents, Brethren,
Husbands, Wives and Children better than others; and we cannot but Love the
Religious Family we are of, more, because we feel them nearer to us, than
another. But this (it may be) will not be denied in a sort; but then the proper
Sense is somewhat Equivocated, viz. I find, says one, the Family of God every
where in every Form and Sect, and that is my Church, which I love; and for that
Reason I love every Society, and can Communicate, as I see Cause, with every
one of them. It is Certain, we ought to See and Love the good in all, and so
far as Virtue shines in any Person, whatever is their Persuasion, so far there
is a Loveliness; it is Comely, and of Good Report: And though of a very
differing Apprehension, as to Revealed and Traditional Points of Religion, yet
they are to be loved; nay Enemies, Phil. 4.8. Heb. 6.1, 2. Matt. 5.44.
such as are Injurious to us in the highest Degree: But all this is with a
Grain of Salt, under Restriction, and with due Bounds. For I am not obliged to
Turn Jew, Turk or Indian, because I Honor their Virtue, and Love their
Persons, as Fellow Creatures: Nor am I bound to Love an Enemy with the same
Degree of Love I have for one, that is my Friend, Benefactor or Relation. To
Worship God with those, that, though Sober and Upright among Men, Worship him
in Ways, my Conscience tells me are below, if not Contrary to the Nature of
God, his Revealed Will, and my own Sense of Duty and Worship, is an Extreme,
that makes all Ways of Worship Indifferent, and in Consequence Impeaches the
Dispensations of God, that have been to Carry Men farther, and to Leave and
Forget those things, that are behind: Yea, Phil. 3.13.
it causes the Offense of the Cross of God's Day and Dispensation to Cease,
especially in Trying and Suffering Times; and opens a Door to a dangerous
Temporizing. Paul according to this Doctrine was much in the wrong, Gal. 2.11,
12, 14.
that he Reproved Peter for his Complacency with the Jews: And indeed, our
Savior and his Apostles will not Escape Blameless for Changing that
Constitution, if it were Lawful for them to Continue to Worship God in the
Jewish Manner. Nor did the Primitive Christians well to be devoured by Wild
Beasts, if they might have been permitted to Symbolize with the Heathen: For it
is certain, there were many Extraordinary Gentiles, the Followers of Plato,
Zeno, Seneca, Epictetus, Plutarch, Marc. Aurelius Antoninus, etc. in those
Times, that have left the Just Fame of Virtue to their Names by their sober
Lives and rare VVritings. I may Converse kindly, but I cannot Worship with one
I differ from, even about that very Way of Worship; and if this be a Fault,
we must impeach our Protestant Ancestors too. But on the other hand I must be
Careful, I suffer not my self to be Carried beyond Bounds in Dissent neither:
the Difference must never Run so far, as to beget a Dislike, and much less an
Aversion of Spirit to his Person or Conversation that I Differ from; this were
sinful, yet, alas! too Common, and it may be, an hard Task to Conquer, and a
True Mark of Discipleship in all that Overcome it. God Almighty Root out and
Expel that Make-bait-Spirit among Men; that where there is not an Unity (for
that comes up to Faith and Worship) we may Exercise true Charity and
Forbearance, especially, where there is any sincere Appearance of the Common
Faith, Tit. 1.4. Heb. 1.1, 2.
and the Fruits of a Fear toward God in general. But as God has Appeared at
sundry Times and in diverse Manners, since the World began, so it was the Way
of his Spirit and Method of his Providence to gather up the Sincere-minded into
one, as so many Grains do Form one Lump: And therefore the Apostle to the
Corinthians calls the Believers, one Bread, unto which, 1 Cor. 10.17.
as a Standard, others were to be gathered, and upon which as a Foundation (of
which Christ the Word was the Cornerstone) succeeding Believers were to be
built. And I challenge all the Disaffected Societies and Forms without
Distinction, or these Vniversalists I am upon, to show any other manner of
God's Appearing to Men in any Age, or that in the same Age, or by the Primitive
or first Instruments of such Appearance, there was a Change of Dispensation, or
a Justifiable Declension, from what they testified of and were the Instruments
to gather and settle People in? so that (to Conclude) Universal Love is a
blessed Truth, but with the Degrees, Limitations and Distinctions that the
Spirit of God sets and gives us, whose Fruit it is, and unto which we shall do
well to take heed, Gal. 5.22.
that we at all times Love truly and rightly, not too little nor too much, but
Consider the Object and Motive of our Love, and we cannot fail in that great
Duty of Love to all.

This Treatise of Universal Love is followed by another, styled, An Epistle of
Love, published at the End of the same Year; Writ and sent by our Author, as A
Friendly Advice to the Ambassadors of the Several Princes of Europe, met at
Nimmegen to Consult of the Peace of Christendom; showing the True Cause of War,
and proposing the best Means of Peace: To each of whom also was given one of
his Apologies, which were all received with Respect. This Epistle has
Edification in it to our present Times. The Original Cause of War is not hard
to Assign; the Apostle James has told it us long ago: He asks and Answers the
Question thus; From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Jam. 1.1.
Come they not hence, even from your Lusts, that War in your Members? It is,
what every one feels in himself, that has not Overcome those Lusts, or whose
Consciences are not seared with an hot Iron; though it is also, what very few
make their due Reflections upon; else we should hear of less Blood and Misery.
But if Lust be the Ground of War, what is become of the Doctrine of
Christianity among those supposed Christians? and what are they, that show a
Pleasure in the Accounts of the bloodiest Battles? Can a Christian of Christ's
making look upon the Blood of Men, or hear of it without horror and distress of
Spirit? Less surely can they shed it, or encourage those, that have a Delight
or Part in that Man-slaying Work. But how low and grossly are some Professed
Christians fallen from the Nature of true Religion, and the purity and Power of
the Faith, that was once delivered to the Saints, and through Sufferings by
them to us, Jud. 3.
that hang their Religion and Gospel upon their Swords and Guns, and pin it
upon an Arm of Flesh; as if the Gospel could be Overcome of that which cannot
Touch it.

But how, I pray, did the Primitive Christians maintain their Ground, yea, grew
upon their Adversaries (Poor, Naked Men, and not of the greatest Quality or
Capacity) and finally Vanquish Cruelty it self, but by Faith and Patience?
Hebr. 11.33 -- 42.
Thus they Converted Executioners, Overcame Emperors and Armies, and, by a
Successive Course of Meek and Suffering Integrity, turned the Edge of the
Sword, quenched the Flames of Fire with their own Blood, not the Blood of their
Enemies; and finally, this Holy Constancy translated them from the Theater of
Slaughter to the Palaces and Diadems of Princes. This brings to my Remembrance
a Passage our Author has in this Book, to this Effect; That there is nothing a
Greater Tarnish and Withering to the Protestant Cause, than the Professors of
it betaking themselves, and that early, to Earthly Powers and Weapons to
preserve and promote it; which are not the Weapons of the Apostolical Warfare,
and Inconsistant with the Nature, Power and Glory of Christ's Kingdom. For the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion stands in a Spirit of true Reformation
as well in Life as Doctrine, as plainly decayed, if not lost; and it is to be
feared for that Reason, that God will blow upon all other Ways of supporting
it, especially such, as we thought a Fault in our Enemies in Wordly Arts and
Force. If we would be Zealous to purpose for the Protestant Cause, let us look
to God, and not Man; Examine our selves, Try our selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. Luke
15.8, 9.
see what is wanting in us both to God and Man. Let us Return Home, Light our
own Candle, and sweep our own House, and we shall find the Silver we have lost;
the Zeal, Power and Purity of Soul, that make our Worship acceptable, our
Prayers prevalent, our Lives Blameless and an Ornament to Religion. This Faith,
this Holiness, this Reformation is the Cause of God; and the rest is our own;
though we Gild the Pill, flatter our selves, and deceive others. This Spirit of
Reformation knows no Man, no People, no Church after the Flesh: This goes on
Overturning, Overturning all Will Worship, Man-made Faiths, Humane Inventions
and Traditions of Men about Religion, till he Reigns in the Soul, whose Right
it is to Rule: It is an Holy Leaven, O Reader, that leavens the whole Lump into
its own Nature, and makes fallen, Matt. 13.33. 2 Pet. 1.4.
degenerate, earthly-minded Man, that receives it, a Partaker of the Divine
Nature. This the earliest and purest Protestants aimed at, Heb. 11.
that had their Eye to an Eternal Country, the City, whose Builder and Maker is
God, Free of Humane Considerations, and the Mixture of Worldly Interests and
Advantages. And to Evidence the Truth of what I say, Read the Accounts that the
Faithfullest Writers of those Times have obliged us with, and you shall Taste
the same thing even among the Martyrs themselves, where the Country and
Mechanical People, those of least Account, outdo those of Title, Learning and
Preferment among Churchmen themselves, as to the Life and Purity of
Reformation and Zeal, and Courage for it, as occasion offered to show both.

Wherefore, O ye Protestants of all sorts, Return! Return! Return to your First
Love and Works, before it be too late: Hos. 12.6. Rev. 2.5. Joel. 2. Zach. 1.3.
Rend your Hearts and not your Garments, and turn to the Lord your God: you
have but a little Time, and a great Account to give. Think not to be long safe
from your Enemies without, while you Entertain your greatest Enemy within in
despite of God, his Spirit and Scripture, and your own Pretensions to
Reformation. While you have so many Sins on your Enemy's Side to fight against
you, they will ever have Power to Vex you, if not to Destroy you. And if in
some Evils your Enemies Exceed, yet in Moral Ones you are not a Jot behind
them: And Remember, they have their Beads, but you have your Bibles in your
Hands, when you Transgress. God Almighty make you sensible with True and Godly
Sorrow, a Repentance never to be repented of; that you may Overcome your
Enemies by your Faith, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10.
Prayers and Love, and by the Power of your Example Recommend your Religion,
and lead them out of Error and Blindness. Don't Charge them, and do worse; for
verily, that will undo you in the End. O that God would rend the Heavens, and
come down in Showers of Love, and Quench the Flames, that everywhere devour
his Creation! That it would please him to still the furious Winds, and calm the
raging Seas, and remove that Enmity, which is the Ground of all; and bring the
Nations under his own heavenly Government, where there is no need to Learn War
against one another any more: that they that have erred in Spirit, Isa. 2.4.
Isa. 29 29. Matt. 5.43 -- 47. Chapter 18.21, 22. Romans 12.18
may come to Understanding; and those that have Murmured, may learn Doctrine,
even the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is a Doctrine of Love,
Meekness, Mercy, Forbearance; a Doctrine of Self-denial, Humility and Holiness;
a Doctrine, that Reconciles us to God, and one to another: And no Man can have
the Benefit of the first, that Hates his Brother, and less, that Kills him for
the Love of this World.

O it is a Crying Sin with God, a strong Judgment upon us, and a sure Token
both of more and nearer Calamities, that we are so Hard-hearted and Insensible
of it! Nay, it looks, as if we were not to be moved, unless God himself would
appear in the Air, and send Fire down to Consume all before our Eyes, and our
selves in the Conclusion of the Tragedy. Is not the Wrath of God (do we think)
Revealed sufficiently against us in the Faction, Strife, War, Romans 1.18. Gal.
5.19 -- 23.
Blood and Poverty, that we see almost all over Europe this Day? God Almighty
make People sensible and weary of it, and the Cause of it, their Sins; Sins
against Light, against Conscience and Knowledge; their Unfaithfulness to God
and Man; their Scandalous Immorality, and most Inordinate Love of the World,
the Ground of all Contention and Mischief: That so the Peace of God, which
passes worldly Men's Understanding, may fill all our Hearts through Repentance
and Conversion! Amen.

I have been the longer in my Notes upon this Occasion, than I Expected; but
our present Condition in Europe drew it from me, that needs an Olive Branch,
the Doctrine of Peace, as much as ever.

Our Author's next Treatise was published 1679. being a Vindication of his
Notable Apology for the Christian Divinity professed by the People called
Quakers; in Reply to the Exceptions made against it by one John Brown, in his
Book called, Quakerism the Pathway to Paganism. In which Vindication the
Reader will find the Truth sifted from all the Dirt and Rubbish, with which her
Malicious or Ignorant Adversaries have endeavored to sully her Beauty, and
disfigure and bury her out of the Sight and Knowledge of the People: The Defense
being, like the Apology, performed with much Labor and Exactness, and so fully
and plainly, that it leaves (one would think) no room for Objection with the
Serious and Moderate Inquirer. I do justly Esteem his Apology and this
Vindication in the Front of his Polemical Works: Though I cannot but
everywhere prefer those Labors in him and others, that have least to do with
Controversy, and whose main and immediate Scope is the Engaging of the Soul
into the Love of Holiness, the End of True Religion; for it leads into the
Blessed Communion of the Father, and of the Son, and gives the Possession of
those Comforts and Refreshments, that no Tongue can Express, nor Soul by any
other means Enjoy: For without Holiness (it is determined) no Man shall ever
see the Lord, that is, with Peace. Heb. 12.14
Yet Controversy handled in the Fear of God, and in the Openings of his Light
and Spirit, that is ever present and sufficient to the Help of his People in
all their Services, has also its Edification, especially, where an Earnest and
Tender Desire to Inform the Mistaken, prevails above Private Interest, or any
Party, or Personal Consideration; for God will witness to such Labors, and
follow them with his Blessing: With which, I beseech him, to Crown our Beloved
Friend's Services in this and all other Respects, that tend to the Exaltation
of his Glorious Truth.

The last Tract our Author left us, (and which is the Conclusion of this Volume
and Preface) was writ and published 1686. and is Entitled, The Possibility and
Necessity of the Inward and Immediate Revelation of the Spirit of God toward
the Foundation and Ground of true Faith, proved in a Letter writ in Latin to a
Person of Quality in Holland; and now also put into English. The Person, to
whom it was writ, was a Learned Man, especially in the New Philosophy; very
Free and Friendly, but not Fool enough to Resign to this Doctrine as entirely,
as he ought; yet, I believe, better Reconciled to it, before he died.

As the Revelation of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, of Mercy, and
Consolation, what to Avoid, what to Repent of, what to Desire, what to Do, and
where to wait for Power to Avoid and Do, as we are thereby directed, is the
Revelation chiefly Insisted upon by us; so those that come to Answer the Love
and Mercy of God in the first part of this Revelation, viz. the Sight of Sin,
shall know the Aboundings of it from Day to Day; and from the Evidence and
Authority of their own Experience shall be enabled, nay constrained to
pronounce this Testimony of the Revelation maintained by the People called
Quakers, It Is true, and according to Scripture. I might Advance diverse
Arguments from the Nature of God and the Soul of Man, and from what may be, as
well as what has been, the Truth of this Revelation; but that being done by our
Author in this small Treatise in an Abstract and proper manner, I chose rather
to speak Scripturally and Experimentally: And whoever is Lowly and Poor enough
in Spirit to Try the Truth of what I say, Shall Comprehend with all Saints the
Height, and Depth, and Length, and Breadth of the Love of God in Christ, to the
Souls of Men by the Revelation of that true Light, and Spirit and Grace I have
testified of in this Preface; and which the Wisest of the Men of this World can
at best have but a Shadow and Idea of. Remember, Life is more than Food, and
the Body, than Raiment; so is Bread better than Husks, Substance than Shadow,
Realities than Imaginations of them; which is the best of their Case, that come
not through the Obedience of the Truth and Discipline of Christ's Cross to
enjoy them.

Reader, It is a most Important Point of the first Consideration to Men,
without it no Knowledge of God, nor of Christ, that Reveals God; and without
that Knowledge no Salvation for the Souls of Men. Matt. 11.27. Joh. 17.3.
So that this Volume ends with that, which all Men must begin with, if they
will ever truly know God, and possess Eternal Life, viz. Revelation. Now some
will say, Revelation, why, we have it: Have we not the Scriptures? Do you
pretend to another Revelation? No, not another Truth, than is therein
Mentioned. But this, Reader, will not do; I must ask Questions too: What is
Revealed to thee by them? Thou Read of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, and
have framed an Image or Idea of them in thy mind, but is that Revelation?
Revelation in Religion is Knowledge, Experience, thy own Sight and Sense, that
of which thou art a true Witness. Mind me, I beseech thee: Regeneration is the
great Work of Religion; yea, Religion, true Christian Religion is Regeneration,
as I before hinted, for it is the very End of Christ's Coming; we cannot be
Saved without it: Nay, it is called that very Salvation. Hear the Apostle: But
after the Kindness and Love of God our Savior appeared, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6.
not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his Mercy
he Saved us by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost,
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Now so far is
God Revealed to thee, and art thou truly Religious, as thou art Born again,
Washed and Renewed by the Regenerating Spirit of God, and no further. If the
Scripture were all the Revelation needful, the Wicked Jews must have known it,
as well as the Believing Jews; because they could read them, and had as good or
better Natural Capacities to take the Grammatical and Literal Sense, of what
they Deliver: But they were so far from understanding Christ and his Doctrine,
though he did Wonders, and spoke as we Read, among them, that Christ both tells
us, they were Blind; and Solemnly Thanks his Father, that he had hid those
Secrets from the Wise and Prudent (of that Day) and Revealed them unto Babes.
Mat. 11.25
And to this Christ himself bears Testimony, when he says, That No Man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son Reveals him: Luke
10.22.
And as the Son Reveals the Father, so the Father must bear Witness, Reveal and
Draw to the Son, Joh. 5.37.
or Men cannot come to him, that Opens and Reveals the Father. Thus in that
notable Saying of Christ to Peter, when asking him, But who say thou that I
am? and he Answering, Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God; he replied
upon him: Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, Matt. 16.17
Flesh and Blood has not Revealed this unto thee, but my Father, which is in
Heaven. So that, though Peter both heard and saw abundance, of what Christ said
and did, it was needful to such a Confession, that God should give a further
Revelation of his Son. And if Peter wanted (under all the Advantages he had
above us) this Revelation, can we hope to know him without it? O no, Reader! As
he knew him, thou must know him. For none comes to the Son, but whom the
Father draws; O mind these Drawings in thy own Soul! Joh. 6.44.
And how does the Father draw? Few (Alas!) trouble themselves to weigh these
Matters; and yet they must be Christians for all that. But what say the
Schools, the Critics, and Learned upon these things? Why, they search their
Books, study and beat their Brains, and Imagine the Meaning. Some say, it is by
the Scripture; but that will not do, for that says no such thing: On the Contrary,
that the Father Reveals the Son, and Draws to him, and the Son Reveals the
Father; and not the Scripture, that tells us so, which is neither the Father
nor the Son. Nor indeed, is it Comprehensible, how the Father should Reveal the
Son by Scripture, and the Son the Father; for so the Scripture would Reveal
both, which is the Reciprocal Work of the Father and Son. And were it so,
Caiphas would have known Christ, as well as Peter; and the Wicked would know
both the Father and the Son, as well as the Good, because the Scriptures are as
much in their Power: Which is Absurd and Impossible. But others more Refined
say; It is by the Spirit, opening the Scripture: As indeed the First Reformers,
and all those that have been pushing on a further Reformation, ever since have
spoken; and have founded their Belief of the Divine Authority of the Scripture
upon the Testimony and Revelation of the Spirit in them: These come near. But
then what is this Spirit? how do thou know it, its Manifestations,
Revelations and Operations? and by what Tokens is it to be Known and Discerned?
This is a Question not to be Answered, but by an Experienced Man; for the
Spirit of God Reveals not the deep things of God to the Carnal and Disobedient
Man. Many are the Degrees, Steps and Lessons of this Holy Spirit of God in and
to Man, as Man receives it, and obeys it, and daily inclines to Learn the
Lesson it teaches. I may tell thee, Reader, and I am not far from the Matter,
that this great Work is (as Mechanics and Chemists speak) a Manual Operation,
a spiritual Labor and Travel. Work out your own Salvation, Phil. 2.12, 13.
says the Apostle, with Fear and Trembling; by whom? by him, by whom all
things were made of old, and that makes all things new, Jo. 1.3, 4.
even Christ the Word, in whom is Life, and that Life is the Light of Men.

It is this Sort of Revelation we Contend for, not that of particular Persons
or things, past or to come, which refer not Immediately to the Knowledge and
Work of God in Man; by which God makes himself savingly known to Men. That
Private or Particular sort of Revelation is however called a Revelation also;
as the Visions of the Prophets, Peter's Sense of the Hypocrisy of Ananias and
Sapphira, and Agabus's Foresight by the Holy Ghost of Paul's Sufferings at
Jerusalem: This Sort of Extraordinary Knowledge is truly called Revelation. But
this is not the Revelation we insist upon; though neither is this Ceased. Nor
yet is it those Doctrines, as of the Incarnation of the Son of God, his Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, etc. Confirmed and Enforced upon the Belief of Men
by the Authority of Miracles, which is also another sort of Revelation; which
being once done, need not to be Repeated, and of which the Wicked are as much
Possessors, as the Good; the Matter of Fact I mean, of the visible Transaction
of the Son of God, being Recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, which they also
have in their Hands. But the Inward sight, sense and knowledge of the Will of
God by the Operation of his Light and Spirit shining and working in our Hearts,
and the Spiritual Sense of that blessed Appearance of the Son of God in the
Flesh, and the Moral End of it to our Benefit and Advantage, is no more
Conceivable by Carnal Men, than is Regeneration, without which no Man can enter
into the Kingdom of God. Christ tells us, John 3.5.
there is such a thing, and the two Principles of it, Water and Spirit; but he
does not tell us, what they are? how to be Obtained? what way they Operate? or
we are to Apply them, or our selves to them for that New Birth? No: this is
Reserved a Secret to be unfolded to the Children of Obedience.

O Reader! Great is the Mystery of Godliness! And if the Apostle said it of the
Manifestation of the Son of God in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16
if that be a Mystery (and if a Mystery, it is not to be spelt out, but by the
Revelation of the Spirit) how much more is the Work of Regeneration a Mystery,
that is wholly Inward and Spiritual in its Operation? who is sufficient for
these things? what Doctor? what Philosopher? what sort of Divine? surely none,
but one of God's making alone, that has past through the Degrees of
Regeneration, which is the Experimental, Operative Revelation of the Spirit of
God in Man. And this Revelation is a Fruit of his Omnipresence: He is ever
Present, his Eye beholds the Evil and the Good; Prove. 15.3. Psalm. 33.18. 1 Chr.
28.9. Psalm. 7.9.139.1, 9. Pro. 17.10. Chapter 20.12. Psalm. 139.7.
but in a particular manner is over them that fear him, and trust in his Mercy.
Yea, his Eyes are upon the Righteous, he searches the Heart, and Tryes the
Reins, and sets Man's Thoughts in Order before him. This David knew, when he
Cried out, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
Presence? And why? but because he is present as a Reprover, an Helper, a
Comforter and Savior: Which also made the same Royal Penitent and Prophet in
his Fifty first Psalm pray, Cast me not away from thy Presence, Psalm. 51.11,
12, 13.
and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. This also made him a Preacher to others:
For if God would but hear his Prayer, and Restore to him the Joy of his
Salvation, and uphold him by his Free Spirit, he would teach Transgressors his
Ways, and Sinners should be Converted unto God: Which comes up to all I have
said upon this Head, that the way to be a Child of God, and Minister of his
Truth, is the Inward Experience of the Revelation of the Spirit and Power of
God in the Soul, without which David could not open his Mouth for God. He
elsewhere tells us, how Near God is to his People: The Meek will he Guide: The
Secrets of the Lord are with them that Fear him: The Lord is nigh unto them,
that are of a broken heart; and saves such, as are of a Contrite Spirit. Psalm.
25.9, 14. Ps. 34.9, 18 Ps. 34.8. Ps. 27.10, 11.
He calls them to Taste and See, how good the Lord is to them that fear him:
This was Revelation with a Witness; no less than Two of the Spiritual Senses of
the Soul at once. And though Father and Mother forsake him, God would take him
up; whom he prayed to Teach him and Lead him in a plain Path: And in the Sense
of God's Inward Goodness to his Soul, in this way of Revelation and
Omnipresency, he Triumphs thus: Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil; for thou art with me, Ps. 23.4.
thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Indeed, his whole Book of Psalms is a
continued Evidence of that Revelation we plead for, and he cried, he waited for
and he Enjoyed; who grew so well Acquainted with the Presence of God, that he
could tell us, that in his Presence was Life, Ps. 16.11.
and at his right hand were pleasures for ever.

Nor is this to be wondered at by the Professors of Christianity, since it is
the Covenant God made of Old: To which the Prophet Jeremiah gives Testimony,
That he would put his Law in their Inward Parts, Jer. 31.31 -- 34.
and write it in their Hearts, and he would be their God, and they should be
his People -- and know him from the least to the greatest. To which the Apostle
refers in his Epistle to the Hebrews, as fulfilled in the Christian
Dispensation then on foot: Heb. 8.9, 10 Joel 2.28, 29. Act. 2.16 -- 18. 2 Cor.
6.16, 17.
So Joel of the pouring out of the Spirit on all Flesh, applied by Peter on the
Day of Pentecost. And Paul to the Corinthians goes yet further, and tells them,
That God (in these latter Days) will dwell in them, and walk in them; and
therefore Commands them not to touch the Unclean Thing. Now, if all this can be
without Revelation, Inspiration, Divine Vision and Sensation in the Soul, we
may Conclude, we do not hear, see, feel, taste and smell, what we do hear, see,
feel, taste and smell every Day. I forbear many Scriptures, as, I in them, and
they in me: He that is with you, shall be in you: I am with you to the end of
the World; and that notable Saying of the Apostle; When it pleased God to
Reveal his son in me, Gal. 1.16.
I consulted not with Flesh and Blood: He grounds his Call, Conversion and
Ministry upon it; and can we now hope for a True and Saving Knowledge or
Ministry without it? By no means.

But our Author in this, as much as in any of his Tracts, acts the Scholar, and
has not Chosen this Way of Arguing; having to do with a Learned Man, that he
Esteemed, and would be Entertained in a more Abstract Way of Arguing: Which
made me the Freer to express my self, in this manner, for their sakes, that
easily submit their Arguments to Scripture-Authority, and that Hunger and
Thirst after an Inward Enjoyment of that, of which so many glorious things are
said by the Holy Men of God in Scripture; that they may be freed of Objections,
and savor the Clear and Divine Truth of this Doctrine: That they may know, Jo.
7.37 -- 39.
the Wells are opened now, as well as formerly. and that Rivers of living Water
flow out of the Bellies of true Believers now as well as then; which Christ
spoke of, meaning the Spirit, that should flow in and out of those that
believed in him. And Reader, if thou will be a Witness hereof, despise not the
Day of small things; Embrace the Talent that is given thee, Zach. 4.10.
follow the Reproofs and Teachings of it, Wait upon it for Power to Enable thee
to Overcome, what it Condemns: And if thou will Abstract thy self from the
World, and the Distracting Impressions and Idea's of it, into a true Silence or
Inactivity, and Quietness of Mind, believe me, thou will find the Heavenly
Potter will Mould and Form his Clay, and work in thee mightily to Will and to
Do: For before Life is Death, and before an Active a Passive Life. Remember
these things; and Almighty God give thee an Experimental Understanding of them
to his Glory, and thy Comfort here and for Ever!

Thus Reader, am I come to the End of this Preface, and thou to the Beginning of
this Author's Volume: Read with Consideration; be not hasty to Judge, what at
first may not please thee; but be Ready to Practice what thou likest: That
Knowledge through Obedience may Increase, and GOD, the great Author of all
Good, through his poor Instruments may have his Glory; who is Worthy for ever!
Amen.

ACCORDING to that True and Sincere Love in the Lord, which we had to our Dear
Brother, Robert Barclay, and Christian Respect, which lives in us to his
Blessed Memory, and our Real Esteem and Value of his Faithful Testimony, great
Industry and Labor of Love for promoting the Ever-living Truth, as it is in
Christ, in his Day and Time;

We, whose Names are underwritten, do sincerely Own, and have Satisfaction and
Unity in Truth with this foregoing Preface and Relation, in the behalf of him
the said Robert Barclay, and his Great and Memorable Service, Labors and
Travels in the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: To whom be the
Glory and Dominion for ever!

London the 15. of the 7th. Month 1691. George Whitehead Patrick Livingston
Alexander Seton Benjamin Antrobus Francis Stamper John Vaughton and John Field.


GEORGE FOX HIS TESTIMONY CONCERNING Robert Barclay.
A Testimony concerning our Dear Brother in the Lord, Robert Barclay, who was a
Wise and Faithful Minister of Christ, and Writ many Precious Books in the
Defense of the Truth in English and Latin; and after Translated into French
and Dutch. He was a Scholar, and a Man of Great Parts; and underwent many
Calumnies, Slanders and Reproaches, and Sufferings for the Name of Christ: but
the Lord gave him Power over them all. He Traveled often up and down Scotland,
and in England, and in Holland and Germany, and did good Service for the Lord;
and was a Man of Repute among Men, and Preached the Everlasting Gospel of Christ
Freely, turning People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to
God. And his Father was a Noble Man for the Lord and his Truth, and died in the
Lord: And after, when his Son Robert had fulfilled his Ministry, and finished
his Testimony, he also died in the Lord, and is Blessed, and at Rest, and
Ceased from his Labors, and his Works follow him. Much more might be Written
concerning this Faithful Brother in the Lord, and Pillar in the Church of
Christ; who was a Man I very much loved for his Labor in the Truth: but I
shall leave the Rest to his Countrymen. And the Lord Raise up more Faithful
Laborers in Christ Jesus to stand in his Place; and preserve his Tender Wife
and Children in the Truth, Amen!

The 13th. 9th. Mo. 1690. G. F.

A TESTIMONY to the Memory of ROBERT BARCLAY: By his Faithful Friend William
Penn.
Surprising was the News of the Death of Dear Robert Barclay to me
particularly, from the Share I claimed in him, and the Esteem I had for him:
But that which gave Weight to my Sorrow, was the Loss, that thereby comes to
the Church of God; and especially in Scotland. For his Many and Excellent Gifts
by Nature, Acquisition and Grace, his Zeal and Integrity, his Labor and Love
so effectually shown in the time he lived, both in his Ministry, Writings and
other Services, and that he lived no longer, who was so well fitted to live for
the Service and Honor of the Truth, and the good of God's People, must render
his Death more Afflicting to all those, that desire to be reckoned of that
Number. It was a Complaint of Old, that the Righteous were taken away, and none
laid it to heart; I pray God, that the Taking away of this Accomplished
Minister of Christ in the Prime of his Age, with other Precious and Honorable
Brethren of late, may be laid close to heart by the Friends of God, especially
where his and their Service lay, and he and they have been most Conversant.

The Overcasting of so many bright Stars almost together, and of the First
Magnitude in our Horizon, from our Bodily View, is not the least Simptome or
Token to me of an Approaching Storm, and perhaps so dreadful, that we may have
fresh cause to think them Happy, that are delivered from the Evils and
Miseries, that may ensue. But this also calls every one home to his own
Dwelling and Tent, to find and feel him that Repairs all Losses, and Supplys
all Wants, and is All to a Faithful People, that they can need or desire.

This Worthy Young Man of God, whose Character I write (as well for their
Example and Encouragement, that have, or hereafter may receive the Eternal
Truth, in which he lived and died, and lives forever, as for a Testimony to the
Power and Goodness of God in raising him up to his Church, and to his lasting
Memorial in the Churches of Christ, which is blessed for ever) was the Son of
Colonel David Barclay, descended of the Barclays of Mathers in the Kingdom of
Scotland, an Ancient and Honorable Family among Men, and of Katherine Gourdon,
from the Gourdons of the House of the Duke of Gourdon. He was born at Edinburgh
in the year 1648. Educated in France; had the advantage of that Tongue, as well
as the Latin. He returned to Scotland about 1664, being 16 years of Age, where
by the Example and Instruction of his Honest and Worthy Father, that in his
Absence had Received the Everlasting Truth, and his Converse with other
Servants of God, he came to See and Taste an Excellency in it; and was Convinced
about the year 1667. and Publicly owned the Testimony of the true Light
enlightening every Man: and came Early forth a Zealous and Fervent Witness for
it; enduring the Cross, and despising the Shame, that attended his
Discipleship: and received the Gift of the Ministry, as his greatest Honor; in
which he labored to bring others to God, and his Labor was not in vain in the
Lord. He was much exercised in Controversy, from the many Contradictions, that
fell upon the Truth, and upon him for its sake in his own Country chiefly; in
which he ever acquitted himself with Honor to the Truth; particularly by his
Apology for the Christian Divinity Professed by the People called Quakers,
which contains a Collection of our Principles, our Enemies Objections, and our
Answers, Augmented and Illustrated closely and amply with many Authorities for
Confirmation. Also his Book of Church Government distinguishing between Tyranny
and Anarchy, Imposition and Lawlessness; occasioned by the Scruples of some,
and Partialities of others, that had a tendency to a Division among us: They
are standing Books of sound Judgment, and good Service to the Truth and Church
of God. Nor must his Scripture-Catechism be forgotten, in that it opens the
Mind of Truth upon points of Doctrine in the words of the Holy Ghost; excluding
all Humane Glosses or Interpretation: which is an easy, safe and peaceable
Method, the tendency of it being to Silence and Commend the Curiosity of Man to
the Text, which all own; and there leave Controversy, as the best Method to
Unity and Peace, next that of the Spirit it self. And indeed, it was exactly
suitable to his own Disposition, that preferred Truth before Victory, and Peace
and Unity before Nicities, and a good Life before Worldly Learning.

We sometimes Traveled together both in this Kingdom, and in Holland, and some
parts of Germany, and were Inward in diverse Services from first to last: and
the Apprehension and Sense I had of him, was this, He loved the Truth and Way
of God, as Revealed among us, above all the World, and was not ashamed of it
before Men; but Bold and Able in Maintaining it: Sound in Judgment, Strong in
Argument, Cheerful in Travails and Sufferings; of a pleasant Disposition, yet
Solid, Plain and Exemplary in his Conversation. He was a Learned Man, a good
Christian, an Able Minister, a Dutiful Son, a Loving Husband, a Tender and
Careful Father, an Easy Master, and a good and kind Neighbor and Friend.
These Eminent Qualities in one, that had Employed them so serviceably, and that
had not lived much above half the life of a Man (having outlived his Father but
four years, and died at least Thirty years short of his Age) aggravates the
Loss of him, especially in that Nation, where he lived.

O Friends, if Precious in the Eyes of the Lord be the Death of his Saints,
ought not their Labors and Death to be Precious to the Lord's People?
Therefore I exhort those, that have survived this and other Worthy and
Honorable Brethren, to take Care, that their Minds are not overcharged, and
that they do not suffer their first Love on any score to Cool to those, that
Travail and Labor in the Word and Doctrine for their good: but that through
their Faithfulness they may come to partake of like Precious Ministry, as well
as of like Precious Faith; that so the great Harvest, that is at the door, may
be supplied with Able and Diligent Laborers. But more especially you of the
Scotch Nation, and most of all you, his Near, Tender and Affectionate
Relations, Wait to feel your Loss made up in and by him, that gives Liberally,
and upbraideth not; who is the best Teacher, Husband, Father and Master, who
Repairs our Losses with Advantage: for in him we Loose nothing, that we Loose,
because we have it again with Advantage even in this Life, and Fellowship, that
outlives time, and endures and abides forever! In which the Lord preserve us
all to the end of our Race, that we may run it with Stedfastness, and finish it
with Everlasting Joy.

William Penn.

Patrick Livingstone his TESTIMONY CONCERNING ROBERT BARCLAY.
THERE is something, that rests upon my Spirit, to say concerning my Dearly
Beloved Friend and Kinsman, Robert Barclay: Who was not only my Kinsman after
the Flesh, but of a nearer and dearer Kindred, and Relation of a more Noble
Seed and Offspring, which is not Corruptible, but Incorruptible; and my Dear
Fellow Laborer in the Service of the Gospel, as also my Fellow-Sufferer for
the Truth in Aberdeen-Prison.

And I have more in my heart concerning him, than I can Express; nor do I find
it meet to say all I can truly Testify of him.

For I had some small Knowledge of him, before he came to Profess the Truth;
and ever since he came forth amongst us, I have had many Opportunities to be
Refreshed with him in his Doctrine, after he came to have a Public Testimony
amongst us; and also in his Conversation both before and since.

He was all-along a Man for Peace, and an Enemy to Strife and Dissension; but
was a Peacemaker: I never knew him at any time to be in Passion or Anger.

He was a Man of a sweet, pleasant and cheerful Temper, and above many for
Evenness of Spirit: a Man of deep Reach in his Judgment and Understanding of
heavenly things, and also of the things that concerned him to know of this Life
amongst Men.

He was Quick and Ready in his Understanding of matters of Difference or
Controversy; and had a notable Way of Deciding and Composing of them.

He was a Man of a public Spirit, and labored for the public Good of all;
but especially of those he was in Fellowship with.

Both as to the Inward and Outward he was a blameless Man in his Conversation;
and he was both Solid, Sound and Comprehensive, in his Writings.

And as for his Doctrine, he was Plain and Clear to the meanest Capacity;
Discreet and Oblidging therein.

And he was a Man generally Beloved of all, both of great and small; unless it
were those that hated him for the Truth's sake, and his Vindicating of it both
in Word and Writing against those that Opposed it: as his Writings will plainly
demonstrate to all Impartial Readers of them.

And Courteous Reader, I being now satisfied with many more, that he is at his
Rest with the Lord, and Reaps the Reward of his Trials, Travails and Sufferings
for the Truth's sake both inwardly and outwardly, and now is out of the Reach,
of what Envy and Malice can do against him; his Writings are Recommended to thy
Serious and Impartial Perusal, wherein thou may see more of him, than at
present I can say: And so I remain

A Lover of Truth and Righteousness, Patrick Livingstone.
Aberdeen the 16th. day of the 1st. month, 1691.
THE TESTIMONY OF Andrew Jaffray CONCERNING ROBERT BARCLAY.
THIS Testimony I have in my Heart to give forth concerning my Dear Brother,
who was one of the Lord's Worthies, and has obtained the Crown of Victory over
all the Rage of the Enemy and his Instruments, who still seek to make War with
the Remnant of the Woman's Seed, who keep the Commandments of God: But they and
their Rage and Enmity is Limited, blessed be the Lord our God for ever! And the
Hairs of the Heads of the Faithful are numbered, and the Angels of God pitch
their Tents about them, that fear him in all their Troubles, and amidst all the
Rage and Slanderous Tongues of this World, that are set on Fire: as this
Faithful and Worthy Servant of the Lord and his Everlasting Truth was a Living
Witness of God's Faithfulness and Power in his Preservation; who being Dead (as
to the Body) yet speaks, and lives, and walks with him for ever, in whom
his Delight and Joy was, while in the Body, beyond all the Honors, Vain
Pleasures and Enjoyments from below.

And though the Lord had Endued him with many large Gifts and Abilities, even
as a Man beyond many (as was well known) so as to be able to Converse with the
Greatest; yet known it is to many of the Upright, that his chief Desire and
Delight was to lay out all these Parts and Qualifications for doing good unto
all, but especially to the Household of Faith: as the many great Services for
Truth and Deliverances of Suffering Friends, which the Lord made him an
Instrument of, both in his own Native Country, and in other Nations, can bear
Witness. So that I may truly say, in all his great Endowments it was his
Delight to make them serviceable to the true Israel of God; and his Sweet
Savor and Memorial shall live (in many of their Hearts, and among all Sober,
Discreet and Moderate People, who knew him) to Generations to come. And I am
very bold to say, his Death could not but be matter of Exercise and Sorrow to
all.

He was a Man, that laid out himself in the Ability of the large Understanding,
given him to set forth the Beauty and Infallibility of the Grounds and
Excellent Principles of Truth, and to open and prove the same over all
Opposition of Gainsayers, to the reaching of the Understanding of many of the
Great and Learned of the World, both at home and abroad, and to the begetting a
better Opinion and Judgment concerning both the Principles and Practices of
God's People (called in Derision Quakers) than had been held forth by the Craft
and Malice of the Priests and others to be in the beginning, as Fools, Madmen,
etc. and holding non-sensical and unreasonable, as well as Unscriptural
Whimsies, and so forth. But God, who is Light, is wipeing away the Reproaches
and Slanders off his Blessed Truth and People, and will more and more exalt the
Standard and Ensign thereof to gather the Nations* unto it out of their
Cruelties, Lusts and Roarings against one another, and of the overflowing of
all Abominations among them, to the great provo^ing of God's Wrath.

Reformation from all which will never be known, nor Deliverance from the
Bondage and Miseries thereby occasioned, by all the Might, Power and Fightings
of the Carnal Sword, nor Politic Devices of Men; but only by the blessed
Power, Spirit and Grace of God, which has appeared to all, to that very end to
teach to deny Ungodliness and wordly Lusts, and to live soberly, Righteously
and Godly in this present World, if Men would turn to believe in and obey it.
Which is our Testimony and Holy Principle we direct all unto; and which this
Blessed Servant of the Church laid out himself in his many Excellent Writings
(especially his Apology) to promulgate through the World with blessed Success
not only in Printing, but in Traveling, having gone through a great part of
Germany, Holland and other Countries in the Service of the Truth: And the Lord
blessed him every way therein.

He was an Exemplary Husband, Parent and Master in his Family; so that the
Beauty, good Order, Holiness, Gravity and Lowliness of the Truth shined
therein, I can say, to my Refreshment and many others, as in a Quiet Habitation.

He was a Man of great Meekness, Sweetness and Lowliness of Spirit, and of such
a bearing, contented Mind, that though a Man of such Parts, and great Authority
over Evil in his Servants and others, yet kept in such a Dominion over any
thing, that would have disordered his own Syirit, that I can truly say, I never
saw him in any peevish, angry, brittle or disordered Temper, since ever I knew
him; though I had as much Intimacy and Frequency of Concerns with him, as most
here-away.

He was so far from being lifted up or Exalted by the great Gifts he had
received from his Maker, both in the Truth, and as a Man, that I can say, I
have often desired to grow in the plain, downright, humble and lowly Spirit,
wherein he became as weak with the weakest, and poor with the poorest, and low
with the lowest; as well as he could be deep with them that were deep: So that
in a good Measure he had learned to become all things to all Men, with a true
and upright Endeavor to Gain some.

I can say, I have parted with a most- Entire Friend and Counselor: But glory
to him who lives for ever! through great Mercy I know him, who is the Fountain
of all Wisdom, Righteousness, Love and Pity; who I trust will make up this
great Loss not only to me, but to his blessed People and Church, especially in
this his Native Country of Scotland, in and to which he had made him an
Ornament, and as a Star and shining Light. And Oh! that he may make me, and all
whom he has Convinced of his precious Truth in our Native Country, whether
living therein, or abroad, to shine forth in the Glory, Beauty and Virtue
thereof, and as the first Fruits thereof, and Witnesses of the great Glory,
that shall livingly arise therein; though perhaps ushered in by great
Tribulations, when our God shall wipe away the Reproaches thereof, and change
its name from Barren or Forsaken: because our God has a true, though a small
Seed therein, in which he delights, and is Married thereunto; and many shall
be the Children of the Lamb's Marriage therein in due time, when the Leaven of
the Pharisees is purged out, and the Bastard-Births of the Adulteresses and
Whoredoms of a false Profession therein comes to be seen, and turned from.

As concerning this our Dear Friend R. B. The Lord soon began his Work with
him, shortly after he was brought home from France, wherein in his Young and
Tender Years he was brought up at Paris under his Uncle: And though at his
Return thence but about sixteen Years, yet it having pleased the Lord to bring
his Dear and Worthy Father into his most-precious Truth, he having thereby
occasion to be in the Meetings of God's Chosen People, who Worship him in his
own Name, Spirit and Power, (and not in the Words of Man's Wisdom and
Preparation) he was by the Virtue and Efficacious Life of this Blessed Power
shortly after reached, and that in the Time of Silence (a Mystery to the
World;) and came so fast to grow therein through his great Love and
Watchfulness to the Inward Appearance thereof, that not long after he was
called out to the Public Ministry, and declaring abroad what his Eyes had
seen, and his Hands had handled of this pure Word of Life. Yea, the Lord who
loved him, counted him worthy so Early to Call him to some Weighty and Hard
Services for his Truth in our Nation, that a little after his coming out of the
Age of Minority (as it is called) he was made willing in the Day of God's Power
to give up his Body as a Sign and Wonder to this Generation, and to deny
himself and all in him as a Man, so far as to become a Fool for his sake, whom
he loved, in going in Obedience to his Will in Sackcloth and Ashes through
Three of the Chief Streets of the City of Aberdeen: As his Testimony printed
concerning it holds forth his Service therein; besides some weighty Services at
several Steeple Houses, and Sufferings in Prison for the Truth's Sake.

And I cannot forbear to touch at his great Care and Zeal, that Unity, Love and
Sweetness might be preserved among God's Children over all the Cunning
Endeavors of the Enemy to the contrary.

What shall I more say concerning this Servant of the Lord, but that Blessed
are the dead, that die in the Lord! Yea, says the Spirit, from henceforth they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. He laid down the Body in
the Holy and Honorable Truth, wherein he had served it about Twenty Three
Years, upon the Third Day of the Eighth Month 1690. near the Forty Second Year
of his Age, at his own House of Vrie in Scotland; and it was laid in his own
Burial-Ground there, upon the sixth Day of the same Month before many Friends
and other People.

Kings-wells the Ninth of the Eighth Month 1690. Andrew Iaffray.

[These following Lines were written by a Person of Repute in Scotland, who is
not One of those called Quakers.]
An Epitaph upon that Faithful Servant of the Lord ROBERT BARCLAY of Vrie.
THere be too Few, that take a true delight
On Virtuous Subjects a few Lines to Write;
In this degenerate Age most Poets uses
On Scurril Rimes for to Extend their Muses:
On Gilded Nothings they their Fancies strain,
Such as patched Plays, like to unhing their Brain;
And think by this their Hearers to Excite,
To satiate their Carnal Appetite:
As if to Forge and Lie were not a Crime;
They thus exhaust their Talent, and their Time.
To shun this Scilla, and my self Acquit
Unto his Friends, I offer this small Mite.
I do Confess, my Mind I cannot Raise
To give the Defunct his deserved Praise:
Him to Commend I need not Call the Arts,
He was Endu'd with Piety and Parts.
His Memory, I Am sure, is dear to all,
Who love the Truth, and wishes Babel's Fall;
Whilst here on Earth he did not Faint, nor Tire
To Preach Christ 's Will without a Farthing Hire.
Though Crosses, Losses, and Imprisonment
Stood in his Way, he boldly over them went.
His Soaring Soul by Grace and Education
Might once been said the Glory of the Nation:
His Elevated Virtue shined so Clear,
It did procure him Love from Prince and Peer.
He had from Heaven his Mission and Vocation,
Which faithfully he showed to every Nation:
Where e're he Traveled, or made some Abode,
He preached Repentance, and the Fear of God.
He as God's Instrument did often bring
The parched Souls to taste the living Spring;
These did stand up for Truth with Heart and Mind,
Who formerly were Bondslaves, and were blind:
God's Strength in him and Efficacious Power
Did at his Doctrine make the Devils lowre.
But the Wise Lord, who knows secret Hearts,
And is the Searcher of the inner parts,
Lest that our Roving Minds should gad abroad,
And fix on something else besides our God,
Did Call him hence, secure from Carnal Fears
He Reaps with Joy, what he did Sow in Tears.
Now since all Flesh must nakedly Appear
At God's Tribunal, there their 'Counts to clear,
And since that we are Living Lumps of Clay,
Which the Great Potter can to Ashes bray,
Learn, Readers all, before your Glass be Run,
To deck your Souls, e're they to Judgment come.
Arthur Forbes of Brux.

A Table of the Authors Cited in this Volume.
A.
Alanus Page 493 Amandus Polanus Page 387 Ambrosius Ansbertus Page 556
Ambrosius Mediolanensis Page 328 525, 552, 556, 558, 563 Amesius Page 515 386
Anselmus Bishop of Canterbury Page 557 Antiochus Page 557 Apollinarius Page 335
Athanasius Page 271, 525, 552 Augustinus Baker Page 459, 460 Augustinus Page
270, 286, 303, 311, 340, 363, 378, 395, 398, 493, 494 Author de Vocatione
Gentium Page 327, 352
B
Basil the Great Page 552, 555, 356. Beda Page 356 Bellarmin Page 369 524
Bernard Page 272, 459, 466 Bertius Page 388 Beza Page 321, 377, 522 Borhaeus
Page 377, 380 Buchanan Page 363 Bucerus Page 377 Bullinger Page 376
C
Calvin Page 282, 283, 296, 321, 378 384, 385, 429, 430, 443, 487, 491, 498,
499 Carolostadius Page 526 Casaubonus Page 538 Cassiodorus Page 556 Castellio
Page 527 Catechism of Westminster Page 388 Chamierus Page 376 Chemnitius Page
378 Christianus Druthmarus Page 556 Chromatius Page 556, 558 Chrysostom Page
327, 328, 516, 553, 551 Cicero Page 361 Claudius Albertus Inuncanus Page 381
Clemens Alexandrinus Page 270, 351, 352 Conference of Oldenburgh El. D. Page
400 Confession of Augsburgh. Page 386 400 Confession of the French Churches
Page 296 Confession of faith of the Churches of Holland Page 296, 297
Confession of the Divines at Westminster Page 297, 301, 367 Council Aszansick
Page 398 Council of Carthage Page 297 Council of Florence Page 289 Council of
Laodicea Page 297 Council of Trent Page 317, 386, 526 Cyprian Page 525, 556,
558 Cyrillus Alexandrinus Page 272, 344, 347, 348, 557, 558
D
Dalleus Page 513 Diodorus Siculus Page 555
E
Epictetus Page 269 Epiphanius Page 303, 556 Erasmus Page 539, 556, 558 Essius
Page 381 Eusebius Page 289 Eutyches Page 334 Euthymius Page 556, 558
F
Forbes Page 377, 378 Franciscus Lambertus Page 420, 462, 463 Fredericus
Sylvius Page 560, 564
G
Gelasius Page 398 Gentiletus Page 386 Gerardus Vossius Page 349, 387, 400
Godeau Page 540 Gregory the Great Page 272 Gregorius Nazianzenus Page 556
Gregorius Nyssenus Page 556
H
Haymo Page 556 Hierom, Page 270, 303, 305, 398, 525, 538, 552, 553, 556, 558
Hilarious Page 524, 525, 556 Hildebrand Page 358 Himmelius Page 381 History of
the Council of Trent Page 526, 527 History of the Reformation of France Page
537 Hosius Page 525 Hugo Grotius Page 552, 555,
I
James Coret Page 385 James Howel Page 559 Johannes Damascenus Page 556
Johannes Ferus Page 558 Johannes Floracensis Page 493 John Huss Page 309 John
Maresius Page 559, 560 Isidorus Hispalensis Page 556 Isidorus Pelusiota Page
556 Justin Martyr Page 352, 362, 555, 558, 560, 562
L
Lactantius Page 362 Lucas Osiander Page 329, 424, 425, Ludovicus Vives Page
558, 564 Luther Page 272, 328, 365, 366, 410, 526, 539
M
Marcio Page 525, 555 Martyr Page 321 Melanchthon Page 272, 377, 400 Musculus
Page 386
N
Nicolaus Arnoldus of Fran^quer Page 409, 421, 422, 433, 441, 442, 486, 493
O
Oecumenius Page 556 Origin Page 272, 425, 555, 558, 563 Otho Brunsfeldius Page
556
P
Papirius Masson Page 493 Paraeus Page 321, 375 Paschasius Rathbertus Page 556
Paulus Riccius Page 491, 505 Philo Judaeus Page 555, 559 Pithaeus Page 493
Phocylides Page 362 Piscator Page 321 Platina Page 415 Plato, Page 361, 555
Plotinus Page 362 Polybius Page 553 Polycarpus Page 289, 555 Prosper Page 327,
328 Pythagoras Page 361, 555
Q
Quintilianus Page 555 Quintus Curtius Page ibid.
R
Reinerius Page 532 Richard Baxter Page 381, 387
S
Seneca Page 361 Smith Doctor in Cambridge Page 272 Stobaeus Page 555 Sulpitius
Severus Page 561 Synod Arelatensian Page 328 Synod of Dort Page 396, 397, 320
T
Tertullian Page 271, 525, 526, 555^punc; 558, 559 Theophilactus Page 556
Thomas Aquinas Page 286 Thysius Page 376
V
Victor Antiochenus Page 349 Vincentius Lyrinensis Page 56^
W
Waldenses Page 556 Wicklef Page 55^
Z
Zanchius Page 321, 376, 378* 38^ Zwinglius Page 317, 321, 381
The CONTENTS of the Ensuing Volume, directing to the Pages of the Several
Tracts therein contained, viz.
I. TRuth Cleared of Calumnies: being an Answer to a Dialogue between a Quaker,
and a Stable Christian, etc. (1670) 1 II. Some things of weighty Concernment
proposed in meekness and love by way of Queries, to the serious Consideration
of the Inhabitants of Aberdeen, added by way of Appendix to Truth Cleared of
Calumnies, etc. (1670) 49 III. William Mitchell Unmasked: being an Answer to
his Animadversions upon Truth Cleared of Calumnies. (1671) 53 IV. A seasonable
Warning and Exhortation to and Expostulation with the Inhabitants of Aberdeen,
concerning this present Dispensation and Day of God's living Visitation toward
them: with an Answer to some Queries Annexed, (1672) 105 107 V. A Catechism and
Confession of Faith approved of, and agreed unto by the general Assembly of the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself Chief Speaker in and among
them, etc. (1673) 109 VI. The Anarchy of the Ranters, and other Libertines; the
Hierarchy of the Romanists, and other pretended Churches, equally Refused and
Refuted, in a twofold Apology for the Churches and People of God called
Quakers, etc. (1674) 181 VII. A Vindication of the preceding Tract, viz. the
Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. serving as an Explanatory Postscript thereof,
(1679) 237 VIII. An Apology for the True Christian Divinity, as the same is
held forth and Preached by the People called in scorn Quakers, etc, (...) to K.
Charles the Second. (1675) 251 IX. A Dispute between some Students of Divinity
(so called) of Aberdeen, and the People called Quakers, held in Aberdeen:
Opponents or Students, John Lesly, Al. Sheriff, P. Gellie* Defendents, R.
Barclay and G. Keith, etc. 569 With the Author's Offer to Jo. Menzies,
Professor of Divinity (so called) G. Meldrum, Minister at Aberdeen, and W.
Mitchell, Catechist at Foot of Dee, etc. And G. K. his Postscript, (1675.) 589
592
X. Quakerism Confirmed: A Vindication of the chief Doctrines and Principles of
the Quakers, from the Objections of the Students aforesaid, in their Book
called, Quakerism Convased: (1676.) 597 XI. Universal Love Considered, and
Established upon its Right Foundation, etc. (1676.) 675 XII. An Epistle of Love
and Friendly Advice to the Ambassadors of the several Princes of Europe, met at
Nimmegen to Consult the Peace of Christendom, etc. (1677.) 706 882 XIII. R. B
's. Apology for the True Christian Divinity Vindicated from John Brown's
pretended Confutation, etc. with L. S's Letter to R. M. C. (1679.) 717 XIV. The
Possibility and Necessity of the Inward and Immediate Revelation of the Spirit
of God, toward the Foundation and Ground of true Faith, proved; in a Letter
writ in Latin to a Person of Quality in Holland: and now also put into
English. (1686.) 892 Whereunto is added
The Author 's Testimony concerning his Father, (1686.) 907 Also an
Alphabetical Table at the End, of the Chief Matters and Things Contained in
this Volume. 908

Truth Cleared of Calumnies: Where-in a BOOK, Entitled, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A
QUAKER AND A Stable Christian, (Printed at ABERDEEN, And upon good ground
judged to be writ by WILLIAM MITCHELL, a Preacher near by it, or at least that
he had the chief Hand in it) is Examined, and the Dis-ingenuity of the Author
in his Representing the QVAKERS, is Discovered.

HERE IS ALSO Their CASE truly Stated, Cleared, Demonstrated, and the
OBJECTIONS of their Opposers Answered, according to Truth, Scripture, and Right
Reason.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

ISA. 53.1. Who has believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord
Revealed?

JOHN 5.39, 40. Ye search the Scriptures, because in them ye think to have
Eternal Life: and they are they, which Testify of me; and ye will not come unto
me, that ye may have Life.

MATTHEW. 5.11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and say all manner of
evil against you falsely for my sake.

ACTS 24.14. After the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my
Fathers.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-street. 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
FOR thy better understanding the Matters handled in this Treatise, I thought
fit to premise somewhat by way of Preface; and indeed the nature of the thing
calls for it, that thou may receive a true Information concerning the
People here pleaded for; and so generally opposed; but more particularly in the
City of Aberdeen, that thou may understand, how the Case stands betwixt them,
and their Adversaries in it.

Know then, that after the Lord had raised up the Witnesses of this Day, and
had opened in them, and unto them the Light and Glory thereof, diverse of them
at sundry times were moved of the Lord to come into these Parts, and unto the
Town of Aberdeen, in love to the Seed, which there was to be gathered; but
their Acceptance for diverse years together, was very unsuitable.

For the Enemy that had wrought, and was exalted in the Mystery of Iniquity, to
darken the appearance of this day, had prepared and stirred up his Ministers,
to resist them and their Testimony, by aspersing them with many gross
Calumnies, Lies, and Reproaches, as demented, distracted, bodily possessed of
the Devil, practicing Abominations under color of being led to them by the
Spirit; and as to their Principles, blasphemous deniers of the true Christ, of
Heaven, Hell, Angels, the Resurrection of the Body and Day of Judgment,
Inconsistent with Magistracy, nothing better then John of Leyden and his
Accomplices. This was the vulgar and familiar Language of the Pulpits, which was
for a time received for unquestionable Truth; till about the Year 1663. some
sober and serious Professors, in and about the said Town, did begin to weigh
these things more narrowly, and find the savor of that Life in the Testimony
of that so much reproached People, which some years before had stirred in
others, who were now come to a great loss and decay; and this gave them
occasion to examine the Principles and Ways of that People more exactly, which
proving upon inquiry, to be far otherways then they had been represented, gave
them a further occasion to see the Integrity and soundness of that despised
People, and of their Principles, on the one hand; and on the other, to see the
prejudiced Disingenuity and Enmity of their Accusers. In these the Lord caused
his Word to prosper, (who were few in number, yet noted as to their sobriety in
their former way of Profession) and raised them up to own that People and their
Testimony, and to become One with them. Now their Adversaries finding nothing
in these, whom the Lord had raised up in these Parts, whereof to Accuse them,
as to their Conversation, these Calumnies must be cast upon Strangers living
some hundred Miles distant, where these Untruths cannot be so easily disproved;
but as to these at home, the Tune must be turned. Therefore George Meldrum, who
has more particularly espoused the Quarrel against Truth and its Followers,
than any of his Brethren, begins to say, That it is no wonder to see Quakers
forbear gross Out-breakings, for that Heretics have formerly come as great a
length (but surely, Abstinence from gross Out-breakings, and a clean outward
Conversation, is no good Argument against the Quakers,) so now the Clamor is,
though they have been Professors, and that noted Ones too, and though they be
honest in their Conversation, yet they are deluded and deceived, and are
Deceivers. And thus as of old, the Truth and the Witnesses of it have always
been reproached by those of the Pharisaical Spirit; so now: for sometimes they
said, Christ had a Devil, sometimes the Apostles are drunk, and other times
mad. Since these things have thus occurred, there has been no little Industry
used, to suppress this People by Threatenings and Persecution, (on which account
diverse of our Friends have been cast into Prison, and some detained long in, of
the said Town,) and also by Preaching and Writing, of which for thy Information
receive this Account.

There were Thirty Queries sent by the Bishop of Aberdeen (so called) to
Alexander Jaffray: Also about the same time, a Paper of three or four sheets
subscribed by G. M. Entitled, The State of the Controversy betwixt the
Protestants and the Quakers. The Thirty Queries were not long after answered by
G. K. in respect of A. J. his sickness at that time, and returned to him from
A. J. And some time afterward, George Meldrum his Paper, called, The State of
the Controversy, etc. was answered by G. K. to which Papers of G. K. somewhat
was premised by A. J. which Papers being several times called for, (but
particularly in a Letter, from G. M. his own hand to A. J. wherein he entreats
for an Answer, that he might know, as he said, in what things we did differ, or
in what things we only seemed to differ) were sent to him within nine Months
after the receipt of G. M. his Papers. Before all which a Sermon on purpose was
preached by G. M. against the Quakers in the ninth Month 1666. wherein the sum
of both his Papers was asserted, only that it was digested in a Pulpit-way, and
introduced with an insinuating Discourse of his pretended kindness for the
persons of some Quakers, and his unwillingness to meddle with them, were it not
his Office, and Zeal for the Truth did engage him to it, but if it had been so
indeed, he would have said no more of them then the truth; whereas it is
stuffed with Lies, which are positively asserted to be the Quakers Principles,
by this pretended Preacher of the Gospel from his Chair of Verity, (so called,)
or rather of Falsehood: whereas yet G. M. his Papers aforementioned, were not
so much as sent, far less answered, by which, according to the words of his own
Letter abovementioned, he was to receive an Understanding of the Differences,
and yet before he received this Understanding, whilst he was ignorant of the
Differences, according to his own Confession, he is not ashamed to forge
numbers of Lies upon the Lord's People; and as if they had been Truths,
consisting in his Knowledge, to vent them before a Public Auditory: which
Sermon is largely answered by G. K. together with some Animadversions upon it
from A. J. Also several Papers past betwixt W. M. and G. K. which had their
rise from some Queries sent by P. L. to W. M. answered by W. M. to which was
returned a Reply by P. L. the same was Replied to by G. K. which having
received a Reply from W. M. was again Replied to at length by G. K. It is now
Two years and upwards, since the last Papers, from our Friends hands, were
returned to the respective Priests; unto which, as yet, there is no Answer, nor
any of them published; but instead of all, at last comes out a Dialogue (of
which the Proverb is verified, Parturiunt Montes, nascitur Mus) subscribed by
no Hand, but generally understood to be W. M. and by him not denied: which
whether it be to deal fairly or ingenuously, the Ingenuous may judge.

Ingenuous Dealing would have stated things, as related from our own Friends
Hands, and given an Account of the many Scripture-Proofs and Arguments made use
of in our Friends Papers, which this Author in his Dialogue has done nothing
less, but deceitfully has represented us, (considering what had past before,
to which he himself, whoever he is, could not but be privy) and disingenuously
has dissembled and waved almost all the Scripture-Proofs and Arguments, used
by our Friends in their aforesaid Papers, as any may see, who are willing to
look into the said Papers, Copies of which are in several Hands, and any who
desire to read them, may have them readily from our Friends.

Therefore, however this Work of his may satisfy and deceive a benighted
Multitude, whose Faith is pinned upon other Men's sleeves, nevertheless I hope,
it shall be an occasion to discover these Men, to any who are ingenuous, and
love not to be hood-winked, but are willing to know the Truth.

So Reader, having given thee this Account, I leave thee to the perusing of the
following Papers, omitting these needless Apologies, and flattering
Insinuations usual in Epistles of this Kind; my end being To answer the Good in
all, and to starve, and not to feed the Evil in any. And I refer my self to
that innocent and pure Principle, the Light of Christ Jesus in thee, which
bears Testimony against all Evil; that thereby thou may try and examine, what
is here written, and who are the Owners of Scripture, and who are the Wresters
of it; which thou can only truly discover and discern by the Spirit, from
which the Scriptures came, even that inward Light and Word of Grace, that is
able to build thee up, and establish thee in the Truth, unto which I Recommend
thee.

Vry the 19th of the 2d Month, 1670. R. B.

TRUTH CLEARED OF CALUMNIES.
To the AVTHOR,
HAVING taken a serious view of the Dialogue lately published by thee, and
having weighed and considered it in the fear of the Lord, I found it incumbent
upon me, to Reply unto it, both upon the account of Truth, at which it strikes,
and for thy Soul's sake, as also for others; that any simple hearts, who have
received hurt by it, may be undeceived, and thy unfair dealing may be
manifested. In order whereunto, before I enter upon the Examination thereof
particularly, I have some things to lay before thee.

And first, as to the manner and method of thy Book by way of Dialogue, it is
no ways allowable from thee, being but a mere shift, to shuffle by those other
Papers aforesaid, from being noticed or regarded, where all these Controversies
are spoken to at large.

Secondly, The nature of this kind of writing ought to have engaged thee, to
set down as largely, what could be said on the one hand, as on the other, and
to have brought-in all the Proofs and Arguments alleged by the Quakers, or at
least the most considerable; but in that thou have done nothing so much as
becomes a Man, far less a Christian, as any who have conversed with that
people, cannot but be sensible of. Thou have made a bare Representation of the
Quaker's Principles, and that so scantly and mincingly, that thou frequently
give thy self occasion to fight against a Man of straw. But that wherein thou
have manifested the badness of thy Cause, and thy weakness in pleading for it,
is that the substance of what thou have said is nothing else, but that which
was writ in the Papers before mentioned, and so largely answered already:
Whereof thou art altogether silent, and would insinuate, that what thou have
here writ, was never answered by any Quaker, yea is unanswerable.

Thirdly, In the beginning of thy Epistle thou alledgest, That thou have
Examined diverse Opinions (of the People called Quakers) and after trial found
them to be naught; whereas thou have not so much as mentioned, far less
answered, the Arguments used by them, and in the manner of signifying their
Principles, thou give not their own words, but couchest them in such words of
thy own framing, as may bear the most dis-advantagious construction; hence thou
say, That they deny Original Sin; That they overturn the Doctrine of the
Saints perseverance; That they call the Ordinances of Christ, the Inventions of
Men; all which things, as so conceived, are false.

Fourthly, There has appeared in thee an Airy Spirit, full of vanity and
self-conceit, a thing which thou seem much to cry out against in others, and
wilt not see it in thy self; hence in thy Epistle thou boastest, that thou have
so succinctly confuted their Errors, highly commending the manner of thy
writing, as that which, for ought thou know, was never done by any, who
never handled these things with greater plainness and condescendingness to the
meanest Capacity, and in so narrow a compass, as thy own words bear. The
signifying, that it was the Judgment of some, that the publishing of thy Papers
might tend to Edification; the crying up of thy Zeal for the Ordinances, and
many other Passages too tedious to relate, do very much evidence an itching
desire in thee to be commended and applauded in thy Enterprise.

Fifthly, In the writing and framing of thy Discourse, thou have introduced thy
self most childishly and ridiculously, and take frequent occasion to play
upon thy own words, and snatch at them, as if thou had got some great
Advantage; not unlike Dogs, that bark at their own shadow, or those Creatures,
that run and are mad, when they see themselves in a Looking-Glass, supposing it
to be some other, when indeed it is but their own Image. That this is thy way,
appears in many Pages in thy Book, as they are hereafter examined.

Now more particularly;

So soon as thou enterest upon the Matter of Debate, Page 2. thou beginnest
with great Dis-ingenuity; an Evidence of what may be expected, or will be found
throughout the rest. For notwithstanding the words of the Quaker are of thy own
framing, and that they lie patent before thee; yet thou have not had so much
honesty in thy Answer, as to subsume them aright. The Quaker says, I use not
flattering Titles, and give thee not Heathenish Salutations and Bowings, lest I
should sin, and be found an Idolater: In answer to which, thou beginnest with a
false Subsumption; saying, Thou wonderest that he should call Salutations and
Bowings Heathenish and Idolatrous. Indeed it is no strange thing, that thou and
others mis-represent us, and belly us in repeating our words at a distance, when
in this manner of writing thou can not truly repeat those words, which thou
placest for ours, when they be just written before thee. Is it not one thing to
say, That Salutations that are heathenish, or heathenish Salutations, cannot be
used without Sin and Idolatry; and another thing to say, That Salutations and
Bowings are heathenish and idolatrous? Who is so blind as not to see here a
vast difference? As to the first, who dares deny it to be a Truth, that will
offer to call himself a Christian? to wit, that Salutations and Bowings, that
are heathenish, cannot be used without Idolatry and Sin? But as to the other,
that Salutations and Bowings are heathenish and idolatrous, being taken in
general, was never said, nor judged by the Quakers; and therefore to charge
them with it, is utterly false, and a lie: for such Salutations as Christ
commands, and the Apostles practiced, the Quakers dearly own, and frequently
use, and find in them great refreshment, because there through the life flows,
and is communicated from one vessel to another; but such Salutations thou art
ignorant of, and of the life that is there-through communicated, which bears
Testimony against all that is heathenish and idolatrous, and leads out of it,
dark mind would from thence plead for the customary Salutations of the
heathen, as appears by the Proofs thou bring, wherein thy folly is very much
manifested. Christ, say thou, commanded his Disciples, when they entered into
a House, to salute it; he did so: And what more? And if the House be worthy,
their Peace shall be upon it, to wit, the Peace through the Salutation
intimated or offered, because they brought to that House the tender of the
Gospel and glad Tidings, which was a good Salutation. But what would thou
infer from that? That we ought to do off our Hats one to another; a thing which
they never did, by whose Example thou would press us to do it: and it is
known, that it is a thing unusual in that part of the World to this day. That
other Proof, alleged from Paul saluting the Churches, makes as little, if not
far less, to the purpose. Paul in his Epistles, who was at a great distance,
wishes Grace and Peace to the Churches from God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ; Ergo, We ought to take off our Hats. Can there be any thing more
ridiculous? Is this the great Esteem ye put upon the Scriptures, to take the
Salutations of the blessed Apostle Paul signified by the motions of the Holy
Spirit, which was the very blessing of Paul to the Churches, or rather of the
Spirit through him, for to prove your doing off Hats, one of the corrupt
customs of this World? Is not this to make a mock of the Scriptures, and a
stretching them to plead for that, against which is the natural tendence of
their Testimony? Next thou give us Abraham's practice; but every practice of
Abraham is not a Rule to us, nor to you either; the like may be said of that of
Moses. Though Moses did Obeisance to his Father-in-law, that makes nothing
against us, far less his kissing of him, and asking him of his Welfare; both
which things the Quakers deny not. Thou acknowledgst, that Religious Worship
given to the Creature, is Idolatry. What is Religious Worship, but that which
is given to God? And is not the bowing of the Body, and uncovering of the Head,
the signification of your Worship to God? And if ye give the same to the
Creature also, where is the difference? for in the external signification it is
not distinguished, unless it be said to be the Intention; which if it be, we
shall have the Papists pleading the same, for their Adoration of Images, and
the Relicts of the Saints. And truly, your being found in these things, gives
them advantage in that matter. That Courtesy and Christianity are not
repugnant, we deny not; and therefore for Christians to be Courteous one to
another, is very fit, which indeed that the Apostle commands, we acknowledge:
But that Courtesy consists in taking off Hats, and bowing to one another, that
rests for thee to prove. In the next place, to prove the indifference of using
the Plural Number instead of the Singular to one person, thou say, thou art
very confident, the Kingdom of God consists not in words: So am I too; yet I
strange thou should say so, considering thy Principles, for what is all your
preaching but words? yea, what is the Scripture it self (I mean that which ye
have of it, to wit the Letter) but words? And seeing the very Gospel, according
to you, is but a company of words, being a Declaration of what past many
hundred years ago, how has thy Zeal here to oppose the Quakers made thee forget
thy self in this matter? Thou say, that to which the Singular Number is
agreeable, the Plural may be applied to without making a lie. The Proofs
alleged for that be Matthew. 23.37. Luke 22.31.3 Epistle of John, verse 13.
evince nothing in this matter; for the Context being rightly considered, will
clearly make out, that the words are not applied to one single person only,
exclusively of others; and that of Luke is to a Flock, comprehending the
Disciples, to whom he was speaking just before; but there is no confounding of
the Number, where one single person is only spoken to, and that without
understanding of any more. And though indeed it were good, that the difference
were not greater, yet the differences in these things evidence, that there be
differences in greater matters. And in respect that ye are estranged from the
Principle, that leads out of Corruption in all things, therefore ye cannot see
the weight that is in these things, which is more then ye are aware of.

Page 3. Thou seem to take great advantage of these words; Heretofore I
walked according to my light, and the same I do still, and while in the
integrity of my heart, I walked in the way thou art now in, I dare not say, but
God countenanced me in it. Here thou make a great stir, as if thou had
brought the Quaker to a great Dilemma: But to pass by thy examining of the weak
Objection, which thou make in the Quakers behalf, which I believe was never
alleged by any of them unto thee, as that wherewith they either only or
chiefly defend themselves in this matter; to wit, Solomon's sacrificing at
Gibeon. As in many other particulars, so in this, thou statest the Quakers part
but too weakly and faintly, yea disingenuously; for the Light, which we walk
according unto, and desire to walk according to it for ever, is the Light of
Christ in us, and not our Light otherwise then by the free gift of God, which
we do freely acknowledge did shine in our hearts in some measure in the time we
walked with you, (though we did not so know it) and gave us some knowledge and
discerning of things, and begot a measure of integrity and honesty of heart
toward the Lord in diverse of us, and turned the bent of our hearts truly
toward him in measure. And the Lord countenanced and visited, and sometimes
refreshed us secretly in those days, with a regard to that measure of integrity
he found in us, and not because of, or in respect unto that way of Profession
we then walked in, which way was truly a hurt unto us, and not advantage. And
it was not your way, which we walked in with you, that the Lord countenanced,
but the integrity and uprightness, which he had begot in us, and had placed in
us, as a tender Plant, and as a Root in dry ground, under the oppression of
your way, which burdened it; and until we were brought out of your way, by his
Arm which drew us, his Seed and Plant in us suffered, and was oppressed as a
Cart with Sheaves: But after we were delivered from your way, and turned to the
way we now walk in, the Seed and Plant, which suffered, came to receive
strength, and be raised unto Life and Dominion, as many are Witnesses at this
day. Nor is this thy Argument any other, but that which the Papists did throw
against those, who sometimes walked with them in the popish way of profession,
some hundred years ago, when they came out from among them, whom the Lord
visited, while they were among them, and at times refreshed them, till he
brought them forth to witness against them. For the Lord has a People in
Babylon, and has his Sheep, which are scattered on the dry and barren
Mountains of many sorts and ways of professions, who have some tender
breathings and desires after him, and with a regard to his breathing Seed in
them, he visits them, and refreshes them at times; which yet proves not, that
they should remain where they are, in Babylon, and upon the dry Mountains of
dead Professions and Observations. For the Call of the Lord is unto them, to
come out of Babylon, and his Arm is stretched forth to gather them off from all
these Hills, unto his own holy Hill, Mount Zion, that they may seed and lie
down with them, who were as Sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls. Also may not those of the Episcopal Form
object the same, against those who have left it upon a further Discovery; and
yet its like thou will not deny, but some, who have been under the Episcopal
Form, had a measure of integrity to God, while under it, and with a regard to
that the Lord at times refreshed them. God does not frequently discover his
will to his Children all at once, nor lead them thoroughly out of things, out of
which they are to come, in an instant; and yet that he countenanceth them in
their travel, cannot be denied. Did not the Lord countenance Cornelius, before
Peter came unto him? as appears by Acts 10.4. And yet this was no Argument,
that Cornelius should not own the Apostles and Christians: And did not the Lord
countenance the Disciples, though even when they were following him, they were
ignorant of many things, and in some things wrong? And whether did not the Lord
countenance Luther in his Testimony against the Pope, as well in the first, as
in the last steps of it; although it appears, that when he first began to
preach against Indulgences, he intended not such a thing, as afterward
followed; but things opened more and more unto him, till they came unto that
period they were brought unto before his Death: And who of you will say, that
God did not countenance him from the beginning, whilst he held many things,
which he himself came to see to be wrong, and erred very grossly in the Matter
of Consubstantiation. The like may be said of John Husse, and others, whom you
acknowledge to have been Martyrs. At last, thou endest it with a Question,
asking, Whether it be safe to lean to the Audience of that Light, which one
while says, that such a way is the way of Christ, and another while, thou must
come out of it, for it is the way of Antichrist? To which, what is above
mentioned, answers sufficiently; yet further, I may easily retort the Question
thus, upon the most of all the National Ministry in Scotland, who are now
licking up that which they heretofore cried out against as Antichristian, and
with Fire and Sword persecuted those who offered to plead for that, which now
they both practice, and avow themselves in. Now as the fault of this cannot be
ascribed to the Scriptures, which is the Rule, whereby they pretend to be
guided; so neither can any man's instability, that pretends to be guided by the
Light, (if any such thing could be shown) prove the Light a Guide not to be
followed.

To prove, that Christ is not in all men, thou arguest thus! Christ is not in
all men, because the Scripture speaks of a being without Christ in the World;
to which thou addest the Reason, The unconverted must needs be without Christ,
because they want the uniting Principle, which is Faith. To answer, that Christ
is in them, but not in Union with them, thou say, is a fond Distinction,
because the Scriptures way of expressing Peoples Union with Christ, is by
asserting Christ to be in them, which thou take for granted, and from thence
drawest thy Conclusion: but if it be found to be false, then the whole Fabric
falls to the Ground (as indeed false it is) For even according to the
Scriptures, the in-being of Christ in Men sometimes signifies Union, and
sometimes his Existence in them, working and operating in them by way of
Reproof and Judgment, as also by way of Call and Invitation, to prepare for
Union with him, as appears by the very first Scripture cited by thee, John
15.4, 5. which answers not thy Mind. For we say not, That, where there is no
Union, Fruit can be brought forth unto God: but mark the last part of it, how
much it makes against thee, Without me, says Christ, ye can do nothing. For how
becomes an unconverted man a Convert, but by having Christ to work with him?
And where does Christ cooperate? Does he not there, where the work of
Conversion is wrought, and is not that within? So that Christ must needs be in
men, before they be in Union with him, whereby the Faith may be wrought, by
which they are united to him. And as to that other Scripture, 1 John 3.24.
these and other Scriptures, which might be cited, hold forth that in-being of
Christ, which is by Union; but say nothing against his in-being in them, where
the Union is not; for he is in them who know him not, and are Darkness, John 1.
verse. 10. and 5. and he was crucified in the Corinthians and Galatians, which
was in the time of their Unbelief, 1 Corinthians. 2. verse. 2. and Galat. 3. verse.
1. for the words in the Greek are (...), i. e. In you; and indeed, there can be
no greater Absurdity, then to say, that Christ is in no man, but in them with
whom he is united; for Christ is not separated from that Light and Seed, which
is of him, that is in every man, but is united with it, which bears Testimony
against all Iniquity; but many times men are far from being in Union with that
in them, which witnesses against all sin, as Experience sufficiently teaches.
Then, if that be in them, which is pure, and if Christ be in that pure, then
Christ is in them; and if they be not united with that which is pure in them,
then are they not united with Christ, which is in the pure, that is in them.

It seems strange to thee, that Christ should be in the Heathen, and they not
know him. Was it not as strange, that he should be among the Jews, who had the
Letter, that did bear a Testimony of him, and they not know him? and that
notwithstanding his Miracles, and other Proofs he gave of himself, they should
so far mistake him, to judge him to be an Impostor and Blasphemer? Thou say,
Is Christ so uncouth to them he dwells in, as not to Reveal himself unto them?
But though we say, that Christ is in all men, we do not say, he dwells in all
men; for dwelling signifies more then in-being: and yet I say, he does Reveal
himself in some measure unto all, in whom he bears witness against Iniquity;
for the Revelation of Christ unto one, is not always by giving the knowledge of
what past externally; but is a Revelation of the righteous Judgment against the
Transgressor in them, which to say, that the Heathen wanted, is false, and
contrary to Scripture, Romans 1.18, 19, 20. John 3.18, 19, 20. yea, and contrary
to the very acknowledgment of Americans, who have confessed, that there was
that in them, which judged and reproved evil. Whether or not their ignorance of
the outward Transaction, derogates any thing from their capacity of Salvation?
comes hereafter in its place to be examined; together with that other saying of
thine, wherein thou show the like Dis-ingenuity, viz. That the saying, that
every man has sufficient Light to lead him to Life and Salvation, tends to put
Christians in the same Condition with Pagans; because, say thou, Christians
have no more; and the preaching of the Gospel, and the benefit of the
Scriptures are little to be regarded; for without them Men have sufficient
Light to lead them to the things of God. For the saying, that men have
sufficient Light, has no such tendency; for he that is truly and really a
Christian, (and not nominally only) is one, that is united to Christ, and
believes in him. Now, it is one thing to have the Light, and another to believe
in it; which is clearly made out by that Scripture, While ye have the Light,
believe in the Light, that ye may become the Children of it. And that it is a
great advantage to have the knowledge of the Scripture, as outwardly, we deny
not, for the reaching and raising of the Seed in them that are afar off; and
also for the comforting and refreshing of them, in whom it is raised, as the
Scriptures are used in that Spirit which gave them forth: Therefore we labor
and travel so much for that end, and are found using the Scriptures Testimony.
If it be said, That therein we contradict our Principle, seeing it is possible,
that People may be saved without the Scriptures: I answer, Nay; For many things
are profitable, which are not of absolute necessity. You your selves
acknowledge, that other Books besides the Scriptures, are not of absolute
necessity unto men's Salvation, and yet you judge not all other Books useless;
yea, ye too much rely upon Books. Also you do not say, that it is impossible,
that any can be saved without preaching upon the Scriptures; and yet you reckon
not preaching to be in vain. But do ye not rather contradict your Principles,
who say, that the number of all those who ever can be saved, is so definite
from all Eternity (and that without respect to their Faithfulness or Diligence
in the using of the Means) in the foreknowledge of God, that none of them can
miss of Salvation, and yet keep such a stir about Preaching and Ordinances? for
you deny, that God has decreed men unto Salvation, whom in his foreknowledge
he did foresee would be faithful, and diligent in the use of the means.

Page 7. Thou say, All men have not saving and sufficient Light in them,
because the Scripture says, that some men are brutish in their knowledge,
Jerem. 10.19. But why did not thou cite these words, For the Pastors are
become brutish, and have not sought the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper?
We see the proof of this at this day. But from thence how make thou it
appear, that some men want Saving Light? The Pastors are now as brutish as they
were then; and it is, because they turn their backs upon that Light, and will
not follow it: Therefore we have the more need to bear Testimony unto it, and
against their brutishness, who reject and despise it.

Next thou citest Romans 3.11. There is none that understands. But will that
infer, that there is not any saving Light in them? Why understand they not, but
because they are not turned to the Light, that can give them understanding? It
is supposed, say thou, that the Light in some may be Darkness. So it may
indeed, to wit, that Light that is gathered from the Carnal and Earthly Wisdom,
which is from below, where it takes the Letter of the Scriptures, and adds
thereunto its Commentaries and Consequences, setting up this in them as their
only Light; we find, that Light proves but Darkness But that will not infer,
that the true Light, which comes from Christ, is or can be Darkness, unless in
that sense, as the Day of the Lord is called Darkness in Scripture. For even
the true Light, unto them who reject it, is as Darkness, in that it gives them
not that Comfort and Joy, which it gives unto them who love it, and own it,
but troubles and affrighteth them, as the Night and the Darkness. So that
these Scriptures stand in good unity with the Principle of all men's having
saving Light in them. Next thou objectest, That having of saving Light and
Grace, presupposes Conversion. But that I deny: For on the contrary, Conversion
presupposes having Light and Grace, by which, and to which men are to be
converted. So that before a man be converted, he must have saving Grace in
order to convert him, even as the being healed of a wound, presupposes the
Plaster or Salve; but not on the contrary, for the application of the
Plaster, presupposes not the being healed. But whereas thou say, What need
is there of his turning, when men are in this state already? Thou
misrepresentest us; for we do not say, That all men are in a state of Light and
Grace. To be in a state of Grace, is to stand in Grace, which the wicked do not
stand in; yet this hinders not, but that Grace is communicated unto them,
whereby they may come to a state, or standing in it, while the Day of their
Visitation remains.

Again, thou undertakest to prove, That all men have not sufficient Light, two
ways: First, That all men have not the Spirit of God, Judge. 19. To which I
answer, That there may be a sufficient Light in men, who may be said, after a
certain manner, not to have the Spirit, as being such, who, though the Spirit
be in them to invite, call and draw them unto God, yet resist his drawings, and
so separate themselves from it so continuing, until the day of God's Visitation
unto them come to an end: concerning whom it is true, that then they have not
the Spirit, so much as to invite and call them unto God, or to give unto them
the least tender of his love. And though all have not the Spirit bringing forth
the Fruits thereof in them, to wit, Love, Meekness, Gentleness, etc. as no
wicked Persons have; yet all, even the wicked, in a certain day have the Spirit
in them to Reprove and Convince, yea, to Call upon them, and strive with them,
in order unto their Conversion; for the Spirit of God reproves the World of
Sin, John 19.8. And Acts 7.50. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised, ye do always
resist the holy Ghost: and Genesis 6. My Spirit shall not always strive with (or
in) man: and many more to that purpose.

For a second Reason of its insufficiency, thou say, It reveals not Jesus
Christ a Savior, in respect it gives not a discovery of his Incarnation,
Passion, Resurrection, etc. citing 1 Cor. 2.2. And from this place thou would
infer, That the Apostle preferred the Knowledge of Christ, as crucified
outwardly, to all other knowledge. Answer; Though we willingly acknowledge,
that to know him, even as he did outwardly come, and was crucified, etc. is a
good knowledge, and of great profit and comfort to them, who believe; yet we
deny, that the knowledge of him, as outwardly crucified, is the best of all
other knowledge of him, or to be preferred to all other ways of knowing him;
nor does that Scripture, 1 Cor 2.2. prove it. For Paul is not speaking there of
Christ, as crucified outwardly in Judea; but of him, as he was inwardly
crucified in the Corinthians, when Paul first came unto them to preach the
Gospel, as the words do plainly import, being rightly translated out of the
Greek; for I determined not to know any thing, (...), i. e. in you, but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. This was the Apostle's care and travel in his
Ministry, to declare and hold forth unto the Corinthians, and other Gentiles
Jesus Christ, who was crucified in them in his suffering Seed, even that Seed
of Light and Truth which suffered, and was crucified in them under the burden
of their Transgression, in the time of their unbelief, and to preach Salvation,
and Deliverance from Sin, and Wrath, through Jesus Christ, according to his
weak and low appearance in them, in the suffering Seed, through their believing
in him, and closing with him, as manifest therein. According to which he said
to the Galatians, That Jesus Christ was evidently set before their eyes,
crucified in them, (...). And Ephesians. 3. verse. 8. he said, This Grace was given
unto him to preach (...), i. e. in the Gentiles, the unsearchable Riches of
Christ. Parallel to which is that of the Apostle, 1 Col. 27. (for so should all
these places be translated) which Riches of Christ lay hid and wrapped up in
them, in the Seed of the Kingdom, which was the least of all Seeds. Even as the
Riches and Fruitfulness of a Tree lies hid in the Seed of it, which comes to be
brought forth, as the Seed takes Root, and gets liberty to grow up unto the due
Stature; so for this the Apostle labored, that People might know Christ in
them, and might embrace him in their hearts, that so he might be formed in
them, Gal. 4.19. and they might know him to live in them, and his Life to rule
in them; which is more then to know him as outwardly crucified. And indeed,
none know the weight and greatness of what he suffered outwardly, but who know
him first, as he has suffered in them, and suffer, and become crucified with
him, so as to have a sympathy and Fellow-feeling with him; even as the Members
suffer, and are pained, when any thing hurts the Head or Heart. And whereas
thou say, You see, the Apostle judges the knowledge of Christ crucified, to
be that one thing necessary; We deny, that the knowledge of his being outwardly
crucified, is that one thing necessary, for People must know him in them; Know
ye not, that Christ is in you, unless ye be Reprobates, 1 Cor. 13.5.

As for thy Charge upon the Quaker, saying, With what face can you blame me for
being in Darkness, seeing your Opinion is, that all men have sufficient Light
in them, it is frivolous; for though the Light, which is sufficient, be in
thee, thy opposition to the Light blinds thee, and hinders thee from seeing
Light. A man may have a Candle burning in his House, but if he put it under a
Bushel, it will not give him the sight of things in the House.

That there is no other Name under Heaven whereby any can be saved, but the
Name of Jesus Christ, is granted; but that Name is another thing than the bare
expression, or declaration and knowledge of words or things, as without.
Because his Name is said to be a strong Tower, whereunto the righteous fly and
are safe; which is another thing, than the bare naming of his Death and Cross
without; for many Unrighteous plead a right to that, and can fly unto it, as we
see by the example of the Papists (to whom, it seems, ye will needs join your
selves in this matter) who say, That the onward naming of Christ, and signing
with the Cross, puts away Devils. And that we are of another mind then you in
this matter, is much to our advantage, because we know, the inward is the main
thing, and where it is enjoyed, the efficacy and benefit of the outward cannot
be wanting, though the distinct knowledge of it be not had. The knowledge of
Christ's Cross within, which is his Power, that crucifies unto the World, is
more than the knowledge of the outward; and to know Christ after the Spirit, is
more than to know him after the Flesh, as is clear from the words of Paul;
Though I have known Christ after the Flesh, yet henceforth know I him so no
more. The Apostle Peter knew well, that God was not so narrow-hearted, as ye
would have him to be; therefore he said, That he had seen, that with God there
was no respect of Persons, but in every Nation, he that loves Righteousness,
and fears God, is accepted of him. You your selves dare not deny, but that
some Infants, and deaf Persons are saved by Christ, without the External
Knowledge: If you say, they are not in a Capacity to know these things; I
answer, so neither are many of the Gentiles, who never had these things
revealed unto them. But if the External Knowledge be necessary to the one, why
not to the other? And if thou say, that some Infants are in the Decree of
Election: I ask at thee, or any of you, who of you has seen the Decrees of God?
and how know thou, that none of the Heathen are enrolled into them?

And whereas thou say, Is not the Application of Christ's Blood and
Sufferings necessary to them that would profit, and get good thereby? For
though the Blood of Christ be a healing Plaster, yet the Plaster must be
applied, e're the Sore can be healed. Now what Application can the Soul make of
Christ's Blood, who knows no such thing? The Blood of Christ is applied by
Faith, but true Faith is not a blind Faith. Answer. It is granted: But this
Blood is known and felt within to wash and purge the Conscience; for Christ, as
he is within, is not without his Blood, which is spiritual, even the pure blood
of the Vine, and is that Wine of the Kingdom which is inwardly felt to wash,
and to refresh, which he gives to them, who know not distinctly the outward
shedding of the Blood, as it was many hundred years ago, and which many are
ignorant of, who have heard much of the outward shedding of his Blood, but know
not the Blood, as shed and poured forth in them, to sprinkle their Consciences
from dead Works; for it is a Mystery sealed up from all, who stand in
opposition to his Light within. But there mark thy own words, The Plaster must
be applied, e're the Sore can be healed. Must not then saving Grace be applied,
e're the Soul be converted, or healed? Contrary to thy other Assertion, Page 7.
That having of saving Light and Grace, presupposes Conversion, that is,
Healing.

As for thy deceitful Insinuation to render us odious, That if our Principles
were generally owned, the Nations in one Age, or two, would be overspread with
as palpable Darkness, as the Heathen-Nations at this day are; Seeing it has no
just ground, we return it upon thee as false and malicious. For it is the
owning the Light, and other Principles held by us therein, which will make
these Nations, and all others who own it and them, to overflow with the true
and saving Knowledge of God and Christ; but so long as they follow such blind
Guides as thy self, who oppose the Light, Darkness will cover them, as at this
day, notwithstanding all their Professions and Confessions of him, while in
Works they deny him, and remain estranged from his Light in them. The Reason
thou addest is blind and unreasonable; For, according to you (thou say) the
Light within us is a sufficient Teacher, take heed to this, and there needs no
more: For we say, the Light within must not only be taken heed unto, but
believed, and obeyed and walked in; which who do, it will lead them to read and
make use of the Scriptures, and will lead them to the Assemblies of God's
People, and to hear and receive the Ministry of those whom God sends, yea, to
love and esteem them greatly for their Works sake; and it will lead them to own
Christ, and the benefits of his Death and Sufferings in the outward, and give
them an understanding, how to conceive and use aright those things, as
opportunity is given them.

Page 10. Thou say, Christ is a Light, who communicates Light to all Men;
but where find you, that the Light communicated to all Men is Christ himself?
we must not confound the Light-giver with the Light or Enlightening given.
Answ. We do not confound them; but we must not divide or separate them, as thou
and you do; for where the Light, or Enlightening from Christ is, there is
Christ himself; he is not separated from it, but is in it, and with it: We must
not be so gross, as to conceive, that Christ enlightens men in such a way of
outward distance, as the Body of the Sun, being so many thousand miles above
the Clouds, enlightens our natural Eyes, but comes not near us otherwise, than
by its influence and rays; for Christ is near unto every one, no less than his
influence, for in him we live, and move, and have our being. And this nearness
of his unto all men, in a day, is more than that general Presence, in respect
whereof he abides with all the works of his hands, for as much as he is in them
to enlighten them, that they may believe, John 1.9. compared with Verse. 7. Page
11. Here, because thou can not deny, but that there is Light in all men, thou
say, It is commonly called the Light of Nature, and that some remainders of
Knowledge and Principles of Good remain in Man, after the ruins of God's Image
in him; as when a City is demolished, some Foundations of Houses do still
remain. But how is this consistent with what you say, to wit, That there is no
good thing at all in men unconverted; and that man fell wholly from God; and
that Adam 's fall was not in part, but wholly, as to all things that are good?
And that we derive nothing from him, but that which is corrupted and defiled?
But the Scriptures Testimony is plain, that since the fall, the free Gift or
Grace of God is come upon all, unto Justification of Life. It is not said,
Justification is come upon all; but the free Gift or Grace of God is come upon
all unto Justification, so that all may be justified, if they did close with
it, Romans 5.8. And God so loved the World, John 3.16. And this is the
condemnation of the World, that Light is come into it, verse 19. which is after
the fall. And whatever any may conceive, that remained in Man of the Image of
God after the fall, that could not have any power to convince man of evil, or
enable him to do any thing that is good, if it were not visited and influenced
anew from the Fountain of Light and Life, but it would remain as a thing
without all Life and Virtue, as a Candle extinguished. For by the fall, the
Lamb, the Witness came to be slain, and remained so, until the Spirit of Life
again was sent from God into it, to give it life and power, to witness against
men's Transgressions: for a witness that is wholly dead, cannot witness unto
particular things of Fact against men, as this inward Witness in all men does,
who do not again crucify it in themselves. And seeing Christ tasted Death for
every man, and the Grace that brings Salvation, has appeared to every man, and
the Gospel is preached in every Creature, as it is according to the Greek, in
Hebr. 2. Tit. 2. Col. 1.23. It is manifest, that the Illumination given to
every man, is a new and fresh Visitation of God's love in Christ, freely given
unto them for Salvation.

Now as to the word Nature, if it be rightly understood, there shall be no
great difference about it. For if by Nature thou understandest the Nature that
is corrupt and fallen, and that which simply is derived from Adam, then we
deny, that that Nature can claim any right to this Light, or that it can be
said to proceed from that Nature. But if thou understandest by Nature, the
Nature that is spiritual and heavenly, and is derived from Christ, the second
Adam, the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, then I say, the Light may
properly be called the Light of that Nature; in which sense is to be understood
that place of the Apostle, Romans 2. verse 14. cited by thee, where he says, The
Gentiles which have not the Law, did by Nature the things contained in the Law.
For who will be so gross, as to say, that the Gentiles by the corrupt Nature
could do the things contained in the Law, which is pure and holy? But by that
Nature which is one with the Law, to wit, Divine and Heavenly, they might do
them. So that thou can not but still be accounted a wilful Enemy to the
Light, whilst thou opposest it, and do not turn to it, and by it come to see
the evil of thy ways, and forsake them.

Page 12. Though it be here asserted, in name of the Quakers, that the
Scriptures are of excellent and blessed use, yet thou will not believe it; and
alledgest, They will not make the due use of them for these Reasons. First,
Because a Bible, thou say, is not to be seen in all our Meetings. But that
will infer nothing at all; for we meet not to read the Scripture, but to wait
on the Lord, and be taught of him, and receive from his Spirit what he pleases
to administer, either in our selves, or through the Mouths of his Servants: and
we meet to worship God, whose worship is to be performed in Spirit and in
Truth, and not in External Reading. Thou say, Christ took the Book of the
Prophet Isaiah, and read out of it. But was not this the performance of a Legal
Duty, and in condescendency to the Jews manner? for it was in the Synagogue:
But did he ever constitute it as a part of the Christian Worship, for one man
to take the Bible, and speak upon it, and all the rest to be excluded from
speaking, while he prattles his own barren empty Notions about it? show me,
where that was the practice or order among the Apostles and primitive
Christians? In the Churches way, 1 Cor. 14. there is no such thing; but on the
contrary, verse. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other
judge, if any thing be revealed to another that ^its by, let the first hold his
peace, for ye may all prophecy, one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted. By which it plainly, appears there was no such settled custom among
them, but it is one of the main Inventions brought-in in the Apostasy, whereby
barrenness and dryness has entered, and whereby the quickening, unlimited Life
has been stopped from flowing through many Vessels. It is true, the Apostles at
times cited Scriptures out of the Law and the Prophets, to show their
fulfilling, or to open the mind of the Spirit concerning them, which is
frequent in our Meetings, to cite Scriptures, and open them in the same Life
and Spirit, that gave them forth, in the order of the Spirit, but not in the
order and way of man's Wisdom and Spirit, as is your way, which savours more of
Aristotle's School, than of the Church of Christ. Secondly, As to what thou
say, That it is not our way to encourage the People to read the Scriptures,
and to try Doctrines by them; it is utterly false: for we desire, that all may
come to try Doctrines even by the Scripture; but we bid them also come to the
Light in them, to read and try Doctrines, and understand the true sense of the
Scriptures therein: and if People did so, we know, that then your Juglings
about them would be made manifest. But indeed we, are far from desiring People
to heed your false Glosses and Commentaries upon them, whereby ye darken them,
rather than interpret them. Thirdly, thou say, When you want an inward
Command to a Duty, I trow the outward Command of the Scripture is not regarded.
Answ. Here thou writest as one unacquainted with the Law and New Covenant writ
in the heart; the inward Command is never wanting in the due season to any
Duty, as it is waited for; and the outward Testimony or Signification of the
Command we regard in its place. Is it not a regarding the outward to mind the
inward Unction and Spirit, to which it directs? which inward teaches all
things, and leads into all Truth, 1 John 2.27. 1 Cor. 14.15. John 16.13. yea,
do not such more regard the outward, than they who under a pretense of an
outward Command, do run about these things in their own natural Will and
Spirit, neglecting to wait upon the Lord for the leading and help of his
Spirit? Thy comparing us to Servants, who will not be moved to work by their
Master's Letter, etc. is vain and ridiculous, nor does it reach us, for our
Master's Letter is writ in our Hearts, and there we are to find it. Neither is
our Master separated from us, as those Masters are, who use to write Letters to
Servants to set them on work, while they are absent, and cannot help them by
their presence; for our Master is always with us, and he requires us to do all
our works by his immediate Counsel, Direction, and Assistance, as present with
us and in us: And that Nature we witness brought forth in us, which does not
shift his Will, but delight in it to do it, and know it, whether told us by a
lively Voice, or by any other inward signification of his Spirit. Fourthly, And
because thou art ignorant of that great Duty of waiting upon the Lord in
silence, out of all thy own Thoughts and Words, and art trampling it under
foot, thou look upon it as misspent time, or a mere looking upon the
ground; whereas, if ever thou come to know the Scriptures aright, or to
confer aright concerning them, so as to profit, thou must first come to that
silence thou now so much despisest. So that these things very well consist,
though the World may judge otherways, whom thou will have to be Judges in the
Case: but in the Judgment of those who are redeemed out of the World, we shall
be found to put the Scriptures in their true place.

Thou can not but smile, thou say, that a man of understanding should grant
the Scriptures to be a declaration of God's Mind, and yet deny them to be God's
Word; for what is a Word, but a declaration of ones Mind.

Answ. Here thy lightness appears, which darkens thy Understanding: If thou
must needs smile, do it at thy impertinent Reason. For though a man's Word be
the declaration of his Mind, yet every declaration of his Mind is not his Word;
for Signs may be a declaration of a man's Mind, without his Word: and People
usually distinguish betwixt a man's Word, and his Writ. And so though the
Scripture be a declaration of God's Mind, yet it is not his Word properly; nor
can those Properties which are declared of the Word, belong to the Scriptures,
as has often been demonstrated, but to that inward and living Word, as it does
declare it self, whether in the Heart, or in the Mouth. The Word of God is like
unto himself, Spiritual, yea, Spirit and Life, and therefore cannot be heard or
read with the Natural External Senses, as the Scriptures can; nor does the
Scriptures cited by thee, as Hosea 1.1. Joel 1.1. Isaiah 38.4. Jeremiah 14.1.
prove thy intent: For that Word which came unto the Prophet^s, was that from
which the Scriptures were given forth, which Word you confess was immediate
from God; but you say, It is ceased to come now. And did not all the Prophets
prophesy from Christ, the Word? Thou might as well reason thus, That when it
is said, the Spirit of the Lord came upon such a one, or to such a one, that
therefore the Scripture is the Spirit, and so deny all Spirit, but that which
is the Scripture; as some do in other Sects, calling the Writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists the Spirit, and denying the necessity of any other
thing: which is abominable deceit, and wresting of Scripture: And that the
Prophets declaring their Message, said, Thus says the Lord, proves that what
God spoke in them, and through them, as the living Word declared it self, was
the Word of God, but not the Letter or Writing. And whereas thou say, It is
all one to say, the Scripture says, and God says. Answ. By way of Inference
and Collection it may be said, they are one, because of their Agreement; yet
the living Word and Speech of God is not the Scripture, more than the Sunbeam
is the shadow, though the one agrees with the other. Every one that reads or
hears the Scriptures read, hears not God immediately; now that which God speaks
to any, or in any immediately, that is only his Word properly unto them. As
they who only read my Letter, cannot be said properly to hear me by Word of
Mouth. Christ said to the Jews, Ye have not heard his Voice, though they heard
the Scriptures; and though the Apostle uses some Scriptures out of the Old
Testament, it proves not, he had not the Word of the Lord speaking then
immediately in him, and to him. That Scripture thou biddest remark, 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. proves not thy intent neither: for the Word which they heard of the
Apostles, was that living Word, declaring it self through the Apostles, which
was answered by the same in them who heard; they heard Christ, of, in and
through the Apostles, does it therefore follow that Christ is the Scripture?
And lastly, Mark 7.13. serves thy purpose no more than the rest: for the
Pharisees, in striking at the fifth Commandment, did consequently strike at the
living inward Word which gave it forth, as those who struck at any of the
Apostles, struck at Christ, yet none of the Apostles was Christ; as neither is
the Scripture, as it is outwardly writ, to speak properly, the Word of God. And
truly, the reason why we may not call the Scriptures the Word of God, (to speak
properly) is, that People may be directed to that inward living Word; for by
their being so much called the Word of God, they have been put in Christ's
stead, and have been set up as an Idol, instead of that from whence they came;
so that to avoid this hazard, we have put them in their due place.

Page 14. To prove that it is the Mind and Will of God, that the Scriptures
should be the Rule, thou citest Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony,
etc. But it rests to be proved, that the Law and Testimony was not the inward
Law, and that that Word, according to which they were to speak, was not the
inward Word, which is said to be in the Heart. It is observable, that to prove
this thou bring John 7.49. where the Pharisees say, Have any of the Rulers
or Pharisees believed in him, but this People that know not the Law, are
accursed. This place suits the matter very well, but makes much against thee.
For the Pharisees here were crying up the outward Law, and the Knowledge of it;
averring, that the ignorance of it caused the mean People to believe in Christ.
So do ye now; ye pretend to cry up the Law, and say, The ignorance of it
occasions so many to leave you. And as they then were setting the Law above
Christ, and covering themselves with a Zeal for it, persecuting him, and
reviling his Followers as Ignorants. So ye now, whilst ye are boasting of your
great Knowledge in the Law, and in the Scripture* and your high esteem of them,
ye are despising, crucifying the same Christ in his Spiritual Appearance, and
upbraiding his Followers now, as they did then, as Ignorants, and Contemners of
the Law. And as to Luke 10.26. How read thou? This was spoke to one that was
a Lawyer, or Interpreter of the Law, and relied upon it, so Christ spoke this
to check him; and beside, the dispensation of the Law, which this Lawyer was
under, was different from that of the Gospel in this matter, as may appear
Hebr. 8.10. Again, as for Christ and his Apostles using the Scriptures, for
convincing of their Opposers, so do we; and yet this proves not, that either he
or we judge them to be the Rule, whereby to try all Things and Spirits, yea
even the Spirit of God himself.

Page 15. Thou seem to lay much stress upon this, That it were impossible
for us to prove to a Jew, or a Turk, that Jesus the Son of Mary is in very deed
the Christ, without the Scripture. But I Answer thee to that easily; by what
way will thou persuade a Turk to believe the Scriptures, or their Testimony,
but by the inward Testimony of the Spirit? Calvin, Calvin lib. 1. cap. 7. Sect.
4. of his Inst.
after he has said all that can be said of outward ways, at last concludes, The
only certain way to know it indeed, is by the Testimony of the Spirit. And as
to the course that Paul took with the obstinate Jews, it was very commendable,
because they said, they believed the Scriptures, and seemed to esteem them
much, though they opposed the Truth witnessed to in the Scriptures: So that it
is evident, that some great pretenders to the Scriptures can make a Cloak of
them, to deny Christ himself, as ye do at this day. And though Paul took that
course with the Jews, yet we see, he took no such course with the Athenians, to
whom he cited no Scripture, nor endeavored to persuade them by it; but told
them, they were the Offspring of God, and wished them to feel after him, who
was not afar off from every one of them. Thirdly, say thou, The Saints had
recourse to the Scriptures in the examination of Doctrines. So have we too, as
before has been declared; but that will not prove, the Scripture is the Rule.

Page 16. Fourthly, thou say, We are commanded to search the Scriptures. John
5.39. Answ. The words may be translated, You search the Scriptures, as Pasor
translateth them; but we do acknowledge, the Scriptures are to be searched, but
are not to be rested in; which was the Jews fault, who would not come to Christ
to get life, thinking to have eternal life in the Scriptures, which Christ
checks them for. And that the Scriptures are profitable for Doctrine,
Scriptures profitable to whom?
Correction, Instruction, we own, (and are commended for their Dignity, and
Authority) but they are thus profitable only to such, as come to the Spirit, to
guide and direct them, how to make use of them, else they may prove an occasion
of stumbling, as they did to the Pharisees. Hence it is said, That the Man of
God may be perfect; mark, the Man of God, not every Man: now, no Man can be
truly called the Man of God, but he that is led by the Spirit of God. Next thou
would undertake to prove, That it is not the Mind of God, that the Spirit
within men should be the Rule. In which thou fallest very short, as appears, by
saying, That Christ made use of the Scripture to prove himself, etc. and not
the light within. And did these Jews receive him, who had the Scriptures? Did
they not reject him? And why? because they hearkened not unto the inward Voice
and Testimony of the Father concerning him: and this was the Testimony, which
he said was greater, than that of John, though John was the greatest of the
Prophets, and those who believe, had the witness in themselves, 1 John 5.10.
but to the unbelieving Jews he said, Ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen
his shape.

Secondly, Thou say, There is an express command to try the Spirits, 1 John
4.1. Answ. But is there any word there of trying them by the Scripture? Trying
Spirits is by the Spirit of God.
Cannot the Spirits be tried by the Spirit of God? or is there any better way
to try them? How tried Peter the spirit of Ananias and Saphirah? And is not the
Trial and discerning of Spirits the privilege of the Saints now? And how is it
a peculiar privilege to Saints, unless it be done by the Spirit of God? For
the Scriptures any can make use of, the Apostle John, writing to the Saints
concerning Seducers, points them to the Anointing, which remained in them, and
did teach them all things, and by this they did know all things, and
consequently Spirits, 1 John 2.20, 26. Thirdly, thou say, Undoubtedly there
are strong delusions, etc. Answ. There are so indeed: But was there any more
strongly deluded, then the Pharisees? Yet how much did they lay claim to the
Scriptures? How came they then to be deluded, who was so skilled in the
Scriptures according to the letter of them? and the poor People, who were not
so skilled, so rightly to hit the matter?

And as to thy Question, What way shall the delusion be tried, if you neglect
the Word of God, and look only within? Answ. As for the Word of God, nor yet
the Scriptures-Testimony we neglect not; but what way, think thou, shall the
Delusion be tried, if you neglect the Spirit within, and look only upon the
letter, and words without you? If the Delusion be strong in the heart, will it
not twine and wrest the Scriptures without, to cause the Scriptures to seem for
it? And suppose a man be deluded with a Spirit of Delusion, what can help him,
but God, whose Spirit searches all the deepest things of Satan, and can and
does discover them to those, who love to be undeceived, and are faithful to
God, in what they certainly know. And though the same deluding Spirit, who
deceived first, may deceive over again, that makes nothing against the
Insufficiency of the Spirit to discover the delusion; but if a man be deceived
either first, or again, he is to blame himself for his defect, in not being
duly watchful and faithful, in what is discovered to him of God truly and
certainly. Consider the tendency of thy Argument, which strikes not only at the
certainty of the Saints faith now from the Spirit within, and the assurance of
Knowledge therefrom, but also strikes at the very certainty and assurance of
all the Faith and Knowledge, the holy Prophets and Men of God had from the
Spirit within, when Scripture was not: We are in no greater hazard to be
deceived now, than they were then. You that set up the Scripture, as your only
Rule, the many Sects of you what jangling and contesting is among you, while
one pleads for his sense, and another for his? Which all proceeds from their
wandering from the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures. And as to satisfying
of others, we refer and recommend them to the same Spirit in them, to receive
their satisfaction from that, which only can and will satisfy them, who wait
for it in singleness.

Page 18. And whereas thou say, The Saints are led and guided by the Spirit,
but it is according to the Scriptures. So say we too; but it does not therefore
follow, that the Spirit has so tied and limited himself to the use of the
Scriptures, as always to use them in every particular step of his guiding the
Saints; the Spirit is free to use or not use the Scriptures at his pleasure,
and guides the Saints in many particular steps of their life, for which there
is no particular Scripture, either to approve, or disprove them in. The more
sure Word of Prophecy.
As for the more sure Word of Prophecy, we grant it is the Rule; but deny, that
that more sure Word is the Scriptures, but it is that Word in the heart, from
which the Scriptures came, and in and by which the Scriptures are to be
interpreted. And is it not gross blindness and darkness, to say, The Scripture
is more sure, than that Word, Light, Life, and Spirit, from which they came?
Had not the Scriptures all their sureness from the inward Testimony of the
Spirit? How then can they be more sure? Thy example of the Schoolmaster and the
Copy serves not thy turn; for the Spirit is unto the Saints both their Teacher
and their Copy; and they need not go forth for a Copy: and if they walk
according to this, by looking upon it and eying it, they shall be good Scholars
and Proficients. He writes them a living Copy in their hearts, engraves it on
fleshly Tables; whereas they, who look upon no other Copy, but the Words
without them, are those, who are ever learning, but never able to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth.

Page 19. Thou ask, Why we disjoin the Spirit and the Scriptures? citing
Isaiah 50.21. Answ. We are not to disjoin, what the Lord puts together;
sometimes the Spirit joineth or concurreth with the Scripture-Words, and
sometimes not: how many preach and pray, and read the Scriptures, and talk of
them without the joint concurrence of the Spirit? Which we say, they ought not
to do, the Scriptures should never be used to preach and pray, etc. but in the
concurrence and assistance of the Spirit; for they are not of true use to any,
without the Spirit, but ye disjoin them, who would have praying in the letter,
and using of it without the Motion of the Spirit: to such the Scripture is
indeed but a dead letter, and it is no ways a reproach unto them, to be so
called. Yea, what are the best of men without the Spirit, but dead men? And
this is not a reproach to them, but their Glory; so, nor is it to Scripture.

Thou say, They are said to be a killing letter, and this shows, that they
are not dead. Answ. A poor Argument indeed! Can not dead things kill, if men
feed upon them? If thou seedest upon sand, gravel, stones, The Letter kills.
shells, will not these things kill thee, though they be dead? And if thou
feedest upon the Letter without thee, and not upon the Life, thou can not
live: yea, if one that lived, did depart from feeding upon the Life, to feed
upon the Letter, it would kill him. And as for that Scripture cited by thee, it
makes very much against thee, to wit, Isaiah 59.21. For it is one thing, for
God to put Words into men's Mouths, and far another, for men to gather these
Words from that without, Isaiah 59.21.
and put them into their own Mouths; nor does it say, that the Words God shall
put into their Mouths, shall be no other Words, more or less, but the express
Scripture Words. Why art thou not ashamed, to cite this Scripture? Do ye not
say, To speak, as the infallible Spirit gives utterance, is ceased? and
consequently, God's putting Words into the Mouth, God's furnishing them with
Words suggested from his own Spirit and Life, which the holy Prophets and
Apostles witnessed, to speak as moved by the Holy Ghost, do ye not say, this is
ceased? Why then citest thou a Scripture, which is so plain and clear for it?
but that thou art in Blindness and Confusion.

Page 19. In thy procedure upon the point of Justification, thou make a large
step in that crooked path of deceit, wherein thou had too much traced from
the beginning; but now more abundantly than ever, thou displayest the Banner of
thy Dis-ingenuity, and gatherest all thy Forces together, it should seem
resolving, to give the Quakers a final Overthrow. And to make the matter misty
in the very entry of it, thou raisest Dust to thy self, venting thy own filthy
Imaginations under the notion of coming from them, applauding thy endeavors,
as if thou were studying to preserve pure the principle of Justification, in a
point, where none is jumbling it among us. As thou advancest a little further,
( Page 20, 21.) having given a very scant Account of their Doctrine in this
Matter, couching it in most disadvantagious terms, thou take great liberty to
extend thy self in a foolish and vain Excursion, as if having fathomed the
Quakers, thou had discovered them to be either turned, or turning rank
Papists: therefore to trace thee thoroughly in this matter, that if it be
possible, thou may come to have a discovery of thy Vanity and Malice, or
though thou should prove irrecoverable, yet others may have a view of both; I
shall first in honesty and plainness declare the Principle of Truth in this
matter, thereby observing thy Mis-representations: Secondly show, what Vast
Difference is betwixt us and the Papists therein: And Thirdly, make manifest,
how much nearer of kin ye are to the Papists, even as to this particular, and
the things relating thereunto, than we; which may serve as a seasonable shower,
to allay that windy Triumph, which thou endeavourest to establish unto thy self.

As to the first, We are justified by Christ Jesus, both as he appeared, and
was made manifest in the Flesh at Jerusalem, and also as he is made manifest
and Revealed in us: And thus we do not divide Christ, nor his Righteousness
without, from his Righteousness within, but we do receive and embrace him
wholly and undivided, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jeremiah 23.6.1.30. By which
we are both made and accounted Righteous in the sight of God, and which ought
not, nor cannot be divided. Christ's Righteousness ours.
And the manner and way, whereby his Righteousness and Obedience, Death and
Sufferings without become profitable unto us, and is made ours, is by receiving
him, and becoming one with him in our hearts, embracing and entertaining that
holy Seed, which as it is embraced and entertained, becomes a holy Birth in
us, which in Scripture is called, Christ formed within; Christ within the hope
of glory, Gal. 4.19. Coloss. 1.27. By which the Body of Sin and Death is done
away, and we cleansed, and washed and purged from our sins not imaginarily, but
really; and we really and truly made righteous, and holy and pure in the sight
of God: which Righteousness is properly enough said to be the Righteousness of
Christ; for it is immediately from him, and stands in him, and is as
unseparable from him, as the Beams are from the Sun; and it is, through the
Union betwixt him and us, (his righteous Life and Nature brought forth in us,
and we made one with it, as the Branches are with the Vine) that we have a true
Title and Right, to what he has done and suffered for us: for, being so
closely united to Christ, his Righteousness becomes ours, his Obedience ours,
his Death and Sufferings ours: Thus we know him and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable to
his Death, Philip. 3 10. By which Nearness and Fellowship we come to know an
Unity with the suffering Seed both in our selves and others, and therein to
travel for its raising and deliverance; which yet no ways derogates from the
Worth of the Sacrifice he offered up unto God without the Gates of Jerusalem,
while he humbled himself unto Death, even unto the Death of the Cross, tasting
Death for every man. This is an honest, and plain and true Account of our
Belief in this matter, and is in Substance one and the same with that, which at
sundry times thou and thy Brethren have received from us; notwithstanding the
bare, scanty, and dis-ingenuous Account thou give of us in this matter.
Secondly, As to the Vast Difference, that lies betwixt us and the Papists, any
who are not wilfully blind, may see it, who know their Doctrine and ours in
this thing.

It is not the Works of Christ wrought in us, nor the works which we work in
his Spirit and Power, that we rest and rely upon, as the Ground and Foundation
of our Justification; How Christ is our Justification.
but it is Christ himself, the Worker revealed in us, in-dwelling in us, his
Life and Spirit covering us, that is the Ground of our Justification; and we
feeling our selves in him, feeling him in us, and his Spirit, his Life covering
us, we feel our Justification and Peace with God in him and through him, the
alone Mediator betwixt God and Man. Now, this manner of Justification by the
indwelling of Christ in the Saints, and of his Spirit, is not held by the
Papists, but is expressly denied by them, and disputed against particularly by
Bellarmine: And Christ Jesus himself is both first and last our Justification
and Foundation of it. And as to being Justified by Works, the Scripture is
plain for it, and so we may not deny it, but plead for it, according to the
true sense and mind of the Spirit, as we are taught of him. But to be Justified
by him, is more than to be Justified by Works; Works wrought in Christ.
and therefore are we justified in our Works, which we work in him, and because
the Lord accepts and justifies us in him; therefore he accepts and
justifies our Works wrought in him, and accepts and justifies us in
relation to these Works. And though it has been said by us, that Good Works,
which are wrought in Christ, and are rather his than ours, are Meritorious, yet
we understand it not any other ways, than thus; That all their Merit or Worth
is from Christ. And seeing, they are said in Scripture to have their Reward,
and Reward and Merit are Relative Terms, inferring one another; in that sense,
wherein they are said to be Rewarded, they may also be said to be Meritorious:
which yet hinders not the freedom of God's Grace in Justification. For we do
verily believe and confess, that both the Works and the Reward are of the
Free Grace of God, and that the Lord gives us all things not of Debt, or as
being in our Debt, but of Free-gift, and his infinite Goodness and Wisdom has
seen it meet to promise a Reward to Good Works; and so he does Reward them,
because of his Goodness and Faithfulness, and not because he is addebted unto
any of us, otherwise then as he has bound himself by his promise. And this is
contrary to that false Popish Doctrine, which affirms, That men deserve a
Reward from God for Good Works, upon the account of strict Justice, without
respect to the Promise. And if it be answered, That all Papists do not say so,
but are more moderate: Well then, I say, If some of them be moderate, and pass
from the erroneous Opinion of Popery, and speak that which is true, if others
speak what is true also in that particular, should the Truth be accused and
condemned for Rank Popery, because, some Papists at times confess to it? You
your selves know, that Papists contradict one another in diverse things, and
where men directly contradict one another, one of the sides must speak true:
But as to that, wherein the Justification stands, and on which it is grounded,
to wit, Christ himself as in-dwelling in the Saints, none of all the Papists,
for ought we ever heard, or read, do own it, but are against it. Again, As to
the Works by which the Papists seek to be justified, The Papists justifying
Works pretended.
they are such, as we believe none can be justified by, viz. their outward
Observations, their Invocation of Saints, bowing to Images, saying Ave Mary's,
telling their Beads, their Pilgrimages, their whipping themselves, their
keeping Lent, and many other such like Works of voluntary Humility, by which
they seek to be justified, though they are evil Works, as not done in the Faith
and Power of God. Nor does it serve thy turn to say, That Papists think not,
that Works considered as evil and sinful, are sufficient to justify them; for
that is not the question, Whether the Papists think to be justified by Works
sinful and evil; but this is the Question, Whether the Papists think to be
justified by Works, which are really sinful and evil, (however they may imagine
them to be good?) And herein I say, we differ vastly from Papists; they think
and seek to be justified by such Works, as are evil in the sight of God;
whereas we believe, that by no such Works can any man be justified. Other
weighty Differences could be showed in relation to this Matter, but what is
here in short declared, may suffice to evince, that we differ widely from the
Papists concerning Justification.

Thirdly, Look how near a kin ye are to Papists, as in many other things, so in
these relating to Justification. First, Do ye not say, That ye are not
justified by Christ in-dwelling in you? So say the Papists. Secondly, Do ye not
say, That the way to attain to a state of Justification is not by believing in
the Word of Faith, which is in every man, and in the Light wherewith Christ has
enlightened every man, that comes into the World? And so say the Papists: who
though they talk of Universal Grace, yet they deny, that this Universal Grace
is an Evangelical Principle of Light, by believing in which men can attain unto
a state of Justification immediately. Thirdly, Do ye not say, That God's Act of
Justification is not an immediate Testimony of his Spirit, declaring or
pronouncing men righteous? And so say the Papists? Fourthly, Do ye not say,
That men are not to know their Justification, or that they are in a justified
state, by an immediate Testimony of the Spirit in them by way of object, for
this were to assert Immediate Revelation? So do the Papists? So by these few
Instances given here, and by many other Instances given by others in other
particulars, try your selves, and first clear your selves of Popery, before you
or thou do throw it upon us.

Now whereas thou alledgest, That the Apostle in the matter of Justification
excludes all Works, even those of Christ his working in the Saints, and which
they work in him, It Is false; nor do the Scriptures cited by thee prove thy
intent. As Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16. Tit. 3.5. thou say, The Apostle speaks of
Works in general, Works of the Law and of the Spirit.
without any limitation: But herein thou contradictest the very express
Scriptures cited by thee; for all these Scriptures speak of Works with a
limitation: As Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be
justified: and Gal. 2.16. Knowing, that a man is not justified by the Works of
the Law. Here the Works of the Law are excluded, but not the Works of Christ in
us, which are not of the Law: for the Law or first Covenant was weak, and gave
not strength to them, who were under it, to fulfill Righteousness; but these who
were in Christ Jesus, witnessed the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in them,
who walked not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. And as for that other
Scripture, Tit. 3.5. though it exclude Works of men's doing, as of themselves;
yet it excludes not all Works, nor inward Righteousness of Christ, but expressly
includes it. According to his Mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration,
and Renewing of the Holy Ghost. Thou could not have brought a more plain
proof against thy self; for thou citest this Scripture has holding forth
Justification. Now the Apostle says, He saved us according to his Mercy by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; and is not the washing
of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost a Work, which comprehends many
particular Works of the Spirit of Christ in the Saints? And is not
Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost a Righteousness wrought in us?
How is it then, that thou art not ashamed to charge us with Rank Popery, for
saying, We are justified by a Righteousness wrought in us; seeing the very
Scripture cited by thee is expressly for it? May we not pertinently return these
words upon thee, which thou mis-appliest to us? Oh! tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the Streets of Askalon, etc. that a man, who pretends to
teach others a-right in the matter of Justification, has so confounded
himself, that to prove, that Justification is not by a Righteousness wrought
within, brings a Scripture which speaks expressly of Righteousness within, to
wit, that of Regeneration and Renovation, by which we are saved. And if any
should say, The words do not say, We are Justified by the washing of
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost; but we are Saved thereby, as
intending Sanctification, and not Justification. I answer, This helps not the
Author out of the Ditch; for he brings this Scripture forth applying it to the
matter of Justification. But again; If these words exclude all Works generally,
and without any limitation, then they exclude all Works, which are wrought by
the Spirit of Christ, from sanctification; as if men were sanctified by no
Works of the Spirit of Christ within them. Sanctification by the Works of the
Spirit.
Or if it be said, that Works of our own doing Self-righteousness, are only
excluded from having place in our Sanctification, but not the Works wrought in
and by the Spirit of Christ; then I say, why may not the same Distinction have
place in all these other Scriptures, which say, We are not justified by Works,
etc. And indeed, in all these Scriptures it holds true no less concerning
Sanctification, than concerning Justification: As thus; By the deeds of the Law
there shall no flesh be sanctified, knowing, that a man is not sanctified by
the Works of the Law, etc. But it were vain to infer from this, that men are
sanctified by no Works of Righteousness wrought in them by the Spirit of
Christ. Therefore it is as vain to infer, that men are justified by no Works of
Righteousness, wrought in them by his Spirit.

Page 22 Thou say, We can shift off Popery with this, that they are not our
Good Works, which deserve and merit Justification, but the Good Works of
Christ's working in us. Yea I say, we do justly cast off the Accusation of
Popery, as having the express testimony of Scripture, that we are justified by
Works, to wit, such as are wrought in Christ, and by him in us, James 2.24. You
see then, that a man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only: Compared
with Tit. 3.5. beforementioned. And as for the Papists Works, by which they
seek to be justified, we do not acknowledge them to be such Works, as whereby
or wherein any can be justified.

And whereas thou pleadest, That the Good Works of Christ's working in us, are
ours; citing Isai. 26.12. Matthew. 5.16. etc. We grant it, but they are not ours
in that signification: as where it is said, He that is entered into his Rest,
has ceased from his own Works, Hebr. 4.10. There are Works, which are so ours,
that they are not the Works of the sanctifying, renewing Spirit of Christ in
us; What works do justify.
and such are Works both of open Unrighteousness, and of self-fained
Righteousness, which has no better Root to bring them forth, then Man's own
Will and Spirit: and by such Works we deny to be justified, yea, we deny all
such Works, and the justification by them, and desire to stand in a continual
denial unto them, and forbearance from them. But again, there are such Works,
which are so ours, that they are Christ's also, who works them in us, and by
us, and are ours by his Free Grace; and by such Works, we affirm, men are
justified.

Page 23. Thou pleadest, That men cannot be justified by any Works of Christ's
working in them, because they are Imperfect. And for their Imperfection thou
instancest, 1. Faith; because it is said, O ye of little Faith, why doubt ye.
Answ. True Faith.
By this thou may as well exclude Faith from Justification every way, as
Works, if it were granted, that their Faith was Imperfect; but that Scripture,
nor no other, speaks not of imperfect Faith, but of little Faith. Now little
Faith is perfect in the measure of it, as a little Gold is perfect Gold. And
though the Disciples had doubting, yet the Faith was not the doubting, nor was
it made impure by it; for the least measure of true Faith can never be defiled,
otherwise it could not purify the heart, it is like the fire, which cannot be
defiled with the impurities of those things, it works upon. And as for the
Disciples at that time, as they were in part justified, or approved by the Lord
in relation to their Faith, so were they reproved, and not justified of him in
relation unto, or because of their doubting. But this Scripture, nor none
other, proves not, that Faith was or is always accompanied with doubting:
Abraham believed God's promise without doubting, and was strong in the Faith,
giving glory to God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness, Romans 4.20,
21, 22. And, said James, His Faith was perfected by Works, Chap. 2.22. For that
which is perfect in a less measure, can be further perfected in a greater.
Secondly, Thou pleadest, that Knowledge is Imperfect, because the Apostle
says, We know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. But the Apostle does not say, our
Knowledge is imperfect, or impure: We may know a thing in part, and yet that
which we know of it, we may know perfectly. Thirdly, Thou pleadest for the
Imperfection and Uncleanness of the Saints Obedience, from Eccles. 7. But that
place is not to be understood concerning all men in all states and times. There
is an earthly, unrenewed state, and while men are here, there is not a just man
among them, as Romans 3. verse 10. There is none righteous, no not one: And there
is an heavenly, renewed state, wherein a Man is born of God, and sins not,
John 3. verse 9. And said the Apostle, Let no Man deceive you, he that does
Righteousness, is righteous; which imports, that there are righteous Men, who
do good. And, said the Lord to the Servants that used their Talents; Well done,
good and faithful Servant, Matthew. 25. verse. 21, 23. And that other Scripture
thou citest, Isai 64.6. serves nothing thy turn: Self-righteousness as filthy
Rags.
For the Prophet says not, All our Righteousness, which is of thy working in
us, who are Saints, is as filthy rags; but All our Righteousness, which we,
even the best of the Saints can perform of and from themselves, are as filthy
rags; man's best Works, his best Righteousness, which is of and from himself,
is filthiness and unrighteousness before God, and he is to cease from all his
own Works, Hebr. 4. verse. 10. And it is plain, that when the Prophet in that
place says, We are all as unclean, and there is none, that calls upon thy
Name; He does understand the multitude of the Jews, who generally were a carnal
People, and relied upon their outward Observations* and did not Worship God in
Spirit and in Truth; but did not understand it of all and every one among them:
For he himself did call upon his Name. And that the Saints were washed and
cleansed, see 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, are sanctified, are justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: And John 15.3. Now ye
are clean through the Word, which I have spoken to you: And Ezekiel 37.33. At
which time I shall cleanse you from all your Iniquities; I shall also cause the
Cities to be inhabited: Which imports a time upon Earth, wherein they should be
made clean from all their Iniquities* And how! art not thou and you ashamed to
affirm, That the best Works of the Spirit of Christ in his Saints are as a
filthy rag? Does not the Apostle say, That a meek and quiet Spirit is an
Ornament, which is of a great price even in the sight of God? How then can it
be a filthy or menstruous rag? A filthy and menstruous rag is good for nothing,
but must be thrown away upon all Accounts; and if that Holiness, and
Righteousness and Meekness, which is of Christ his working in men, be as filthy
rags, then according to your Doctrine men should throw them away, as being not
only unprofitable to Justification, but to any other use? Yea, a filthy and
menstruous Rag men do hide from the sight of another, and do never wear it as
an Ornament; whereas the Saints put on the meek, and quiet, and sober, and
righteous Spirit, as an Ornament of great price, not only in the sight of the
Saints, but even in the sight of God.

Page 24. Thou pleadest, That the Good Works of Christ in the Saints are
defiled and imperfect, because the Saints, who are subservient and instrumental
in them, are unclean; and who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job
14.4. Answ. It is granted, that the Saints are subordinate Co-workers with
Christ; but yet it follows not, that his Works in them, and by them are
defiled. And though it is said, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
This hinders not, but that the Lord can and does make Clean those, The Lord
makes clean the unclean.
who have been unclean; and so out of them, who are made clean, bring forth
clean things. And though every one, in whom the work of Sanctification is
begun, be not wholly cleansed, but that there may be an unclean part in them
for a time; yet there is also a clean part in them, who are in the least
measure sanctified: and so these, who work with the Spirit of Christ, work with
him according to this clean part; and it is the clean part in them, which he
makes use of, as his Instrument. And as for the unclean part, it is not to
work with Christ, but to be chained down, and fettered and bound up from
working, to the end it may be wrought upon, that it may be cleansed: and thus
by degrees the clean part increases, and the unclean is diminished, till all
the uncleanness be wrought out. And where the unclean part is let loose to
work, the pure Spirit of Christ does never join in working with it, but judges
and reproves it; and therefore in so far, as the unclean part works in any,
that man, in whom it works, is not thoroughly justified and approved by the
Lord: but there are, who witness the cleansing from all the uncleanness; and so
as clean Vessels and Instruments throughout, bring forth clean things, clean
works.

Thy Example, how that Clean water passing through an unclean Pipe, receives a
tincture of uncleanness, hits not the case: The spiritual Water is undefilable.
For the spiritual Water is not like the common, gross, outward Water, which an
unclean Pipe can defile; but like the fire, and the Light, which though it
touch unclean things* cannot be defiled by them. Every thing of the Spirit is
undefilable, as the Spirit is, which no unclean thing can defile: And if thou
were well skilled in the outward Creation, thou might find an outward Water
so pure, that passing through an unclean Pipe, shall not be defiled with it.
But if thou know not these earthly things, and believe them not, as Christ
said John 3.12. How shall thou believe, if we tell thee heavenly things.

Page 25. Thou chargest us with Erring grievously, in confounding Justification
and Sanctification. Answ. Justification is either taken for God his adjudging a
man, unto Eternal Life, A twofold Justification.
and in that sense it is not to be confounded with Sanctification; yet it is
not to be separated therefrom: for God adjudgeth no man, but the sanctified
unto Eternal Life or Happiness. Or it is taken for the making a man righteous;
and then it is all one with Sanctification. And that thou say, The word is
most frequently used in Scripture in that sense of adjudging, being opposed to
condemnation; Does imply, thou have not the confidence to assert, that it is
always so used, as indeed it is not.

And whereas thou citest Philip. 3.9. to prove, That the choicest Saints upon
Earth have disclaimed all Righteousness wrought in them, by which they could be
justified; I say, that Scripture proves no such thing, and thy Observation to
prove it, is insufficient; to wit, that the Apostle does not speak of his
Righteousness, whilst he was a Pharisee, for that he disowned, verse. 6, 7. for
admitting it, yet he was still to deny and disown the Work and Righteousness,
which could proceed from his own Will and Spirit; even all the willings and
runnings, which can arise from a man's self, though he be a Saint,
Self-righteousness to be watched against.
without the immediate operation of the Spirit of Christ, the Saints have this
to watch against, to keep down the active and working self-will, and stop it
from working the Self-righteousness; which if it be not watched against, and
stood against, will fall a working its Righteousness, which God accepts not, as
being but the bare Righteousness of man; And this is that Righteousness, which
Paul denied to have, which he even calls the Righteousness of the Law; but
this, ( which is of the Law) thou cunningly omittest, because it made against
thee, it seems. Now what that Righteousness of God through Faith was, which he
desires to have, he plainly expresses verse 10. That he might know him, and
the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, in being
made conform unto his death.

Now, is not the knowledge of him, and the power of his Resurrection a work of
the Spirit of Christ in the Saints, by which they are justified? according to
that, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many? And is not the
fellowship of his suffering, or the suffering with him a work of his Spirit?
And Lastly, is not the Conformity unto his Death a work of his Spirit in the
Saints, comprehending the whole work of Mortification?

Page 26. Thy last Argument from 2 Cor. 5.21. is most absurd and impious, for
accordingly it would follow, that as Christ was made sin for us, or suffered
for our sins, who himself had no sin, no, not in the least; So we may be made
righteous before God, though we have no righteousness, no holiness, no faith,
no repentance, no mortification, no good thing wrought in us. Christ's
Righteousness made by the Priest a strengthening of the wicked.
And does not this strengthen the wicked, ungodly and profane in their
Presumption, to have title to Christ his Righteousness? And so, to return thy
mis-applied Instance in another case; Suppose, some of the profane, who plead a
right to Christ's Righteousness, having lost some of their number, should
happen to hear thee disputing against all Good Works, as being profitable to
Justification, might they not say concerning thee and thy Brethren, who teach
such Doctrine, We have not only got the lost sheep, but the lost shepherds,
and the chiefest of them too on our side, let us rejoice, we have found them?
We find, the Apostle makes a far better Inference from Christ his dying for us,
2 Cor. 6.15. He died for all, that they who live, might not any longer live to
themselves, but to God; yea, and every where he holds forth Inward holiness
and righteousness, as that without which no man can lay claim to Christ: If any
man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; but he does not say, God reputes him a
New Creature, though he be not really renewed. And though it be said, that we
are made righteous in him; This hinders not (as thou vainly inferrest,) That we
are not made righteous by an inward righteousness: for he is in the Saints, and
fulfils the righteousness of the Law in them; that the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, The righteousness of the Law fulfilling in us.
Romans 8.4. Therefore that 2 Cor. 5.21. is thus to be understood, that Jesus
Christ, who knew no sin, was made to be sin for us, that is, suffered for our
sins, that we, who had really sinned, and so deserved wrath, might partake of
the Love and Grace by him, and through the workings thereof be made the
Righteousness of God in him. For that the Apostle understood here a really
being made righteous, and not a being esteemed or held as righteous, while
indeed impure, is very evident by the whole following Chapter, but especially
toward the end; What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
Wherefore come out from among them, touch not the unclean thing, be ye
separate, and I will receive you, and ye shall be unto me for sons and
daughters.

Now to be Received of the Lord, is to be justified of him; and here we see
plainly, that in order thereunto there is required a Righteousness, by which
they must be separated from the evil and unclean, and must not touch it.

And whereas thou say, That the holiest Actions of the Saints, because of
the sinfulness of these Actions, deserve Condemnation. I ask thee, Whether did
the Apostles sin in writing the Scriptures, Then writing the Scriptures was Sin
in the holy men of God? according to W. M's. Position.
in preaching Christ, and gathering the Churches? Whether their being the
Instruments made these things sinful, which were done not only by the command,
but by the power and virtue of Christ in them? And seeing thou can not deny,
but the Scriptures (called by thee the Word of God) were brought forth by the
holy Spirit in the holy men of God, and did flow as waters from the Spirit of
God, which gave them forth, through the very first Penmen of them, because of
the uncleanness which thou supposest to have been in them? If thou say, Nay,
thou contradictest thy former instance of Clean water, receiving a Tincture of
uncleanness from the unclean Pipe, through which it passes: If thou say,
Yea, to wit, that the Scriptures were defiled and corrupted by the Penmen of
them, I leave it to all of any sound Judgment, whether you or we be most
Esteemers of the Scriptures, We, who say, They were pure words as Gold, without
any tincture of uncleanness or corruption, as they came forth from the Spirit
of God through the Penmen of them: Or You, if you say, That they were defiled
with the uncleanness of the men, through which they were given forth? He who
has any true understanding, let him judge concerning these things.

Page 26. Thou blamest it, as an Unsuitable thing for a Quaker to say, That
that People, to whom he is joined, are the most Christ-like Christians this day
upon the Earth: And yet will any of you say less of your Way? For if yours be
not the best Way, why do you plead so much for it? Why do ye preach it up? Why
do you study to draw People to it, and complain of those who have left it? Now
is not a good Principle a ready way to lead People to good Practices? And are
not these who are in the right Way, of the Flock of Christ? And is not Christ's
Flock like unto him? Can it therefore be an unsuitable thing for one, who
supposes himself to be of Christ's Flock, to say, The Flock, with whom he is,
is likest to Christ? Will any of you say less, except ye grant your selves not
to be of Christ's Flock? We are not the most-Christ-like People, say thou,
by what we outwardly appear, because the Monks and Heremits therein excel us;
nor yet by what we inwardly feel, because others different from us have felt as
much.

As to the first, thou have showed thy Ignorance of the very Appearance of
Christianity: for the Appearance of Christianity is not in fleeing the Society
of Men, or retiring the outward Man, making Vows of voluntary Poverty; for any
one, that has the least knowledge in true Mortification, may know, that where
a man's Meat and Provision is laid up for him, and that there is no care of
these things lying upon the Mind, but a full liberty to live in Idleness (which
is the Monks Case) it is an easy thing, in Self-will to take on a demure
deportment, or to wear Hair-cloth, or go barefoot; which by custom becomes
familiar. And truly, many of the Commons in Scotland are used to greater
hardships, than all that, and yet are far from having the Appearance of
Christianity. But the matter is, for People to be conversant in this World, to
have their Occasions and Business in it, and to have dealing with the Spirit of
it, and yet to keep to the meek, lowly, simple Appearance, using it as if they
were not using it, by keeping out of its Spirit and Way in all manner of
Conversation: This is to be like unto Christ, who did not retire himself unto
an Heremits lodge, but conversed among Publicans and Sinners. Now let Your
Flocks, and the Quakers be compared together in this particular, and let the
Light in all Consciences judge, who are likest to Christ.

Secondly, To evidence* that some different from us have had as much Inward
feeling, thou say, Thou can tell us of some, who have had so much of the
fear and dread of God upon their hearts, that they durst not adventure upon
Sin. By this thou seem to grant, that there are inward feelings and
enjoyments among the Quakers; saying, What good is it, that you truly feel,
that persons different from you have not felt? And how does this consist with
your judging the Quakers fallen into Apostasy and Delusion of the Devil, and
that they are possessed with the Devil? Can such have inward feelings and
enjoyments of God? For my part I am glad to hear, that any such have been, who
have had so much of the fear and dread of God upon their hearts, that they
durst not adventure upon sin; and I should be glad, and so I know, would any of
the Quakers be glad to meet with them. But now such, who have so much of the
fear of God upon their hearts, that they durst not adventure upon sin, would
they not love to be Perfect? Would they dispute against Perfection, and
conclude it impossible? Would such, who dare not sin for a world, sin every
day, yea every moment, as you say ye do? If they dare not sin, would they not
refrain from sin, and cease from it? And would they make use of that poor
evasion, which thou addest, that therefore they would not willingly sin for a
world? As long as the dread and fear of God remains and stands over the heart,
sin is shut out, and the Mind's will is to fear God, and not to sin.

Thou can tell us of others (thou say) who many years lived in the sweet
sense of God's favor, and have gone most triumphantly out of the world, with
strong persuasions of their Eternal Well-being. But would such have pleaded for
Continuance in sin? Does not Continuance in sin eclipse and take away the sense
of God's favor? And further, would such have denied fellowship with God by
Immediate Revelation, Immediate Teachings of the Spirit.
as you do? Would they have denied the Immediate Teachings of the Spirit, as
you do? Do not some now living remember some of them, who had these feelings,
and did bear an express Testimony to the imediate Teachings of the Spirit, and
Immediate fellowship with God, and plainly declared, That no preaching was
profitable, but that which came immediately from the Spirit? and found fault
with the Ministers, that they preached from their Study and their Books, and
wished them to put away or burn their Books, for that they were a hurt to them?
And some of those saw over and beyond, and unto the end of your so called
Ordinance of outward Bread and Wine, Bread and Wine.
and said plainly; It was but a shadow or figure, and that those who witnessed
the substance, had no need of the other. And though those and some others, who
witnessed such inward feelings and enjoyments of God, were not called Quakers,
nor had their understandings so clearly opened as to many things, as the People
called Quakers have; yet with the same life in some measure they have been
acquainted, which is the Quakers Way, even Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the
Truth and the Life. And so as to those Examples thou give, which were
witnessed (thou say) some twenty years ago, We deny not, but that the Lord
did appear, and was near the simple-hearted in that day: and some who are now
among the Quakers, remember that day, Former Feelings and Enjoyments.
and have a share in those feelings and enjoyments, which are now; and in the
experience and enjoyment of them can bear a true Testimony, that the feelings
and enjoyments of this day, unto those who follow the Lord in his leadings, do
far exceed, what was in that day. And now the Sun is set upon that day; for the
Lord is calling his People further: and those among us, who had those former
feelings, can witness, that while they would have been tasting of that
sweetness, and remained still with you, the Lord would not; but suffered
dryness and barrenness to come over them: and that which some time had been as
a fruitful Field, to become a barren Wilderness, till they saw, that they were
not to limit him to Invented Forms, but were to forsake those things in his
Will, in which through his Indulgence and Compassion he had sometimes appeared
unto them, and to be found following the footsteps of the Flock whom he is
leading on to a further state, in which they find the Lord appearing more
gloriously, than ever, to their refreshment: Glory to him for evermore! But
with you it is otherwise: for who among you witness these things at this day?
Yea, some of you are so ingenuous, as to confess, That ye find not these things
now; and that this is a cloudy and gloomy day: and it shall certainly so
continue unto you, until ye come, and walk with us in the Light of the Lord.
But because ye will not, but will confine the Lord in these forms, whereunto ye
have devoted your selves; therefore is darkness over you, and your Prayers are
become dry and barren, and full of Complaints of an Absent God. And what Inward
joy from God any have felt among you, we cannot impute it to your Way; more
than what some have felt of refreshment in some other Professions and Forms,
can be imputed to their Way.

Page 30. Thou say, It is known, that we are Enemies to singing of Psalms,
Baptism and the Lord's Supper; And because we say, Baptism and the Lord's
Supper.
that we are not against these things, therefore thou call us dis-ingenuous,
or such as seek to delude People; Which Challenge is false, and a Calumny. For
we do indeed own these things in the true acceptance and meaning of them, and
in the substance and reality; and if we do so, are we dis-ingenuous and
deceitful, because we deny them in your Acceptance, which only comprehends the
shadow, that passes away? The Shadow for the Substance comprehended by
Professors.
If Baptism, which is really and truly the Baptism of Christ, we own, and
participation of the Body and Blood of Christ, which is really so, I say, if
these things be really owned by us, as they are indeed, can we be said to deny
them, because we use not the shadow, as ye do, while ye are ignorant of, and
strangers to the substance? Nay, it may be retorted much more properly, and
without deceit upon your selves, that ye do but pretendly in Words own these
things, while indeed ye deny them. So that herein ye are found to be the
Equivocators, who are contending for the Husk, and will needs have it accounted
the Kernel: and there can be no error more dangerous, than to place the shadow
for the substance; for such as so do, are those that trample upon the precious
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, in which the work of grace is begun and increased.

Page 32. To prove thy Assertions particularly, Singing of Psalms, as used by
the Saints, allowed.
thou beginnest saying, That singing of Psalms is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ;
Whereby if thou understandest, that singing of Psalms was used by the Saints,
that it is a part of God's Worship, when performed in his Will, and by his
Spirit, and that yet it may be, and is warrantably performed among the Saints,
it is a thing denied by no Quaker (so called) and it is not unusual among them;
whereof I have my self been a witness, and have felt of the sweetness and
quickening virtue of the Spirit therein, and at such occasions ministered. And
that at times David's Words may also be used, as the Spirit leads thereunto,
and as they suit the condition of the party, is acknowledged without dispute:
but that without the Spirit in Self-will, not regarding how the thing suits
their Condition, for a mixed multitude to use and sing the Expressions of
blessed David, we deny. For that was not the Method the Apostle spoke of 1 Cor.
14.15. when he said; I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
Understanding also. Therefore, though singing of Psalms in the true use of them
be allowable; yet as used by you, it is abominable, and is a Mock-worship;
because ye cannot deny, but that the Persons using it are a mixed Multitude,
known to be Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, etc. Now such cannot praise God,
The Dead cannot praise God.
for they are dead in their sins; and it is the living, that praise him, and
not the dead. Next, All Lying is abomination: but many times it falls out, that
by singing of Psalms the People come to lie in the presence of God, instead of
worshipping him, by saying, I am not puffed up in mind, I have no deceitful
heart, I water my Couch with tears; and much more of this nature, which were
the particular Experiences of David, and may be safely said by those that
witness the same thing: but as to you that use them, are false and untrue. I
say, as thou do, That though every Psalm does not suit our Condition, yet in
every Psalm there may be Meditation for Edification. But this no ways meets the
case; for there is a great difference betwixt Meditating upon a Psalm, and
Singing one, whereby we apply our selves to the Lord in the words of David;
which unless they suit our Condition, cannot be done without a lie.

Page 33, and 34. Thou come to prove, That Baptism with water is an Ordinance
of Jesus Christ; for which thou give as a Reason; First, Because John
baptized with water, and was really sent of God; Which thing is not denied,
because John's Baptism was a Baptism with Water: But that that was the Baptism,
which was to Continue, is the matter in question. To prove which, thou bring
in thy

Second Reason, That the baptism of Christ and the baptism of John differed
only in Circumstance, and not in Substance, because they agree in the Author,
in the Matter, and in the End. To which

I Answer, That though they agreed in the Author, that will not conclude them
to be one; because by the same reason it might be said, that the Old Testament
and the New are one, or that Circumcision and Baptism are one, The Baptism of
John and of Christ, differ as the Shadow and Substance.
for that God was the Author of both. As to the Matter, they are not one
neither; for the one was a Baptism with Water, and the other a Baptism with the
Spirit and with Fire, as John himself distinguishes them, Mark 1.8. Now in
respect Baptism with water can be administered, where the other (to wit, with
the Spirit) is not, therefore they are not one in Substance. They also agree
not in the End; for the End of the one, to wit, Baptism with Water, is but to
point or show forth the other. So that as the Shadow, and the Substance differ
in their Ends, in like manner do these two: for the End of the Shadow is but to
point to the Substance; the End of the Substance in this thing being to cleanse
and purify the heart, producing that effect to such as it is truly administered
unto; but the Shadow is frequently administered, and the heart not cleansed;
therefore they differ in their Ends. Now to show, that they differ in
Substance; it is written, Acts 19.2, 3, 4, 5. that there were of the Baptism of
John, who had not so much as heard of the Holy Ghost, far less received it: Now
had the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ been one, they could not
have had the one, and been altogether ignorant of the other.

For a Third Reason thou say, That Jesus Christ commanded and injoined the
Disciples to Baptize, and that Baptizing they used Water. But where he commands
them to Baptize, (Matthew. 28.) there is no Command to Baptize them with Water,
or into Water, but into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit: So here is
the Baptism into the Spirit, but not into outward Water. And the Apostles were
Ministers of the Spirit, and ministered the Spirit unto those who believed: And
though they used the Water Baptism at times, Water Baptism used in
Condescension to the Weak.
yet it rests to be proved, that they did it in obedience to that general
Command, Matthew. 28. and not in Condescendence to the People, who had received a
great Esteem of John, and were so nursed up with outward Ceremonies, that it
was hard suddenly to wean them from such; as they did the like in other Cases.

Which also serves for answer to thy Fourth Reason, where thou instancest Peter
his baptizing Cornelius, after he received the Spirit; For Peter's words imply
no Command, but only that at that occasion the thing might be done; Can any
man, said he, forbid Water, that they may not be Baptized? Acts 10.47. And
though it be said, ( Verse. 48.) That he commanded them to be baptized in the
Name of Christ; yet it holds forth no Command from Christ; only the thing being
agreed upon, that it might be done, he did do it. But that the Apostles
received no Commission to Baptize with water, Water Baptism no Commission to
the Apostles.
is clear from that of Paul, where he says, I thank God, I baptized none of
you, but Crispus, and Gajus, and the household of Stephanus, etc. for, said he,
I was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.16, 17. Now it is
not questioned, but his Commission was as large, as any of the rest; for he
himself said, that he was not Inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles; but
that he thereby denied, he was sent to administer the Holy Spirit, which is the
Baptism of Christ, is absurd to think.

For a Fifth Reason thou say, It is the will of Christ, that this Ordinance
should continue and abide in the Church, because he promised to be with his
Ministers to the end of the World. To which I Answer; That this promise related
to the Baptism of the Spirit, which is Christ's Baptism, is granted; but that
it related to the Baptism of water, is denied: for he was with Paul, who yet
professed, he was not sent to Baptize with water. And whereas some give their
meaning to Paul his words, that he was not sent only, or principally to baptize
with water; this is an Addition to the Scripture-Words, for which they can show
no sufficient ground: And if men will take a liberty to Add to Scripture-Words
from their own Spirit, they may wrest the Scriptures to defend the worst of
Opinions. As when it is said, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor Worship
them; One should put this meaning upon it: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
Worship them principally; and therefore would aver, that Graven Images may be
worshipped: this were a most perverse abusing of Scripture.

Sixthly, Thou say, These who cast off this Ordinance, do what in them
lies, to rob themselves of all the excellent ends and uses of it, which are
held forth in these Scripture-Expressions. Answ. That such who cast off the
Baptism of Christ by the Spirit, may incur that hazard, it is granted; but that
any such thing will follow from the not using of water, is denied: as shall
appear by examining the Scriptures cited. The first is, Acts 2.28. Repent, and
be baptized every one of you for the Remission of your sins. Answ. Here is no
mention made of outward Water; and Repentance and Remission of sins may be, and
are found without it; and where it is, both these are frequently wanting.
Water Baptism no universal Command, but to particulars.
But though it should be understood of outward water, it is spoke but to
particulars, and is no universal Command. The Second is, 1 Pet. 3.21. The like
figure whereunto even Baptism does also save us: But the very following words
do give an Answer to that, and clear the meaning not to be of Water Baptism,
saying, Not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Third is, Acts
22.16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. But that a being baptized
with water, is a washing away of sin, thou can not from hence prove, seeing
the contrary is abundantly witnessed. And suppose Water Baptism were here to be
understood; it being but spoke to one, infers no universal Command. The Fourth
is Ephesians. 5. verse 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing
of water. But by Water cannot here be understood outward Water, but that of the
Word and Spirit; for the next Verse speaks of presenting it without spot or
wrinkle; Which the outward Water cannot do: see the like place John 3.5. Unless
a man be born of the Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God. Now, if by Water here were to be understood outward Water, it would
infer, that Water Baptism is absolutely necessary to Salvation; which thou
say, thou can not affirm with Papists. Lastly, thou citest Gal. 3.7. For
as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. But
Water Baptism cannot be here understood, because many, who are baptized with
Water, never put on Christ, nor bear his Image, but the Devil's, and are found
doing the Devil's works. So that none of these Scriptures prove the
Water Baptism to be of Continual necessity in the Church; for it being but a
figure, it was to give place to that one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. And whereas it is
said by some, That the Water Baptism, and the Baptism by the Spirit is but one,
because of that agreement betwixt the signification of the Water and the Spirit
thereby signified. This is a wresting of this Scripture, as much as if one
should say; That all the Types, Figures and Shadows of the Old Testament were
one with the Substance signified by them, and consequently, that these Types
are all now to be upheld and used: whereas indeed the Coming of the Substance
ends the figures; among which are the diverse Baptisms; for so should the place
be translated, Hebr. 9.10. which were imposed until the time of Reformation,
but are no longer binding, since the Reformation is come.

Thou endest this matter with Asserting, That thou can safely say, That the
Spirit of God concurring with, and blessing this Ordinance, it is a profitable
means to further our Salvation. But if so be it be no Ordinance of Christ, as
heretofore is proved, then we cannot expect, that the Spirit will concur with
it; but indeed that he is provoked by it, considering the Abuses in your
Administration of it. As First, in administering it to Infants, Sprinkling of
Infants.
for which ye have no Command nor Example in Scripture. Next, In causing
ignorant People to promise and engage before God, that the Children shall
forsake the Devil, the World and the Flesh, while they themselves be slaves to
all the three. And many more abuses; as that whereby ye pretend to Inroll
Children, as Members of the Church of God, which is pure and holy; it being
oftentimes an occasion of Excess and Drunkenness; and is indeed rather like an
Inrolling under the Devil's Banner, seeing it is for most part accompanied with
doing his Work. Therefore, it is so far from being hazardous to contemn such an
Ordinance of Man, that it cannot be but hurtful to continue in it.

In the Third place (Page 39.) thou come to prove, That the Lord's Supper (so
called) is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ: For which thou bring as a First
Reason, That Jesus Christ was the Author and Ordainer of it; But that proves
not, The Lord's Supper (so called) not perpetual.
That it was to be of perpetual Continuance. Nor thy Second Reason; for though
the Disciples were bid do it in Remembrance of him; they were not bid do it
always. Neither will Acts 2. verse 42. (which thou bring as a Third Proof)
serve thy turn; for by comparing in with Verse 46. it is evident, that their
breaking of bread was their Ordinary eating: for it is said, They continued
daily with one accord in the Temple, The breaking of Bread from House to House.
and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart. So that this was a daily eating from house to house, and
not at all such an eating as yours is, which you have but once, or twice or
thrice in a year, or at such set times, as you appoint to your selves; whereas
theirs was an eating from house to house, wherein they received food sufficient
to their bodily nourishment. Your eating is not so; You will not have your
Sacramental Bread and Wine (so called) to be used in private Houses or
Families, and your eating is rather a Mock-eating, wherein you do not eat that
which is sufficient to the Bodily nourishment (as these did Acts 2.42, 46.)
every one of you taking a little bread about the quantity of a Bean, wherein
you have no Example from the Saints, but rather from the Papists, who have
their Wafers.

Again, This Eating mentioned ( Acts 2. verse 42, 46.) is conjoined with this,
That they sold their possessions, Having all things in Common.
and had all things in common; and so they did eat together daily in common,
which is not like your eating. Now if you would make their Example and Practice
your Rule, why do ye not sell your Possessions, as they did, and have things in
Common? Also, why do ye not abstain from eating blood, and things strangled, as
they did? And why do ye not wash one another feet, which they were as solemnly
commanded to do, as to take and eat? etc. John 13.14, 15. If you say, These
things were but to continue for a time; what ground have ye to affirm, that
these were not always to continue? and those of Water Baptism and breaking
bread were to be always continued.

For a Fourth Reason thou say, Paul Recommended the practice of this to the
Church of Corinth, Cor. 11.23. Answ. That he recommended it unto them by way of
Command, we deny; for he delivered unto them no Command to practice it, but
that which he delivered unto them was the Relation of the Matter of Fact, as
what the Lord did in the Night, wherein he was betrayed. Thou say, The
Apostle does not only here relate the Matter of Fact, but likewise warrants the
frequent use of this Ordinance. It is one thing to warrant the use of it, and
far another, to command the use of it. We do not deny, but the use of it was
lawful and warrantable at that time; but we say, it was not commanded unto
them, but left or permitted to them, as these words import; As often as ye eat,
etc. And again, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat. The words imply
no Command, but only that they were in the use or practice of it; and being
therein, he gives them direction, how they might use it, so as not to receive
hurt there-by. Now that the Corinthians were weak in many things, and did many
things by permission, is clear by the whole strain of that Epistle to them.

For a Fifth Reason thou say, Thou read not in Scripture, where Christ
and his Apostles did abolish it. Answ. If it were so, that then there was no
absolute need; Its Institution intimates its Abolishing.
for the very Institution intimates the Abolishing thereof at Christ his
coming, as to any Necessity by way of Command; though afterward it might have
been used by permission, being gradually to pass away, as did other things. For
Circumcision was abolished by the Coming of Christ; yet it was used after his
Coming, together with diverse other Jewish Ceremonies. But as concerning the
Abolishing or Ending of it, see 1 Cor. 10.15, 16, 17. I speak, as unto wise
men, judge ye what I say; the Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread, which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? And then he proceeds to show, what that Bread
was? For (says he) we being many, are one Bread. Now what is that one Bread?
Is it the Outward? or is it the Inward and Spiritual? The one Bread, not many.
If it be the Outward, then there is no Inward and Spiritual Bread: Or if it be
the Inward and Spiritual, which is that one Bread, then that Outward Bread, (as
being but a Figure) is ceased from being of use, as to any necessity. And this
he spoke unto the Wise, who saw beyond the Shadow and Figure unto the
Substance, the end of it; which was that Heavenly Bread and Refreshment, which
Christ himself gives unto those Souls to feed upon, who know the Mystery of
his Indwelling in them; which Bread is indeed his Body. So that now the Bread
being one, which is the Body of Christ, the Outward Bread has no place in the
Supper of the Lord; for then there should be not one Bread, but two: for the
Outward Bread, and the Inward are two, and not one Bread.

And if any say, The outward Bread, though it be not properly the Body of
Christ and thing signified, yet it may be said to be one with it, because of
that Agreement betwixt the sign, and the thing signified. I Answer; That is not
sufficient, why the outward Bread should be called the one Bread, or one with
the thing signified; otherwise by the same evasion one might plead for the
Continuance of all the Sacrifices and Offerings of Rams, and Bulls and Goats,
and say, they are one with that one Offering of Christ mentioned Hebr. 10.14.
because they signified that one Offering: Now were not this an abominable
wresting of the Apostle's words, to say, All these outward Offerings were the
one Offering, because they did signify it? For indeed, he does
contra-distinguish them from this one Offering, that because of its being come,
he infers, they were to pass away. And so it is as plain, that the Apostle
contra-distinguished betwixt that one Bread, and the outward Bread, together
with the other Figures and Shadows, according to which writing to the
Colossians he says, Coloss. 2.16, 17. Let no man condemn you in Meat or Drink,
or Holy Day, or New Moon, or Sabbath Days, which are a Shadow of things to
come; but the Body is of Christ. And he bids them seek the things above, and
not the things, which the Apostle said, did perish in the using; saying, Touch
not, taste not, handle not; Coloss. 2.10, 21, 22. compared with Coloss. 3.1, 2.
which he spoke, because they began to lay too great a weight upon these things,
and to hold them up as perpetual, which were to pass away.

For a Sixth Reason thou say; The Apostles and Primitive Christians, who did
partake of the Spirit in a large measure, did use it. Answ. That they used it
for some time, is granted; but that they used it, as of Necessity or Command,
is denied: nor did they use it for themselves, but for the sake of the weak,
who could not be suddenly weaned from it.

Thy Seventh Reason is; That it is the Mind and Will of God, that this
Ordinance should be continued in his Church, until the Second Coming of Christ
to Judgment. Christ's Second Coming is spiritual.
By which Second Coming thou and you understand his Outward Coming; for which
you have no ground to say, that he bid them Observe it, till his outward Coming
so many hundred years after: for the Scripture speaks nothing so, but thus; --
Ye show forth my Death, till I come. Now we say, he did Come according to his
Promise in a Spiritual and Inward way of Appearance in their Hearts, feeding
them with the heavenly Food and Refreshment of his own Life and Spirit, which
is the Substance. And concerning this Coming he spoke unto them in many places,
particularly John 14.18. I will not leave you Fatherless, I will come unto you.
Yet a little while, and the World sees me not; but ye shall see me. And Verse
23. If any Man love me, he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him, and make our Abode with him: Which Coming was inward,
according to Verse 20. You in me, and I in you. And those that witnessed him
thus Come, needed not outward Bread and Wine to remember them of him; for his
own Spirit would bring all things to their remembrance: they need not look upon
the Figure and Shadow, who have the Substance. Paul said; We look not upon
things, which are visible; neither will God's Condescendence to their Weakness,
God's Condescension to the Weak.
who were but newly Redeemed from out of a mass of Heathenish Superstitions,
prove a Command or a Rule to the whole Church, or a Warrant for any now to be
found in the Administration thereof; and to hold up the outward Figure, do
cloak themselves, by shutting out and denying the Spiritual Appearance of
Christ, as he does immediately Reveal himself in his Children, in whom he has
made manifest the Substance, which ends the Shadow.

For an Eighth Reason thou say; That Persons, who cast off this Ordinance,
are their Soul's great Enemies, for they stand in the way of their Soul's
Spiritual good, in that this is a Spiritual Nourishing, strengthening
Ordinance, where Spiritual Food is offered, and delicate Meat and Drink, for
strengthening Believers in their Journey to Heaven. To which I Answer; That
those, who neglect and despise having Fellowship and Communion with God, and
laugh and scoff at the useful and necessary Duty of Waiting upon the Lord in
silence, wherein his Children feel their Souls nourished with the Body and
Blood of Christ, The ^^ue Nourishment of the Soul.
and with Spiritual Manna, which descends from Heaven, and is distilled into
their Souls not only once or twice a year (which are the Seasons, wherein that
which thou termest Spiritual Food, is ministered among you) but daily and
hourly, by the fresh Incoms of Life, such indeed are to their Souls great
Enemies, though they be sticking to the performance of some External
Ceremonies, wherein in former times God (in Condescendence to some, because of
the simplicity of their hearts) appeared, and yet even then frequently, and as
much and more at other times. But now the Sun is set upon those, who will needs
be upholding the Shadow in opposition to the Substance; therefore their Table
is become polluted, The polluted Table.
and may more truly be termed the Table of Devils, than the Communion of the
Body of Christ, where a mixed Multitude of all sorts of Wicked Persons, living
out of God's fear, sit down together, being seemingly in words Excommunicated
from Approaching by the Preacher, and yet presently Admitted to it by the same.
And to turn away from such an Ordinance, so called, is no sin nor hurt; but all
who become obedient to the Light of Christ in them, will find in their place to
forsake it, as being such an Ordinance, which the Apostle said, Touch not,
taste not, handle not, which is all to perish with the using.

In the fourth place, Page 41. thou will prove, That the Ministry of the Word
is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ: because first Christ appointed Ministers and
Pastors to be in his Church; But this cannot be asserted in opposition to the
Quakers, who grant the same. And why citest thou Ephesians. 5.11. and 1. for 12.8.
which if they prove the Continuance of Pastors and Teachers, prove also the
Continuance of Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles; which ye deny. As to the
second Reason, That the Ministry is not common to all, but that there be some
Pastors and Teachers, is also owned by us: Yet that hinders not, but that any
at a time may speak, when the Saints are met together, as the Lord moves by his
Spirit: according to 1 Cor. 14.31. For it is one thing to be particularly
called to the Ministry; and another, to be moved to speak at a particular time:
which distinction that it was usual among the Apostles in the Primitive times,
is easily observed in the forenamed Chapter. For a Third Reason thou say;
True Minister's Call is not of Man.
Whom God calls to the Ministry, he does it either immediately, without the
intervention of Men, or mediately by Men authorized for that purpose: But for
this thou bring'st no proof, neither art thou able to make out, that ever God
called any under the New Covenant mediately to their Ministry by Men, as they
were not to have an Immediate Call in themselves: Though the Approbation of
Good and Experienced Men in its place is not denied by us, but dearly owned.
Fourthly thou say; Who ever pretends to an immediate Call, they ought for
the satisfaction of others to show signs and tokens of their Apostleship. To
which I answer: That those who come preaching the Gospel not in speech only,
The proof of the same Call.
but also in Power and in the Holy Ghost, and in the evidence and demonstration
thereof, (as it is 1 Thessalonians. 15. and 1 Cor. 2.4.) give sufficient proof, that
they are Called of God, though they come not with outward Miracles. And though
Paul came to some with Miracles, where he preached the Gospel, yet many
believed, who saw no outward Miracle. Also many of the Prophets wrought no
Miracle, nor John the Baptist: And though some miraculous things came to pass
about his Conception and Birth, those do not of themselves prove him to be a
Prophet; Outward Miracles.
for Miraculous things and Miracles were wrought upon many, who were no
Prophets. If Miracles be necessary to evince a Man sent of God, he must come
with these Miracles before the People, which John did not. Nor did Jonas come
with any Miracle to convince the Ninivites, but simply declared his Message.
And John Calvin asserteth, Calv. l. 4. c. 3. Inst.
That there is no need of Miracles; and yet he maintains, that in his day God
raised up Apostles or Evangelists, saying, That it was needful such should be,
to bring back the poor People, that had gone astray after Antichrist. Neither
did any Protestants pretend to any Miracles, they pleading against the Papists,
That there was no absolute need of any, in respect they preached not a New
Gospel, but that which was already confirmed with Miracles by Christ and his
Apostles. And so thy Plea against us here is the same, that was urged by the
Papists against the Primitive Protestants. An evil and adulterous Generation,
said Christ, seeks after Miracles; and though Miracles should be given, they
who will not believe the Testimony of the Spirit of God in their Consciences,
bearing witness to the Truth, will not also believe, because of Miracles: as we
see plainly in the Jews. And whereas thou say; John's Immediate Call is
evident by the special Predictions both of Malachy and Isaias concerning him.
So are there many special Predictions concerning the Lord his pouring forth of
his Spirit upon many in these latter days, to Prophecy or Minister, as the
Spirit should put words into their Mouths. And as for these Scriptures Tit.
1.5. Acts 14.23. which thou bring'st in the Fifth place, they prove not, that
those Elders had not the Authority and Call of the Spirit of God in themselves.
And whereas in the Sixth place thou say; Though Ministers be set apart and
ordained by Men, yet their Ministry is not from Men, but from God: I Answer;
Where the Inward Call and Authority of the Spirit of God is not witnessed, it
cannot be said to be of God. And though Moses be said to Consesecrate Aaron,
yet it does not follow, that Aaron had no immediate Call from God. Seventhly,
thou say; The Ministry is so necessary, that it is the Will of Jesus Christ,
that it should continue unto the end of the World, Ephesians. 5.12, 13. Ministry
perfecting the Saints.
But thy proof from that Scripture is altogether impertinent as to you, who
believe not, that the Saints can be perfected in this Life, seeing the Ministry
is given for the perfecting of them. And that this perfection is on Earth, is
clear from the following Verse; That henceforth we be no more as Children
tossed to and fro: for in the other Life there is no hazard of being so
tossed. And if the Ministry perfected not Men in this life, it nowhere
perfecteth them; for in the other Life it has no operation upon them. The Law
and Priesthood thereof was abolished, because it made nothing perfect; and if
the Gospel Ministry should not make perfect, it should also be abolished. And
seeing your Ministry perfecteth not, it is not the true Ministry of the Gospel;
as indeed it is not, for it stands not in the Power of God, nor is it
excercised in the Will and Motion of God; your Ministry being such, that the
whole ESSE, or BEING of it may be without Saving Grace, or true Holiness; you
expressly affirming, That Holiness is not necessary to the Being of a Minister,
but that a Man may be a Minister of the Gospel, who ought to be received and
heard, though he have not the least Grain of Holiness. Eighthly thou say;
They who cast off the Ministry of the Word, wrong their own Souls, etc. Answ.
If it be understood of the Ministry of Christ, it is granted; but of yours, it
is denied.

In the Fifth place, Page 44. thou would prove, That the Lord's People are
under a tie and engagement, to keep the first day of the Week for a Sabbath.
For a First Reason thou say; The Fourth Commandment requires the keeping
holy of one day of seven. But as it requires the observation of one day of
seven, so it expressly instanceth that day to be the seventh, which day ^^e keep
not. Wherefore as to the Second Reason, If the Command be Moral and Perpetual,
as thou call it, it ought to be kept in every Point of it; which ye not
doing, therein condemn your selves. The outward Sabbath not perpetual.
But the outward Sabbath, or the keeping one day of the Week for a Sabbath, is
not perpetual, but abolished, together with the New Mons and other Feasts of
the Jews. See Coloss. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge you in Meat or Drink, or Holy
Day, or New Moon, or Sabbath Days, which are a Shadow of things to come: See
also Romans 14. which plainly holds forth all days under the Gospel to be alike:
and said Paul to the Galatians; To observe days, etc. I am afraid of you. For a
Third Reason thou say; That Jesus Christ plainly intimates the Continuance
of a Sabbath, because that speaking of the Desolation of Jerusalem, he said;
pray that your flight be not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day. Answ. But
that Sabbath Day is neither here nor elsewhere said to be the First Day of the
Week. The Jews were to flee at that time; and Christ holds forth their
difficulties, that it should be grievous unto them, to be put to it to flee on
their Sabbath Day, or be killed; for they kept it in the strictness of it. But
as for any of your Sabbath-keepers, they are not so strait-laced, but they will
do less necessary things, than to flee from a danger on that day. And as the
outward Jew desires, that he may not be put to flee on his outward Sabbath; so
the inward Jew in Spirit desires much more, that he may keep his Sabbath,
which is his Spiritual Rest in Christ, that the Enemy often seeks to break, to
cause him to flee on his Sabbath Day: but this to you is a Mystery, viz. what
the Sabbath of them who believe, is; Hebr. 4.9, 10. There remains therefore a
Sabbatism to the People of God: and he that is entered into his Rest, has
ceased from his own works, as God did from his.

And that this Sabbath or Rest is not an outward day, is plain, because in the
next Verse he says; Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest. But if it
were an outward day, it might be easily entered into; but this is such a Rest,
as none can enter into, who hearken not to the Voice of the Lord by believing
and obeying it. For a Fourth Reason thou say; though ye keep not the same
day the Jews did, ye have the same Authority for keeping your day, that they
had for theirs. Hence this day, The Lord's Day not the first day of the Week.
that we keep (say thou) is called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. it being set
apart by the Lord for his Service, and as a special Memorial of his
Resurrection. Answ. But for all this here is no Probation at all, but mere
Assertions: If ye have the same Authority, produce it, and let us see it. John
was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, therefore the first day of the Week ought
to be kept; how hangs this together? Prove, that John meant the first day of
the Week. We read much in Scripture of the Day of the Lord, which is the Lord's
Day; but no where do find it called the First Day of the Week, or any other
Natural Day; for it is Spiritual: and as God called the Natural Light, Day, so
he calls the Spiritual Light of his Appearance (where the Sun of
Righteousness arises with healing under his Wings) Day: And this is the Day of
the Lord, wherein his People rejoice, and are glad. And whereas thou say, It
is set apart by the Lord, as a Special Memorial of his Resurrection. This is
thy naked Assertion, without any shadow of proof: and if thou will say, that
therefore it is to be a Holy Day, because he Rose on it; Is not this a fair
inlet to all the Popish Holy Days? Popish Holy Days.
If ye keep one Day for his Resurrection, why not one Day for his Conception,
another for his Birth, another for the Annunciation of the Angel, another for
his being Crucified, another for his Ascension? and then we shall not want Holy
Days in good store. Fifthly thou say; Who oppose the Sabbath Day, sin
against Mercy, and Equity and Justice. Answ. It is granted: but who oppose your
Day, which ye have made or imagined to be the Sabbath, do no sin against any of
the foresaid; if in other things they keep unto the Rule of Mercy and Justice.
First, They sin not against Mercy, if through all the days of the Week they be
found in that, which is for the good of themselves, and their Neighbors; not
laying too heavy burdens upon their own Souls by excessive care and labor in
outward things, nor yet forcing their bodily strength beyond the Rule of Mercy
and Love, nor imposing any things upon either Servants or Cattle, contrary to
Mercy. For if the Law required Mercy even in these things, much more the
Gospel; so that we grant, Times of Rest are to be given unto Servants and
Beasts, and Mercy is to be showed unto them more than under the Law. And thus
is the End of the Sabbath answered, which was made for Man: yea, this is indeed
to keep the Sabbath; The true Sabbath.
To undo every burden, and to let the oppressed go free, both as to the inward,
and the outward. And the Lord's People have frequent times, more than once a
Week, wherein, laying aside their outward Affairs for a Season, they may and do
Meet together to wait upon the Lord, and be quickened, and refreshed and
instructed by him, and worship him in his Spirit, and may be useful unto one
another in Exhortation, or Admonition, or any other way, as the Lord shall
furnish. And such, who find any distemper upon their Minds, through letting
them go forth too much upon outward things, may find the Lord allowing them any
other day or time, no less than that, to get their hearts reduced into a right
frame. And it were sad, if the Lord had only allowed but one day of seven unto
this effect. The Lord inviteth and allows the weary and distempered, (who
love to be cured of their Distempers) to come unto him every day: And as for
those, who abide not in a due care every day, to have their Hearts ordered
a-right, but let their Minds go forth excessively in outward Occasions all the
Week, they provoke the Lord to shut them out from Access to him upon the First
day. And our Souls do often bless the Lord, in allowing us many times of
refreshment and strengthening, to the establishing and confirming us in his
love and life, and disburdening our Minds of earthly things much more
frequently, than in one day of seven. And as for sinning against Justice, they
cannot be charged with it, who give up unto the Lord not only one day of seven,
but all the seven, even all the days of their life unto his Service: for Equity
and Justice calls upon us to spend all the seven in his Service, that our
Hearts may continually be exercised in his Fear and Love; and whatever we do,
we may do it to him, and in him. And as for the First Day of the Week, The
first day of the Week.
we meet together even on that day, (as we do on other days) according to the
practice of the Primitive Christians, to wait upon the Lord and worship him;
but to plead so obstinately as ye do, that the Fourth Commandment binds to a
particular observation of that day, and yet to be found so slack in the
observation of it, as you generally are in such an Inconstancy, as the Quakers
cannot own. And so whereas thou would confine the Lord his giving rest and
comfort to the Souls of his People, and the falling of the Manna to the First
Days, calling them Spiritual Market-days, as if there were no other; we cannot
own it: knowing, that the Lord gives rest and comfort every day, and causes
the Manna plentifully to fall every day to those that walk in his fear, and
wait upon him; and he has no such circumscribed Market Day, as thou dreamest
of. The Priest's Market Day.
But that ye (I mean the Priests) make a Market Day of that day (so that ye may
call it Your Day, as thou say Page 44. our day) we know, wherein you sell
and vend your Babylonish Commodities, and will be forcing and compelling all to
come, and buy of them; or if not, to send you Money, whether they receive ought
or not: or else ye will endeavor by the help of the Magistrate to have them
punished. So that it is made manifest, that it is only the Inventions of Men,
that we disown, and not any of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

Page 46. Thou grantest, the word [Original Sin] is not found in Scripture; and
yet thou plead^st for it, because (say thou) the thing intended by it is
contained and expressed in Scripture. Answ. We deny, that the thing by you
intended, is expressed in Scripture, to wit, That all Infants are sinners before
God, only for Adam 's sin; and that there are Reprobate Infants, who are sent
to Hell only for Adam 's first sin: This we deny; nor do the Scriptures cited
by thee prove it, Psalm. 51. Behold, I was conceived in sin. But first, if this
place should prove the Infant guilty of any sin, Infants not guilty of Adam's
sin.
it should be of the sin of its own immediate Parents; In iniquity did my
Mother bring me forth. Now you say, the Infant is not guilty of the sin of its
own immediate Parents, but only of Adam's and Eve's first sin; of which, this
Scripture speaks nothing. 2. It does not say, I was conceived and brought forth
a Sinner, as you would have it; why make you Infants guilty of Adam's sin, and
not the sins of their immediate Parents? Now it is granted, that there is a
seed of sin derived unto Adam's Posterity; The Seed of Sin.
but we say, none become guilty of sin before God, until they close with this
evil seed: and in them, who close with it, it becomes an Origin or Fountain of
evil Thoughts, Desires, Words and Actions, which are their sins who close with
it. But that the guilt of Adam's first sin lies at the door of Infants, who
never actually sinned, we deny. For a Second Proof thou citest Romans 5.12.
alleging, It should be rendered, that in Adam all sinned. But it is no such
matter: For the words, however they be truly Translated, can never be so
rendered, In Adam all sinned: The strictest Translation of the words is thus, [
upon which all have sinned, or, in which all have sinned.] They hold forth, how
that Adam by his Sin gave an entrance to Sin in the World, and Death by Sin;
and so upon this accasion all others have sinned, to wit, actually in their own
Person; so that all who ever sinned actually, it was upon the occasion of
Adam's Sin. For the Apostle is here speaking not of Infants, who are not
capable of any Law, but of such, as have a Law, and act against it. Yea, from
the Apostle's words in the other following Verse it is plain, that Sin is not
imputed to Infants. For says he; Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law.
Now there is no Law given to Infants as such; for they are not capable of it.
What the Law says, it says to them, No Law, no Transgression.
who have in more or less some exercise of understanding, which Infants new
born have not. Or, if the words be translated [ in which all have sinned] that
word WHICH has a nearer Relative than ADAM, to wit, Death; for the seed of sin
is justly called Death, because where it is joined unto and obeyed, it kills:
and so in this seed all have sinned, who ever did actually sin. And as for the
18 th Verse of Romans 5. which is commonly used to prove Infants guilty and under
Condemnation, it is not rightly translated; for the word Judgment, or
Condemnation, or Guilt, is not at all in the Greek; but those, who have
drunk-in this imagination, have added this word to the Scripture: so bending
and bowing the Scripture to their false Opinion. And whereas thou say, We
were all in the Loins of Adam; and therefore would infer, That Infants are
sinners in him, or guilty of his sin. I say, It follows not more than to say,
We are guilty of all the sins of our Forefathers, because we have been in
their Loins. Again, thou labourest to prove, that Infants are sinners, because
they are subject to pains, and diseases and death. But this proves them not to
be Sinners, as it proves not, that the Earth is a Sinner, or that the Herbs
and Trees of the Field are sinners; for even these things have suffered by
Adam's fall a great decay. And as for the outward Death of those that are saved
from Eternal Death, it is rather a Sleep, The outward and eternal Death.
than a Death, as Christ said concerning Lazarus, he sleeps: And concerning
the Maid; she is not dead, but sleeps. And therefore that Scripture Romans
6.23. cannot be applied to them, who dye not or perish not eternally: for
though the Saints lay down the outward man, is not as the punishment or reward
of their Sins, which are forgiven, and from which they are delivered: And so
the sting of Death being taken away in those who are saved, it is not that
Death, which is the Wages of Sin. And seeing the Apostle said unto the Saints,
that all things were theirs, even Death, it cannot be, that their Death should
be reckoned the Wages of their Sin. How many of the blessed Martyrs have looked
upon their Suffering a most violent Death for Truth and Righteousness as a Gift
of God? How then could it be said to be the Wages of their Sins; which implys,
as if their Sins were not all freely forgiven?

Page 48. From this Doctrine (thou say) it will follow, First, That all
Infants, that dye in their Infancy, are saved; and though Charity may be
pleaded for this Opinion, (thou say) yet what Scripture can be alleged for
it? Infants dying, how saved.
Answ. If I should bring that Scripture, Suffer little Children to come unto
me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; It will much more naturally flow from
the words, than that they ought to be sprinkled, which is the meaning ye put
upon them. And whereas some object; It is not said of them, but of such. I
answer; but that such includes them and all others, who are like them in
harmlessness: otherwise if they had been excluded, he would not have given it
as a Reason, why he bid suffer them to come unto him. But besides the 18 th
Chapt. verse 20. of Ezekiel is a plain proof, The soul that sins, shall die;
the Son shall not bear the Father's iniquity: unless that the Son be found
acting the same iniquity, and continuing in it; for then he visits the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children. Now thou have produced no
Scripture to prove, That any Infants do perish; and indeed, there is nothing in
Scripture for it, but against it. Secondly, thou say; It would follow, that
Infants dying in their infancy, stood not in need of Christ, as a Savior; for
he is a Savior to save his People from their sins. Infants saved from sin.
Answ. He is a Savior not only to save from sins, but also from the
Consequences of sin, and not only from the fruits and branches of it, but from
the seed: and they are saved from sin, who are not suffered to fall into it.
And so these Infants, whom the Lord takes away in their infancy, that they
might not sin, are saved from it. It is salvation, to be kept from falling into
a pit as truly, as to be taken out of it after the falling in. And as for that
Scripture, it makes against you, Matthew. 1.12. For it speaks of a salvation
from sin, whereas you dream of a salvation in your sins: Nor does Romans 7.24.
speak of Infants; so thy citing it here is impertinent. And though there be a
time, wherein there is a crying out for deliverance from the body of sin and
death; yet there is also a time of deliverance from it; even before the laying
down of the outward body, as is plain from Romans 6.6, 7. Knowing this, that the
old man is crucified, and he that is dead, is freed from sin: Yet we
acknowledge, there is great occasion to be Low, and to be in great fear and
care, lest Sin, which is once crucified, revive again.

Page 48. Thou chargest us, As holding a falling away from Regeneration, and as
agreeing therein with Arminians. But if the Arminians hold a falling away from
Regeneration, we hold no such matter. For those who fall away, never attained
unto the Regeneration, and so were never the Children of God, but only were in
the way to it, by having attained to some beginnings of Faith, The falling away
from Faith is of themselves.
from which some may and have fallen away. For that it is expressly said by
Christ; some believe, and afterward fall away: and some depart from the faith,
and make shipwreck of it: and some, who have tasted the good Word of God, and
the Powers of the World to come, Fall away. These and many such Instances are
in Scripture; nor do the Scriptures cited by thee prove the contrary: as
Philip. 1.6. which is to be understood no otherwise, then as the Condition is
performed upon their part. As Hebr. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if
we hold fast the Principle of our Establishment, (or whereby we are
established) firm unto the end; and so these, who hold fast this Principle,
witness the Work, which God has begun in them, to be carried on until the day
of Christ, even till he be completely formed in them, and they in him. It may
be supposed, that Paul was as confident, that God would perfect the Work begun
in himself, and yet he supposes, it might be otherwise, where he says; Lest
preaching the Gospel to others, I my self become a Castaway. And though some
fall away, the dishonor of the foolish Builder cannot be cast upon God, but
upon them, who fall away: for it stands very well with the Wisdom and Power
of God, to suffer them to fall away, who knowingly and wilfully depart from the
Lord, and will not concur with him in the work, as subordinate Instruments; but
resist him, though he invite and call, yea, draw them. The next thou citest, is
1 Pet. 15. Answ. Such as are so kept by the Power of God, it is through Faith;
but as they abide not in that power through Faith, but wander from it, they
fall, and cannot but fall away. And as for Jerem. 32.40. cited by thee, it
should be translated thus; I will put my fear into their hearts, that they may
not depart from me: so Junius and Tremellius's Version; or, not to depart from
me, as the Septuagint has it. Now to say, That they may not depart, is one
thing; and to say, They cannot depart, is another. Yet where the fear of God
comes so to be raised and established in the heart over all, we believe, such
cannot depart: but every one is not attained to that state, where yet the fear
of God may have some place. And as touching these other Scriptures, John 10.27,
28, 29. and John 13.1. and 1 John 2.19. they speak of those, who are come to a
thorough-Regeneration, who (we do believe) can never fall away; as being begot
in the perfect Nature of the Elect Sheep and Children. Nor does it follow from
this, that one may be a Child of God to day, and a Child of the Devil to
morrow; for these, who are once properly the Children of God through a true and
thorough-Regeneration, can never become the Children of the Devil nor be cast
out of God's special love, that he bears to his own Children. For to end this
matter, thou say; It is safer to question the Truth of the Graces of those
that fall away, than the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints. But do
thou look upon the Quakers, as having fallen away? if thou do, how comes it,
that thou bespeakest them in thy Epistle, as those, who have had real Grace,
saying to them; Did ye attain to that knowledge of, and acquaintance with God,
which ye have, in the use of Ordinances? And again, Ye did run well, who did
hinder you? And again; Why should they asperse these Ordinances, which have
been the means of their Conversion? Or are these words only a Joab's kiss, by
which thou would kiss the Quakers, while in the mean time thou have a Sword
hid under thy Cloak to strike them through under the fifth Rib? But the Quakers
are aware of thee, and having on the Armor of God, are out of thy reach.

In the last place, Page 50. thou undertakest to prove; That our Errors (as
thou call them) tend to Irreligiousness and Atheism; because they tend to
take away the Worship due to God. But it has been heretofore proved, that we
deny not true Worship, but only your Idolatrous, superstitious Worships, which
cannot truly be called the Worship of God. Our way (thou say) tends to
Irreligiousness; because frequently we go to Meat, Prayer before Meat.
and come from it without seeking a Blessing, or returning Thanks; which is to
deny God a part of that Worship, which is due to him, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Answ. To
receive the Gifts and Benefits of God with Thanksgiving, and to witnese it
blessed and sanctified to us by the Word and Prayer, is owned by us: and to
know this so, without taking off the Hat, or using of formal speaking of words
(though it be a thing frequently used by us also) tends to no Irreligiousness.
For it is a thing usual amongst us, when we sit down to Eat, to wait upon the
Lord for some time, that we may feel his presence, and know our selves stated
in his fear, to which the blessing is: and as we there stand, if any outward
Expressions be required of any, then in God's fear they may utter them: and
this is to know the blessing indeed, and to be in the place that is blessed.
But for People, that are conversing out of God's fear, stated in a light, airy
Spirit, not only many times laughing and scoffing, but some times even
blaspheming, presently, so soon as the Meat comes, to clap off their Hats, and
speak a few words in a custom; and so soon as they have done, fall to their
former work again; is not this Atheism and Irreligiousness? For if such did
think of God aright, and knew, what it were to fear him, they would be far from
addressing themselves in such Postures unto him: neither could they be so
impudent, as to expect a blessing from him, while they stand in that condition,
to which the Curse is annexed.

In the second place, Page 51. thou say; Does not the taking men off from
Prayer, tend to Irreligiousness and Atheism? Now you teach, we must not pray in
private, nor in families without an impulse; Therefore -- Answ. This is no
sound Argument. To take men off from prayer, tends to irreligiousness, is
granted; but to say, That a man cannot or ought not to pray without the
Spirit's drawing and motion which you commonly name by Impulse (a word, which
common People do not understand) has no such tendency, Hypocritical Prayers an
Abomination.
or that it takes any off from prayer truly so called, is denied. For has that
a bad tendency, which takes men off from such Prayers, as are abomination, and
are not true Prayers, but hypocritical and deceitful? As all such Prayers are,
that are performed without the help of the Spirit. We say, whosoever can pray
to the Lord indeed, let them pray, we are not to forbid them; but that any can
pray without the Spirit, that we deny; according to 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray
with the Spirit, etc. And Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not, what we should pray for, as we ought. Now if we
know not, what to pray for without the Spirit, how can we pray without it? Paul
durst not adventure upon this duty, without the assistance of the Spirit (yea
he said, no man could say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost) but
here an arrogant Generation will needs be praying without it; which yet is not
Prayer: and such Families, where this only is used, cannot be truly said to
call upon God, while such truly may be said so to do, that wait upon the Lord,
and stand in his fear, and bring forth the fruits of Righteousness; though they
be not so much in the external signification of words; which also at times is
found in our Families, as the Lord requires it, and gives utterance. And
whereas thou say; That thou believe it will be found, that some of us for
the space of a whole Year, have not so much as once bowed a Knee, to call upon
God in their Families. What ground have thou for this thy belief? May they not
bow their knees in their Families, though it be hid from the observation of
malicious eyes, who may so asperse them? May they not pray in secret, Prayers
in secret, with out words.
and be seen of the Father to pray, according to Matthew. 6.6. Though they cannot
be seen by the eyes of malicious Spies? And where a public Testimony in words
is required, it is also given; nor do we know any Friends of Truth, who have
any, whom they can join with in Prayer in the Family, but do meet together in
the Family, and wait together, breath together, and pray together, and that
much oftener than thou insinuates, sometimes without, and sometimes with the
outward signification of words: so that we return this thy Charge, as false and
malicious. Thou say; If this Impulse be denied for years, men all that while
(according to us) must not pray. But here thou speak as one wholly
unacquainted with the ways and motions of the Spirit, to suppose such a case
which cannot be; Breathings of the Spirit frequent.
for the breathings and motions of the Spirit, and especially unto Prayer, are
very frequent unto those who wait for them, and are as necessary unto the
Children of God, as their daily bread, yea and more; which the Father
withholds not, but gives in due season. But many times the Spirit of Prayer
is felt to move, and is answered, when there is no liberty given to speak words
in the hearing of others. Nor is thy other Supposition less vain and foolish;
That if a man were at the Gates of Death, and in danger of present drowning,
yet without an Impulse (as thou call it) he must not adventure to cry to God
for Mercy and Help. For suppose he did Cry without all help of the Spirit,
Prayer without the Spirit avails not.
what would it avail him? would it have any acceptance with God? Show us
wherever a spiritless Prayer was accepted of God or required? Nay, it is a
vain Oblation, which is expressly forbidden; and it is expressly commanded, that
praying be always in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. And as for the Saints, when they
are dying, or in any difficulty, we know, the Spirit of Prayer will never be
wanting, to breath through them at such Occasions, and to give words, as there
is a service for them.

But further thou alledgest; That this Principle of ours leads to woeful
security; for what need you be disquieted for refraining Prayer before God
(thou say) or any other piece of Service, seeing you have salve at hand to
heal this sore, and that is, the want of an Impulse. Answ. If any fall into
security and refrain Prayer, it is not, that our Principle leads into it; for
our Principle leads out of all security into continual watching unto Prayer,
and waiting upon the motions of the Spirit of God: now if any feel not these
motions, they are nothing the less guilty, because by their neglect they
provoke the Lord to withold them, and render themselves out of frame to feel
or entertain them: and thus, who neglect the Worship of God, are justly under
Condemnation; and if they have Peace, it is but a false Peace, which will fail
them. And as for our Peace, we have found it to be great Peace; True Peace with
God.
but we have not come by it after such a way, as thou do falsely and rashly
judge, as by neglecting the Worship of God, and stopping the mouth of
Conscience; but by being turned to that living Word and Law of God in our
hearts, by loving it, and cleaving to it, yea, by receiving the reproofs and
chastisements of God through it, and submitting to the Judgment of it, when it
has been as a hammer and as a sword, and as a fire in us, breaking in pieces
and destroying all that false unsound Peace, we had created to our selves in
the day of our alienation from the light of God in us. And unto Peace we are
come through great tribulation of Soul, even such, as thou art a stranger unto,
being ignorant both of the one, and the other: and so have therein showed thy
folly in judging, what thou know not. And as for woeful security, we know
not, where it more abounds, than among hypocritical Professors, The Whore's
Peace.
who, with the Whore in the Proverbs, offer up their Sacrifices of Morning and
Evening Prayers, and thereby create a Peace to themselves, though they let
their hearts go a whoring after their Lusts all the day. Did not the Pharisees
pray much outwardly, and were much in other outward practices of Devotion, and
so created a false peace and esteem unto themselves? And can you deny, but that
there are many such among you, who make up a false peace to themselves, by
leaning upon their outward performances? Now what if I should charge this upon
your Principle, would thou think it fair dealing?

Thirdly, Page 52. Thou say; Does not that Opinion tend to Atheism, which
renders mortification of sin (even in this life) useless, etc. Answ. Here thou
dealest dis-ingenuously. Is Mortification of sin useless, where the end of it
is attained? And is not perfection the end of mortification? Again thou say;
The Opinion of a sinless perfection wounds the very vitals of Religion? Answ.
Who could have expected, that one, that pretends to Religion, would have been
so brazen-faced, as to put such an Expression in print? What is the end of true
Religion, The end of true Religion, to lead out of sin.
but to lead out of sin? Do the vitals of Religion consist in sinning, or in
not sinning? If it consist in sinning, then they that sin most, are most
religious: But if it consist in not sinning, and keeping the Commandments of
God without sin, then to plead for such a thing as attainable, hurts not the
vitals of Religion? What! cannot the Saints live better without sin, than with
it? Yea surely, they can live well without that, which is a burden, and as
Death unto their life: they whose life is in sin, cannot live but in sin; but
the Saints life is not in sin, but in righteousness. And thy consequences are
vain and foolish; As 1. That men need not pray for pardon of sin; 2. That they
need not the Blood of Christ, to cleanse them from sin; 3. That they need not
Repentance: For we grant, that All have sinned, and so need those things, by
which they may attain unto perfection; and who witness perfection, are come to
witness the true use of these things; and as the Blood of Christ cleanses from
all the sin, so it preserves clean, and such have received the forgiveness of
their sins, being turned from them unto righteousness, which is the fulfilling
of Repentance. And whereas thou say; Bring me to the particular person, that
is sinless, and I shall apply to him that of the Apostle 1 John 1.8. Thou
show openly thy confusion; for by thy applying to him that of the Apostle,
would thou infer a sinless man to be a sinning man? That is a contradiction:
but though we should bring a man to thee, that is made free from sin by the
power of God, thou could no more judge of him, than a blind man can judge of
Colors. And as to 1 John 1.8. it is a plain case; If we say, we have no sin,
and have fellowship with him, and yet walk in darkness, (as verse 6.) then we
deceive our selves: So it is Conditional, otherwise it would contradict what
follows Verse 9. and Chap. 2.4. and Chap. 3.6, 9. As to that of the Sabbath, it
is answered above.

Page 53. Your Religion (say thou) will be welcome to the worst and
wickedest of men, for you will please them exceedingly, in crying down of
Ordinances, the observation of the Sabbath, and private and family Prayer, etc.
Answ. We cry down no Ordinance of God, but your hypocritical ways; and we know
no worse men, than those Hypocrites, whom we are so far from pleasing, Crying
down Hypocrisy pleases not the Hypocrite.
in crying down their hypocritical Prayers and Performances, that they fr^t and
gnash at us with their Teeth: and if they could get their will, would tear us
in pieces, for witnessing against those things. And they are very blind, who
see not, that the denying of those things in shadow and bare formality, and
establishing them in the power and substance, can no ways be acceptable to the
Wicked, but most unpleasing to Hypocrites, who can perform the one, but not the
other. But now let us examine, whether your Principles, or ours be most
acceptable to the wicked and hypocrites. 1. Wicked men and Hypocrites love well
to hear, Hypocrites and wicked men's Principles of the Priests.
that they can never be free from their sins in this life, and that they must
always sin. 2. They love well to hear, to be justified by Christ without them,
and his Righteousness without, but not by him, and his Righteousness within
them. 3. They love well to hear, that the words without them are the only Rule,
which they can wrest according to their own corrupt Inclinations; but they love
not to hear, that the Word and Light of God within, is to be their Rule, which
they cannot wrest, nor bend. 4. They love well to hear, that they may use the
fashions and customs of this World, bow and cringe, and give and receive the
Honor of this World. 5. They love to hear, they may use Sports, and Games and
Plays. 6. To wear Laces and Ribbons, and Gold Rings, and other superfluity. 7.
They love well to hear, that men must not expect to hear God immediately, being
such as those, who said, Let not God speak unto us. 8. They love well to hear,
that Water Baptism and giving of Bread and Wine, are the Ordinances of God, and
the true Baptism and Supper; for then they think they are Christians, if they
partake of these outward things; and they are mad against us, who call them
shadows. And as for their Observation of that called the Sabbath, we find none
more plead for it, than profane, light men and women; for they can easily
dispense to hear a man talk for an hour or two, and then have all the rest of
the day to spend in idleness, vain communication, and frequenting the
Alehouse, and decking themselves with vain Apparel. 10. They love well to
hear, that they may be Members of the Church, though they have no infallible of
Evidence Holiness. 11. They love to hear of your Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation. 12. And of your Doctrine, Once in grace, and ever in grace,
whereby they feed themselves in presumption and carelessness. Many other
particulars could be mentioned, but these may serve enough to show, Quakers
Principles not acceptable to Hypocrites.
that your Principles are pleasing to the wicked and hypocrites, and ours
displeasing. Next to come to experience; where are the Drunkards, the Swearers,
the Whore-mongers, the envious licentious Persons, the Scorners, the Mockers,
whether are they yours, or ours? If our Principles be so acceptable unto them,
why do they not inroll themselves among us? why do they oppose us at our
Meetings at Aberdeen, and elsewhere, and curse and rant, and use all manner of
filthy Communication, and are ready to stone us in the streets? And none more
found so doing, than that young Fry and Spawn of the Priesthood, who are bread
at your Nurseries of Learning. Now whose Church Members are those, yours or
ours? Is not the Proverb verified of you: Fowls of one Feather fly together?

Thou closest with addressing thy self to God with a notorious lie, saying;
Follow with thy blessing, that which WE have been about: meaning the Quaker and
thy self, but it was none of the Quakers work; the Dialogue not being any real
Conference: Is not this to deride, and take the Name of God in vain?

Some Things of Weighty Concernment, proposed in Meekness and Love by way of
QUERIES to the Serious Consideration of the Inhabitants of Aberdeen; which also
may be of Use to such, as are of the same Mind with them elsewhere in this
Nation. Added by way of APPENDIX to Truth Cleared of Calumnies.
Question 1. WHether it be a thing any-wise warrantable in Common Equity, or
true Christianity, for any Person or Persons to take ^iberty, both in Pulpit
and Print, to speak against a People as Dangerous and Heretical, and yet wholly
to debar that People from Vindicating themselves in either of these ways, so
far as they can? Or whether it can be supposed, that any Persons, except they
wholly give up themselves Implicitly to believe, the Accusers can make a true
Judgment in that Case upon the Accused, especially considering the Maxim of
Law, Quicunque inaudita altera part, etc. i. e. He that without hearing both
Parties pronounces Judgment, though he decide the Right upon the matter, has
not done the part of a Just Judge. To which add the Consideration of these
Passages of Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove. 18.13. Isai. 40.2.

Quest. 2. Whether then it was not contrary to the Laws both Divine and Humane,
for the Priests in Aberdeen to importune the Magistrates, to make search for
that Book lately published in Vindication of the People called Quakers? Or
whether such a Practice has any Warrant, except what flows originally from the
Spanish Inquisition, as being directly contrary to Equity, and to the
Scriptures abovementioned?

Quest. 3. Whether also it was not both Anti-scriptural and Popish in G. M. to
prohibit his Hearers from reading of that Book, by comparing it with Poison?
Whether that was not to keep People in Darkness and Dependence upon him? or
with how little Reason could he desire such a thing, considering, he asserted
it to contain an ample Confession of all those Errors he had charged them with?
And if so, whether it be likely, that it could prove dangerous, the Errors
being so gross and monstrous, which by him and his Brethren are charged upon
that People, that their confessing them would rather scare People, than engage
any to like them?

Quest. 4. And whether G. M. his bidding People abstain from that Book as
Poison, without trial of what is in it, be not like unto the Papists way, who
bid their Neighbors abstain from the Protestants Books as Poison? And whether
may not even Poison be tried (though not by eating it) in a way that is not
hazzardous to the Tryer, especially seeing, that which some may call Poison,
may be afterward found by sound Trial, to be good and wholesome Food, yea,
Medicine to expel such poisonable Doctrines, as your Priests infuse into People?

Quest. 5. And seeing G. M. bids his Hearers abstain from the Quakers words as
Poison, does he not endanger such to be poisoned, whom he sends or allows to
come to our Meetings to hear what is spoke? And what knows G. M. but his
Spies may be touched, so that it may be said, as it was then, Is Saul also
among the Prophets?

Quest. 6. And seeing G. M. counts our Words as Poison, why does he bring them
forth so much among his Hearers, if he thinks, he gives strong Antidotes
against them? I have heard some of his own Hearers say, That that which he
calls the Poison, wrought more effectually to persuade even out of his Mouth,
than all his Antidotes could do to dissuade?

Quest. 7. Whether the latter part of that Allegance of G. M. (viz. That all
they had charged on the Quakers, was confessed to in that Book) be not a
manifest untruth, in respect the greatest Charges alleged by him against the
Quakers, are therein utterly denied. As for instance, the matter of Pelagianism
in page 25. the matter of Popery in page 34. and of Arminianism page 65, etc.

Quest. 8. Whether the said G. M. has not manifested very much deceit, in
saying also publicly, That the said Book asserts it, not only to be a thing
easy, but pleasant for wicked people, to keep holy the Sabbath Day, and to
perform the spiritual duties commanded to be performed thereon unless he
understands them to be simply the disposing to hear a man talk an hour or to,
and to have all the rest of the day to spend in Idleness, vain Communication,
and frequenting the Alehouse, etc. which are the words mentioned page 72.

Quest. 9. Whether it be any way unsuitable to the Law of Charity, or to the
meek Spirit of Christ, to use plain and downright dealing, calling a Lie a Lie?
Or whether any be to be blamed for so doing, considering the practice of all
the Prophets, and of Christ's and of his Apostles, how sharply they dealt with
false Teachers; as may appear by the Scriptures? Isai. 56.11. Lev. 23. to verse
33. Ezekiel. 34. Hos. 4. from 6. to 10. Ibid. 5.1. Mich. 3.5. Matthew. 3.7. John 8.

Quest. 10. Whether then they be not prejudiced, who Accuse the Quakers for
using the same terms, seeing they are willing to make the Application manifest,
by comparing the fruits of the present pretended Preachers with those that were
of old? As for instance, whether it be a breach either of Moral Civility, or
Christian Meekness to say; John Menzies lied, in asserting Robert Barclay to
have been educated in a Jesuites-Colledge; seeing it is utterly false?

Quest. 11. And whether David Lyall may not be judged more guilty of foolish
Rashness and Envy, than any of us of the breach of Civility to reprove him for
it, who that he might not want something to say against the Quakers, alleged a
notorious Untruth upon God, in saying; That the God of Heaven shut the mouths
of all the Quakers, that not one word was spoken among them at their last
Monthly Meeting, the 3 d of the 11 th Month: which diverse of their own
Church Members can witness to be a Lie?

Quest. 12. Whether it be not a far greater Breach of Charity in the Priests of
Aberdeen, not only to speak all manner of evil falsely against that People in
the Pulpit, but also there to stir up both Magistrates and People to imprison
and persecute them? Whether that be not more like the Practice of the
Pharisees, and of Demetrius the Silver-Smith, than the Ministers of Christ?

Quest. 13. Whether beating, striking, punching, pulling out of hair, and that
openly in the streets, threatening to stone and pistol their sober innocent
Neighbors, and boasting, that though they should do so, they should be under no
hazard of the Law, be like the fruits of Christ's Flock? Or whether such
practices and boastings be not more abusive of, and destructive to Magistracy,
than Meeting together in sobriety and God's fear, to wait upon him, and edify
one another, which is expressly commanded, Hebr. 10. Or if such Actings be not
liker John a Leyden, and the tumults and cruelties of Munster, than any thing,
that can be proved against the Quakers?

Quest. 14. Whether singing, dancing, swearing, asking if the Spirit be come,
whistling, and saying, the Spirit's upon them in the Quakers Meeting, be not
Barbarous and Atheistical, and Interruptions far of another nature, than for
honest men in seriousness to stand up in your Meeting House, after your
preaching is ended, and preach Repentance; seeing these practices
abovementioned evidence, how much ye stand in need of such an Advertisement:
and both Reason and Christianity would say, it deserved more Civil and
Christian usage, than Imprisonment or a pair of Stocks?

Quest. 15. Whether David Lyall his Expressions, intimating his fears of the
increase of Preachers, does not show him contrary to the Spirit of Moses, who
wished, all the Lord's People might be Prophets; and to the Apostle Paul 1 Cor.
14.29. Ye may all prophesy one by one; and to Luther, and many of the first
Reformers and Martyrs, who held preaching to be the common privilege of
Christians, and so many of them being Tradesmen, did preach, judging it no
Inconsistence: though this Generation of lofty Priests, (who may well be
compared in many things to those idle Shavelings, whom Luther reproves) are
loath to admit of any such thing? knowing, if it once should be supposed, that
Tradesmen, or Plough-men should preach, it would also follow, that Preachers
might be Tradesmen, and so win their Living with their hands, as did the
Apostle 2 Cor. 4.12. Ibid. 9.18. Whether if so, it be not probable, fewer would
be ambitious of that Office, than now are, and that there would be no such
gaping for Presentations, the desirable baits of Stipends being removed; and as
it would abate the pride and sumptuousness of the Priests, so it would clip
shorter the strip'd-silk Petticoats of their Wives, and other gaudy Apparel of
their Children?

Quest. 16. Whether it can then pertinently be objected as a token of pride
against the Quakers, that they preach Repentance, especially against their
doing it without study or premeditation, as if trusting to the Spirit of God
for utterance were pride; which is expressly allowed, commanded and practiced in
the Scripture, Luc. 21.14, 15. Acts 2.4. 1 Cor. 2.14. and 1 Cor. 14.29. 1 Pet.
4.11.

Quest. 17. Whether that does not homologate the Popish Argument for a Liturgy,
alleging it to be pride for men to address themselves in Prayers framed ex
tempore, seeing there are Prayers framed by the Church, and by learned Men
heretofore (as they say) better then private men can make off-hand, containing
whatever is applicable to the condition of any Soul? Or whether it may not by
the same Argument he pressed upon David Lyall, as a point of pride, for him or
his Brethren to use any Prayer, except that examplar left by Christ, commonly
called the Lord's Prayer, seeing, they themselves make the Extent of it so
large, as there can be no Condition of any particular person, which they will
not reduce to some of the Heads of it; and that Enlargments and Tautologies to
God, are not only vain and needless, but also by himself prohibited?

Quest. 18. And whether it savours more of pride, to preach without
premeditation, which is but a speaking unto Man, than to pray without
premeditation, which is a speaking unto God? And seeing David Lyall and his
Brethren pray ex tempore, and without premeditation of any conceived form of
prayer, may it not be laid at his and their door, first to clear themselves of
pride as to this matter, especially, when they do not pretend to pray by the
immediate teaching and leading of the Spirit, in which the only true Prayer is
framed, that is acceptable unto God?

Quest. 19. Whether or no it did not as well express a mind filled with pride,
as contain a manifest impertinency, for the same David Lyall to allege as a
token of the Quakers pride, that a little black fellow came into the Church (
such were his expressions) whether these words, I say, savor not as little of
Humility, as the thing it self is void of Reason, that either littleness of
body, blackness of feature, or meanness of outward Extract (for so I think he
means by fellow) are inconsistent with the esse, or being of a Preacher; which
if they had, its probable, himself could hardly have been admitted to be one?

Quest. 20. Whether if such words and expressions be the fruits of
premeditation and study, ( which these men cry up so much, and judge so
needful) it deserves that esteem they would have put upon it, or upon
themselves because thereof; especially considering many more impertinencies and
inconsistencies used by them in their Pulpits: witness that one mentioned upon
the same occasion by the aforesaid D. L. to wit, that its better to be an
humble Devil, than a proud Saint: which if used by a Schoolboy, would have
deserved hissing, if not whips, as being Repugnantia in adjecto.

Let David Lyall, George Mildrum, John Menzies, three Priests in Aberdeen, who
have lately most appeared in Pulpit against them called Quakers, and among all
their Fellow-Priests are herein mostly concerned, answer these Queries, if they
can, without using those shifts and tergiversations, which the Papists used
against the Primitive Reformers.

Given forth the 11 th Month 1670. by R. B.

William Mitchell UNMASKED: OR, THE Staggering Instability Of the Pretended
Stable Christian DISCOVERED, HIS Omissions observed, and Weakness unvailed. IN
HIS Late faint and feeble Animadversions by way of Reply to a BOOK, Entitled,
Truth Cleared of Calumnies. WHEREIN The Integrity of the Quakers Doctrine is
the Second time Justified, and Cleared from the Reiterate, Clamorous but
Causless Calumnies of this Cavilling Catechist.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

JOHN 16.2. They will put you out of their Synagogues, yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think he does God good service.

1 JOHN 4.4. Ye are of God, little Children, because greater is he that is in
you, than he that is in the World.

3 JOHN 10. Wherefore if I come, I will remember his Deeds (which he does)
prating against us with malicious words.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street. 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
HAving seriously perused W. M. his late Animadversions upon my Book, I find,
my Judgment of it, though a Party concerned, to jump with that which is the
sense of several Judicious Persons, who neither own nor walk in that Profession
I am in; and therefore can the less be suspected of Partiality; viz. That they
contain nothing of a solid or satisfactory Reply. For though he seems to take
notice of all the Particulars mentioned, yet he omits in many more than the
half, of what is said by me concerning them; and against that which he does
mention in my name, his most frequent Arguments are without any Proof; having
no other bottom, but his own Judgment, Thoughts and Conjectures, whereby it
seems (forgetting, or mistaking his Work) he plays the Catechist rather, than
the Disputant. This put me to some stand, Whether it was fit to give him any
Reply? though truly, such as will be at the pains to compare his with my last,
will need little further. Yet knowing, how many are apt to take things upon
Trust, and to receive Misrepresentations concerning us, who are a People so
generally Reproached; I found it expedient to write this succinct Reply, which
may lead the Reader to a narrow Observation of the Invalidity of W. M. his Work
against us; and may present in short his most Obvious Omissions, his most
manifest Contradictions, unvail his Dis-ingenuity, lay open his Weakness, and
show his Unstability (especially so far as he has deserved) in most of these
Arguments he used in his Dialogue, as not being able further to maintain them;
and discover, how faintly such new ones, as he does now bring forth, militate
against us. Let it not startle thee, that so small a bulk as this is, should
Answer his; for thou may perceive, several Pages of his taken up in the
Capital Letters of the Contents of his many Heads and subdivided Sections;
which makes it not unlike the City Mindus (whereof the Ancients spoke) whose
Gates were so disproportionable in greatness to the quantity of the Town, that
a certain Philosopher is said to have advised the Citizens To shut them, least
the City should flee out of them. We may very well so far extend the parallel,
as to aver, That the Contained in no ways answers to the Contents; there is a
deal of more Heads, than either Heart or Horns: several Sections, but small
Substance, and a great show of Method, but very little Matter. I confess, I
might have far more enlarged this Duply, had I taken notice of all the
Impertinencies, which herein come under my Observation; but that the more
Judicious and Intelligent would ascribe these things not so much to the Cause,
as his Weakness, who managed it. I desire to contend for Truth, and not for
Victory; knowing, though I were so minded, the Triumph should be but Small,
that I could gain from so Inconsiderable an Antagonist. Therefore Reader, I
shall wish thee for the Truth's sake, (that thou may be found truly owning it,
and not something else in stead of it) seriously to Read and peruse these
Papers, with such as relate unto them; and may that Spirit of Truth, which
teaches all things, so direct thy Understanding, as thou may discern, what
Doctrine is truly and really most according to the Holy Scriptures! Which thou
art heartily invited in this matter to search and peruse,

Urie, the 24th of the 10th Month, commonly called December, 1671. By a
Well-wisher of thy Soul and of all Men, R. B.

William Mitchell UNMASKED: Staggering Instability of the pretended Stable
Christian Discovered, his Omissions observed, and Weakness Unvailed, etc.
THAT which first presents it self to my View, is W. M. his Epistle directed to
me and the Quakers in and about Aberdeen, which he prefixes as his
Considerations upon my Preface; but that which is the substantial part of it,
he has left Unanswered. For my Preface was, to show the Method of the Priests
of Aberdeen's Procedure against the Quakers, giving account of most, if not all
the Papers had past betwixt them, and also how by their Instigation some of us
had been Imprisoned; particularly the falsness of G. Meldrum his way with us,
first in Pulpit to accuse us as Heretics, and then in private to desire to
know of us our Principles: but all this he has wholly waved, it seems he
either could not, or would not defend his own, nor his Brethrens double dealing
with us. As to what he mentions I take notice --

First, Of his denying, That any in or about Aberdeen has reproached the
Quakers, as Demented, Distracted, or bodily possessed; Checking me, for taking
things upon Trust. Well, it suffices me, that they are ashamed of such
falsehoods; though if need be, I can instance, that I had ground to say so.

Secondly, I take notice, how that not being willing wholly to clear us, he
says; Some of us in England have given ground to be so charged, by their
extraordinarily Trembling, etc. But it is strange, W. M. should so far forget
himself, as to account this a ground to charge People as Demented, etc. seeing
there was a season, wherein himself acknowledged, He seldom or never went to
the Pulpit without sensible Trembling: Which if he dare to deny, I offer to
prove by undeniable Testimonies. As to what he adds of Women going naked in the
Streets, and some offering to raise the Dead; alleging for proof Samuel Clark,
the Newcastle Ministers, Paget's Heresiography. I Answer; As these Calumnies
have been particularly answered by our Friends in England, so they signify no
more against us (being writ by our declared Enemies) than Cochlaeus lies
against Luther, particularly that he assayed to Cast out Devils; or what the
Popish Authors write of Calvin, That he made a Living Man counterfeit himself
Dead, that so he might Raise him; and that Beza was stigmatized for Sodomy: and
much more of this kind.

Thirdly, The thing I observe is his Comparing us to John of Leyden, and
Ignatius Loyola, and that, because they Preached in the Streets, cried down
wearing of Rings, and other Superfluities as we do, were against needless
Salutations, spoke much of Mortification, and pretended to or expected
Immediate Revelation. John of Leyden.
But our resembling them in these things, which the Apostles of Christ
commanded and practiced, will not prove the Jesuits our Grandfathers (as W. M.
terms it) more, than their being found in them, will prove them the
Grandchildren of the Apostles. We must not forsake doing good, because
Hypocrites seem to do so, nor forbear to preach the Gospel, because Judas did
it: but as for the other practices of John a Leyden, and Ignatius Loyola's
followers the Jesuits, to wit, their cutting down all that would not be of
their way, their assuming outward Power, their seeking to overturn Kingdoms,
their preaching up War and Blood: The Principles and Practices of W.M. his
Brethren do declare, how much more they resemble them, than the Quakers; who
from the Pulpit blew the Trumpet of all the late Troubles, Seditions and Civil
Dissensions, which have proved so bloody and monstrous to the Inhabitants of
this poor Island! And many of them have now turned their backs upon that Cause,
which they hunted out others to fight for: and some (to wit, W. N. and his
Brethren at Aberdeen) can find out Jesuitical Distinctions and Mental
Reservations, whereby (notwithstanding they swore against all detestable
Neutrality) they can make a shift to preach under Bishop, dispense with the
Doxology, forbear Lecturing, and several other parts of the Directorian
Discipline, as W. M. has done at the Bishops order, and yet keep a Reserve for
Presbytery, in case it come again in fashion.

Fourthly, I take notice of the Impertinency of W.M. his bringing in this story
of Ignatius Loyola, upon my saying; Some Professors in Aberdeen found that
savor of Life in the Quakers Testimony, which formerly had stirred among
others, who were come to a great decay. Now because it was obvious, I intended
by these Professors, who were come to a decay, W.M and some others of his
Brethren, who pretended to be for Independency in that day; but now were turned
with the times, knowing, how much it would reflect upon him to harp on this
string, he runs away and says; These others are Ignatius Loyola; and thereupon
makes the Comparison abovementioned: which Impertinent Digression is
abundantly manifest.

The plain Language used in the Scriptures.
Fifthly, I take notice of his charging us, as rather Reproachers of others,
than Reproached, because of the plain Language we use against him and his
Brethren; alleging, We will not find Christ and his Apostles use the like to
such, as professed Christianity. For a reproof of his Ignorance in the
Scriptures let him read Rom 16.18. Phil. 3.2. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. ib. chap. 4.1,
2, 3, etc. ib. chap 6 verse. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2.17. Tit 1.10, 11. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
1 John 2.18, 19. etc. His adding. That they show earnestness of desire, that
Souls may be saved, and willingness to promote that design, says nothing;
except this desire and willingness proceed from the right ground. Papists are
as zealous in their Earnestness and Willingness as they, and do no less profess
Subjection to the Gospel, owning Christ to be the Messiah, and yet Calvin
spared not to term them Impuros Canes, filthy Dogs. Innumerable are the
Expressions of this kind used by the zealous Luther against them.

Sixthly, I take notice of his Cautions to me, wherein he charge me of Pride,
Passion, Censoriousness, Folly, Contrariety to the Word of God, Ignorance, and
Endeavoring to promote the Popish Interest: but had he truly minded my good in
his Cautions, he should have produced some Reasons to prove me guilty of these
Crimes. He concludes us Proud, for separating from them in Burying-Places;
Burying-Grounds separate.
and so condemns the French Protestants, for doing the like from Papists. He
falsely charge us with placing Religion in forbearing Ribands, keeping on the
Hat, and saying Thou and Thee; and therefore concludes me Ignorant of true
Conversion: While his Ignorance of us has made him thus Calumniatious. He
concludes us Advancers of the Popish Interest, because we decry their Ministry
and Churches: While he borrows this very Argument from the Papists, who used it
against the First Reformers, alleging, that their crying down the Church of
Rome, was a joining hand with the Turks, who did the same; though then the
First Reformers were no Turks, though they agreed with them in denying the
Church of Rome. Neither are we Romanists, though with those of Rome we condemn
them; especially considering, that it is, bebecause of their too great Affinity
with Papists, that we do so.

Seventhly, I take notice of his confessing, He never intends to tell the World
the Scriptures we use; alleging, we abuse them. But if he could have proved we
did so, it would have tended more to our disadvantage. And whereas he says; He
resolves to write no more: I confess, it will be his Wisdom; except he speak to
better purpose: it is a very apparent subterfuge, to cover his Resolutions of
not prosecuting farther this Debate, by alleging, it will prove endless; and
comparing us to Scolds, who will have the last word: Which in reason can have
no place in this matter, seeing being challenged by me of many great Omissions,
he freely acknowledged, he had not, nor did not intend to answer me fully; and
what he had writ, was but some Animadversions: Which I have indeed found true,
having allowed some time, as he desired, to read them; though it very hardly
deserves, to be so much regarded.

As to his Epistle, if he had as really affected Retirement, as he pretends he
does, he should have done well to have appeared in Public with some more solid
stuff. He has herein almost only showed his Ingenuity, in that he
acknowledges himself amongst the weakest of our Opposers, comparing his Work
but to a small quantity of Water, brought to quench an House on fire: We have
indeed found it of less force, than many, that have come before it, to Smother
or Drowned that Truth, which God has Revealed among us. Truth is the strongest,
and will prevail.
In the end of his Epistle he would willingly have the Reader believe, he is an
Vpholder of the Protestant Interest, against our endeavors to overthrow it;
but to how little purpose, may, as it occurs, be manifested.

After he has made an entire Omission, of what is particularly directed by me
to him in my 8 th and 9 th pages (as not being able to Vindicate himself) he
enters upon the matter of Salutation, undertaking in his first Section, to
prove such as are used by gestures, wherein I observe --

First, His most manifest Omission of the first part of mine concerning this
thing page 9. and 10. where I charge with Dis-ingenuity in wrong Subsuming of
our words; which he shuffleth over with this general, That after the Quakers
rate I have Saluted him with Reproach.

Secondly, He having expressed my Argument against their manner of Salutations,
viz. That being it is the Expression or Signification of our Worship to God,
All Worship belongs to God alone.
it ought not, nor cannot be given to the Creature without Idolatry; He makes
thereunto no direct Answer; but instead of one frames a distinction of Worship
in Civil and Sacred: The first (he says) may be given to men, but the second
to God only; alleging, this distinction to be founded on Scripture, Luke
14.10. Then shall thou have worship in the presence of them, Luke 14.10. wrong
Translated.
that sit at meat with thee. Now these words ought to be translated; Thou shall
have glory, praise or renown; and therefore in the Latin it is, Et erit tibi
gloria; for so the Greek word Doxa signifies, (...) gloria.
which W.M. will not show me to signify Adoratio or Worship. It Is therefore
but a poor Argument, that has no better bottom than this manifest mistake of
the Translation. For other proof he has none, neither for his Distinction, nor
former Assertion.

Thirdly, I observe his Instancing of the practices of Abraham, Lot, Joseph,
Jacob, adding, That though they be not to be followed in all things, yet in
such they may, as are not elsewhere Reprehended nor Prohibited. For Answer; Let
him look unto Rev. 22.9. where the Angel refused it: and seeing I suppose, he
may have so much Charity for this beloved Disciple, as to judge, he was not
Tempted with Idolatry, especially in a season, wherein God was Revealing such
precious things unto him; he may observe, now this Holy Man was a stranger to
this unscriptural distinction of Civil and Religious Worship.

Fourthly, I observe his endeavors to shift Affinity with Popery; but he has
no way disproved the parity in that, wherein I compared them, viz. The Papists
distinguish the Worship they give to God, and that they give to their Images
only in the Intention, and not in the outward signification: and ye distinguish
the Worship ye give to Men, and that ye give to God, only in the Intention, and
not in the outward signification. For ye bow and take off your Hats to the
worst of Men, as well as to God; and therefore ye agree in so far, as both have
nothing, but their simple Intention to plead the difference, whereunto nothing
is answered. He concludes his Section, saying; I seem to justify Moses his
doing Obeisance to his Father in law; adding, What is Obeisance, but civil
Reverence by bowing the Body? This is a fit Conclusion to close up such a silly
Section; for after he has labored long in vain, he concludes, thus begging the
thing in question. And if Moses bowed himself, as I said in my last, that makes
nothing against us. His second Section is to prove Salutations by words; which
might have been spared until he had proved, how and where we deny them. But
because he had something to say from Scripture for this (which we deny not, but
own as much as himself) he would have it, in that he might seem with some
credit to bring-in his Inference, which is; That bowing of the Body, and
expressing our Affection by words, is agreeable to Scripture. The latter part
of this concerns not us, as being not denied: and for the first, of Bowing, it
signifies nothing, until it be brought in with some more pressing Premises. In
this Section he acknowledges, That taking off the Hat is without any
Scripture-warrant: Hat-honour to Man not warranted by Scripture; but to God.
And from Argument passes here to Entreaties, begging, that it may not be
quarrelled at. But seeing, the taking of it off, or uncovering of our Heads is
that which the Apostle requires, as a sign of Subjection in our Worship toward
God, 1 Cor. 11.4, 7. we Resolve to keep it to him, and not to give it to man:
wherein if he will solve our Scruple according to Scripture, we may be the more
easily induced to answer his desire. It is to be Observed, that notwithstanding
of this, we are not against outward Signification of Honor; though in the end
of this Section he falsely would be insinuating the contrary.

He has here subjoined a Third Section, which he terms an Answer to my
Objection, and which in Reason should have some relation to Salutations, as
being under this Head; though indeed it has none at all, but is a mere Cavil
at some of my words upon another Subject, concerning the Single Language. Where
page 11. I confess with him, that the Kingdom of God consists not in words,
adding, that it seems inconsistent with his Principles, seeing the Gospel
according to him is but words, yea, the Scripture it self (I mean, that which
ye have of it, to wit, the Letter:) Now this Parenthesis he has
Dis-ingenuously omitted; and thereupon goes about to explain their meaning of
the Scripture, and the Gospel, alleging; If we be for another, we may justly
be accounted Subverters of the Christian Religion: But such shallow Criticisms
brought in beside the purpose, (whereas other things more Material, are either
wholly Omitted* or scurvily Shifted over) will easily appear to the Impartial
and Judicious Reader.

In his second Head, concerning our using Thou and Thee, which is the singular
number to one Person, I observe --

First, How he has given away his own Cause, by confessing, By [ You] are
meant all the Apostles, Luke 22.31.
that Luke 22.31. is not understood of one exclusively of others, and therefore
no wonder, if Christ used the Plural Number, seeing as W.M. confesses, he
intended to speak to all the Apostles. As for that Expression of Bildad's,
Job's Friend (granting both the Transcription and Translation to be true) shall
this one Expression overturn the Universal practice of Christ and the whole
Saints in Scripture? or let him tell us plainly, whether these Words and
Practices of Job's Friends, which are Recorded, be for to be our Rule, so as we
ought to imitate and follow them? especially, where they contradict or differ
from the Practice of Christ and his Apostles? But to follow this so frequent
Practice of the Saints, is with W.M. to be proud, knowing nothing, but doting
about Questions and Strife of Words; for so he mis-applies 1 Timothy 6.4. and to
his own Confusion uses it himself in the end of his Epistle to the Reader,
where he has these Words; I am thy Servant: and thereby has Condemned himself
as one of those Ignorant, Proud Boasters he speaks of, etc.

Secondly, The second thing I observe, that he produces not one Argument
against our Practice in this thing, but his own groundless, yea, lying
Imaginations and Conjectures, alleging; He is of the mind, that if the
Translators had not kept to the Rigor of Construction, but Translated Atach,
and so not Thou (which is the true signification) but You, we had kept our old
tone: Though his disdainful Insinuation of our Ignorance be here apparent, yet
experience might have taught him and his Brethren, that even where the
Translators have favored them with their Escapes, the Quakers have both had
Hebrew and Greek enough to find them out. It is also here to be observed, how
easily W. M. can dispense with Mistakes (even wilful ones) in the Translators,
when they make for his purpose; thereby in effect (for all his pretenses of
Exalting the Scripture and making it his Rule) he signifies his desire not so
much to Square his Practices to the Scripture, as by twining it like a Nose of
Wax to make it Square to them.

He Superscribeth his Third Head; An Undertaking to prove, That our Departing
from them is not to be Justified by their departing from Papists; Wherein is to
be observed his manifest Omissions, which the Reader will see by comparing the
12, 13, and 14 th pages of my last, with this his Third Head.

Next, I Observe the weakness of his Arguing in what he has mentioned, wherein
he concludes; That because we grant, we had a measure of Integrity while among
them, that therefore it was begot by their Ordinances so called. But does not
the same recur in the Case of the Primitive Protestants? or will he say, that
all of them were void of any measure of Integrity, while they were among the
Papists? Moreover, whereas he Objects, Papists not Converted by Popish
Traditions, etc.
that though God visited some among Papists, it was not by Popish Traditions;
alleging, Luther had the benefit of the Copy of a Latin Bible, whereby he was
Instructed. For Answer; The same recurs in our Case; for whatever Advantages
Luther had either by the use of the Bible or otherways, had not we the same?

And therefore in the Third place is to be Observed, that he has altered the
State of the Question, alleging it to be Incumbent upon me, to prove, that
they were Converted by the Popish Traditions. Which is a wilful mistake; for
the Question (as may be seen in the pages abovementioned) was, Whether God
might not countenance us with a regard to that measure of Integrity he has
begot in our Hearts, though we are indeed wrong as to our walking with them in
their Way. And this I did Illustrate by the Example of the Disciples of
Cornelius and of Luther, who though he came but Gradually to his Discoveries,
yet was Countenanced in the first as well as last steps; yea, notwithstanding
of his erring grossly in the matter of Transubstantiation. All this he has
wholly omitted, closing up this Head, by endeavoring to draw from my words a
reflection upon P.L. as if I accounted an Objection coming from him weak* but
it is ill Inferred, to conclude P. L. from thence a feeble Person. For though
P.L. as well as I, might reckon it weak comparatively, in respect of others
more strong; yet he might judge it strong enough for such faint Disputers, as
W.M. or his Brethren at Aberdeen to Answer: as that which he reckoned would put
the Quakers to a great Nonplus, he proposed in his Dialogue upon this occasion
a Query, viz. Whether it was safe to lean to the Guidance of that Light, which
one while says, This is the Way of God walk in it; another while, Come out of
it, for it is Babylon? To which, beside the general Answer abovementioned, I
show him, how easily it might be Retorted upon most of all the National
Ministry of Scotland, who now are gainsaying and contradicting that, which they
had formerly pleaded for as the Cause and Work of God: even then as this their
Changableness cannot be ascribed to the Scripture, which they pretend to be
their Rule, neither will any man's Instability, who pretends to be guided by
the Light, prove, the Light ought not to be followed. This, because he felt
might touch him and his Brethren too near, therefore he has wholly omitted it.

His Fourth Head is concerning the Light, containing five Sections, from Page
9. to the 25. wherein is to be observed,

First, How he has gone from the State of the Question, as it is in his
Dialogue page 5. where he denies Christ to be in the Wicked or Unconverted in
any other manner, then as he is in the very Bruits and unsensible Creatures:
But now he grants Christ to be in such as to common Operations: and page 22. he
says, That the Light is in all men, and that Christ is in all men, in so far as
his Light is in all men. And thus he overthrows his chief Argument, used
against us in his Dialogue page 5. where he says; That Christ is in none, but
in such with whom He is in Union: For here he grants Christ's Light to be in
all men, even such as are not in Union with him; adding, that Where the Light
of Christ is, there is Christ the Donator of it. Which is all we say; so then
the Controversy is no more, if Christ or his Light be in all men.

But after what manner He is in them, and whether this Light be Saving, yea or
nay?

And here in the second place I Observe his shameless Dis-ingenuity and
Omission, in saying; It remains for me to prove, that this Light in all is
Saving: Whereby he would make the Reader believe, that I had never offered to
prove this. For clearing of which I desire he may look into page 23. of my
last, where from Romans 5.8. Joh. 3.16, 19. Hebr. 2. Tit. 2.11. Col. 1.23. I did
prove, that the Universal Grace of God given to all men is Saving in its
Nature, and in order to Save. And now, though no Rules of strict Debate could
require me to proceed further, yet I shall go on to Examine the Question, as he
has now stated it, viz. That such, as are not in Union with Christ, have not
Saving Grace. To prove this he produces some Scriptures, where such as have
Saving Grace and Light, are said to be in Union with Christ, which is not in
the least denied: But the Question is; Whether all, that have Saving Light, are
in Union with Christ: which he has not so much as offered to prove. And
therefore it is here to be Observed, how he has not so much as mentioned, far
less meddled with my Arguments, proving Saving Light and Grace to be in men,
before they be Converted or in Union with Christ; showing, He must needs be in
them, before He be in Union with them, that he may work the Faith, by which He
may be united unto them: seeing, without Him (the Scripture says) we can do
nothing, Joh. 15.5. as it is more amply contained in page 15. of my last. Page
14. he seems to take some notice of an Example brought by me to show, That
Saving Grace presupposes not Conversion. It is from the Instance of a Plaster,
and a Wound: the being healed of a Wound, presupposes a Plaster; but the
Application of the Plaster presupposes not the being healed: this he Rejects
as not to the Purpose, because, as he says; Who have Saving Grace, are in part
healed, cured of the Reigning Power of Sin: but for this he brings no Proof,
nor has not shown us, wherein the Comparison Answers not after the like
manner. In the same page he adds; That the difference betwixt having of
Saving Grace, and being in a State of Grace, is but the Figment of the Quaker
's own Brain; Without giving any cause for it, either from Scripture or Reason,
but only he says so. These are his most Frequent and Enforcing Arguments
against us. Of this nature is his Arguing page 11. Reckoning it as a great
Absurdity flowing from our Doctrine, that it would Import Christ in some
measure to be in the Americans, because He bears Testimony in them against
Iniquity. Christ in the Americans in some measure.
But to prove this to be Absurd, he produces no Reason; and if we may believe
the Apostle Paul, he tells us; That a Manifestation of the Spirit is given
every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. So this Every one Includes the
Americans.

The second Absurdity, which he seeks to Infer from this, has no better
bottom; That then it might be said, that Christ is Revealed to Devils, and that
we do the Heathens small favor, in putting them but in the same case with
such. For the Revelation of Christ to man, before the Day of their Visitation
be Expired, and to such after they have sinned it out, is far different, as may
appear by Luke 17. Likewise W. M. has forgot, how easily this Argument may be
Retorted upon himself; for it is not questioned, but Devils have enough of
outward Knowledge, even such as is gathered from Scripture, and that which W.M.
accounts the great Privilege of Christians; does it therefore follow, that
Christians are in no better condition than Devils?

And thus is Answered another of his profuse Assertions page 12. That if Pagans
have Saving Light, their State should be as good, as the State of real
Christians: For it is one thing to have Saving Light, and another, to harken to
and receive it; else according to his own Argument the State of Devils should
be as good, as the State of Real Christians.

He adds; Where Saving Illumination is, there is Saving Faith, because there is
a Concatination betwixt these Graces of the Spirit.

Answ. There is Grace given in order to Save, where Faith does not follow upon
it; which is evident by the Parable of the Seeds, Matthew. 13.3. it was the same
Seed was sown in the Stony and Thorny Ground, that was sown in the good Ground,
and yet it only brought forth Fruit there. The Light enlighteneth every man; He
came unto His own, and they received Him not: but it was only To as many as
received Him, that He gave Power to become the Sons of God.

And whereas he Objecteth, That where we are desired to believe in the Light,
it is understood of Christ's Person, else it would Import a belief in a
Creature.

I Answer; He that believes in the Light, believes in Christ: for where the
Light of Christ is, as says W.M himself ( page 22.) there is Christ himself.

In the same page he further adds; That if Pagans have Saving Light, then there
is no Spiritual Benefit accrues to Christians by the Scriptures and Gospel.
Pagans have Saving Light and Gospel.
But he has not heard us contra-distinguish this Light from the Gospel. We say
expressly, it is the Gospel, according to Col, 1.23. where the Apostle says;
That the Gospel, whereof he was a Minister, was preached to every Creature:
This Scripture mentioned by me in my last, he has wholly Omitted. Nor is this
Arguing of his concerning the bad tendency of our Principle, but a reiterate
Clamor of what is already Answered in page 16. of my last; where I show him,
we distinguish betwixt things absolutely needful and things very profitable;
and how they Admit of this Distinction themselves. As also, how these bad
Consequences of rendering the Gospel and Preaching useless, does far more follow
from their Doctrine of absolute Predestination; all which he has also Omitted.
Predestination made void.
Now such are far likelier than we, to reprove David his Praying for more
Understanding, and that he might keep the Precepts of God; for being
Predestinate to Life, he could not miss of it: and how can such but reckon it
folly for him to Pray, that he might keep the Precepts, whose Principles
Obliges them to believe, they can never be made able to keep them.

Page 13. To say, That men are Brutish in their Knowledge, because they turn
their Backs upon the Light, he reckons a Begging of the Question, as having no
proof at all: Whereas it is particularly Intimated 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. where the
cause of men's Walking in Darkness is said to be their not Walking in the Light;
though it be Pastors, mentioned in that 10 th of Jer. 19. that are said to be
Brutish; Brutish Pastors.
yet he cannot be Induced to name them. It is easy to prove (though he
Insinuate the contrary) that what in Scripture is called Darkness, has Saving
Light; seeing it is expressly mentioned, that the Light shines in the Darkness,
but the Darkness comprehended it not. And this was Saving, being Christ, who is
the Savior, Joh. 1.5.

Nor does his supposed Contradiction follow from this, as if men could be
Spiritually Dead, and not Spiritually Dead, in respect they have this in them,
which is Saving: for though it be in them, yet it is not of them; he that
believes in me, says Christ, though he be dead, yet shall he live, Joh.
11.25. If Life be not in them, as their permanent Condition, yet they may have
some touches of it; and the Principle of Life is Permanent even in those that
are Spiritually Dead: though many times as a Spark covered under the Ashes. He
adds further; That according to us, such who are the Children of Darkness,
may be called the Children of Light, because a Child of Light is as much, as
one, in whom there is Saving Light and Grace, citing for proof Luke 16.8* the
words are; For the Children of this world are wiser in their generation, than
the Children of Light. But he offers from this to Inter, That such, who are
indeed the Children of Darkness, because of their Disobedience to the Saving
Light and Grace of Truth, that is in them: he has not offered so much as to
mention.

Page 13. He confesses with me, That the Light in some may be Darkness; but
speaks not one word, of what Light I mention, may be so; page 17. of mine, only
adds, That we will do well, to exhort our Disciples, to take heed of our Light,
not to it. But we desire not People to take heed to our Light, or their Light,
as he terms it, but to the Light, wherewith Christ Jesus has Enlightened them;
and in this there is no danger. He greatly declares his Ignorance, in
alleging, Our way of bidding People heed the Light within is not warranted by
Scripture, for God is Light, 1 John 1.3. Is he not in us? Acts 17.27, 28. God
is Light.
Must we not then there take heed unto Him? Or is not that Light to be taken
heed unto, which shines in our hearts, to give us the knowledge of the glory
of God? 2 Cor. 4.6. And is not the Word of God Light, which the Apostle says
expressly, is not far off, neither above us, below us, nor without us, but Nigh,
even in our mouths and in our hearts, Romans 10.8. Deuteronomy. 30.14. Moreover W. M.
himself Confesses, That the Light of Christ is in Wicked Men; and if so, let
him tell us plainly, if Men ought not to take heed to the Light of Christ,
where it is? how has Darkness blinded him in this Matter!

Page 14. He repeats my words falsely, alleging I say; The Light is Darkness to
them that Reject it, instead of, is as Darkness. For I said plainly, The Light
of Christ is not, nor connot be Darkness otherways, than as the Day of the Lord
in Scripture is called Darkness: this he has Omitted.

Page 15. Having sought (but Ineffectually) to overturn my Assertion, where I
say; Some may have Saving Light and Grace, who after a certain manner may be
said not to have the Spirit, Viz. as not bringing forth the Fruits of it:
Averring; That unless I can prove, that the Spirit calls upon all in Order to
Conversion, I cannot conclude, that all have the Spirit. Answ. As the one is
easily proved, so is the other safely concluded: these are the plain words of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.7. A manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man
to profit withal: Now it were not profitable unto them, if it did not strive
with them in Order to Convert them. That other Scripture John 16.8. he passes
over, alleging; I should prove, the World there to be understood of All and
every one: though in Reason it might suffice for answer, that there is nothing
brought by him to show, why the word World here is not taken in its Genuine and
Common Acceptance; yet the Apostle solves this Scruple in the following Verse;
-- Of sin, because they believe not in me. Then if there All unbelievers be
included, is not that all and every one in the World? for of the Saints there
is not here any question.

In his second Section, page 16. he begins with Omitting my Concession of
the Benefit and Advantages, that accrue to those that Believe, by the outward
Knowledge of Christ: and mentions nothing of the state of the Question, which
was; Whether any might be Saved without this outward Knowledge? And to show,
that some might, I gave him the Instance of Deaf People and Children. To which
he returns nothing; but takes up the Paper to prove, That the Greek
Preposition (...), is sometimes Translated [among]; Which is not denied: yet I
shall find him twenty to one, The Preposition (...) signifies [in] this place
more properly.
where it is rendered [ in] and can no ways be said to be [ among.] The Question
is; Whether in this place 1 Cor. 2.2. it be In or Among? The Reason alleged by
him proves it no ways to be Among, to wit, That it would have been the
Apostle's Grief, not his Joy, to know, that the Light of Truth was born down
Among them; This was the Apostle's Joy, that the Corinthians came to be
sensible, how they had Crucified Christ in them; that so looking upon, and
taking heed to Him, whom they had Pierced, they might come to be Healed by him.

Page 17. He slightly passes over that expression of Paul, 2 Cor. 5.16. where
he says, Henceforth know we Christ no more after the flesh, but after the
Spirit (Adduced by me to show, that Paul preferred a Spiritual Knowledge of
Christ to all other). As if the Apostle were here only condemning earthly
thoughts of Christ, as if, as King of Israel, he should begin a Temporal
Kingdom: but for this Exposition we have only the bare Authority of his own
naked Assertion.

Page 18. For want of a true Spiritual Understanding concerning what I mean by
the Inward Blood of Christ, he brings forth his own malicious Guessings.

The first is, That I seem to incline to Justify, that which has been charged
upon some of my Brethren, to wit, That we are not such Fools, as to hope to be
Saved by that Jesus, that died at Jerusalem: As he has no ground to Suspect
such a thing from my words; so there was never any ground for such a Charge
against any, owned of that People.

The second is, That perhaps I intend, that Christ, as Man, dwells in us. There
can none truly charge us with such grosness, Christ's Indwelling in Man is
Spiritual.
as to Assert, the Manhood, or Vessel, that walked at Jerusalem, is in us; but
if any of us have said, that Christ, as Man, dwells in us, they have said no
more than the express words of Scripture, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. Let your adorning be
the hidden man of the heart, Ephesians 4.24. That ye put on the new man. Now what is
this New Man, but Christ Jesus? And therefore says the Scripture, Romans 13.14.
Put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 3.27. As many as are baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. And this is Christ, which the Apostle traveled, that He
might be formed in the Galatians, Gal. 4.19. And whereof he Admonishes the
Corinthians, that they should know Him in them, else they were Reprobates, 2
Cor. 13.5. If it be hard for W.M. to take up the meaning of these things, let
him acknowledge his Ignorance in the Holy Scriptures, whose Language this is.

In his third Section, page 19. he begins by offering to prove, Our Principles
have a tendency to introduce Paganism; and to Contradict him, he reckons an
Impertinency: But his ridiculous Vanity herein will appear, by looking unto
page 24. of my last. Neither brings he any Arguments to prove this, but such,
whereby he might conclude the same against the Apostle Paul. The Quakers, says
he, The Light no Introduction of Paganism.
Speaks of a Light within, to which who take heed, need no Teacher: And the
Apostle speaks of a Knowledge or Light under the New Covenant, where there is
no need of a Teacher, Hebr. 8.10, 11. So if the tendency of the Apostle's words
be not to Introduce Paganism, neither are ours. And because that W.M. finds,
that notwithstanding of this we despise not Teaching, but are led even by that
Light, to hear and to receive the Ministry of them whom God sends; he
concludes, that herein we are Inconsistent: adding, That some of us have been
heard to say, That we only taught to bring People off from other Teachers to
mind the Light within, that then they will need none; which he concludes, would
quickly make them like such, among whom the Name of Christ is not in
Remembrance. But he might as well seek to Infer the like hazard and
Contradiction from the plain words of the Apostle, 1 John 2.27. Ye have an
Anointing, and ye need not, that any man teach you; but as the same Anointing
teaches you of all things: and yet in the mean time was Teaching them.

As for that Story mentioned by him, Of a certain Dying Man in Aberdeen, whom
two Quakers pressed so much to mind Christ within: The inward Knowledge of
Christ preferred before the outward.
It infers nothing for his purpose; for that Dying Person had Abundance of
the outward Knowledge of Christ, and they needed not Preach that to him, which
he knew; therefore was he sensible of the seasonableness of their Advice,
saying (as I am certainly informed by one of the two) How good a thing would it
be for an old dying Man like me, to know that Christ within, which ye speak of!

He brings not any thing of weight in his fourth Section, as Reply to that
which is contained in the 22 th page of my last, where I show, We do no ways
confound the Light-giver with the Light, or enlightening given: the Reason
alleged here is, because we call that Light Jesus Christ, wherewith all Men
are Enlightened; which implies no more his Consequence, than that usual
expression, that it is the Sun, by which we are outwardly Enlightened, implies
any confounding of the Sun with the Beams.

Whereas in his last he said; There was a certain Light in all men, and that as
the Remainders of God's Image in him, since the Fall; in the end of page 24. he
explains it to be the Light of Reason and Understanding, and thereby makes the
Reason of Man all one with Christ and the Spirit; which page 10. and 22. he
granted to be in Wicked Men, as to common Operations.

After that he labors much in this fifth Section to prove, That Man
retains some Good since the Fall; he instanceth nothing but the Soul, which
he says, is Good and Precious and of great Excellency and Worth, and Retains a
Similitude to the Image of God, as being Spiritual and Immortal. W. M's.
Confusion.
Where it is observable, That he grants, the Souls of Wicked and Unconverted
Men to be of great Worth and Excellency; and yet he denies, the Works of the
Pure Spirit of God to be of any Worth or Excellency, and that because the Soul
has a share in them. If so be, the Souls of Wicked Men are conformed to the
Image of God, because they are Spiritual and Immortal; then are Devils also
conform to the Image of God, for they are also Spiritual and Immortal in the
same sense, that the Souls of Wicked Men are.

Lastly, I desire the Reader may here observe, how he has entirely omitted
that part of page 23. of mine, where I show, How and in what sense the Light is
to be understood, or called the Light of Nature, and of what Nature? Therein
clearing us from the Aspersion of Pelagianism. By which Omission it may appear,
how willing these Men are to Calumniate us, and apt to pass by that which tends
to our Vindication.

Page 25. Head 5. Sect. 1. He alleges; We vilify the Scriptures, and that
because we confess, That the end of our Meeting is not to Read them, but to
Wait on God; adding, that therefore we make an opposition betwixt Reading the
Scriptures, Reading the Scriptures is owned.
and Waiting on God. But as this Conclusion has no Proof, so it is most
Inconsequential: As if nothing could be distinguished, except it were Opposite:
According to which he might Argue, that because Preaching and Praying are not
all one, therefore they are Opposite. That some have been Countenanced of God
in Reading the Scriptures, is not denied by us; and therefore the bringing of
it forth against us, is wholly Impertinent.

And whereas he avers, That Reading of the Scripture is the means of having the
Word of God to dwell richly in us, alluding to Col. 3.16. He should have first
proved the Word there mentioned to be the Scripture, before he had been so
hasty to draw his Conclusion.

His alleging some passages, where Christ and others spoke upon some words of
Scripture, says nothing to the purpose: For as I confessed, it was sometimes
used by them; so I told him, it was also frequent among us. But the Question
is; Whether their settled Custom of speaking upon a Text be according to
Scripture? And thereupon I show him, how Christ and his Apostles did Preach
without it; as Christ, Matthew. 5. and in many other places: And Paul to the
Athenians: But this of Paul mentioned by me in my last, he has left unanswered.

And in Answer to 1 Cor. 14, 29, 30, 31. For ye may all Prophesy one by one,
etc. He says, This will not conduce to keep up the successive talking of
Quakers; Prophesying restricted only to Prophets by W. M. falsely.
alleging it to be Restricted to the Prophets, which (he says) it will be hard
to prove our Preachers to be: Adding; That it makes not against their Way,
because Ministers speak among them two or three. Here though in relation to us
he Restricts this place to the Prophets, yet in relation to himself he does it
not; else he must prove their Ministers, that so speak, to be Prophets, as he
desires me to do our Preachers: Now this he cannot, since he says peremptorily
page 97. That such a thing is ceased. And therefore this may show, how he
twinds and wrests the Scripture, to make it answer his corrupt Ends. It is a
manifest shift, to avert the strength of this place, where the Order of the
Church, which is quite contrary to theirs, is expressly mentioned, To run to the
matter of Women's Speaking, thereby to make a Digression to a new Debate; (which
has been largely defended by us, and particularly by Margaret Fell in a Book
never yet answered) And as to the place alleged, we have often shown, how it
cannot be understood in a rigid Literal sense, else it would contradict the
same Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.5. where he proposes to Women the Method and Manner of
their behavior in their public Preaching and Praying: The Promise was, that
the Daughters as well as the Sons should Prophecy, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.17.

As a second Reason of our vilifying the Scriptures, he adds, and that by way
of derision, They will not have the Scripture called their Master's Letter ( No
forsooth) their Master's Letter is writ in their hearts, etc. Answ. Here his
Malice has not only led him foolishly to Deride us, but the Apostle, yea, God
himself. The Law of God is our Master's Letter.
For the Law of God is our Master's Letter, and this is in our Hearts, if we be
under the New Covenant, Hebr. 8.10. I will put my Law into their minds, and
write them in their hearts; and verse. 11. They shall not need every man to
teach their neighbor, for they shall all know me, etc. His Argument taken from
Christ's writing to the seven Churches of Asia, makes nothing against us,
except he will be so ridiculous to aver, that these Churches had no Rule, nor
Knowledge of their Master's Will, before they received that Writing; Which if
they had, it was not there only. And this was that Incumbent to be proved, for
which that Example was brought; for the Testimony of Christ through his
Servants, whether by Word or Writ, is dearly owned by us, as has often been
declared.

With the like Impudence he concludes, That we bend our strength to Evacuate
the Authority of the Scriptures, and confirm negligent Atheists in their
contemptuous slighting of them; Because we speak of walking, The Anointing is
no Confirming of Atheists.
or doing our Work by the immediate Counsel of God. But he might as well babble
against the Beloved Disciple, 1 John 2.24. Ye have received an Anointing, and
ye need not, that any man should teach you; and yet was then teaching them
himself without Contradiction. As for that Scripture, Joh 12.24, 48. which he
desires us to read, we find not, how in the least they strike against our
Principle: for as it is without doubt to us, that the words, which Christ
spoke, will stand in Judgment against him and his Brethren, because while in
words they pretend to Exalt it, both in Principle and Practice they vilify and
deny it.

As a third Reason he alleges, We prefer our silent Waiting to the Reading of
Scriptures, as if we must first come to this, e're we can know the Scripture
aright; adding, that this Waiting is defined by us, To be a silent posture of
the Heart, without thinking good or evil.

Answ. These thoughts, which we say ought to be excluded from Waiting, are
man's own thoughts; Waiting excludes man's own thoughts.
not such as the Spirit of God furnishes him with: and it is great Ignorance
to say, That without this we can use the Scriptures aright; seeing the things
of God knows no man, save the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. As for his own
Imaginations, which he subjoins concerning our Waiting, they signify nothing;
because alleged without any proof: We deny not, but that Faith, Hope and
Charity is exercised in waiting, yet not without such thoughts, as proceed from
the Spirit of God. And whereas he finds, we clear our selves of this Calumny of
being Vilifiers of the Scripture, by showing, how much it is our desire to try
Doctrines by them; he alleges: We have herein been suspected of Juggling; the
proof is, R. Farmer says so. But R. Farmer's saying and W. M's. saying is all
one in this matter; neither of them are to be trusted without proof. Now the
Reason, because we say, that the Scriptures are not the Saints Rule of knowing
God and living to him: But this is just to beg the thing in Question.

That Story mentioned by him of a Quaker's telling a certain Woman in Aberdeen,
that she might as well read a Latin Book, as the Bible, does no ways prove,
that we are against trying of Doctrines by the Scripture; seeing the Quaker he
speaks of, might have had good reason, to look upon that supposed Religious
Woman, as one alienated from that Spiritual Key of David, which can alone truly
open the Scriptures, and so might well tell her; she would do well first to
come to that else her Reading might be so far from profiting her, that she
might come to wrest them to her own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

Sect. 2. Page 30. He begins with Acknowledging, That something may be
accounted the Declaration of ones Mind, which is not his Word: Though page 12.
of his Dialogue, he could not but smile at it, as Irrational.

To prove the Scriptures to be truly and properly called the Word of God, he
subjoineth; That the Precepts of the Scripture were uttered and spoke of God.
But in Answer to this I show him page 26. of my last, that the Properties
peculiar to the Word, cannot be spoken of the Scripture, The outward and inward
word distinguished.
but of the Inward and Living Word. To which he replies nothing, only tells;
There is a twofold Word, a Co-essential, Coeternal Word, and a Spiritual Word;
the Temporal expressed Word, or the Word written in time. But seeing he
pretends to be pleading for the Scripture, he should have used the Language of
it, and not such strange Anti-scriptural Expressions, which are not to be found
in all the Bible. Where does he read of a Spiritual Temporal, expressed Word? A
part of my Argument showing, that these Scriptures, Hos. 1.1. Joel 1.1. Isai.
38.4, are understood of that Word, from which the Scriptures are given forth;
he has but mentioned, not answered: for I told him; page 26. of my last, that
where it is said, The Spirit of God came upon such a one, or to such a one,
that therefore the Scripture is the Spirit? and so as do the Socinians, call
the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles the Spirit, denying the necessity of
any other Spirit? this he has wholly omitted. And indeed, he seems pretty much
to incline to the Socinians in this matter, Sword of the Spirit.
for he says; That the Scripture is the Sword of the Spirit, and that, because
Christ in his conflict with Satan said, It was written. But had this been
Christ's only Sword, we must conclude, the Devil to have had the same; for he
said also, It is written: and according to this Doctrine, who has a Bible in
his pocket, wants not the Sword of the Spirit: which savoureth of that Popish
soppery, That the sign of the Cross puts away Devils; but experience teaches
us, both these Opinions to be alike ridiculous.

Upon this occasion in his Dialogue, page 13. he asserted; That it is all one
to say, the Scripture says, and God says. And whereas in Answer to this I
told him, that they might be said to be one, because of their Agreement; yet
were no more one, than the Sunbeam and the Shadow is one, though they agree
together. Because he knew not, what to reply to this, he mentions a part of
these words of mine, and subjoins by way of Answer to them, That they tend to
advance humane Writings, and equal them with the Scripture, when they agree
with what God says. Which as it is a manifest shift, and no Reply, so it is a
notable Impertinency to say; There is any Hazard of advancing such Writings,
as truly agree with what God says; for upon what other account are the
Scriptures to be esteemed?

Page 32. to prove, That word mentioned Mark 7. which he fancies is said to be
made void, is not the Living Word, but the outward Precept of the Scripture; he
says, It is plainly held forth to be so, without any further Probation.

He adds page 34. That it seems we think, they set up the Scriptures us an
Idol, instead of that from which they come; asking, If we did ever hear them
call it the Eternal Son of God, that Savior who died, etc.

Answ. Though we have not heard you term the Scripture, yet it is not without
Reason, we say, ye set them up in Christ's stead. For I have a Letter under one
of the present National Teacher's hand, A National Teacher's belief of the
Scriptures.
wherein he says; The Scriptures are the alone means of Salvation; yea, the
alone Way, Truth and Life, and that none can be saved without them.

And I have heard another call the Greek Testament, The only Foundation. Now
being these are the peculiar Properties of Christ, have we not reason to say,
that such, as ascribe them to the Scriptures, put the Scriptures in Christ's
stead? though W. M. be pleased to term it unworthy dealing.

Sect. 2. page 35. he says; it is not difficult to prove, that the Law and
Testimony, mentioned Deuteronomy. 8.20. was not an inward Law: The reason alleged is,
Because the Prophet opposes, what is written, as no Light, if it agree not to
the Law and Testimony. But what then? The Law and Testimony inward.
does this prove the Testimony here not to be inward? He adds; That let People
pretend, what they will to a Law within, if it agree not with the
Scripture-Word, there is no Light in them; and that the outward Law gets the
name of the Testimony. But granting him all this, it does not in the least
follow, that the Law and Testimony there mentioned, was not inward. It is more
observably strange here, than in any other place, with what shameless
confidence he asserts his own bare Assertions instead of Arguments.

After the like manner without answering a word, of what I infer, page 27. of
mine against him and his Brethren from Joh. 7.49. he concludes, That Scripture
fits us better than them, because of our known, rash censuring. Upon which
Supposition of his own he condemns us, as like to Pharisees without more ado:
still by way of Reply to me, he says; It is not probable, that Christ checked
the Lawyer, in saying, How read thou? Luke 10.26. not offering to add any
further probation. And as for what he subjoineth, page 7. That Christ used the
Scripture about Divorcement, and in the matter of the Sabbath; it does no ways
prove them to be the only Rule; for as is said, we are willing, to try
Doctrines by them.

Page 37. He says; It is false to affirm, that the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures cannot be proved other ways, than by the Spirit's inward Testimony:
adding, There are other Arguments, whereby it can solidly and convincingly be
proved; and for this he instanceth one which he says, is excellently approved
by R. Baxter. What then? because W. M. thinks, that Argument of R. Baxter will
prove the Scriptures Authority without the Spirit; must we therefore be of the
same mind? I doubt very much, if R. Baxter think so much himself. Now W. M. his
deceit is very remarkable, Joh. Calvin's Testimony concerning the Scriptures.
in quoting some words of John Calvin, where he says, If he were to deal with
Arguments, he could produce many to prove the Laws came from God; for that I
never imagined, these Arguments could convincingly prove the Scriptures
Authority without the Spirit, (which is the thing in debate) it appears in the
very following words, Lib. Inst. 1. c. 7. Sect. 4. But if we will well look to
our Consciences, that they be not troubled with doubts, and stick not at every
scruple, it is requisite, the Persuasion, whereof we have spoken, be taken
higher than human Judgment or Conjecture, viz t.he secret Testimony of the Holy
Spirit. And a little after in direct Opposition, to wit, his words, he adds;
This Word shall not obtain Faith in the hearts of Men, if it be not Sealed by
the Inward Testimony of the Spirit. It is necessary then, says he, that the
Saints Spirit, which spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, enter in our Hearts,
and touch them livingly, to persuade us, that the Prophets have faithfully
delivered that, which was Commanded them from on high; and a little after, This
then is a Persuasion, which requires no Reasons: And again, This is a
Persuasion, which cannot be Begotten, but by a heavenly Revelation.

And in the beginning of the next Chapter he adds; If we have not This
certainly higher, and more firm than all humane Judgment, in vain is the
Authority of the Scriptures proved by Arguments. This does abundantly show, how
contrary W. M. is to Calvin in this matter; and not to him alone, but to the
whole Reformed Churches of France, who in their Confession of Faith, agreed
upon by the first National Synod they ever had at Paris (Anno 1559.) say thus,
The Synod at Paris concerning the Canonical Books in Scripture.
Art. 4. We know these Books to be Canonique, not so much by the common consent
of the Church, as by the Inward Testimony and Persuasion of the Holy Spirit.
And whereas he advises me to read Calvin his 6 th Chap. but that it would
prove too long a Digression, I could easily show, that we are no such
Contemners of the Scripture, as those he there speaks to: And what, if he
contradict the Truth, which we and himself elsewhere acknowledge? I make use of
his Testimony against W. M. and his Brethren, even as he did the Testimony of
Augustine, Gregory and others of the Fathers against those of Rome, whom
nevertheless he spared not to reject some times: Read Inst. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Sect. 5. lib. cap. Sect. 4. and in many other places. Thus also is added that,
which he adds about Pasor, whose Translation, he says, We follow in one thing,
but not in another; for we are not bound to follow him further, than he follows
the Truth. Nor does W. M. here produce any Argument to prove, that these words,
Joh. 5.39. should be, Ye search the Scriptures, etc. 2 pl. praes. Ind. See
Pasor.
Search the Scriptures, and not, Ye search the Scriptures, but his own bare
Assertion; adding, That Christ did not check them, when he said; In them ye
think to have Eternal Life: Whereas the very following words clearly Import a
Reproof, Ye will not come to me that ye might have Life. He says not, Seek for
Life in the Scriptures, ye do well to think to find it there; but thus, Ye
think to have Eternal life in the Scriptures, but will not come to me, that ye
might have life.

He ends this Section, asking; Seeing I grant, the Scriptures are profitable
for Doctrine, Correction, Reproof, etc. Why I deny them to be a perfect Rule?
But I never denied them; and I told him also, they were thus profitable, not to
every man, but to the man of God, The Scriptures profitable to the man of God.
i. e. he that is led by the Spirit of God. Now to this he replys nothing; only
tells me, The man of God is most commonly understood of the Ministers of Christ
Jesus; which though I should grant him, what he either can or would Infer from
it against my Argument, he has left unmentioned.

Sect. 3. Page 40. He alleges; The Voice and Testimony of the Father, which
Christ speaks of to the Jews, not to have been inward, desiring the Reader to
look to the place: and thereupon he cites Joh. 5.36. where Christ speaks of his
Miracles, as a greater Witness, than that of John. But his deceit is here
abundantly manifest; for the place mentioned by me was, 1 John 5.10. For this
is the witness of God, which he testified of his Son, he that believes in the
Son of God, has the witness in himself. Now, this he has wholly omitted; and
mentioned another in the stead of it, which makes nothing to the purpose. I
deny not, but the Miracles were a greater witness, than that of John; but then
will it therefore follow, that the inward Testimony of the Father is not
greater also? This was the matter in question. After the like manner he
concludes the Voice spoken of Joh. 5.37. Is not inward, but outward; citing
for Proof Matthew. 3.27. 2 Pet. 1.17, 18. the one is the Voice heard at Christ's
being Baptized; the other at his being Transfigured: But what way he seeks to
Infer from thence, that the Voice of the Father here spoken of by Christ to the
Jews, was not inward, but outward, he has left unmentioned.

Likewise the Exposition he adds unto this place, as if Christ were only here
reproving the Ignorance of the Jews, whose Predecessors had heard so much of
God; It would be the better received, that it had some other bottom, than his
own mere Assertion.

Page 14. He confesses; That where we are desired to try the Spirits, there is
no mention of trying them by the Scripture: And to my Question, asking, If
there be any surer way of trying of Spirits, and by the Spirit of God? he
returns no Reply, but another Question; Viz.

Whether there be any surer way, than that for which the Bereans were commended?

I Answer, Yes, by the Spirit: Ananias and Sapphira were discerned by the
Spirit.
Peter could never have discerned Ananias and Sapphira by the Scripture, and
yet did it by the Spirit. To say (as he does) That this was a matter of Fact,
and not of Doctrine, and that it was extraordinary, is a mere silly shift; for
it was only by the Spirit of God; which is so ordinary to Christians, that none
can be truly one without it, Romans 8.9 If any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. And if this Spirit can discern the secret hypocrisy of the
Heart in matters of Fact, far more the Errors and Mistake of the Understanding,
in matters of Judgment, which all grant to be more Obvious.

And though I never averred, that John excluded all external Rules, by pointing
to the Anointing; so his Assertion to say, That the Anointing directs us to
the Law and to the Testimony, as supposing it to be outward; is but to beg the
thing in question ^lready refuted.

Page 43. As he affirms; That man's being deluded proceeds not from the
Scripture, but their own blindness; so he acknowledges. That falling in
Delusion, proceeds not from the Spirit, but from the tricks and deceits of
Satan; and thereby he has clearly confessed, what is asserted by me page 30.
and not answered. And whereas he adds, That leaning to the Spirit, and
forsaking the Scripture, provokes God to give men up to strong Delusions: which
he Illustrateth by the Example of one J. Gilpin once a Quaker, who by harkening
to a voice within, was put upon Mischievous and Detestable Practices.

I Answer; He has not proved, that we forsake the Scripture; nor will one
man's being deceived by harkening to a voice within, prove the Spirit not to be
a certain Rule: more than (as himself acknowledges) The Pharisees having the
Scripture in such high esteem, and accounting them their Rule, will prove,
their Delusion proceeded from them. That Story of Gilpin's was largely answered
about five years ago by E. B. and C. A. who have laid open his Deceit and
Wickedness; J. Gilpin's Story Answered.
neither can any of these Ridiculous Pranks, (granting the matter to be true)
which he pretended to do by a voice within, while appearing to be among us,
prove the Insufficiency of that Light we Preach, or the hazard of following
it, more than his beastly Drunkenness and open Prophanity (naturally known in
the Garrison of Carlisle, where he was a Soldier) proves, he was led by the
Scripture (which it is like he then pretended, was his Rule) unto these wicked
practices, which were the best fruits of that Repentance W.M. seems so much to
congratulate in him. Such filthy Dross, whom God purges out from among us, are
fittest persons to be Proselited by him and his Brethren: and truly, we are
well rid of them, and can heartily spare such unto them; They went out from us,
but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest, that
they were not all of us, 1 John 2.16.

Page 43. He says, That though the Scripture be sufficient for discovering of
Delusions, and ending of Differences in genere Objecti, yet the Spirit is
necessary, in genere Causae Effectivae. Now this necessity of the Spirit, he
says himself, is, That we may be right Discerners for removing our natural
depravedness: and now granting, the Scripture were sufficient in this manner;
will it therefore follow, that the Spirit within is not the Rule? which was the
thing to prove in this Section. In so far, as he acknowledges this necessity of
the Spirit's work, he has yielded to the Truth; yet it is observable, how in
contradiction to the Truth he overturns it all again.

Page 47, 48. Where he expressly pleads For preaching upon, and using the
Scriptures, without the joint Concurrence of the Spirit; alleging, I have no
ground to say, they ought not so to do. Then consider; First, he said, The
Spirit was necessary to remove the depravedness of our Nature, that we might be
discerners: but now he says, We ought to use the Scripture without the Spirit,
though our Nature be depraved; yea, though we be in no capacity to make a right
discerning. And here he has notably manifested his Affinity with the Jesuits,
Jesuits, etc. Doctrine of the Scriptures.
Arminians, Socinians, Pelagians and Semipelagians, in saying; How many cold
Hearts have been Rubbed and Chafed unto spiritual Heat, by reading and talking
of the Scripture: For is not this to set Nature a work, and to grant a Capacity
in man to beget Spiritual heat without the joint Concurrence of the Spirit? And
this is altogether agreeable to that known Maxim of the Semipelagians; Facienti
quod in se est, Deus non denegat gratiam: i. e. God will not deny him Grace,
that does what in him lies. And hereby the Intelligent Reader may perceive, how
much nearer a kin our Adversaries are to these Errors than we, notwithstanding
they so falsely and frequently brand us with them in their Pulpits, and
elsewhere; as also, that it is merely constraint, when they are hardly put to
it, that they now and then, and that in Contradiction to themselves, let a word
or two drop concerning a necessary Work of the Spirit.

Sect. 4. Page 45. He alleges; There is no convincing People by this Rule of
the Spirit within, because each way may pretend to the guidance of his Spirit,
and so both remain obstinate: adding, That according to them the Scripture is
the Rule, which lies patent to both parties; and though it do not actually
convince the stubborn, yet there is enough in it, to satisfy any Inquisitive
Adversary.

Answ. And is not that Spirit sufficient to satisfy any Inquisitive Adversary,
that is willing to be undeceived, which searches all things, even the deep
things of God? There is no inconvenience can be pressed from making the Spirit
a Rule or Guide, but the same recurs by making the Scripture one. Men of
different Judgments claiming the Scriptures without the Spirit falsely.
For is it not laid claim unto by Persons quite different in Judgment, yea,
both some times to one verse, and will have it speak opposite to the other? If
it be said, That Scripture being compared, explains it self: Has not such, as
have so compared, been found incessantly to jangle even in their comparing of
it? And this W. M. cannot deny; but this has been, because one or both Parties
have been estranged from the true Testimony of the Spirit. What is then the
Vltimate Recourse, that can only resolve all Doubts even concerning the meaning
of the Scripture, but the certain Testimony of the Spirit? For if the
Scriptures be only certain, because they came from the Spirit of God; then the
Testimony of the Spirit must be more certain, than they; The certainty of the
Testimony of the Spirit.
according to the received Maxim of the Schools, Propter quod unumquodque est
tale, id ipsum magis est tale: That which makes a thing certain, must be more
certain than it. And this arguing against the Certainty of the Spirit, checks
not only at the certainty of the Saints Faith now from the Light within, and
the assurance of Knowledge, but at the Faith and Knowledge, which all the
Saints and holy Prophets had, not only before the Scripture was writ, but even
in their writing of them. We are in no greater hazard to be deceived now, than
they were then; therefore the Apostle notably reproves such Pratlers against
this Certainty, 1 John 4.6. We are of God, he that knows God, hears us, he
that is not of God, hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the
Spirit of Error.

Page 48. He asks, Why I complain for his improving Isai. 59.21. but mentions
not one word of that part of page 32. of mine, wherein I show him, how this
Scripture made against him, as holding forth God's putting words in men's
mouths; which they deny, as a thing ceased: This the Reader by looking to the
place may observe, that the Lord there Promises, his Spirit and Word shall
continue to direct his People, is not denied.

In his Dialogue page 16. he says; That the Scriptures cannot be said to be a
dead Letter, because they are called killing: and whereas I told him page 31.
of my Answer, That as dead things do kill, if fed upon; so if men feed upon the
Letter of the Scripture without the Spirit, which is the Life, How the Letter
kills.
they will kill: He shifts a Reply to this, telling me; The Scripture is called
killing, as being the Ministration of the Law, which threatens Death against
the sinner. What then? does it therefore follow, that they are not dead, and
deadly to such as feed upon them without the Spirit, which gives Life? It is
an apparent Malicious Passion, to add; That the drinking in of the Lifeless,
Poisonous Opinions of the Quakers will prove hurtful to the Soul; seeing he
brings not the least shadow of proof for it. I observe, that he ^ntitleth
this Section, The Quakers way Ineffectual to Convince an Opposer: And yet how
is it, that he and his Brethren, are so afraid, that it spread, and are daily
so much crying out and clamouring against it as dangerous, Priests call for the
Magistrates Sword to defend their Doctrine against the Quakers.
entreating and beseeching People to beware of us, and comparing our Words and
Writings to Poison, as that which is so ready to gain ground? I say, how comes
it, that they are so pressing in their importunate, and often reiterate
Pulpit-Exhortations to the Magistrates, to Suppress, Imprison us, and break up
our Meetings, as such, against whom their Labors will prove altogether
fruitless and ineffectual, if not assisted by the external Sword.

Sect. 5. Page 49. He undertakes to compare us with Papists, as having learned
our Language about Scripture from them: But herein he has notably manifested
both his Self-contradiction, and Ignorance. He alleges; We agree with
Papists, in that we say, If the delusion be strong in the Heart, it will twine
the Scriptures to make them seem for it; and in that we say, They are dead, and
occasion Sects and Janglings; whereunto we always add, because the Spirit is
wanting: And yet in this sense he fully grants it himself, page 43. saying; It
is granted, that deluded Souls do wrest the Scriptures, etc. He concludes us
one with Papists, for saying, There was a Rule before the Scriptures; And yet
grants it himself page 46. in confessing, The Scripture was not a Rule to such
Saints, as lived, The Saints had a Rule before the Scriptures was writ.
before it was writ; Such then had some Rule before the Scriptures. Thus far as
to his Self-contradictions. As to his Ignorance; Can there be any thing more
sottish, to compare us with Papists for our preferring and calling the Light
within, as that which only makes the outward dispensation of the Gospel
profitable; and for our saying, that the Spirit is both our Teacher, and our
Copy, according to which if we walk, we may profit without going forth for a
Copy; seeing it is known, none to be more Enemies to these Doctrines, than
Papists? And if we deny the Scripture to be the principal and complete Rule of
Faith, that proves us no ways to agree with Papists; except we all agreed with
them, concerning what is the Rule of Faith: wherein we differ wider from
Papists, than our Opposers. Therefore that sentence of Tertullian, viz. That
Christ is always Crucified betwixt two Thieves, is impertinently objected by W*
M. against us; and if the Lord will, it may in due time be made appear to
public view, that it far better suits our Adversaries.

He looks upon it as a great Absurdity, page 51. To deny, the more sure Word of
Prophecy, The more sure Word of Prophecy is not the Scripture, but the Spirit.
mentioned 2 Pet. 1.19. to be the Scripture: alleging, I should have confuted
the Apostle, who expounds it so, verse. 20. But before he had been so peremptory
in his Conclusion, he should have first proved, that the Apostle mentions these
words by way of Exposition to the former. Seeing he thinks himself so secure
here, why did he omit to answer that part of page 31. of mine, where I told
him; That seeing the Scriptures have all their Sureness from the Spirit, they
cannot be more sure, than it? For to say, that Scripture is more sure as to us,
being a standing Record, than a Transient Voice from Heaven, which may be
mistaken or forgotten, answers nothing; seeing that more sure Word we speak of,
is not a Transient Voice, but that Word of God, which is always with us, nigh
us, in our hearts, if we be willing to hear it and regard it; and can far less
be either forgotten or mistaken, than Scripture: for it speaks plain, home and
near, even to such some times, who would willingly both mistake and forget it,
Hebr. 4.12.

Though I could freely refer his sixth Head, concerning Justification, to be
compared by the Judicious Reader with that which is contained from page 32. of
my last, to page 44. as being a Confused Mass, which needs no further
refutation; yet because he makes a great noise here, I shall subjoin these few
Observations a little to unvail him in this matter.

And in his first Section from page 52. to 58. I observe, how hastily he passes
over the Charges laid by me to his door page 23. Which because he cannot clear
himself of, therefore he has not leisure to Answer.

Secondly, I observe, how, after he repeats my words of our sense of
Justification (which the Reader may see at length page 33. of my first) he can
say nothing against them; but only I seem to insinuate, they had no need of
inward Righteousness. It appears, his Guilt has made him so jealous in this
thing, as if I had been reproaching him; where I only gave an account of my own
Belief. His accusing or suspecting me of Fraud or Cheating, signifies nothing*
except he produce some reason for it.

In order to discover this, he proposes; Justification before God is the
Making a man Just by an inward Righteousness.
What may be the sense of the word Justify in Scripture, as it imports the
sinners Justification before God? which he determinately affirms, Only to be a
pronouncing or accounting a man Righteous, and not a making him so: citing for
proof Prove. 17.15. Though [ Justifie] in some places may be so understood, as
in this, which indeed has no relation to the sinners Justification before God;
yet where it has such a relation, it may be understood otherways, viz. a
Making a man Just: as in that notable expression of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor.
6.11. But ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified, etc. For if [
Justifie^ here were not to make men Righteous, but only to impute them or
account them so, then Washing and Sanctifying were not real, but only
imputative also: Imputative Righteousness, a Cloak for Wickedness.
And at this rate the Corinthians could not be esteemed truly washed of their
sins, which the Apostle mentions in the former verse, such as Stealing,
Drunkenness, Covetousness, but only thought or imputed so: and this were to
make the Christian Religion a cloak for all wickedness, as if men were not by
it truly cleansed of these evils, but on the contrary fostered in them. In
these places also Justification was taken in relation to inward righteousness,
Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them
he also glorified, Rev. 22.11. Qui Justus est, Justificetur adhuc, for so the
Greek and Latin has it, which being rightly Translated, is, He that is just,
let him be justified still. It is to be observed, that I deny not, but the word
[ Justifie] is sometimes taken in Scripture for pronouncing men just; though he
falsely seems to insinuate the contrary.

Thirdly, I observe his alleging, That our speaking of being Justified by
Christ revealed in us, is a falling in with the Popish sense of Justification;
adding, That our more full agreement with them does appear in that, wherein I
say we differ from them. But here his shameless dis-ingenuity is manifest, in
that he has not answered at all page 34, 35. of my last, as to that wherein I
show our dis-agreement with Papists; and how this manner of Justification by
the indwelling of Christ is denied by them, and particularly disputed against
by Bellarmine. For to prove our supposed Affinity with Papists, and imagined
opposition to Protestants, he forms a Question, viz.

What is that, which causes a man to stand pardoned and so Just before God,
and for which he is pronounced Righteous? adding, That the Papists have herein
recourse to Infused Righteousness, but Protestants to the Imputed Righteousness
of Christ, namely the Satisfaction and Merit of his Death.

But here is to be observed, how confusedly he has tumbled things together,
that ought to be distinguished; whereby he may the more securely lurk under
them. Though Originally the Cause of both be the infinite Love of God, in which
Christ was given, who offered up himself a most sweet and satisfactory
Sacrifice, as the Ransom, the Atonement, the Propitiation for our Sins; but as
to our being Justified, it is by Christ and his Spirit, Our Justification is by
Christ and his Spirit.
as he comes in our hearts truly and really to make us Righteous: which,
because we are thus made, therefore are we accounted so of him, as the Apostle
plainly intimates in 1 Cor. 6.11. That it is by the Spirit of God, we are
Justified: Nor is this any connivance with Papists, who as is abovesaid, deny
Justification in this manner. And it is but to befool Children and simple
Ignorants, that he covers himself so much with the general term of Protestants,
as if our Doctrine were generally denied by all such; seeing many, and that
very famous Protestants have been of our mind, and have eagerly pleaded for
this Real Righteousness, as to Justification, against his sense of it;
particularly Osiander, one of the first and most Renowned Reformers of Germany,
who not without ground averred, Luther to be of this Judgment.

And Melanchthon, in the Apology of the Augustan Confession says, To be
Justified, in Scripture not only signifies to be pronounced Just, but to be
made Just, or Regenerate. Johannes Brentius and Chemnitius admit also of the
same signification; The Testimony of some of the first Protestant-Writers,
concerning our Justification in the Life of Christ.
so Epinus and Bucenus include in Justification not only forgiveness of sins,
but Regeneration and Righteousness wrought in us. And Borheus (sive Cellanus) a
German Protestant, and Professor of Theology at Basil; In the Imputation, says
he, by which Christ is ascribed and imputed to Believers for Righteousness,
both the Merit of his Blood, and the Holy Spirit given unto us by the virtue of
his Merits, is equally included; and thus, says he, we shall consider wholly
Christ proposed to us unto Salvation, and not a part of him; Lib. in Genesis page
162. Again page 169. he says; In our Justification Christ is considered, who
breaths and lives in us; viz. Put on by us through his Spirit. And page 181.
he says; The form of our Justification is the Divine Righteousness, whereby we
are formed Just and Good; this is Jesus Christ, who is esteemed our
Righteousness, partly by the forgiveness of sins, partly by the Restoration
and Renovation to Integrity, lost by the fall of the first Adam; He being put
on by us, as the new and heavenly Adam, of which the Apostle, Ye have put on
Christ, put him on, I say, as a Form, i. e. the Wisdom, Righteousness and Life
of God. And Pareus de Just. Cont. Bellar. lib 2. cap. 7. page 469. We, says
he, neither ever spoke nor thought the Righteousness of Christ to be imputed to
us, that by it we were and might be named formally Righteous, as we have often
now showed; for surely, that should no less fight with reason, than if one
quite absolved in Judgment, should say, he were formally Righteous by the mercy
of the Judge. These are the plain and positive expressions of several famous
Protestants; though W. M. reckons G. Keith's words, mentioned by him page 55.
as Popish, which are nothing different from these. And of late R. Baxter (whom
W. M. page 37. terms A Judicious Servant of God) holds this Doctrine
throughout, in his Book termed, Aphorisms of Justification; who page 80. says;
That some ignorant Wretches gnash their teeth at this Doctrine, as if it were
flat Popery, not understanding the nature of the Righteousness of the New
Covenant, which is all out of Christ in our selves, though wrought by the power
of the Spirit of Christ. Page 195. he says; How this differs from the
Papist, he need not tell any Scholar, who have read their Writings. Hereby the
Intelligent Reader may observe, how ridiculous, if not malicious W. M. is, in
making such a noise, as if we were in this matter either going with Papists, or
opposing Protestants.

In his second Section page 58. though he would be making a great bussle of our
speaking of Justification by Works, yet in the very entry he cannot deny, but
he is for it, according to the true sense and meaning of the Spirit: And
therefore it remains to prove, that ours is not so.

His alleging from some words of Samuel Fisher, where he speaks of Works
having Merit, says nothing; for the Question recurs concerning the
signification of the word Merit, which we use in a qualified sense: for we say,
That Works are no other ways Meritorious, Works are Meritorius by the promised
Reward upon Conditions.
than as they are Rewarded; Merit and Reward being Relative terms, as I told
him in my last, to which he returns no Answer. And thus is solved Sam.
Fisher's using of that Argument, mentioned by him page 60. (to whom, he
foolishly supposes, I cannot reconcile my self, without being of a higher
strain, than for a Reward of Merit) to wit; That as Condemnation is the reward
of evil works; so Eternal Salvation, and consequently Justification is the
reward of good works. Now, Merit in a qualified sense does not import an
absolute desert, according to strict Justice, as on our part; but a
sutableness, agreeableness, or congruity, according to these Scriptures, Matthew.
3.8. Bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance; the Greek word is (...), which
signifies Meritorious, or Worthy: and the same Greek word is used in these
other Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Walk worthy of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. That ye may
be counted Worthy of the Kingdom of God. And thus R. Baxter speaks of Merit
in the Book abovementioned page 90. In a large sense, says he, as promise is
an obligation, and the thing promised is called debt, so the Performers of the
Conditions are called Worthy, and their Performance, Merit; Though properly it
is all of Grace, and not of Debt.

Moreover, whereas Augustine, Bernard and others of the Fathers use the word
Merit in this qualified sense, W.M and his Brethren can give it the right hand;
but where we use it (notwithstanding we tell them the simplicity of our
meaning) we must be upbraided with Popery.

It is here observable, how he turns it to my Reproach, That I seem to draw
near, in the least, to any of the moderate sort of Papists; And yet as to
things, wherein I charged him of Affinity with them, he returns no solid
Answer, Papists and W. M. agree.
but says; I must not be credited: Yea, he plainly not only draws near, but
fully acknowledges his agreement with them, saying; They hold some things
common with the Orthodox.

His third and fourth Section contains not any thing of a solid Reply to
that, which is writ from page 36. to 44. of my last, which the Reader by
comparing them may easily observe: He begins, alleging; That Romans 3.28. Gal.
2.19. must exclude all Works, even the Works of Christ in us; And that, because
the Apostle must be supposed to exclude either evil, or good Works: not evil;
therefore good: And consequently the Works of Christ in us. But as I told him
in my last, some Works may be good materially, The Works of the Spirit of God
and those of Man's own Spirit differ.
which proceeding not from the Spirit of God, but Man's own Spirit, are
therefore excluded: And thus the Case of Abraham does not answer, who though a
godly man, was capable sometimes, to have done Works from his own Spirit.

It is here observable, how he seeks to shift, that which I enforce upon him
from Tit. 3 5. alleging; He mentioned it in opposition to Justification by
Works, as the Meritorious cause thereof: But of this there was not one Word,
where he cites in his Dialogue page 20. Nor does he answer any thing for that,
which I infer from this Scripture, showing page 37. of my last (to which I
refer the Reader, he having wholly omitted it) that by this Scripture (where
the Apostle says, According to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration) the Apostle includes Good Works, as to Justification: now all
this he shuffles over, as Insulting, Triumphing Words; and yet notwithstanding
he himself insults here, as though he had found us guilty of Popery: though
what we say in this matter, be no other, than what is clearly asserted by these
famous Protestants abovementioned; and more particularly by R. Baxter in his
Book aforesaid, The Works of the ^aw excluded from Justification; not the Works
of the Gospel*
from page 185. to the end, where he says, That we are Justified by Works in
the same kind of causality, as by Faith, viz. as causae sine quibus non,
Conditions or Qualifications of the New Covenant, requisite on our part in
order to Justification; showing, how the Apostle Paul, in the places
abovementioned, excludes only the Works of the Law from Justification, and
never at all the Works of the Gospel, as they are the Conditions of the New
Covenant: and there he refutes W.M's. Exposition upon Isa. 2.12. As if our
Justification were only Justified by Works, or we declared Just by them before
men. And seeing W.M. has declared, he has so good an Esteem of R. Baxter, I
refer him to read, how he is Refuted by him, as being too large to be here
inserted.

Page 65, 66. To overturn that, which is said by me concerning the Faith,
Knowledge and Obedience of the Saints, page 38, 39. of mine; But his
Impertinency will be more than manifest, if the Reader do but look unto the
place: for I show him, how Faith was not always attended with doubting, by the
Example of Abraham; And therefore his Example of the Light and the Air is
foolish: for Faith and Doubt are not only distinct, Little Faith is perfect in
its Measure.
but Opposite; and not mixed, as is the Air and Light: and a little Gold may be
perfect, and unmixed with dross; so may little Faith be perfect in its measure,
without doubting. And though the knowledge and obedience of the Saints be not
such, as there can nothing be added unto, or answerable to the infinite Love of
God; yet that does not prove them, in what they are, to be defined.

His Answer to that Scripture brought by me, 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God,
sins not; is most Impious and Antichristian; He that is born of God, sins
not; Impiously explained by W. M.
as if the words imported only, He makes not a trade of sinning. For
accordingly he might argue, that where it is said, Commit no Adultery, do not
Steal, Murder, etc. it is only understood, that we ought not to make a trade of
these sins, but yet might practice them now and then.

Page 67. He adds, That (as the Prophet Isa. 64.6. says) not All our
Righteousness, which is of thy working in us, is as filthy Rags; What
Righteousness is as filthy ragg^.
so neither as we say, All our Righteousness, which we, even the best of Saints
can perform of and from themselves, are as filthy Rags: from thence inferring;
That because of this general term All, even the Righteousness of Christ in us
ought to be accounted as filthy Rags: but for this he brings no proof; and
as the Prophet says All, so he says Our, which implies it to be different
from the Righteousness of Christ. As he proceeds in the same page, he is highly
confused. First, he says; It ought not to make us ashamed, that our
Righteousness (understanding that which Christ works in us) are as filthy
rags; and then he says, That they are a special Ornament to the Soul, making
it in Beauty to resemble God: And again, to get ground, he says, That as so,
W. M's. Blasphemy.
Imperfection cleaves to the very Grace of God here: Absolute Blasphemy! Can
there be any thing more confused and contradictory, than to say; That which is
defiled, as filthy rags, is a special Ornament to the Soul, or, makes it in
Beauty to resemble God?

In Answer to page 40, 41. he replies nothing; only grants, That the Saints in
Heaven are cleansed, but not on Earth: Which instead of Reply, is a mere
begging the thing in question. He closes up this Section to prove, The
Righteousness of the Saints is defiled, with his old Instance of Clean water
passing through an unclean Pipe, alleging it, By me not to be weakened, though
it do no ways answer, what I said against it page 41. to wit, That Spiritual
Water is not like outward Water, which an unclean Pipe can defile; but is like
the Fire and Light, An outward Water not capable of defilement.
which though it touch unclean things, cannot be defiled, because every thing
of the Spirit is undefilable, as is the Spirit. And whereas he desires me To
instruct him of an outward Water, which is not capable of defilement; I refer
him to a more diligent study in his Physics, of which, it seems, he is very
ignorant: and that he may not have reason to think this a shift, let him read
the Essays of the Virtuosi in France; and those termed, The Royal Society at
London: and he will find such a thing both practicable and practiced.

He begins his fourth Section page 70. with a gross piece of dis-ingenuity, in
mentioning a part of my words, where I say, Justification is taken for making a
man righteous, and then it is all one with Sanctification: thereupon alleging;
I confound Justification, and Sanctification: whereas he omits the very former
sentence, wherein I say; Justification is also taken, as God's Judging men unto
Eternal Life: But this deceit, the Reader may at more length observe by looking
to page 41. of my last. And in that he adds; Men are made righteous by an
Inward Righteousness.
Men are not made Righteous by an inward Righteousness; he does greatly declare
his Ignorance: for if men can really be made Righteous, without Righteousness
be really in them, by that which is wholly in another, then they might as well
be really made holy, without any inward Holiness: and this were rather to
confound that, which God distinguishes, and to alter the Scripture-sense of
the word Justify. He alleges, That Phil. 3.8. disclaims the Righteousness of
Christ; but brings no proof for it: And as to his Commentaries, he must advert,
he is not in the Pulpit; and must bring nothing here without probation. And
whereas I show, That this Argument from 2 Cor. 5.12. is most absurd and
impious, because accordingly it would follow, that as Christ was made Sin for
us, who of himself knew no Sin, no not in the least; so we may be made
righteous before God, though we have no Holiness, no Faith, no good thing
wrought in us: he terms this an impudent wresting of his Words, alleging; That
the strength of his Argument lies in that; As our Sins are inherent in us, and
imputed to Christ, W.M's. Gloss of Imputed Righteousness.
so his Righteousness is inherent in him, and imputed to us: but he does not
show me, how this in the least solves the Consequence above deduced, which
follows as before. And as for that Excellent gloss, which he says, A certain
one put on these words; it would appear the more such, that it had some shadow
of proof for it. It is with a Fool's Consequence, that he calls; This which I
show, was (deduceable from his Words) my Inference, charging me with it, as if
I were Impious, and absurd to imagine, that God should accept one as Righteous
in his sight, and yet his Person remain abhorred, as an unholy Sinner: Did I
ever assert any such thing? or can there be any thing more ridiculous, than for
him to dream, I imagine that to be true, which I reprove in him as false,
absurd and impious? In the like manner he condemns me as Impious, for
insinuating, That they are against inward holiness, seeing, as he says, They
profess, that without holiness none can see God. It is true, they say so some
times; and therein often contradict themselves, as is above remarked: yet
seeing, they look not upon it, as any ways necessary to Justification, and term
the best of it but as filthy rags; their seeming to plead for it, does but
bewray their ignorance and confusion. Now whereas to prove, that Works of the
pure Spirit of God are not all as filthy rags, I did inquire of him, if the
Apostles did sin in writing the Scriptures?

He Answers, First, That it was a singular, extraordinary thing; and so
supposes, they might have been preserved.

Secondly, He demands, What were the hazard to aver, that they were wanting in
that, which they ought to have had?

As to the First, it is but an Evasion without proof: what singular and
extraordinary thing is in some of Paul's Epistles, which are concerning his
outward occasions? And if the last be admitted (as I find, he fears, he will be
forced to do) it overturns his Example of Clean water passing through an
unclean Pipe; or else he must acknowledge the Scriptures are defiled, because
they come through the Apostles, whom his Principles obliges him to believe, not
to have been perfect.

In his Seventh Head page 74. he summarily passes over, and that by large
omissions, what is contained in the 44, 45, 46, and 47 pages of my last; which
if the Reader do but review, he may easily discover that silly shift which he
uses, to wit; That he means to be thrifty of his Paper, in answering the
Quakers Self-advancing Words. Seeing he is such a good Manager of his Paper, he
might have bestowed some of that, he has lavished in the large Capital Titles
of his many Heads and Sections, to show the Impertinency or Vanity of my words;
and then he might have been the better credited, after he has omitted my
Answer, wherein I clear the Quakers from that Calumny of exalting themselves;
showing, they do therein no more, than all other professions have done, and do
do.

He adds with a great Exclamation, Oh! it is intolerable Pride, to vilify all
the Saints and Servants of God in the World, and to shut them out from being of
Christ's stock! A strange Inference! according to which we must conclude, that
because Luke called Theophilus (...), Luke called Theophilus, most good.
or most good, that therefore there was none good, but he? W. M. will do well
to go back to the Grammar School, and there learn the natures of Degrees of
Comparison; and when he has instructed himself there, he may next look over his
Logicks, and there he will find, that Majus and minus non variat speciem, i. e.
Less or more of a thing changes not its nature or kind. I suppose, he will not
deny, but there are several sorts of Christians, who though they do all profess
Christianity, yet are more or less pure in their Doctrine, Discipline or
Practice. Is it not upon this score, that the Calvinist has separated from the
Lutheran? and the Presbyter from the Episcopalian? Certainly W. M. himself
looked upon Independency, as more pure than Presbytery, when he separated with
the Congregationists at Aberdeen, and Communicated apart with them; and yet
his practice now shows, that he does not exclude even Episcopacy from
Christ's Stock, though his Independent and Presbyterian Brethren do look upon
it, if not within the Walls, at least in the Suburbs of Rome. Neither is this
Calumny against us, as if we trusted in our selves, that we were Righteous, and
despised others, (for so he mis-applieth the parable Luke 18.9.) any other than
the same, which those of Rome used against the first Reformers, to wit, they
were Proud, and Boasters, as if all the World had been in darkness before them;
Or as if they were Wiser, than all the Doctors and Fathers of the Church,
seeking to innvovate the Order thereof, which had been Confirmed by the
Unanimous Consent of so many Generations.

It is observable, How here, as in other places, he is so ready to lay claim to
the Protestant Churches, alleging; That in disdain I call them their flocks;
which is utterly false: I speak of their flocks as inferior to the People
called Quakers in point of Mortification; but that I intended thereby the
Protestant Churches, is but his groundless Conjecture. I let him understand, I
look not upon their flocks, as deserving the name of Protestants, Some
Protestants degenerated in Time-Servers.
and that because of their shameless degenerating from such, as were first so
called; among whom, as I freely confess, there were several of a heavenly and
spiritual Conversation: So I look upon W.M. and his Brethrens laying claim unto
them, but as the Jews, boasting of Abraham as their Father. After the same
dis-ingenuous manner he concludes, That the Persons he spoke of in his
Dialogue, as having such notable Enjoiments of, and Communion with God, were
from Quakerism, etc. but answers not a word of page 28. of mine, where I show,
that those Professors agreed with us in many of these things, wherein W.M. and
his Brethren oppose us; but particularly in the matter of the Spirit's
immediate Teaching. It is then likely, they would have been far from us,
especially considering, that several, who have received and owned the Quakers
Testimony at Aberdeen, are such* who were the most Intimate Friends even in
Spiritual Matters with these Professors; whereas W. M. and some other of his
Brethren, who walked also among them, that are not come to own the Quakers, are
degenerated, and gone back unto that, which all of them acknowledged to be
Antichristian: For which their gross backsliding and degenerating, (to use
rightly his own mis-applied instance) it is without doubt, these Professors
would have looked upon him and his Brethren as Monstrous, and abhorred their
Treacherous, Time-serving Turnings with the greatest detestation.

Head 8. page 77. He avers us to be guilty of Equivocating, and that, because
we say, We are for Baptism; and yet are against Baptism with Water. The corrupt
Acceptance of the word Baptism denied.
The reason alleged is, because Baptism is commonly understood of Baptism with
water; and therefore to understand it otherways, he concludes, is to speak lies
in hypocrisy, etc. But this Conclusion is founded upon a Supposition denied by
us, and therefore it is a mere begging of the thing in question. For since we
deny that Common (because corrupt) Acceptance of the word Baptism, and give it
the true one (as in its place shall be shown) therefore we are not obliged to
put another meaning upon it, than we are persuaded it ought to be understood.
But this Calumny against us, as Equivocators or Liars, W.M. has also borrowed
from the Papist, who used to upbraid the Protestants, for saying, They were
for, or of the Catholic Church; Because the Papist will have the Church of
Rome only to be the Catholic Church: but the Protestants denied her to be so,
and therefore would not call her so; even as we deny the sprinkling with water
to be Baptism, and therefore will not account it that which it is not, but
reserve the name to that, which truly is the thing according to the Scriptures.

The like may be said of the Lord's Supper, I mean that, which is so called.

Head 9. page 78. Because he can produce nothing against my Concession of
singing of Psalms, he suspects, I mean not honestly; and that because none of
his spies, whom he sends to our Meetings, have had occasion to be witnesses to
our practice in this thing: which says just nothing. Why might not W. M. his
Intelligencers fail him in this, as well as his Brother's David Lyall did, in
telling him, That there was not one word spoken among the Quakers at their
Meeting, the 3 d of the 11 th Month, 1670. Which though a manifest untruth in
matter of Fact, he spared not to bring forth in his Chair of Verity, upbraiding
the Magistrates, as if God had miraculously sent an Officer to stop or impede
our Worship; though they had refused to do it. J. Nailor's sincere Repentance.
The Story of J. Nailor, which he subjoins, any may observe to be merely
brought in to render us Odious, and fill up the paper; though indeed it tends
no ways to our disadvantage, he being in that thing, and at that time
altogether denied by us; and has since in print freely acknowledged his fall
in that hour of Temptation: of whose sincere Repentance and true return to the
fellowship of the Truth we have had many evident tokens: whereas, were we to
retort, we could find a Thousand to one among your Church Members, many whereof
are daily knit up for Thieving, Murder, etc. and some burnt for Witchcraft,
without the least sense of true Repentance.

For to vindicate their manner of singing with a mixed Multitude, he alleges;
That all men, yea all the Earth are called to praise God. And though all be
called to do so, Singing by whar Instrument it is acceptable.
yet there are things absolutely needful previous to this duty. And granting,
their want of praising to be sinful; yet the way to prevent this evil is, to
come first to that, wherein they may be in a capacity to do it acceptably:
Therefore says the Apostle, I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with
the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. Where he speaks of singing, he always
subjoins the Instrument, wherewith it is altogether needful that we take it.
And that the same may be urged in the case of Praying, without any absurdity,
in its place shall be shown. He says, It is no more a lie to use words in
singing, which suit not our condition, such as (I water my Couch with tears; My
heart is not haughty) than to read them: But there is a great difference
betwixt Reading and Singing; in Reading we but relate the Conditions and
Actions of others, as wholly distinct and extrinsick from our selves, but in
Singing we do really address our selves to God as in Prayer: and it is no less
a lie, to sing to God words, that suit not our Condition, than to pray with
them. The Saints in Scripture used such expressions, as did suit the present
posture of their hearts, in their Spiritual Songs; see Luke 1.46. and 2.29. He
shall not find me in the whole Bible, where they borrowed or sealed the
Expressions of others Experience, which no ways suited their own Condition: this
is a mere human Invention, which has its original from the Romish Vespers and
Mattins, and from no other foundation.

Head 10. Concerning Baptism page 81. he alleges, That John distinguishes
not the matter of his Baptism from Christ, but only his work: But his proof for
this overthrows himself. For since, as he says truly, John could only
administer Baptism with water, John's Baptism and Christ's differ in the
Matter, and End,
but Christ with the Spirit; this shows them to have differed in the matter:
for without doubt, John could administer the matter of his own Baptism. And
whereas I told him, they differed in the End, because the one pointed to the
other, even as the shadow pointed to the substance; Instead of replying to
this, he tells me; That the Scripture speaking of John 's Baptism, calls it the
Baptism of Repentance, intimating, its End was, to signify and seal Remission
of Sins, which likewise is the End of Christ's Baptism. As this no ways answers
my Argument, so it makes nothing to the purpose: for it is one thing, to
signify Repentance and Remission of Sins, and far another, to know and possess
it; which is the End and constant fruit of Christ's Baptism, Gal. 3.27. As many
of you (says the Apostle) as have been baptized unto Christ, have put on
Christ. And therefore it may be observed, that without any proof he concludes,
that John's Baptism and Christ's agree both in the Matter and End.

Page 82. As a Reply to Acts 19.2. cited by me to show, And Substance.
that they differed in substance, he says; The meaning is, not that they were
ignorant of the Person of the Holy Ghost: Contrary to the very express
Scripture-words, viz. We have not so much as heard, if there be any Holy Ghost.
He says further; That the Apostles did not anew baptize such Persons, that
had been baptized with the Baptism of John: In direct Contradiction to the
Scripture-words, verse 5. When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name
of the Lord Jesus: W. M. contradicts the Scriptures.
And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came upon them. Now
verse 3. shows; That they were baptized unto John's Baptism before; so let
him clear himself here of giving the Scripture the Lie, if he can.

Section 2. page 83. To prove the perpetuity of Water Baptism, he begins with
that often answered Argument of the Apostle's practice, adding; That though
Christ (Matthew. 28.) does not mention Baptism with Water, so neither with the
Spirit, alleging; That thus the one may be excluded, as well as the other.

Answ. Seeing Christ commanded them to baptize, it cannot be denied, but it was
with his own Baptism; which is that of the Spirit. He adds, That if Baptism of
the Spirit were intended, it would infer a needless Tautology in the Command of
Christ, as being all one with these words; Go Teach.

Answ. Teaching, and making men holy and righteous, are different things.
Water Baptism not commanded by Christ.
For he will grant, that he and his Brethren have been Teaching People these
several years, and yet he will have much ado, to prove, all their
Church Members are really made Righteous and Holy; Why then does he account
these two one, reckoning it a Tautology, to express them severally? A little
after he insinuates (and that most falsely) That I deny Peter's commanding
Cornelius to be baptized; Concealing my express words page 31. which are these;
And though it be said; ver. 48. that he commanded them to be baptized in the
Name of Christ, yet it holds forth no Command from Christ; only the thing being
agreed upon, that it might be done, he bid do it: This he has left un
answered. And whereas he adds, That doing things in the Name of Christ, is as
much as his Command. He brings no proof for giving, but not granting, it did
hold so. Matthew. 18.20. in the case of Meeting, that will not prove, it is
always so taken.

To evict my Objection against any determinate Commission the Apostles had of
Baptizing with Water, because Paul said, he was not sent to Baptize, but to
Preach, he returns; That if he had no Commission, he would have Baptized none:
but he Baptized some; which would have been of Self-will.

Answ. He might object the same as to Circumcision, that because the Apostle
Circumcised Timothy, Paul was not sent to Baptize.
therefore he had a Commission for it; he would not have done it of Self-will.
His Inference from Hos. 6.6. For I desire Mercy, and not Sacrifice, as if from
thence Paul were sent principally to Baptize, and not to Preach, as God there
required only principally Mercy, not excluding Sacrifice; is most Ridiculous
and Inconsequential. Nor is there any reason produced to show the Party, the
Apostles were Commissioned to Baptize, as principally as to Preach; Go Preach
and Baptize, are knit together: But the Question is, Whether this be a Baptism
with Water? which remains yet unproved. And therefore his Additions to the
Scripture is no ways Justified; as if Paul had been sent to Baptize with Water,
but not principally.

Page 86. He undertaketh to prove, that Matthew. 28.19. is meant of
Water Baptism, and not of the Spirit's Baptism: the Reason alleged there;
Because the Baptism there mentioned, is the action of the Apostles, and that to
Baptize with the Spirit is peculiar to Christ; adding, That it would be a
confounding of the Duty commanded with the Promise of the Blessing annexed to
it: from thence he concludes, That Baptism with Water is to continue to the end
of the World.

Answ. The Reasons prove nothing, and might militate the same way against
Teaching, which is also there Commanded, as the Action of the Apostles: And
though it be peculiar to Christ to Teach by the Spirit, that did not hinder
them to do it. Water Baptism not perpetual.
Further, the very Apostles by laying on of hands did administer the Holy
Spirit, and so Baptize with the Spirit, Acts 10.44.19.6. And this is no
confounding of the Promise with the Duty; for therein was the Promise and
Blessing fulfilled, that they did it effectually: and therefore from hence he
had no ground to conclude the Perpetuity of Water Baptism. Moreover, whereas he
cited in his Dialogue ( page 39.) Acts 2.28. 1 Pet. 3.21. Acts 22.16. Ephesians.
5.26. Gal. 3.27. as holding forth the Excellent uses of Water Baptism, though I
show him page 5. of mine, that these Scriptures are only applicable to Baptism
with the Spirit, and not to sprinkling with Water: When page 87. he comes to
Reply again, he offers not in the least to prove, that they are applicable to
Baptism with Water, which is the thing in question; but tells me, That those
Scriptures strike against the Popish Opus operatum. Quid inde? What then? Does
it therefore follow, that they are applicable to sprinkling with Water? who is
so blind as not to see through such silly Subterfugies? He adds, That I
proceed upon a wrong Supposition, as if they thought, Baptism with Water were
of it self effectual to cleanse the Soul.

Answ. I never proceeded upon such a Supposition; that which I proceed upon is
this; Sprinkling is not the Baptism of Christ.
That they should call or account sprinkling with Water, the Baptism of Christ;
whereas the Scripture declares it not to be so: 2 Pet. 3.21. Baptism is not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, etc. And also ascribe such Scriptures to
sprinkling with Water, as are only applicable to the Baptism of the Spirit. Now
this, as is said above, he has left unanswered.

Page 88. He says, That the one Baptism spoken of Ephesians. 4.5. cannot be called
the Substance, and Baptism with Water the Shadow, because they are the same
thing. But this is pitifully to beg the thing in question. And thus W. M's.
Arguments about Baptism runs round; Baptism with Water is the one Baptism,
because the one Baptism is commanded by Christ; and the one Baptism is Baptism
with Water, because Baptism with Water is commanded by Christ. He wholly passes
by that part of page 52. of mine, where I show, how absurd and Anti-scriptural
their manner of Baptising is; and thereby he comes the more easily to his
Conclusion in this matter.

Head 11. Concerning the Supper page 88, 89. he begins, confessing, That
Christ's Instituting of the Supper does not prove its Continuance; and here he
carps at my speaking of it with this addition ( The Lord's Supper, so called)
asking, Why I give it not that Name the Scripture gives it?

Answ. It is to be observed, that where I speak of it thus, page 33. of my
last, that it is in my Entry upon this matter, addressing my self to him, my
words are; Thou come to prove, that the Lord's Supper (so called) etc. where
I intended not that, which was Instituted by Christ, and had its season in the
Church; but that which they call so, but really is not so: though they seek
from this to draw a Warrant for it. And whereas I show him, that by Breaking of
Bread, The breaking of bread from house to house.
Acts 2.42. is meant their Ordinary Eating: His Answer is; That their Eating is
not ordinary, but Sacramental; and the Text speaks not of daily eating, but a
continuing daily in the Temple; and that the Syriack Exposition expounds it of
the Eucharist. But it is in vain: he thinks by his Imaginations to overturn the
plain words of Scripture, Acts 2.46. And they continuing daily in the Temple
with one accord, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat
with gladness and singleness of heart: Can there be any thing more plain, than
that their breaking of bread here, was their ordinary Eating? And as for his
talk of Sacramental Eating, where does he read of such a phrase in all the
Bible? It is ill argued to say, I am ignorant of the way of some
Protestant-Churches, who uses breaking of bread once a fortnight, or once a
month, because I say; their doing of it once or twice a year, is not according
to the Example of such, as of old used it. Page 90. he adds; That though this
Eating, Acts 2 46. be conjoined with this, that they sold their Possessions,
etc. yet we are to follow them in the one, and not in the other; because the
one was to Continue, and not the other: But for this he brings no proof, save
his own bare Assertion. After the like manner, page 91. he says; That though
abstaining from blood and things strangled be commanded, yet the Apostle Paul
repeats it, extending Christian Liberty, to whatsoever is sold in the shambles.
But according to this he might argue; That though abstaining from Circumcision
be there commanded; Paul's Circumcising, no warrant for its Continuance.
yet Paul's Circumcising of Timothy might now warrant it. And whereas he
asks, If Paul Circumcised any other? What if he had not? Church History tells
us, that many years after several Bishops of Jerusalem were circumcised: it
will not therefore follow, that was a Repealing of the Apostle's determination
by the Holy Ghost, or that we should continue in the use of Circumcision. He
adds; That Washing of one another feet, which was expressly commanded, was
not, that we might practice it, but only to teach us Humility: for this he adds
no proof; it is only his own Conjecture. Upon all which I desire the Reader to
observe how W.M. can find shifts to evict those abovesaid, which are expressly
commanded by Christ and his Apostles; and yet make such a great noise of our
forbearing Water Baptism and the External Supper, which are not more
particularly pressed. So Water Baptism and the External Supper --
As also, how we can say far more against the Perpetuity of these last, than
they against the former; and yet they clamor against us, as if so much as to
call the constant use of them in question, were to despise the Ordinances of
Christ, etc. He asks; What clearer Command there can be, than these words;
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat? But this question does not at
all prove these words to imply a Command. His folly is observable, page 92.
where he desires, It may be observed, That the Corinthians were to be often in
the use of it, because it is said, As often as ye eat, etc. A rare Argument
indeed, by which he might conclude, that to say, as often as a man sins, he
offends God, did import, we should sin often.

It is badly inferred, That this thing ought to continue by Divine Authority,
because the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.23. That which I received of the Lord, have
I delivered unto you; seeing the very following words declare it, to have been
the account of the matter of fact, which he so received.

Sect. 1. page 93. He slimly passes, what is contained p. 34. of mine,
alleging; I let off my great Guns, but make a noise without any spoil. The
Reader by comparing these pages together, will easily observe his lurking in
this particular.

To my Question, What the One Bread is, spoken of 1 Cor. 10.15, 16. If it be
the outward, or the inward?

He Answers; It is both the inward and the outward, and yet but one in respect
of the Sacramental Union, which is between the sign and the thing signified.
Now to this I answered in the end of page 34. of my last, that it cannot be
called one, because of the agreement betwixt the sign, and the thing signified;
else by the same Inference one might plead for the Continuance of all the
Sacrifices and Offerings, and say, Discontinued, as the Offerings of old.
they are all one with the one Offering mentioned Hebr. 10.14. because they
signified that one Offering. And whereas W.M. reckons this a pitiful Evasion,
saying; Any one may see a Non sequitur in it: It would have become him better,
to have proved this by Reason, than by his own bare Assertion; though any may
observe this to be his constant course, when other Arguments fail him. As he
proceeds to prove the Continuance of this Practice, he says; It cannot be
denied, there was once a Command for it, and there is no Repeal of it. But the
same recurs in Washing one another Feet, and Anointing the sick with Oil, Jam.
5.14. which were as expressly Commanded, and never Repealed. And yet W.M. can
easily find a gloss to evict these, reckoning it a small matter to forbear
them. He adds; That the Coming of Christ, till which, the Apostles were
injoined to be in the use of the outward Supper, must be meant of his outward
Coming so many years after; because such, to whom Christ was come in the
Spirit, were found in the practice of it. But this proves no more its
Continuance, necessitate Praecepti (as he wordeth it) than the Circumcising and
being Circumcised under the Gospel, will prove Circumcision to be binding upon
us. He concludes, saying; That surely we are great enemies to our Souls, that
oppose this Ordinance: But answers not one word of page 35. where I show, how
great reason we have to forsake it; as also the many Abuses, wherewith they
have corrupted it: it suffices him to say, That it is meeter to pass it by,
than to reply unto it. For part of it being about the Qualifications of
Persons, W.M. is loath to tell his Judgment, least he should harp upon the old
Independent Controversy; it is dangerous to touch this string, especially while
he injoys his Hire under the shadow of Episcopacy.

Head 12. Concerning the Ministry, The Ministry of the Word owned.
page 96. he has nothing to say against my affirming, that the Quakers own the
Ministry of the Word. Page 97. speaking of Ephesians. 4.11. where Paul says; Christ
gave some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, He says; The
first three are Extraordinary and Temporary; the last two Ordinary and
Perpetual: for this he brings no proof at all, but that frequent Argument, his
own bare Assertion. And whereas I told him page 37. of mine, That the former
three were not ceased; citing for proof Calvin, who Inst. lib. 4. cap. 3.
avers, That in his day God raised up Apostles and Evangelists; To this he
answers not one word. As he goes on, he repeats my words, where I say; That
though we own the Ministry not to be Common, yet that does not hinder, but that
any may speak, as the Saints are met together; according to 1 Cor. 14.31.
Asking; How I can make out, that in that place is meant an ordinary Office?
Though it might suffice for answer, to ask; What reason W. M. has, to frame
here his distinction of Ordinary and Extraordinary? yet it is obvious, that the
Apostle is here presenting the Ordinary Order of the Church; he needed not
present an Order to extraordinary Offices: for such as are Extraordinarily
sent, are also instructed, how to go about their Office, and not limited to set
Rules; else it were not Extraordinary. Page 98. He goes about to prove this
distinction of Mediate and Immediate, asking; If the Prophets and Apostles were
not called immediately? And if Timothy was not set apart to the work
immediately, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery? The Call to the
Ministry and laying on of hands.
What then? as the Apostles being called by the Lord, did not hinder them from
receiving the Approbation and Testimony of the Brethren, yea, laying on of
hands, as did Paul, who without doubt was as immediately sent, as any of the
rest, Acts 9.17. So Timothy's having the hands of the Presbytery laid on him,
does not prove, he wanted an inward, immediate Call in himself. It is without
any Proof at all, what he subjoins; That Paul saying, he was an Apostle, not by
man, does oppose himself to Ordinary Ministers. He adds; That seeing I say,
That those who come Preaching the Gospel not in speech only, but also in Power,
and in the Holy Ghost, and in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit,
give sufficient proof, that they are called of God; he thinks, I should have
favorable thoughts of Protestant Ministers, who have given such proofs of
their Call.

Answ. He should have told me, what these Protestant Ministers are, whom he
says, we impiously censure; or by what Rule he or his Brethren would be laying
such claim to be Protestant Ministers, so as to exclude the Quakers from being
such?

Page 99. Though he quarrel with me for saying; That with Papists he pleads for
Miracles: he is so far from vindicating himself from this Charge, Whether
Miracles are necessary to prove a true Call.
that he gives again new ground for it, saying; That such as assert an
Immediate Call, ought to give tokens of it by Miracles, etc. adding, That
though John did no Miracles, yet his Call was attended with extraordinary
things, at his Conception and Birth. Now this was the very Objection, which the
Papists made against the first Reformers, to whom Luther and Calvin replied;
That though they had an Immediate Call, yet there was no need of Miracles. And
this Objection of W. M. is no other than that, which almost in totidem verbis,
in as many words was objected to Beza, at the Conference of Poizy in France by
Claudius Dispensus, Doctor of the Sarbone, who urged this very Argument of John
the Baptist, confirming his Call by the Testimony of Malachy, etc. alleging,
That they ought to Confirm their Call by Miracles. To whom these are Beza his
express words ( Hist. Eccles. of France* p. 581.) And as to what dispense thou
alledgest, that extraordinary Vocation is always approved by Miracles, or by
the Testimony of the Prophets; I deny, that it is always so verified. But if we
must come to Miracles, do you not think, that the Changing of the Life, the
Fruit, which is seen to proceed from this Doctrine in our time by Persons so
contemptible, and so much persecuted by the greatest of the World, are not
sufficient Miracles? as said the Apostle to the Corinthians, that they were the
Seals of his Apostleship. So the rational Reader may observe, that
notwithstanding of W. M's. so often laying claim to the Protestant Churches,
and Protestant Ministry, and crying out against us as Opposers of them, he so
directly makes use of Popish Arguments against us, and how we defend our
selves; by no other, but the very same Answers the Protestants gave unto the
Papists. Yea of late W. Rett, present Preacher of Dandy, in his Book against
Papists, printed but the last year at Aberdeen, Miracles not needful.
does plead, That Miracles are not needful; instancing, that John the Baptist
did none. And so W. M. though he compare us to the Jesuits in his Epistle, is
so far one with them himself, that if his Evasion may be esteemed of worth,
whereby he seeks to overturn this Example of John, when brought by us, he will
rather furnish the Jesuits with it to fight against his Brother W. Rett, or
rather borrow it out of their Artillery, whereby they fight against
Protestants, than miss to have a hit at the Quakers. May we not truly apply the
instance in his Epistle to himself, that he is sailing in one Boat with
Papists, though his face seems to look averse from them?

Page 100. He says; Whatever inward Call the Elders mentioned Tit. 1.5. Acts
14.23. had, yet they had not an Immediate Call, The Immediate Call of the
Ministry.
which is by immediate Command and Voice of God without the intervention of
men. But for this he adds no proof at all; nor is there any Inconsistency
betwixt being immediately Called by Command from God, and afterward being
approved of men; or that being Approved and set apart by man, excludes having
an Immediate Call from God.

Sect. 1. page 101. He says, That Ephesians. 4.13. is a pregnant and pertinent proof
for the Continuance of the Ministry; which I never denied: But this does not
answer my saying, that it is impertinent, as to them, who deny perfection;
seeing that place says, The Ministry is for Perfection.
The Ministry is for the perfecting of the Saints. Now to this he answers
nothing; but that it cannot be gathered, that this Perfection is on the Earth:
which is but his own Assertion; yea by himself there after overthrown, saying;
That the Ministry is given, that we may press after an absolute full Perfection
even of degrees: for it is folly to press after this, if there be no hopes of
attaining it. He wholly passes by my Objections against their Ministry, page
59. especially, in that they make not the Grace of God a necessary
Qualification to the esse or Being of a Preacher, without so much as making any
mention of it: where I also show, how contrary it is to the order delivered by
the Apostles in Scripture. Therefore his Conclusion is false, to say, We cast
off such a Ministry; seeing he was not able to prove theirs to be such, else he
would not have wholly past in silence my Reasons, showing it not to be so.

His thirteenth Head, page 102. is concerning the Sabbath or first day of the
week's being so; The Sabbath --
as to which I desire the Reader first to take notice, that as we believe, the
Apostles and primitive Christians did meet this day to worship God; so we, as
following their Example, do the like, and forbear working, or using our lawful
Occasions upon that day, as much as our Adversaries: so that the Debate is
only* Whether there be any inherent Holiness in this Day more than in another?
Or if there be any positive Command for it from Scripture? particularly, If the
fourth Command bind us to the Observation of it? And here W. M. notwithstanding
of his great pretenses to the Protestant Churches, does wholly disagree from
them in this thing; who are of our mind as to it: the generality of all the
Protestants both in Germany, France and elsewhere out of this Island, do look
upon the supposed Morality of the First Day of the Week as altogether
Ridiculous: which may be seen in Calvin upon the Fourth Command, Lib. Inst. 2
c. 8. Sect. 34. where he explains the signification of it, as we do, viz.
Typifying a Spiritual Rest.
Typifying a Spiritual Rest, wherein leaving our own Works, the Spirit of God
may work in us. He there refutes W. M's. Notion, as a Jewish Opinion, saying;
Some false Doctors have abused ignorant People with it: adding, as we do: That
the Apostle Paul reproves such Superstitions: Likewise he plainly asserts, That
the keeping of the first day is only for Convenience, and to preserve Order in
the Church, that the Saints might have a fit time set apart to meet together to
Worship: The keeping of the First Day of the Week, why?
which we also say. Hence does appear the folly of that impertinent story
mentioned by him page 105. seeking to infer, That we agree with Papists, in
taking away the fourth Command, as they have done the second: For by this he
might conclude the first and chiefest Reformers guilty of Popery, whereas
himself agrees with Papists both against the Protestants abroad, and us, in
pleading for this imaginary holiness of the first day of the week, which in his
Dialogue he sought to prove, because Christ did rise upon it; but to my Answer,
showing, he might from thence infer the rest of the Popish Holy Days, of his
Birth, Ascension, Conception, etc. he replies not one word: He summarily passes
over, what is said by me concerning this thing, page 38, 39, 40, and 42. which
the Reader by looking unto, may observe. He alleges; The fourth Command
speaks not precisely of the Seventh day in order from the Creation, and that
the beginning and ending of it mentions the Sabbath Day, and not the Seventh.
Quid inde? etc. What then? Is not the middle of the Command as observable;
which says expressly, But the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord? There God
himself expounds the Sabbath to be the Seventh day: And W.M. must not think we
will reject this Exposition to accept of his proofless Glosses. My Argument
drawn from Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge you in respect of an Holy Day or
Sabbath Days; and Romans 14.6. which shows all days to be alike: and Gal. 4.10,
11. Ye observe days and months, All Days alike.
times and years; He answers, alleging; These reprove not Moral days, but
Ceremonial: adding; That the fourth Command binds to this, and therefore it
cannot be more abrogate, than any of the rest of the Ten Commands. But this is
no proof at all, only a mere begging the question; he should have more
convincingly proved, that the fourth Command binds to the Observation of this
Day. Now the Apostle in these places says not; I am afraid of you, because ye
observe Ceremonial days: W. M. has no bottom for this distinction. He
confesses, that Christ Matthew. 24.20. speaks nothing of the first day of the
week; and therefore overthrows the Inference he makes in his Dialogue from it.
And what I further add, to show the folly of this Inference from the Scripture,
he has wholly omitted: which the Reader may see, page 38, 39. of my last.

Page 106. He says; O! the conscientious keeping of the Sabbath is a
comfortable evidence of those that shall be admitted to this Rest, viz. the
Rest of the Lamb. But seeing these words are without any proof, they are only
like to have credit with such silly, superstitious Bigots, as Calvin in the
place abovementioned reproves, and not with any solid, serious Christians.

Sect. 2. page 107. To prove, that the First Day of the Week is set apart for
the Service of God, The Lord's Day not limited to a particular Day.
by Divine Authority, he cites Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lord's
day; but whereas I told him, this did no way prove that Day to be the First Day
of the Week, because the Day of the Lord, or the Lord's day in Scripture is not
limited to any particular Day.

He answers; That these two ought not to be confounded; for all days, wherein
the Lord executes Judgment, are days of the Lord: but the Lord's day mentioned
Rev. 1. is but one: For this he brings no proof, but his own mere Assertion.
As Ignatius calling the First day of the week, The Queen of days, does not
prove that Lord's day, spoken of by John, to be the first day; so if Ignatius
had been of this mind, and had esteemed of it above other days, that makes
nothing against us: we know, this Superstition was creeping into the Church
before Ignatius's time; therefore the Apostle Paul warned the Galatians, Gal.
4.10, 11.

To prove, this Day spoken of by John to be the First Day of the Week, he
says; Christ appeared to his Disciples, declared himself to be the Son of God
upon the First Day of the Week; That it is supposed, that was the day, the
Spirit was poured forth: And that Beza in an ancient Greek Manuscript did find
the First Day of the Week called the Lord's Day. But all this does not in the
least prove the matter in question; except this may suffice for proof, W.M.
thinks, this will infer the Day of the Lord spoken of by John, to be the First
Day of the Week, Therefore it is so. There may be Superstition enough found in
old Greek Manuscripts: Superstitious Observing of days, the Inventions of Men.
It is near fourteen hundred years, since the Eastern and Western Churches were
like to split about the Observation of Easter; and yet Protestants with good
reason look upon that Controversy, as both Superstitious and Frivolous.

Now giving, but not granting this Day spoken of by John, were the First Day of
the Week; How does he prove from this, that the First Day of the Week is come
to Christians, in place of the Jewish Sabbath? or that it stands as an
Obligation upon them, as a part of the Moral Law, whereunto we are bound by the
fourth Command? First Day of the Week.
Which though it be the chief thing in debate, remains yet unproved. Seeing
then, he has had very few proofs for these his supposed Ordinances, but such,
as are only bottomed upon his own Affirmations; the Judicious Reader may judge,
it is without ground he concludes here, that we deny the Ordinances of Christ,
and not the Inventions of Men.

His fourteenth Head, Original Sin not grounded in Scripture.
page 109. is concerning Original Sin (so called) which the Reader by comparing
with page 40, 41, 42, and 65. of mine, will see, that he makes no Real, but a
mere Counterfeit show of Answer. And I desire the Reader first to observe; That
neither here, nor in his Dialogue he does not so much as offer to prove, that
this phrase, Original Sin, is to be found in Scripture: and for all his
pretenses to make the Scripture his Rule, he has no ground from this; but from
Popish Tradition.

Secondly, That we grant a real Seed of Sin, derived from Satan, Our Sense of
it.
which Adam's Posterity is liable to; But we say, none become guilty of this
before God, until they close with this evil Seed; and in them who close with
it, it becomes an Origin or Fountain of evil thoughts, desires, words and
actions.

And as by granting all capable of receiving this real Seed of Sin, we differ
from the Socinians and Pelagians; So by saying ["It is not the Childrens Sin,
until they do close with it] We agree with Zuinglius, a famous Protestant, who
for this very Doctrine was condemned by the Council of Trent, in the Art. of
the Fifth Ses. Conf. Trent. lib. 2 page 208. The Acts of which Council not only
against us, but against this famous Founder of the Protestant Churches in
Zuitserland is that, which W.M. is here Vindicating.

Thirdly, I desire the Reader may observe, That the thing he pleads for, is,
That Infants are really guilty before God; That Infants are guilty before God
simply for Adam's Sin; and that some of them, who die in their Infancy, Whether
Infants are guilty before the Act of Sin
and never actually sin in their own Persons, do for this sin of Adam Eternally
perish. Now whether this Doctrine be suitable either to the Justice or Mercy of
God, I leave the Christian Reader to judge. I shall examine the Reasons he
brings for it. His chief Argument for this in his Dialogue, page 47. was; That
because Children die, citing Romans 23. The wages of sin is death. Now I show him
page 41. of mine, how that made nothing, because natural Death of the Saints is
not the Wages of Sin; for their Sins are forgiven them, etc. this he has not
so much as mentioned, far less answered. And whereas he might as well argue,
that the Earth, The Saints natural Death is not the Wages of Sin.
Trees and Herbs were Sinners, because they received great decay by Adam's Sin;
He slightly passes it over: alleging; It will not therefore follow, that all
Mankind, who suffer Death, are not Sinners. Now this is no answer, but a mere
shift; and the thing I intended against his Assertion, does very naturally
follow from my Argument thus; If (as W. M. says) Infants be guilty of Adam's
Sin, because they are subject to Diseases and Death, then the Beasts, who are
subject to the like, and the Earth, Herbs and Trees, who have received their
decay, are Sinners before God: But this is absurd; therefore the other. Let him
answer this the next time more effectually.

The first proof he brings here, is 1 John 3.6. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh: adding; This intimates, man by his natural Birth to be Corrupt
and Fleshly. But for this his gloss he brings no proof: Though That which is
born of the flesh, be flesh; he shows us not, how it follows thence, that
Infants are guilty of Adam's Sin. After the like manner he concludes this his
Doctrine from Job 14.4. Psalm. 5.5. Whether Infants are guilty of Adam's Sin.
But as the words in these places do not plainly express any such thing, so he
brings no Reasons to make his Consequences deduceable from them. After the like
proofless manner he alleges Romans 5.14. By one man's disobedience many were
made sinners: Now, though the matter in question be, Whether these many were
made Sinners, before they actually sinned in their own Persons? He does not so
much as offer to prove it. In the like manner, though David said, his Mother
conceived him in sin; he shows us not, how it follows from thence, that
David was guilty of Sin, before he actually sinned. And here I observe, how he
asserts, That men are guilty of the Sin of their immoderate Parents; contrary
to the plain Testimony of the Scripture, Ezekiel. 18.20. The Son shall not bear
the Iniquity of the Father. To prove Infants thus guilty, he further adds
Romans 5.12. alleging these words; For that all have sinned, includes Infants:
But I show him, this includes not Infants, because the Apostle clears it in the
next verse, saying; Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law: and that there
being no Law to Infants, they cannot be guilty of sin. To this he Replies;
There was a Law to Adam, and that he represented mankind, and stood as a
public Person; Therefore Children had a Law in him: But for this signification
of his own he produces no proof; and it cannot be received, as being direct
contrary to the Scripture abovementioned, The Son shall not bear the Father 's
Iniquity. He alleges; That those the Apostle speaks of, who sinned not after
the similitude of Adam 's Transgression, are Infants: But after his usual
manner brings not the least proof for it. The 1 Cor. 15.22. cited by him, is
so far from making anything for his purpose, that it makes directly against
him; which any, that have the least grain of true understanding, may perceive.
The words are; As in Adam all died, even so in Christ all are made alive; for
here All are said to die in Adam, None die in Adam, until they actually join
with his Unrighteousness.
even as All are said to be made alive in Christ: now, as none are made alive
in Christ, until they actually receive and join with his Righteousness; so none
die in Adam, until they actually receive and join with his unrighteousness,
etc. He makes a deal a do page 110, 111. about the Greek (...), wherein though
it were easy to refute him, were it not needless to fill up Paper with
Grammatical Criticisms. For giving, but not granting, the words might be
Translated, In Adam all have sinned; it will not from thence follow, that
Infants are guilty, before they actually sin: seeing All are said to die, or
have sinned in Adam, even as All are said to be made alive in Christ; and yet
none are said to be so, until they actually receive his Righteousness, as is
above demonstrated.

Page 113. He alleges; Though it be said, that the Kingdom of God is of
little Children, yet some Infants are not saved, because they are not of the
Kingdom of Grace: But for this he brings no proof at all. And I here take
notice, That he acknowledges, that God Sanctifies and Regenerates some Infants;
W.M. contradicting himself.
and thereby he notably contradicts his second Section concerning the Light;
and page 29. of his Dialogue, where he condemns it, as a dangerous Error in us,
to say, Any can be saved without the outward Knowledge of Christ, of which
Infants are not capable. To prove, That some Infants perish, even Eternally, he
alleges The burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, citing Jude 7. But his wresting
this Scripture is very manifest. For the reason Jude gives of their suffering
Vengeance, was, because they gave themselves up to Fornication, and went after
strange flesh: Now of this Infants were not capable; of whom therefore Jude
speaks not one word. He terms Impudent, or else Ignorant, for bringing Matthew.
1.22. against them, alleging; It is an unjust charge, to say, they plead for a
Salvation in their sins: And yet he has the Impudence immediately to aver it
himself, saying; They are but in part delivered or saved in this Life: do they
not then dream of Salvation, while in part they remain in their Sins? Compare
Matthew. 1.21. with 1 John 1.7. Christ is said to cleanse us from All Iniquity,
not a part of it. It is bad Inference drawn from my Assertion, that Children
are not guilty of sin, to say, that therefore they need not a Savior: I told
him in my last, Christ was truly a Savior unto them, in that he kept them from
sinning; as one, How Christ is a Savior to Children.
that is kept from falling in a Ditch, is as truly saved, as he that is taken out
of one. It is altogether Inconsequential to infer from this, That Christ died
to save the holy Angels from sin, because they are not suffered to fall into
it: For Christ is said only to have died for Adam's Posterity, of which number
Infants are, but not Angels. It is likewise without reason, that he compares us
to Pelagians; as if we took from Christ the Name Jesus, seeing it has been
shown, we own him to be Jesus, or Savior to all, even to Infants.

He begins his fifteenth Head, Of Perseverance.
concerning the Perseverance of the Saints, page 115. alleging; That in
saying, the Quakers hold not a falling away from Regeneration, I seek to hide
my self; Because G. Keith says, That Saints may fall away from saving Grace;
asking, if Saints be Regenerate?

Answ. Though all that be fully Regenerate, are Saints; yet some may be called
Saints, who are not fully Regenerate.

Page 116. He alleges; It is in vain to assert this falling away; because it
is said, Some who believed, afterward fell away, and some make shipwreck of
the Faith; and some who tasted of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the
Life to come, etc. Because they use to distinguish betwixt seeming counterfeit
Grace, and sound saving Grace.

Answ. Can there be any more palpable wresting of Scripture? For if so be, that
Faith which they had, were not real, they were not to be blamed for falling
away from it; Who they are that Fell away from Faith*
it were their mercy, to make shipwreck of that, which was Counterfeit. The
Apostle speaks positively Heb. 6.4. of the capacity of such to fall away, who
were once enlightened, who have tasted of the heavenly gift, yea, who were
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God, and the
powers of the world to come; he says not, they seemed to be so: Nay, the very
Context shows the contrary, saying; It is impossible, to renew such again to
Repentance. Now had this been all in Appearance, the Apostle needed not to
speak of Renewing them again to Repentance, or say, They crucify the Son of God
afresh; seeing if so, they had never been penitent, and been always Crucifiers
of Christ. Whereas in answer to Phil. 1.6. I told him, It might be supposed,
that Paul was as confident, that God would perfect the work in himself, as in
any other: And yet he supposes the contrary, where he says; Lest preaching the
Gospel to others, I my self become a Castaway. To this he replieth nothing;
but cites another Scripture, Jer. 32.29. I will give them one heart, that they
may fear me for ever. Though God give them this, that they may fear him, yet
such may abuse the Gift of God, and so run out of his Fear: he gives to all his
Grace, Turning Grace unto Wantonness.
and yet it is said, that some turn it unto wantonness, Jude 4. He jeereth at
my Answer to Peter, saying; A goodly Reply forsooth: as if he had said, If the
Saints fall from Faith, they must fall: But he might spare his Insulting, until
he had found some way to answer my words, which are; That those, that abide not
in the Power of God through Faith, must fall away: For he might as well Scoff
at all the Conditional Promises of the Gospel, such as, He that continues
steadfast to the end, shall obtain the Crown. To say, That Faith, and the Power
of God concurs, to prevent the Saints falling away, Answers nothing; for so
long as these concur, we do not deny it: and though they be always willing to
concur, yet it is clear, that some, who have believed not counterfeitly, but
really, have departed from the power, and so fallen away, as is above shown.

Page 117. Upon the words of Jer. 32.40. he says; It proves the perseverance,
or impossibility of falling away, because it is said: God put his fear in their
hearts for this end, that they might not depart from him. What then? that does
not prove, that they cannot depart from him: Christ came to his own for this
end, that he might save them; and yet it is said, They received him not, Joh.
1.11. He says; I make short work of these Scriptures, Joh. 10.27, 28. Joh.
13.1. 1 John 2.19. because I say; "They speak of those, who were come to a
through Regeneration: which he says, is without proof. But the Reader by
looking unto them, will find, they cannot be understood otherways, than of
such, as are thoroughly Regenerate: and it appears, he was sensible of this,
having produced nothing to the contrary. And whereas he adds; That if those,
who are thoroughly Regenerate, were only to persevere, then this were the
privilege of Saints in Heaven, and not in Earth, who never come to be so.
There can be nothing more ridiculous, than this manner of Arguing; seeing that
question, Whether the Saints can be perfectly Regenerate on Earth? is as much
in debate, as the other. That Objection of his, as if from this Doctrine it
might follow, One were a Child of God to day, and a Child of the Devil to
morrow; I answered in my last page 43. to which he returns no answer: and
therefore it is dis-ingenuity in him, to bring it forth here again. And whereas
in page 43. aforesaid, I show him, how he Contradicted himself in this matter,
by granting some of the Quakers to have been truly Converted, and yet now to
Condemn them as Apostates: He is so far from Reconciling it, that he avers it
anew in plain terms, saying; page 118. That some of them that have felt a
gracious Operation on their hearts; and page 9. He cannot but think, That some
of them were savingly wrought upon: and yet adds; That it is clear, that they
have Apostatised from the Truth. Now to reconcile this, he has nothing to say,
But he trusts, the Lord will Convince them.

Answ. As some of them, to whom he and his Brethren were forced to give the
Testimony of gracious Persons, have already departed this Life not only not
shrinking from, but even Testifying to these Truths he calls Error; so others,
whom they have also accounted gracious, having been at death's door, have
asserted the same Truth, and rejoiced in it: which suffices to overturn his
vain Confidence. And truly, such a groundless Hope is but a poor shift to
reconcile so palpable a Contradiction; whereby, while in words they condemn
this Doctrine of the capacity of man's falling away from Grace, yet as to the
experience of some particulars, they are forced to acknowledge it, for fear
they should fall in greater Inconveniences, of granting, some among the Quakers
to be Choice Saints.

His sixteenth Head, page 119. is to prove the Danger of Quakerism, as he terms
it. But that his Folly may appear in this particular, Praying with the Spirit,
granted by W. M.
I desire the Reader first to observe our Principle, which he concludes so
hazzardous, even as repeated by himself page 121. viz. That a man cannot, nor
ought not to Pray without the Spirit 's Motion: and to say, none can Pray
without it, has no bad tendency; because all such Prayers, as are performed
without the help of the Spirit, are Abomination, not true Prayers, but
hypocritical and deceitful. Now he cannot deny this; and therefore grants it to
be true: yea, says plainly in the next page; That Prayer without the Spirit is
Abomination. And whereas he adds; That forbearing of Prayer is also
Abomination; we do not deny it: but freely confess, that forbearing of Prayer
in the Wicked is sinful. But the way to prevent this, is not to commit a second
evil, viz. to Pray without the Spirit: they ought first to come to the Spirit,
that thereby they may Pray acceptably, according to that of Paul, Romans 8.26.
Prayer without the Spirit avails not.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not, what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groans, that cannot be uttered. 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray with the Spirit;
which being brought by me in my last, he has wholly omitted so much as to
mention; far less to answer. And though omitting of Prayer be sinful, yet to
bid a man Pray without the Spirit, is as much as to desire a man to see without
opening his eyes. This thing may appear by a familiar Example, thus: Suppose a
Servant turn sluggard, and sleep, while he should be about his Master's work;
if when he is raised out of his bed, he should run naked to it, without taking
along those Tools or Instruments, which are absolutely needful for the doing of
it, what will he profit either himself, or his Master? Yea, he will but hinder
the work more: Even so the Wicked, as they ought to Pray, so they ought first
to come to the Spirit, whereby they may do it to the glory of God, and their
own Souls good. Now though this be so undeniable, that he cannot gainsay it;
yet in Contradiction to the Truth and his own Concessions, he goes about to
Cavil against it, alleging; It might take off men as well from their necessary
works, because the ploughing of the Wicked is Sin; and that also it might
follow from this, That Children should not honor their Parents, and Husbands
love their Wives, but when they have a motion of the Spirit for it.

Answ. This Objection has no weight to overturn the Truth: for there is a
great difference betwixt these things, that relate to the Worship of God; and
what relates to Outward things, either concerning our selves or our Neighbors.
The Worship of God is Spiritual.
The Worship of God is a Spiritual thing relating to himself, which we are
commanded to perform in the Spirit; and God does offer us his Spirit for the
performance of it: And because it is that, which is merely relative betwixt God
and the Soul, he does not accept of it, but as so offered; we cannot Pray, as
we ought, says the Apostle, But the Spirit helps, etc. Now, though these
other things would, no doubt, be the more acceptable to God, and more
frequently accompanied with his blessing, that they were done in the sense of
his Fear, and in the drawings of his Spirit; yet they are materially good in
themselves, answering really their End to them, unto whom they immediately
Relate without it: But it is not so of Prayer, which as it immediately Relates
to God, so W. M. himself confesses, without the Spirit to be Abomination. The
Prayer of the Wicked is sin.
Thus is also solved his Supposition page 124. That if a wicked Man contract
guilt, he may provoke the Lord to withdraw the Motions of the Spirit; and then
his Not Praying is not Sin: For I have asserted, that the Not Praying of the
Wicked is sinful. And this does not Lull People in a sinful Security; on the
contrary they are alike rather to be Lulled in such a Security, by being told,
they may be set about Prayer, when they please: whereby they foster themselves
in a groundless hope, because of their now and then repeating their words of
Prayer, neither expecting nor looking for the Spirit's Assistance: whereby
instead of advancing in Grace and Righteousness, they do but reiterate
Abominations; and so aggravate their own Guilt. And whereas here he is forced
to acknowledge, that Motives of the Spirit will not be wanting to the Saints to
Pray, when they are at the Gates of Death, or in danger of present Drowning; He
asks me; Let the Wicked Repent, etc.
What shall the Wicked do in this case? Shall they not follow the Advice, which
Peter gave to Simon Magus, Acts 8.22. Pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy
heart may be forgiven thee? But here he minceth the Apostle's words which are;
Repent therefore of thy Wickedness, and pray, etc. here the Apostle puts
Repentance before Prayer: it shall not be denied, but when the Wicked have
Repented of their Wickedness, the Spirit will not be wanting to assist them to
Pray. Craving a blessing before Meat.
It is therefore to little purpose, that page 120, and 121. he pleads for
Craving a Blessing, when we use the Creatures of God; calling the neglect of it
a Profane Custom: For we do not deny it; and Condemn a Profane Neglect of it,
as much as themselves. And as Christ had the Spirit without and above measure,
having always a ready Access to the Father; so we are glad and willing at such
Occasions to express Words, if we find the Spirit assisting us so to do: yea,
we reckon, that we ought not to use the Creatures, without our hearts be in
some measure retired to the sense of God's presence, and stayed in his Fear,
whereby we may secretly breath for a Blessing: for to speak audible words, is
not Essential. And therefore it is apparently malicious for him to say; That
when we are not stayed in God 's fear, we have liberty and freedom to fall to
Meat; my words had no such Importance, though he seeks to turn them. And yet
can wholly omit much of page 44. of mine, where I show their Abuses in this
matter, how they mock God in it, and provoke him to withdraw his Blessing. And
whereas he says; One of us Confessed, That he had not called together, nor
Prayed in his Family for a Twelvemonth past: He should have produced the
Person's Name, that we might have inquired concerning it; and therefore until
he so do, we can lay no stress upon it, but reject it as False: especially
considering, that W.M. being particularly challenged upon this, refuses
absolutely to do it; nor durst he aver, he had any better ground for it, than
Hearsay. Upon this occasion he asks; If Abraham must not keep up Religion in
his Family, because an Ishmael is in it? But this makes nothing against us:
for none of us, that are Masters of Families, have forborne to keep up the
Worship of God, though Enemies of Truth have been in it; whom we have not
barred from being present: Praying for Enemies.
and for whom we have not been wanting to Pray; though we cannot join with them
in their Prayers (as W. M. advises us) until first they Repent of their
Wickedness. This was the Method of Peter's Advice to Simon Magus, first to
Repent, and then to Pray; as is above showed.

Sect. page 125. He says; Quakerism tends to make Mortification of sin Useless;
and to me (asking; Whether Mortification be useless, where the end of it (which
is Perfection) is attained?) He answers; That Perfection is twofold,
Comparative and Absolute; and seeing we are for an Absolute Perfection, there
is no use for Mortification.

Answ. There can none come to this Absolute Perfection (as he terms it) but by
Mortification of Sin: and even such, Perfection attained by Mortification.
as are so Perfect while on Earth, do constantly use Mortification to keep down
Sin, least it rise again; and to resist the Temptations of the Enemy, wherewith
even such as be Perfect, are daily assaulted. He alleges; I Triumph before
the Victory, in quarrelling him for saying; That a sinless Perfection wounds
the very Vitals of Religion: But his silly Subterfuge in this place may easily
be discovered. I asked him in my last, That seeing he says so, Whether the
Vitals of Religion consisted in sinning or not sinning? Adding, That if it
consist in sinning, they that sin most, are most Religious; but if it consist
in not sinning, than to plead for such a thing as attainable, hurts not the
Vitals of Religion: To this he answers; That the Vitals of Religion consist
in the means appointed of God. Who sees not this to be a mere Evasion? Why did
he not give a direct Answer? But that he could not, without either denying his
former Antichristian Expression, or else falling into palpable Grosness. And
whereas he adds; That these Means are Repentance, Mortification, Believing,
Application of the Blood of Christ: Though it be no Answer to my Question, I
deny not, but that Religion consists in these things; but I suppose, he will
not say, that they are sinning. It is not in the least absurd, that one, who
has attained to Perfection, may practice these Duties; Man, though he have
attained to Perfection, cannot too much Repent of his former Wickedness. And
therefore it is without ground, that he alleges, That I shift; and cannot
deny, but the forbearance of these Duties flow, as a Consequence, from our
Principle. Nor is my saying (that they who come to Perfection, witness the true
use of these things) any Shift at all; though he be pleased to term it so
without any proof, after his wonted manner: according to which he adds; That
under the pretense of Perfection we take Men off from the practice of these
Duties, and so strike at Christianity in the Vitals of it: Which though it fall
of it self, as being a mere Assertion; yet the contrary is above abundantly
shown. He says; He does not contradict himself, in inferring, a sinless man to
be sinful: He affirmed only; the Quaker's conceitedly sinless men to be sinful,
who discover much sin in their pride, passion, bitterness, railing accusations:
adding; If such say, they have no sin, they are but liars, and the Truth is not
in them.

Answ. There was no such Addition in his Dialogue, as Conceitedly Sinless: but
absolutely he said; Bring me to the Man, that is sinless; and therefore his
Contradiction remains. Moreover, let him name that Quaker, if he can, that told
him, he was Perfectly free from all sin, and yet was guilty of those Crimes he
speaks of? else he can deduce nothing from his own false Supposition.

Page 127. To prove the Saints Continuance always in Sin, he desires to remark,
that 1 John 18. It is even such, who have heard, seen and handled of the Word
of God, The Saints were cleansed from All Unrighteousness.
etc. Who say, If we have no sin, we are liars: And here indeed is to be
observed his detestable Impudence in adding to the Scripture-words, citing
verse 7. which he repeats thus; We, who are cleansed from the guilt of sin:
whereas there is no such word as Guilt in that place; but only, We are cleansed
from all Sin: which imports a Cleansing from the Filth. Mark these words verse
9. From All unrighteousness: now when the Guilt is only taken away, and the
Filth remains (as W. M. falsely supposes) they could not be said to be
cleansed from All Unrighteousness. For it is an improper speech to say, W.M.
pleads for a Cleansing from the Guilt or Punishment, but not from the Filth or
Act of Sin.
We are cleansed from Guilt; It is from the Filth we are cleansed, and the
Guilt is forgiven us: Therefore says the Apostle, verse 9. first, He is
faithful to forgive us, and next he adds, To cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Nor will John's saying, If we say, we have no sin, import,
John himself to be of that number; more than than the Apostle James speaking of
the Tongue, James 3.9. saying; Therewith Curse we Men, who are made after the
similitude of God; will prove James to have been of these Cursers. Now in
answer to me, showing, that that Scripture 1 John 1.8. is Conditional, else it
would contradict what follows, verse 9. Chap. 24. and Chap. 3, 9. he returns
no Answer, but his own Assertions. He says; The 9 th verse speaks of
Forgiveness; but it also adds Cleansing, as is above observed. He says, That 1
John 2.4. is understood of a sincere, not absolute keeping of the Commands of
God; but for this he brings no proof at all: He says; That John 3.9. whosoever
is born of God sins not; Is meant of sinning unto death, from which the
Child of God is secured: The reason he gives of this gloss, is, Because the
Apostle Chap. 5. verse 16. speaks of a Sin unto Death; which Sin W. M.
supposes to be, that the Apostle means, He that is born of God, cannot Commit.
But to prove this Supposition, we have nothing but his own mere Assertion:
Reader, These are the best and strongest Arguments he has to prove his
Doctrines.

His Seventeenth Head, page 128. is to show, his Doctrines not to be acceptable
to the Wicked; and his Eighteenth Head, page 131. is, To prove ours to be so:
But he is so pitifully ridiculous in this matter, that such as have the least
measure of Understanding, and are Unprejudiced, cannot but see his Weakness.
Yet that he may be left altogether without a Cover, I shall Answer his
Objections, and leave the Unbiassed Reader (as he desires) to judge, which
Principles, in their nature have most tendency to strike at, or foster
Wickedness? To prove, that it is not acceptable to the Wicked to hear, they
must always Sin, he says; Some are so conceited of their honesty, that they
cannot be convinced of their Sins; And that Mortification of Sin is distastful
to them: But how he makes this to answer the other, is not told us. If
Hypocrites love not to hear of their sins, it does not therefore follow, that
pleading for a constant Continuance in Sin, is not acceptable to the Wicked;
Continuance in Sin pleaded for, is acceptable to the Wicked.
they may be the easier induced to acknowledge their Sins, that they hear it
told them for sound and solid Doctrine, that they may be Reputed good Saints
and Christians, though they always remain in them. To prove, that their
Doctrine of Imputative Righteousness, and of Election and Reprobation, is not
pleasing to the Wicked, he says; Some wicked men scoff at them: What then? so
some Wicked Men scoff at the folly of Mahumetanism; will it therefore follow,
their Doctrine is good? The Question is; Whether their Doctrine of men's being
altogether reputed Righteous in the sight of God by a Righteousness altogether
without them, and men's being Elected to Life from all Eternity, without any
respect to their deeds, be not more acceptable to the Wicked, than to tell
them, They must seek to be Justified by the Righteousness of God wrought in
them? And as they are joined to the Elect Seed Christ Jesus, born again and
brought forth in them, which works out all Iniquity and Unrighteousness in
them? Now, this he has not in the least offered to Answer. After the like
manner, whereas I show, It is more acceptable to the Wicked to hear, that the
outward Letter is the Rule, which they can bend and twine* than the inward,
which cannot be so twisted. He says; Some Wicked men could wish, there were no
such outward Rule; and that some understand not, what is intended by God's
Immediate Speaking, but hate the Ministry of the Word. Both which Answers make
nothing to the purpose: What! though Wicked men hate the Scripture and the
Ministry, does it therefore follow, that it is not more acceptable to them to
hear, This is their Only Rule, which they can twine as they please, than the
inward, which cannot be twined, as the Scriptures may, nor bribed, as the
Ministry of men? He confesses, They allow of Laces, Ribbons, Gold-Rings, etc.
and other superfluities; and therefore cannot deny, but that their Doctrine
therein is acceptable to the Wicked: His shift is here; That People ought not
to exceed their Rank and Quality: alleging; The Apostle only condemns this, 1 Timothy 2.9. But that his detestable wrestling of the Scripture may be manifest, I
shall cite the Apostle's words; In like manner also, Modest Apparel.
that women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shamefastness and
sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array. Is there
any word here, that they should only not Exceed their Rank? who cannot but
abominate his abusing of Scripture? And whereas he says? He thinks, they should
be sparing of lawful Games and Recreations: it seems, their deeds suit not
their thoughts in this matter; or else it must be accounted a sparingness with
him, not only to spend much of the day in Field-sports, but even largely of the
night in Carding, etc. For so to my certain knowledge, some of his Brethren in
the Priesthood of the Synod of Aberdeen are found doing, The Sabbath.
and justifying themselves in it. As to the Sabbath, he offers not in the
least to answer that, wherein I show, it was Acceptable to the Wicked according
to the same rate. In answer to my Assertion, That the Wicked love well to hear,
that they may be Members of the Church, without having infallible Evidence of
Holiness; He asks; If all the Members of the Quaker's-Church have so? adding;
That our Raw, Conceited Proselytes are so ignorant, and yet so confident, that
sober men suspect them to be in a Fool's Paradise. First, As this is a mere
Shift, and no Reply, to disprove the Principle aforesaid to be Acceptable to
the Wicked; so likewise, if his Spirit had not been in a Raw, Conceited
posture, filled both with Ignorance and Confidence, he had not suffered himself
so far to fall in a Fool's Paradise, as to imagine, this his mere proofless
Calumny, with many more his groundless Assertions, would have any weight with
sober men, not being backed with any Argument. He adds; Their Doctrine, Once
in grace, and ever in Grace, has no tendency to please the Wicked, because
such never had Grace; and therefore have no ground to think, that belongs
unto them. But seeing he himself confesses, That such, as had true Grace, may
fall both unto detestable practices, and Blasphemous or Erroneous Principles;
may not such then foster themselves in these Evils, by saying; That since they
once had true Grace, they can never totally fall from it? That part of page 47,
48. of mine, where I show by Example, how the Wicked living among them, and
being their Church Members, and also Opposing and Vilifying us, did declare,
their Principles to be more Acceptable to the Wicked, than ours; he has wholly
waved: it seems, he knew of no shift, how to shuffle by this; and therefore
found it fittest, altogether to omit it.

Head 18. page 131. He says; The Quaker 's Religion is exceeding suitable to
carnal hearts: and thereupon he instanceth some particulars, saying; They are
pleasing to the Wicked: without offering any reason. W. M. is wearied with
raking in his own Dunghill.
The Reader, upon the particular debate of these matters in their places, will
observe, how he was necessitated, to bottom this Conclusion of these Principles
being suitable to carnal hearts, upon the mere Credit of his own Affirmation;
and therefore it is no wonder, he adds; That he is wearied, raking in this
dunghill. It is high time for him to leave of trampling in such miry Stuff, as
is the whole bulk of his Book; and no doubt, a Dunghill is a very fit term for
such a dirty product, as is these drossy dregs of his dark Understanding. I
charged him in the end of mine for lying to God, for that in the Prayer he
ends his Dialogue with, he uses these words; Follow with thy Blessing, that
which We have been about: Which now he is so far from clearing himself of, that
he now acknowledges, it was only a supposed Conference, and therefore it was a
Lie, yea, a Mocking of God, to desire him to accompany a mere Supposition with
his Blessing. As for his expressing Pity toward the Seduced, and wishing God
to Reclaim them; It was not for that, I challenged him; but for his desiring
God to accompany with his Blessing a mere Chymaera, which never was: and
therefore his best Shift for this is; What is it, that some Men will not Carp
at, especially the Quakers? of whom he adds; A pious Minister has said, that
their Religion consists in Railing: and then he goes on, and tells some terms,
wherewith that Person says, The Quakers have named the Ministers of Christ.

Answ. First, The Testimony of his supposed pious Minister is no more to be
received in this Case, than W. M. his own; and to say, The Quakers gave these
names he mentions to the Ministers of Christ, is to take for granted the thing
in debate; for the Quakers deny them to be such. And is just one, as if a
Papist should say; Luther and his Associates Religion consisted in Railing,
because they called (as to the Papists) their holy Mother the Church of Rome a
Strumpet, a Whore, the Mother of Fornications, Babylon, etc. and all her devout
Clergy no better than Baal's Priests, filthy Dogs, blind Guides, Liars,
Dissemblers, etc. and all these other Denominations W. M. mentions the Quakers
give his Brethren: Dare he deny, but there are some of his Fraternity guilty of
all these Terms? And what knows he, but the Quakers have applied them aright?
It is manifest enough, some of these Terms are too Applicable to them all;
Blind Guides, Persecutors, Hirelings, Time-servers,

W.M's. supposed pious Ministers.


such as blind Guides, Persecutors. It is here Observeable, That among all
these Denominations he alleges the Quakers give him and his Brethren, he has
omitted the two, both most frequently used against them by the Quakers, and
most universally deserved by his Fellow-Priests, viz. Hirelings and
Time-servers. It seems he feared, every Reader would have found them
Applicable: Herein do we find our selves Justified both before God and
Good-men, that we have named them no otherways, than as their Guilt deserved;
and that we have no enmity nor hatred at any Man's Person, nor have desired to
harm it. Whereas while they plead Forbearance for themselves, that we should
not speak the Truth plainly to them, and of them, terming our so doing Railing
and Reviling; yet they are not ashamed to speak all manner of evil falsely
against us, Railing at us without a cause: And not only so, but stirring up (so
far as they can) the Magistrate, to cause us to be Beat, Imprisoned and
Persecuted both in our Bodies, Estates and Liberties, by offering to banish us
out of our Native Countries; Yea, and Cut us off (if they could) from the face
of the Earth: Let the Vnprejudiced Judge, who shows forth here most Meekness,
or most Wrath?

Postscript.
WHereas W. M. in his fifth Head concerning the Scriptures, and in his twelfth
Head, page 96. concerning the Ministry, alleges; That these words of the
Apostle Paul mentioned by me, 1 Cor. 14 30. Ye may all Prophesy one by one; are
restricted to Prophets, etc. not for the Common Order of the Church: Adding,
That except we could prove all our Teachers to be Prophets, we ought not to lay
claim to that Scripture: Pastors are called Prophets.
I would desire him to answer his Brother Samuel Rutherford's (Professor of
Divinity at St. Andrews, so called; who in his Book, entitled, The due Right
of Presbytery, page 466, 467.) Eight Arguments, wherein he has proved it to be
of Pastors, etc. not of Extraordinary Prophets; and thereby has saved me that
labor.

This coming to my hands, after the other was committed to the Press, was the
Cause of its not being inserted in the due place.

A Seasonable Warning, and Serious Exhortation to, and Expostulation with the
Inhabitants of Aberdeen, concerning this present Dispensation and Day of God's
living Visitation toward them.
GReat, Unutterably great, O ye Inhabitants, is the Love of God* which flows in
my heart toward you, and in bowels of unspeakable Compassion am I opened, am I
enlarged unto you in the sight and sense of your Conditions, which the Lord
has Discovered and Revealed unto me. O that your Eyes were opened, that ye
might see and behold this Day of the Lord! and that your Ears were unstopped,
to hear his voice, that cries aloud, and calls One and All of you to
REPENTANCE! and that your hearts were softened and inclined to discern and
perceive this blessed hour of his present Visitation, which is come unto you!
He has lifted up a Standard in the midst of you, and among your Brethren; He
has called already a Remnant, and enrolled them under his Banner, and he is
calling ALL to come; he has not left one without a Witness: Blessed are they,
that Receive him, and Hear him in this Day of his Appearance. He has sent
forth, and is daily sending forth his Servants and Messengers, to invite you to
Come and Partake with him of the Supper, of the Feast which he has prepared!
And among many others, whom at sundry times he has caused to sound forth his
Testimony, I also have in the Name, and Power, and Authority of God proclaimed
his Everlasting Gospel among you, and preached, and held forth the glad Tidings
of this glorious Dispensation, which is Christ, manifesting and revealing
himself in and by his Light and Spirit in the hearts of all men, To lead them
out of all Unrighteousness and Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; unto all
Righteousness, Truth, Holiness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. But because
many of you have despised this Day, and as ye have made merry over God's
Witness in your hearts, not liking there to entertain him in his meek, lowly,
yet lovely Appearance; so have ye despised, mocked and rejected that which
testifies to this Witness without you. Therefore was I commanded of the Lord
God, to pass through your Streets covered with Sackcloth and Ashes, calling
you to REPENTANCE, that ye might yet more be awakened, and Alarmed to take
notice of the Lord's Voice unto you; and not to despise these things, which
belong to your peace, while your Day lasts, least hereafter they be hid from
your eyes. And the Command of the Lord concerning this thing came unto me that
very Morning, as I awakened, and the Burden thereof was very Great; yea, seemed
almost insupportable unto me, (for such a thing, until that very moment, had
never entered me before, not in the most remote Consideration.) And some, whom
I called to declare to them this thing, can bear witness, how great was the
Agony of my Spirit, how I besought the Lord with tears, that this Cup might
pass away from me! Yea, how the Pillars of my Tabernacle, were shaken, and how
exceedingly my bones trembled, until I freely gave up unto the Lord's Will. And
this was the end and tendency of my Testimony, to call you to Repentance by
this signal and singular Step; which I, as to my own Will and Inclination, was
as unwilling to be found in, as the worst and the wickedest of you can be
averse from receiving, or laying it to heart. Let all and every one of you, in
whom there is yet alive the least regard to God, or his fear, Consider and
Weigh this matter in the presence of God, and by the Spirit of Jesus Christ in
your hearts, which makes all things manifest; Search and Examine every one his
own Soul, how far this Warning and Voice of the Lord is applicable unto them?
and how great need they have to be truly humbled in their Spirits? Returning to
the Lord in their inward parts with such true and unfeigned Repentance, as
answers to the outward Clothing of Sackcloth, and being Covered with Ashes.
And in the Fear and Name of the Lord I charge all upon this occasion, to beware
of a slight frothy, jearing, mocking Spirit: for though such may be permitted
to Insult for a season; yet God will turn their laughter into howling, and will
laugh, when their calamity comes: and such are seen to be in one Spirit with
those, who spat in the face of the LORD JESUS, and buffeting him, bid him
prophecy, who smote him. Therefore consider, O ye Inhabitants, and be serious,
standing in fear: Where are ye, who are called Christians? Among whom it is
become a Wonder, A Stone of Stumbling, or Matter of Mockery, or a Ground of
Reproach, for one in the Name of the LORD to invite you to Repentance in
Sackcloth and Ashes! Would not the Heathen condemn you in this thing; And will
not Ninive stand up in judgment against you? How is it, that ye, that are
called Christians, can willingly give room to every idle Mountebank, and can
suffer your minds to be drawn out to behold these sinful Divertisments, which
indeed divert the Mind from the serious sense of God's fear? The People can be
gathered there, and neither the Magistrates complain of Tumult, nor yet
Preachers, nor Professors cry out against it as Delusion, or Madness. O my
Friends, consider, Can there be any more strongly Deluded, than for People
daily to Acknowledge and Confess, they are Sinners and sinning, in words; and
to startle at that, which did so lively Represent unto them, what they own to
be their Condition? Were it in good Earnest, or were it from a true sense of
your Sins, that ye so frequently seem to acknowledge them, ye would not
despise, nor overlook that which calls you to Repentance for it. How is it,
that you can so confidently Array your selves in all manner of gaudy and
superfluous Apparel? and exceed in lustful pouderings and perfumes; and yet are
ashamed and amazed at Sackcloth and Ashes, which according to your own
acknowledgment, is so suitable to your states? Is not this to glory in your
shame, and to be ashamed of that which ought to be, and would be your greatest
glory, to wit, true and unfeigned Repentance? I shall add, that which upon this
occasion I declared unto you, I was for a Sign from the Lord unto you; I
desire, ye may not be among those, that wonder and perish, but rather Repent
and be Saved. And this is my Testimony unto you, whether you will hear or
forbear; I have peace with my God, in what I have done, and am satisfied, that
his Requirings I have answered in this thing. I have not sought yours, but you:
I have not coveted your gold or silver, or any thing else; nor do I retain, or
entertain the least Hatred, Grudge or Evil Will toward any within or without
your Gates: but continue in pure and unfeigned Love toward all and every one
of you, even those, who do most despise or reject me and my Testimony: being
ready to bless those that curse, and to do good to those, that despitefully use
me; and to be spent in the will of the Lord for your sakes, that your Souls may
be saved, and God over all may be glorified: For which I travel, and cry before
the Throne of Grace, as becomes

This came before me to signify unto you by Writing at Urie the 12 th of the
first Month, 1672. A Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, ROBERT BARCLAY.
After this Paper was committed to the Press, some Queries concerning this
Matter were sent (to a Friend in Aberdeen) by One, who in the Inscription
styles himself a Sober Inquirer; which Mask he quickly pulled off, either for
want of Wit, or from too much Malice against the Truth, by spreading these
Queries at the same time among several Hands: which no truly Sober Inquirer
would have done, until he had first received, or been refused Satisfaction from
him, to whom he particularly directed them. In order therefore to dispel such
Cloudy Mists, as the Enemy seeks to raise for darkning the Day of God's
Appearance through his Children, These Answers are judged fit to be here
anexed. The Premises and Queries following upon them, being all one on the
matter, the first being Positions in general, and the other the particular
Application of them hereto, they need not different Answers; both of them are
herein comprehended and implied: as any that will be at the pains to look after
the Queries, and Compare them, may Observe.

To the first is therefore Answered;

1. R. B. denies his Message to have proceeded from any Light or Illumination
in him as a man; but from the Immediate Testimony of the Spirit of God in his
heart, A Manifestation of which Spirit is given to every man to profit withal,
according to the plain Testimony of the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 John 2.20,
27. Hebr. 8.10, 11, 12. The which Spirit and Anointing teaches all the Saints
under the New Covenant, whereunto an Audible voice is not required: For this is
said to be within them, and not without them. Nor can it be proved, that God
spoke always to the Prophets by an Audible Voice, or that such a thing is
requisite to every true Revelation, received from the Spirit; else none could
be truly certain, that the Scriptures came from the Spirit of God, until they
received an Audible Voice by the outward Ear, confirming them of it: nor could
any have the Assurance of Salvation without the same; both which the generality
of Protestants hold needful to Believers, and Calv. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 7. sect.
4. cap. 8 sect. 1. lib. 3. cap. 1. sect. 4. cap. 3. sect. 39. That by the
inward, secret Testimony of the Spirit, without an Audible Voice. Nor was John
Huss his Prophecy of Luther, or George Wishart's of the Cardinal's Death
alleged to have proceeded from an outward audible voice; and yet proved both
True: As likewise several others of latter years, which might be mentioned.

2. A Message thus delivered from the Testimony of the Spirit of God in the
heart, reaches to the Manifestation of the same Spirit in the hearts of those,
to whom it is delivered; if they wilfully do not resist and shut it out. Thus
the Ninivites were reached at the Call of Jonah; and those who heard Peter,
were pricked in their hearts; yet neither the one or the other had such an
immediate particular Call, as Jonah and Peter had; but the Testimony of the
Spirit through these two, touched, reached and raised that of God in their
hearts, and made it applicable unto them. Yet those that despise this Light and
Manifestation of God in themselves, may come to jeer, and mock at a Message
proceeding from it through another, even as the Scribes and Pharisees did at
Christ; and therefore were worthy of Condemnation, and judged by the Heathen,
such as Tire and Sidon, and Ninive. Even as it is with those of the same Spirit
at this day, who while they cry up the Writings of the Prophets, and other
Scriptures, (as did the Pharisees) are despising Prophesying, or the teaching,
or leadings of the Spirit; which the Apostle declared to be the nature of the
New Covenant-Dispensation: and therefore no wonder, if according to the
Scripture, Prove. 28.18. Where there is no Vision, the People perish.

3. The Assisters to this Action having had the thing declared unto them,
retiring to the inward Testimony of the same Spirit in themselves, did feel
Union therewith; and such as went along, did not only find a true liberty
(which might have sufficed) but some of them a necessity to Concur with it. And
as for the carrying of the Hat and Cloak, it was altogether Extrinsick, being
neither Essential nor Circumstantial to the thing; nor so looked upon by these
who did it: Yet the Carping thereat shows in the Proposer a Critical mind, very
void of seriousness, which the Lord, as of purpose to starve, has permitted
him to build that part of the Query in relation to A. H's. Wife upon a false
Report, the thing being a manifest Untruth.

And in Answer to the second Proposition of the Premises, it is the alone
immediate Testimony of the Spirit of God, that can truly discover all false
Pretenders and Delusions: which if any can, let them deny, without overturning
the Basis of all Christian Religion, and rendering the Faith of the Saints in
all Ages Uncertain.

R. B.



A CATECHISM AND Confession of Faith, Approved of and Agreed unto by the
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE PATRIARCHS, PROPHETS and APOSTLES, CHRIST himself CHIEF
SPEAKER In and Among them.

Which contains A True and Faithful Account of the Principles and Doctrines,
which are most surely believed by the Churches of Christ in Great Britain and
Ireland, who are reproachfully called by the Name of Quakers; yet are found in
the one Faith with the Primitive Church and Saints: as is most clearly
demonstrated by some plain Scripture-Testimonies (without Consequences or
Commentaries) which are here Collected and Inserted by way of Answer to a Few,
Weighty, yet Easy and Familiar Questions, fitted as well for the Wisest and
Largest, as for the Weakest and Lowest Capacities. To which is added An
EXPOSTVLATION with, and APPEAL to all other Professors.

By R B. a Servant of the Church of Christ.

JOHN 5.39, 40. Search the Scriptures (or, Ye search the Scriptures) for in
them ye think ye have Eternal Life; and they are they, which testify of me,
that ye might have Life.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street. 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
SInce first that great Apostasy took place in the Hearts and Heads of those,
who began even in the Apostles days to depart from the Simplicity and Purity of
the Gospel, as it was then delivered in its Primitive Splendour and Integrity;
innumerable have been the manifold Inventions and Traditions, the different and
various Notions and Opinions, wherewith Man (by giving way to the vain and airy
Imaginations of his own unstable Mind) has burdened the Christian Faith; So
that indeed, first by adding these things, and afterward by equalling them, if
not exalting them above the Truth, they have at last come to be substitute in
the stead of it: so that in process in time, Truth came to be shut out of
doors, and another thing placed in the room thereof; having a Show and a Name,
but wanting the Substance and Thing it self. Nevertheless it pleased God to
raise up Witnesses for himself almost in every Age and Generation, who,
according to the Discoveries they received, bore some Testimony, less or more,
against the Superstition and Apostasy of the time: and in special manner
through the appearing of that Light, which first broke forth in Germany about
One hundred and fifty years ago, and afterward reached diverse other Nations,
the Beast received a deadly Wound: and a very great Number did at one time
Protest against, and Rescind from the Church of Rome in diverse of their most
gross and sensual Doctrines and superstitious Traditions. But alas! It is for
matter of lamentation, that the Successors of these Protestants are
Establishing and Building up in themselves that, which their Fathers were
pulling down instead of prosecuting and going on with so Good and Honorable a
Work, which will easily appear.

The generality of all Protestants (though in many other things miserably Rent
and Shattered among themselves) do agree in dividing from the Church of Rome in
these two particulars:

First, That every Principle and Doctrine of the Christian Faith is, and ought
to be founded upon the Scripture; and that whatsoever Principles or Doctrines
are not only not contrary, but even not according thereto, ought to be denied,
as Antichristian.

Secondly, That the Scriptures themselves are Plain and Easy to be understood;
and that every private Christian and Member of the Church ought to read and
peruse them, that they may know their Faith and Belief founded upon them, and
receive them for that Cause alone; and not, because any Church or Assembly has
Compounded and Recommended them: the Choicest and Most-pure of which they are
obliged to look upon as Fallible.

Now, contrary to this their known and acknowledged Principle, they do most
vigorously prosecute and persecute others with the like Severity, the Papists
did their Fathers, for believing things, that are plainly set down in the
Scriptures; and for not believing diverse Principles, for which themseves are
forced to recur to Tradition; and can by no means prove from Scripture. To show
which, I shall not here insist, having allotted a Chapter for it in the Book it
self; because to put it here, would swell beyond the bounds of a Preface.

Oh! How like do they show themselves (I mention it with Regret) to the Scribes
and Pharisees of Old, who of all men most cried up and exalted Moses and the
Prophets, boasting greatly of being Abraham's Children! And yet those were
they, that were the greatest Opposers and Vilifiers of Christ, to whom Moses
and all the Prophets gave Witness: yea, their chief Accusations and Exceptions
against Christ was, as being a Breaker of the Law, and a Blasphemer.

Can there any Comparison run more parallel, seeing, there is now found a
People, who are greatly Persecuted, and bitterly Reviled, and Accused as
Heretics by a Generation, that cry up and exalt the Scriptures; And yet this
Peoples Principles are found in Scripture, Word by Word; though the most
grievous, and indeed the greatest Calumny cast upon them is, that they Vilify
and Deny the Scriptures, and set up their own Imaginations instead of them.

To disprove which, this Catechism and Confession of Faith is Compiled, and
presented to thy Serious and Impartial View. If thou love the Scripture
indeed, and desire to hold the plain Doctrines there delivered, and not these
Strained and Far-fetched Consequences, which Men have invented; thou shall
easily observe the whole Principles of the People called QUAKERS, plainly
couched in Scripture-Words, without Addition or Commentary: especially in those
things, their Adversaries Oppose them in, where the Scripture plainly decideth
the Controversy for them, without Nicities and School-Distinctions; which have
been the Wisdom, by which the World has not known God; and the Words, which
have been multiplied without knowledge, by which Counsel has been darkened.

In the Answers to the Questions there is not one Word, that I know of, placed,
but the express Words of Scripture: and if in some of the Questions there be
somewhat Subsumed, of what in my Judgment is the plain and naked Import of the
Words, it is not to Impose my Sense upon the Reader; but to make way for the
next Question, for the dependence of the Matter's sake. I shall leave it to the
reason of any Understanding and Judicious Man, who is not biased by
Self-Interest, (that great Enemy to true Equity) and who in the least measure
is willing to give way to the Light of Christ in his Conscience, if the
Scriptures do not pertinently and aptly Answer to the Questions.

As I have upon serious Grounds Separated from most of the Confessions and
Catechisms heretofore published; so, not without Cause, I have now taken
another Method. They usually place their Confession of Faith before the
Catechism; I judge, it ought to be otherwise: in regard that which is Easiest,
and is Composed for Children, or such as are Weak, ought in my Judgment to be
placed first; it being most Regular, to Begin with things that are Easy and
Familiar, and lead on to things, that are more Hard and Intricate. Besides,
that things be more largely opened in the Catechism, and diverse Objections
Answered, which are proposed in the Questions; the Reader having past through
that first, will more perfectly understand the Confession, which consists
mainly in positive Assertions.

Not long after I had received and believed the Testimony I now bear, I had in
my view both the possibility and facility of such a Work; and now after a more
large and perfect acquaintance with the Holy Scripture, I found Access to allow
some time to set about it; and have also been helped to accomplish the same.

I doubt not, but it might be enlarged by diverse Citations, which are here
omitted; as not being at present brought to my Remembrance: Yet I find Cause to
be contented, in that God has so far assisted me in this Work by his Spirit,
that good Remembrancer; the Manifestation of which, as it is minded, will help
such, as Seriously and Conscientiously Read this, to find out, and cleave to
the Truth, and also Establish and Confirm those, who have already believed.
Which of all things is most earnestly desired, and daily prayed for By

From Vrie, the Place of my Being in my Native Country of Scotland, the 11th of
the 6th Month, 1673. ROBERT BARCLAY, A Servant of the Church of CHRIST.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF God, and the true and saving Knowledge of him. Chap. 2. Of the
Rule and Guide of Christians, and of the Scriptures. Chap. 3. Of Jesus Christ's
being manifest in the Flesh, the Use and End of it. Chap. 4. Of the New Birth,
the Inward Appearance of Christ in Spirit, and the Unity of the Saints with
him. Chap. 5. Concerning the Light, wherewith Jesus Christ has enlightened
every Man; the Universality and Sufficiency of God's Grace to all the World
made manifest therein. Chap. 6. Concerning Faith, Justification and Works.
Chap. 7. Concerning Perfection, or Freedom from Sin. Chap. 8. Concerning
Perseverance and falling from Grace. Chap. 9. Concerning the Church and
Ministry. Chap. 10. Concerning Worship. Chap. 11. Concerning Baptism, and Bread
and Wine. Chap. 12. Concerning the Life of a Christian in general, what, and
how it ought to be in this World. Chap. 13. Concerning Magistracy. Chap. 14.
Concerning the Resurrection. Chap. 15. A short Introduction to the Confession
of Faith. Chap. 16. A Confession of Faith, containing Twenty Three Articles.
Article 1. Concerning God, and the True and Saving Knowledge of him. Art. 2.
Concerning the Guide and Rule of Christians. Art. 3. Concerning the Scriptures.
Art. 4* Concerning the Divinity of Christ, and his being from the Beginning.
Art. 5. Concerning his Appearance in the Flesh. Art. 6. Concerning the End and
Use of that Appearance. Art. 7. Concerning the Inward Manifestation of Christ.
Art. 8. Concerning the New Birth. Art. 9. Concerning the Unity of the Saints
with Christ. Art. 10. Concerning the Universal Love and Grace of God to all.
Art. 11. Concerning the Light that enlightneth every Man. Art. 12. Concerning
Faith and Justification. Art. 13. Concerning Good Works. Art. 14. Concerning
Perfection. Art. 15. Concerning Perseverance and Falling from Grace. Art. 16.
Concerning the Church and Ministry Art. 17. Concerning Worship. Art. 18.
Concerning Baptism. Art. 19. Concerning Eating of Bread and Wine, Washing of
one another Feet, abstaining from things strangled, and from Blood: and
Anointing of the Sick with Oil. Art. 20. Concerning the Liberty of such
Christians, as are come to know the Substance, as to the using or not using of
these Rites, and of the Observation of Days. Art. 21. Concerning Swearing,
Fighting, and Persecution. Art. 22. Concerning Magistracy. Art. 23. Concerning
the Resurrection.
Chap. 17. A short Expostulation with, and Appeal to all other Professors.
Chap. 18. A short Examination of some of the Scripture-Proofs alleged by the
Divines at Westminster, to prove diverse Articles in their Confession of Faith
and Catechism.
A CATECHISM, etc.
CHAP. I. Of GOD, and the True and Saving Knowledge of Him.
Question. SEeing it is a thing Unquestioned by all sorts of Christians, that
the Hight of Happiness consists in coming to know and enjoy Eternal Life;
what is it in the Sense and Judgment of Christ?

Answer. This is Life Eternal, that they might know thee, John 17.3.
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.

Q. How does God Reveal this Knowledge?

A. For God, who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of
God in the Face of Jesus Christ.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. One God. We know, that an Idol is nothing in the World; Ephesians. 4.9. 1 Cor.
8.4, 6.
and that there is none other God but one. But to us there is but one God.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit. John 4.24.


Q. Among all the Blessed, Glorious and Divine Excellencies of God, which are
ascribed and given to him in the Scriptures, what is that, which is most
needful for us to take notice of, as being the Message which the Apostles
Recorded in special manner to declare of him now under the Gospel?

A. This then is the Message, which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all. 1 John 1.5.


Q. What are they, that bear Record in Heaven?

A. There are Three* that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, 1 John 5.7.
the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One.

Q. How comes any Man to know God the Father, according to Christ's Words?

A. All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no Man knows, who the Son
is, but the Father; and who the Father is, Luke 10.22. Mal. 11.27. John 14.6.
but the Son, and he, to whom the Son will Reveal him. Jesus says unto him, I
am the Way, the Truth and the Life, no Man comes unto the Father, but by me.

Q. By whom, and after what manner does the Son Reveal this Knowledge?

A. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has
entered into the Heart of Man the things, which God has prepared for them that
love him. But God has Revealed them unto us by his Spirit: 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11,
12.
For the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man
knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man, which is in him? Even so
the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Now, we have received
not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit, which is of God, that we might
know the things, that are freely given to us of God.

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, John 14.26.
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your Remembrance, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Rule and Guide of Christians, and of the Scriptures.
Question. SEeing it is by the Spirit, that Christ Reveals the Knowledge of God
in things Spiritual, The Spirit the Guide.
is it by the Spirit, that we must be led under the Gospel?

Answer. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit; if so be, that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he
is none of his. For as many, as are Led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.9, 14.
they are the Sons of God.

Q. It is an Inward Principle then, that is to be the Guide and Rule of
Christians?

A. But the Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you: 1 John
2.27.
and ye need not, that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches
you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you,
ye shall abide in him.

But as touching Brotherly Love, ye need not, that I write unto you; These. 4.9.
for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another.

Q. I perceive by this, that it is by an Inward Anointing and Rule, that
Christians are to be taught? Is this the very tenor of the
New-Covenant-Dispensation?

A. For this is the Covenant, that I will make with the House of Israel after
those Days, The Anointing the Teacher.
says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them in their
Hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People: And they
shall not Teach every Man his Neighbor, Hebr. 8.10, 11.
and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me, from
the Least to the Greatest.

John 6.45.
And they shall be all taught of God.

Q. Did Christ then promise, that the Spirit should both abide with his
Disciples, and be in them?

A. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, Joh.
14.16, 17.
that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him;
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.

Q. For what End were the Scriptures written?

A. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, Romans 15.4.
were written for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.

Q. For what are they profitable?

A. Thou have known the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in
Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works.

Q. Wherein consists the Excellency of the Scriptures?

A. Knowing this first, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private Interpretation: For the
Prophecy came not in Old Time by the Will of Man; but Holy Men of God spoke, as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Q. The Scriptures are then to be regarded, because they came from the Spirit;
and they also testify, that not they, but the Spirit is to lead into all
Truth? In what respect does Christ Command to Search them?

A. Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, John 5.39.
and they are they, which testify of me.

Q. I perceive, there was a Generation of old, that greatly exalted the
Scriptures, and yet would not believe, nor come to be guided by that the
Scriptures directed to; How does Christ bespeak such?

A. Do not think, that I will accuse you to the Father; there is One that
accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust: for had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me; for he wrote of me: But if ye believe not his Writings, how
shall ye believe my Words. John 5.45, 46, 47.


Q. What ought then such to be accounted of, notwithstanding of their Pretenses
of being ruled by the Scriptures?

A. In which are some things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
which they that are Unlearned and Unstable, wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.

CHAP. III. Of Jesus Christ being manifest in the Flesh; the Use and End of it.
Question. WHat are the Scriptures, which do most observably prophesy of
Christ's Appearance?

Answer. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken.

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a Sign: Behold, Isai. 7.14.
a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel

Q. Was not Jesus Christ in being, before he Appeared in the Flesh? What clear
Scriptures prove this, against such as erroneously assert the contrary?

Mich. 5.2.
A. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the Thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in
Israel, whose Goings forth have been from of Old, from Everlasting.

John 1.1, 2, 3.
In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;
The same was in the Beginning with God: All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made, that was made.

Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, John
8.58.
I am.

John 17.5.
And now, O Father, Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which I
had with thee before the World was.

And to make all Men see, what is the Fellowship of the Mystery, which from the
beginning of the World has been hid in God, Ephesians. 3.9.
who created all things by Jesus Christ.

Col. 1.16.
For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers: All things were created by him, and for him.

God has in these last Days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed
Heir of all things, Hebr. 1.2.
by whom also he made the Worlds.

Q. These are very clear, that even the World was Created by Christ; But what
Scriptures prove the Divinity of Christ, against such as falsely deny the same?

A. And the Word was God.

John 1 1.
Romans 9.5.
Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, who is
over all, God blessed for ever, Amen.

Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery, to be Equal with God.
Phil 2.6.


And we know, that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding,
1 John 5.20.
that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God, and Eternal Life.

Q. What are the Glorious Names the Scripture gives unto Jesus Christ, the
Eternal Son of God?

A And his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, Isai.
9.5.
The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature. Col.
1.15.


Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the Express Image of his Person (or
more properly, Hebr. 1.3. (...).
according to the Greek, of his Substance.)

Rev. 19.13.
And he was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name is called The
Word of God.

Q. After what manner was the Birth of Christ?

Matthew. 1.18.
A. Now, the Birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his Mother Mary
was espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with Child of
the Holy Ghost.

And the Angel said unto her, Fear not Mary, for thou have found Favor with
God: And behold, thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and
shall call his Name Jesus: He shall be Great, and shall be called The Son of
the Highest, The Birth of Christ.
and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David. Then said
Mary unto the Angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a Man? Luke 1.30, 31,
32, 34, 35.
And the Angel answered and said unto her; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the Power of the Highest shall over-shadow thee: Therefore also that Holy
Thing, that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

Q. Was Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and supposed to be the
Son of Joseph, a True and Real Man?

A. Forasmuch as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, Hebr. 2.14.
he also himself took part of the same, that through Death he might destroy
him, that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil.

For verily, he took not on him the Nature of Angels, Hebr. 2.16, 17.
but He took on him the Seed of Abraham, wherefore in all things it behoved him
To be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and Faithful
High Priest, etc.

For we have not an High Priest, Hebr. 4.15.
which cannot be Touched with the feeling of our Infirmities; but was in all
Points tempted, as we are, yet without Sin.

And the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man, Jesus Christ, Hebr. 5.15.
has abounded unto many.

But now is Christ risen from the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.20, 21.
and become the First Fruits of them that slept: for since by Man came Death,
by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead.

Q. After what manner does the Scripture assert the Conjunction and Unity of
the Eternal Son of God in and with the Man Christ Jesus?

A. And the Word was made Flesh, John 1.14.
and dwelt among us (and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the Only Begotten
of the Father) full of Grace and Truth.

For he, whom God has sent, speaks the Words of God; John 3.34.
for God gives not the Spirit by Measure unto him.

Now God Anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, Acts 10 38.
and with Power; who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed
of the Devil; for God was with him.

For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. Col. 1.19.


For in him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. Col. 2.9.


In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Col. 2.3.


Q. For what End did Christ appear in the World?

A. For what the Law could not do, Romans 8.3.
in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his Son in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin in the Flesh.

For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, 1 John 3.8, 9.
That he might destroy the Works of the Devil. And ye know, that he was
manifested To take away our Sins.

Q. Was Jesus Christ really Crucified and Raised again?

A. For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, 1 Cor.
15.3, 4.
how that Christ died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures; And that he
was buried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures.

Q. What End do the Scriptures ascribe unto the Coming, Death and Sufferings of
Christ.

Luke 2.30, 31, 32.
A. For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the
Face of all People, A Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy
People Israel.

Romans 3.25.
Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, that are past, through the
forbearance of God.

And walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us
an Offering, Ephesians. 5.2.
and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor.

And (having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross) by him To Reconcile all
things unto himself, by him I say, whether they be things in Earth, or things
in Heaven. And you that were sometimes alienated, and Enemies in your minds by
wicked Works; yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his Flesh through
Death, Col. 1.20, 21, 22.
to present you Holy, Unblameable and Vnreprovable in his Sight.

Hebr. 9.12, 14.
Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered-in
once into the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. How much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself
without Spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the
Living God.

1 Pet. 3.18.
For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust ( that he
might bring us to God) being put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit.

1 John 3 16.
Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because He laid down his Life for us.

Hebr. 9.15.
And for this Cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
the Redemption of Transgressions, that were under the first Testament, They
which are called, might receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance.

Q. Is Christ then the Mediator?

1 Timothy 2.5.
A For there is One God, and One Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

Q. Was not Christ the Mediator, until he appeared, and was Crucified in the
Flesh?

Rev. 5.12. and 13.8.
A He is the Lamb, that was slain from the Foundation of the World.

Q. Is it then needful to believe, that the Saints of old did partake of
Christ, as then present with, and nourishing them?

1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
A. Moreover, Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all
our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea; and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea; and did all eat the same
spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink: for they drank of
that spiritual Rock, that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.

Q. But whereas most of these Scriptures beforementioned do hold forth, that
the Death and Sufferings of Christ were appointed for the destroying, removing
and remitting of Sin; Did he so do it, while he was outwardly upon Earth, as
not to leave any thing for himself to do in us, nor for us to do in and by his
Strength?

A. For even hereunto were ye called, 1 Pet. 2.21.
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that ye should
follow his Steps.

Whereof I Paul am made a Minister, Col. 1.23, 24.
who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind, of
the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh for his Body's sake, which is the Church.

Always bearing about in the Body the Dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10, 11.
that the Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body. For we which
live, are always delivered unto Death for Jesus 's sake, that the Life also of
Jesus might be made manifest in our Mortal Flesh.

And that he died for all, that they which live, 2 Cor. 5.15.
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them,
and also rose again.

That I may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10.
and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable to his Death.

CHAP. IV. Of the New Birth, the Inward Appearance of Christ in Spirit, and the
Unity of the Saints with him.
Question. Does Christ promise then to Come again to his Disciples?

Answer. I will not leave you Comfortless; I Come unto you. John 14.18.


Q. Was this only a Special Promise to these Disciples? Or is it not the Common
Privilege of the Saints?

A. For thus says the High and Lofty One, that inhabits Eternity, whose Name
is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place, Isa. 57.15.
with him also, that is of a Contrite and Humble Spirit, etc.

For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, 2 Cor. 6.16.
I will dwell in them, and walk in them.

Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock, if any man hear my voice, Rev. 3.20.
and open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me.

Q Does the Apostle Paul speak of the Son of God's being Revealed in him?

A. But when it pleased God, Gal. 1.15, 16.
who separated me from my Mother's Womb, and called me by his Grace, To Reveal
his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen.

Q. Is it needful then, to know Christ within?

A. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13.5.
prove your own selves, Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be Reprobates?

Q. Was the Apostle Earnest, that this Inward Birth of Christ should be brought
forth in any?

A. Gal. 41.9.
My little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed in
you?

Q What says the same Apostle of the Necessity of this Inward Knowledge of
Christ, and of the New Creature beyond the Outward?

A. Wherefore henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh; yea, though we have
known Christ after the Flesh; yet now henceforth know we him no more. 2 Cor.
5.16, 17
Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; Old things are passed
away, behold all things are become New.

But ye have not so learned Christ; if so be that ye have heard him, Ephesians.
4.21, 22, 23, 24.
and have been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus, That ye put off,
concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful Lusts; and to be Renewed in the Spirit of your Mind; and that ye
Put on the New Man, which after God is Created in Righteousness, and true
Holiness.

Q. Is this Christ-within the Mystery of God, and Hope of Glory, which the
Apostle Preached?

Col. 1.27, 28.
A. To whom God would make known, what are the Riches of the Glory of this
Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the Hope of Glory, whom ye
preach.

Q. Does the Apostle any where else press the putting on of this New Birth?

A. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. Romans 13.14.


Q. Does he write to any of the Saints, as having put off the Old, and on the
New Man?

A. For as many of you, as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
Gal. 3 27.


Seeing that ye have put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and have put on the
New Man, Col. 3.9, 10.
which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him.

Q. What speaks Christ himself of the Necessity of this New Birth?

John 3.3.
A. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a
Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Q Of what Seed comes this Birth?

1 Pet. 1.23.
A. Being born again not of Corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible, by the Word
of God, which lives and abides for ever.

Q. What does the Apostle Paul witness of himself concerning this New Life?

A. I am Crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. Gal. 2.20.


Q. What is the Preaching of the Cross of Christ?

1 Cor. 1.18.
A. For the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, Foolishness; but
unto us that are saved, it is the Power of God.

Q. What Effect had this Cross in the Apostle? and how much prefers he the
New Creature to all outward and visible Ordinances and Observances?

A. Gal. 6.14, 15.
But God forbid, that I should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is Crucified unto me, and I unto the World: For in
Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a
New Creature.

Q. What speaks Christ of the Unity of the Saints with him?

A. At that Day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, John 14.20.
and ye in me, and I in you.

Abide in me, and I in you: John 15.4, 5.
As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no
more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches; He that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much Fruit; for without me
ye can do nothing.

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also, John 17.20, 21, 22, 23.
which shall believe in me through their Word: That they all may be One; as
thou Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in Us, that
the World may believe it, that thou have sent me. And the Glory which thou
gave me, I have given them, that they may be One, even as we are One: I in
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in One; and that the World
may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me.

Q. What says the Apostle Paul to this purpose?

A. For both he that Sanctifies, and they that are Sanctified, Hebr. 2.11.
are all of One; for which Cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren.

Q. What says the Apostle Peter?

A. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that by these you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
Corruption, that is in the World through Lust.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Light wherewith Jesus Christ has enlightened every
Man; The Universality and Sufficiency of God's Grace to all the World made
manifest therein.
Question. WHerein consists the Love of God toward Fallen and Lost Man?

Answer. For God so loved the World, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should
not Perish, but have Everlasting Life.

In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the World, 1 John 4.9.
that we might live through him.

Q. What is intended here by the World? all and every Man, or only a few?

A. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of Death crowned with Glory and Honor, Hebr. 2.9.
that he by the Grace of God Should taste Death for every Man.

1 John 2.1, 2.
And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the
Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the Sins of the whole World.

Q. Methinks, the Apostle John is very plain there, in mentioning the whole
World, which must be not only the Saints, but all others; seeing he
distinguishes the World from himself, and all the Saints, to whom he then
wrote: What says Paul elsewhere in this matter?

A. Christ in you the Hope of Glory, whom we Preach, warning every Man, Col.
1.27, 28.
and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, That we may present every Man perfect in
Christ Jesus.

1 Timothy 2.3, 4, 6.
I Exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and Giving of Thanks be made for All Men; for this is good and acceptable in
the Sight of God our Savior, who will have All Men to be saved, and to come to
the Knowledge of the Truth: who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified
in due time.

Q. What is the Apostle Peter 's Testimony in this?

A. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise (as some Men count slackness)
but is long-suffering to usward, 2 Pet. 3.9.
Not willing, that any should Perish, but that All should come to Repentance.

Q. Are there any more Scripture-Passages, that prove this thing?

A. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the
Death of the Wicked; Ezekiel. 33.11.
but that the Wicked turn from his Way, and Live.

The Lord is Gracious, and full of Compassion; slow to Anger, and of great
Mercy. Psalm. 145.8, 9.
The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works.

To wit, That God was in Christ Reconciling the World unto him self. 2 Cor.
5.19.


Q. Seeing then, by these Scriptures it appears, that the Love of God is held
out to all, that all might have been or may be saved by Christ; What is to be
judged of those, who assert, that God nor Christ never purposed Love nor
Salvation to a great part of Mankind; and that the Coming and Sufferings of
Christ never was intended, nor could be useful to their Justification; but will
and must be effectual for their Condemnation: even according to God's Purpose,
who from their very Infancy to their Grave withheld from them all means of
Salvation? What says the Scripture to such?

A. For God sent not his Son into the World to Condemn the World, but that the
World through him might be saved. John 3 17.


I am come a Light into the World, that Whosoever believes in me, John 12.46,
47.
should not abide in Darkness. And if any Man hear my Words and believe not, I
judge him not; for I came not to judge the World, but to save the World.

Q. From what Scripture then came these Men to wrest an Opinion so contrary to
Truth?

A. For the Children being not yet born, neither have done any Good or Evil,
Romans 9, 11, 12, 13.
that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand, it was said unto
her, The Elder shall serve the Younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated.

Q. I perceive, in that Scripture it was only said, before the Children were
born, The Elder shall serve the Younger; These other Words (Jacob have I loved,
Esau have I hated) are mentioned out of the Prophet Malachy, who wrote them
many hundred Years after both were Dead: Does not the Scripture mention any
other Cause of God's hating Esau, than merely his Decree? What says the same
Apostle elsewhere?

A. Lest there be any Fornication, or Profane Person, as Esau, Hebr. 12.16, 17.
who for one Morsel of Meat sold his Birthright; for ye know, how that
afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected.

Q. But seeing, that such allege, that it is because of Adam 's Sin, that
many, even Children are Damned: Does not the Scripture aver, that the Death of
Christ was as large to Heal, as Adam 's Sin could Condemn?

A. For if through the Offense of one many be Dead, Romans 5.15, 18.
much more the Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man, Jesus
Christ. Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
Men unto Justification of Life.

Q. That proves abundantly, that Christ's Death is of sufficient Extent to make
up any Hurt Adam 's Sin brought upon Mankind? What is then the cause of
Condemnation?

A. He that believes on him, is not Condemned; but he that believes not, is
Condemned already, 1 John 3 18.
because he has not believed in the Name of the Only Begotten Son of God.

And with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them that Perish, because
they received not the Love of the Truth, 2 Thessalonians 2 10 11, 12.
that they might be saved. And for this Cause God shall send them strong
Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might be damned, who
believe not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness.

Q. Seeing it is so of a Truth according to the Scriptures Testimony, that God
has purposed Love and Mercy to all, in the appearance of his Son Jesus Christ;
Is the Gospel or Glad Tidings of this Salvation brought nigh unto all, by which
they are put into a Capacity of receiving the Grace, and being saved by it.

A. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, Col. 1.23.
and be not moved away from the Hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and
which was preached to every Creature, which is under Heaven, whereof I Paul am
made a Minister.

Q. What is the Gospel?

A. I am not ashamed of the Gospel; for It is the Power of God unto Salvation,
Romans 1.16.
unto every one that believes.

Q. Is this Gospel hid?

2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
A. If our Gospel be hid, It is hid to them that are Lost, in whom the God of
this World has blinded the Minds of them, which believe not, lest the Light of
the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them.

Q. Is this Light then come into the World? And are not Men condemned, because
they love it not, and not because it is hid from them?

John 3.19.
A. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men
love Darkness rather than Light.

Q. Why do they so?

A. Because their Deeds are Evil.

Q. Is every Man enlightened by this Light?

John 1.8, 9.
A. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light, that was
the True Light, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World?

Q. Does this Light discover all things?

A. All things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for
whatsoever does make manifest, Ephesians. 5.13.
is Light.

Q. Do Evil Men preach up this Light, or mind it?

John 3 20.
A. Every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light,
lest his Deeds should be reproved.

Job 24.13.
They are of those that Rebel against the Light.

Q. Do good Men love it, and follow it?

John 3.21.
A. He that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God.

Q What Benefit does redound to such as love the Light, and walk in it?

1 John 1.7.
A. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin.

Q. Does Christ command to take heed to the Light?

A. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children
of the Light. John 12.36.


Q. Were the Apostles Commanded to turn People to the Light?

Acts 26.17, 18.
A. Delivering thee from the People, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee to open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness unto Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive Forgiveness of Sins,
and Inheritance among them which are sanctified, through Faith, that is in me.

Q. Does this Light abide with every man all his Life time, in order to save,
or only during the Day of his Visitation?

John 12.25.
A. Yet a little while is the Light with you; walk while ye have the Light,
lest Darkness come upon you.

Again, He limiteth a certain Day, saying in David, To day, after so long time,
Hebr. 4.7.
as it is said, To day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts.

Q. How can it be proved, that there is a Day, wherein People may know things
concerning their Peace, which afterward may be hid from them?

A. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, Luke 19.41, 42.
and wept over it, saying; If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy
Day the things which belong unto thy Peace; but now they are hid from thine
Eyes.

Q. Is there any further Scripture Proof of the Lord's willingness to gather a
People, who would not, and therefore were Condemned?

A. Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, Matthew. 23.37.
Luke 13.34.
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye
would not.

Then his Lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, Matthew. 18.32, 33,
34.
O thou wicked Servant! I forgave thee all the Debt, because thou desiredst me;
should not thou also have had Compassion on thy Fellow Servants, even as I had
Pity on thee? And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till
he should pay all that was due unto him.

Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary, Acts 13.46.
that the Word of God should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put
it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of Everlasting Life, lo, we turn to
the Gentiles.

Because I have called, and ye refused, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.
I have stretched out my Hand, and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught
all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I also will laugh at your
Calamity, Jer. 18.9, 10.
I will mock, when your Fear comes.

And at what Instance I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom to build and to plant it; If it do Evil in my Sight, that it obey not
my Voice, then will I Repent of the Good, wherewith I said, I would benefit
them.

Q. Does God's Spirit strive then for a season, and afterward forbear?

A. And the Lord said, Genesis 3.9.
My Spirit shall not always strive with man.

Q. May it then be resisted?

A. Ye Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye do always Resist
the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye. Acts 7.51.


For the Wrath of God is Revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of man, Romans 1.18.
who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.

Q. Has God manifested to Man, that which may be known of himself?

A. That which may be known of God, is manifest in them; Romans 1.19.
for God has showed it unto them.

Q. Is then this Light or Seed sown in the Hearts of Evil Men?

A. And he spoke many things to them in Parables: Behold, a Sower went forth to
sow, and when he sowed, Matthew. 13.3, 4, 5, 7.
some Seeds fell by the wayside, etc. some fell among stony places, etc. and
some fell among Thorns, etc.

Q. Are these places, where the Seed is said to have fallen, understood of the
Heart of Man?

A. Hear ye therefore the Parable of the Sower, when any one hears the Word
of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.18, 19.
and understands it not, then comes the Wicked One, and catches away that
which was sown in his Heart; this is he, which received the Seed by the
way-side, etc.

Q. Is this Seed small in its first Appearance?

A. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which a Man took
and sowed in his Field, Matthew. 13, 31, 32.
which indeed is the least of all Seeds.

Q. Forasmuch as many understand not this under the Notion and Appellation of
Light or Seed, it being quite another Dialect, than the common; though I must
needs confess, it is the very Language of the Scriptures; Is there a saving
Manifestation of the Spirit given unto all?

A. The Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. 1
Cor. 12.7.


Q. Sure, if it be to profit withal, it must be in order to save; for were it
not useful, nor yet sufficient to save, what Profit could it be of? But in
regard some speak of a Grace that is Common, and of a Grace that is Saving, is
there such a Grace Common unto all, as brings Salvation?

A. The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men. Tit.
2.11.


Q. That which brings Salvation, must needs be saving; What does that Grace
teach us?

A. Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live
Soberly, Tit. 2.12.
Righteously and Godly in this present World.

Q. Certainly, that which teaches both Righteousness and Godliness, must be
sufficient; for therein consists the whole Duty of Man: What says the
Apostle elsewhere of this Instructor?

A. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, Acts
20.32.
which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all those
that are Sanctified.

Q. What is the Word of God?

A. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper, than any Two-edged
Sword, Hebr. 4.12, 13.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints
and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart.
Neither is there any Creature, that is not Manifest in his Sight, but all
things are naked and open to the Eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

Q. Ought we not to take heed to this Word?

A. We have also a more Sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.
as unto a Light that shines in a Dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in your Hearts.

Q. I perceive the Scriptures are very clear both concerning the Universality
and Sufficiency of this Light, Seed, Grace and Word of God, but is this Word
nigh, or afar off? Inward or Outward?

A. Say not in thine Heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring
Christ down from above; Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
or who shall descend into the Deep, that is, to bring up Christ again from the
Dead? But what says it, The Word is nigh, in thy Mouth and in thy Heart; that
is the Word of Faith, which we preach.

Q. That is clear as to the Word; Is there any Scripture speaks of the Light's
being Inward?

A. God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7
to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of
the Power may be of God, and not of us.

Q. But seeing, it is also called the Seed of the Kingdom, is the Kingdom of
God also within?

A. The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation, neither shall they say, Lo
here, or Lo there; for behold, Luke 17.20, 21.
the Kingdom of God is within you.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Faith, Justification and Works.
Question. WHat is Faith?

Answer. Hebr. 11.1.
Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen.

Q. Is Faith of absolute necessity?

A. Without Faith it is Impossible to please him: for he that comes to God,
must believe, that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them, Hebr. 11.6.
that diligently seek him.

Q. Are we Justified by Faith?

A. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be Justified by Faith. Gal. 3.24.


Q. What is the Nature of this Faith, that avails to Justification?

A. For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision; but Faith, which works by Love. Gal. 5.6.


Q. Are Works then necessary to Justification, as well as Faith?

A. But will thou know, O Vain Man, that Faith without Works is Dead? Was not
Abraham our Father justified by Works, Jam. 2.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? See thou, how Faith
wrought with his Works, and by Works was Faith made perfect? And the Scripture
was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness: He was called the Friend of God. Ye see then, how that by Works
a Man is justified, and not by Faith only.

Q. If then both be equally required in Justification, what are these Works,
which the Apostle excludes so much?

Romans 3.20.
A. By the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be Justified in his sight.

Q. But though we be not Justified by the Deeds of the Law, is not this to
exclude Boastings, that the Grace of God may be exalted?

Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10.
A. For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith, and not of your selves, it is the
Gift of God; not of the Works, lest any Man should boast; for we are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works.

Q Are even the Works, which are performed by Grace, excluded? Are we never
said to be saved or justified by them?

Tit. 3 5, 6.7.
A. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his
Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior; that
being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs, according to the hope of
Eternal Life.

Q. I perceive then, that to be Justified by Grace, is to be Justified or Saved
by Regeneration, which cannot exclude the Works wrought by Grace, and by the
Spirit; How does the Apostle add in the next verse, for the maintaining this
against those that Cavil about the Law?

A. This is a Faithful Saying, and these things I will, that thou affirm
constantly, Tit. 3.8, 9.
that they, which believe in God, might be Careful to maintain good Works;
these things are good and profitable unto Men: But avoid foolish Questions, and
Genealogies, and Contentions, and Strivings about the Law, for they are
unprofitable and vain.

Q. Does the Apostle Paul, that is so much against Justification by the Works
of the Law, speak any where else of being justified by the Spirit?

A. But ye are Washed, but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.11.
and by the Spirit of our God.

Q. But since the Law gives not Power nor Ability to obey, and so falls short
of Justification; Is there no Power under the Gospel, by which the
Righteousness of the Law comes to be fulfilled inwardly?

A. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, Romans
8.3, 4.
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned
Sin in the Flesh; That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Q. Seeing then, there is Power in the Spirit, is not Works through it a
Condition, upon which Life is proposed under the New Covenant?

Romans 8.13.
A. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall Dye; but if ye through the Spirit
do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall Live.

Q. Do not the Apostles then frequently propose Life to People upon Condition
of Repentance and other Works?

Acts 3.19.
A. Repent ye therefore, and be Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out.

And if Children, then Heirs of God, and joint-Heirs with Christ, if so be,
Romans 8.17.
that we may suffer with him, that we also may be glorified together.

2 Timothy 2.11, 12, 21.
It is a faithful Saying; For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him: If we Suffer, we shall also Reign with him. If a Man therefore purge
himself from these, he shall be a Vessel unto Honor, sanctified and meet for
the Master's Use, and prepared unto every good Work

Remember therefore, from whence thou art fallen, Rev. 2.5.
and Repent, and do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou Repent.

Q. It appears clearly by these Passages, that the Apostle excludes only our
Righteousness, which he elsewhere explains, Reward of Works.
as being the Righteousness of the Law, from being necessary to Justification,
and not such Works, as the Law of the Spirit of Life leads to; and are not so
much ours, as Christ in us: are not such good Works Rewarded, though they
require no absolute Merit, as being the Fruits of free Grace, yet does not God
judge according to them, and may they not be said to have a Reward?

A. But if a Man be just, and do that which is lawful and right, Ezekiel. 18.5, 6,
7, 8, 9.
and has not eaten upon the Mountains, neither has lift up his Eyes to the
Idols of the House of Israel, neither has defiled his Neighbor's Wife, neither
has come near to a Menstruous Woman, and has not oppressed any; but has
restored to the Debtor his Pledge, has spoiled none by Violence, has given
his Bread to the Hungry, and has covered the Naked with a Garment; he that
has not given forth upon Usury, neither has taken any Increase, that has
withdrawn his Hand from Iniquity, has executed true Judgment between Man and
Man, has walked in my Statutes, and has kept my Judgments to deal Truth, he
is Just, he shall surely Live, says the Lord God.

For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels,
Matthew. 16.27.
and then he shall Reward every Man according to his Works.

Then Peter opened his Mouth, and said, Of a Truth I perceive, that God is no
Respecter of Persons; Acts 10.34, 35.
but in every Nation he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted with him.

The Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.6, 7, 10
who will render to every Man according to his Deeds; To them, who by Patient
Continuance in well-doing seek for Glory and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal
Life: But Glory, Honor and Peace to every Man that works Good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile.

For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad.

Which is a manifest Token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
for which ye also suffer.

But who so looks into the Perfect Law of Liberty, James 1.25.
and continues therein, being not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of the Work,
this Man shall be blessed in his Deed.

Hebr. 10.35.
Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense of Reward.

1 Pet. 1.17.
And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of Persons judges according
to every Man's Work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear.

Rev. 22.12, 14
And behold, I come quickly, and behold my Reward is with me, to give every Man
according as his Works shall be. Blessed are they, that do his Commandments,
that they may have a Right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the
Gates into the City.

Christ saves from Sin.
Q. It should seem, that the Purpose of God, in sending his Son the Lord Jesus
Christ, was not simply to save Man by an Imputative Righteousness altogether
without them; but also by the washing of Regeneration, or an inward
Righteousness; What says the Scripture further of this?

Matthew. 1.21.
A. And thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their
Sins.

Tit. 2.13, 14.
Looking for that blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the Great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from
all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good Works.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Perfection, or Freedom from SIN.
Question. I Perceive then by all these Scriptures aforementioned, that
Christ, as well as he has purchased Pardon for our Sins, has also obtained
Power, by which we may even here be cleansed from the Filth of them; may we
expect then in this Life to be freed from the Dominion of Sin?

Romans 6.14.
A. For Sin shall not have Dominion over you.

Q. For what Reason?

Romans 6.14.
A. For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Q. How comes the Apostle then to cry out and complain of Sin, saying, Who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? Does he speak that as a Condition
always permanent to him and other Saints, or only that which he had passed
through? What says he afterward?

A. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 5, 36, 37, 38, 39.
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. Who
shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, or Sword? (as it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the
Day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter.) Nay, in all these
things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am
persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Q. What says that Apostle then unto such, who taking Occasion from his words,
should plead for Continuance in Sin for Term of Life, and think to be saved by
the Imputative Righteousness of Christ, as being under Grace?

A. What shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin, Romans 6.1, 2.
that Grace may abound? God forbid.

What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace?
God forbid.

Q. Is not the Apostle then so far from supposing that Condition, of being
always under Sin, to be his own Constant Condition, Freedom from Sin.
or that of all the Saints, that he even supposes many of the then Church of
Rome, to whom he wrote, to be free of it; How bespeaketh he then as in relation
to this matter?

A. How shall we, that are Dead to Sin, Romans 6.2, -- 7, 11, 12, 13, 16, -- 23.
live any longer therein? Know ye not, that so many of us, as were baptized
into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we are Buried with
him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by
the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of Life: For if
we have been planted together in the Likeness of his Death, we shall be also in
the Likeness of his Resurrection; knowing this, that our Old Man is crucified
with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve Sin; for he that is dead, is free from Sin. Likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead indeed unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Let not Sin therefore reign in your mortal Body, that ye should obey
it in the Lusts thereof: Neither yield ye your Members as Instruments of
Unrighteousness unto Sin; but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are
alive from the Dead, and your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God.
Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his servants
ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto
Righteousness? But God be thanked, that ye were the Servants of Sin; but ye
have Obeyed from the Heart that form of Doctrine, which was delivered unto you.
Being then made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness: I speak
after the manner of Men, because of the Infirmity of your Flesh: for as ye have
yielded your Members Servants to Uncleanness and to Iniquity; even so now yield
your Members Servants to Righteousness, unto Holiness. For when ye were the
Servants of Sin, ye were free from Righteousness; What Fruit had ye then in
those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the End of those things is Death.
But now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your
Fruit unto Holiness, and the End, Everlasting Life: For the Wages of Sin is
Death; but the Gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Q It would appear then, that God requires of us to be Perfect?

A. Be ye therefore Perfect, even as your Father, which is in Heaven, Matt.
5.48.
is Perfect.

Q. Is it then possible to keep the Commandments.

A. My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light. For this is the Law of God, Matt.
11.30.
that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. 1 John
5.3.


Q. Is it necessary then for Salvation, to keep the Commandments?

A. Blessed are they, that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the
Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14.
and may enter in through the Gates into the City.

Q. Do you understand by this Perfection, that any have so kept the
Commandments, as never to have sinned?

1 John 1.10.
A. If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not
in us.

Q Do you understand, that those who are Perfect, may say, they have no Sin; or
only that having sinned, and so having Sin, in respect they once sinned, as the
Apostle in the Passage cited mentions? May they notwithstanding thereof come to
know Forgiveness for the Guilt, but also Cleansing from the Filth?

A. If we say, we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in
us: 1 John 1.8.
If we confess our Sins, he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness.

Q. This Scripture seems to be very plain being compared with the other before
mentioned: But because some are apt to mistake, and wrest the Words of that
Apostle, What says he elsewhere? Did he judge, any could know God, or be True
Christians, who kept not the Commandments?

A. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye Sin not; 1 John
2.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 3.2, -- 10.
and if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous: And hereby do we know, that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
Liar, and the Truth is not in him: But who so keeps his Word, in him verily
is the Love of God perfected. Hereby know we, that we are in him. He that
says, he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even as he walked.
Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear, what we shall
be; but we know, that when we shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him, as he is: And every Man, that has this Hope in him; purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. Whosoever commits Sin, transgresses also the
Law; for Sin is the Transgression of the Law. And ye know, that he was
manifested to take away our Sins, and in him is no Sin: Whosoever abides in
him, sins not: Whosoever sins, has not seen him neither known him.
Little Children, let no Man deceive you; he that does Righteousness, is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil,
for the Devil sins from the beginning: For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. Whosoever is born of
God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot Sin,
because he is born of God. In this the Children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither
he, that loves not his Brother.

Q. It is very plain by these Passages, that the Apostles were far of another
Mind, then those that plead for Sin during term of Life; and much against the
Deceit of those, who will esteem themselves Good Christians, while they live in
their Sins?

A. Not every one, that says unto me, Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7.21, 24.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my
Father, which is in Heaven. Therefore whosoever hears these things of mine,
and does them, I will liken him unto a Wise Man, which built his House upon a
Rock. If ye know these things, happy are ye, John 13 17.
if ye do them.

Q. What says the Apostle Paul further, concerning the needfulness of this
thing?

A. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing; 1 Cor. 7.19.
but the keeping of the Commandments of God.

Q. Was not this according to the Apostle Paul 's Judgment, the very Intention
of Christ, to have his Church and Children to be Pure and without Spot?

A. According as he has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World,
Ephesians. 1.4.
that we should be Holy and without Blame before him in Love. Even as Christ
also loved the Church, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
and gave himself for it, that he might Sanctify and Cleanse it, that he might
present it to himself a Glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any
such thing; but that it should be Holy and without Blemish.

Q. Does not Paul press the same thing further, besides the other Passages
abovementioned?

A. Having therefore these Promises, Dearly Beloved, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Let us Cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. Finally, Brethren farewell, 2 Cor.
13.11. Col. 1.28.
be Perfect. Christ in you the Hope of Glory, whom we Preach, warning every
Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may present every Man
Perfect in Christ Jesus. Gal. 2.12.
Laboring fervently for you in Prayers, that ye may stand Perfect and Complete
in all the Will of God. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13.
To the end he may establish your Hearts Unblameable in Holiness before God.
And the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God, your whole
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and Soul, and Body be presented Blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Q. Is not this then the very End, for which God appointed Teachers in his
Church?

A. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the Perfecting of the
Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ,
till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a Perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Statute of the Fullness of
Christ.

Q. Seeing this is so much pressed by the Holy Men, does not the Scripture,
which cannot lie, give none of the Saints this Testimony, as being free from
Sin at sometimes, and so not always and daily sinning, as is supposed?

Genesis 6.9.
A. Noah was a Just Man, and perfect in his Generations; and Noah walked with
God. And the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou considered my Servant Job, Job 1.8.
that there is none like him in the Earth, a Perfect and an Upright Man, one
that fears God, and escheweth Evil. There was in the days of Herod King of
Judea, a certain Priest named Zacharias, of the Course of Abia; and his Wife
was of the Daughters of Aaron, Luke 1.1, 2.
and her Name was Elizabeth; and they were both Righteous before God, walking
in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord Blameless.

Q. That proves sufficiently as to particular Persons; but what does the
Scripture intimate of this Nature, even of Considerable Numbers?

Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6.
A. But God, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he has loved
us, even when we were dead in Sin, has quickened us together with Christ, and
has raised us up together, and made us sit together* in Heavenly Places in
Christ Jesus. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the Living
God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, Hebr. 12.22, 23.
and to an Innumerable Company of Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of
the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; to God, the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of Just Men made perfect. And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on
Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1, 4.
and with him an Hundred Forty and Four Thousand, having his Fathers Name
written in their Forehead: These are they, which were not defiled with Women;
for they are Virgins: These are they, which follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes: These are Redeemed from among Men, being their first Fruits unto God,
and to the Lamb. And in their Mouth was found no Guile, for they are without
Fault before the Throne of God.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Perseverance and Falling from GRACE.
Question. IS it enough for a Believer, to be sure, that he has once received
true Grace? or is there any further Certainty requisite?

2 Pet. 1.10.
Answer. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give Diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

Q. May one that has received true Grace, have Ground to fear, or suppose he
can fall?

A. 1 Cor. 9.27.
But I keep under my Body, and bring it into Subjection, least that by any
means, when I have Preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway.

Q. That greatly contradicts the Doctrine of such as say, Once in Grace, ever
in Grace; but does the Apostle Paul express this only out of an Humble Esteem
of himself? or does he judge or suppose the like of other Saints?

A. Take heed, Brethren, Hebr. 4.12, 13.
lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the
Living God; but exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, least any
of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Hebr. 4.11.
Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest, lest any Man fall after the
same Example of Unbelief. For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6.
and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy
Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to
come, If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance; seeing they
Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open Shame.
Looking diligently, lest any Man fail of the Grace of God, Hebr. 12.15.
lest any Root of Bitterness springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled.

Q Does he speak this only by Supposition; or does he assert it not only
possible, but certain?

A. For the time will come, 2 Timothy 4* 3, 4.
when they will not endure sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts shall they
heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, and they shall turn away
their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables.

Q. Does the Apostle even judge it necessary to guard such a one, as his
beloved Son Timothy against this Hazard?

A. This Charge I commit unto thee, Son Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19.
according to the Prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them
might war the good Warfare, Holding Faith in a good Conscience, which some
having put away, concerning Faith have made Shipwreck. For the Love of Money is
the Root of all Evil, 2 Timothy 4.10.
which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced
themselves through with many Sorrows. 2 Timothy 17.17, 18.
And their Word will eat, as does a Canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus,
who concerning the true Faith have erred; saying, That the Resurrection is past
already, and overthrown the Faith of some.

Q. Does the Apostle any where express his Fears of this, as a thing that may
happen to any number of People, who once truly received the Faith of Christ?

A. Well, because of Unbelief they were broken off; Romans 11.20.
and thou stand by Faith, be not High-minded, but fear. Now, the Spirit
speaks expressly, 1 Timothy 4.1.
that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, etc. For this
Cause, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your Faith, lest by some means
the Tempter have Tempted you, and our Labor be in vain.

Q. What is the Apostle Peter's Mind; does he judge, that such as have known
the right Way, may forsake it?

A. 2 Pet. 2.14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22.
Cursed Children, which have forsaken the Righteous Way, and are gone astray,
following the Way of Balaam the Son of Bezor, who loved the Ways of
Unrighteousness; but was rebuked for his Iniquity: the dumb Ass speaking with
Man's Voice, forbad the Madness of the Prophet. These are Wells without Water,
Clouds that are carried with a Tempest, to whom the Mist of Darkness is
reserved for ever. For when they speak great swelling Words of Vanity, they
allure through the Lust of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them, who live in Error: For if after they have escaped the
Pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again Entangled therein and Overcome, the latter End is worse
with them, than the Beginning: for it had been better for them, not to have
known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
Holy Commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened to them according to
the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his Vomit, and the Sow that was washed,
to her wallowing in the Mire.

Q. Gives he any Cautions to them that stand, as supposing they may also fall?

2 Pet. 3.17.
A. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware, lest ye
also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
Stedfastness.

Q. May a Man be truly a Branch in Christ, or a real Member of his Body, and
afterward be Cut off?

John 15.6.
A. If any Man abide not in me, he is Cast forth, as a Branch, and is Withered.

Q May a Righteous Man then depart from his Righteousness?

Ez^k. 18.26. and 33.13.
A. But when the Righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, and commits
Iniquity, and dies in them, for his Iniquity, that he has done, shall he die.

Q. May a Believer come to such a Condition in this Life, from which he cannot
fall away?

Rev. 3.12.
A. Him that Overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the Name of my God, which is
New Jerusalem, who comes down out of Heaven from my God; and will write upon
him my New Name.

Q. May such an one come to be assured, that he is in this Condition?

Romans 8.38, 39.
A. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Church and Ministry.
Question. WHat is the Church?

Answer. But if I tarry long, 1 Timothy 3 15.
that thou may know, how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of
God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

Q. Who is the Head of the Church?

A. Who has delivered us from the Power of Darkness, Col. 113. and 2.19.
and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; and he is the Head of
the Body, the Church, from which all the Body by Joints and Bands having
Nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the Increase of God.

Q. What kind of Persons make the Church?

A. Them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.2. Acts 2.47.
And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved?

Q. Has not Christ appointed any Officers in the Church for the Work of the
Ministry?

A. Wherefore he says, when he Ascended up on High, Ephesians. 4.8, 11.12.
he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto Men; and he gave some Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
Edification of the Body of Christ.

Q. What kind of Men should such as are Teachers and Overseers of the Church,
be?

A. A Bishop then must be Blameless, the Husband of one Wife, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7.
Vigilant, Sober, of good Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to Teach, not
given to Wine, no Striker, not greedy of filthy Lucre; but Patient, not a
Brawler, not Covetous, one that rules well his own House, having his Children
in Subjection with all Gravity (for if a Man know not, how to rule his own
House, how shall he take Care of the Church of God) not a Novice, lest being
lifted up with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. Moreover, he
must have a good Report of them which are without, lest he fall into Reproach,
and the Snare of the Devil.

For a Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God, Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.
not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to Wine, no Striker, not given to
filthy Lucre, but a lover of Hospitality, a lover of good Men, sober, just,
holy, temperate, holding fast the Faithful Word, as he has been taught, that
he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the
Gainsayers.

Q. What is incumbent upon such to do?

A. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the Flock, Acts 20.28.
over which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God.

1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.
The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a Witness
of the Sufferings of Christ, and also a Partaker of the Glory, that shall be
revealed; Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the Oversight
thereof not by Constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready
Mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the
Flock.

Q. Though they be not to Lord it over the Flock, yet is there not a Respect
due to them in their Place?

1 Timothy 5.17.
A. Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially they, who Labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Q. Albeit then among true Christians every one that believes, is to have the
Witness in himself, being persuaded in himself by the Spirit; yet is there not
also a real Subjection to be to one another in the Lord?

1 Cor. 14.32.
A. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, Hebr. 13.17.
as they that must give Account, that they may do it with Joy, and not with
Grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in Love, for
their Works sake.

1 Pet. 5 5.
Likewise, ye Younger, submit your selves unto the Elder; yea, all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with Humility; for God resists the
Proud, and gives Grace unto the Humble.

Q. How ought true Teachers to minister in the Church?

A. As every man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to
another, 2 Pet. 4.10, 11.
as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any speak, let him speak as
the Oracles of God: If any Man minister, let him do it, as of the ability,
which God gives; that God in all Things may be glorified, through Jesus Christ.

Q. I perceive then, that every true Minister of the Church of Christ is to
Minister of the Gift and Grace of God, which he has received: But some are of
the Judgment, that natural Wisdom or Parts, and Human Learning are the
Qualification, Human Learning.
which are of absolute Necessity for a Minister; but Grace they judge not to be
so absolutely necessary, but that one may be Minister without it: what says
the Scripture in this Case.

A. A Bishop must be sober, just, holy, temperate.

Tit. 1.6, 8.
Q. Methinks, it is impossible for a Man to be blameless, just, holy, sober, and
temperate without the Grace of God: So that if these Qualifications be
absolutely necessary, then surely, that without which a Man cannot be so
qualified, must be necessary also: But what says the Scripture, as to the
Necessity of Natural Wisdom and Human Learning?

A. Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this
World? 1 Cor. 1.20, 21
has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World? For after that in the
Wisdom of God the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God, by the
Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.

Q. It seems then, the Preachings of the true Ministers are not gathered
together by Wisdom and Learning: It has been supposed, that a Man must be
greatly skilled in Learning to make a good Sermon; what is the Apostle's
Judgment in the Case?

A. For Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel; 1 Cor. 1.17.
not with Wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none
Effect.

And I was with you in Weakness, and in Fear, 1 Cor. 2 3, 4, 5
and in much Trembling, and my Speech and my Preaching was not with Enticing
Words of Man's Wisdom; but in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, that
your Faith should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God.

Q. I perceive, the Apostle lays far more stress upon the Demonstration and
Power of the Spirit in a Preacher, than upon human Literature? ought Ministers
then to preach, as the Spirit teaches them?

A. Also we speak not in the Words, which Man's Wisdom teaches; 2 Cor. 2.13.
but which the Holy Ghost teaches.

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak, Acts 2.4.
as the Spirit gave them Utterance.

Q. Is it Christ then, that speaks in and through his Ministers?

A. For it is not ye, that speak, but the Spirit of your Father, Matthew. 10.20.
which speaks in you.

For it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost. Mark 13.11.


For the Holy Ghost shall Teach you in the same Hour, Luke 12.12.
what ye ought to say.

Since ye seek a Proof of Christ speaking in me, 2 Cor. 13.3.
which to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in you.

Q. What is the Apostle's Mind of that human Learning, which some cry up so
much, and think so needful in a Minister?

A. Beware, Col. 2.8.
lest any Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition
of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ.

O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, 1 Timothy 6.20.
avoiding profane and vain Babbling, and Oppositions of Science, falsely so
caled.

Q. Though true Ministers speak not by the natural Wisdom of Men; yet is their
Testimony altogether void of Wisdom?

A. Howbeit, we speak Wisdom among them that are perfect; 1 Cor. 2.6, 7.
yet not the Wisdom of this World, nor of the Prince of this World, that came
to naught; but we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom,
which God ordained before the World, to our Glory.

Q. What is the Reason, that Man by his natural Wisdom is not capable to
Minister in the Things of God?

A. For what Man knows the Things of a Man, 1 Cor. 2.11, 14
save the Spirit of a Man, which is in him? even so the Things of God knows
no Man, but the Spirit of God: But the natural Man received not the Things of
the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.

Q. These Scriptures do sufficiently hold forth, that the true Call to the
Ministry is from God; that which makes a Minister, is the Gift and Grace of
God; that the true and effectual Preaching of a faithful Minister is such,
Maintenance.
as is from the inward Teaching and Leading of the Spirit of God: But what say
the Scriptures touching the Maintenance of Ministers?

Gal. 6.6.
A. Let him that is taught in the Word, Communicate unto him that teaches, in
all good Things.

1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14.
If we have sown unto you Spiritual Things, is it a great matter, if we shall
reap Carnal Things? If others be Partakers of this Power over you, are not we
rather: Nevertheless, we have not used this Power, but suffer all Things, lest
we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do ye not know, that they which minister
about holy Things, live of the Things of the Temple: and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel, shall live of the Gospel. For the Scripture says, 1 Timothy 5.18.
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox, that treads out the Corn; and the Labourer is
worthy of his Reward.

Q. I perceive by these Scriptures, that there lies an Obligation upon the
Saints, to help with Outward Things such, as truly Minister unto them
Spiritual; but this seems to be Voluntary. Ought not therefore true Ministers
to preach, whether they be sure of this, or not? What says the Apostle of
himself in this Case? and what advises he others?

1 Cor 9.15, 16, 17, 18.
A. But I have used none of These Things; neither have I written those things,
that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for me to die, than that
any Man should make my Glorying void. For though I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to Glory of; for Necessity is laid upon me, yea, Woe is unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel. For if I do this Thing willingly, I have a Reward; but
if against my Will a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me, what is
my Reward then? Verily, that when I Preach the Gospel, I make the Gospel of
Christ without Charge, that I abuse not my Power in the Gospel.

Acts 20.33, 34, 35.
I have Coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; yea, your selves know,
that these Hands have ministered unto my Necessities, and to them that were with
me. I have showed you all things, how that so Laboring, ye ought to support
the weak; and to remember the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more
blessed to give, than to receive.

Q. It Is observable, that the Apostle every where makes special mention among
the Qualifications of Teachers, that they be not given to Filthy Lucre; What
ought we then to think of these Teachers, as will not preach without Hire? yea,
that will by Violence take from those, who receive no Spirituals from them? Are
they like to be the Ministers of Christ; or what else says the Scripture of
such?

Isa. 56.11.
A. Yea, they are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough; and they are
Shepherds, that cannot understand: they all look to their own Way, every one
for his Gain from his Quarter.

Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 8.
Son of Man, Prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel, Prophecy, and say unto
them; Shepherds, Woe to the Shepherds of Israel, that do feed themselves: Should
not the Shepherds feed the Flook? Ye eat the Fat, and ye cloth you with the
Woll, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flock. As I live, says
the Lord God, surely, because my Flock became a Prey, and my Flock became Meat
to every Beast of the Field, because there was no Shepherd; neither did my
Shepherds search for my Flock; but The Shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my
Flock --

Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets, that make my People Err, that
bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace; Mich. 3 5, 11.
and he that puts not into their Mouths, they even prepare War against him: The
Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the Priests thereof teach for Hire, and the
Prophets thereof Divine for Money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say,
Is not the Lord amongst us? None evil can come upon us.

Q. These are plain Testimonies from the Prophets; Are there none such from the
Apostles?

A. Perverse Disputings of Men of Corrupt Minds, and destitute of the Truth,
supposing, that Gain is Godliness; 1 Timothy 6.5, 6 -- 7, 8, 9, 10.
from such withdraw thy self: But Godliness with Contentment is great Gain. For
we brought nothing into the World, and it is certain, we can carry nothing out;
and having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content. But they that will be
Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drown men in Destruction and Perdition. For the Love of Money is
the Root of all Evil, which while some Coveted after, they have erred from the
Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. For Men shall be
Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, 2 Timothy 2.3.
Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy.

For there are many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers, Tit. 1.10, 11.
especially they of the Circumcision, whose Mouths must be stopped; who subvert
whole Houses, teaching things which they ought not, for Filthy Lucre's sake.

But there were false Prophets also among the People, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3, 14, 15.
even as there shall be False Teachers among you, who privately shall bring in
Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift Destruction: And many shall follow their Pernicious Ways, by
reason of whom the Way of Truth shall be Evil spoken of. And through
Covetousness shall they, with feigned Words, make Merchandise of you; whose
Judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their Damnation slumbereth not:
Having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling
unstable Souls; an Heart they have exercised with Covetous practices. Cursed
Children, which have forsaken the Right Way, and are gone astray, following the
way of Balaam, the Son of Bozor, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness.

Woe unto them! For they have gone in the Way of Cain, and run greedily after
the Error of Balaam for Reward, Jude 11, 16.
and perished in the Gainsaying of Corah: These are Murmurers, Complainers,
walking after their own Lust; and their Mouth speaks great, Swelling Words,
having Men's Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage.

Q Ought there to be any Order in the Church of God?

A. Let all things be done decently, and in Order.

1 Cor. 14.40.
Q What good Order is prescribed in the Church concerning Preachers? Is it fit,
that only one or two speak, or many more, if moved thereto?

1 Cor. 14.30, 31, 32, 33.
A. If any thing be Revealed to another, that sits by, let the first hold
his Peace; For ye may all prophecy, one by one, that all may learn, and that
all may be comforted. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets: for God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the
Churches of the Saints.

Q. Is there any Promise, that Daughters as well as Sons shall Prophecy under
the Gospel?

Joel 2.28.
A. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy; your old Men
shall dream Dreams, your young Men shall see Visions.

Q. Is that Promise fulfilled, and to be fulfilled?

Acts ^^* 17.
A. But this is that, which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, and it shall come
to pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh,
and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy; and your Young men shall see
Visions, and your Old Men shall dream Dreams.

Q. Is there any such Instance of Old in the Scripture.

Acts 21.9.
A. And the same Man had four Daughters, Virgins, which did prophecy.

Q. But may All Women speak? or are any commanded to keep Silence in the Church?

1 Cor. 14.34, 35.
A. Let your Women keep Silence in the Church; for it is not permitted unto
them to speak: but they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says the
Law. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at Home; for
it is a Shame for Women to speak in the Church.

1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
Let the Woman learn in Silence with all Subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to
teach, or usurp Authority over the Man; but to be in Silence.

Q. The first of these seems only to relate to Women that have Husbands; What
comes of them that have none? The second speaks nothing of the Church, but only
that she ought not to usurp Authority over the Man; has this no Limitation?
Does not the same Apostle give Directions, how Women that speak, should behave
themselves in the Church?

1 Cor. 11.4, 5.
A. Every man Praying or Prophesying, having his Head covered, dishonors his
Head: But every Woman that Prays or Prophesies with her Head uncovered,
dishonors her Head; for that is even all one, as if she were shaven.

CHAP. X. Concerning Worship.
Question. WHat is the Worship that is Acceptable to God?

Answer. But the Hour comes, and now is, John 4.23, 24.
when the True Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for
the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

Q. Seeing Prayer is a part of Worship; when ought we to Pray?

A. And he spoke a Parable unto them to this End, Luke 18.1.
That men ought Always to Pray, and not to faint.

Pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5.17.


Q. Has God no respect to the Manner of Calling upon him?

For there is no Difference between the Jew and the Greek; Romans 10.12.
for the same Lord over all is Rich unto all, that call upon him.

Q. Does God hear the Prayers of all, that call upon him?

A. The Lord is nigh unto all them, that call upon him, Psalm. 145.18.
to all that call upon him in Truth.

The Lord is far from the Wicked; Prove. 15.29.
but he hears the Prayer of the Righteous.

Now we know, that God hears not Sinners; John 9.38.
but if any man be a Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. And
this is the Confidence, that we have in him, 1 John 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his Will, he hears us.

Q After what Mannner does the Apostle then declare he will Pray?

A. What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the
Understanding also; I will sing with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and I will sing with the Understanding also.

Q. Must we then pray always in the Spirit?

A. Praying always, Ephesians. 6.18.
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and Watching thereunto with
all Preseverance and Supplication for all Saints.

Q. Since we are commanded to pray always in it, can we do it of our selves,
without the Help thereof?

A. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities; for we know not, what we
should pray for, as we ought; Romans 8.26, 27.
but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with Groanings, which cannot
be uttered. And he that searches the Hearts, knows, what is the Mind of the
Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the Saints according to the Will of
God.

Q. I perceive, that without the Leadings and Help of the Spirit, prayers are
altogether unprofitable; may not a man truly utter these things, that are
Spiritual, without the Spirit's Assistance?

A. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of
God, calls Jesus Accursed; and that no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost.

1 Cor. 18.3.
Q. That is strange: It seems, the Spirit is much more necessary, than many
called Christians suppose it to be; some of which can scarce give a good
Account, whether they have it, or want it: But if a man speak things true upon
the Matter, are they not true as from him, if spoken without the Spirit.

Jer. 5.2.
A. And though they say, The Lord lives, surely, they swear falsely.

Q. It is apparent from all these Scriptures, that the True Worship of God is
in Spirit; and as it is not limited to a certain place, neither to any certain
time, what shall we think of them, that plead for the Observation of certain
Days?

A. But now, after that ye have known God, or rather, are known of God, Gal. 4
9, 10, 11.
how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again
to be in Bondage? Ye observe Days and Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid
of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain.

Col. 2.16, 17.
Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or Drink, or in respect of an Holy Day,
or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Day, which are a Shadow of things to
come; but the Body is of Christ.

Q. Seeing it is so, may not some Christians as lawfully esteem all Days alike,
as others may esteem some Days above another? What Rule gives the Apostle in
this Case?

A. One man esteems one Day above another, another esteems every Day alike;
Romans 14.5, 6.
let every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind: He that regards a Day,
regards it unto the Lord: and he that regards not the Day to the Lord, he
does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the Lord; for he gives God
thanks: and he that eats not to the Lord, he eats not, and gives God
Thanks.

Q. But is it not convenient and necessary, that there be a Day set a part to
Meet and Worship God in? Did not the Apostles and Primitive Christians use to
meet upon the First Day of the Week, to make their Collections, and to Worship?

A. Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given Order to the
Churches of Galatia, 1 Cor. 16.1.
even so do ye upon the First Day of the Week; Let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God has prosper'd him, that there be no Gatherings, when I come.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Baptism, and Bread and Wine.
Question. HOw many BAPTISMS are there?

Answer. One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.

Q. What is this Baptism?

A. The like Figure, whereunto even Baptism does now save us: Ephesians. 4.5.
not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh; but The Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21, 22.
who is gone into Heaven, and is on the Right Hand of God; Angels, and
Authorities and Powers being made subject unto him.

Q. What says John the Baptist of Christ's Baptism? how distinguishes he it
from his?

A. I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after
me, is Mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, Matthew. 3.11.
he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.

Q. Does not Christ so distinguish it also?

A. And being assembled together with them, commanded them, that they should
not depart from Jerusalem; Acts 1.4, 5.
but wait for the promise of the Father, which, says he, ye have heard of me:
For John truly baptized with Water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence.

Q. Does not the Apostle Peter observe this?

A. And as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, Acts 11.15, 16.
as on us at the Beginning; Then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that he
said, John indeed Baptized with Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy
Ghost.

Q. Then it seems, John's Baptism must pass away, John's Baptism.
that Christ's may take place; because John must decrease, that Christ may
increase?

A. He must increase, but I must decrease. John 30.30.


Q. I perceive then, many may be sprinkled with, and dipped and baptized in
Water, Christ's Baptism.
and yet not truly baptized with the Baptism of Christ? What are the real
Effects in such, as are truly baptized with the Baptism of Christ?

A. Know ye not, that so many of us, Romans 6.3, 4.
as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we
are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up
from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
Newness of Life.

For as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, Gal. 2.27.
have put on Christ.

Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him, Col. 2.12.
through the Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised him from the Dead.

Q. I perceive, there was a Baptism of Water, which was John's Baptism, and is
therefore by John himself contra-distinguished from Christ's; was there not
likewise something of the like nature appointed by Christ to his Disciples,
Bread and Wine --
of eating Bread, and drinking Wine in Remembrance of him?

1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
A. For I have received of the Lord that which also I have delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus the same Night, in which he was betrayed, took Bread, and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body,
which is broken for you; this do in Remembrance of me. After the same manner
also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament
in my Blood; This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me.

discontinued.
Q. How long was this to continue?

1 Cor. 11 26.
A. For, as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lord's Death, till he come.

Christ's coming. -- John 14.18, 23.
Q Did Christ promise to come again to his Disciples?

A. I will not leave you Comfortless; I will come to you. Jesus answered, and
said unto him; If a man love me, he will keep my Words; and my Father will love
him, and We will come unto him, and make our Abode with him.

-- Inward.
Q. Was this an Inward Coming?

John 14.20.
A. At that Day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in
you.

Q. But it would seem, this was even practiced by the Church of Corinth, after
Christ was come inwardly; was it so, that there were certain Appointments
positively commanded, yea, and Zealously and Conscientiously practiced by the
Saints of Old, As Certain Appointments not perpetual --
which were not of perpetual Continuance, nor yet now needful to be practiced
in the Church?

John 13.14, 15.
A. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash
one another's Feet: For I have given you an Example, that ye should do, as I
have done to you.

Acts 15.28, 91.
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater
Burden, than these necessary things. That ye abstain from Meats offered to
Idols, and from Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication; from
which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well: Fare-wel.

Jam. 5.14.
Is any man sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, Anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord.

Q. These Commands are no less positive, than the other, yea, some of them are
asserted, as the very Sense of the Holy Ghost, as no less necessary, -- so
Bread and Wine.
than abstaining from Fornication; and yet the generality of Protestants have
laid them aside, as not of perpetual Continuance: But what other Scriptures are
there to show, that it is not Necessary, that of Bread, and Wine to Continue?

Romans 14.17.
A. For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink; but Righteousness, and Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an Holy
Day, Col. 2.16, 20, 21, 22.
or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath Days: Wherefore if ye be dead with
Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are
ye subject to Ordinances (touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to
perish with the Using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of Man?

Q. These Scriptures are very plain, The Spiritual Bread.
and say as much for the Abolishing of this, as to any Necessity, as ought can
be alleged for the former: But what is the Bread then, wherewith the Saints
are to be nourished?

A. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you
not that Bread from Heaven; but my Father gives you the True Bread from
Heaven, for the Bread of God is he, which comes down from Heaven, and gives
Life unto the World. Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this
Bread? And Jesus said unto them, I am the Bread of Life; he that comes to me,
shall never Hunger; and he that believes on me, shall never Thirst. I am that
Bread of Life: Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are Dead: This
is the Bread, which comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and
not die. I am the Living Bread, which came down from Heaven; If any man eat of
this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the Bread that I will give him, is my
Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World. Joh. 6.32, 33, 34, 35, 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58.
The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves, saying, How can this man give us
his Flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life
in you: Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I
will raise him up at the last Day; For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is
Drink indeed. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. As the Living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so
he that eats me, even he shall live by me. This is that Bread, which came
down from Heaven; not as your Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead: He that
eats of this Bread, shall live for ever.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the Life of a Christian in general, what and how it
ought to be in this World.
Question. WHat is the True RELIGION? Religion.


Answer. Pure Religion and Undefiled is this, To visit the Fatherless and the
Widow in their Affliction, James 1.2^.
and to keep himself unspotted from the World.

Q. What is required of man?

A. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; Mich. 6.8.
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God?

Isa. 66.2.
But to this man will I look, even to him that is pure, and of a contrite
Spirit, and trembles at my Word.

Q. Does God then require People to be Quakers, to tremble at his Word?
Trembling.
was there any such among the Saints of old?

A. Then were assembled unto every one, that Trembled at the Words of the God
of Israel. Ezra 9.4.
Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, 10.3.
to put away all the Wives, and such as are born of them, according to the
Counsel of my Lord; and of those, that Tremble at the Commandment of our God.

Q. It seems, Ezra loved well, and had a high Esteem of Quakers, since he would
have their Counsel followed: Quakers of old.
Do any other of the Prophets point out Quakers or Tremblers, as God's People?

A. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that Tremble at his Word: Your Brethren, Isa.
66.5.
that hated you, that cast you out for my Name's sake, said, Let the Lord be
glorified; but he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be ashamed.

And it shall be to me a Name of Joy, a Praise and an Honor before all the
Nations of the Earth, Jer. 33.9.
which shall hear all the good that I do unto them, and they shall Fear and
Tremble for all the Goodness, and for all the Prosperity, that I procure unto
it.

Q. The Prophets promise good Things there to Quakers; what becomes of those,
that Tremble not, and are not such?

Jer. 5.21, 22.
A. Hear now this, O foolish People, and without Understanding, which have
Eyes, and see not, which have Ears, and Hear not; fear ye not me, says the
Lord? will ye not Tremble at my Presence? etc.

Q. God's Children.
Q. Are then all God's Children Quakers? and are we commanded to quake or
tremble in order to our Salvation, both under the Law, and now under the Gospel?

A. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. I make a Decree,
Psalm. 2.11.
that in every Dominion of my Kingdom Men Fear and Tremble before the God of
Daniel; Dan. 6.26.
for he is the Living God, and steadfast for ever. Work out your own Salvation
with Fear and Trembling. Phil. 2.12.


Commandments.
Q. What be the Chief Commandments?

A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Mind; This is the first and great Commandment: Matthew. 22.37,
38, 39, 40.
And the second is like unto it; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: On
these two Commandments hang all the Law and Prophets.

Q. What ought a Christian to seek after in the first Place?

Matthew. 6.32.
A. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

Behavior.
Q. How ought Christians to behave themselves in this World?

A. But this I say, Brethren, the Time is short: It remains, That both they
that have Wives, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
be, as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and
they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though
they Possessed not; and they that use this World, as not abusing it: for the
Fashion of this World passes away.

Q. What says the Apostle Paul further, as that which is fit, for Christian
Men and Women to be found in?

A. I will therefore, that Men Pray every where, lifting up holy Hands without
Wrath and Doubting: In like Manner also, 1 Timothy 2.8, 9, 10.
that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shamefacedness and
Sobriety; not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but
(which becomes Women professing Godliness) with good Works.

Q. I observe, Apparel.
the Apostle is much against the Vanity and Superfluity of Cloths among
Christians; what says Peter to this?

A. Whose Adorning, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
let it not be that outward Adorning of Plaiting the Hair, of wearing of Gold,
or of putting on of Apparel: But let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that
which is not corruptible; even the Ornament of a meek, quiet Spirit, which is
in the Sight of God of great Price.

Q. The Apostle is very plain there; but what says the Scriptures, Respect of
Persons.
as to Respect of Persons among Christians?

A. My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
Glory, with Respect of Persons: James 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
For if there come unto your Assembly a man with a Gold Ring in goodly Apparel;
and there come in also a poor Man in vile Raiment; and ye have Respect to him
that wears the gay Clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good
Place; and say to the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my Footstool:
Are ye not then partial in your selves, and are become Judges of evil Thoughts?
Hearken, my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this World, rich
in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him? but ye have despised the Poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you
before the Judgment Seat? Do they not blaspheme that worthy Name, by the which
ye are called? If ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well; but if ye have RESPECT to
Persons, ye commit Sin, and are convinced of the Law, as Transgressors.

Q. Though that be indeed sufficient to reprove the different Ranks among
Christians upon the Account of Riches or Birth: Master and Servant.
yet is there not a Relative Respect among Christians, as betwixt Master and
Servants? What Admonitions gives the Apostle in this Case?

A. Servants, be Obedient to them, that are your Masters according to the
Flesh, with Fear and Trembling, in Singleness of your Heart, Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7,
8, 9.
as unto Christ, not with Eye-Service, as Men-Pleasers; but as the Servants of
Christ, doing the Will of God from the Heart; with Good will doing service as
to the Lord, and not to Men: knowing, that whatsoever good Thing any Man does,
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. And ye
Masters, do the same Things unto them, forbearing Threatening; knowing, that
your Master also is in Heaven; neither is there Respect of Persons with him.

Servants, obey in all things your Masters, according to the Flesh; not with
Eye-Service, as Men-pleasers; but in Singleness of Heart, Col. 3.22, 23, 24, 25.
fearing God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not
unto Men; knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the Reward of the
Inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. But he that does Wrong, shall
receive for the Wrong, which he has done; and there is no Respect of Persons.
Masters, give unto your Servants that which is Just and Equal, knowing, that ye
also have a Master in Heaven. Col. 4.1.
Let as many Servants, as are under the Yoke, count their own Masters worthy of
all Honor, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2^
that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. And they that have
believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are Brethren; but
rather do them Service, because they are faithful and beloved, Partakers of the
Benefit: These things teach and exhort. Exhort Servants to be obedient unto
their own Masters, Tit. 2.9, 10.
and to please them well in all Things; not answering again, not purloining;
but showing all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God in all
Things. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21.
Servants, be subject to your Masters with all Fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward; for this is Thank-worthy, if a Man for
Conscience toward God endure Griefs, suffering wrongfully. For what Glory is
it, if when ye be buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if
when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his Steps.

Parents and Children.
Q. What good Admonitions gives the Scripture, as to the Relation betwixt
Parents and Children?

Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, 4.
A. Children, Obey your Parents in the Lord; for this is right: Honor thy
Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment with Promise) that it may
be well with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth. And ye Fathers,
provoke not your Children to Wrath; but bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord. Col. 3.20, 21.
Children, Obey your Parents in all Things; for this is well-pleasing unto the
Lord. Fathers provoke not your Children to Anger, lest they be discouraged.

Q. What between Husbands and Wives?

Husband and Wife.
A. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord; for the
Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church,
Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 31, 33.
and he is the Savior of the Body: Therefore, as the Church is subject unto
Christ; so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing. Husbands,
love your Wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, so
ought men to love their own Wives, as their own Bodies: he that loves his
Wife, loves himself; for this Cause shall a Man leave his Father and Mother,
and shall be joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh.
Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular so love his Wife, even as
himself; and the Wife see, that she Reverence her Husband. Col. 3.19. 1 Pet.
3.1, 2, 7.
Husbands, love your Wives, and be not bitter against them. Likewise ye Wives,
be subject to your own Husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may
without the Word be won by the Conversation of the Wives, while they behold
your Chaste Conversation coupled with Fear. Likewise ye Husbands, dwell with
them according to Knowledge, giving Honor unto the Wife, as unto the weaker
Vessel, and as being Heirs together of the Grace of Life, that your Prayers be
not hindered.

Q. Christian's Armor --
What is the Armor of a true Christian? and wherewith ought he to wrestle?

A. Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the Wiles
of the Devil; for we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against Spiritual Wickedness in high Places: wherefore take unto you the
whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the Evil Day, and
having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your Loins girt about with
Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your Feet shod with
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace: above all, taking the Shield of Faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked One; and
take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God.

Q. What are Christians Weapons? and for what End? -and Weapons.


A. For though we walk in the Flesh, we do not war after the Flesh; (for the
Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5.
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds) casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God; and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.

Q. Ought Strife and Envy to be among Christians? No Strife --


A. Who is a wise Man, and endued with Knowledge amongst you? Let him show out
of a good Conversation his Works with Meekness of Wisdom: But if ye have bitter
Envying and Strife in your Hearts, James 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
glory not, and lie not against the Truth. This Wisdom descends not from
above; but is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish; for where Envying and Strife is,
there is Confusion and every Evil Work. But the Wisdom that is from above, is
first pure, then peaceable, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy: And the Fruit of
Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make Peace.

Q Ought Wars to be among Christians? from whence proceed they? -- Nor Wars,


A. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they not hence, even
from your Lusts, that war in your Members? James 4.1, 2.
Ye lust, and have not; ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye
fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

Q. What says Christ, even of Defensive War? Not Defensive.


A. But I say unto you, that ye Resist not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee
on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also. Matthew. 5.39.
But I say unto you, which hear, Love your Enemies; do good to them which hate
you; bless them that curse you, Luke 6.27, 28, 29.
and pray for them which despitefully use you: and unto him that smites thee
on the one Cheek, offer also the other; and him that takes away thy Cloak,
forbid not to take thy Coat also.

Q. What say the Apostles?

A. Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil. Not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing
for Railing; but contrary-wise Blessing: Romans 12.17. 1 Pet. 3.9.
knowing, that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a Blessing. See,
that none render Evil for Evil unto any Man; but ever follow that which is
good, both among your selves, and to all Men. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15.


Q. Oaths and Swearing.
It was lawful of Old to Swear; and an Oath for Confirmation was to them an End
of all Strife: Is it not Lawful for Christians also to Swear?

A. Again, ye have heard, that it has been said by them of old time, Matthew.
5.33, 34, 35, 36, 27.
Thou shall not forswear thy self; but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.
But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is God's
Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it
is the City of the great King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because
thou can not make one Hair white or black: James 5.12.
But let your Communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more than
these, comes of Evil. But above all things my Brethren, Swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath: but let your Yea be
Yea, and your Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation.

World's Honor.
Q. Is it fit for Christians or Believers to receive Carnal and Worldly Honor
one from another?

John 5.44.
A. How can ye believe, which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the
Honor, that comes from God only?

Titles.
Q. Does God allow us to give flattering Titles to Men?

Job 32.21, 22.
A. Let me not, I pray you, accept any Man's Person: neither let me give
flattering Titles unto Man; for I know not to give flattering Titles, in so
doing my Maker would soon take me away.

Q. What should we say to such, as quarrel us for speaking proper sound Words,
Thee and Thou.
as Thou to one, You to many; which is Christ and the Saints Language in the
Scripture?

1 Timothy 6.3, 4.
A. If any Man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome Words, even the
Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing; but doting about Questions and Strifes
of Words, whereof comes Envy, 2 Timothy 1.13.
Strife, Railings, Evil Surmisings. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which
thou have heard of me in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.

Q. What is the great Commandment given by Christ to his Disciples, as that
which even declares them to be such, Love.
and is also pressed by his Apostles?

A. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another: John 13.34, 35
and 15.12, 17.
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another; by this shall all men
know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love to one another. This is my
Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you: These things I
command you, that ye love one another. Be ye therefore Followers of God, Ephesians.
5.1, 2.
as dear Children; and walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and has
given himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling
Savor. If any Man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for
he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 4.20, 21.
whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? And this
Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, loves his Brother also.

Humility.
Q. Is Humility very needful to Christians? what like must we be, e're we can
enter the Kingdom?

A. Mat. 18.3, 4.
And said, verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become
as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; whosoever
therefore shall humble himself, as this little Child, the same is greatest in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. Ought Christians to lord over one another? What Rule gives Christ in this
Case?

A. But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know, Mat. 20.25, 26, 27, 28.
that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them; and they that
are Great, exercise Authority upon them: but It shall not be so among you; but
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will
be Chief among you, let him be your Servant: even as the Son of Man came not to
be Ministered unto, but to Minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many.

Q. How then are Christians in this World?

A. Behold, I send you forth, as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; Mat. 10.16.
be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Go your ways; behold,
I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves. Luke 10.3.


Q. Are we then to expect Afflictions and Persecutions here? Afflictions.


A. And ye shall be hated of all Men for my Names sake; but he that endures to
the End, shall be saved. Mat. 10.22. Mark 13.13. Luke 21.17. John 15.18, 19.
And ye shall be hated of all Men for my Name's sake. If the World hate you, ye
know that it hated me, before it hated you: if ye were of the World, the World
would love his own; but because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you
out of the World, therefore the World hates you. These things I have spoken
unto you, that ye might have Peace: John 16, 33.
in the World ye shall have Tribulation; but be of good Cheer, I have overcome
the World. And all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
shall suffer Persecution.

Q. Ought we then to fear Persecution? Persecution --


A. Fear not them* which kill the Body, Mat. 3.10, 28*
but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him, who is able to destroy
both Soul and Body in Hell. And I say unto you, my Friends, Luke 12.4, 5.
Be not afraid of them, that kill the Body, and after that have no more, that
they can do: But I will fore-warn you, whom ye shall fear; fear him, which
after he has killed, has Power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear
him.

Q. What Advantage is it to them, that suffer Persecution cheerfully, and
Hazzards, to them that shun it? -- Advantageous.


A. Blessed are they, which are persecuted for Righteousness sake; Mat. 5.10. 1
Pet. 3.4.
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. But if ye suffer for Righteousness sake,
happy are ye; and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be troubled.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before Men, Mat. 10.32, 33, 37, 38, 39.
him will I confess also before my Father, which is in Heaven; but whosoever
shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in
Heaven: He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and
he that takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me: He
that finds his Life, shall lose it; and he that loses his Life for my sake,
shall find it. Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, Luke
12.8, 9
him shall the Son of Man also confess before the Angels of God; but he that
denies me before Men, shall be denied before the Angels of God. Then said
Jesus unto his Disciples, If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross, and follow me; for whosoever will save his Life, Mat.
1^.24, 25.
shall lose it; and whosoever ever will lose his Life for my sake, shall find it.
If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; 2 Timothy 2, 12. Luke 14 26.
if we deny him, he also will deny us. If any come to me, and hate not his
Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and
his own Life, he cannot be my Disciple. Luke 9.23, 24*
And he said to them, If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross daily, and follow me; for whosoever will save his Life, shall
lose it: but whosoever will lose his Life for my sake, the same shall save it.
And when he had called the People to him, Luke 8.34, 35.
with his Disciples also, he said unto them, whosoever will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me: for whosoever will save
his Life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his Life for my sake and the
Gospel's, the same shall save it.

Q. There is nothing more certain, according to those Scriptures, than that
Christians must suffer Persecution in this World, Reviled
even in their Persons and Estates: But shall they not also suffer in their
good Names, in being accounted Blasphemers, Heretics and Deceivers?

A. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; Mat.
10.24, 25.
it is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant as
his Lord: If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub; how much more
shall they call them of his Household? Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you,
Mat. 5.11.
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my
sake. Acts 6.11, 12.
Then they suborned Men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous Words
against Moses, and against God: And they stirred up the People, and the Elders,
and the Scribes; and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the
Council. Acts 17.6.
And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain Brethren unto the
Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the World upside down, are
come hither also. But this I confess unto thee, that after the Way, which they
call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, Acts 24.14.
believing all things, which are written in the Law and the Prophets. 1 Cor.
14.13.
Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as Filth of the World, and are the
Offscouring of all things unto this Day; 1 Cor. 6^8.
By Honor and Dishonor, by Evil Report and Good Report, as Deceivers, and yet
true.

Q. It is easily apparent, from what is mentioned, that Christians are to
expect Persecution and Tribulation; and that they are always the Sheep, and
never the Wolves; the Persecuted, and never the Persecutors; Pray for
persecutors.
the Afflicted, and not the Afflictors: the Reproached, and not the
Reproachers: Is it not fit then, that Christians be so far from Persecuting
others, that they ought to Pray for the Persecutors? is this Christ's Command?

A. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies; Bless them that Curse you, do Good
to them that hate you, and Pray for them which despightfully use you, and
Persecute you.

Q. By Christ's
Was this Christ's own Practice?

A. Luke 23.34.
Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do, etc.

Q. Is Christ herein to be our Example?

A. For even hereunto were you called, 1 Pet. 2.12, 22, 23.
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that ye should
follow his Steps, who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; Example
who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed himself unto him, that judges righteously.

Q. Is there an Instance of any Saints in Scriptures, -and Stephen's.
who followed his Example herein?

A. And he ( Stephen) kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Acts 7.60.
Lord, lay not this Sin to their Charge, etc.

Q. It appears by all these Scriptures, that Christianity consists in the
Exercise of Fear and Trembling, Humility, Patience and Self-denial; What ought
we then to think of such, Beware of Seducing Spirits.
who place much of their Religion in Abstaining from Marriage, and certain
Meats; Worshipping of Angels, and other such Acts of voluntary Humility?

A. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in
Hypocrisy; having their Conscience seared as with an hot Iron, forbidding to
Marry, and commanding to Abstain from Meats, which God has Created, to be
received with Thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the Truth. Let no
Man beguile you of your Reward in voluntary Humility, Col. 2.18.
and Worshipping of Angels; intruding into these things, which he has not
seen, vainly puffed up by his Fleshly Mind.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning Magistracy.
Question. WHat is the Duty of a Magistrate?

Answer. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me; he that Rules
over Men, must be Just, 2 Samuel 23.3.
Ruling in the Fear of God.

Q. What do the Scriptures speak of the Duty of such, Subjection.
as are under Authority?

A. Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers; Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
for there is no Power, but of God: The Powers that be, are ordained of God;
Whatsoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they
that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. For Rulers are not a Terror
to good Works, but to the Evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do
that which is Good, and thou shall have Praise of the same; for he is the
Minister of God to thee for Good. But if thou do that which is Evil, be afraid;
for he bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God; a Revenger
to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil. Wherefore Ye must needs be subject,
not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme; 1
Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
or unto Governors, as unto them, that are sent by him for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well: for so is the Will of God,
that with Well-doing ye may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men.

Tribute.
Q. Ought Tribute to be paid to them?

A. For, for this Cause pay we Tribute also; for they are God's Ministers, Romans
13 6, 7.
attending continually upon this very thing: Render therefore to all their
Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar,
the things which are Caesar's; Matthew. 22.21.
and unto God the things that are God's.

Obedience.
Q. Are we obliged to obey Magistrates in such things, as we are persuaded in
our Minds, are contrary to the Commands of Christ?

Acts 4.18, 19, 20.
A. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in
the Name of Jesus: but Peter and John answered and said unto them* Whether it
be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye;
for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. And when they
had brought them, Acts 5 27, 28, 29.
they set them before the Council, and the High Priest asked them, saying; Did
not we straightly command you, that ye should not Teach in this Name? And
behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine, and intended to bring this
Man's Blood upon us. Then Peter and the other Apostles answered, and said, We
ought to obey God rather, than Man.

Moderation.
Q. What ought to be Magistrates Behavior in such Cases according to the
Counsel of wise Gamaliel?

A. Then stood there up one in the Council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, Acts
5.34, 35, 38 39.
a Doctor of Law, had in Reputation among the People, and commanded to put the
Apostles forth a little space, and said unto them; Ye Men of Israel, take heed
to your selves, what ye intend to do, as touching these men: And now I say unto
you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this Counsel or this
Work of Men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow
it, le^t happily ye be found even to fight against God.

Tares.
Q. What Command gives Christ to his People under the Gospel, in Relation to
this matter? How does he hold forth their Duty under the Parable of the Tares?

A. So the Servants of the Household came, and said unto him; Sir, did thou
not sow Good Seed in thy Field? Matthew. 13.27, 28, 29.
from whence then has it Tares? He said unto them, An Enemy has done this.
The Servants said unto him, Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But
he said, Nay, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with
them.

Tares, the Wicked.
Q. Does he explain these Tares of the Wicked, whom the Godly must not take upon
them to cut off, lest through mistake they hurt the Good; but leave it to God,
to do it by his Angels?

A. Matthew. 13.38, 39, 40, 41.
The Field is the World; the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; but the
Tares are the Children of the Wicked One; the Enemy that sowed them, is the
Devil; the Harvest is the End of the World; and the Reapers are the Angels: And
therefore the Tares are gathered and burnt in the Fire. So shall it be in the
end of this World; the Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do Iniquity.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning the Resurrection.
Question. WHat says the Scripture of the Resurrection of the Dead?

Answer. And have Hope toward God, Acts 24.15.
which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the
Dead, both of the Just and Unjust.

Q. To what different End shall the Good be raised from the Bad? and how are
they thereunto reserved?

A. Marvel not at this; for the Hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the Graves, shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth; John 5.28, 29.
they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have
done Evil, unto the Resurrection of Condemnation. But the Heavens and the
Earth, which are now, 2 Pet. 3.7.
by the same Word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of
Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men.

Q. What must be answered to such as ask, how the Dead are raised; and with
what Body?

A. Thou Fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.
except it die: and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body which
shall be; but bare Grain, it may chance of Wheat, or some other Grain: But God
gives it a Body, as it has pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body. All
Flesh is not the same Flesh; but there is one kind of Flesh of Men, another
Flesh of Beasts, another of Fishes, and another of Birds: there are also
Celestial Bodies, and Bodies Terrestrial; but the Glory of the Celestial is
one, and the Glory of the Terrestrial is another. There is one Glory of the
Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; for one
Star differs from another Star in Glory: so also is the Resurrection of the
Dead; it is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption; it is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in
Power; it is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body: There is a
Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body.

Q. The Apostle seems to be very positive, that it is not that Natural Body,
which we now have, that shall rise, but a Spiritual Body.

A. 1 Cor. 15.50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55.
Now this I say, Brethren, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption. Behold, I show you a
Mystery, We shall not all sleep; but we shall all be changed in a Moment, in
the Twinkling of an Eye, at the last Trump (for the Trumpet shall sound) and
the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed: For this
Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality:
So when this Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall
have put on Immortality, then shall be brought to pass the Saying, that is
written; Death is swallowed up in Victory: O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave
where is thy Victory?

CHAP. XV. A Short Introduction to the CONFESSION of FAITH.
HAving thus largely and evidently performed the chief Part of that, which I
promised in this Treatise, in giving a full account of our Principles in plain
Scripture-words; and also answering by the Scriptures the chief and main
Objections made against us; I come to a Confession of Faith: in which I shall
not be so large, for that I judge it not Convenient to make an Interpretation
of all the Scriptures beforementioned; which, if needful, the Reader may easily
observe, were not very difficult to do. But whereas a Confession of Faith
called rather for an Affirmative Account of ones own Faith, than for the
Solution of Objections, or any thing of Debate in a Discursive Way, which is
both more properly and pertinently performed in a Catechism; therefore I have
here only done so. I am necessitated sometimes to intermix some words for
Coherence of the Matter, as sometimes (And) and sometimes (Therefore) and the
like; but not such, as any Ingenuous Person can affirm, do add to the Matter,
or that may any wise justly be reckoned a Comment or Meaning: and therefore to
avoid the Censure of the most Curious, Carping Critics; these are marked with
a different Character. Likewise, unless I should have ridiculously offered to
publish incongruous Grammar, there was a true need sometimes to change the Mood
and Person of a Verb: in all which places, whosoever will look to the words,
shall find, it is done upon no Design to alter any whit the naked Import of
them. As for Instance: where Christ says, I am the Light of the World, were it
proper for me to write thus, I am the Light, etc. Or can it be reckoned any
whit Contradicting of my Purpose and Promise to write, Christ is the Light,
where the first Person is changed to the third? Also sometimes I express
things, which are necessarily understood; as when any of the Apostles say, We,
there instead of We, I write Apostles; and where they say You, speaking of the
Saints, there I mention Saints instead of it: for the Connection of the Sentence
sometimes requires it. As in the first Article in mentioning that of 1 John
1.5. concerning God's being Light, and in such like Cases, which I know, no
impartial Reader would have quarrelled, though wanting this Apology: which I
judged meet to premise, knowing, there is a Generation, who when they cannot
find any real or substantial Ground against Truth and its Followers, will be
Cavilling at such little Niceties; therefore such may see, this Objection is
obviated.

CHAP. XVI. A CONFESSION of FAITH, concerning Twenty Three Articles.
ARTICLE I. Concerning God, and the True and Saving Knowledge of him.
THere is one God Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Cor. 8.4, 6.
who is a Spirit John 4.24.
: And This is the Message, which the Apostles heard of him, and declared unto
the Saints, That he is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all 1 John 1.5.
. There are Three, that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are One 1 John 1.7.
. The Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father John 10.38. and 14.10,
11. and 5.26.
. No Man knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the Father,
but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will Reveal him Matthew. 11.27 Luke
10.22.
. The Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2.10.
: For the Things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Now the Saints
have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit, which is of God,
that they might know the things, which are freely given them of God 1 Cor.
2.11, 12.
. For the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father sends in Christ's
Name, he teaches them all things, and brings all things to their Remembrance
John 14.26*
.

ARTICLE II. Concerning the Guide and Rule of Christians.
CHrist prayed to the Father, and he gave the Saints another Comforter, that
was to abide with them for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World
cannot receive, because it sees him not, nor knows him. But the Saints know
him; for he dwells with them, and is to be in them John 14.16, 17.
. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: For as many
as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God Romans 8.9, 14.
. For this is the Covenant, that God has made with the House of Israel, He
has put his Laws in their Mind, and writ them in their Hearts; and they are
all taught of God Hebr. 8.10, 11.
. And the Anointing, which they have received of him, abides in them; and they
need not, that any man teach them, but as the same Anointing teaches them of
all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie 1 John 2.27
.

ARTICLE III. Concerning the Scriptures.
WHatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning, that
we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope Romans 15.4.
, which are able to make wise unto Salvation through Faith, which is in Christ
Jesus: All Scripture being given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
. No Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation; for the
Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God spoke, as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.


ARTICLE IV. Concerning the Divinity of Christ, and his Being from the
Beginning.
IN the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God; and the same was in the Beginning with God: All things were made by him;
and without him was not any thing made, that was made John 1.1, 2, 3.
. Whose Goings forth have been from of Old, from Everlasting Mich. 5.2.
. For God created all by Jesus Christ Ephesians 3.9.
; Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God
Phil. 2.6.
. And his Name is called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father; the Prince of Peace Isa. 9.6.
; Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature Col.
1.15.
: The Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the Express Image of his Substance
Hebr. 1.3.
. Who was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood; and his Name is called the
Word of God Rev. 19.13.
. In him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily Col. 2.9.
: And in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge Col. 2.3.
.

ARTICLE V. Concerning his Appearance in the Flesh.
THe Word was made Flesh John 14.
: For he took not on him the Nature of Angels; but he took on him the Seed of
Abraham, being in all things made like unto his Brethren Hebr. 2.16, 17.
. Touched with a feeling of our Infirmities; and in all things tempted, like as
we are, yet without Sin Hebr. 4.15.
. He died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures; and he was Buried, and he
Rose again the Third Day according to the Scriptures 1 Cor. 15.3, 4.
.

ARTICLE VI. Concerning the End and Use of that Appearance.
GOD sent his own Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned
Sin in the Flesh Romans 8.3.
. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil 1 John 3.
, Being manifested to take away our Sins 1 John 3.5.
: For he gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling Savor Ephesians. 5.2.
; Having obtained Eternal Redemption for us Hebr. 9.12.
: And through the Eternal Spirit offered up himself without Spot unto God, to
purge our Consciences from dead Works, to serve the Living God Hebr. 9.14.
. He was the Lamb, that was slain from the Foundation of the World Rev. 5.1,
12, 13.
; Of whom the Fathers did all drink; of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his
Steps 1 Pet. 2.21.
. For we are to bear about in the Body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the
Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body, being always delivered
unto Death for Jesus sake, that the Life also of Jesus may be made manifest in
our Flesh 2 Cor. 4.10, 11.
That we may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Sufferings, being made conformable to his Death Phil. 3.10.
.

ARTICLE VII. Concerning the Inward Manifestation of Christ.
GOD dwells with the Contrite and Humble in Spirit Isa. 57.15.
: For he said, he will dwell in them, and walk in them 2 Cor. 6.16.
. And Christ stands at the Door, and knocks; if any Man hear his Voice, and
open the Door, he will come unto him, and Sup with him, and he with him Rev.
3.20.
. And therefore ought we to Examine our own selves, and prove our own selves,
knowing, how that Christ is in us, except we be Reprobates 2 Col. 13.5.
. For this is the Riches of the Glory of the Mystery, which God would make
known among ( or rather IN) the Gentiles, CHRIST WITHIN, the Hope of Glory Col.
1.27.
.

ARTICLE VIII. Concerning the New Birth.
EXcept a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God John 3.3.
. Therefore ought we to put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and put on the New
Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that Created him, and
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness Ephesians. 9.21, 22.
Col. 3.10.
: For henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh; yea, though we have known
Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more 2 Cor. 5.16.
. For if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: old things are past away;
behold, all things are become new 2 Cor. 5 17.
: For such have put on the Lord Jesus Christ Romans 13.14.
, and are renewed in the Spirit of their Minds Ephesians. 4.28.
; Since as many, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ Gal 3 27.
: Being born again not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word
of God, which lives and abides for ever 1 Pet. 1.23.
. And glory in nothing, save in the Cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
World is crucified unto them, and they unto the World Gal. 6.14.
. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a New Creature Gal. 6.5.
.

ARTICLE IX. Concerning the Unity of the Saints with Christ.
HE that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of One Hebr. 2.11.
: For by the exceeding great and precious Promises, that are given them, they
are made Partakers of the Divine Nature 2 Pet. 1.4.
; Because for this End prayed Christ, that all might be one, as the Father is
in him, and he in the Father, that they also might be one in them; and the
Glory, which he had gotten from the Father, he gave them, that they might be
one, even as the Father and he is one: Christ in the Saints, and the Father in
Christ, that they might be made perfect in one John 17.21, 22, 23.
.

ARTICLE X. Concerning the Universal Love and Grace of God to all.
GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have Everlasting Life John 3.16.
. And in this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent
his only begotten Son, that we might live through him 1 John 4.9.
. So that if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the Sins of the whole World 1 John 2.1, 2.
: For by the Grace of God he has tasted Death for every Man Hebr 2.9
, And gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due Time 1 Timothy 2.6.
: Willing all Men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth 1 Timothy
2.4.
; Not willing, that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance 2
Pet. 3.9.
. For God sent not his Son into the World to Condemn the World; but that the
World through him might be saved John 3 17.
. And Christ came a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in him,
should not abide in Darkness John 12.46.
: Therefore, as by the Offense of One Judgment came upon All Men to
Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of One, the free Gift came upon all
Men to Justification of Life Romans 5.18.
.

ARTICLE XI. Concerning the Light, that enlightneth every Man.
THe Gospel was preached to every Creature under Heaven Col. 1.23.
, which Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation to them that believe Romans
1.16.
: And if it be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
World has blinded the Minds of them, which believe not, lest the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into them 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil John 3.19.
. And this was the true Light, which lightneth every Man that comes into the
World John 1.9.
; By which all things that are reproveable, are made manifest: for whatsoever
makes manifest, is Light Ephesians. 5.11.
. Every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest
his Deeds should be reproved: but he that does Truth, comes to to the Light,
that his Deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God Joh. 3 20, 21.
. And they that walk in the Light, as Christ is in the Light, have Fellowship
one with another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses them from
all Sin 1 John 1.
: Therefore ought we to believe in the Light, while we have the Light, that we
may be the Children of the Light John 12.36.
. Therefore to Day, if we will hear his Voice, let us not harden our Hearts
Hebr. 4 7.
: For Christ wept over Jerusalem, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at
least in this thy Day the Things which belong unto thy Peace. But now they are
hid from thine Eyes Luke 19.42.
: And he would often have gathered her Children, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens; but they would not Matthew. 23.37.
: for the stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears do always Resist the
Holy Ghost Acts 7.51.
: And are of those that Rebel against the Light Job 24.13.
. Therefore God's Spirit will not always strive with Man Genesis 7.3.
; For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness Romans 1.18.
: Because what is to be known of God, is manifest in them; for God has showed
it unto them Romans 1.19.
; And a Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal 1
Cor. 12.7.
. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men,
teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World Tit. 2.11, 12.
: And this Word of this Grace is able to build up, and give an Inheritance
among all those that are Sanctified Acts 20.32.
. For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper, than any two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart
Hebr. 4.12.
: Is that more sure Word of Prophesy, whereunto we do well, that we take heed,
as unto a Light, that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in the Heart 2 Pet. 1.^9.
. And this is the Word of Faith, which the Apostles Preached, which is nigh in
the Mouth and in the Heart Romans 10.8.
: For God, who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4.6.
. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the
Power may be of God 2 Cor. 4.7.
, and not of us: for the Kingdom of God comes not by Observation, but is
within us.

ARTICLE XII. Concerning Faith and Justification.
FAith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen Hebr. 11.1.
; Without which it is impossible to please God Hebr. 11.6.
. Therefore we are justified by Faith, which works by Love Gal. 5.6.
: For Faith without Works being dead, is by Works made perfect Jam. 2.23, 26.
. By the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified Romans 3.20.
: Nor yet by the Works of Righteousness, which we have done; but according to
his Mercy we are saved by the Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost 1 Tit. 3.5.
: For we are both washed, sanctified and justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God 1 Cor. 6.11.
.

ARTICLE XIII. Concerning Good Works.
IF we live after the Flesh, we shall die; but if we through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall live Romans 8.13.
: For they, which believe in God, must be careful to maintain good Works Tit
3.8.
: For God will render to every Man according to his Deeds, according to his
Righteous Judgment to them; who by patient Continuance in well-doing seek for
Glory, Honor and Immortality, Eternal Life Romans 2.6, 7.
: For such are counted worthy of the Kingdom of God 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
; and cast not away their Confidence, which has great Recompense of Reward
Hebr. 10.35.
. Blessed then are they, that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to
the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City Rev. 22.14.
.

ARTICLE XIV. Concerning Perfection.
SIn shall not have Dominion over such, as are not under the Law, but under
Grace Romans 6.14.
: For there is no Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of Life makes
free from the Law of Sin and Death Romans 8 1, 2.
: For such are become dead unto Sin, and alive unto Righteousness; and being
made free from Sin, are become Servants of Righteousness Romans 6 2.18
. Therefore ought we to be perfect, as our Heavenly Father is perfect Matthew.
5.48.
: For the Yoke of Christ is easy, and his Burden is light Matt. 11.30.
; And his Commandments are not grievous 1 John 5.3.
: And whosoever will enter into Life, must keep the Commandments Matthew. 19.17
. Hereby do we know, that we know God, if we keep his Commandments 1 John 2.3.
: He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and
the Truth is not in him 1 John 2.4.
. Whosoever abides in him, sins not; whosoever sins, has not seen him,
neither known him John 3.6.
. Let no Man deceive us; he that does Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he
is Righteous; He that commits Sin, is of the Devil: whosoever is born of
God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God 1 John 3.7, 8, 9.
. For not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the will of the Father, which is in Heaven Matthew. 7.21.
. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of
the Commandments of God 1 Cor. 7.19.
.

ARTICLE XV. Concerning Perseverance and Falling from Grace.
WE ought to give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; which things
if we do, we shall never fall 2 Pet. 1.10.
: For even Paul kept under his Body, and brought it into Subjection, lest by
any Means, when he preached to others, he himself became a Castaway 1 Cor.
9.27.
. Let us therefore take heed, lest there be in any of us an evil Heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the Living God Hebr. 3.12.
; Likewise let us labor to enter into that Rest, lest any Man fall after the
same Example of Unbelief Hebr. 4.11.
: For it is impossible for those, who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if they shall
fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6.
: For he that abides not in Christ, is cast forth, and is withered John 15.16.
. Yet such as overcome, he will make as Pillars in the Temple of his God, and
they shall go no more out Rev. 3.12.
: And these are persuaded, that nothing shall be able to separate them from the
Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus Romans 8.38.
.

ARTICLE XVI. Concerning the Church and Ministry.
THe Church of God is the Pillar and Ground of Truth 1 Timothy 3.15.
: Whereof the Dear Son of God is the Head Col. 1.18.
; From which all the Body by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment Ministered,
and knit together, increases with the Increase of God Col. 2.19.
. Which Church of God are they, that are sanctified in Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 1.2.
; Who when he ascended up on high, gave Gifts unto Men: And he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints for the Work of the Ministry Ephesians. 4.9, 11.
; Who ought to be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good Behavior, given to
Hospitality, apt to teach; not given to Wine, no Strikers, not greedy of filthy
Lucre, but patient: not Brawlers, not Covetous 1 Timothy 3.2, 3.
; but Lovers of good Men, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast the Faith,
as they have been taught, that they may be able by sound Doctrine both to
Exhort and to Convince Gainsayers Tit 1.8, 9.
: Taking heed to themselves, and to the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has
made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God Acts 20.28.
; Taking the Oversight thereof not by Constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
Lucre, but of a ready Mind: neither as being Lords over God's Heritage; but as
being Ensamples to the Flock 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
. And such Elders as rule well, are to be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially they, who labor in the Word and Doctrine 1 Timothy 5.17.
; And to be esteemed very highly in Love for their Works sake 1 Thessalonians. 5.5, 12.
. As every Man has received the Gift, so ought the same to be Ministered. If
any Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any Man minister, let
him do it, as of the Ability which God gives 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
: Preaching the Gospel, not with the Wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ
be made of none effect 1 Cor. 1.17.
. Nor yet with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom; but in Demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power: that the Faith may not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in
the Power of God 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
. Howbeit such spoke Wisdom among them that are Perfect; yet not the Wisdom of
this World, not of the Princes of this World, which comes to naught; but they
speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which God
ordained before the World to their Glory 1 Cor. 2.6, 7.
. Which things they also speak not in the Words, which Man's Wisdom teaches;
but which the Holy Ghost teaches 1 Cor. 2.13.
: For it is not they that speak, but the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of the Father
that speaks in them Matthew. 10.20
. Who if they sow spiritual things, ought to reap carnal things: for so the
Lord has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel: for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox,
that treads out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward 1 Cor.
9.11, 14
. Yet a necessity is laid upon them; yea, Woe is unto them, if they preach not
the Gospel: and their Reward is, that when they preach the Gospel, they make
the Gospel of Christ without Charge 1 Cor. 9 15, 17, 18.
: Not coveting any Man's Silver or Gold, or Apparel; but their Hands ministering
to their Necessities: that so laboring, they may support the Weak; remembering
the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It Is more blessed to give, than to
receive Acts 20 33, 34.
. For they are not of the greedy Dogs, that can never have enough Isa. 56.11.
: Nor of the Shepherds, that look to their own Way, every one for his Gain from
his Quarter Ibidem.
; That Feed themselves, and not the Flock Ezekiel. 34.8.
: That make the People Err, biting with their Teeth, and crying Peace, and
preparing War against all such, as put not in their Mouths: teaching for Hire,
and divining for Money Mich. 3.5, 11.
. Nor yet of those which teach things, which they ought not, for filthy Lucre's
sake Tit. 1.11.
. That run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, loving the Wages of
Unrighteousness 2 Pet. 2.15.
; And through Covetousness with feigned Words making Merchandise of Souls 2
Pet. 2.3.
: Men of corrupt Minds, destitute of the Truth, supposing, that Gain is
Godliness 1 Timothy 6.5.
; but they know, that Godliness with Contentment is great Gain 1 Timothy 6 6.
: and having Food and Raiment, they are therewith content 1 Timothy 6.8.
.

ARTICLE XVII. Concerning Worship.
THe Hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him John
4.23.
. God is a Spirit; and they which worship, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth John 4 24.
: For the Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in Truth Psalm. 145.18.
. He is far from the wicked; but he hears the Prayer of the Righteous Prove.
15.29.
. And this is the Confidence, that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his Will, he hears us 1 John 5.14.
. What is it then? We must pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding
also 1 Cor. 14.15.
: Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities: for we know not, what we
should pray for, as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us
with Groanings, which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the Heart,
knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the
Saints according to the Will of God Romans 8.26, 27.
.

ARTICLE XVIII. Concerning Baptism.
AS there is One Lord, One Faith, so there is One Baptism Ephesians. 4.5.
, which does also now save us; not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh,
but the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ 1 Pet. 3.21, 22.
. For John indeed baptized with Water, but Christ with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire Matthew. 3.1.
. Therefore as many as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his
Death, and are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as Christ was
raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so they also should
walk in Newness of Life Romans 6.34.
, having put on Christ Gal. 3.27.
.

ARTICLE XIX. Concerning Eating of Bread and Wine; Washing of one another
Feet; Abstaining from things Strangled, and from Blood; and Anointing of the
Sick with Oil.
THe Lord Jesus the same Night in which he was betrayed, took Bread, and when
he had given Thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my Body, which
is broken for you; this do in Remembrance of me. After the same manner also he
took the Cup, when he had supped, saying: This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood; this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me. For as often as
ye do eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lord's Death,
till he come Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
. Jesus knowing, that the Father had given all things into his Hands, and that
he was come from God, and went to God; he raises from Supper, and laid aside
his Garments, and took a Towel, and girded himself: after that he poured Water
into a Basin, and began to wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the
Towel, wherewith he was girded. So after he had washed their Feet, and had
taken his Garments, and set down again, he said unto them; Know ye, what I have
done unto you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for so I am: If I
then your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash one
another Feet: For I have given you an Example; that ye should do, as I have
done unto you John 13 2, 3, 4, 12, 13, 14, 15.
. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater
Burden, than these Necessary Things; That ye abstain from Meats offered to
Idols; from Blood, and from things Strangled; and from Fornication: from which
if ye keep your selves, ye do well Acts 15.28, 29.
. Is any man sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them Pray over him, Anointing him with Oil James 5.14.
.

ARTICLE XX. Concerning the Liberty of such Christians as are come to know the
Substance, as to the Using, or not Using of these Rites, and of the Observation
of Days.
THe Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink; but Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost Romans 14 17.
. Let no man therefore judge us in Meat or Drink, or in Respect of an Holy Day,
or of the New Mood, or the Sabbath Days Col. 2.16.
: For if we be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though
living in the World, are We subject to Ordinances? Let us not touch, or taste,
or handle, (which all are to perish with the Using) after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men Col. 2.20, 21, 22.
. For now, after we have known God, or rather are known of him, why should we
turn again unto the Weak and Beggarly Elements, or desire again to be in
Bondage to observe Days, and Months, and Times, and Years, lest Labor have
been bestowed on us in vain Gal. 4.9, 10, 11.
? If one man esteem a Day above another, another esteems every day alike; let
every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind: He that regards a Day,
regards it unto the Lord; and he that regards not the Day to the Lord; he
does not regard it Romans 14.5, 6.
.

ARTICLE XXI. Concerning Swearing, Fighting and Persecution.
IT has been said by them of Old, Thou shall not Forswear thy self; but shall
perform unto the Lord thine Oaths: But Christ says unto us, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King: neither
shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one Hair white or
black. But let your Communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay: for whatsoever is more
than these, comes of Evil Mat. 5 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
. And James charge us, Above all things not to swear, neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and
your Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. Jam. 5.12.
Though we walk in the Flesh, we are not to War after the Flesh; for the
Weapons of our Warfare are not to be carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every High Thing,
that exalts itself against the Knowledge of God* and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of Christ 2 Cor. 10 3.4, 5.
. For Wars and Fightings come of the Lusts, that war in the Members Jam. 4.1, 2.
: Therefore Christ commands, not to resist Evil; but whosoever will smite on
the right Cheek, to turn the other also Mat. 5.39.
. Because Christians are Lambs among Wolves Luke 10.3.
; Therefore are they hated of all Men for Christ's sake Mat. 10.22,
. And all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution 2 Timothy
3.12.
: Such are Blessed; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 5 10.
. For though they have lost their Lives, yet shall they save them Mat. 16.25.
; And because they have confessed Christ before Men, he will also confess them
before the Angels of God Luke 12.8, 9.
. We ought not then to fear them, which kill the Body, but are not able to kill
the Soul; but rather him, which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell
Mat. 10.28.
.

ARTICLE XXII. Concerning Magistracy.
LEt every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; for there is no Power but of
God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation. For Rulers are not a Terror to Good Works, but to the
Evil: will thou then not be afraid of the Power, do that which is good, and
thou shall have Praise of the same; for he is the Minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon
him that does Evil. Wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but
also for Conscience sake: For for this Cause pay we also Tribute; for they are
God's Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore
to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear
to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor Romans 13.1, 2 -- 7.
. Therefore are we to submit ourselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him, for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of
them that do Well: for so is the Will of God, that with well-doing we may put
to Silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
. Yet it is right in the Spirit of God, to hearken unto him more, than unto
them Acts 4.19.
: And though they straightly Command us, not to teach in Christ's Name, we
ought to obey God rather, than Men Acts 5.28, 29.
.

ARTICLE XXIII. Concerning the Resurrection.
THere shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust Acts
24.15.
: They that have done Good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have
done Evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation John 5.29.
. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
inherit Incorruption 1 Cor. 15.50.
: Nor is that Body sown, that shall be; but God gives it a Body, as it has
pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body. It is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in Incorruption; It is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; It is
sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power; It is sown a Natural Body, it is
raised a Spiritual Body 1 Cor. 15.37, 38, 42, 43, 44.
.

CHAP. XVII. A short Expostulation with, and APPEAL to all other Professors.
COme, let us reason with you, all ye Professors of Christianity, of what sort
or kind soever; and bring forth your Catechisms and Confessions of FAITH to
that, which by most of your selves is accounted the Touchstone or Rule. And
suffer your selves no more to be blinded, and to Err through your Ignorance of
the Scriptures, and of the Power of God; but freely acknowledge and confess to
that Glorious Gospel and Light, which the Scriptures so clearly witness to, and
your Experience must needs answer: as also to these other Doctrines, The Noble
Principle of Truth all are Invited unto.
which consequentially depend upon the behalf of that Noble and truly Catholic
Principle, wherein the Love of God is so mercifully exhibited to all Men, and
his Justice and Mercy do like Twins so Harmoniously Concord: his Mercy in the
often tendering of his Love through the Strivings and Wrestlings of his Light,
during the day of every man's Visitation; and his Justice, both in the
destroying and cutting away of the Wicked Nature and Spirit in those, that
suffer themselves to be Redeemed through his Judgments: and in the utter
Overthrow of such, who rebelling against the Light, and doing Despite to the
Spirit of Grace, hate to be Reformed. Now, not only this Fundamental Principle
is clearly held forth in this Treatise, but all these that depend upon it, as
the real and inward Justification of the Saints, through the Power and Life of
Jesus Revealed in them, their full and perfect Redemption from the Body of
Death and Sin, as they grow up by the Workings and Prevalency of his Grace. And
yet, lest Security should enter, there is great need of Watchfulness in that
they may even depart, after they have really witnessed a good Condition, and
make Shipwreck of the Faith, and of a good Conscience, with all the parts of
the Doctrine of Christ, as they lie linked together like a Golden Chain, which
does very much evidence the Certainty and Virtue of Truth above all Heresies,
Error and Deceit, however so cunningly gilded with the specious Pretenses
thereof. For Truth is entire in all its parts, and consonant to it self,
without the least Jar; having a wonderful Coherence, and notable Harmony, The
Harmony of Truth, as of a well-tuned Instrument.
answering together like the Strings of a well-tuned Instrument: whereas the
Principles of all other Professors, though in some things most of them come
near, and diverse acknowledge that which is Truth; yet in most things they stray
from it: so that their Principles greatly contradict and Jar one against
another. And though they may allege Scriptures for some of their Principles;
yet they are put strangely to wrest it, and to deny it for others. My Appeal
then to, and Expostulation with all sorts of Professors is, not to prove some
one or two Points by the Scriptures, (for there be some general Notions of
Truth, which most (if not all) agree to) but the whole Body of our Principles,
as they stand in relation to each other, which none of them all is able to do.
For among the many Professors their Catechisms and Confessions of Faith, I find
none (save the Dispensation of Truth now again revealed) but such, as in most
of their substantial Principles differ greatly, and in many Contradict grossly
the plain Text and Tenor of the Scripture. I confess, there be certain Men in
this Age, who with some plausible Appearance of Reality undertake this Task:
These are they, that join with, and own not wholly any Imbodied People; but
while they pretend a general Love to all, yet find fault with some part of
every Sort, while in the mean time they scarce can give any Account of their
own Religion, and most of them prove at bottom to have none at all. These Men,
I say, may perhaps acknowledge some general Truths, and also hold to the Letter
of the Scripture in some other things, so as thereby to take Occasion largely
to judge others; while themselves offer not to bring these good things to
practice, they blame others for the Want or Neglect of. But such an Enterprise
from these Men will not (when weighed) prove a fulfilling of this Matter:
Seeing it is not enough to acknowledge many Truths, but also to deny and
witness against all Error; and likewise, not to fall short of any Truth, which
ought to be acknowledged: Whereas these sort of Men for the most part cannot
give account of their Faith in many things needful to be believed; and whatever
things they may acknowledge to be true, they Err most grievously, and
Contradict a Truth most needful to be minded and answered, as is proved hereto,
in that they stand not forth to appear for any of these Discoveries, they
pretend they have; but make a shift to hide their Heads in Times of Trial,
Pretenders hide their Heads in time of Trial.
so as not to suffer for, nor with any. And through these fine Pretenses
abovementioned, through their Scruples of joining with any, they can cunningly
shun the Difficulties of Persecutions, that attend the particular Sects of
Christians; yet by their general Charity and Love to all* claim a share in any
Benefits or Advantages, that accrue to one and all: Such then cannot honestly
lay claim to justify their Principles and Practices from the Scriptures. But I
leave these Straglers in Religion, and come again to the diverse Sects.

To begin with these, that are most numerous, I think, I need not say much to
the Papists in this Case; for they do not so much as pretend to prove all their
Dogma's by the Scriptures: since it is one of their chief Doctrines, That
Tradition may Authorize Doctrines, without any Authority of Scriptures:
Papistical Dogma's Traditions and Councils.
Yea, the Council of Constance has made bold to Command things to be believed
Non obstante Scriptura; i. e. Though the Scriptures say the contrary. And
indeed, it were their great Folly, to pretend to prove their Doctrines by
Scripture; seeing, the Adoration of Saints and Images, Purgatory, and Prayer
for the Dead, the Precedence of the Bishop of Rome, the Matter of Indulgencies,
with much more Stuff of that kind, has not the least Shadow of Scripture for
it.

Socinians Pretenses contrary to Scriptures.
Among Protestants I know, the Socinians are great Pretenders to the Scriptures,
and in Words as much exalt them, as any other People: and yet its strange to
see, how that not only in many things they are not agreeable to them; but in
some of their chief Principles quite contrary unto it: as in their Denying the
Divinity of Christ, which is as expressly mentioned, as any thing can be; And
the Word was God, John 1. As also in Denying his Being from the Beginning,
against the very Tenor of that of John 1. and diverse others; as at large is
shown in the Third Chapter of this Treatise. Diverse other things as to them,
might be mentioned; but this may suffice, to stop their Boasting in this Matter.

The Arminians are not more successful in their Denying the Doctrine of
Absolute Reprobation, Arminians Denials do center amiss.
and in Asserting the Universal Extent of Christ's Death for all, than they are
short in not placing this Salvation in that Spiritual Light, wherewith Man is
enlightened by Christ; but wrongously ascribing a part of that to the Natural
Will and Capacity, which is due alone to the Grace and Power of God, by which
the Work is both begun, carried on and accomplished. And herein they, Pelagians
the like.
as well as both the Socinians and Pelagians, though they do well in Condemning
their Errors; yet they miss in setting up another, and not the Truth in place
thereof: and in that respect are justly proved by such Scriptures, as their
Adversaries (who otherwise are as far wrong as they) bring against them, in
showing the Depravity of Man's Will by Nature, and his Incapacity to do any
Good, but as assisted by the Grace of God so to do.

On the other hand its strange to observe, how many Protestants (the first
Article of whose Confession of Faith is, to assert the Scripture to be the Only
Rule) should deny the Universal Extent of Christ's Death, contrary to the
express words of Scripture, which says, He tasted Death for every man: or the
Universality of Grace, and a sufficient Principle, which the Scriptures assert
in as many positive Words, as (except we may suppose the Penmen intended
another thing, than they spoke) it was possible to do, viz A Manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; The Grace of God, that
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men: and many more beforementioned.
The like may be said of their denying the Perfection of the Saints, and
asserting the Impossibility of any falling away from real Beginnings of true
and saving Grace; contrary to so many express Scriptures, as are heretofore
adduced in their proper place. But to give all, that desire to be undeceived, a
more full Opportunity to observe, how the Devil has abused many pretending to
be Wise, in making them cloak with a Pretense of Scripture, false and
pernicious Doctrines. I shall take a few of many Instances out of the
Confession of Faith and Catechism, made by the Divines at Westminster (so
called,) because the same is not only most universally received and believed by
the People of Britain and Ireland; but also contains upon the Matter the
Faith of the French Churches, and of most others, both in the Nether-lands, and
elsewhere: that it may appear, what wild Consequences these Men have sought,
both contrary to the naked Import of the Words, and to all Common Sense and
Reason, to cover some of their Erroneous Principles.

CHAP. XVIII. A Short Examination of some of the Scripture-Proofs, alleged by
the Divines at Westminster, to prove diverse Articles in their Confession of
Faith and Catechism.
IT is not in the least my Design in this Chapter, to offer so large and
Examination of any of their Articles, as might be done, nor yet of so many, as
are very obvious; but only of two or three, to give the Reader a Taste of them
for Examples sake: whereby, as ex ungue leonem, he may judge of most of all the
rest, if he will be at the pains narrowly to look over and Examine them.

I shall begin with the first Chapter, Sect. 1. where they assert two things:
First, That God has committed his Will now wholly to Writing. Secondly, That
the former Ways of God's revealing his Will, as by Immediate Revelation, are
now ceased. The Scriptures they bring to prove, are first Prove. 22.19, 20, 21.
Verse 19. Their pretended Proofs for the Written Word.
That thy Trust may be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this day, even to
thee. Verse 20. Have not I Written to thee Excellent Things in Counsels and
Knowledge? Verse 21. That I might make thee know the Certainty of the Words of
Truth, that thou might answer the Words of Truth to them that send unto
thee. Luke 1.3, 4. Verse 3. It seemed good to me also, having had perfect
Understanding of all things from the very first, to Write unto thee in Order,
most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the Certainty of these
things, wherein thou have been Instructed. Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things
were Written afore-time, were Written for our Learning, that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope. Matthew. 4.4, 7, 10. But
he answered, and said, It is Written, Man shall not live by Bread alone, but by
every Word, that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. Verse. 7. Jesus said unto
him, It is Written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Verse. 10. Then
says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is Written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Isa. 8.19, 20. Verse
19. And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have Familiar
Spirits, and unto Wizzards, that peep and that mutter; Should not a People seek
unto their God? for the Living to the Dead? Verse 20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them.

But is it not Matter of Admiration, that Men should be so beside themselves,
as to imagine, these Testimonies do in the least prove their Assertion; or that
others, that do not take things merely upon Trust, would be so foolish, as to
believe them. For though God made known and Wrote excellent things to Solomon;
Though Luke Wrote unto Theophilus an Account of diverse Transactions of Christ's
outward abode; Many things were never Written.
( for many were never Written, John 21. verse last, and 20.30. And there are
also many other things, which Jesus did, the which if they should be Written
every one, I suppose, that even the World it self could not contain the Books,
that should be Written: And many other things truly did Jesus in the Presence
of his Disciples, which are not Written in this Book); Though Christ made use
of diverse Scriptures against Satan, and that Isaiah directed People to the Law,
and to the Testimony; Who will be so mad as to say, It naturally follows from
thence, that God has now committed his Will wholly to Writing? Such a
Consequence is no more deducible from these Scriptures, than if I should Argue
thus; The Divines of Westminster have asserted many things without Ground,
therefore they had Ground for nothing they said: Nay, it follows not by far so
naturally; seeing after the Writing of all these Passages by them cited,
according to their own Judgment, there were diverse Scriptures written: so that
it had been false for them to assert, That God had then committed his Counsel
wholly to Writing; which indeed was not true: So it is most Irrational and
Unwarrantable for any, to draw such a strange and strained Consequence from
their words.

For the Second, That the former Ways are now Ceased, they allege 2 Timothy 3.15.
where Paul writes to Timothy, saying, That from a Child he (Timothy) has known
the Holy Scriptures, Pretended Proofs for Scripture Revelations only
which were able to make him wise unto Salvation through Faith, which is in
Christ Jesus. And Hebr. 1.1, 2. God, who at sundry Times and in diverse Manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last Days
spoken unto us by his Son, whom also he has appointed Heir of all things, by
whom also he made the Worlds. And 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of
Prophecy, whereunto* ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that
shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your
Hearts.

Which prove the Matter as little as the former. If Paul had intended by that
to Timothy, what those Divines would have, would not they have made the Apostle
speak a manifest Untruth? seeing they themselves acknowledge, that John's
Revelation was Written long after: so that these former Ways were not then
ceased. As for that of Peter, John's Revelation when written?
it is to beg the thing in Question, To say, It is intended of the Scripture:
and though it were, it proves not the Case at all. That of the Hebrews is so
far from asserting the Matter they would have it, that it may be very aptly
brought to prove the quite contrary. For God indeed speaks to us now by his
Son; but to infer from thence, That the Son speaks only by the Scriptures, is
Erroneous.
That the Son speaks only to us by the Scriptures, remains yet unproved: And
for the Apostle to have Asserted it, had been false; seeing the Revelations,
which he and others afterward had, were inward, and so such were not Ceased.
And if we may trust the same Apostle better than these Men, he tells us, that
so soon as Christ was Revealed in him, he went straight and obeyed: And the
same Apostle tells us, that Except Christ be in us, we are Reprobates. Sure, he
is not dumb in us, seeing he says, He will dwell in us, and walk in us, and be
with us to the End of the World. And John tells us, that the Inward Anointing
is to teach us all things; so that we need not, as to any absolute Necessity,
any Man to teach us: how then is this ceased, seeing God speaks to us by
Christ, and Christ must be in us? Surely, these Men have not herein followed
the Rule of the Scriptures; but rather endeavored most grossly to wrest them,
and make of them a Nose of Wax, notwithstanding their Pretenses as to the
contrary in their sixth Section, where they say: All things necessary are
either expressly set down, or by good and necessary Consequences may be deduced.
Now that these two former Assertions are not expressly set down, they will not
deny: whether they follow by sound Consequence, any understanding Man may
judge, by what is above observed.

There are diverse other things in the same Chapter, which will not abide the
Test, for which the Scripture-Proofs alleged by them, are most ridiculous;
which for Brevity's sake I have omitted.

In Chap. 21. Sect. 7. where they say, That the Sabbath from the Resurrection
of Christ was changed into the First Day of the Week, which in Scripture (say
they) is called the Lord's Day, and is to be continued to the End of the World,
as the Christians Sabbath. In which they assert Three Things:

First, That the First Day of the Week is come in place of the Seventh for a
Sabbath. To prove which, they allege 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now concerning the
Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye. Upon the First Day of the Week let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God has prospered him; that there be no Gathering, when I come.
Acts 20.7. The Divines Non-sensical Proofs, That the First day of the Week is
instead of the Sabbath.
And upon the First Day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break
Bread, Paul preached to them, ready to depart on the Morrow, and continued his
Speech until Midnight.

That these Proofs Assert not the things expressly, we need not, I suppose,
dispute. Now to say, that because Paul desires the Corinthians to lay something
by them in store that day; or because he brake Bread, continued his Speech
until Midnight; therefore the First Day of the Week is come in place of the
Sabbath: is a Consequence more remarkable for its Sottishness, than to be
credited for its Soundness. Indeed, to make so solemn an Article of Faith, as
these Men would have the Morality of the First Day of the Week to be, would
need a more positive and express Authority. The Text does clearly enough tell
the Reason of the Disciples Meeting so frequently, and of Paul's preaching so
long, because he was ready to depart to Morrow; it speaks not a word of its
being Sabbath.

Their Second Assertion, That the First Day of the Week is therefore called the
Lord 's Day, Is drawn yet more strangely from that of Rev. 1.10. The Lord's Day.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord 's Day, and heard behind me a great Voice, as
of a Trumpet: Whereas no particular Day of the Week is mentioned. So for them
to say, John meaned the First Day of the Week, has no more Proof, but their
own bare Assertion.

For their Third Assertion, That it is to be continued to the End of the World,
as the Christians Sabbath; They that allege these Scriptures, Exodus 20.8, 10,
11. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy: but the Seventh Day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any Work, The Sabbath Day.
thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor
thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger, which is within thy Gates: for in Six Days the
Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
Seventh Day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.
Isaiah 56.2, 4, 6, 7. Matthew. 5.17, 18. Think not, that I am come to destroy the
Law or the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill: For verily, I say
unto you, Till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or one Tittle shall in no wise
pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

If they prove any thing, they must needs prove the continuance of the Seventh
Day; seeing in all the Law there is no mention made of the First Day of the
Week being a Sabbath. The Seventh Day.
If these may be reckoned good and sound Consequences, I know no Absurdities so
great, no Heresies so damnable, no Superstitions so ridiculous, but may be
clothed with the Authority of Scripture.

In their Twenty Seventh Chapter, in the 1, 2, 3. Sections, they speak at large
of the Definition and Nature of Sacraments; but in all the Scriptures they
bring, there is not one Word of Sacraments. The Truth is, there was a good
Reason for this Omission; for such a thing is not to be found in all the Bible.
The word Sacrament, not to be found in all the Bible.
For them to allege, that the thing signified is to be found in Scripture,
(though that be also a begging of the Question) will not excuse such, who
elsewhere aver, The Whole Counsel of God is contained in the Scripture, to
forsake and reject the Tenor thereof, and scrape, out of the Rubbish of the
Romish Tradition, for that which is reckoned by themselves so substantial a
part of their Faith.

In their Fourth Section they assert two things: First, That there are Two only
Sacraments under the Gospel. Secondly, That these two are Baptism, and the
Supper.

To prove which they allege, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and Teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 11.20, 23. When ye come together therefore into one place,
this is* not to eat the Lord 's Supper; for I have received of the Lord, that
which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same Night, in which
he was betrayed, took Bread. 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a Man so account of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Heb. 5.4. 4. And no
Man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Now granting, there were such a thing, as Sacraments, to be solemnly
performed; all that these Scriptures will prove, is, That these Two were
appointed to be performed: But that there are only Two, or that these are they
(which is the thing asserted, and incumbent to be proved) there is not the
least Shadow of Proof alleged. For according to their own Definition of a
Sacrament in the larger Catechism, where they say, The parts of a Sacrament are
two; the one an outward and sensible Sign, used according to Christ's own
appointment; the other, an inward and spiritual Grace thereby signified: both
the Washing of one another's Feet, and the Anointing of the Sick with Oil does
answer to it, and many other Things. So that the Probation of a Sacrament at
all, or of their being Two, Seven, yea, or Seventy, is all alike easy; seeing
neither Name nor Number is to be found in the Scripture: they being the mere
Conceits and Inventions of Men. And yet it is mavelous to see, with how great
Confidence some Men do assert the Scripture to be their Rule; while they build
up so considerable Parts of their Doctrine without the least
Scripture-Foundation.

Thus I thought fit to pitch upon these Three, viz. the Scriptures, Sabbath and
Sacraments, because these be Three of the main things, for which we the Quakers
are chiefly cried out against, and accused, as believing Erroneously concerning
them. Now what we believe concerning these things, and how agreeable our
Testimony herein is to the Scriptures, is heretofore sufficiently demonstrated:
Also, how little Scripture Proof these have for their Contrary Assertions to us
in these things, notwithstanding of their great Pretenses to Scripture, will
also appear to the Unbiassed Reader.

Advertisement to the Reader.
NOTE Reader, That I have here throughout made use of the last Common
Translation of the Bible: And if I would have made use of the Hebrew and Greek;
I could have produced diverse other very clear Scriptures, which in the Common
Translation are corrupted and perverted. But I choosed rather to do thus, that
our Opposers might see, I took no Advantage that way; and also, that all that
can but read, may find the places Cited in their own Bibles.

THE ANARCHY OF THE RANTERS AND OTHER LIBERTINES, THE HIERARCHY OF THE
ROMANISTS, AND OTHER Pretended CHURCHES, equally Refused and Refuted in a
Twofold APOLOGY for the Church and People of God called in Derision QUAKERS.
WHEREIN They are Vindicated from those that Accuse them of Disorder and
Confusion on the one hand, and from such as Calumniate them with Tyranny and
IMPOSITION on the other: showing, that as the True and Pure Principles of the
Gospel are Restored by their Testimony, so is also the Ancient Apostolic ORDER
of the Church of Christ Re-established among them, and settled upon its Right
Basis and Foundation.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

PHIL. 2.3. Let nothing be done through Strife, or Vainglory; but in Lowliness
of Mind let each esteem another Better, than themselves.

HEBR. 13.7. Remember them that have the Rule over you, who spoke unto you the
Word of God, whose Faith follow.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street. 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SVCH is the Malignity of Man's Nature in his fallen State, and so averse is he
from walking in the Straight and Even Path of TRVTH, that at every turn he is
inclinable to lean either to the Right Hand or to the Left; yea, such as by the
Work of God's Grace in their Hearts, and powerful Operation of his Spirit have
obtained an Entrance in this Way, are daily Molested, and set upon on all
Hands; some striving to draw them the one way, some the other: And if through
the Power of God they be kept faithful and stable, then are they Calumniated on
both sides; each Likening or Comparing them to the Worst of their Enemies.

Those that are acquainted with the Holy Scriptures, may observe this to have
been the Lot of the Saints in all Ages; but especially those, whose place it
has been to Reform and Restore the Ruins of the House of God, when decayed, or
any considerable time have been liable to such Censures: hence those that set
about Repairing of the Walls of Jerusalem, were necessitated to Work with the
one Hand, and Defend with the other.

Christ is accused of the Jews as a Samaritan; and by the Samaritans
quarrelled, for being a Jew. The Apostle Paul is whipped and imprisoned by the
Gentiles, and upbraided with being a Jew, and teaching their Customs; the same
Paul is haled and ready to be killed by the Jews for breaking the Law, and
defiling the Temple with the Gentiles. The like has also befallen these
faithful Witnesses and Messengers, whom God has raised up in this day to
witness for his Truth, which has long been in a great Measure Hid; but now is
again Revealed, and many brought to be Witnesses of it who thereby are come to
Walk in the Light of the Lord.

This People, thus gathered, have not wanted those Trials, that usually
accompany the Church of Christ, both on the right hand and on the left, each
Characterizing them in such Terms, as they have judged would prove most to
their Disadvantage. From whence (as the Testimony of the false Witnesses
against their Lord did not agree, neither do these against us) some will have
us to be Foolish, Mad Creatures; others to be deep, subtle Politicians; John
Owen charges us with so much Ignorance, that though he writes against us in
Latin, he fears we will not understand it: And Thomas Danson about the same
time accuses us of being Jesuits, sent from abroad under this Vizzard.
some to be Illiterate, Ignorant Fellows; others, to be Learned, Cunning
Jesuits under a mere Vizzard: diverse Professors will have us to be only
Pensioners of the Pope, undoubtedly Papists; but the Papists abhor us as
Heretics: Sometimes we are a Disorderly, Confused Rabble, leaving every one to
do, as they list, against all Good Order and Government; at other times we are
so much for Order, as we admit not men to exercise the Liberty of their own
Judgments. Thus are our Reputations tossed by the Envy of our Adversaries;
which yet cannot but have this Effect upon sober-minded People, as to see, what
MALICE works against us; and how these men, by their Contradictory Assertions
concerning us, save us the Pains, while they Refute one another.

True it is, we have labored to Walk amidst these Extremities; and upon our
appearing for the Truth, we have found things good in themselves abused upon
both hands: for such has always been the Work of an Apostasy, to keep up the
Shadow of certain Truths; that there-through they might shelter other Evils.
Thus the Jews made use of the Law and the Prophets to vindicate their Abuses;
yea, and to Crucify Christ: And how much many Christians abuse the Scriptures
and the Traditions of the Apostles, to uphold Things quite Contrary to it, will
in the general be readily acknowledged by most.

But to descend more particularly; There be Two Things especially, both of
which in their Primitive Use were appointed; and did very much contribute
toward the Edification of the Church: The one is,

The Power and Authority, which the Apostles had given them of Christ for the
Gathering, Building up and Governing of his Church; by Virtue of which Power
and Authority they also wrote the Holy Scriptures.

That Privilege given to every Christian under the Gospel to be led and guided
by the Spirit of Christ, and to be taught thereof in all things.

Now, both these in the Primitive Church wrought effectually toward the same
End of Edification; and did (as in their Nature they may, and in their Use they
ought to do) in a good Harmony very well Consist together: but by the Workings
of Satan and Perverseness of Men they are made to fight against and destroy one
another. For on the one hand the Authority and Power, that resided in the
Apostles, while it is annexed and entailed to an Outward Ordination and
Succession of Teachers, is made use of to cloak and cover all manner of Abuses,
even the height of Idolatry and Superstition. For by Virtue of this Succession
these Men claiming the like Infallibility, that was in the Apostles (though
they be Strangers to any inward Work or Manifestation of the Spirit in their
Hearts) will needs oblige all others to acquiesce and agree to their
Conclusions, however different from or contrary to the Truths of the Gospel;
and yet for any to call such Conclusions in Question, or Examine them, is no
less than a Heinous Heresy, deserving Death, etc. Or while the Revelation of
God's Mind is wholly bound up to these things already delivered in the
Scriptures, (as if God had spoke his last words there to his People So says
James Durham, a noted Man among the Presbyterians, in his Exposition upon the
Revelations.
) we are put with our own natural Understandings to Debate about the Meanings
of it, and forced to Interpret them not as they plainly speak, but according to
the Analogy of a certain Faith made by Men, not so much contrived to answer the
Scriptures, as the Scriptures are strained to vindicate it: which to doubt of,
is also counted Heresy, deserving no less than Ejection out of our Native
Country, and to be Robbed of the Common Aid our Nativity entitles us to. And on
this hand, we may boldly say, both Papists and Protestants have greatly gone
aside.

On the other hand, some are so great Pretenders to inward Motions and
Revelations of the Spirit, that there are no Extravagancies so wild, which they
will not cloak with it; and so much are they for every ones following their own
Mind, as can admit of no Christian Fellowship and Community, nor of that good
Order and Discipline, which the Church of Christ never was nor can be without.
This gives an open Door to all Libertinism, and brings great Reproach to the
Christian Faith. And on this hand have foully fallen the German Anabaptists, so
called, John of Leyden, Knipperdolling, etc. (in case these monstrous things
committed by them be such, as they are related) and some more moderate of that
kind have been found among the People in England, called Ranters; as it is
true, the People called Quakers have been branded with both of these Extremes:
it is as true, it has been and is their Work to Avoid them; and to be found in
that even and good Path of the Primitive Church, where all were (no doubt) led
and acted by the Holy Spirit: and might all have prophesied one by one; and yet
there was a Subjection of the Prophets to the Spirits of the Prophets. There
was an Authority some had in the Church, yet it was for Edification, and not
for Destruction: there was an Obedience in the Lord to such, as were set over;
and a being taught by such, and yet a knowing of the Inward Anointing, by which
each Individual was to be led into all Truth. The Work and Testimony, the Lord
has given us is, to Restore this again, and to set both these in their right
place, without causing them to destroy one another. To manifest, how this is
Accomplished, and Accomplishing among us, is the Business of this Treatise;
which I hope, will give some Satisfaction to Men of sober Judgments, and
impartial and unprejudicate Spirits: and may be made useful in the good Hand of
the Lord, to Confirm and Establish Friends against their present Opposers.
Which is mainly intended and earnestly prayed for By

The 17th of the 8th Month, 1674. Robert Barclay.

THE CONTENTS.
Section I. THe Introduction and Method of this Treatise. Section II.
Concerning the Ground and Cause of this Controversy. Section III. Whether
there be any Order or Government in the Church of Christ. Section IV. Of the
Order and Government we plead for. Section V. In what Cases, and how far this
Government extends. Section VI. How far this Government extends in Matters
Spiritual and purely Conscientious. Section VII. Concerning the Power of
Decision. Section VIII. How this Government altogether differs from the
Oppressing and Persecuting Principality of the Church of Rome, and other
Antichristian Assemblies.
The Conclusion.

THE Anarchy of the Ranters, etc.
SECTION I. The Introduction and Method of this Treatise.
AFter that the Lord God in his own appointed time had seen meet to put an End
to the Dispensation of the Law, The End of the Law and Beginning of the
Gospel Dispensation recited.
which was delivered to the Children of Israel by the Ministry of Moses;
through and by whom he did Communicate unto them in the Wilderness from Mount
Sinai diverse Commandments, Ordinances, Appointments and Observations, according
as they are testified in the Writings of the Law; it pleased him to send his
own Son the Lord Jesus Christ in the fullness of Time: who having perfectly
fulfilled the Law and the Righteousness thereof, gave Witness to the
Dispensation of the Gospel. And having Approved himself, and the Excellency of
his Doctrine by many, Great and Wonderful Signs and Miracles, he sealed it with
his Blood; and Triumphing over Death (of which it was impossible for him to be
held) he cherished and encouraged his despised Witnesses, who had believed in
him, in that he Appeared to them, after he was raised from the Dead; comforting
them with the Hope and Assurance of the pouring forth of his Spirit, by which
they were to be led and ordered in all things; in and by which he was to be
with them to the End of the World, not suffering the Gates of Hell to prevail
against them. By which Spirit come upon them, they being filled, were emboldned
to preach the Gospel without Fear; and in a short time Thousands were added to
the Church: and the Multitude of them that believed, were of One Heart and of
One Soul, and great Love and Zeal prevailed, and there was nothing lacking for
a season.

But all that was Caught in the Net, did not prove Good and Wholesome Fish; some
were again to be Cast in that Ocean, from whence they were Drawn: of those many
that were Called, The Diverse Sorts of them that were called in the Apostles
days.
all proved not Chosen Vessels fit for the Master's Use; and of all that were
brought into the great Supper and Marriage of the King's Son, there were, that
were found without the Wedding Garment. Some made a Show for a Season, and
afterward fell away: there were, that drew back; there were, that made
Shipwreck of Faith, and of a Good Conscience: there were not only such, as did
backslide themselves, but sought to draw others into the same Perdition with
themselves, seeking to overturn their Faith also: yea, there were, that brought
in Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. And also of those
Members, that became not wholly Corrupt (for some were never again Restored by
Repentance) there were that were weak, and sickly, and young; some were to be
fed with Milk, and not with strong Meat; some were to be purged, when the Old
Leaven received any place; and some to be Cut off for a season, to be shut out
(as it were) of the Camp for a time, until their Leprosy were healed, and then
to be received in again.

Moreover as to Outward, there was the Care of the Poor, of the Widow, The
Order in the Church of God in the Outward.
of the Fatherless, of the Strangers, etc. Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the Head of the Body, the Church, (for the Church is the Body of Christ, and
the Saints are the several Members of that Body) knowing in his infinite
Wisdom, what was needful for the good Ordering and Disposing all things in
their proper Place, and for preserving and keeping all things in their right
Station, did in the Dispensation and Communication of his holy Spirit Minister
unto every Member a Measure of the same Spirit, yet diverse according to
Operation, for the Edification of the Body; some Apostles; some Teachers, some
Pastors some Elders: there are Old Men, there are Young Men, there are Babes.
For all are not Apostles, neither are all Elders, neither are all Babes; yet
are all Members: And as such, all have a Sense and Feeling of the Life of the
Body, which from the Head flows unto all the Body, as the Ointment of Aaron 's
Beard unto the Skirts of his Garment: and every Member has its place and
Station in the Body, so long as it keeps in the Life of the Body; and all have
need one of another: yet is no Member to assume another Place in the Body, than
God has given it; nor yet to grudg or repine its Fellow-member's Place; but to
be content with its own: For the Uncomely Parts are no less needful, than the
Comely; and the less-Honourable, than the more-Honourable: which the Apostle
Paul holds forth in 1 Cor. 12. from Verse 13 to 30.

Now the Ground of all Schisms, Divisions or Rents in the Body is, The Ground
of Rents and Divisions.
when as any Member assumes another Place, than is allotted it; or being gone
from the Life and Unity of the Body, and loosing the Sense of it, lets in the
Murmurer, the Eye that watches for Evil, and not in holy Care over its
Fellow Members: And then, instead of coming down to Judgment in it self, will
stand up and judge its Fellow Members, yea, the whole Body, or those whom God
has set in a more Honorable and Eminent Place in the Body, than it self. Such
suffer not the Word of Exhortation; and term the Reproofs of Instruction (which
is the Way of Life) Imposition and Oppression: and are not aware, how far they
are in the things they Condemn others for; while they spare not to reprove and
revile all their Fellow Members: Yet if they be but admonished themselves, they
cry out, as if their Great Charter of Gospel-Liberty were broken.

Now, though such, and the Spirit by which they are acted, The Subtilty of that
Spirit.
be sufficiently seen and felt by Thousands, whose Hearts God has so
established, as they are out of Danger of being entangled in that Snare; and
who have Power and Strength in themselves to judge that Spirit even in its most
subtle Appearances: yet there are, who cannot so well withstand the Subtilty
and seeming Sincerity some such pretend to, though in measure they have a sight
of them; and others, that cannot so rightly distinguish betwixt the Precious
and the Vile: and some there are, that through Weakness, and want of true
Discerning may be deceived, and the Simplicity in them betrayed for a season;
as it is written, With Fair Speeches and Smooth Words they deceive the Hearts
of the Simple.

Therefore having, according to my measure, received an Opening in my
Understanding, as to these things, from the Light of the Lord, and having been
for some time under the weighty sense of them; I find at this instant a Freedom
to commit them to Writing, for the more Universal Benefit and Edification of
the Church of CHRIST.

Now, The Heads treated of, viz.
for the more plain and clear opening and understanding of these things, it is
fit to sum up this Treatise in these following general Heads, to be considered
of:

First, From whence the Ground and Cause of this Controversy is, the

Secondly, Whether there be now any Order and Government in the

Thirdly, What is the Order and Government which we plead for? Church of Rome,
and other Antichristian Assemblies.

SECTION II. Concerning the Ground and Cause of this CONTROVERSY.
WHenas the Lord God by his mighty Power began to visit the Nations with the
Dawning of his Heavenly Day (for thus I write unto those, The first Dawning of
the Heavenly Day of the Lord described.
that have received and believed the Truth) and that he sent forth his
Instruments, whom he had fitted and prepared for his Work, having fashioned
them not according to the Wisdom and Will of Man, but to his own heavenly
Wisdom and Counsel, they went forth and preached the Gospel in the Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit: not in the Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom; but in
Appearance as Fools and Mad, And breaking forth.
to those that judged according to Man. But their Words and Testimony pierced
through into the Inner Man in the Heart, and reached to that of God in the
Conscience; whereby as many as were simple-hearted, and waited for the
Redemption of their Souls, received them as the Messengers of the Most High
God; and their Words were unto them, not as the Words of Men, but as the Words
of God: for in the receiving and embracing the Testimony of Truth through them,
they felt their Souls eased, and the Acceptable Day began to dawn in and upon
them.

Now what Evidence brought these Men to make their Testimony to be received?
did they Entice? did they flatter? did they daub up? did they preach Liberty to
the Flesh, or Will of Man? Nay verily, they used no such Method: their Words
were as Thunderbolts, knocking down all that stood in their Way; and pouring
down the Judgment of God upon the Head of the Transgressor every where. Did
they spare the Zealous Professor more than the open Profane? Nay verily, they
condemned equally the Hypocrisy of the one, as well as the Profanity of the
other; yet wanted they not Regard to the tender Seed and Plant of God in
either. Did they give way? Did they yield to the Wisdom of Man? To the
Deceitfulness of the Serpent, that would reason Truth for themselves, saying: I
must stay, until I be Convinced of this and that, and the other thing; I see
not yet this to be wrong, or the other thing to be my Duty? How did they knock
down this manner of Reasoning by the Spirit of God, which wrought mightily in
them; showing and holding forth, that this is the Day of the Lord, that is
dawned: that all are invited to come; that none ought to tarry behind: that
that which so pleads, is the same Spirit, which of old time said in those
that were invited; I cannot come yet, I must first marry a Wife; I must go
prove my Yoke of Oxen; I must go visit my Possessions; let me first bury my
dead Father. Did not the Lord through them testify and declare against these
things? and is there not a Cloud of Witnesses, who felt the Enemy thus
reasoning to keep us in the Forms, Fellowships, false Worships and Foolish
Fashions of this World? But we felt, as we were obedient, all these things to
be for Condemnation; and that, as we obeyed the pure Manifestation of the Light
of Jesus in our Hearts, there was no Hesitation. We might and should have
parted with all those things at the first; and what occasioned such Scruples,
was but that, which drew back, through being unwilling to give pure Obedience
to the Cross of Christ: for as many as gave Obedience, and believed in the
Light, found no Occasion of stumbling; but such as believed not, were Condemned
already, because they believed not in him that Appeared. Now the Boldness, and
Courage, and Efficacy of these Messengers Testimony wrought such Astonishment,
The Courage of the Messengers.
Fear and Amazement in the Hearts of such as were Ingenuous, that many began to
be inwardly pricked, as in the Days of old; and the Foundations of many began
to be shaken: and some that were asleep, were awakened; and many that were dead
and buried in the Graves of Sin, and Formality, and Superstition and Idolatry
of all Sorts, were Alarmed: and many were brought in from the Hedges and the
Highways; and the Truth was received by Thousands with great Cheerfulness, and
a Readiness of Mind: and the Feet of those were beheld to be beautiful upon the
Mountains, that brought the Glad Tidings of these good things. And great
Lowliness and Simplicity of Heart was upon such, that were newly Convinced of
the Truth, and Deep Humiliation of Spirit, and Subjection to the Power both in
themselves, and in those who were over them in the Lord, and had gathered them
into the Truth.

But as it was in the Gatherings of Old, so it also fell out in this Day; all
kept not their first Love: As among those Thousands, which Moses led out of
Egypt, and carried through the Red Sea, who had sung Praises to God upon the
Banks of Salvation, many Carcases fell in the Wilderness; some who Murmured and
longed to return again to the Fleshpots of Egypt; Opposition and --
and some for Opposing and Contradicting the Servant, and Servants of the Lord,
whom the Lord had made Use of to lead them out of Bondage, in saying; Ye take
too much upon you; has the Lord indeed only spoken by Moses? has he not
spoken also by us? And as among these Multitudes, which were gathered by the
Apostles, there were many, who continued not faithful to the End; some returned
back again with the Sow to the Puddle, after they were washed; some embraced
the present World; some again separated themselves, -- Separation entering.
being sensual and without the Spirit, despising Dominion, and speaking Evil of
Dignities; their Mouths speaking great swelling Words, being puffed up, and not
abiding in these things, which they were taught of the Apostles; So it is to be
lamented, that among these many Thousands, whom the Apostles and Evangelists
whom God raised up in this Day (for the gathering of his Seed and People out of
spiritual Egypt and Babylon into his pure Light and Life) did bring forth and
gather, there are, that have fallen upon the right Hand and the left. Some are
turned back again into Egypt, running into the same Excess of Lust and Riot,
from whence they were once purified and Redeemed: some could not bear the
Reproach of the Cross of Christ; and were by and anon offended in him: some
could not bear the Tribulations, Sufferings and Persecutions, which came for
the Truth's sake; and the Seed in them was soon scorched with the Heat of the
Day. And some not abiding in Subjection to the Truth in themselves, were not
contented with that Place and Station in the Body, which God had placed them
in; but became vainly puffed up in their Fleshly Minds, intruding into those
things which they have not seen: and would needs be Innovators, given to
Change, Innovators causing Divisions.
and introducing new Doctrines and Practices, not only differing, but contrary
to what was already delivered in the Beginning; making Parties, causing
Divisions and Rents, stumbling the weak, and denying, despising and reviling
the Apostles and Messengers of Christ, the Elders of the Church, who loved not
their Lives unto Death, but through much Care, and Travel, and Watchings, and
Whippings, and Bonds, and Beatings in daily Jeopardy gathered us by the mighty
Power of God in the most precious Truth. Yet in all this there has nothing
befallen us, but that which has been the Ancient Lot of the Church of Christ
in the Primitive Times.

Now He, that was careful for his Church and People in old times, has not been
wanting to us in our Day; The good Shepherd of Israel his Care over his Church
and People.
but as he has again Restored the Truth unto its primitive Integrity and
Simplicity, and as he has delivered our Understandings from these false
Doctrines and Principles, which prevailed in the Apostasy; so he has not
gathered us to be As Sheep scattered without a Shepherd, that every one may run
his own Way, and every one follow his own Will, and so to be as a Confused Mass
or Chaos without any Order; but He, even the LORD has also gathered and is
gathering us into the Good Order, Discipline and Government of his own Son the
Lord Jesus Christ: therefore he has laid Care upon some beyond others, who
watch for the Souls of their Brethren, as they, that must give account.

The several Stations in the Church. 1 Cor. 4.15, 16, 17.
There are then Fathers, that have begotten us unto Christ Jesus through the
Gospel, of whom We ought to be Followers, and to remember their Ways, which be
in Christ. There are then Fathers and Children, Instructors and Instructed,
Elders and Young Men, yea, and Babes; there are that cannot cease, but must
Exhort, Instruct, Reprove, Condemn, Judge; or else, for what End gave Christ
the Gifts mentioned Ephesians. 4.11, 12? And how are the Saints perfected? and the
Body of Christ Edified of those, who come under the Cognizance, and as it were,
the Test of this Order and Government? I may chiefly sum them up in three sorts
(though there be diverse others little subdivided Species of them.)

1. Profane Backsliding Apostates.
The First is, Those that turn openly back to the World again, through finding
the Way of Truth too narrow. These have not been capable to do us any
considerable Hurt; for being as Salt, that has lost its Savor, they mostly
prove a Stink among those, to whom they go: And I never knew any of them, that
proved any ways steadable to those, to whom they go. I find other Professors
make but small Boast of any Proselytes they got out from among us; I hear
little of their proving Champions for the Principles of others against us. And
indeed, for the most part they lose all Religion with the Truth: for I have
heard some of them say; That if ever they took on them to be Religious, they
would come back again to the Quakers, etc.

2. Unwary Repenting Sinners.
Secondly, Those, who through Vnwatchfulness, the secret Corruption of their
own Hearts, and the mysterious or hidden Temptations of the Enemy have fallen
into his Snares; and so have come under the Power of some Temptation or other,
either of Fleshly Lusts, or of Spiritual Wickedness: who being seasonably
warned by those that keep their Habitation, and faithful Overseers in the
Church; have been again Restored by unfeigned Repentance: not kicking against
the Pricks; but have rejoiced, that others watched over them for their good:
and are become Monuments of God's Mercy unto this Day.

3. Self-separating, troublesome Opposers.
Thirdly, Such, who being departed from their first Love and Ancient Zeal for
the Truth, become Cold and Lukewarm; and yet are ashamed to make open Apostasy,
and to turn back again, so as to deny all the Principles of Truth, they having
had already such Evidence of Clearness upon their Understanding: yet not
keeping low in their own Habitations, but being puffed up, and giving Way to
the restless Imaginations of their Exalted and Wandering Minds, fall out with
their Brethren; cause Divisions; begin to find Fault with every thing, and to
look at others more, than at themselves; with swelling Words to talk of and
preach up a higher Dispensation, while they are far from living up to the Life
and Perfection of this present; like unto such, who said, we will not have this
Man to rule over us: cry out of Formality and Apostasy, because they are not
followed in all Things; and if they be reproved for their Vnruliness, according
to the good Order of the Church of Christ, then they cry out, Breach of
Liberty, Oppression, Persecution! we will have none of your Order and
Government; we were taught to follow the Light in our Consciences, and not the
Orders of Men. Well, of this hereafter; but this gave the Rise of this
Controversy: Which leads me to that, which I proposed in the second Place.

SECTION III. Whether there be now to be any Order or Government in the Church
of Christ.
IN Answer to this Proposition I meddle not at this Time with those, that deny
any such Thing, as a Church of Christ; I have reserved their Plea to another
Place. Neither need I to be at much Pains to prove the Affirmative, to wit,
That there ought to be Government and Order in the Church of Christ,
Church Order and Government granted.
unto the Generality of our Opposers, both Papists and Protestants; who readily
confess and acknowledge it, and have heretofore blamed us for want of it.
Though now some of them, and that of the highest Pretenders, are become so
unreasonable, as to accuse us for the Use of it; improving it so far as they
can, to our Disadvantage: For such is the Blindness of partial Envy; that
whereas the supposed Want of it was once reckoned Heretical, now the present
Performance of it is counted Criminal.

These then, to whom I come to prove this Thing, are such, who having cast off
the Yoke of the Cross of Christ in themselves, refuse all Subjection or
Government: denying, that any such thing ought to be, as disagreeing with the
Testimony of Truth: or those, who not being so wilful and obstinate in their
Minds, yet are fearful or scrupulous in the Matter, in respect of the dangerous
Consequences, they may apprehend, such a Thing may draw after it.

For the clearing then as well the Mistakes of the one, as answering the Cavils
of the other, I judge, the Truth of these following Assertions will
sufficiently prove the Matter; which I shall make no great Difficulty to
Evidence.

First, That Jesus Christ, the King and Head of the Church, Order and
Government in it.

Secondly, That the Apostles and Primitive Christians, when they Practice and
Commend it.

Thirdly, That the same Occasion and Necessity now occurring, which gave them
Opportunity to exercise that Authority; the Church of Christ Power now, as
ever, and are led by the same Spirit into the same Practices.

The Abuse makes not void the true Use.
As to the First, I know, there are some, that the very Name of a Church, and
the very Words Order and Government, they are afraid of. Now this I suppose
has proceeded, because of the great Hypocrisy, Deceit and Oppression, that
has been cloaked with the Pretense of these Things; but why should the Truth
be neglected, because Hypocrites have pretended to it? The right Institution of
these Things, which have been appointed and ordained by God, must not, nor
ought not to be despised, because corrupt Men have abused and perverted them. I
know not any thing, that has been more abused and perverted in the whole
World, than the Name of a Christian; shall we then renounce that Honorable
Title, because so many Thousands of Wicked Men, yea, Antichrists have falsely
assumed it to themselves? The Man of Sin has taken upon him to sit in the
Temple of God, as God; yet we must not therefore deny, that God is in this
Temple. If the Synagogue of Satan has assumed the Name of the Church of
Christ, and has termed her Oppression and Violence, the Power and Authority
thereof; therefore must not the Church of Christ and its Authority be
exercised, where it truly is according to his Mind? This I prefix to warn all
to beware of stumbling at things, which are innocent in themselves; and that we
may labor to hold the steady, even Path of Truth, without running in either of
the Extremes. For that Jesus Christ did appoint Order and Government to be in
the Church, Church Order appointed by Christ and the Form thereof.
is very clear from his plain Words, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. Ver. 15.
Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go tell him his Fault
between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother. Ver. 16. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word may be
established. Ver. 17. (...) he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
Church: but (...) neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen^^^* and a Publican, Ver. 18. Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever (...)
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever (...) loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. From which First, that Jesus Christ intended,
there should be a certain Order and Method in Church, in the Procedure toward
such as Transgress. Secondly, That he that refuses to hear two, is become more
guilty (as hardened) first reproved alone. Thirdly, That refusing to hear the
Judgment of the Church, or whole Assembly, he does thereby Exclude himself, and
shut out himself from being a Member; and is justly judged by his Brethren, as
a Heathen and a Publican.

lastly, That the Church, Gathering or Assembly of God's People has Power to
Examine and call to an Account such, as appearing to be among them, or owning
the same Faith with them, do Transgress; and in Case of their refusing to hear,
or Repent, to Exclude them from their Fellowship: and that God has a special
Regard to the Judgment and Sense of his People thus orderly proceeding, so as
to hold such bound in Heaven, whom they bind on Earth, and such loosed in
Heaven, whom they loose on Earth. I am partly Confident, that no rational Man
will deny, but that these naturally follow from the abovementioned Scripture;
and if there should be any found so unreasonable, as to deny it, I could prove
it by necessary and unevitable Consequences: which at present, as taking it for
granted, I forbear to do. If it be reckoned so great a Crime to offend one of
the little ones, that it were better for him, that so did, that a Millstone were
hanged about his Neck, and he were drowned in the Depth of the Sea; without
Question, to Offend and gainsay the whole Flock must be more Criminal, and must
draw after it a far deeper Judgment.

Now if there were no Order nor Government in the Church, what should become of
those that Transgress? How should they be again Restored? Would not this make
all Reproving, all Instructing, The End of Church Order.
all Caring for, and Watching over one another void and null? Why should Christ
have desired them to proceed after this Method? Why does he place so much
Weight upon the Judgment of the Church, as to make the refusing of Hearing it
to draw so deep a Censure after it; which he will not have to follow the
refusing to hear one or two apart, though the Matter be one and the same? And
so as to the Substantial and Intrinsic Truth of the Thing, there lies the same
Obligation upon the Transgressor to hear that one, as well as all; for that one
advises him to that which is right and good, as well as the whole: and they do
but homologate or Confirm that, which that one has already asserted: Yet Jesus
Christ, who is the Author of Order, and not of Confusion, will not have a
Brother cut off, or reputed a Publican, for refusing to hear one or two, but
for refusing to hear the Church. And if it be Objected, That the Church of Rome
and all other false Churches make use of this Scripture, and cover their
Persecution, and Cruelty, and Oppression by it; and thou say no more, than
they say. I answer; I suppose, no man will be so unreasonable, as to affirm,
that the Church of Rome abusing this Scripture, will make it false in it self:
but how we differ in our Application of this Scripture, shall be spoken of
hereafter. I am not now claiming Right to this Power, as due to us (that is
reserved for another place;) but this, I say, is that, which I now aver to be
manifest from the Scripture-Testimony, and to be in itself an unquestionable
Truth, That Jesus Christ intended, there should be Order and Government in his
Church; which is the Thing at present in hand to be proved: which if it be so
really true (as it cannot be denied) then I hope, it will also necessarily
follow, that such, who really and truly are the Church of Christ, have Right to
exercise this Order and Government.

Secondly, That the Apostles and Primitive Christians did practice Order
Government, we need but to read the History of the Acts, of which I shall
mention a few pregnant and undeniable Testimonies, Church Order Practiced by
the Apostles and Primitive Christians.

-- In Elections^


as we may observe in the very first Chapter of the Acts, from Verse 13. to the
End, where at the very first Meeting the Apostles and Brethren held together
after the Ascension of Christ, they began orderly to Appoint one to fulfill the
Place of Judas; it may be thought, this was a needless Ceremony; yet we see,
how the Lord countenanced it. I hope, none will say, that the Apostles
appointing of these two Men, or of him, upon whom the Lot did not fall,
Contradicted their Inward Freedom, or Imposed upon it; but both agreed very
well together: the one in the Will and Movings of God in Appointing, and the
other in the same in submitting to their Appointment.

Moreover, after they had received the holy Ghost, you may read Acts 6. so soon
as there was an Opportunity, how they wisely gave Order concerning the
Distribution of the Poor, -- in Distributions for the Poor.
and Appointed some men for that Purpose. So here was Order and Government
according to the Present Necessity of the Case: And the Lord God was well
pleased with it, and the Word of God increased, and the Number of the Disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem greatly. Might they not have said then, as some say
now: We will give our Charity, to whom we see Cause; and we will take no Notice
of your Appointments and Orders? Whether would God have approved of such, yea,
or nay?

Thirdly, When that the Business of Circumcision fell in, whether it was fit or
not to Circumcise the Gentiles? We see, the Apostles saw not meet To suffer
every one to follow their own Minds and Wills: They did not judge, W. M. in his
Queries.
as one confusedly supposes, That this Difference in an outward Exercise would
commend the Unity of the true Faith; nay, they took another Method. It is said
expressly, Acts 15.6. And the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of
this Matter; and after there had been much disputing about it (no doubt then,
-- in Differences occurring.
there were here Diversities of Opinions and Judgments) the Apostles and Elders
told their Judgments, and came also to a positive Conclusion. Sure, some
behoved to submit, else they should never have agreed. So those that were the
Elders, gave a positive Judgment: and they were bold to say; That it pleased
not only them, but the Holy Ghost. By all which it does undeniably appear, that
the Apostles and Primitive Saints practiced a Holy Order and Government among
themselves: and I hope, none will be so bold as to say, they did these Things
without the Leadings of the Spirit of God, and his Power and Authority
concurring and going along with them.

The Apostles Doctrine concerning Order in the Church.
And that these Things were not only singular Practices; but that they held it
doctrinally, that is to say, it was Doctrine, which they preached, that there
ought to be Order and Government in the Church, is manifest from these
following Testimonies. 1 Cor. 4.15, 16, 17. (15.) For though you have ten
Thousand Instructors in Christ; 1 Cor. 4, 15, 16, 17.
yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through
the Gospel. (16.) Wherefore I beseech you, be ye Followers of me. (17.) For
this Cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved Son, and faithful
in the Lord; who shall bring you into Remembrance of my Ways, which be in
Christ, as I teach every where in every Church. Here the Apostle Paul is very
absolute: First, In that he desires them to be Followers of him. Secondly, In
that he sends a Teacher, yea, a Minister, and Eminent Bishop or Overseer of the
Church for to put them in Mind of his Ways, which be in Christ, as he taught in
every Church. No doubt, there were Apostates and Dissenting Spirits in the
Church of Corinth, that gave Paul Occasion thus to write; as he testifies in
the Beginning of the Chapter, How he was Judged by some of them; he shows, how
they were grown high, verse 8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have
reigned as Kings without us, etc. Might not these Dissenters of the Church of
Corinth have reasoned thus against Paul? Dissenting Reasonings against
Church Government.
Did not this Paul teach us at first to mind the Measure of Grace in our
selves, and follow that? (for no doubt, that was Paul's Doctrine) but now he
begins to Lord it over us, and tells us, we must be Followers of him. Might not
they have judged the Beloved Timothy to be far out of his Place? Might they not
have said; It seems, it is not God that moved thee, and sent thee here by his
Spirit; but Lordly Paul, that seeks Dominion over our Faith: It seems, thou
come not here to preach Christ, and wish us to be Followers of him, and of
his Grace in our Hearts; but to mind us to follow Paul's Ways, and take notice,
how he teaches in every Church: We are not concerned with him, nor with his
Messenger, nor with none of your Orders; and so forth. Does not this run very
plausible? I question not, but there was such a Reasoning among the Apostate
Corinthians; let such, as are of the same kind among us, examine seriously, and
measure their Spirits truly hereby. Yea, he goes yet further in the following
Chapter, verse. 3, 4. Verse. 3. As absent in Body, 1 Cor. 5.3 -- 13. The Power of
giving Judgment in the Church. --
but present in Spirit, have judged already, as though I were present,
concerning him that has so done this Deed. Verse 4. In the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit with the Power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Would not one think this to have been a very
presumptuous Word? and yet who dare offer to Condemn it? From all which I shall
shortly observe, that it seems, it was judged no Inconsistency nor
Contradiction, to be Followers of the Grace in themselves, to be persuaded in
their own Hearts, and also to be Followers of the Apostle Paul, and of his
Ways; because his Ways and Example was no other, than the Spirit of God in
themselves would have led them to, if they had been obedient. Therefore he
found it needful to charge them positively to follow him, without adding this
Reason.

Next, the great Argument the Apostle uses to persuade them hereunto, upon
which he mainly insists, because he had begotten them into the Truth; Ye have
not many Fathers; -- As of Fathers.
for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: wherefore I
beseech you, be ye Followers of me. So he makes that as the Cause; which the
same Apostle also in his Expostulation with the Galatians, putting them in
mind, how he preached the Gospel to them at first, and Chap. 4. Verse. 15. Where
is then the Blessedness ye spoke of? for I bear you Record, if possible, ye
would have plucked out your own Eyes, and given them unto me. We see then, that
the Lord has, and does give such, whom he has furnished, and sent forth to
gather a People unto himself, -- And Overseers.
Care and Oversight over that People; yea, and a certain Authority in the Power
over them to bring them back to their Duty, when they stray at any Time; and to
Appoint, yea, and Command such Things, as are needful for Peace, and Order, and
Vnity's sake: and that there lies an Obligation upon such, as are so gathered,
to Reverence, Honor, yea, and Obey such as are set over them in the Lord. --
To be Obeyed.
For says the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.9. For to this End also did I write, that
I might know the Proof of you, whether you be Obedient in all Things: and Chap.
7. Verse. 13, 15. -- Yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the Joy of
Titus, because his Spirit was refreshed by you all. Verse 15. And his inward
Affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he remembers the Obedience of
you all, how with Fear and Trembling you received him.

Betrayings of the Enemy.
Now this will not at all Infer, as if they had been Implicitly led of Old: or
that such, as having the same Authority to exercise it now, sought Dominion
over their Brethrens FAITH, or to force them to do any thing beyond, far less
contrary, to what the Lord leads us to by his Spirit: but we know (as they did
of Old) that the Enemy lies near to BETRAY under such Pretenses. And seeing, in
case of Difference the Lord has, and does, and will Reveal his Will to his
People, and has and does raise up Members of his Body, to whom he gives a
Discerning, and Power and Authority to Instruct, Reprove, yea, and Command in
some Cases; those, that are faithful and low in their Minds, keeping their own
places, and minding the Lord, and the Interest and Good of his TRVTH in the
general over all, The Murmurer shut out.
shut out the Murmurer; and the Spirit of God leads them to have Unity, and
concur with their Brethren. But such as are heady and high-minded, are inwardly
Vexed, that any should Lead or Rule, but themselves: And so it is the high
Thing in themselves, that makes them quarrel with others for taking so much
upon them; pretending a Liberty, not sinking down in the Seed to be willing to
be of no Reputation for its sake. The Honor of Truth prostrated by Divisions.
Such, rather than give up their own Wills, will study to make Rents and
Divisions, not sparing the Flock; but prostrating the Reputation and Honor of
the Truth even to the World, minister to them an Occasion of Scorn and
Laughter, to the hardening them in their Wickedness and Atheism.

Besides these Scriptures mentioned, I shall set down a few of many more, that
might be Instanced to the same Purpose.

Scriptures for Submission and Lowliness of Mind; and Esteem of the Brethren.
Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting your selves one to another in the Fear of God.

Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through Strife or Vain glory, but in Lowliness
of Mind let each esteem other better, than themselves.

Verse 29. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all Gladness, and hold such
in Reputation.

And 3.17. Brethren, be Followers together of me; and mark them, which walk so,
as ye have us for an Ensample.

And 4.9. Those Things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, Do; and the God of Peace shall be with you.

Col. 2.5. For though I be absent in the Flesh, yet am I with you in the
Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and the Stedfastness of your Faith in
Christ.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12. And we beseech you Brethren, to know them, which Labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

Verse 13. And to Esteem them very highly in Love, for their Work's Sake; and
be at Peace among your selves.

Verse 14. Now we exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all Men.

2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions, which
ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle.

2 Cor. 10.8. For though I should boast somewhat more of our Authority ( which
the Lord has given us for Edification, and not for your Destruction) I should
not be ashamed.

Now though the Papists greatly abuse this place, as if hereby they could
justify that Mass of Superstition, which they have heaped together; yet except
we will deny the plain Scripture, we must needs believe, there lay an
Obligation upon the Thessalonians to observe and hold these Appointments, and
no Doubt, needful Institutions, which by the Apostles were recommended unto
them: and yet who will say, that they ought or were thereby Commanded to do any
thing contrary to that, which the Grace of God in their Hearts moved them to?

2 Thessalonians. 3.4. And we have Confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both
do, and will do the Things, which we Command you.

Verse 6. Now we Command you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother, that walks disorderly, and
not after the Tradition, which he received of us.

What more positive than this? The Authority of the Church, no Imposition.
and yet the Apostle was not here any Imposer. And yet further, Verse 14. And
if any Man Obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no
Company with him, that he may be ashamed.

Thus Hebr. 13.7. Remember them, which have the Rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow; considering the End of their
Conversation.

Verse 17. Obey them, that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account: that they may do it
with Joy, and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

Jude 8. Likewise also these filthy Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise
Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities.

I might at length enlarge, if needful, upon these Passages; any of which is
sufficient to prove the Matter in Hand: but that what is said, may satisfy
such, as are not wilfully blind and obstinate. For there can be nothing more
plain from these Testimonies, The Primitive Christians Order practiced in the
Church.
than that the Ancient Apostles and Primitive Christians practiced Order and
Government in the Church; that some did Appoint, and Ordain certain Things;
Condemn, and Approve certain Practices, as well as Doctrines by the Spirit of
God: That there lay an Obligation in Point of Duty upon others to obey and
submit: That this was no Encroachment, nor Imposition upon their Christian
Liberty; nor any ways contradictory to their being inwardly and immediately led
by the Spirit of God in their Hearts: And lastly, That such, as are in the true
Feeling and Sense, will find it their places to Obey, and be one with the
Church of Christ in such like Cases: And that it is such, as have lost their
Sense and Feeling of the Life of the Body, that Dissent and are disobedient
under the false Pretense of Liberty. So that thus it is sufficiently proved,
what I undertook in this place.

Thirdly, I judge, there will need no great Arguments to prove, the People of
God may and do well to Exercise the like Government upon the very like
Occasion. For even Reason may teach us, that what proved good and wholesome
Cures to the Distemper of the Church in former Ages, will not now (the very
like Distempers falling in) prove hurtful and poisonable; especially, if We
have the Testimony of the same Spirit in our Hearts, not only allowing us, but
commanding us so to do. Distempers of the Church require a Cure now, as of old.
It is manifest (though we are sorry for it) that the same Occasions now fall
in; we find, that there are, that have eaten and drunken with us at the Table
of the Lord, and have been Sharers of the same spiritual Joy and Consolation,
that afterward fall away. We find (to our great Grief) that some walk
disorderly; and some are puffed up, and strive to sow Division, laboring to
stumble the weak, and to cause Offenses in the Church of Christ: What then is
more suitable, and more Christian, than to follow the Footsteps of the Flock,
and to labor and travel for the good of the Church, and for the removing all
that is hurtful; even as the holy Apostles, who walked with Jesus, did before
us? If there be such as walk disorderly now; must not they be admonished,
rebuked and withdrawn from, as well as of Old? Or is such to be the Condition
of the Church in these latter Times, that all Iniquity must go unreproved? Must
it be Heresy or Oppression, to watch over one another in Love? To take Care for
the Poor? To see, that there be no Corrupt, no Defiled Members of the Body, and
carefully and Christianly deal with them, for Restoring them, if possible? and
for withdrawing from them, if incurable? I am persuaded, that there are none,
that look upon the Commands of Christ and his Apostles, the Practice and
Experience of the primitive Church and Saints, as a sufficient Precedent to
authorize a Practice now, that will deny the Lawfulness or Usefulness hereof;
but must needs acknowledge the Necessity of it. But if it be Objected (as some
have done) Do not you deny, Scripture is the adequate Rule of Faith and
Manners? and that the Commands or Practices of the Scripture are not a
sufficient Warrant for you now to do any thing, without you be again
Authorized, and led unto it by the same Spirit? and upon that Score, do you not
forbear some things both Practiced and Commanded by the primitive Church and
Saints?

Well, I hope, I have not any thing weakened this Objection, but presented it in
its full Vigor and Strength: to which I shall clearly and distinctly answer
thus.

Times alter the Usefulness of things Commanded.
First, Seasons and Times do not alter the Nature and Substance of Things in
themselves; though it may cause Things to alter, as to the Usefulness, or not
Usefulness of them.

Secondly, Things commanded and practiced at certain Times and Seasons fall of
themseves, when as the Cause and Ground, for which they were commanded, is
removed: As there is no need now for the Decision about Circumcision, seeing
there are none Contend for it: neither as to the Orders concerning Things
Offered to Idols; seeing there is now no such Occasion: yet who will say, that
the Command enjoined in the same place, Acts 15.20. To abstain from
Fornication, is now made void? seeing, there is daily need for its standing in
force, because it yet remains as a Temptation man is incident to? We confess
indeed, we are against such, as from the bare Letter of the Scripture, (though
if it were seasonable now to debate it, we find but few to deal with, whose
Practices are so exactly squared) seek to uphold Customs, Forms or Shadows,
when the Use, for which they were appointed, is removed, or the Substance it
self known and witnessed: as we have sufficiently elsewhere answered our
Opposers in the Case of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, etc. so that the
Objection, as to that, does not hold; and the Difference is very wide, in
respect of such Things: the very Nature and Substance of which can never be
dispensed with by the People of God, so long as they are in this World; yea,
without which they could not be his People. For the Doctrines, and Fundamental
Principles of the Christian Faith we own and believe originally and
principally, because they are the Truths of God; whereunto the Spirit of God in
our Hearts has constrained our Understandings to obey and submit. In the
second place, we are greatly Confirmed, The Joint-Testimony of the Apostles,
etc. to the Truths of God in our Hearts.
Strengthened and Comforted in the Joint-Testimony of our Brethren, the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ, who by the Revelation of the same Spirit in the Days
of old believed, and have left upon Record the same Truths; so we having the
same Spirit of Faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore
have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore we speak. And we deny not, but
some, that from the Letter have had the Notion of these Things, have thereby in
the Mercy of God received Occasion to have them Revealed in the Life: for we
freely acknowledge, (though often calumniated to the contrary) that Whatsoever
Things were written aforetime, were written for our learning; that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures may have Hope. So then I hope, if the
Spirit of God lead me now unto that which is good, profitable, yea, and
absolutely needful in order to the keeping my Conscience clear and void of
Offense toward God and Man; none will be so unreasonable as to say, I ought
not to do it, because it is according to the Scriptures? Nor do I think, it
will savor ill among any serious, solid Christians, for me to be the more
confirmed and persuaded, that I am led to this Thing by the Spirit, that I find
it in it self good and useful; and that upon the like Occasions Christ
Commanded it, and the Apostles and Primitive Christians practiced and
recommended it.

Now seeing it is so, that we can boldly say with a good Conscience in the
Sight of God, that the same Spirit, which leads us to believe the Doctrines and
Principles of the Truth, and to hold and maintain them again after the Apostasy
in their primitive and ancient Purity, as they were delivered by the Apostles
of Christ in the Holy Scriptures, I say, that the same Spirit does now lead us
into the like holy Order and Government to be exercised among us, as it was
among them, being now the like Occasion and Opportunity ministered to us
therefore; what can any Christianly or Rationally object against it? For that
there is a Real Cause for it, the thing it self speaks; A Real Cause for the
same Order.
and that it was the Practice of the Saints and Church of old, is undeniable:
what kind of Ground then can any such Opposers have (being such, as scrupling
at this, do notwithstanding acknowledge our Principle) that this were done by
Imposition or Imitation, more than the Belief of the Doctrines and Principles?
seeing as it is needful to use all Diligence to Convince and Persuade People of
the Truth, and bring them to the Belief of it (which yet we cannot do, but as
Truth moves and draws in their Hearts) it is also no less needful, when a
People is gathered, to keep and preserve them in Unity and Love, as becomes the
Church of Christ; and to be careful, as says the Apostle, That all things be
done decently, and in Order: and that all that is wrong, be removed, according
to the Method of the Gospel; and the good cherished and encouraged. So that we
conclude, and that upon very good Grounds, That there ought now, as well as
heretofore to be Order and Government in the Church of Christ.

Head III.
That which now comes to be examined in the Third place is,

What is the Order and Government we plead for?

In what Cases, and how far it may extend? and in whom the Power Decisive is?

How it differs, and is wholly another, than the oppressive and persecuting
Principality of the Church of Rome, and other Antichristian Assemblies?

SECTION IV. Of the Order and Government, which we plead for.
IT will be needful then, before I proceed to describe the Order and Government
of the Church, to consider, what is or may be properly understood by the
Church: for some (as I touched before) seem to be offended, or at least afraid
of the very Word, because, The Power of the CHVRCH, The Order of the Church,
The Judgment of the Church, and such like Pretenses, have been the great
Weapons, wherewith Antichrist and the Apostate Christians have been these many
Generations persecuting the Woman, and warring against the Man-child. And
indeed, great Disputes have been among the Learned Rabbis in the Apostasy
concerning this CHVRCH, what it is, or what may be so accounted? Which I find
not my place at present to dive much in; but shall only give the true Sense of
it, according to Truth, and the Scriptures plain Testimony.

What the word Church signifies properly?
The word CHVRCH in it self, and as used in the Scriptures, is no other but a
Gathering, Company or Assembly of certain People called or gathered together:
for so the Greek Word (...) signifies (which is, that the Translators render
Church) which word is derived from the Verb (...), i. e. Evoco, I call out of;
from the Root (...), Voco, I Call. Now though the English word CHVRCH be only
taken in such a Sense, as People are gathered together upon a Religious
Account; yet the Greek word, that is so rendered, is taken in general for every
Gathering or Meeting together of People: and therefore where it is said, The
Town-Clark of the Ephesians dismissed the Tumult, that was gathered there
together, the same Greek word (...) is used, Acts 19.41. (...), he dismissed
the Assembly (or the Church. ( dimisit concionem.)
.)

A Church then in the Scripture Phrase is no other, than a Meeting or Gathering
of certain People, which (if it be taken in a Religious Sense, as most commonly
it is) are gathered together in the Belief of the same Principles, Doctrines
and Points of Faith, What a Religious Church is?
whereby as a Body they become distinguished from others, and have a certain
Relation among themselves; and a Conjunct Interest to the maintaining and
propagating these Principles, they judge to be right: and therefore have a
certain Care and Oversight over one another, to prevent and remove all
Occasions, that may tend to break this their Conjunct Interest, hinder the
Propagation of it, or bring Infamy, Contempt, or Contumely upon it; or give
such, as on the other hand are or may be banded together to undo them, just
Occasion against them, to decry and defame them.

Now the Way to distinguish that Church, How to distinguish the true Church
from the false.
Gathering or Assembly of People, whereof Christ truly is the Head, from such
as falsely pretend thereto, is by considering the Principles and Grounds, upon
which they are gathered together; the Nature of that Hierarchy and Order, they
have among themselves; the Way and Method they take to uphold it; and the
Bottom upon which it stands: which will greatly contribute to clear all
Mistakes.

Forasmuch as Sanctification and Holiness is the great and chief End among true
Christians, which moves them to gather together; therefore the Apostle Paul
defines the Church in his Salutation to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the
Church of God, which is at Corinth, them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints: so the Church is such, as are Sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints.

The Power and Authority, Order and Government we speak of, The Churches Care
over its Members, etc.
is such, as a Church, Meeting, Gathering or Assembly claims toward those,
that have or do declare themselves Members; who own, believe and profess the
same Doctrines and Principles of Faith with us, and go under the same
Distinction and Denomination: whose Escapes, Faults and Errors may by our
Adversaries justly be imputed to us, if not seasonably and Christianly
Reproved, Reclaimed or Condemned. For we are not so foolish, as to concern our
selves with those, who are not of us: far less, who stand in Opposition to us,
so as to Reprove, Instruct or Reclaim them, as Fellow Members or Brethren: Yet
with a respect to remove the general Reproach from the Christian Name, with a
tender Regard to the good of their Immortal Souls, for the Zeal we owe to God's
Glory, and for the Exaltation and Propagation of his Everlasting Truth and
Gospel in the Earth, we have not been wanting with the Hazard of our Lives to
seek the Scattered Ones; holding forth the Living and Sure Foundation, and
inviting and persuading all to Obey the Gospel of Christ, and to take Notice of
his Reproofs, as he makes himself manifest in and by his Light in their Hearts.
So our Care and Travel is and has been toward those, that are without, that
we may bring them into the Fellowship of the Saints in Light; and toward those
that are brought in, that they may not be led out again, or drawn aside, either
to the Left hand, or the Right, by the Workings and Temptations of the Enemy.

These Things being thus cleared and opened, we do positively Affirm, that we
being a People gathered together by the Power of God (which most, if not all of
those, that arising among our selves do Oppose us herein, have acknowledged)
into the Belief of certain Principles and Doctrines, and also certain Practices
and Performances, by which we are come to be separated and distinguished from
others, so as to meet apart, and also to Suffer deeply for our Joint-Testimony;
there are and must of Necessity be, as in the gathering of us, so in the
preserving of us while gathered, Diversities of Gifts in the Church.
Diversities of Gifts and Operations for the edifying of the whole Body. Hence
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders, that rule well, be counted
worthy of double Honor, especially they, who labor in the Word and Doctrine:
And this we suppose neither to be Popish, nor Antichristian; let our Opposers
say it, as often as they can, without reckoning the Apostles such.

Secondly; Forasmuch as all are not called in the same Station, some rich, some
poor; some Servants, some Masters, some married, some unmarried; some Widows,
and some Orphans, and so forth; it is not only convenient, but absolutely
needful, that there be certain Meetings at certain Places and Times, Meetings
about Business --
as may best suit the Conveniences of such, who may be most particularly
concerned in them: where both those that are to take Care, may Assemble, and
those who may need this Care, may come, and make known their Necessities, and
receive Help, whether by Counsel or Supply, according to their respective
Needs. This does not at all contradict the Principle of being Led inwardly and
immediately by the Spirit; else how came the Apostle in that Day of the
Powerful pouring forth of the Spirit of God to set apart Men for this Purpose?
-- established by the Apostle
sure, this was not to lead them from their Inward Guide; yea, of the contrary
it is expressly said, Look ye out among you Seven Men of honest Report, full of
the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this Business. Sure, they
were not to undertake a Business being full of the Holy Ghost, which might
import a Contradiction to their being led by it: So we see, it is both fit and
suitable to the Apostle's Doctrine to have Meetings about Business. Now if any
should be so whimsical or conceited, as to scruple their being at set Places
and Times, though these be nothing relative to the Essential parts, but only
Circumstances relating to the Convenience of our Persons (which we must have
Regard to, so long as we are clothed with Flesh and Blood: and such
Notionists, as are against this Godly Care, work far more in their vain
Imaginations, than they reduce to Practice; being like unto such, of whom the
Apostle James testified, who content themselves with saying to the Naked, Be
^loathed; and to the Hungry, be fed; while they offer not in the least to
Minister to them those Things, which are needful for Clothing and Feeding of
them) Yet shall we not scruple to make it appear, that it is not without very
good Ground, that we both appoint Places and Times. Convenient Places to Meet
in --
And first: As to the Place, I say as before, it is with our Bodies we must
meet, as well as with our Spirits; and so of Necessity we must convey our
Bodies unto one Place, that we may speak and act in those Things we Meet for:
and that must be in some certain Place, where all must know where to find it;
having herein a regard to the Conveniences and Occasions of such as Meet. Were
it fit, that those of the Church of Corinth should go do their Business at
Antioch, or the Church of Jerusalem at Rome? Nay surely, God has not given us
our Reasons to no Purpose; but that we should make use of them for his Glory,
and the good of our Brethren; yet always in Subjection to his Power and Spirit:
and therefore we have respect to these Things in the appointing of our
Meetings, and do it not without a regard to the Lord; but in a Sense of his
Fear. And so the like as to Times; -- And Convenient Set-Times appointed.
which is no contradicting of the inward Leading of the Spirit. Else how came
the Apostle to Appoint a Time to the Corinthians in their Contributions,
desiring them 1 Cor. 16.2. To lay by them in store upon the first Day of the
Week, yea, says he, not that he gave the same Order to the Church of Galatia.
I know not, how any in reason can quarrel Set Times for outward Business; it
being done in a Subjection to God's Will, as all things ought to be: or else
how can such, as so do, but quarrel the Apostle for this Imposition (at that
Rate) upon the Churches of Corinth and Galatia? We appoint no Set-Times for the
Performance of the Worship of God, so as to appoint Men to preach and pray at
such and such Set-Times; though we appoint Times to Meet together in the Name
of the Lord, that we may feel his Presence, and he may move in and through whom
he pleases without Limitation. Reasons for the Continuance of our said
Practice.
Which Practice of Meeting together we are greatly encouraged to by the Promise
of Christ, and our own blessed Experience; and also we are severely prohibited
to lay it aside by the holy Apostle: and also on the other Hand by the sad
Experience of such, as by Negligence or Prejudice forsake the Assemblies of
God's People; upon many of which is already fulfilled, and upon others daily
fulfilling the Judgments threatened upon such Transgressors: read Hebr. 10. from
verse. 23. to the End, where that Duty is so seriously exhorted to, and the
Contempt of it reckoned a Wilful Sin, almost (if not altogether) unpardonable;
yea, a Treading under Foot the Son of God, and a Doing Despite to the Spirit of
Grace: which is fulfilled in our Day; and proves the lamentable Fruits of such,
as have so back-slidden among us. And therefore having so much good and real
Ground, for what we do herein, together with the Approbation and Encouragement
of Christ and his Apostles both by Command and Practice, we can (as that both
the Alpha and Omega, the Foundation and Cap-stone required) faithfully affirm
in good Conscience, That God has led us by his Spirit, both to Appoint Places
and Times, where we may see the Faces one of another; and to take Care one for
another, provoking one another to Love and good Works. And our Faith and
Confidence herein cannot be staggered by a mere Denial in our Opposers, which
no Man of Conscience and Reason will say it ought; seeing the Thing it self
has such a solid and real Cause and Foundation; so good and suitable a Pattern
and Example; and that it is constantly Confirmed to us both by the Testimony of
God's Spirit in our Hearts, and by the good Fruits and Effects, which we daily
reap thereby; as a Seal and Confirmation, that God is well-pleased therewith,
and approves us in it.

Having thus far proceeded to show, that there ought to be Order and Government
among the People of God; and that that, which we plead for, is, that there may
be Certain Meetings set apart for that End; It is next to be considered, In
what Cases, and how far it may Extend?

SECTION V. In what Cases, and how far this Government Extends? and first, as
to Outward and Temporals.
I Shall begin with that, which gave the First Rise for this Order among the
Apostles; The Occasion of those Meetings about Business.
and I do verily believe, might have been among the first Occasions, that gave
the like among us; and that is, The Care of the Poor; of Widows, and Orphans.
Love and Compassion are the great, yea, and the chiefest Marks of Christianity:
Hereby shall it be known, says Christ, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another. And James the Apostle places Religion herein in the first place;
1. To take Care for the Poor, Widows and Orphans.
Pure Religion (says he) and Undefiled before God and the Father is, to visit
the Fatherless and Widows in their Afflictions, etc. For this then, as one main
End do we Meet together, that Inquiry may be made, if there be any poor of the
Household of Faith, that need; that they may be supplied: that the Widows may be
taken Care of; that the Orphans and Fatherless may be bred up and Educated: Who
will be so Unchristian, as to reprove this good Order and Government, and to
say, it is needless? But if any will thus Object; May not the Spirit lead every
one of you to give to them that need? What needs meeting about it, and such
Formalities?

I answer, The Spirit of God leads us so to do; what can they say to the
contrary? Nor is this a Practice any ways Inconsistent with being inwardly and
immediately led by the Spirit; for the Spirit of God does now as well, as in
the Days of Old lead his People into those Things, which are orderly, and of a
good Report; for he is the God of Order, The Example of the Apostles.
and not of Confusion: and therefore the Holy Apostles judged it no
Inconsistency with their being led by the Spirit to appoint Men full of the
Holy Ghost and of Wisdom over the Business of the Poor. Now if to be full of
the Holy Ghost be a Qualification needful for this Employment: surely, the
Nature of their Employment was not to render this so needful a Qualification
useless and ineffectual, as if they were not to be led by it.

Moreover we see, though they were at that Time all filled with the Spirit; yet
there was something wanting, before this good Order was Established. There was
a Murmuring, that some Widows were neglected in the daily Ministration; and we
must not suppose, the Apostles went about to remedy this Evil, that was
creeping into the Church, without the Counsel of God by his Spirit, or that
this Remedy they were led to, was stepping into Apostasy: neither can it be so
said of us, we proceeding upon the like Occasion.

Contributions for the Poor.
If then it be thus needful and suitable to the Gospel to Relieve the
Necessities of the Poor, that as there was No Beggar to be among Israel of Old,
so far less now; must there not be Meetings to appoint Contribution, in Order
to the performing these Things? which is no other, but the giving of a general
Intimation, what the needs are? that every one, as God moves their Hearts, and
has prospered them (without Imposition, Force or Limitation) may give toward
these needful Uses. In which Case these Murmurers at our good Order in such
matters, may well think strange at the Apostle: How pressingly! how earnestly
does he reiterate his Desires and Provocations so to speak, in this Respect to
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.2. and the 8 th and 9 th Chapters of the 2 d Epistle
throughout!

Now though he testifies to them elsewhere, That they are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost; and that the Spirit of God dwells in them; yet cease he not to
entreat and exhort, yea, and to give them certain Orders in this Matter.

Besides all these Reasons, which are sufficient to Convince any unprejudicate
Man, The Secret Approbation of God's Spirit accompanying us in this Thing,
together with the Fruits and Effects of it; which hundreds can witness to,
whose Needs have been supplied, and themselves helped through diverse
Difficulties; and the Testimonies of some already, and of many more Orphans and
Fatherless Children, Fatherless Children put Apprentices.
who have found no want neither of Father nor Mother, or other Relations,
through the tender Love and Care of God's People in putting them in Trades and
Employments, and giving them all needful Education: which will make it appear,
e're this Age pass away, to those that have an Eye to see, that these are not
the mere Doings and Orders of Men; but the Work of him, who is appearing in ten
Thousands of his Saints, to establish not only Truth, but Mercy and
Righteousness in the Earth.

And for that End therefore in the second Place this Order reaches the taking
up and composing of Differences as to outward things, 2. To Compose Differences
in the Church in outward Matters.
which may fall out betwixt Friend and Friend; for such things may fall out
through the Intricacies of diverse Affairs, where neither has any positive
Intention to Injure and Defraud his Neighbor, as in many Cases might be
instanced. Or if through the Workings and Temptations of him, whose Work is to
beset the Faithful, and People of the Lord, and to engender (so far as he can)
Strife and Division among them, any should step aside, as to offer to wrong or
prejudice his Neighbor; we do boldly aver, as a People gathered together by
the Lord unto the same Faith, and distinguished from all others by our
Joint-Testimony and Sufferings, that we have Power and Authority to Decide and
Remove these things among our selves, without going to others to seek Redress:
and this in it self has so much Reason, that I cannot tell, if any that are
not wholly prejudicate or obstinate, can blame it. For if we be of one Mind
concerning Faith and Religion, and that it be our Joint-Interest to bring all
others unto the same Truth with us, as supposing them to be wrong; what
Confidence can we have to think of Reclaiming them, if the Truth we profess,
have not Efficacy, as to Reconcile us among our selves in the Matters of this
World: If we be forced to go out to others for Equity and Justice, because we
cannot find it among our selves; how can we expect to invite them to come among
us, when such Virtues, as which still accompany the Truth, are necessarily
supposed to be wanting? should we affirm otherwise, it were to destroy the
Truth and Faith: we have been and are in the Lord's Hand building up: and
indeed the Spirit and Practice of such as Oppose us herein, has no less
Tendency.

Moreover, besides the Enforcing and Intrinsic Reason of this Thing, we have
the Concurrence, Approbation and Comfort of the Apostle's Testimony, 1 Cor. 6.
Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to Law before the Unjust,
and not before the Saints? If it be objected, Do you reckon all Unjust, that
are not of you? Think ye all other People void of Justice?

Believers not to go to Law before the V^just, etc.
I answer, Though the Apostle uses this Expression, I am persuaded, he did not
reckon all others Unjust, that had not received then the Christian Faith: there
were, no doubt, Moral and Just Men among the Heathen; and therefore the same
Paul commends the Nobility of Festus. He reckons them there Unjust in Respect
of the Saints, or Camparatively with them, as such as are not come to the just
principle of God in themselves to obey it and follow it: and therefore though
he accounts them, who are least Esteemed in the Church, capable to decide such
Matters; yet he supposes it safer to submit to their Judgment in such Cases,
though it were by taking wrong, or suffering wrong, than to go before others to
the greater Reproach of the Truth. We hope, though many Occasions of this kind
have fallen in among us, since we have been a People; none have had just
occasion to decline our Judgment: And though some should suppose themselves to
be wronged; yet if they should go bring their matter before others, we might
say, as the Apostle says in the forementioned Chapter, verse. 7. This were
thereby a Fault in them; and would evidence a greater Care of some outward
Concern, than of the Honor and Interest of Truth: and therefore such, as have
a tender Regard that Way, would rather suffer, The Case of Meum and Tuum.
what to their Apprehensions may seem wrong. For in matters, wherein two
Parties are opposite in the Case of Meum and Tuum, it is somewhat hard to
please both; except where the Power of Truth, and the Righteous Judgment
thereof reaching to that of God in the Conscience, has brought to a true
Acknowledgment him that has been mistaken, or in the wrong: which has
frequently fallen out among us, to the often refreshing and confirming our
Souls in the certain Belief, that Christ was fulfilling his Promises among us,
In restoring Judges, as at the first, and Counselors, as in the Beginning.

Now suppose, any should be so pettish or humorous, as not to agree in such
Matters to the Judgment of his Brethren, Going before Unbelievers from the
Judgment of the Brethren, is a dishonor to the Truth.
and to go before the Unbelievers (for though I reckon them not such
Unbelievers, as the Heathen of Old, because they profess a Faith in God and
Christ: yet I may safely say, they are Unbelievers as to these Principles and
Doctrines which we know are the Truth of God; and in that Sense must be
Unbelievers as to him, that so Appealeth to them from his Brethren.) I say,
such as so do, first commit a certain Hurt and Evil in staining the Honor and
Reputation of the Truth they profess; which ought to be dearer to us, than our
Lives. And even in that outward Matter, for which they thus do, they run a
Hazard, not knowing, whether things shall carry, as they expect: if they
loose, they have a double prejudice; if they gain, it is a too dear Rate, even
with the Hurt of Truth's Reputation, which their outward Advantage cannot make
up. If then it be unlawful to do evil, that good may come of it, even a
Spiritual Good; far less is it lawful to do a positive Evil of so deep a Dye,
as to bring an Evil Report upon the good Land, and give the Uncircumcised an
Occasion to Rejoice: out of the Uncertain Hope of an outward Gain, it is far
better to suffer Loss, as the Apostle very well argues in the Place
abovementioned.

Indeed, if there be any such, have been, or appear to be of us, as suppose,
There is not a wise Man among us all, nor an honest Man, that is able to judge
betwixt his Brethren, We shall not covet to meddle in their Matter; being
persuaded, that either they, or their Cause is naught. Though (Praises to God)
among all those that have gone from us either upon one Account or other, I
never heard, that any were so minded toward us; Apostates Testimony concerning
us.
but the most part of them having let in the Offense of some things or persons,
have had this Unanimous Testimony concerning us, that Generally we are an
honest and upright-hearted People.

But whatever Sense our Enemies or Apostates have of us, who look asquint of
the Face of Truth, and can see nothing aright in those they love not, or are
prejudicate against; This we can say in the last place (besides the Reasons and
Scripture above declared) that the good Fruits and Effects, which daily abound
to the Household of Faith in this as well as the other Parts of the Government
the Lord is establishing among us, does more and more Commend it unto us; and
confirms our Hearts in the certain Belief of that, which we can confidently
testify in good Conscience, That God has led us hereunto by his Spirit: and we
see the Hand of the Lord herein, which in due Time will yet more appear;
Priests forced Maintenance and Tithes have received a deadly Blow.
that as through our faithful Testimony in the Hand of the Lord that
Antichristian and Apostatized Generation, the NATIONAL MINISTRY has received a
deadly Blow by our discovering and witnessing against their Forced Maintenance
and Tithes, against which we have testified by many Cruel Sufferings of all
kinds (as our Chronicles shall make known to Generations to come) so that their
Kingdom in the Hearts of Thousands begins to totter and loose its Strength, and
shall assuredly fall to the Ground, through Truth's prevailing in the Earth; so
on the other Hand do we by coming to Righteousness and Innocence, weaken the
Strength of their Kingdom, who judge for Rewards (as well as such as preach for
Hire) and by not ministering Occasion to those, who have heaped up Riches, and
lived in Excess, Lust and Riot, by feeding and preying upon the Iniquities and
Contentions of the People. For as Truth and Righteousness prevails in the Earth
by our faithful witnessing and keeping to it, the Nations shall come to be
eased and disburdened of that deceitful Tribe of Lawyers, (as well as Priests)
who by their many Tricks and Endless Intricacies have rendered Justice in their
Method burdensome to honest Men, Lawyers by Tricks and Intricacies foment
Controversies.
and seek not so much to put an End, as to foment Controversies and
Contentions, that they themselves may be still fed and upheld, and their Trade
kept up. Whereas by Truth's Propagation as many of these Controversies will die
by Men's coming to be less Contentious; so when any Difference arises, the
Saints giving Judgment without Gift or Reward, or running into the Tricks and
endless Labyrinths of the Lawyers, will soon Compose them. And this is that we
are persuaded, the Lord is bringing about in our Day, though many do not, and
many will not see it; because it is indeed in a Way different and contrary to
Man's Wisdom, who are now despising Christ in his inward Appearance, because of
the Meanness of it; as the Jews of Old did him in his outward: yet
notwithstanding there were some then, that did witness, and could not be
silent, but must testify, that he was come. Even so now are there Thousands,
that can set to their Seal, that he has now again the second time Appeared,
and is appearing in Ten Thousands of his Saints; in and among whom (as a first
Fruits of many more, that shall be gathered) he is restoring the Golden Age,
and bringing them into the Holy Order and Government of his own Son, Christ's
restoring the Golden Age.
who is ruling, and to rule in the midst of them, setting forth the Counselors
as at the Beginning, and Judges as at first; and establishing Truth, Mercy,
Righteousness and Judgment again in the Earth: Amen, Hallelujah!

3. To take care in the Case of MARRIAGES.
Thirdly, These Meetings take Care in the Case of Marriages, that all things be
clear; and that there may nothing be done in that Procedure, which afterward
may prove to the Prejudice of Truth, or of the Parties concerned: which being
an outward Thing (that is acknowledged in it self to be lawful) of the greatest
Importance a Man or a Woman can perform in this World; and from the sudden,
unwary or disorderly Procedure whereof very great Snares and Reproaches may be
cast both upon the Parties, and the Profession owned by them; therefore it does
very fitly among other things, when it occurs, come to be considered of by the
People of God, when Met, to take Care to preserve all things right and savoury
in the Household of Faith. We do believe, our Adversaries, that watch for Evil
against us, would be glad, how promiscuously or disorderly we proceeded in this
weighty Matter; that so they might the more boldly accuse us, as Overturners of
all Humane and Christian Order: But God has not left us without his Counsel
and Wisdom in this Thing; nor will he, that any should receive Just Occasion
against us his People: and therefore in this weighty Concern, we, who can do
nothing against the Truth, but all for and with a Regard to the Truth, have
diverse Testimonies for the Lord. And --

1. Our Testimoniy against Marrying with the Unbeliever.
First, That we cannot Marry with those that walk not in, and obey not the
Truth, as being of another Judgment or Fellowship; or pretending to it, walk
not suitably and answerably thereto.

Secondly, Nor can we go to the Hireling-Priests to uphold their false and
usurped Authority, 2. By the Priest.
who take upon them to marry People without any Command or Precedent for it
from the Law of God.

Lastly, Nor can we suffer any such Kind of Marriages to pass among us, 3. In
forbidden Degrees.
which either as to the Degrees of Consanguinity, or otherwise in it self is
unlawful, or from which there may be any just Reflection cast upon our Way.

Test. 1. Against Unbelievers.
As to the first Two, they being Matter of Principles received and believed, it
is not my Work here to debate them; only since they are received and owned as
such (for which we can and have given our sufficient Reasons elsewhere, as for
our other Principles) we ought to care, how any by walking otherwise, bring
Reproach upon us. Yet not to pass them wholly by, as to the First; Besides the
Testimony of the Spirit of God in our Hearts (which is the Original Ground of
our Faith in all things) we have the Testimony of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor.
6.14. Be ye not unequally yoked together, etc. Now if any should think, it were
much from this Scripture to plead it absolutely unlawful in any Case to join in
Marriage with any (however otherwise Sober) because of their not being one with
us in all Things: I shall speak my Judgment. To me it appears so; and to many
more, who have obtained Mercy; and we think, we have the Spirit of God. But
whether it be lawful or not, I can say positively, It is not Expedient, neither
does it Edify; and (as that which is of dangerous Consequence) does give justly
Offense to the Church of Christ: and therefore no true tender Heart will prefer
his private Love to the Good and Interest of the whole Body.

As for the Second, Test. 2. Against the Priests Usurpations.
In that we deny the Priests their Assumed Authority and Power to Marry, it is
that which in no wise we can Refile from, nor can we own any in the doing of
it; it being a part of our Testimony against the Usurpations of that
Generation, who never yet, that I ever heard of, could produce any
Scripture Proof or Example for it. And seeing, none can pretend Conscience in
the Matter (for they themselves confess, that it is no part of the Essence of
Marriage;) if any pretending to be among us, should through Fear, Interest, or
Prejudice to the Truth come under and bow to that Image, have we not Reason to
deny such Slavish and Ignoble Spirits, as mind not Truth and its Testimony?

Lastly, Seeing, if any walking with us, Test. 3. Against forbidden Degrees of
Consanguinity and Pre-engagements, etc.
or going under the same Name, should hastily or disorderly go together, either
being within the Degrees of Consanguinity, which the Law of God forbids, or
that either Party should have been formerly under any Tie or Obligation to
others, or any other vast Disproportion, which might bring a just Reflection
upon us from our Opposers; Can any blame us for taking Care to prevent these
Evils, by appointing, that such as so design, make known their Intentions to
these Churches or Assemblies, where they are most known, that if any know just
Cause of Hinderance, it may be mentioned, and a Timous Let put to the Hurt,
either by stopping it, if they can be brought to Condescend; or by refusing to
be Witnesses and Concurrers with them in it, if they will not? For we take not
upon us to hinder any to Marry, otherwise than by Advice, or Disconcerning our
selves; neither do we judge, that such as do Marry contrary to our Mind, that
therefore their Marriage is null and void in it self, or may be Dissolved
afterward; Nay: All our meddling is in a holy Care for the Truth. For if the
Thing be Right, all that we do, is to be Witnesses; and if otherwise, that we
may say for our Vindication to such, as may upbraid us therewith, that we
Advised otherwise, and did no ways Concur in the Matter: that so they may bear
their own Burden, and the Truth and People of God be cleared.

Now I am confident, What kind of Persons cannot bear the good Order of Truth.
that our Way herein is so answerable to Reason and Christianity, that none
will blame us therefore; except either such, whose Irregular and Impatient
Lusts cannot suffer a Serious and Christian Examination, and an advised and
moderate Procedure; or such, who watching for Evil against us, are sorry, we
should proceed so Orderly, and would rather, we should suffer all manner of
Irregularities and Abominations, that they might have the more to say against
us. But the Solid and Real Reasons we have for our Way herein, will
sufficiently plead for us in the Hearts of all Sober Men; and moreover, the
Testimony of God's Spirit in our Hearts does abundantly Confirm us both against
the Folly of the one, and the Envy of the other.

Fourthly, There being nothing more needful, than to preserve Men and Women in
Righteousness, after they are brought into it; and also nothing more certain,
4. Our Care for Restoring or Separating Offenders.
than that the great Enemy of Man's Soul seeks daily, how he may draw back
again, and catch those, who have in some measure escaped his Snares, and known
Deliverance from them; therefore do we also Meet together, that we may receive
an Opportunity to understand, if any have fallen under his Temptations, that we
may Restore them again, if possible; or otherwise Separate them from us.
Surely, if we did not so, we might be justly blamed as such, among whom it were
lawful to Commit any Evil unreproved; indeed, this were to be guilty of that
Libertinism, which some have falsely accused us of, and which has been our Care
all along, as became the People of God, to avoid: therefore we have sought
always to keep the House clean, by faithfully Reproving and Removing, according
to the Nature of the Offense, and the Scandal following thereupon; private
things privately, and public things publicly. We desire not to propagate
Hurt, and defile Peoples Minds with telling them such things, as tend not to
Edify; yet do we not so Cover over or Smooth over any Wickedness, as not to
deal roundly with the Persons guilty, and causing them to take away the Scandal
in their Acknowledgment before all, to whose Knowledge it has come: Yet judge
we not our selves obliged to tell that in Gath, or publish that in the Streets
of Askelon, which makes the Daughters of the Uncircumcised Rejoice; or
strengthen Atheists and Ranters in their Obduredness, who feed more upon the
Failings of the Saints, than to Imitate their true Repentance. And therefore
where we find an Vnfeigning Returning to the Lord, we desire not to Remember
that, which the Lord has forgotten; nor yet to throw Offenses in the Way of
the Weak, that they may stumble upon them.

And therefore I conclude, that our Care as to these Things also, is most
needful, and a part of that Order and Government, which the Church of Christ
never was, nor can be without; as does abundantly appear by diverse Scriptures
heretofore mentioned.

SECTION VI. How far this Government does extend in Matters Spiritual, and
purely Conscientious.
THus far I have considered the Order and Government of the Church, as it
respects Outward things; and its Authority in Condemning or Removing such
things, which in themselves are Evil, as being those, which none will readily
justify: the Necessity of which things is such, that few but will acknowledge,
the Care and Order in these Cases to be Commendable and Expedient.

Now I come to consider the things of another kind, which either verily are, or
are supposed to be Matters of CONSCIENCE, or at least, wherein People may lay
claim to Conscience in the acting or forbearing of them. In which the great
Question is, How far in such Cases the Church may give positive Orders, or
Rules? How far her Authority reaches, or may be supposed to be binding, and
ought to be submitted to? For the better clearing and Examination of which, it
will be fit to Consider, First, Whether the Church of Christ have Power in any
Cases, that Sentence and Decision, which may be Obligatory upon Believers?

Secondly, If so, in what Cases and Respects she may so do?

Thirdly, Wherein consists the Freedom and Liberty of Conscience,

And Lastly, In whom the Power decisive is in Case of Controversy Which will
also lead us To observe the vast Difference betwixt us and the Papists, and
others in this particular.



As to the First, Whether the Church of Christ have Power in any Matters of
Conscience, to give a positive Sentence and Decision, which may be Obligatory
upon Believers --

I Answer Affirmatively, she has; Scripture and Reason. For First, All
Principles and Articles of Faith, which are held doctrinally, Articles of Faith
are Matters of Conscience.
are in Respect to those that believe them, Matters of Conscience. We know, the
Papists do out of Conscience, (such as are zealous among them) adore, worship
and pray to Angels, Saints and Images, yea, and to the Eucharist, as judging it
to be really Christ Jesus; and so do others place Conscience in things that are
absolutely wrong: Now I say, 1. Proof from Right-Reason.
We being gathered together into the Belief of certain Principles and Doctrines
without any Constraint or worldly Respect, but by the mere Force of Truth upon
our Understanding, and its Power and Influence upon our Hearts; these
Principles and Doctrines, and the Practices necessarily depending upon them
are, as it were, the Terms, that have drawn us together, and the Yet this is
not so the Bond, but that we have also a more inward and invisible, to wit, the
Life of Righteousness, whereby we also have Unity with the upright Seed in all,
even in those, whose Understandings are not yet so enlightened. But those, who
are once enlightened, this is as an outward Bond; and if they suffer themselves
to be darkened through Disobedience, which as it does in the outward Bond, so it
does in the inward.
Bond, by which we became centered into one Body and Fellowship, and
distinguished from others. Now if any one or more so engaged with us should
arise to teach any other Doctrine or Doctrines, contrary to these, which were
Ground of our being One; who can deny, but the Body has Power in such a Case
to declare, This is not according to the Truth we profess; and therefore we
pronounce such and such Doctrines to be wrong, with which we cannot have Unity,
nor yet any more Spiritual Fellowship with those as hold them? And so such Cut
themselves off from being Members by dissolving the very Bond, by which they
were linked to the Body. Now this cannot be accounted Tyranny and Oppression,
no more than in a Civil Society, if one of the Society shall contradict one or
more of the fundamental Articles, upon which the Society was contracted, it can
be reckoned a breach or iniquity in the whole Society to declare, that such
Contradictors have done wrong, and forfeited their Right in that Society; in
case by the Original Constitution the Nature of the Contradiction implys such a
Forfeiture, as usually it is; and will no doubt hold in Religious Matters. As
if a Body be gathered into one Fellowship by the Belief of certain Principles,
The Disbeliever of the Principles of a Fellowship excludes himself therefrom
and scatters.
he that comes to believe otherways, naturally scatters himself; for that the
Cause, that gathered him, is taken away: and so those, that abide Constant, in
declaring the thing to be so as it is, and in looking upon him and witnessing
of him to others (if need be) to be such, as he has made himself; do him no
Injury. I shall make the Supposition in the general, and let every People make
the Application to themselves, abstracting from us; and then let Conscience and
Reason in every Impartial Reader declare, whether or not it does not hold?
Suppose a People really gathered unto the Belief of the true and certain
Principles of the Gospel, if any of these people shall arise and Contradict any
of those fundamental Truths, whether has not such as stand, good right to Cast
such a one out from among them, and to pronounce positively, This is contrary
to the Truth we profess and own; and therefore ought to be rejected, and not
received, nor yet he that Asserts it, as one of us? And is not this Obligatory
upon all the Members, seeing all are concerned in the like Care, as to
themselves, to hold the right, and shut out the wrong? I cannot tell, if any
man of Reason can well deny this? however I shall prove it next from the
Testimony of the Scripture.

Gal. 1.8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto
you, 2 Proof from Scripture.
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said
before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that ye have received, let him be accursed.

1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Holding Faith and a Good Conscience, which some having put
away, concerning Faith have made shipwreck. Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander,
whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

2 John 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive
him not into your House, neither bid him Rejoice. (for so the Greek has it.)

These Scriptures are so plain and clear in themselves, as to this Purpose,
that they need no great Exposition to the Unbyassed and Unprejudicate Reader.
Foreseeing it is so, that in the True Church there may men arise, and speak
perverse things contrary to the Doctrine and Gospel already received; what is
to be the place of those, that hold the pure and ancient Truth? Must they look
upon these perverse men still, as their Brethren? Must they cherish them as
Fellow Members, or must they judge, condemn and deny them? We must not think,
the Apostle wanted Charity, who will have them Accursed; and that gave
Hymenaeus and Alexander over to Satan, Hymenaeus and Alexander Instanced.
after that they had departed from the true Faith, that they might learn not to
Blaspheme. In short, if we must (as our Opposers herein acknowledge) preserve
and keep those, that are come to own the Truth, by the same means they were
gathered and brought into it; we must not cease to be plain with them, and tell
them, when they are wrong; and by sound Doctrine both Exhort and Convince
Gainsayers. If the Apostles of Christ of old, and the Preachers of the
Everlasting Gospel in this day had told all People, however wrong they found
them in their Faith and Principles, Our Charity and Love is such, We dare not
judge you, A wrong Charity and false Love to Cherish in Error -- is
nor separate from you; but let us all live in Love together, and every one
enjoy his own Opinion, and all will be well: how should the Nations have been?
or what way now can they be brought to Truth and Righteousness? Would not the
Devil love this Doctrine well, by which Darkness and Ignorance, Error and
Confusion might still continue in the Earth unreproved, and uncondemned? If it
was needful then for the Apostles of Christ in the days of old to Reprove,
without sparing to tell the Highpriests and great Professors among the Jews,
That they were stubborn and stiff-necked, and always resisted the Holy Ghost,
without being guilty of Imposition and Oppression, or want of true Love and
Charity; and also for those Messengers the Lord raised up in this day, to
Reprove and Cry out against the Hireling Priests* and to tell the World openly
both Professors and Profane, That they were in Darkness and Ignorance, out of
the Truth, Strangers and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; if God has
gathered a People by this means into the Belief of one and the same Truth, must
not they, they turn and depart from it, be Admonished, Reproved and Condemned
(yea, rather than those, that are not yet come to the Truth) because they
Crucify afresh unto themselves the Lord of Glory, and put him to open Shame?
It seems, the Apostle judged it very needful, they should be so dealt with,
Tit. 1.10. when he says, There are many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers,
especially they of the Circumcision, WHOSE MOVTHS MVST BE STOPPED, etc. Were
such a Principle to be received or believed, That in the Church of Christ no
man should be Separated from, no man Condemned or Excluded the Fellowship and
Communion of the Body for his Judgment or Opinion in Matter of Faith, -- The
Inlet to all manner of Abominations.
then what Blasphemies so horrid, what Heresies so damnable, what Doctrines of
Devils, but might harbor it self in the Church of Christ? What need then of
sound Doctrine, if no Doctrine make unsound? what need of Convincing and
Exhorting Gainsayers, if to Gainsay be no Crime? where should the Unity of the
Faith be? Were not this an Inlet to all manner of Abominations? and to make
void the whole tendency of Christ and his Apostles Doctrine? and render the
Gospel of none Effect? and give a Liberty to the unconstant and giddy Will of
Man to innovate, alter and overturn it at his Pleasure? So that from all that
is abovementioned, we do safely Conclude, That where a People are gathered
together into the Belief of the Principles and Doctrines of the Gospel of
Christ, if any of that People shall go from their Principles, and assert things
false and contrary, to what they have already received; such as stand and abide
firm in the Faith, have Power by the Spirit of God, after they have used
Christian Endeavors to Convince and Reclaim them, upon their Obstinacy to
Separate from such, and to Exclude them from their spiritual Fellowship and
Communion: for otherways if this be denied, farewell to all Christianity, or to
the maintaining of any sound Doctrine in the Church of Christ.

But secondly, Taking it for granted, that the Church of Christ or Assembly of
Believers may in some Cases, that are Matter of Conscience, pronounce a
positive Sentence and Judgment without hazard of Imposition upon the Members,
it comes to be inquired; In what Cases, and how far this Power reaches?

I answer, First, As that which is most clear and undeniable; In the
fundamental Principles and Doctrines of Faith, teach otherways, as is above
declared and proved. But some may perhaps acknowledge that indeed, if any
should Contradict the known and owned Principles of Truth, and teach otherways,
it were fit to cast out and exclude such; but what judge thou as to lesser
matters, as in Principles of less Consequence, or in outward Ceremonies or
Gestures, whether it be fit to press Uniformity in these things? Consideration
For Answer to this, it is fit to Consider,

The Nature of things themselves.

The Spirit and Ground they proceed from.

The Consequence and Tendency of them.

But before I proceed upon these, I affirm, and that according to Truth, That
as the Church and Assembly of God's People may and has Power to Decide by the
Spirit of God in Matters fundamental and weighty (without which no Decision nor
Decree in whatever Matters is available) so the same Church and Assembly also
in other Matters of less Moment, The Decision of Matters of less Moment in the
Church Obligatory.
as to themselves (yet being needful and expedient with a Respect to the
Circumstance of Time, Place and other things that may fall in) may and has
Power by the same Spirit, and not otherways, being acted, moved and assisted,
and led by it thereto, to pronounce a positive Judgment: which, no doubt, will
be found Obligatory upon all such, who have a Sense and Feeling of the Mind of
the Spirit; though rejected by such, as are not watchful, and so are out of the
Feeling and Unity of the Life. And this is that, which none that own Immediate
Revelation, or a being inwardly led by the Spirit, to be now a thing expected
or dispensed to the Saints, can without contradicting their own Principle deny;
far less such, with whom I have to do in this Matter, who claiming this
Privilege to Particulars, saying, That they being moved to do such and such
things, though contrary to the Mind and Sense of their Brethren, are not to be
judged for it; adding, Why may it not be so, that God has moved them to it?
Now, if this be a sufficient Reason for them to suppose as to one or two, I may
without absurdity suppose it as well to the whole Body. And therefore as to the
first, to wit,

The Nature of the things themselves. If it be such a thing, the doing or not
doing whereof, that is either any Act, or the Forbearance of any, may bring a
real Reproach or Ground of Accusation against the Truth professed and owned,
and in and through which there may a visible Schism and Dissension arise in the
Church, Against the Reproach of Truth.
by which Truth's Enemies may be gratified, and it self brought into
Dis-esteem; then it is fit lor such, whose Care is to keep all right, to take
Inspection in the Matter, to Meet together in the Fear of God, to wait for his
Counsel, and to speak forth his Mind, according as he shall manifest himself in
and among them. And this was the Practice of the primitive Church in the Matter
of Circumcision. For here lay the Debate: some thought it not needful to
Circumcise the Gentiles; others thought it a thing not to be dispensed with:
and no doubt, of these (for we must remember, they were not the Rebellious
Jews, but such as had already believed in Christ) there were, that did it out
of Conscience, as judging Circumcision to be still Obligatory. For they said
thus; Except ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved:
Now what Course took the Church of Antioch in these Cases? Acts 15.2. The
Church at Antioch sends a Case to Jerusalem for Advice from the Elders.
They determined, that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them should go
unto Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders about this Question. We must not
suppose, they wanted the Spirit of God at Antioch, to have decided the Matter,
neither that these Apostles neglected or went from their Inward Guide in
undertaking this Journey; yet we see, they judged it meet in this Matter to
have the Advice and Concurrence of the Apostles and Elders, that were at
Jerusalem, that they might be all of one mind in the matter. For there is no
greater Property of the Church of Christ, than pure Unity in the Spirit, that
is, a Consenting and Oneness in Judgment and Practices in Matters of Faith and
Worship (which yet admits of different Measures, Growths and Motions* but never
contrary and contradictory Ones; and in these Diversities of Operations, yet
still by the same Spirit, the true Liberty is exercised, as shall be declared
hereafter:) Therefore prays Christ, That they all may be one, as he and the
Father is one. To which Purpose also let these following Scriptures be Examined:

Romans 12.16. Be of the same Mind one toward another.

1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among
you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment.

Ephesians. 5.21. Submitting your selves one to another in the Fear of God.

Phil. 2.2. Fulfill ye my Joy, that ye be like-minded, having the same Love,
being of one accord, of one Mind.

And yet more remarkable is that of the Apostle Paul to the Philippians, Chap.
3. Verse. 15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in
any thing ye be otherways minded, God shall Reveal even this unto you.

Verse. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing.

Verse. 17. Brethren, be Followers together of me, and mark them which walk so,
as ye have us for an Example.

So here, though the Apostle grants Forbearance in things, Pretenders and
Innovators Judged by the Power of God.
wherein they have not yet attained; yet he concludes, they must walk so, as
they have him for an Example, and so consequently not Contrary, or otherways.
And therefore we conclude, that whereas any in the Church of God pretending
Conscience or Revelation, shall arise to teach and practice (however
insignificant or small in themselves) whether Principles or Practices, yet if
they be contrary to such, as are already received as true, and confirmed by
God's Spirit in the Hearts of the Saints, and that the introducing of these
things tend to bring Reproach upon the Truth, as such, as are not edifying in
themselves, and so stumble the Weak; those who have a true and right
Discerning, may in and by the Power of God authorizing them (and no otherways)
Condemn and Judge such things: and they so doing it, it will be Obligatory upon
all the Members, that have a true Sense, because they will feel it to be so,
and therefore submit to it. And thus far as to the Nature of themselves.

Secondly, As to the Spirit and Ground they proceed from. Whatsoever
Innovation, Difference or diverse Appearance, whether in Doctrine or Practice,
What proceeds not from the Spirit of God, to be withstood and denied.
proceeds not from the pure Moving of the Spirit of God, or is not done out
of pure Tenderness of Conscience, but either from that, which being puffed up,
affects Singularity, and therethrough would be observed, commended and
exalted; or from that, which is the Malignity of some Humors and natural
Tempers, which will be Contradicting without Cause, and secretly begetting of
Divisions, Animosities and Emulations, by which the Unity and unfeigned Love of
the Brethren is lessened or rent; I say, all things proceeding from this Root
and Spirit, however little they may be supposed to be of themselves, are to be
guarded against, withstood and denied, as hurtful to the true Church's Peace,
and a Hindrance to the Prosperity of Truth.

Quest.
If it be said, How know ye, that these things proceed from that Ground?

Answer, I make not here any Application as to particular Persons or Things;
but if it be granted (as it cannot be denied) that there may arise Persons in
the true Church, that may do such Things from such a Spirit, though pretending
Conscience and Tenderness; then it must also be acknowledged, The Spirit of
Discerning in the Church Judges Transgressors,
that such, to whom God has given a true Discerning by his Spirit, may and
ought to judge such Practices, and the Spirit they come from, and have no Unity
with them. Which if it be owned in the General, proves the Case, to wit, That
some pretending Conscience in Things seeming indifferent, but yet it proceeding
in them from a Spirit of Singularity, Emulation or Strife, those that have
received a Discerning thereof from the Lord, may and ought to judge the
Transgressors, without being accounted Imposers, Oppressors of Conscience, or
Inforcers of Uniformity contrary to the Mind of Christ: against which the
Apostle also guardeth the Churches of Old.

Phil. 2.3, 4. Let nothing be done through Strife or Vain Glory; but in
Lowliness of Mind let each esteem other BETTER THAN THEMSELVES.

Look not every Man on his own Things; but every Man also on the Things of
others.

Now if it be an Evil, to do any Thing out of Strife; then such Things, that
are seen so to be done, are they not to be avoided and forsaken? So that we are
confident, our Judgment herein cannot be denied, or reputed Erroneous; except
it be said, That none will or can arise in the Church of Christ, Pretenders may
arise, and must be watched against.
pretending such things from such a Spirit: which I know not any, that will, it
being contrary to the express Prophecies of the Scripture, and the Experience
of the Church in all Ages, as may appear from Matthew. 24.24. Acts 15.54. 1 Timothy
4.5. 2 Timothy 3.8. Mark 13.21, 22. 2 Pet. 2.19. Or on the other Hand, that those
that abide faithful, Discerners of Evils to reprove and warn --
and have a Discerning of those Evils, ought to be silent, and never ought to
Reprove and gain-stand them, nor yet Warn and guard others against them; and
that it is a part of the commendable Unity of the Church of Christ, to suffer
all such Things without taking Notice of them. I know none will say so; but if
there be any so foolish, as to affirm it, let them consider these Scriptures,
Gal. 2.4. 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Tit. 1.9, 10, 11.

Now if none of these hold true; but on the contrary such Evils have been, and
may be found to creep in among the People of God, and that such as see them,
may and ought to reprove them; then necessarily the doing so, is neither
Imposition, Force nor Oppression.

As to the Third, concerning the Consequence and Tendency of them, two former:
for whatsoever tends not to Edification; but on the contrary to Destruction,
-- Sowers of Discord among Brethren to be avoided.
and to beget Discord among Brethren, is to be avoided: according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them, which cause
Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine, which ye have learned, and
avoid them.

And since there is no greater Mark of the People of God, -- To follow Peace
among our selves --
than to be at Peace among themselves; whatsoever tends to break that Bond of
Love and Peace, must be testified against. Let it be observed, I speak always
of the Church of Christ indeed, and deal with such, as are of another Mind: not
as reckoning only false Churches not to have this Power; but denying it even to
the true Church of Christ, as judging it not fit for her so to Act, as in
relation to her Members. For though Christ be the Prince of Peace, and does
most of all commend Love and Unity to his Disciples; yet I also know, he came
not to send Peace, but a Sword that is, in dividing Man from the Lusts and Sins
he has been united to. And also it is the Work of his Disciples and Messengers
to break the Bands and Unity of the Wicked, To the breaking of the Bands of the
Wicked.
wherein they are banded against God and his Truth, and the Confederacy of such
as stand in Unrighteousness, by inviting and bringing as many as will obey,
unto Righteousness; whereby they become dis-united and separated from their
Companion's, with whom they were Centered, and at Peace in the contrary and
cursed Nature. And indeed, blessed are they, Prove. 20.26.
that are sent forth of the Lord to scatter here, that they may gather into the
Unity of the Life: and they are blessed, that in this Respect, even for
Righteousness sake are scattered and separated from their Brethren; that they
may come to know the Brotherhood and Fellowship, which is in the Light: from
which none ought to scatter, nor to be scattered; but be more and more gathered
thereunto. And this leads me, to what I proposed in the Third Place under this
Head of the True Churches Power in Matters Spiritual, or purely Conscientious;
which may be thus Objected:

If thou plead so much for an Oneness in the smallest Matters, wherein Freedom
and Liberty of the Conscience, which may be Exercised by the Members of the
true Church diversely, without judging one another?

In Answer to this Proposition, I affirm, first in general; That whatsoever
Things may be supposed to proceed from the same Spirit, diverse in its
Appearance, tending to the same End of Edification, and which in the Tendency
of it lays not a real Ground for Division or Dissension of Spirit,
Fellow Members ought not only to bear one another, but strengthen one another
in them.

Now the Respects, wherein this may be, I can describe no better, than the
Apostle Paul does principally in two Places, which therefore will be fit to
consider at length for the opening of this Matter; this being one of the
weightiest Points pertaining to this Subject. Because as on the one Hand due
Forbearance ought to be exercised in its right place; so on the other, the many
Devices and false Pretenses of the Enemy

The first is, 1 Cor. 12. from Verse 4. to 31. thus:

Verse. 4. Now there are Diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit.

Diversity of Gifts, Administrations and Operations from the same Spirit, makes
no Division.
V. 5. And there are Differences of Administrations, but the same Lord.

Verse. 6. And there are Diversities of Operations, but it is the same God,
which works all in all.

Verse. 7. But the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

Verse. 8. For to one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the
Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit;

Verse. 9. To another Faith by the same Spirit, to another the Gifts of Healing
by the same Spirit:

Verse. 10. To another the Working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another
Discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, to another the
Interpretation of Tongues.

Verse. 11. But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally, as he will.

As many Members in one Body concur to the upholding the same.
Verse. 12. For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of
that one Body being many, are one Body, so also is Christ.

Verse. 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink
into one Spirit.

Verse. 14. For the Body is not one Member, but many.

Verse. 15. If the Foot shall say, because I am not the Hand, I am not of the
Body; is it therefore not of the Body?

Verse. 16. And if the Ear shall say* because I am not the Eye, I am not of the
Body; is it not therefore of the Body?

Verse. 17. If the whole Body were an Eye, where were the Hearing? If the whole
were Hearing, where were the Smelling?

Verse. 18. But now has God set the Members every one of them in the Body, as
it has pleased him.

Verse. 19. And if they were all one Member, where were the Body?

Verse. 20. But now are they many Members, yet but one Body.

Verse. 21. And the Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor
again, the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you:

Verse. 22. Nay, much more those Members of the Body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary:

Verse. 23. And those Members of the Body, which we think to be less honorable,
upon these we bestow more abundant Honor, and our uncomely Parts have more
abundant Comeliness.

Verse. 24. For our Comely Parts have no Need, but God has tempered the Body
together, having given more abundant Honor to that Part, which lacked:

Verse. 25. That there should be no Schism in the Body; but that the Members
should have the same Care one of another.

Verse. 26. And whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or
one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it.

Verse. 27. Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular:

Verse. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healing, Helps,
Governments, Diversities for Tongues.

Verse. 29. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all
Workers of Miracles?

Verse. 30. Have all the Gifts of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues? Do all
Interpret?

Which I would not have set down at large; but that there be some so careless
(especially in Matters they like not) that they will scarce be at the pains
seriously to read over a Citation only named; and that also this being
presented before the Reader in the Current of the Discourse, will fix the
Nature of my Application the more in his Understanding. The sum of the
premises.
For the Apostle shows here the Variety of the Operations of the diverse Members
of the Body of Christ, working to one and the same End; as the diverse Members
of a Man's Body toward the Maintaining and upholding of the whole.

Now these are not placed in Contrary Workings, for so they would destroy one
another; and so the Apostle in the ordering of them in three several kinds
proves this. First, Diversities of Gifts. Secondly, Differences of
Administrations. Thirdly, Diversities of Operations: and that which is the Bond
that keeps the Oneness, here he also mentions, to wit, The same Spirit, the
same Lord, the same God: the Apostle names nothing of Contrariety or
Opposition. But lest any should be so Critical, as to bring in here the
School-Distinction of Contrarium Oppositum and Contradictorium; I shall not
deny, but Contrariety or Opposition in the Sense it is sometimes taken, may be
found in the Body without Schism: as the Comely Parts may be said to be
Opposite or Contrary to the Uncomely, or the left Hand contrary to the right,
or the Foot opposite to the Head, as the uppermost Part to the undermost; No
Contrariety in the Body of Christ.
or the Doing a thing is contrary to the Forbearing of it; but as for that
which is acknowledged to be Propositions or Termini Contradictorii, that is
Contradictory Propositions, which are in themselves Irreconcilable, whereof one
must be still wrong, and that still destroy one another, and work Contrary
Effects, they are not at all admitted, nor supposed to be in the Body of
Christ: as I shall give in one Instance, Ver. 8. Instances.
To one is given by the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of
Knowledge by the same Spirit: here are two different Gifts, but not Contrary.
Secondly, Contrariety in the Sense before mentioned, be here supposed; as, some
may want this Gift of Wisdom and Knowledge, and so to have is contrary to want
(though as to these two, none may be absolutely said to want them; yet all have
them not in the same Degree, as a special Gift: though as to some Gifts there
may be an absolute Want; as that of Miracles, and Interpretation of Tongues.)
But should I suppose such a Contrariety, or more properly a Contradiction, as
to Wisdom to oppose Folly, and to Knowledge, Utter Ignorance; this were an
Opposition not to be admitted of in the Body, because it were false to suppose,
that to proceed from the same Spirit: And such Contrarieties or Diversities, as
cannot justly be supposed to proceed from the same Spirit of God which is the
Bond that links together, cannot be mutually entertained in the Body. So the
Differences and Diversities, which the Apostle admits of, while he speaks
largely in this Matter, Diversities of Works and Operations in the Body.
are, That none ought to be offended at his Brother, that he has not the same
Work and Office in the Body, that he has; but that every one keep in his own
Place, as God has appointed them: that neither them that are set in a higher
Place, despise them that are set in a lower; nor them that are set in a lower,
grudge and repine at such as are set higher: but all work in their proper Place
toward the Edification of the whole. And that the Apostle intends this, is
manifest, where he draws to a Conclusion, Ver. 27. Now ye are the Body of
Christ and Members in particular, and God has set some in the Church, first,
Apostles, secondly Prophets, etc. and then he subsumes, Are all Apostles? etc.

Paul again Confirms, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. to the 17th. which was the Second Place I
intended; and shall only mention for Brevity's sake, leaving the Reader to
consider of it at his Leisure.

This is also held forth by the Beloved Disciple John in his Threefold
Distinction, 1 John 2.12, 13. Of Fathers, Young Men, and little Children: and
by Peter, 1 Pet. 5.1, 5. in that of Elders and Younger. The true Liberty then
in the Church of Christ is exercised, whenas one judges not another in these
different Places; The true Liberty in the Church.
but live in Love together, all minding the Unity and general good of the Body,
and to work their own Work in their own Place. Also the Forbearance of the
Saints is exercised, whenas they judge not one another for being found in the
different Appearance either of Doing or forbearing; which may be peculiar to
their several Places and Stations in the Body: Diversities of Works expressed
by the Apostle.
For that there is and may be Diversities of Works there, is excellently well
expressed by the Apostle; viz.

Romans 12.3. For I say through the Grace given unto me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly, than he ought to think; but to
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the Measure of Faith.

Verse. 4. For as we have many Members in one Body, and all Members have not the
same Office;

Verse. 5. So we being many, are one Body in Christ, and every one Members one
of another.

Verse. 6. Having then Gifts differing, according to the Grace that is given to
us, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the Proportion of Faith:

Verse. 7. Or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that teaches, on
Teaching:

Verse. 8. Or he that Exhorts, on Exhortation: He that gives, let him do it
with Simplicity; he that Rules, with Diligence; he that shows Mercy, with
Cheerfulness.

If any then should quarrel with his Brother, for exercising that which
belongs to the Office of the Body, Christ has called him to, and would force
him to exercise the same Office he does, though he be not called to it; The
Breach of Liberty begets Jars and Schisms.
here is a Breach of Christian Liberty, and an Imposing upon it. Now all
Schisms and Jars fall out in this twofold Respect: Either when any Person or
Persons assume another or an higher Place in the Body, than God will have them
to be in, and so exercise an Office; or go about to perform that, which they
ought not to do; or when as any truly exercising in their Place, which God has
given them, others rise up, and judge them, and would draw them from it: both
of which Cases have been, and may be supposed to fall out in the Church of
Christ. As 1 Cor. 4.3, 4 where some judged Paul wrongously: 3 John 9. where one
exalting himself above his Place, judged, whom he ought not. We see then, what
Diversities be most usually in the Church of God, consisting in the Difference
of the Gift proceeding from the same Spirit; and in the diverse Places, that the
several Members have in the same Body for the Edification of it; and every one
being here in his own Station, is standing therein, is his Strength and
Perfection; and to be in another, though higher and more eminent, would but
weaken and hurt him: and so in this there ought to be a mutual Forbearance,
that there may neither be a coveting nor aspiring on the one hand, nor yet a
despising or condemning on the other. Acts of Forbearance in the Primitive
Church.
But besides the Forbearance of this Nature, which is most ordinary and
universal (and for the Exercise whereof there is and will still be a need, so
long as there is any Gathering or Church of Christ upon the Earth) there is a
certain Liberty and Forbearance also, that is more particular, and has a
Relation to the Circumstance of Times and Places, which will not hold
universally: whereof we have the Example of the Primitive Church, testified by
the Scriptures in two or three Particulars. The first was, in suffering
Circumcision to the Jews for a time, and not only so, but also diverse others of
the Legal and Ceremonial Purifications and Customs, as may appear Acts 21.
verse. 21, 22, 23, 24, etc. The second was, in the Observation of certain days,
Romans 14.5. And the third, In the Abstaining from Meats, 1 Cor. 8. throughout:
Here the Apostle persuades to and recommends a Forbearance, because of the
Weakness of some; for he says not any where, nor can it be found in all the
Scriptures of the Gospel, that these things such Weak ones were exercised in,
were things indipsensibly necessary, or that it had been better for them, they
had not been under such Scruples, providing it had been from a Principle of
true Clearness, and so of Faith.

Next again, Acts of Forbearance or Condescension under the Law.
These Acts of Forbearance were done in a Condescension to the Weakness of
such, upon whom the Ancient (and truly deserved in its season) Veneration of
the Law had such a deep Impression, that they could not yet dispense with all
its Ceremonies and Customs: And to such the Apostle holds forth a twofold
Forbearance.

First, A certain Compliance by such Believers, as were gathered out from the
Jews: though they saw over these things, 1. To Jews.
yet it was fit they should Condescend somewhat to their Countrymen and
Brethren, who were Weak.

Secondly, The like Forbearance in the Gentiles, 2. To Gentiles.
not to judge them in these things: but we see, that it was not allowed for
such weak ones to propagate these Scruples, or draw others into them; and that
whenas any of the Churches of the Gentiles, who wanted this Occasion, would
have been exercising this Liberty, or pleading for it, the Apostle does
down-rightly Condemn it; as I shall make appear in all the Three Instances
abovementioned.

First, In that of Circumcision, Gal. 5.2, 4. 1. Of Circumcision.


Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing; Christ is become of none effect unto you: Whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace.

Can there be any thing more positive? Might not some here have pretended
Tenderness of Conscience, and have said; Though the Decree of the Apostles do
dispense with Circumcision in me; yet if I find a Scruple in my self, and a
Desire to it out of Tenderness, why should it be an Evil in me to do it, more
than in the Jews that believe? We see, there is no room left here for such
Reasoning.

Secondly, As to Observations, Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. Might not they have answered,
Of Observations of Days.
What if we Regard a Day to the Lord, must we not then? Are not these thy own
Words? We see, that did not hold here, because in them it was a Returning to
the Beggarly Elements.

Thirdly, As to Meats, 1 Timothy 4.3. Here we see, that is accounted Doctrine of
Devils; Of Meats.
which in another respect was Christian Forbearance. And therefore now, and
that in the general respect, he gives this Reason, Verse. 4. For every Creature
of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving
of them that believe, and know the Truth. So we see, that in these particular
things there is great need of Wariness in the Church of Christ; for that
sometimes Forbearance under a Pretense of Liberty may be more hurtful, than
downright Judging. I suppose, if any should arise, and pretend Conscience, and
claim a Liberty for Circumcision and the Purifications of the Law, whether all
Christians would not with one Voice Condemn it? And so as to Days and Meats,
how do the Generality of Protestants Judge it? Though I deny not, but there may
and ought to be a mutual Forbearance in the Church of Christ in certain such
Cases, which may fall in; and a Liberty there is in the Lord, which breaks not
the Peace of the true Church: but in such Matters (as I observed at large
before) both the Nature of the things, the Spirit they come from, and the
Occasion from whence, and their Consequence and Tendency is to be carefully
observed.

SECTION VII. Concerning the Power of Decision.
SEeing then, it may fall out in the Church of Christ, that both some may
assume another place in the Body, than they ought, and others may lay claim to
a Liberty, and pretend Conscience in things they ought not, and that without
Question the wrong is not to be tolerated, but to be testified against, however
specious its Appearance may be; and that it must and ought to be judged: The
Question will arise, Head III.
Who is the proper Judge or Judges, in whom resideth the Power of this
Controversy? And this is that, which I undertook in the next Place to Treat of,
as being the Specific Difference, and Distinguishing Property of the Church of
Christ from all other Antichristian Assemblies and Churches of Man's building
and framing.

To give a short, and yet clear and plain Answer to this Proposition: The only
proper Judge of Controversies in the Church, is the Spirit of God, and the
Power of deciding solely lies in it; as having the only Unerring, Infallible
and Certain Judgment belonging to it: which Infallibility is not necessarily
annexed to any Persons, The Spirit of God the proper Judge of Controversies in
the Church.
Person or Places whatsoever by Virtue of any Office, Place or Station any one
may have, or have had in the Body of Christ. That is to say, that any have
Ground to Reason thus, Because I am or have been such an Eminent Member,
therefore my Judgment is Infallible; or, Because we are the greatest Number;
or, that We live in such a Noted or Famous Place, or the like: though some of
these Reasons may and ought to have their true Weight in Case of Contradictory
Assertions (as shall hereafter be observed) yet not so, as upon which either
mainly or only the Infallible Judgment is to be placed; but upon the Spirit, as
that which is the firm and unmovable Foundation.

And now if I should go on no further, I have said enough to vindicate us from
IMPOSITION, and from the Tyranny whether of Popery, Prelacy or Presbytery, or
any such like we have or may be branded with; as shall after appear.

But to proceed: herein lies the Difference betwixt the Dispensation of the
Law, and the Gospel or New Covenant; for that of old all Answers were to be
received from the Priests in the Tabernacle. For he, that appeared betwixt the
Cherubims there, Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89. Hos. 12.10. Amos 7.14. 2 Chronicles. 18.6,
7. John 6.45. Hebr. 1.1, 2.
spoke forth his Mind to the People; and there were also Families of the
Prophets, to whom they resorted for the Answer of the Lord (though sometimes as
a Signification of the further Glory, that was to be Revealed, it pleased God
to Reveal his Mind to some, even to them, who were neither Prophets nor
Prophets Sons) but under the Gospel we are all to be taught of God, that is,
none are excluded from his Privilege by not being of the Tribe of Levi, or of
the Children of the Prophets: though this Privilege is as truly exercised in
some by Assenting and Obeying, to what God Commands and Reveals through others
(they feeling Unity with it in the Life) as by such, who by the Revelation and
Command of God's Spirit hold forth his Will to his People in certain
Particulars, which the same Spirit leads and commands them to obey. So that we
say, and that with a very good Ground, that it is no way Inconsistant with this
Sound and Unerring Principle, to affirm, That the Judgment of a certain Person
or Persons in certain Cases is Infallible, Judgment Infallible proceeds from
the Spirit Infallible.
or for a certain Person or Persons to give a positive Judgment, and pronounce
it as Obligatory upon others, because the Foundations and Ground thereof is not
because they are Infallible; but because in these Things, and at that Time they
were Led by the Infallible Spirit. And therefore it will not shelter any in
this Respect to pretend, I am not bound to obey the Dictates of Fallible Man;
is not this Popery, I not being persuaded in my self? Because it is not to be
disobedient to them, but to the Judgment of Truth through them at such a Time;
and one or more their not being persuaded, may as probably proceed from their
being hardened, and being out of their Place, and in an Incapacity to hear the
Requirings, as that the Thing is not Required of them; which none can deny, but
it may as well be supposed, as the Contrary. But for the further clearing of
this Matter, before I Conclude, I shall not doubt both to affirm and prove
these following Propositions.

First, That there never will, nor can be wanting in Case of Controversy, the
Spirit of God to give Judgment through some or other in the Church of Christ,
so long as any Assembly can properly, or in any Supposition be so termed.

Secondly, That God has ordinarily, in the communicating of his Will under his
Gospel, employed such, whom he had made Use of in gathering of his Church, and
in feeding and watching over them; though not Excluding others.

Thirdly, That their de Facto, or effectually Meeting together, and positive
Judgment in such Cases, will not import Tyranny and Usurpation, or an
Inconsistency with the Universal Privilege, that all Christians have, to be
led by the Spirit; neither will the Pretenses of any contradicting them, or
refusing to Submit upon the account they see it not, or so, excuse them from
being really guilty of disobeying God.

For the First, to those that believe the Scripture, there will need no
Probation, Matthew. 28.20. And lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of the
World. And Verse 18. And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

Now if the Church of Christ were so destitute of the Spirit of God, that in
Case of Difference there were not any found, that by the Infallible Spirit
could give a certain Judgment; The Infallible Spirit the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against.
would not then the Gates of Hell prevail against it? For where is Strife and
Division, and no effectual Way to put an End to it, there not only the Gates,
but the Courts and Inner Chambers of Darkness prevail; for where Envying and
Strife is, there is Confusion, and every Evil Work.

But that there may be here no Ground of Mistake, or Supposition, that we were
annexing Infallibility to certain Persons, or limiting the Church to such; I
understand not by the Church, every particular Gathering or Assembly,
circumscribed to any particular Country or City: for I will not refuse, but
diverse of them, both apart and together, if not Established in God's Power, The
Erring Church or People. --
may Err. Nor yet do I lay the absolute Stress upon a General Assembly of
Persons, as such, picked and chosen out of every one of those particular
Churches; as if what the Generality or Plurality of those Conclude upon, were
necessarily to be supposed to be the Infallible Judgment of Truth: though to
such an Assembly of Persons truly stated (as they ought) in God's Power, he
has heretofore Revealed his Will in such Cases; and yet may, as the most
probable Way (which shall be spoken of hereafter:) yet such, as a mere
Assembly, is not Conclusive. Nor yet do I understand by the Church, every
Gathering or Assembly of People, who may hold Sound and True Principles, or
have a Form of Truth; for some may lose the Life and Power of Godliness, --
Having the Form of Truth.
who notwithstanding may retain the Form or Notions of Things, but yet are to
be turned away from, because in so far (as I observed before) as
Sanctification, to wit, those that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, make the
Church, and give the right Definition to it: where that is wholly wanting, the
Church of Christ cease to be; and there remains nothing but a Shadow without
Substance. Such Assemblies then are like the dead Body, when the Soul is
departed, which is no more fit to be Conversed with; because it corrupts, and
proves noisome to the living. But by the Church of Christ I understand all
those, that truly and really have received and hold the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, and are in measure sanctified, or sanctifying in and by the Power and
Virtue thereof working in their inward Parts: The true Church.
and this may be made up of diverse distinct Gatherings or Churches in several
Countries or Nations; I say, so long as these or any of them do retain that,
which justly entitles them the Church or Churches of Christ (which they may be
truly called) though there may fall out some Differences, Divisions or Schisms
among them: as we may see, there was no small Dissension in the Church of
Antioch, and yet it ceased not to be a Church, Acts 15.2. and 1 Cor. 1.11.

For it has been declared unto me of you, my Brethren, that there are
Contentious among you, and yet Verse. 2. he entitles them the Church of God,
them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus: So long, I say, as they truly retain
this Title of the Church of Christ, as being really such, there will never be
wanting the certain Judgment of Truth. For which, The certain Judgment of Truth
is never wanting in the Church of Christ.
besides the positive Promise of Christ beforementioned (which is not without
Blasphemy to be called in question, or doubted of) I shall add these Reasons.
That seeing the Church of Christ is his Body, of which he is the Head, it were
to make Christ negligent of his Body, who styles himself the good Shepherd,
and has said, He will never leave nor forsake his own; or else (which is
worse) it would infer a possibility of Error, or Mistake in Christ, in whom, as
the Head are the Eyes of the Body, by which it is to be Ruled in all things.
Next, we never find in all the Scripture since the Gospel, that ever this was
wanting; but that God still gave Infallible Judgment by his Spirit in some of
the Respects abovementioned. If the Transactions and Controversies of the
after-Centuries be alleged, I will boldly affirm and prove, that there was
never a true Judgment wanting, so long as the Nature and Essence of the true
Church was retained: If any will needs affirm otherwise, let them show me
where, and I shall answer it. Though I deny not (that after the Mystery of
Iniquity did begin to work, or had so wrought first by intermixing, and
afterward by altogether forsaking the Nature of Truth, retaining only the bare
Name of the Church) but that there might be some scattered ones, here and there
one in a Nation, and now and then one in an Age, who by the Power and Virtue of
the Spirit of Life working in them, might be truly sanctified; yet these were
but as Witnesses in Sackcloth, Witnesses in Sackcloth.
no ways sufficient to give these Assemblies, in which they were engrossed, the
Appellation of the Church of Christ, coming no more under Observation by the
Generality, nor having as to them any more Influence, than some Tittle, or
scarcely discernable Sparks of Fire in many great Heaps and Mountains of Ashes.
And thus much to prove, that where there is any Gathering or Assembly, which
truly and properly may be called the Church of Christ, the Infallible Judgment
will never be wanting in Matters of Controversy.

Secondly, That ordinarily God has in the Communicating of his Will whom he
had made use of in Gathering of his Church, and in feeding and watching over
them, though not excluding others. For as in a Natural Body (to which the
Church of Christ is compared) the more-substantial and powerful Members do work
most effectually; and their Help is most necessary to supply any Defect or
Trouble in the Body: so also, if there be Diversities of Gifts in the Church
(as is above proved) and some have a greater Measure, and some a lesser; those
that have the greater, are more capable to do good and to help the Body in its
need, than others, that are weaker, and less powerful: since there are strong
and weak, Babes and Young Men, who have overcome the Evil One, and in whom the
Word of God abides; such are more able, when the Enemy besets, to Resist
(having already Overcome) than others, who are but yet Wrestling, and not
Conquerors. Now, From the Besetments of the Enemy Dissensions arise.
every Controversy and Dissension in the Church comes from the Besetments of
the Enemy; yet if any of these Strong or Young Men, or Powerful Members go from
their Station, it is not denied, but that they are as Weak as any; and it is
presupposing their Faithfulness in their Place, that I thus Affirm, and no
otherwise. Nor yet do I limit the Lord to this Method; for in him are all the
Treasures both of our Wisdom and Strength; and the weakest in his Hand are as
strong, as the strongest, who may now as well, as heretofore kill a Goliath by
the Hand of little David: yet we see, the Lord does ordinarily make use of the
Strong to support the Weak; and indeed, when such as may be termed Weak, are so
made use of, it alters the Nature of their Place, and constitutes them in a
higher and more eminent Degree. For though it was little David, it was also he,
that was to be King of Israel. Though the Apostles were mean Men among the
Jews; yet they were such, as were to be the Apostles of the Lord of Glory,
Instruments to gather the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, and to proclaim
the Acceptable Day of the Lord. And though Paul was once accounted the Least of
all the Saints, a Child born out of due Time; yet was he him, who was to be the
greatest Apostle of the Gentiles.

Now then let us Consider, whom the Lord makes use of in the Affairs of the
Primitive Church, and through whom he gave forth his Infallible Judgment? Did
he not begin first by Peter? he was the first, that spoke in the first Meeting
they had, Acts 1. and who first stood up after the pouring forth of the Spirit;
and who first appeared before the Council of the Jews, and spoke in behalf of
the Gospel of Christ: Though I am far from calling him (as some do) the Prince
of the Apostles; yet I may safely say, he was one of the most Ancient and
Eminent, and to whom Christ in a Manner somewhat more than ordinary had
recommended the Feeding of his Flock. We see also, he was first made use of in
preaching to the Gentiles; and what Weight his and James's Words had in the
Contest about Circumcision toward the bringing the Matter to a Conclusion,
Acts 15. Yet that we may see, Infallibility was not inseparably annexed to him,
he was found blamable in a certain Matter, Gal. 2.11. notwithstanding his
Sentence was positively received in many particulars.

So also the Apostle Paul argues from his Gathering of the Churches of Corinth
and Galatia, that they ought to be Followers of him; and positively Concludes
in diverse Things: and upon this Supposition exhorts the Churches (both he and
Peter) in many Passages heretofore mentioned (which I will not, to avoid
Repetition, again rehearse) To obey the Elders that watch for them; to hold
such in Reputation, and to submit themselves to them that have addicted
themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15, 16.

Also we see, how the Lord makes use of John his beloved Disciple, to Inform
and Reprove the seven Churches of Asia; and no doubt, John (the Rest by the
usual Computation being at that Time all Removed) was then the most-noted and
famous Elder alive: And indeed, I mind not, where under the Gospel Christ has
used any other Method, but that he always in Revealing his Will has made use
of such, as he himself had before appointed Elders and Officers in his Church.
Though it be far from us to limit the Lord, so as to Exclude any from this
Privilege; nor yet on the other hand will the Possibility hereof be a
sufficient Warrant to allow every obscure Member to stand up, and offer to
Rule, Judge and Condemn the whole Body: nor yet is it without Cause, that such
an one's Message is Jealoused, and called in Question; unless it have very
great Evidence, and be bottomed upon some very weighty and solid Cause and
Foundation. And God does so furnish those whom he raises up, in a singular
Manner, of which (as I said) I mind no Instance in the New Testament: and in
the Old we see, though it was strange, that little David should Oppose himself
to the great Goliath, yet he had before that killed both the Lion and the Bear,
which was no less improbable; and which of all is most observable, was before
that Time by the Appointment of God, and the Hand of the Prophet Anointed King
of Israel. Compare the 16th and 17th Chap. of the 1 st of Samuel.

Now as to the Third, That any particular Persons de facto, or effectually is
no Incroaching nor Imposing upon their Brethren's Conscience, is necessarily
included, in what is said before; upon which for further Probation there will
only need this short Reflection. That for any Member or Members in Obedience to
the Lord to give forth a positive Judgment in the Church of Christ, is their
proper Place and Office, they being called to it; and so for them to exercise
that Place in the Body, which the Head moves them to, is not to Vsurp Authority
over their Fellow Members: As on the other Hand to submit and obey, (it being
the Place of some so to do,) is not a Renouncing a being led by the Spirit;
seeing the Spirit leads them so to do: And not to Obey, in Case the Judgment be
according to Truth, and the Spirit lead to it, is, no doubt, both Offensive and
Sinful. And that all this may be supposed in the Church of Christ without
Absurdity, and so establish the abovementioned Propositions, will appear by a
short Review of the former Passages.

If that Peter and James their giving a positive Judgment in the Case of
Difference in diverse particulars, did not infer them to be Imposers; so neither
will any so doing now, being led to it by the same Authority: Every one may
easily make the Application. And on the Contrary, if for any to have stood up
and Resisted their Judgment, pretending an Vnclearness, or so, and thereby held
up the Difference after their Sentence, breaking the Peace and Unity of the
Church (Things being concluded with an It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us) I say, if such would have given just Cause of Offense, Acts 15.21.
and have been Cut off, as Despisers of Dignities of old, will not the like
Case now occurring hold the same Conclusion? Now whether those Propositions do
not hold upon the Principles before laid down and proved, I leave to every
Judicious and Impartial Reader to judge.

Moreover we see, how positive the Apostle Paul is in many particulars
throughout all his Epistles, insomuch as he says, 2 Thessalonians. ult. v. 14. If any
Man obey not our Word by this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with
him, that he may be ashamed. And in many more Places beforementioned, where he
Commands them both to Obey him and several others, Submission and Obedience to
the Judgment of Truth, the Spirit of God leads into.
who were Appointed (no doubt by the Spirit of God) to be Rulers among them;
and yet who will say, that either the Apostle did more, than he ought, in
Commanding? or they less, than they were obliged to, in Submitting? and yet
neither were to do any thing Contrary or more, than the Spirit of God in
themselves led them to or allowed them in. And if the Church of God bear any
Parity or Proportion now in these Days, with what it did of Old (as I know no
Reason, why it should not) the same things may now be supposed to take Effect,
that did then; and also be lawfully done upon the like Occasion proceeding from
the same Spirit, and established upon the same Basis and Foundation. And thus
much as to that Part to show, In whom the Power of Decision is? Which being
seriously and impartially considered, is sufficient to clear us from the
Tyranny either of Popery, or any other of that Nature, with those that are not
either wilfully Blind, or very Ignorant of Popish Principles; as the Judicious
Reader may observe. But seeing, To manifest that Difference, was one of those
things propsoed to be Considered of; I shall now come to say something of it in
its proper Place.

Section VIII. How this Government altogether differs from the Oppressing and
Persecuting Principality of the Church of Rome, and other Antichristian
Assemblies.
Head III.
WHatever Way we understand the Popish Principles in this Matter, Most devoted
to the Sea of Rome, as the King of Spain's Dominions, Italy, the Jesuits and
Generality of all those called Religious Orders, who hold, that Papa in
Cathedra non potest errare, licet absque Concilio, that is, That the Pope in
his Chair cannot Err, though without a Council; or of those that are Less
devoted, who plead this Infallibility in the Pope and Council lawfully
Convened, who yet by the more zealous are reckoned Petty Schismatics; I say,
whatever, Way we take them, all those that do profess themselves Members of the
Romish Church, Principles of the Romish Church.
and are so far such, as to understand their own Principles, do unquestionably
acknowledge,

That no General Council can be lawfully called, without the Bishop of Rome, as
Christ's Vicar and Peter 's Successor call it.

Secondly, That either he himself, or some for him, as his Legates must be
there present, and always preceed.

Thirdly, That the Members having Vote, are made up of Bishops, or Presbyters,
or Commissioners from the several Orders being of the

Fourthly, That what is Concluded on by Plurality of Votes, and Agreed Pope and
his Legates, must necessarily be supposed to be the Judgment of the Infallible
Spirit.

Fifthly, That all the Members of the Church are bound Implicitly to Council to
be accounted Lawful in the Respects abovementioned, without Regard to the
Intrinsic or Real Truths of the Things prescribed, or bringing them in any
Respect to the Test or Examination of the Spirit of God in themselves, or the
Scriptures Testimony, or their Agreement or Disagreement with Truths formerly
believed and received: for so much as to Prove or Try them by Way of Doubt,
they reckon a Breach of the first Command; as on the other Hand a matter of
Merit, Implicitly to receive and believe them, however inconsistent with the
Testimony of the Spirit in ones own Heart, Scripture, Truth and Reason.

Sixthly, That no Man as a Member of the Church of Christ in that unless a
Clergyman, or the Ambassador of some King, etc. can be admitted to Sit, Vote
or give his Judgment.

Seventhly, That it is in no Respect to be supposed, that any Members,
especially Laics, whether in a particular City, Country or Nation, may meet
concerning any Things relating to the Faith and Worship of the Church, and give
by the Spirit of God any Judgment; but that all such Meetings are to be
accounted Schismatical and Unlawful. And

Lastly, That the Promise of Infallibility, and the Gates of Hell not is
necessarily annexed to the Pope and Council called and authorized in the Manner
above-expressed.

Now if to deny every one of these Propositions, wherein all Understanding Men
know the Errors and Abuses of the Romish Church consist, be to be Popish; then
indeed may we be supposed to be one with the Papists in this Matter, but no
otherwise: So that the very mentioning of these things is sufficient to show
the Difference betwixt us and them. But if any will needs plead our Agreement
with them thus;

The Papists affirm an Infallibility of Judgment in the Church of Christ, and
so do you; therefore you are one with Papists.

I Answer, That proves no more our Oneness in this Matter, than if The Papists
plead, that God ought to be Worshipped, and so do you; Therefore ye Agree:
Notwithstanding of the Vast Differences as to that; which is known not only
betwixt us and them, but betwixt them and all Protestants, who Agree more with
them in the matter of Worship, than we do.

Next again, Infallibility in the Church (according as we hold it, Defined it)
no man upon our Supposition (or Hypothesis) can deny it. For since we first
Assert as a Principle, That no Gathering, no Church, nor Assembly of People,
The true Church is Led by the Infallible Spirit.
however True their Principles or Exact their Form be, are to be accounted the
Church of Christ, except the Infallible Spirit lead and guide; what can be the
Hazard to say, that in such a Church there is still an Infallible Judgment?
Indeed, this is so far from Popery, that it resolves in a Proposition quite
Contradictory to them. The Romanists say, That the Infallible Spirit always
accompanies the Outward Visible Professors, and is annexed to the External
Succession of Bishops and Pastors, though ever so Vicious, as to their Lives:
yea, though perfect For some Popes have been known to deny, or at least to
doubt the Truth of the Scriptures, as to the History of Christ, and to call in
question the Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection.
Atheists and Infidels in their private Judgments, yet if outwardly professing
the Catholic Faith and Subjection to the Church, they must be partakers of the
Infallible Spirit. We say the quite Contrary: That where there is either
Vitiousness of Persons, or Vnsoundness of Judgment in the particular Members;
these cannot by Virtue of any outward Call or Succession they have, or any
Profession they make, or Authority they may pretend to, so much as claim an
Interest in any part of the Church of Christ, or the Infallible Spirit.

So then, if we admit none to be Members of the Church, but such as are led and
guided by the Spirit; The Infallible Judgment where it is?
it will be no Popery in the Second Place to affirm, That were there is a
Company of People so gathered who are not any longer to retain justly the Name
of the Church of Christ, than they are led and guided by his Spirit; or a
Church so qualified and designed, there is still an Infallible Judgment. So
that this Infallibility is not annexed to the Persons, to the Succession, to
the bare Visible Profession (though true, which the Church of Rome is denied to
be) or to any Society, because of its Profession; but singly and alone to the
True, Real and Effectual Work of Sanctification and Regeneration, the New
Creature brought forth in the Heart: And this is the Spiritual Man, which the
Apostle says, Judges all Things, 1 Cor. 2.15. To affirm, there is an
Infallibility here, cannot well be Condemned by any; or whosoever does, must needs
say, the Spirit of God is fallible: For we place the Infallibility in the
Spirit and in the Power, not in the Persons. And so these are the Degrees we
Ascend by; Because such and such Men are led by the Spirit of God, and are
obedient to the Grace in their Hearts, therefore are they Members and Officers
in the Church of Christ. And because they are Members of the Church of Christ
in the Respect before declared, therefore there is an Infallible Judgment among
them. We do not say, Because such men profess the Christian Faith, and have
received an outward Ordination, and so are by a lawful Succession formally
established Officers in the Church, when they Meet together (according to
certain Rules above-declared) there is an Infallibility annexed to their
Conclusions, and they cannot but Decide what is Right; or rather, what they
Decide, must needs be supposed to be Right: Who sees not here a vast
Disproportion?

Now we differ herein fundamentally, that is, as to the very Basis and
Foundation, upon which we build; and that not only from the Church of Rome, but
also from the Generality of Protestants in this matter. All Protestants do
acknowledge a General Council to be useful, The Constitution of a Synod or
General Council among --
yea, necessary in the Case of Division or Debate; let us consider the Basis,
upon which they proceed, and the Stress they lay upon it.

First, All jointly, both the Prelatical and Presbyterial will have this Synod
or Council to Consist of a Convocation of the Clergy, 1. Protestants.
Chosen and sent from the Particular Congregations, with some few Laick Elders
called together by the Civil Magistrate; in case he be one in Judgment with
them.

They decide by Plurality of Votes. And though they assume not an Absolute
Infallibility, in that they reckon it possible for them to Err; yet do they
reckon their Decisions Obligatory upon their supposed Consonancy to the
Scripture: and however do Affirm, that the Civil Magistrate has Power to
Constrain all to Submit and Obey; or else to punish them either by Death,
Banishment, Imprisonment, Confiscation of Goods, or some other Corporal Pain;
even though such be persuaded and offer to make appear, that the Decisions they
Refuse, are Contrary to the Scriptures.

And Lastly: (Among the Papists,) None, 2. Papists.
though otherwise Confessed to be a Member of the Church both Knowing and
Sober, except Commissionate in some of the Respects above-declared, can be
Admitted to Sit, Vote and give his Judgment.

Any that will be at the Pains to apply this to the Foundation I before laid of
the Infallibility of Judgment, in that we may account only to be truly called
the Church of Christ, 3. We Differ from them Both.
will easily fee the great Difference betwixt us; which I shall sum up in these
particulars:

First, Do we Exclude any Member of the Church of Christ, that Judgment?

Secondly, Do we say, man ought to be persecuted in his Outward in Spirituals?

Thirdly, Do we plead, that Decision is to pass Conclusive, because of
plurality of Votes?

And much more; which the Reader may observe, from what is already mentioned:
which that it may be all more Obvious at One View, will appear somewhat clearly
by this following Figure; which will give the Reader an Opportunity to
Recollect, what lay heretofore more scattered.

I. The ROMANISTS say,
1. That there is an Infallibility in the Church: which Infallibility is, when
the Pope calls a General Council of Bishops, etc. that whatsoever they Conclude
and Agree upon, must needs be the Infallible Judgment of the Spirit of God,
because of the Promise of Christ, That he would never suffer the Gates of Hell
to prevail against his Church.

2. And that the Pope and Council, made up of certain of the Clergy, having one
Outward Succession, and being lawfully Ordained according to the Canons, are
that Church, to which that Promise is made, however wicked or depraved without
any necessary Respect to the Inward Holiness or Regeneration of the Persons; if
so be, they be Outwardly Called, Ordained and Invested in such a Place and
Capacity, as gives them an Authority to be Members of such an Assembly.

3. What they thus Decide (as they judge according to the Scripture) ought to
be received with Reverence, and Submitted to: and those that do not, to be
punished by the Civil Magistrate by Death, Banishment or Imprisonment; though
they declare and be ready to evidence, that it is, because they are not
Agreeable to the Scripture, they refuse such Decrees.

II. The Generality of PROTESTANTS say,
1. That though all Synods and Councils may Err; yet such Assemblies are
needful for the Edification of the Church. That such do Consist of a
Convocation of the Clergy, West. Conf. of Faith. Chap.
with some few Laics particularly Chosen. That all others, except those so
Elected, have not any Right to Vote or give Judgment.

2. That such an Assembly so Constitute, may Ministerially determine
Controversies of Faith, Cases of Conscience, Matters of Worship, and
authoritatively determine the same. The Decision is to be by Plurality of
Votes, praved they be; yet this Infallible Judgment follows them, as being
necessarily annexed to their Office, in which the Authority still stands in its
full Strength and Vigor.

3. So that there lies an Obligation upon the whole Body of the Church to Obey
their Decrees: And such as do not, are not only certainly damned for their
Disobedience; but that it is the Duty of the Civil Magistrate to punish such by
Death, Banishment or Imprisonment, etc. in Case they Refuse.

III. The QUAKERS say,
The Sanctified Members.
1. That whereas none truly ought, nor can be accounted the Church of Christ,
but such, as are in a measure Sanctified or Sanctifying by the Grace of God,
and led by his Spirit; nor yet any made Officers in the Church, but by the
Grace of God, and Inward Revelation of his Spirit, (not by Outward Ordination
or Succession:) from which none is to be Excluded, if so Called, whether
Married, or a Tradesman, or a Servant.

2. If so be, in such a Church there should arise any Difference, there will be
an Infallible Judgment from the Spirit of God, Their Infallible Judgment --
which may be in a General Assembly; yet not limited to it, as excluding
others: And may prove the Judgment of the Plurality; yet not to be decided
thereby, as if the Infallibility were placed there, excluding the fewer. In
which Meeting or Assembly upon such an Account, there is no Limitation to be of
Persons particularly Chosen; but that all, that in a true Sense may be reckoned
of the Church, as being Sober and Weighty, may be present, and give their
Judgment.

-- To be Submitted unto.
3. And that the Infallible Judgment of Truth (which cannot be wanting in such a
Church) whether it be given through one or more, ought to be Submitted to, not
because such Persons give it; but because the Spirit leads so to do: which
every one coming to in themselves, will willingly and naturally Assent to. And
if any through Disobedience or Vnclearness do not all, that the Church ought to
do, She is to deny them her spiritual Fellowship; in case the nature of their
Disobedience be of that Consequence, as may deserve such a Censure: But by no
means for Matter of Conscience to Molest, Trouble or Persecute any in their
Outward.

Who will be at the Pains, to Compare these Three seriously together, I am
hopeful, will need no further. Argument to prove the Difference. But if any
will further Object, What, if it fall out de facto, that the Teachers, Elders
or Plurality do Decide, (and from thence will say,) This is like the Church of
Rome, and other false Churches? It will be hard to prove that to be an
Infallible Mark of a Wrong Judgment, as we have not said, it is of a Right. And
indeed, Conclude it were so, would necessarily Condemn the Church in the
Apostles days, where we see, the Teachers and Elders, and so far as we can
observe, the greater Number did agree to the Decision, Acts 1.15. For if the
thing be Right, and according to Truth, it is so much the better, that the
Elders and greater Number do agree to it; and if Wrong, their Affirming of it
will not make it Right: And truly, a Gathering, where the Elders and greater
Number are always or most frequently Wrong, and the Younger and lesser Number
Right, is such, as we cannot suppose the True Church of Christ to be. And if
any will plead, that there is now no Infallible Judgment to be expected from
the Spirit of God in the Church, it (no doubt) will leave the Dissenters as
much in the Mist, and at as great a loss, as those they Dissent from; both
being no better than blind men, hitting at random; which will turn Christianity
into Skepticism. And though we may acknowledge, that this Uncertainty prevails
in the generality of those called Churches; yet we do firmly believe (for the
Reasons above declared, and many more, that might be given) That the True
Church of Christ has a more solid, stable Foundation; and being never separated
from Christ, her Head, walks in a more certain, steady and unerring Path.

The CONCLUSION.
THE Substance then, of what is Asserted and Proved in this Treatise, resolves
in these following Particulars: A Summary Recollection of the whole.


First, That in the Church of Christ, when it Consists of a visible (for I
speak not here of the Church in the dark Night of Apostasy, that consisted not
of any Society visibly united) gathered into the Belief of certain Principles,
and united in the joint- Performance of the Worship of God, as Meeting
together, praying, preaching, etc. there is and still must be a Certain Order
and Government.

Secondly, That this Government, as to the Outward Form of it, Consists Certain
Meetings, Appointed principally for that End; yet not so, as to exclude Acts of
Worship, if the Spirit move thereunto.

Thirdly, The Object of this Government is twofold, Outward and Inwards. The
Outward relate mainly to the Care of the Poor, of Widows and Fatherless; where
may be also included Marriages, and the Removing of all Scandals in things
undeniably wrong: The Inwards respect an Apostasy either in Principles or
Practices, that have a Pretense of Conscience, and that either in Denying some
Truths already Received and Believed; or Asserting New Doctrines, that ought
not to be Received. Which again (to subdivide) may either be in Things
Fundamental, 1674
and of great moment; or in things of less Weight in themselves, yet proceeding
from a Wrong Spirit, and which in the natural and certain Consequence of them
tend to make Schisms, Divisions, Animosities, and in sum, to break that Bond of
Love and Unity, that is so needful to be upheld and established in the Church
of Christ. And here come also under this Consideration all Emulations, Strifes,
Backbitings and evil Surmisings.

Fourthly, That in the True Church of Christ, according to the Definition above
given of it,) there will in such Cases of Differences and Controversies still
be an Infallible Judgment from the Spirit of God, either in one or other, few
or more.

Fifthly, That this Infallible Judgment is only and unalterably annexed and
seated in the Spirit and Power of God; not to any particular Person or Persons,
Meeting or Assembly, by virtue of any settled Ordination, Office, Place or
Station, that such may have, or have had in the Church; no Man, Men nor Meeting
standing or being Invested in any Authority in the Church of Christ upon other
Terms, than so long as he or they abide in the living Sense and Unity of the
Life in their own particulars: which whosoever one or more inwardly departs
from, ipso facto loses all Authority, Office or certain Discerning, he or they
formerly have had; though retaining the true Principles and sound Form, and
(may be) not fallen into any gross Practices, as may declare them generally to
be thus withered and decayed.

Sixthly, That Jesus Christ under the Gospel has ordinarily Revealed his Will
in such Cases through the Elders, and Ministers of the Church, or a General
Meeting; whose Testimony is neither to be despised or rejected without good
Cause. Neither is their taking upon them Really to Decide, any just Ground to
charge them with Imposition, or to quarrel their Judgment; unless it can be
proved, that they are decayed, and have lost their Discerning, as above.

Seventhly, That to Submit and Obey in such Cases, is no detracting from the
Common Privilege of Christians to be Inwardly led by the Spirit, seeing the
Spirit has led some heretofore so to do, and yet may. And that every Pretense
of Vnclearness is not a Sufficient Excuse for Disobedience, seeing that may
proceed from Obstinacy, or a Mind prepossessed with Prejudice: Yet say I not,
any ought to do it, before they be Clear; and who are, every Right will not
want Clearness, in what They ought to do.

Lastly, That these Principles are no ways tainted with Imposition, or contrary
to true Liberty of Conscience: And that they fundamentally differ from the
Usurpations both of Popery, Prelacy and Presbytery, or any other of that Nature.

Robert Barclay.

Robert Barclay HIS VINDICATION, Scruples and Mistakes some have had touching
his Book called The Anarchy of the Ranters, are Cleared, and the Ground, upon
which W.R's. Papers against it are Built, Removed; the Substance of the Papers
being briefly Answered by way of EPISTLE to FRIENDS, who therein have or may be
Concerned.
Which may serve, as an EXPLANATORY P0ST-SCRIPT to Robert Barclay's Book of
GOVERNMENT.
Aberdeen-Prison the Sixth of the First Month, 1679.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
UNTO all my Dear Friends and Brethren, unto whose Hands this Paper may come,
or who may be any ways more particularly Concerned in the Contents hereof, The
Salutation of my unfeigned Love in that Unchangeable Truth, whereunto it has
pleased the Lord to Call me according to his great Mercy, so as to be a
Partaker in some measure of the Peace and Glory, which in this Day is Revealed;
wherewith my heart has been often filled, as I have Waited in Faithfulness,
according to the Dispensation of Light Manifested in me and to me.

And since it has pleased God to make me a Living Witness of the precious
Truth, and to Commit unto me any Share of the Ministry thereof, my Conscience
bears me Witness in the sight of God, that I have Labored (according to my
Knowledge) to follow Love and Peace with all my Brethren, R. B's. Ministry.
and to do those things, which might tend to advance, strengthen and confirm
Unity, and Brotherly Love: as also to Avoid, what had a tendency to beget
Strife, Jealousies, or Evil Surmises. Likewise I have studied as well in my
Public Testimony, His Writings.
as in my Writings, to beware of any thing, that to my Understanding might
minister just Occasion of Stumbling or Offcence to the least of my Brethren, or
the youngest and weakest Babe in the Truth: as such, as are Conversant with me
i^ my own Country, as well as those elsewhere, where I have Traveled, can bear
we Witness.

Nevertheless as I cannot shun my part of that Labor and Service, which my
Lord and Master Christ Jesus Calls me to; His Anarchy, etc.
so in Obedience to his Requirings near five years ago I wrote some Sheets
concering the Lawfulness and Necessity of the Government, and Order of the
Truth: having principally and only in my View therein, to bear a Faithful
Testimony against all false Liberty and Disorder on the one hand, and against
Imposition and Dominion on the other hand; intending no less to guard against
the one, than the other: And this I did with particular Respect to some of my
Near Friends, whom I found liable to some Mistakes in that Matter. And I do
sincerely Declare before God, (who knows, I speak the Truth and lie not) that
in the Writing thereof I had not the least Purpose nor Intention to Meddle with
or Concern my self in any of those Debates, that have since fallen out amongst
Friends in Westmoreland, Debates in Westmoreland.
or elsewhere, Relative thereunto: much of which as it had not then a Being,
when I wrote that Book, so the Substance of that Matter was then Unknown to me.
And I can safely say, that I had not so much as one Remote Thought, or any
Remembrance of the least beginning of that Affair, which I knew during the time
of my Writing of it: so that nothing could be Intended by me therein Relative
to that Matter. Which as it is sufficient to Vindicate my Innocence and
Integrity to all, His Innocence in that matter.
as to my Intentions; so I cannot forbear also to signify, that as often, as I
have had Occasion, seriously and in the holy Fear and Dread of God to Reflect
upon these Papers (which I have often done, because of the Opposition they have
met with from some) I have never found Occasion to Repent or Retract any thing
from the Matter or Principles there Asserted by me; The soundness of the Book.
but have the Testimony and Approbation of God's Light and Spirit in my heart
for my Work and Service in that Matter.

Moreover albeit I Labored with all the Care and Circumspection I could, so to
Express my self, as not to Offend in a Word; yet had I known, or could have
foreseen, that any thing in the Wording or Expressing thereof would have
stumbled or hurt any; Expressions stumbled at.
I have that Tenderness (and hope always to have) to the least of the Household
of Faith, that I would have rather Omitted or Changed any such Words or
Expressions, than ministered them any Occasion of Dissatisfaction. And therefore
I was not a little Surprised, when I understood, that Several Sheets of Paper
were spread abroad in Opposition to that Book of mine, at a time when I was
wholly a Stranger to those Proceedings, by reason of my Imprisonment for the
Truth's sake, especially by William Rogers, a Person, who not only to my self,
but afterward before many Witnesses professed a singular Respect and
Friendship to me; and yet without once Acquainting me. His Imprisonment.


Now what followed upon my Meeting with that Person at London near two years
ago, will appear by a Copy of William Rogers's own Letter (annexed hereto) and
the Sense of those Brethren, W. R's. Satisfaction.
who were Witnesses to that Transaction: so that resting thereupon in my own
Innocence (especially, since those in such places, where the greatest
Dissatisfaction was said to be, did for the most part signify to me their
Satisfaction) I forbore hitherto to meddle any more in that Matter, hoping, it
might have died of it self.

And being Conscientiously gathered in that Spirit, wherein I desired rather to
bear, than by seeking too earnestly to Vindicate my self, R. B's. Aversness to
foment Controversies.
any ways Advance or Foment Controversies amongst Friends by multiplying
Papers; having some hope, he might (according to the Advice of the Brethren)
called in his Papers: And as what related to me, his Letter sufficing, wherein
he expresses my Sense of the things Scrupled by him, to his own Satisfaction,
and his Belief of the Soundness of my Principles.

And truly, I have been so willing to starve that Spirit, that has any Life in
Divisions or Controversies of this kind, either in my self, or others; that
since I read those Papers of W. R's. at London, now near two years ago, I have
not so much as once looked out upon them, until now. And albeit I might have
mentioned that Transaction without any Disadvantage to my self, but otherwise;
(as most, if not all present can Testify, yea, W. R's. own Letter does Import;)
yet I do not remember, that I did ever so much as once Mention it to any,
unless their Inquiry occasioned it: Yea, I have wholly Concealed it to this day
from diverse Friends, in whom I am nearly concerned; and whom I know, would be
very apt to Justify and Commend my Whole procedure in that matter. So unwilling
was I to fill the minds of any with such things; being otherways weightily
Concerned as well with the inward Work of the Lord in my own Soul, as in those
Concerns of Truth's Prosperity, both abroad, where I had a Service, and at
home, with respect to the present Continued Sufferings, Friends lies under
here. But since he has so far walked in another Method, The Occasion of this
Vindication.
as to labor to keep up the Remembrance of these things, and busy the Minds of
Friends with them, having (as I am informed) made further mention of these
Papers to my Disadvantage, I am constrained to say something in my own Defense,
and of the Truth Asserted by me: wherein as the Lord knows the Integrity of my
Intentions, and the Tenderness of my heart, so I hope, my way herein will
Commend it self to that of God in the Consciences of all the Tenderhearted.
And albeit those things, which were chiefly scrupled at by any, be sufficiently
Cleared by W. R's. own Letter; yet that all may be Satisfied in having them
from mine own hand, I am free to signify this, as to them. Only I will premise
this to the serious Consideration of not a few, who seemed to be startled at
that Book, who retain that Tenderness to God, and Regard to the hurt of their
own Souls, as to make Conscience unjustly to Accuse the Innocent; that since it
was Asserted by some, and Entertained as a Truth by diverse, That that Book was
writ upon Design, and with a particular Respect of Prejudice to some Persons
(whom I did not so much as once think on in writing of it) with somewhat worse,
R.B. had no Design in writing the Book, as suggested.
(which I am not willing to Remember, far less to Mention) whether those that
progagated and entertained so false and groundless a Jealousy to the prejudice
of the Innocent, have not reason narrowly to Examine, what Spirit they were
influenced by in so doing? (which certainly could not be of God:) And whether
they ought not thence to take Occasion, justly to Suspect the Effects and
Fruits of the same Spirit in them, even where it has Appeared in things, for
which they may have somewhat more to say? Surely, with men of inward Tenderness
this cannot but have great Weight. And albeit that my Intentions were so Clear
in this matter; yet I will not say, but the Lord (whose Ways are unsearchable,
and past finding out) may have purposed, by those Papers seasonably to Reprove
and single out a Wrong Spirit: And therefore all concerned, had need in true
Tenderness and Godly Fear to beware, how they shut out and turn by the Warnings
and Admonitions of the Lord, A Warning from the Lord.
by seeking to Carp at and find fault with the Innocent Instruments; least they
be found foolishly (like those Dogs) to Run after, and seek to bite the Stone,
because they cannot reach the Hand, that threw it.

I have known this by manifold Experience to have been a Snare to many; and
therefore without the least Prejudice or Reflection upon any (God knows) out of
true Tenderness and Love do desire, it may be seriously weighed in the true
Light by all, that may feel themselves concerned in this matter.

First, as to the things Scrupled at, whereas some did suppose, That I did
Ascribe to Friends Meetings an Absolute Jurisdiction over Men's Property in
outward things; Concerning Property. See above page 207, 208, 209.
therein I have been greatly Mistaken. For I never intended any such thing; but
simply to hold forth that, which, by the Apostle to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 6.)
is urged: That whereas there would a Manifest Scandal arise from Friends going
to Law together, Friends going to Law together.
that therefore such, as will rather go to Law, than seek to come to Agreement
by the Interposing of Friends, ought, with a respect to their bringing such a
Scandal, to be Censured; since it cannot be supposed, that any such Difference,
as to outward things, can fall out among Friends, but some or other may be
found, who either by their own Knowledge, or by Advice and Information of such,
as may be known in the Matter Controverted, may bring it to an End.

Secondly, That whereas I say, There will not be wanting in case of Controversy
the Spirit of God, to give Judgment through one or other in the Church of
Christ, Decision of Differences.

See above page 227, 232.


so long as any Assembly can properly, or in any tolerable sense be so called;
-- some have supposed, that by those last Words I did Insinuate, as if any
Assembly Assuming to themselves the Name of the Church of Christ, and having
some show of it, may of right claim the Power of such Decision, and ought
accordingly to be Submitted unto: Such a thing never entered me; but was far
from my Intentions. For albeit that I Judge, that an Assembly may sometimes
deserve the Name of the Church of Christ, or not to have lost the Claim, albeit
not altogether so Fresh and Lively (at least in the generality of its Members)
and so under some Languishing and Hazard to Decay, if Life do not again come
up more abundantly: The seven Churches of Asia.
as may be seen in the Example of the Seven Churches of Asia, whom
notwithstanding of the several Weaknesses diverse of them were under, yet the
Apostle, or rather the Spirit of Christ by the Apostle dignifies with the Name
of the Churches of Christ. Neither did I intend, to make this Judgment
necessary to Attend every particular Church or Assembly: But by the Church
there I understood it in a more Universal Sense, that is, Some or other among
all the Churches of Christ; who being spoken of in the Complex, may be rightly
termed the Church of Christ; And this is manifest in the same Example of the
Churches of Asia.

For albeit we might suppose, there might have been wanting in each of them
some, to give forth this true Judgment concerning them; yet in respect they
were such, as in some tolerable supposition might be termed the Churches of
Christ, albeit some of them had left their first Love, and were near to have
their Candlestick Removed; Rev. 2.4, 5, 14, 15, 20. Chap. 3, 16.
and some had the Doctrine of Balaam and of the Nicolaitans; and some suffered
the Woman Jezabel; and some were Lukewarm, and ready to be Spewed out: yet we
see, God would not suffer them to be without a Certain Judgment; but gave forth
one through the Apostle John, who was a Member of the Church.

But to Esteem, that any Assembly may be tolerably supposed to be the Church of
Christ, False Church.
where either the True Doctrines and Principles are wanting, or the True Life
and Power in some good measure, is not felt and known, is far from my thoughts:
Yea, how far I am Contrary-minded, may be seen at large in my Apology upon the
Tenth Proposition, now published in English, page 194, 195, 196, 200, 201, 202,
etc. See Apol. Prop. 10. V. and X.


Thirdly, Whereas it was thought strange, that I should call Doctrines
Principles the Bonds and Terms of our being together, I understand it only of
an Outward Bond: Principles a Bond.
and that I laid the stress upon it no further, appears in that I Affirm, Those
Principles and Doctrines to be the product of Truth's Power and Virtue upon the
Heart; which appears, by what is printed upon the Sea above page 213.
Margent.

And William Rogers saying in his Papers, That this was but like the
Entertainment of Christ in the Manger, shows too little of Christian Sobriety,
and too much of a Scornful Reflection; for which I will rather choose to Forgive
him, than therein to Contend with him. For how much I value that Inward Bond
(to wit, the Life of Righteousness) beyond the Outward; and that I esteem the
Outward not at all to be valued, but as it comes from the Inward, may be seen
throughout all I have Written in my Apology upon the Tenth Proposition, and
elsewhere. And my Affirming, Exclusion.
That any denying of any of the Truth's Principles and Doctrines is a ground of
Disowning, Was only in respect, that who do so, do manifestly thence make it
appear, they have broken the Inward Bond first, from which that Outward did
naturally spring and arise.

Fourthly, If any do suppose, that by my Asserting [ The Ancient Apostolic
Order was Established amongst us upon the right Basis and Foundation] I
intended, that those particular Orders relating to Outward that were among the
Apostles, either was or were to be Established among us, they did much Mistake
me: For I never purposed any such thing; Our Order and its Foundation.
but only to signify, that by Establishing the Government and Authority in and
upon the Spirit only, and such as are led by it, we did Establish it upon the
same Basis and Foundation, where-upon, that Exercised in the Church in the days
of the Apostles, were built. For I am far from believing, that the most Exact
Conformity to the Order and Method of the Church in the Apostles days,
Conformity from the Life.
or even to what may now be Appointed by the same Spirit, without the Inward
Life and Virtue go along, signifies any thing: for I know, that nothing done by
mere Imitation, will any thing avail in the Worship and Service of God; and
therefore that No Act done without Conviction, will any ways be profitable to
the Doer. Yet that hinders not, but that such, as forbear to do, what by the
Testimony of God in his Servants is Commanded to be performed in the Church,
are Justly to be blamed and be judged therefore, in respect, that through
Disobedience and Vnwatchfulness they have blinded themselves from the sight and
knowledge of their Duty. For if it should be said, No man were to be Condemned
for not doing that which he sees not to be his Duty; Then no man were to be
Condemned, who had by Iniquity and Vnwatchfulness brought Hardness and
Blindness upon himself, The Hardened and blinded see not their Duty.
for all the Iniquities he commits afterward: And how would this tend to
Establish Ranterism, the substance of which is to bring their Consciences to
that pass, as not to be sensible of any Checks? Then the Nations are not to be
blamed for all their Idolatry, Wickedness and Superstition, for that they are
not sensible of the Evil of it? Whereas Truth teaches us to believe, that had
they been faithful to the small measure of Light in things more obvious, it
would have further opened and manifested other things. The Jews Crucifying
Christ ignorantly.
Then should not the Jews have been Condemned for Crucifying Christ, since
Peter says, They did it Ignorantly? And Paul testifies, That if they had known,
they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Yea, then all those, that
persecuted and burned the Protestant Martyrs, Martyrs Instanced.
were not to be Judged for it, because they suppose, they did well in it; even
according to Christ's Testimony, who says, That in killing you, they shall
think, they do God good Service. Shall men then never be Condemned for doing
evil or omitting their duty, because they see it not? What Absurdity would
follow thereupon, may easily appear. And yet its strange, that William Rogers
in his Papers should labor so much against this, Affirming very positively,
That nothing ought to be given forth in the Church of Christ but by way of
Recommendation, and not of Command; Wherein he does either greatly Mistake the
matter, as affirmed by me; or otherways run into a far greater Inconveniency,
than he is aware. For if he mean, That no Man of or from himself only, or by
virtue of any Office or Place he either has, or has born in the Church of
Christ, ought to Command any thing to be performed in the Church, I freely
Agree to it, and have Asserted the same in very full and ample Terms: But if he
will say, That no man, albeit really moved by the Spirit of God, ought to go
further, than a mere Recommendation, It is a most Insolent Limiting of God
under a false pretense of liberty; and will necessarily Conclude, that God has
not power to Command any thing, unless Men be content to agree to it. For the
Controversy is here drawn to a Narrow Compass.

For he that will allow, that God has power to Command things to be practiced
in the Church, and that those Commands must be Conveyed by Immediate Revelation
through some of the Members of the Church; and that it may fall out, that some
of the Members of the Church may through Weakness or Vnwatchfulness not be
sensible; they must either acknowledge, that Such are to be Condemned; or say,
that God has not power to Command; or that there is no such Revelation
nowadays; (as do the Priests and Truth's Enemies) or, that Man is not
Condemnable for disobeying God, if he believe it not to be his Duty; which is
as much as to say, that Unbelief is no sin.

Now let these things be seriously Considered, how this is or can be Avoided,
without granting the things Affirmed by me? For what way can the Truth be
Asserted; the honor and just Authority of God Acknowledged; the Necessity of
the continuance of Immediate Revelation Affirmed; and the Iniquity of Unbelief
not Justified; and the just Judgment of God upon the Rebellious and Disobedient
Vindicated, without Affirming, what I have done? And if any can do this in
words more wary, than I have done, I shall very readily Agree to it. For that
things may be proposed to the Church by way of Command, and further than a mere
Recommendation, the whole Current of the Scripture shows, not only to the
Churches among the Jews, where Moses and the Prophets do propose the Will of
God to be performed very positively and peremptorily; but even under the New
Covenant, as appears in the Eleventh of the Acts, and in many places of Paul's
Epistles: particularly that on 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. If any man Obey not our word by
this Epistle, note that man and have no Company with him, that he may be
ashamed. This then being manifest with respect to those Times, I would know of
W. R. Whether Christ has now lost any of his Authority, as he has left off to
Rule his Church Immediately by his Spirit? and whether so to Affirm, be not
grossly to Contradict the Ancient and Primitive Doctrine of Friends?

Fifthly, Whereas some did suppose that I did make the Difference very small
betwixt Decisive Judgment among Friends, and among Papists and other Persons,
because I say, Decisive Judgment.
They place the Decisive Judgment in the plurality of an Assembly made up of
their Chief Teachers and Ministers: And albeit I Limit it not to that; yet I
seem to Affirm, that it most usually is so conveyed: and so the difference only
is, that they make it always so, and I most usually.

To this I Answer; That if in Charity I may suppose this Insinuation comes not
from Malice, at least it proceeds from great Ignorance of the Popish Principle:
and it were better for such to be Silent, than to Judge of things they do not
understand. For the Difference here is very great and Fundamental, in respect
both Papists and others do Affirm, That men by virtue of an outward Succession
or Vocation may have true Right to sit, and give Judgment in such Assemblies;
Papists pleading Succession, etc.
albeit they be void of true Holiness, and have not the Grace of God, which
(they say) is no Necessary Qualification to the being of a Minister. So that
they place the power of Judgment not only in the plurality of Votes absolutely
(in which we differ from them) but also in the Judgment of such, as may without
any absurdity by their own Principles be supposed to be all and each of them
void of the true Grace of God, -- Votes.
and whom, even supposing them to be gracious, they affirm not at all to be led
by the Immediate Spirit of Christ, which they say, is now Ceased. Now can there
be a greater Difference, than is betwixt these Two? (to wit) To Affirm, --

That the power of Decision is in an Assembly of men being Members, of which
Assembly the Grace of God is no necessary qualification, The false Decision.
and who deny any such thing, as to be Immediately led by the Spirit of Christ,
as a thing not attainable in these days; and yet that all Christians must be
subject, to what the Plurality of such an Assembly so Constituted, do
determine? And to Affirm; --

That the power of Decision is only and alone in the Spirit, not necessarily
Tied to a General Assembly; but if it please God to make use of such an
Assembly, yet neither to the Plurality of them, but in and through such of his
Servants, The true Decision.
as he sees meet. And that none are Capable, or can be supposed to be Members
of such an Assembly, or esteemed such from whom such a Judgment can be
expected, or ought to be received, unless they be men, in whom the Grace of God
not only is, but has truly wrought to Mortify and Regenerate them in a good
measure: In whom the Judgment of Truth really proceeding from the Spirit, will
be manifest to all, who are truly Faithful; who will accordingly Submit
thereunto not with respect to the Men, but the Authority of God manifested in
and through them. So that such, as see not this Judgment aright, will be justly
Condemnable of God for their not submitting; not as if they should be accepted
of God, if they did Obey before Conviction, but because they brought this
Blindness upon themselves through their Unfaithfulness and Unwatchfulness,
which renders them both Guilty of the Blindness and of the Disobedience
occasioned by it?

Now the Vastness of the Difference that is here Manifest, cannot but be
Obvious to any, that will Read and Consider this Impartially, and without
Prejudice.

Thus I have passed through all the things that I understood, any did Scruple
at; there being naught else, that I remember, which is not either Relative to
some of the particulars beforementioned, or Included in them. But if any
Wonder, why I have Chosen this Method, and not rather made a formal Reply to W.
R's. Papers? I hope, these following Reasons will satisfy all sober and truly
peaceable-minded Friends, who love Truth's Prosperity more, than Jangling, as a
Sufficient Reason for my so doing.

First, Forasmuch as the greater part of what W.R. has Writ, is wholly built
upon the Particulars heretofore mentioned, which Particulars being Cleared, and
his Mistakes therein Removed (as his own Letter signifies) the Superstructure
falls of it self, as not touching my Intentions, nor yet reaching me; but only
that Apprehension he supposed to be my Meaning, and to follow from my Words:
for which end he oftentimes is so Wary as to Affirm in his Papers, That to his
Understanding my Words seemed to Import, and my Meaning seems to be so. In
which things since himself saw (and I have manifested) his Mistake, I am not so
great a Lover of Contention, as to busy either my self, or the Minds of others
with the men of straw of his making.

But yet he was not so Modest, nor Kind to his Old Friend, but that sometimes
he did seek to render my Words Odious (albeit the Mistake be his own) by a
Reiterate Repetition, in Repeating that of the Tolerable Supposition of a
Church at every Turn above twenty times: But also he very obviously Wrests my
Words, and seeks to Impose upon me a disadvantagious Meaning; that he may
furnish himself an Occasion thereafter the more Liberally to Smite at me. As
where from the Apostle's Words [saying, And we have Confidence, ye will do the
things we Command you, etc. and in another place, where he desires those to
whom he writes, to submit themselves to such, as rule over them] I Infer, That
some did Appoint and Ordain some things, and that there lay an Obligation in
point of Duty on others to Obey, etc.

Upon which W. R. very unfairly Observes, It is to be doubted, his meaning is,
Others ought to Obey, whether they see it their Duty, Yea or Nay. I leave such
dealing to the Reader's Judgment: surely, it is not answerable to that Candor
and Justice, that W. R. lays claim to.

Secondly, Because W. R. in these Papers has taken occasion to extend
Digressions upon other Matters, not treated upon in that Book, and takes often
Occasion to Insinuate his Jealousies of Persons and things, that I meddled not
with: As where he makes a large Digression (which takes up several pages)
concerning the Constitution of the Second-Days-Meeting at London) endeavoring
what he can, to Represent the Hurt and Abuse of it; W. R's. Reflections.
and where he diverse times insinuates, that some are Usurpers, or seeking to
Vsurp a Jurisdiction over the Consciences of the Brethren; And that some do
believe, that God has raised up some outward Person to be among the Children
of Light at this Day, as Moses was of old among the Children of Israel, etc.
And that some do lead many into a Temptation to run beyond their Line, by
procuring a Multitude of Hands to Confirm, what is given forth by one, or at
least by a very few: With diverse other things of this kind; which takes up no
small part of his Papers. Now these things are not pertinently brought in
against me; nor would I judge my self less Impertinent to enlarge in a Contest
concerning those things, which do not Immediately concern the things under
Debate; since the Person or Persons aimed at by him in these Reflections, may
take Occasion, as they find it their place, to Answer: and perhaps may have had
Opportunity, to have discoursed with him diverse of those things e're this time
upon other Occasions.

Thirdly, Since a Considerable part of W. R's. Papers is taken up to Evidence
(as he pretends) the Impertinent Application I make of the several passages of
the Apostles (which he thinks I have been too Curious to Collect) that make
mention of these words, Order, Rule, Command and Government; how he Evinces
that, I leave to the Serious Reader; being the more willing to bear his
Reflections in that respect, that he is so bold (when he cannot Compass his
Matter otherwise) not only to Censure me, but the Apostle Paul 's Saying of 1 Timothy 1.19.20. (mentioned by me) That it is not only not to the purpose Intended
by me, but that it is not plain to the Purpose Paul himself intended, at least
to ordinary Capacities: Adding, That the Method there proposed by the Apostle,
Answers not that, which the Light within tells us.

Since then the Light he follows, is such, as finds Fault with the Apostle's
Assertions; W. R. Censures the Apostle boldly.
I may the more patiently bear his Affirming mine to be Erroneous. And whereas
W. R. labors To make it appear, that the Scriptures brought by me to prove a
power of Decision in the Church, do not Affirm any such thing, because in these
Scriptures there is no mention made of the Church's Decision; Yet if he
Consider, that those places do speak of the Separating from and Cutting off of
diverse Persons, Judgment Evinced.
and forsaking their Fellowship, to the Saints, who make up the Church of
Christ; it necessarily presupposes a Judgment of the Church or Saints
concerning those Persons, for which they are so Cut off from the Fellowship of
the Body of Christ, which is his Church.

Fourthly, A great part of W.R's. Work is but a building up, and then pulling
down; wherein he apparently Contradicts himself: Yea, the whole Scope of his
Book Implies a Manifest Contradiction. For whereas he plainly declares, his
Writing to be a Plea for Christian Liberty against Judging and Censuring one
another, holding forth, that Diversity of Opinions and Judgments in matters of
Conscience (but especially in such matters, as relate to Discipline and
Government) is not nor ought to be a Breach of Unity, which he understands, may
be supposed to be the diversities of Gifts and Administrations mentioned in
Scriptures; which he expresses in these words upon Paul in Romans 14. So then
every one of us shall give an Account of himself unto God; let us not therefore
Judge one another any more.

And again he says upon Verse 34. viz. Which evidently shows, that Inasmuch as
every one must Answer for himself, it is fit, every one should believe for
himself, A wrong Spirit of Liberty.
and so practice, without being Imposed upon by others: and this is the ground
of all Christian Forbearance.

And again in another place he says; These things considered, and that also we
find the Apostle's Exhorting the Churches not to be Judging one another with
respect to things relating to Conscience; there is great need to watch against
this Censorious, Judging Spirit, least while any are Judging their Brethren,
themselves become Cast-aways: he has many more Expressions of this kind.

Now, since this is the whole Scope of W. R's. Papers, and that he did, yea,
has (since he wrote these Papers) acknowledged me to be his Christian Brother,
and many more (at least them he did Repute such) whom he Censures, Judges and
Condemns through his whole Treatise, yea, since his whole Papers are a Judging,
Censuring and Condemning of me and my Judgment in things pertaining to
Conscience and to my Judgment, in matters of Government and outward Discipline;
does not the Work Imply a manifest Contradiction? So his very Writing
Contradicts the matter he writes of, and pleads for; especially, since not only
he makes some General Censure of me and many others professing the same
fundamental Truths with him; but is very Particular and Peremptory, W. R. a
false Accuser.
yea, Insinuating Accusations, as if I in Particular intended to make way for
an Authority, to Rule over at least some of my Brethren; as his very Conclusion
Intimates, and in diverse other places may be Observed. And it will aggravate
this Injury done by him the more, that the Reader may Observe as well in his
own Letter, as in what is above mentioned, that this his Censure was built upon
his own Mistakes: So that I hope, who consider these things, will acknowledge,
a sufficient Answer is hereby Returned. And albeit I my self be fully
satisfied; yet I should not have Churled the Pains of a particular Disquisition
of every thing in Order, as Asserted by him (albeit he has not done that to
mine) If I had not an Aversion from multiplying Controversies of this kind: for
the desire I have to Avoid that sort of Work, and not for any strength of
Argumentation I observe in W. R's. Papers, has stopped me from so doing. But if
any do Apprehend that Strength of Reason in his Papers, as to Judge, I was
Unable to Answer, or that this is not Satisfactory; it will but Evidence the
Weakness of their own Understanding to the more Judicious: and I shall not
think much to bear their Censure. For I value more my own Inward Peace, and
that of my Brethren, than to Obtain an Applause of my Natural Capacity;
wherein, if any Judge that W. R. do surpass me; I shall not therewith be
troubled: The Excellency of the Simplicity of Truth.
For I more and more see the Excellency of that Simplicity, that is in the
Truth; and of that Unity, that it leads to. And thence do more Earnestly than
ever desire to Witness all, that is of and from Self, Crucified in me, and
brought into true Subjection to the Cross of Christ; and there alone may be my
Rejoicing: wherein I am at Unity with all those, who make Self of no Reputation
for the Seed's sake; that the Prosperity of Truth may be Advanced, and the
Peace of Israel Preserved.

R. Barclay.


William Rogers's Letter of his and R. Barclay's Discourse about the Book
beforementioned, in the presence of many Brethren; and also a Paper signifying
the Brethrens Sense touching the Discourse, then present.
Friends.
IT was upon me for several weeks past, W. R's Letter Clearing R. B's Anarchy,
etc.
if my Occasions would any wise permit, to come up to the City of London to be
present among Friends from diverse parts of the Nation at this Time, that so I
might have Opportunity to Confer with Friends, who were dissatisfied with me,
touching what I had written in Answer to R. Barclay 's Book of Government: And
a few days before my Coming up, R. Barclay being in London writ unto me to come
up, that we might have a Conference at large touching the same. This his
Request laid the greater Obligation upon me to be present in London at this
time. On Conference had with him we Agreed, that a Free Meeting might be had
with Friends, in whose presence R. B. and my self might in all Coolness and
Moderation Confer together; that so all Mis-understandings might be Removed,
and the Truth be Evidenced to the Consciences of the Brethren then Present.

The Meeting for that end was this Day had, and a very Christian and Fair
Debate was had, to the satisfaction of both of us, as far as I can understand;
and the matters chiefly Objected by me, were fairly and brother-like, and in
much love Discoursed: and upon the whole matter I am satisfied, that R. B. is
not principled so, as I and others have taken his Book to Import.

In particular he does declare, that his Book teaches not, that the Church of
Christ has Jurisdiction over the outward Concerns of Friends in Case of
Difference; Jurisdiction.
without Assent of the Differing parties; and that it was far from his
Intentions.

For his Intention (as he declares) was only to manifest, that Friends ought to
Submit their Cases of Difference to the Decision of the Church; and in case of
Refractoriness, that such Persons ought to be Disowned.

That though R. B. in one place Affirms to this purpose; That there never will,
nor can be wanting in Case of Controversy the Spirit of God to give Judgment
through some or other in the Church of Christ, as long as any Assembly can
properly or in any tolerable supposition be so termed: he declares, that the
Words are sound; and further says: that thereby he Intends no other, but such
Assemblies, as in reality and truth may be termed the Church of Christ. And
whereas he says to this purpose; Submission.
That it is Disobedience to God, not to Submit to the Sentence of such
Assemblies, though the Persons refusing to Submit, pretend, they see it not;
yet he declares, that his Meaning thereby is not, That if they Submit before
Conviction of Conscience, they therein find Acceptance with the Lord: but
rather to show, that their Want of Sight is through Disobedience or
Unwatchfulness to the Grace of God in themselves; which if they did take heed
thereunto, would show it their Duty to Obey.

Principles as Terms.
We also had Discourse touching his Assertion, That Principles and Doctrines,
etc. believed, through the force of Truth on the Understanding are as it were
the Terms: and in another place of the Book produced it appeared, that he
Asserted, There was a more Inward Bond ( viz.) the Life of Righteousness; and
that the Book declares, that we are gathered into the belief of the Principles
and Doctrines by the Truth it is Power and Influence upon our hearts, and that
very Bond, by which we became centred into one Body and Fellowship, etc. And on
a Debate thereof he acknowledged, That his meaning was not, they were the
Original Bond; but rather as Fruits and Branches of that Bond: and so in that
respect might be as an outward Bond, whereby we are united in an heavenly
Society.

The Order of the Gospel.
We also had some Discourse touching his Title Page, wherein he Asserts, That
the Ancient, Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ is re-established on its
right Basis and Foundation: touching which he declares, that his meaning is,
Not only with respect to all the outward Orders or Forms of Discipline in
Government amongst us; but with respect to the Power of God, which in the
Primitive Days was, and now is the great Order of the Gospel.

And though R. Barclay has given these Explications of his Meanings, yet the
very Explications (as he says) are to be found in his Book, if duly weighed.

Having given you an Account in short, of what Discoursed this day amongst
Friends; this further lies upon me to signify unto you on the Behalf of R.
Barklay, I am satisfied, that he is not Principled, as I and many by some
Passages in his Book took him to be. And since it is so, that many have taken
an Offense against him for that Cause, R. B. Cleared.
and (as may be doubted) even so far, as to Reject his Testimony and Service
for the Truth, it lies upon me as my Duty, even for his and the Truth 's sake
to Warn all, that they take heed not to entertain a Prejudice against his
Testimony, on Jealousy, that may enter on the score of any Apprehensions or
Mistakes of his Book, and that Answer, that I have given thereto; but rather in
an Unprejudiced Spirit to Wait on the Lord to feel and savor his Testimony,
even as if the Occasion taken had never been.

And I do freely Confess, that in as much as I published my Book, before I gave
R. B. Notice of my Objections and Intentions therein, W.R. blameworthy.
I acted in that respect not according to Gospel Order, but am Justly worthy of
Blame therein.

It is with me also to signify unto you, that l am abundantly satisfied, that
R. B 's. Book of Government was written at or before the Time of it is date; for
that he solemnly affirms, it was so.

W. Rogers.


FOrasmuch as William Rogers of Bristol has lately written a Book in
Manuscript, The Judgment of the Meeting.
against a Book of Robert Barclay's Entitled The Anarchy of the Ranters, and
Approved at the Second-Days-Meeting in London, and has dispersed his
Manuscript in several parts of this Nation, without so much as first giving
either to the said R. Barclay in particular, or the Second-Days-Meeting in
general, an Account of his Scruples or Dissatisfaction concerning the said Book
of R.B's. Contrary to all Rules of Brotherly Love, Christian Fellowship,
Gospel Order, and Exemplary Practice of the Church of Christ, to the Defamation
of the said R.B. the great Derogation from the Christian Authority of the said
Meeting, and the general Disservice of Truth; especially being sent unto
persons who at present are Disaffected to the Unity of the Body of Friends. And
whereas on the Seventh day of the Third Month 1677. we whose Names are
underwritten, were Met together in the City of London in the pure Fear and
holy Dread of the Lord God Almighty, to hear, what the said W. R. had Objected
against the said Book of R. Barclay's -- It Appeared to us upon Deliberate,
serious and Impartial Hearing of the matter in Controversy, that the Objections
of the said W. R. lay not so much against the Matter and Substance of the said
R. B's Book, as against his way of Expressing some passages therein; and that
upon R. B's Defense and Explanation the said W. R. did declare, that he was
satisfied with R. B. as to his principles; but that he thought, some Passages
in his book might have been better Worded; Confessing, that he did not
Brotherly, to publish his Book, before he had Communicated his Exception to the
said R. B. and the Brethren of the Second-days-Morning-Meeting in London.

It is therefore the Inward Sense, Advice and Judgment of this Meeting, that
the said W. R. ought forthwith to deliver up into the hands of James Claypoole
that Copy of his said Book (which he has here with him) and as speedily as may
be, Recall all such other Copies of his said Book, as he knows to be Dispersed
in the Nation, or elsewhere: And that he also ought speedily to write a Letter
to Friends in all those places, where he does, or shall know the said Book to
be dispersed; and therein to Clear both the said R B. and the Friends of the
Second-Days-Meeting in London from all such Aspersions, as by means of his said
Book may be Cast upon him or them. And though it does not appear to this
Meeting by any thing, that the said W. R. has Objected or Offered, that there
is any Error or Vnsoundness of Doctrine in the said R. B's. Book; yet
forasmuch as there are some Terms or Expressions therein, which some conceive,
might be made yet more Plain, Easy and Familiar; It is the desire of this
Meeting, that the said R B. (as he feels in himself the Opening of Life
thereunto) will in Christian Condescension to the Capacity of the Weak write an
Explanatory Postscript to the said Book for the sake of all such, as may be
supposed to have Mis-apprehended any Expression therein.

Henry Jackson. Joseph Batt. Thomas Holmes. John Burnyeat. Francis Moore.
Stephen Crisp. Thomas Jany. Richard Vickris. William Gibson. Ambrose Rigge.
Richard Snead. James Mammeck. Thomas Atkins. John Blakeling. Charles Harfford.
John Furly Senior. Benjamin Furly. Francis Lea. Thomas Elwood. William Welsh.
Stephen Smith. Thomas Bur. Thomas Robinson. George Keith. John Buy. Thomas
Hill. Gawen Lowry. Charles Marshall. John Osgood. William Penn. James Holyday.
James Claypoole. William Shown.


ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader may Observe, That William Rogers's Papers (before Annexed) of his
Discourse with R. B. about some Objections against his Book, whereupon he
acknowledges himself satisfied, was written in the Third Month 1677. And their
Narrative from Bristol, wherein W. R. and the rest thus Reflect against R. B.
was written in and about the Eleventh and Twelfth Month 1677. so that it
appears to be Eight or Nine Months after. But is not this like J. S. and J.
W's. Papers of Condemnation* which W. R. called a Rattle? For who could have
thought, that W. R. could have had the Impudence, as after he had so plainly
Confessed, and given it under his own Hand, that he was satisfied, to have
again published such things against him?

AN APOLOGY FOR THE True Christian Divinity, As the same is held forth, and
Preached by the People, Called in Scorn, QUAKERS.

BEING A Full Explanation and Vindication of their Principles and Doctrines, by
many Arguments deduced from Scripture and Right Reason, and the Testimonies of
Famous Autohrs, both Ancient and Modern: With a full Answer to the strongest
Objections usually made against them. Presented to the KING.

Written and Published in Latin, for the Information of Strangers, By ROBERT
BARCLAY, And now put into our own Language, for the benefit of his Countrymen.

Acts 24.14. -- After the way, which they call Heresy, so Worship I the God of
my Fathers; believing all things, which are written in the Law and the Prophets.

Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. For the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has
appeared to all Men;

Verse. 12. Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should
live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World;

Verse. 13. Looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Verse. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity,
and Purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street. 1691.

UNTO CHARLES the II. KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, And the Dominions thereunto
belonging.
ROBERT BARCLAY, A Servant of JESUS CHRIST, Called of God to the Dispensation
of the Gospel now again Revealed, and after a long and dark Night of Apostasy
Commanded to be Preached to all NATIONS, Wishes Health and Salvation.
AS the Condition of KINGS and Princes puts them in a Station more obvious to
the View and Observation of the World, than that of other Men, of whom (as
Cicero observes) neither any Word or Action can be Obscure; so are those Kings,
during whose Appearance upon the Stage of this World it pleases the Great KING
of KINGS singularly to make known unto Men the Wonderful Steps of his
Unsearchable Providence, more signally Observed, and their Lives and Actions
more diligently Remarked and Inquired into by Posterity: especially, if those
things be such, as not only relate to the Outward Transactions of this World;
but also are signalized by the Manifestation or Revelation of the Knowledge of
God in Matters Spiritual and Religious. These are the things, that rendered the
Lives of Cyrus, Augustus Caesar and Constantine the Great in former times, and
of Charles the Fifth, and some other Modern Princes in these last Ages so
Considerable.

But among all these Transactions, which it has pleased God to permit for the
Glory of his Power, and the Manifestation of his Wisdom and Providence, no Age
furnishes us with things so Strange and Mavelous, whether with respect to
Matters Civil or Religious, as these, that have fallen out within the Compass
of Thy Time; who, though thou be not yet arrived at the Fiftieth Year of Thy
Age, have yet been a Witness of stranger things, than many Ages before
produced. So that, whether we respect those Various Troubles, wherein thou
found'st thy self engaged, while scarce got out of thy Infancy; the many
Different Afflictions, wherewith Men of thy Circumstances are often
unacquainted; the strange and unparalled Fortune, that befell thy Father; Thy
own narrow Escape, and Banishment following thereupon; with the great
Improbability of Thy ever Returning (at least without very much Pains and
tedious Combatings;) or finally, the Incapacity thou were under to accomplish
such a Design, considering the Strength of those, that had possessed themselves
of Thy Throne, and the Terror they had inflicted upon Foreign States: and yet
that after all this Thou should be Restored without Stroke of Sword, the Help
or Assistance of Foreign States, or the Contrivance and Work of Human Policy;
All these do sufficiently declare, that it is the Lord's Doing: which, as it is
mavelous in our Eyes, so it will justly be a matter of Wonder and
Astonishment to Generations to come; and may sufficiently serve, if rightly
Observed, to Confute and Confound that Atheism, wherewith this Age does so much
Abound.

As the Vindication of the Liberty of Conscience, which thy Father by giving
way to the Importunate Clamors of the Clergy (the answering and fulfilling of
whose Unrighteous Wills has often proved hurtful and pernicious to Princes)
sought in some part to Restrain, was a great Occasion of these Troubles and
Revolutions; so the Pretense of Conscience was that, which carried it on, and
brought it to that pitch, it came to. And though (no doubt) some that were
Engaged in that work, designed good things, at least in the beginning, (albeit
always wrong in the manner they took to Accomplish it, viz. by Carnal Weapons)
yet so soon as they had tasted of the Sweet of the Possessions of them they had
turned out, they quickly began to do those things themselves, for which they
had accused others. For their hands were found full of Oppression, and they
hated the Reproofs of Instruction, which is the way of Life: And they evilly
entreated the Messengers of the Lord, and caused to Beat and Imprison his
Prophets, and persecuted his People, whom he had Called end Gathered out from
among them; whom he had made to Beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their
Spears into Pruning Hooks, and not to learn Carnal War any more. But he Raised
them up, and Armed them with Spiritual Weapons, even with his own Spirit and
Power; whereby they Testified in the Streets and Highways, and public Markets
and Synagogues against the Pride, Vanity, Lusts and Hypocrisy of that
Generation, who were Righteous in their own Eyes; though often Cruelly
Entreated therefore: and they faithfully prophesied and foretold them of their
Judgment and Downfall; which came upon them: as by several Warnings and Epistles
delivered to Oliver and Richard Cromwell, the Parliament and other then Powers
yet upon Record, does appear.

And after it pleased God to Restore Thee, what Oppressions, what Banishments
and Evil Entreatings they have met with, by Men pretending Thy Authority, and
Cloaking their Mischief with thy Name; is known to most Men in this Island;
especially in England, where there is scarce a prison, that has not been
filled with them; not a Judge, before whom they have not been haled: Though
they could never yet be found Guilty of any thing, that might deserve that
Usage. Therefore the Sense of their Innocence did no doubt greatly Contribute
to Move Thee Three Years ago to cause some Hundreds of them to be set at
Liberty: for indeed, their Sufferings are singular, and obviously
distinguishable from all the Rest of such as live under Thee, in these Two
Respects.

First, In that among all Plots Contrived by others against Thee since thy
Return into Britain, there was never any, owned of that People, found or known
to be Guilty (though many of them have been taken and Imprisoned upon such kind
of Jealousies) but were always found Innocent and Harmless, as became the
followers of Christ, not Coveting after, nor Contending for the Kingdoms of
this World; but subject to every Ordinance of Man for Conscience sake.

Secondly, In that in the hottest Times of Prsecution and the most violent
Prosecution of those Laws made against Meetings (being clothed with Innocence)
they have boldly stood to their Testimony to God, without Creeping into Holes
or Corners, or once Hiding themselves, as all other Dissenters have done; but
daily Met according to their Custom, in the Public Places Appointed for that
End: so that none of thy Officers can say of them, That they have surprised
them in a Corner; overtaken them in a Private Conventicle; or Catched them
lurking in their Secret Chambers: nor needed they to send out Spies to get
them, whom they were sure daily to find in their Open Assemblies Testifying for
God and his Truth. By which those, that have an Eye to see, may observe their
Christian Patience and Courage, Constancy and Suffering joined in one, more
than in any other people, that Differ from them, or Oppose them. And yet in the
midst of those Troubles Thou can bear Witness, that as on the one part they
never sought to Detract from Thee, or to render Thee and thy Government Odious
to the People by Nameless and Scandalous Pamphlets and Libels; so on the other
hand they have not spared to Admonish, Exhort and Reprove Thee, and have
faithfully Discharged their Consciences toward thee without flattering words:
as ever the True Prophets in ancient times used to do to those Kings and
Princes, under whose Power Violence and Oppression was acted.

And albeit it be Evident by Experience to be most agreeable both to Divine
Truth and Human Policy, To allow every one to serve God according to their
Consciences; nevertheless those other Sects, who for the most part durst not
peep out in the times of Persecution, while these Innocent People stood bold
and faithful, do now Combine in a Joint-Confederacy (notwithstanding all the
former Janglings and Contention among themselves) to render us Odious; seeking
unjustly to Wrest our Doctrine and Words, as if they were Inconsistent both
with Christianity and Civil Society: so that to Effectuate this their Work of
Malice against us, they have not been ashamed to take the Help and Commend the
Labors of some Invidious Socinians against us. So do Herod and Pontius Pilate
agree to Crucify Christ.

But our Practice known to thee by good Experience, to be more Consistent with
Christianity and Civil Society, and the Peace and Welfare of this Island, than
that of those, that thus Accuse us, does sufficiently guard us against this
Calumny; that we may indeed Appeal to the Testimony of thy Conscience, as a
Witness for us in the face of the Nation.

These things Moved me to present the World with a Brief, but True Account of
this Peoples Principles in some short Theological Propositions, which according
to the will of God proving Successful beyond my Expectation, to the
Satisfaction of several, and to the Moving in many a Desire of being further
Informed concerning us (as being everywhere Evil spoken of) and likewise
meeting with Public Opposition by some (as such will always do, so long as the
Devil rules in the Children of Disobedience) I was thereby further engaged, in
the Liberty of the Lord to present to the World this APOLOGY of the Truth held
by those People; which, because of thy Interest in them, and theirs in thee, as
having first Appeared and mostly Increased in these Nations under thy Rule, I
make bold to present unto Thee.

Thou know and have Experienced their Faithfulness toward their God, their
patience in suffering, their peaceableness toward the King, their honesty,
plainness and integrity in their faithful Warnings and Testimonies to Thee: and
if thou will allow thy self so much time as to Read this, thou may find, how
Consonant their Principles are both to Scripture, Truth, and right Reason. The
Simplicity of their Behavior, the generality of their Condition (as being poor
men and Illiterate) the manner of their procedures being without the Wisdom and
Policy of this World, has made many Conclude them Fools and Madmen, and
neglect them, as not being Capable of Reason: But though it be to them as their
Crown, thus to be Esteemed of the Wise, and Great and Learned of this World;
and though they Rejoice to be accounted Fools for Christ's sake; yet of late
some, even such, who in the World's Account are esteemed both Wise and Learned,
begin to Judge otherwise of them; and find, that they hold forth things very
Agreeable both to Scripture, Reason, and true Learning.

As it is Inconsistent with the Truth I bear, so it is far from me to use this
Epistle, as an Engine to flatter thee (the usual Design of such Works) and
therefore I can neither Dedicate it to thee, nor Crave thy Patronage, as if
thereby I might have more Confidence to present it to the World, or be more
hopeful of its Success: To God alone I owe what I have, and that more
Immediately in matters Spiritual; and therefore to Him alone, and to the
Service of his Truth I Dedicate, whatever Work he brings forth in me: to whom
only the praise and honor appertains, whose Truth needs not the Patronage of
Worldly Princes; his Arm and Power being that alone, by which it is propagated,
established and confirmed. But I found it upon my Spirit to take occasion to
present this Book unto Thee: that as thou have been often Warned by several of
that people, who are Inhabitants of England; so thou may not want a
Seasonable Advertisement from a Member of thy Ancient Kingdom of Scotland: and
that thou may know (which, I hope, thou shall have no Reason to be troubled
at) that God is Raising up and Increasing that people in that Nation. And the
Nations shall also hereby know, that the Truth we profess, is not a Work of
Darkness, nor propagated by Stealth, and that we are not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, because we know it to be the Power of God unto Salvation: and that
we are no ways so Inconsistent with Government, nor such Disturbers of the
Peace, as our Enemies by Traducing us have sought to make the World believe, we
are: for which to Thee I dare Appeal as a Witness of our peaceableness, and
Christian patience.

Generations to come shall not more Admire that singular Step of Divine
Providence in Restoring thee to thy Throne without outward Bloodshed; than they
shall admire the Increase and Progress of this Truth without all outward Help,
and against so Great Opposition; which shall be-none of the least things
rendering thy Memory Remarkable. God has done great things for thee; he has
sufficiently shown thee, that it is By Him Princes Rule, and that He can pull
down and set up at his pleasure. He has often faithfully Warned thee by his
Servants, since he Restored thee to thy Royal Dignity, that thy Heart might not
wax Wanton against him to forget his Mercies and Providence toward thee;
whereby he might permit Thee to be soothed up and lulled asleep in thy Sins by
the flattering of Court-Parasites, who by their fawning are the Ruin of many
Princes.

There is no King in the World, who can so Experimentally testify of God's
Providence and Goodness, neither is there any, who Rules so many Free People,
so many True Christians: which thing renders thy Government more Honorable,
and Thy self more Considerable, than the Accession of many Nations filled with
slavish and superstitious Souls.

Thou have Tasted of Prosperity and Adversity; thou know, what it is to be
Banished thy Native Country; to be Overruled, as well as to Rule and Sit upon
the Throne; and being Oppressed, thou have reason to know, how hateful the
Oppressor is both to God and Man: If after all these Warnings and
Advertisements thou do not Turn unto the Lord with all thy heart, but forget
him, who remembered thee in thy Distress, and give up thy self to follow Lust
and Vanity; surely, Great will be thy Condemnation.

Against which Snare, as well as the Temptation of those, that may or do feed
thee, and prompt thee to Evil, the most Excellent and Prevalent Remedy will be,
to Apply thy self to that Light of Christ, which shines in thy Conscience,
which neither can, nor will flatter thee, nor suffer thee to be at Ease in thy
Sins; but does and will deal plainly and faithfully with thee, as those, that
are Followers thereof, have also done.

GOD Almighty who has so signally hitherto visited Thee with his love, so
Touch and Reach thy heart, e're the Day of thy Visitation be Expired, that thou
may effectually Turn to him, so as to Improve thy Place and Station for his
Name. So wishes, so prays

From Ury, the place of my Pilgrimage, in my Native Country of Scotland, the 25
th of the Month, called November, in the Year 1675. Thy Faithful Friend and
Subject, Robert Barclay.

R B. unto the Friendly Reader Wishes Salvation.
FOrasmuch as that, which above all things I propose to my self, is to Declare
and Defend the Truth; for the Service whereof I have given up and devoted my
self, and all that is mine: therefore there is nothing, which for its sake (by
the Help and Assistance of God) I may not Attempt. And in this Confidence I did
sometime ago publish certain Propositions of Divinity, comprehending briefly
the Chief Principles and Doctrines of Truth; which appearing not unprofitable
to some, and being beyond my Expectation well Received both by Forreiners,
though Dissenting from us, (albeit also Opposed by some Envious ones) did so
far prevail, as in some part to Remove that false and monstrous Opinion, which
lying Fame and the Malice of our Adversaries had Implanted in the Minds of some
concerning us and our Doctrines. In this Respect it seemed to me not fit to
spare my Pains and Labor.

Therefore being acted by the same Measure of the Divine Spirit, and the like
Design of propagating the Truth, by which I published the Propositions, I
judged it meet to Explain them somewhat more largely at this time, and Defend
them by Certain Arguments.

Perhaps my Method of Writing may seem not only Different, but even Contrary to
that, which is commonly used by the Men, called Divines; with which I am not
concerned: for that I Confess my self to be not only no Imitator and Admirer of
the Schoolmen, but an Opposer and Despiser of them, as such; by whose Labor I
judge the Christian Religion to be so far from being bettered, that it is
rather destroyed. Neither have I sought to Accommodate this my Work to Itching
Ears, who desire rather to Comprehend in their Head the Sublime Notions of
Truth, than to Embrace it in their Heart: For what I have written, comes more
from my Hearth, than from my Head; what I have heard with the Ears of my Soul,
and seen with my inward Eyes, and my hands have handled of the Word of Life,
and what has been inwardly Manifested to me of the Things of God, that do I
Declare; not so much minding the Eloquence and Excellency of Speech, as
desiring to Demonstrate the Efficacy and Operation of Truth: and if I Err
sometime in the former, it is no great matter; for I act not here the
Grammarian or the Orator, but the Christian: And therefore in this have
followed the certain Rule of the Divine Light, and of the Holy Scriptures.

And to make an end, what I have Written, is Written not to feed the Wisdom and
Knowledge, or rather Vain Pride of this World; but to starve and oppose it: As
the little Preface prefixed to the Propositions does show. Which with the Title
of them is, as follows.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF Perhaps it be known to the Reader, e're this come to his hand, that there
is a large Answer writ to the Latin Edition (before this came forth) by John
Brown (that little Presbyterian, etc. at his Brother Robert Macquair terms him
in the Postscript) though it be Esteemed, that such, as will seriously Compare
it with this, will judge no further Reply needful, and that it appeared not to
deserve any; seeing a great part of it is a bundle of mere Railing and Abuse:
and that the said John Brown has now Manifested himself to be a person so
Furious, Headstrong and Violent, as he is become Unsupportable to the Chiefest
of his own Nonconforming Brethren. Yet there was a Reply written to it diverse
Months ago, and may e're long come to Public View, if the Difficulty of
Printing, and Distance do not retard it: In which the Reader may find
Satisfaction, and see that Furious Railer soberly Rebuked, and as is hoped,
solidly Refuted.

THESES THEOLOGICAE.
To the CLERGY of what Sort soever, unto whose hands these may come; but more
particularly to the Doctors, Professors and Students of Divinity in the
Universities and Schools of Great Britain, whether Prelatical, Presbyterian, or
any other: Robert Barclay, a Servant of the Lord God, and one of those, who in
Derision are called Quakers, Wishes Unfeigned Repentance unto the
Acknowledgment of the Truth.
FRIENDS,
UNto You these following PROPOSITIONS are Offered, in which, they being Read
and Considered in the Fear of the Lord, you may perceive that Simple, Naked
Truth, which Man by his Wisdom has rendered so Obscure and Mysterious, that the
World is even Burdened with the great and Voluminous Tractates, which are made
about it, and by their Vain Jangling and Commentaries, by which it is rendered a
hundred fold more Dark and Intricate, than of it self it is: which Great
Learning (so accounted of) to wit, your School Divinity (which takes up almost
a Man's whole Lifetime to learn) brings not a-whit nearer to God, neither
makes any Man less Wicked, or more Righteous, than he was. Therefore has God
laid aside the Wise and Learned, and the Disputers of this World; and has
chosen a few, despicable and Unlearned Instruments (as to Letter-learning) as
he did Fishermen of old, to publish his pure and naked Truth, and to free it
of these Mists and Fogs, wherewith the Clergy has Clouded it, that the People
might Admire and Maintain them. And among several others, whom God has Chosen
to make known these things, seeing, also have Received (in Measure) Grace to be
a Dispenser of the same Gospel, it seemed good unto me, according to my Duty to
Offer unto You these Propositions; which (though short, yet) are Weighty,
Comprehending much, and declaring, what the true Ground of Knowledge is, even
of that Knowledge, which leads to Life Eternal: which is here witnessed of; and
the Testimony thereof left unto the Light of Christ in all your Consciences.

Farewell, R. B.

The First Proposition. Concerning the true Foundation of Knowledge.
SEeing the Height of all Happiness is placed in the true Knowledge of God,
(This is Life Eternal, to know the true God, and Jesus Christ, John 17.3.
whom thou have sent) the true and right Understanding of this Foundation and
Ground of Knowledge is that, which is most necessary to be known and believed
in the first place.

The Second Proposition. Concerning Immediate Revelation.
Seeing no Man knows the Father, but the Son, and he, to whom the Son
Reveals him: Matthew. 11.27.
and seeing, the Revelation of the Son is in and by the Spirit; therefore the
Testimony of the Spirit is that alone, by which the true Knowledge of God has
been, is and can be only Revealed: Who, as by the moving of his own Spirit,
Converted the Chaos of this World into that Wonderful Order, wherein it was in
the beginning, and Created Man a living Soul to Rule and Govern it; so by the
Revelation of the same Spirit he has Manifested himself all along unto the
Sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles. Which Revelations of God
by the Spirit, whether by outward Voices and Appearances, Dreams, or inward
Objective Manifestations in the Heart were of old the formal Object of their
Faith, and remains yet so to be; since the Object of the Saints Faith is the
same in all Ages, though set forth under diverse Administrations. Moreover these
Divine, Inward Revelations, which we make absolutely Necessary for the building
up of true Faith, neither do nor can ever Contradict the outward Testimony of
the Scriptures, or right and sound Reason; Yet from hence it will not follow,
that these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the Examination either of
the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or of the Natural Reason of Man, as to
a more noble, or certain Rule and Touchstone. For this Divine Revelation and
inward Illumination is that, which is evident and clear of it self, forcing by
its own Evidence and Clearness the well-disposed Understanding to Assent,
irresistibly moving the same thereunto; even as the Common Principles of
Natural Truths move and incline the mind to a Natural Assent (such as are
these; That the Whole is greater than the Part; That two Contradictory Sayings
cannot be both true, or false.) Which is also manifest according to our
Adversaries Principle; who (supposing the possibility of inward Divine
Revelations) will nevertheless Confess with us, that neither Scripture, nor
sound Reason will Contradict it: and yet it will not follow according to them,
that the Scripture, or sound Reason should be subjected to the Examination of
the Divine Revelations in the heart.

The Third Proposition. Concerning the Scriptures.
From these Revelations of the Spirit of God to the Saints, have proceeded the
Scriptures of Truth, which contain, 1. A faithful, Historical Account of the
Actings of God's People in diverse Ages; with many singular and remarkable
Providence attending them. 2. A Prophetical Account of several things, whereof
some are already past, and some yet to come. 3. A full and ample Account of all
the chief Principles of the Doctrine of Christ held forth in diverse precious
Declarations, Exhortations and Sentences, which by the moving of God's Spirit
were at several times, and upon sundry occasions spoken and written unto some
Churches and their Pastors; Nevertheless, because they are only a Declaration
of the Fountain, and not the Fountain it self, therefore they are not to be
esteemed the principal Ground of all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the Adequate,
Primary Rule of Faith and Manners. Nevertheless, as that which gives a true
and faithful Testimony of the first Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a
secondary Rule, subordinate to the Spirit, from which they have all their
Excellency and Certainty. For as by the Inward Testimony of the Spirit we do
alone truly know them; so they testify, that the Spirit is that Guide, John
16.13. Romans 8.14.
by which the Saints are led into all Truth: Therefore, according to the
Scriptures, the Spirit is the first and principal Leader. And seeing, we do
therefore receive and believe the Scriptures, because they proceeded from the
Spirit; therefore also the Spirit is more originally and principally the Rule,
according to that received Maxim in the Schools, Propter quod unumquodque est
tale, illud ipsum est magis tale: Englished thus; That for which a thing is
such, that thing it self is more such.

The Fourth Proposition. Concerning the Condition of Man in the Fall.
All Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 5.12, 15.
as to the first Adam (or Earthly Man) is fallen, degenerated and dead,
deprived of the sensation (or feeling) of this inward Testimony or Seed of God;
and is subject unto the Power, Nature and Seed of the Serpent, which he sows in
men's hearts, while they abide in this Natural and Corrupted State: from whence
it comes, that not their words and deeds only, but all their Imaginations are
evil perpetually in the sight of God, as proceeding from this depraved and
wicked Seed. Man therefore, as he is in this State, can know nothing aright;
yea, his Thoughts and Conceptions concerning God and things spiritual (until he
be dis-joined from this Evil Seed, and united to the Divine Light) are
unprofitable both to himself and others. Hence are rejected the Socinian and
Pelagian Errors in exalting a Natural Light: as also the Papists and most of
Protestants, who affirm, Ephesians 2.1.
That Man without the true Grace of God may be a true Minister of the Gospel.
Nevertheless this Seed is not imputed to Infants, until by Transgression they
actually join themselves therewith: for they are by Nature the Children of
Wrath, who walk according to the Power of the Prince of the Air.

The Fifth and Sixth Propositions. Concerning the Universal Redemption by
Christ; and also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every Man is
enlightened.
The Fifth Proposition.
Ezekiel. 18.23. Isai 49.6. John 3.16. and 1 9. Tit 2.11. Ephesians. 5 13. Hebr. 2 9.
God (out of his Infinite Love, who delights not in the death of a Sinner, but
that all should live and be saved) has so loved the World, that he has given
his Only Son (a Light) that whosoever believes in him, should be saved: Who
enlighteneth every Man, that comes into the World; and makes manifest all
things, that are reproveable: and teaches all Temperance, Righteousness and
Godliness. And this Light enlighteneth the Hearts of all in a Day in order to
Salvation, if not Resisted: Nor is it less Universal, than the Seed of Sin,
being the purchase of his Death, 1 Cor. 15.22.
who tasted death for every Man. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all
shall be made alive.

The Sixth Proposition.
According to which Principle (or Hypothesis) all the Objections against the
Universality of Christ's Death are easily solved. Neither is it needful to
recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other Miraculous Means, which, they
say, God makes use of to manifest the Doctrine and History of Christ's Passion
unto such, who (living in those places of the World, where the outward
preaching of the Gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and Common
Grace: For hence it well follows, that as some of the Old Philosophers might
have been Saved; so also may now some (who by Providence are cast into those
Remote parts of the World, where the Knowledge of the History is wanting) be
made partakers of the Divine Mystery, if they receive and resist not that
Grace, 1 Cor. 12.7.
A manifestation whereof is given to every Man to profit withal. This certain
Doctrine then being received, ( to wit) that there is an Evangelical and Saving
Light and Grace in all, the Universality of the Love and Mercy of God toward
Mankind (both in the Death of his beloved Son the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the
manifestation of the Light in the heart) is established and confirmed against
all the Objections of such, as deny it. Therefore Christ has tasted death for
every Man, Hebr. 2 9.
not only for all kinds of Men, as some vainly talk; but for every one of all
kinds: the Benefit of whose Offering is not only extended to such, who have the
distinct outward Knowledge of his Death and Suffering, as the same is declared
in the Scriptures; but even unto those, who are necessarily excluded from the
Benefit of this Knowledge by some inevitable accident. Which Knowledge we
willingly Confess to be very Profitable and Comfortable; but not absolutely
Needful unto such, from whom God himself has withheld it: yet they may be
made partakers of the Mystery of his Death (though ignorant of the History) if
they suffer his Seed and Light (enlightening their hearts) to take place (in
which Light Communion with the Father and the Son is enjoied) so as of wicked
men to become holy, and lovers of that Power, by whose inward and secret
Touches they feel themselves turned from the Evil to the Good, and learn To do
to others, as they would be done by; in which Christ himself affirms all to be
included. As they have then falsely and erroneously taught, who have denied
Christ to have died for all men; so neither have they sufficiently taught the
Truth, who affirming him to have died for all, have added the absolute
necessity of the outward Knowledge thereof in order to the obtaining its saving
Effect. Among whom the Remonstrants of Holland have been chiefly wanting, and
many other Asserters of Universal Redemption; in that they have not placed the
Extent of this Salvation in that Divine and Evangelical Principle of Light and
Life, wherewith Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the World:
which is excellently and evidently held forth in these Scriptures, Genesis 6.3.
Deuteronomy. 30.14. John 1.7, 8, 9. Romans 10.8. Tit. 2.11.

The Seventh Proposition. Concerning Justification.
As many as resist not this Light, but receive the same, in them is produced a
holy, pure and spiritual Birth bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity,
and all these other blessed Fruits, which are acceptable to God: by which holy
Birth (to wit) Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his work in us, as we
are Sanctified, so are we Justified in the Sight of God, according to the
Apostle's words; But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Therefore it is
not by our Works wrought in our Will, nor yet by good Works, considered as of
themselves; but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the Giver, and the Cause
producing the Effects in us: who as he has Reconciled us, while we were
Enemies, does also in his Wisdom save us, and justify us after this manner, as
says the same Apostle elsewhere; According to his Mercy he has saved us by
the washing of Regeneration, Titus 3.5.
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost.

The Eighth Proposition. Concerning Perfection.
In whom this holy and pure Birth is fully brought forth, Romans 6.14. Id. 8.13.
Id. 6.2, 18. 1 John 3.6.
the body of Death and Sin comes to be Crucified and removed, and their hearts
united and subjected unto the Truth, so as not to obey any Suggestion or
Temptation of the Evil one; but to be Free from actual Sinning and
Transgressing of the Law of God, and in that respect Perfect. Yet does this
Perfection still admit of a Growth; there remains a possibility of sinning,
where the Mind does not most diligently and watchfully attend unto the Lord.

The Ninth Proposition. Concerning Perseverance, and the possibility of Falling
from Grace.
Although this Gift and inward Grace of God be sufficient to work out
Salvation; yet in those in whom it is Resisted, it both may and does become
their Condemnation. Moreover, in whom it has wrought in part to purify and
sanctify them in order to their further Perfection, 1 Timothy 1.6. Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6.
by disobedience such may fall from it, and turn it to wantonness, making
shipwreck of Faith, and ( after having tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and being
made partakers of the Holy Ghost) again fall away. Yet such an increase and
stability in the Truth may in this life be attained, from which there cannot be
any Apostasy.

The Tenth Proposition. Concerning the Ministry.
As by this Gift, or Light of God all true Knowledge in things Spiritual is
Received and Revealed; so by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
heart by the strength and power thereof, every true Minister of the Gospel is
Ordained, prepared and supplied in the Work of the Ministry: and by the
leading, moving and drawing hereof ought every Evangelist and Christian Pastor
to be led and ordered in his labor and work of the Gospel, both as to the
Place where? as to the Person to whom? and as to the Times when he is to
Minister? Moreover who have this Authority, may and ought to Preach the Gospel,
though without humane Commission or Literature; as on the other hand, who want
the Authority of this Divine Gift, however Learned or Authorized by the
Commissions of Men and Churches, are to be esteemed but as Deceivers, and not
true Ministers of the Gospel. Also who have received this holy and unspotted
Gift, as they have freely received, so are they freely to give, without Hire or
Bargaining; far less to use it as a Trade to get Money by it. Matthew. 10.
Yet if God has called any from their Employments or Trades, by which they
acquire their Livelihood; it may be lawful for such (according to the Liberty,
which they feel given them in the Lord) to receive such Temporals (to wit, what
may be needful to them for Meat and Clothing) as are freely given them by
those, to whom they have Communicated Spirituals.

The Eleventh Proposition. Concerning Worship.
All true and acceptable Worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate
moving and drawing of his own Spirit; which is neither limited to Places, Times
or Persons. For though we be to Worship him always, in that we are to fear
before him; yet as to the outward signification thereof in Prayers, Praises or
Preachings we ought not to do it where and when we will, but where and when we
are moved thereunto by the secret Inspirations of his Spirit in our hearts;
which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move us thereunto,
when need is: of which he himself is the alone proper Judge. All other Worship
then, both Praises, Prayers and Preachings, which man sets about in his own
Will and at his own Appointment, which he can both begin and end at his
pleasure, do or leave undone as himself sees meet, whether they be a prescribed
Form, as a Liturgy, or Prayers conceived Extemporarily by the natural strength
and faculty of the mind, they are all but Superstitions, Will Worship and
abominable Idolatry in the sight of God; which are to be denied, Ezekiel. 13.
Matthew. 10.20. Acts 2.4, 18, 5.
rejected and separated from in this day of his Spiritual Arising: however it
might have pleased him (who winked at the times of Ignorance with a respect to
the simplicity and integrity of some, John 3.6, and 4.21.
and of his own Innocent Seed, which lay (as it were) buried in the hearts of
men under the Mass of Superstition) To blow upon the dead and dry bones, Jude
19. Acts 17.23.
and to raise some Breathings, and Answer them; and that until the Day should
more clearly dawn and break forth.

The Twelfth Proposition. Concerning Baptism.
As there is one Lord, and one Faith, so there is one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet.
3.21* Romans 6.4. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. John 3.30.
which is not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience before God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And this Baptism is
a Pure and Spiritual thing, to wit, the Baptism of the Spirit and Fire, by
which we are buried with him: that being washed and purged from our sins, we
may walk in Newness of Life. 1 Cor. 1.17.
Of which the Baptism of John was a figure; which was Commanded for a Time, and
not to Continue for ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere human
Tradition; for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the
Scripture.

The Thirteenth Proposition. Concerning the Communion or Participation of the
body and blood of Christ.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is Inward and Spiritual, which
is the participation of this flesh and Blood, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. John 6.32, 33,
55. 1 Cor. 5.8.
by which the Inward man is daily nourished in the hearts of those, in whom
Christ dwells. Of which things the breaking of Bread by Christ with his
Disciples was a Figure; which they even used in the Church for a time (who had
received the Substance) for the Cause of the Weak: even as Abstaining from
things strangled and from blood, Acts 15.20.
the Washing one another feet, and the Anointing of the Sick with Oil, all
which are Commanded with no less Authority and Solemnity, than the former; John
13.14.
yet seeing they are but the shadows of better things, James 5.14.
they Cease in such, as have obtained the Substance.

The Fourteenth Proposition. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in
Matters purely Religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.
Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it, therefore it is not lawful for
any whatsoever, Luke 9.55, 56. Matthew. 7.12, 29. Tit. 3.10.
by virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the Government of this
World, To force the Consciences of others. And therefore all Killing,
Banishing, Fining, Imprisoning and other such things, which men are Afflicted
with for the alone Exercise of their Conscience, or difference in Worship or
Opinion, proceeds from the Spirit of Cain, the Murderer; and is contrary to
the Truth. Providing always, that no Man under the pretense of Conscience
prejudice his Neighbor in his Life or Estate; or do any thing destructive to,
or inconsistent with Human Society: in which Case the Law is for the
Transgressor, and Justice is to be administered upon all without Respect of
Persons.

The Fifteenth Proposition. Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc.
Seeing, the Chief End of all Religion is To* Redeem Man from the Spirit and
vain Conversation of this World, and to lead into inward Communion with God;
before whom if we Fear always, we are accounted Happy. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Pet. 1.14.
John 5.44. Jer. 10.3. Acts 10.26. Matthew. 15.13. Col. 2.8.
Therefore all the vain Customs and Habits thereof both in word and deed are to
be rejected and forsaken by those, who come to this Fear: Such as the Taking
off the Hat to a Man, the Bowings and Cringings of the Body, and other such
Salutations of that kind, with all the foolish and superstitious Formalities
attending them: all which Man has invented in his degenerate State to feed his
Pride in the vain Pomp and Glory of this World. As also the unprofitable Plays,
frivolous Recreations, Sportings and Gamings, which are invented to pass away
the precious time, and divert the mind from the Witness of God in the Heart,
and from the living Sense of his Fear, and from that Evangelical Spirit*
wherewith Christians ought to be leavened; and which leads into Sobriety,
Gravity and Godly Fear: in which as we abide, the Blessing of the Lord is felt
to attend us in these Actions, which we are necessarily engaged in order to the
taking care for the Sustenance of the Outward Man.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE True Christian Divinity.

Seeing, the Height of all Happiness is placed in the true Knowledge of G0D,
(This is Life Eternal, John 17.3.
to know the true God and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent) the true and right
understanding of this Foundation and Ground of Knowledge is that which is most
necessary to be known and believed in the first place.

HE, that desires to acquire any Art or Science, seeks first those Means, by
which that Art or Science is obtained. If we ought to do so in things Natural
and Earthly; how much more then in Spiritual? In this Affair then should our
Inquiry be the more diligent; because he that Errs in the Entrance, is not so
easily reduced again into the right Way: he that misseth his Road from the
beginning of his Journey, and is deceived in his first Marks at his first
setting forth; the greater his Mistake is, the more difficult will be his
Entrance into the right Way.

Thus when a Man first proposes to himself the Knowledge of God from a sense
of his own Unworthiness, The Way to the true Knowledge of God.
and from the great Weariness of his Mind, occasioned by the secret Checks of
his Conscience, and the tender, yet real Glances of God's Light upon his heart,
the Earnest Desires he has to be Redeemed from his present trouble, and the
fervent Breathings he has to be eased of his disordered Passions and Lusts, and
to find quietness and peace in the certain Knowledge of God, and in the
assurance of his Love and Good Will toward him, makes his heart Tender, and
ready to receive any Impression: and so not having then a distinct Discerning,
through Forwardness embraces any thing, that brings present Ease. If either
through the Reverence he bears to certain Persons, or from the secret
Inclination to what does comply with his natural Disposition, he fall upon any
Principles or Means, by which he apprehends he may come to know God, and so
does Center himself; it will be hard to remove him thence again, how wrong
soever they may be. For the first Anguish being over, he becomes more hardy;
and the Enemy being near, creates a false Peace, and a certain Confidence;
which is strengthened by the mind's Unwillingness to enter again into new
Doubtfulness, or the former Anxiety of a Search.

Jewish Doctors and Pharisees Resist Christ.
This is sufficiently verified in the Example of the Pharisees and Jewish
Doctors, who most of all Resisted Christ, disdaining to be esteemed Ignorant:
for this Vain Opinion they had of their Knowledge, hindered them from the true
Knowledge; and the mean People, who were not so much pre-occupied with former
Principles, nor Conceited of their own Knowledge, did easily believe. Wherefore
the Pharisees upbraid them, saying, Joh. 7.48, 49.
Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed in him? But this People, which
know not the Law, are accursed. This is also abundantly proved by the
Experience of all such, as being secretly touched with the Call of God's Grace
unto them, do apply themselves unto false Teachers; where the Remedy proves
worse than the Disease: because instead of knowing God, or the things relating
to their Salvation aright, they drink-in wrong Opinions of him; from which it is
harder to be disentangled, than while the Soul remains a Blank, or Tabula Rasa:
For they, that conceit themselves Wise, are worse to deal with, than they, that
are Sensible of their Ignorance. Nor has it been less the Device of the Devil
(the great Enemy of Mankind) to persuade men into wrong Notions of God, than to
keep them altogether from Acknowledging him: the latter taking with few,
because odious; but the other having been the constant Ruin of the World. For
there has scarce been a Nation found, but has had some Notions or other of
Religion: so that not from their denying any Deity, but from their Mistakes and
Misapprehensions of it has proceeded all the Idolatry and Superstition of the
World. Yea, hence even Atheism it self has proceeded: for these many and
various Opinions of God and Religion being so much mixed with the Guessings and
uncertain Judgments of Men, have begotten in many the Opinion, that there is no
God at all. This, and much more, that might be said, may show, how dangerous it
is to miss in this first Step: All, that come not in by the door, are accounted
as Thieves and Robbers.

Again: How needful and desirable that Knowledge is, which brings Life Eternal,
Epictetus.
Epictetus shows, saying Excellently well, Cap. 38. (...): Know, that the
main Foundation of Piety is this, to have (...), right Opinions and
Apprehensions of God.

This therefore I judged necessary, as a First Principle in the first place to
Affirm; and I suppose, will not need much further Explanation, nor Defense, as
being generally acknowledged by all (and in these things, that are without
Controversy, I love to be brief) as that, which will easily Commend it self to
every Man's Reason and Conscience. And therefore I shall proceed to the Next
Proposition: which, though it be nothing less certain; yet by the Malice of
Satan and Ignorance of many comes far more under Debate.

PROPOSITION II.
Of Immediate Revelation.
Seeing no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he, to whom the Son
Reveals him, Matthew. 11.27. And seeing, the Revelation of the Son is in and by
the Spirit; therefore the Testimony of the Spirit is that alone, by which the
True Knowledge of God has been, is and can be only Revealed. Who as by the
Moving of his own Spirit he disposed the Chaos of this World into that
Wonderful Order, wherein it was in the beginning, and Created Man a living Soul
to Rule and Govern it; so by the Revelation of the same Spirit he has
manifested himself all along unto the Sons of men, both Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles: which Revelation of God by the Spirit, whether by outward Voices
and Appearances, dreams or inward objective Manifestations in the heart, were
of old the formal Object of their Faith; and remain yet so to be: since the
Object of the Saints Faith is the same in all Ages, though held forth under
diverse Administrations. Moreover these divine, inward Revelations, which we
make absolutely necessary for the building up of true Faith, neither do, nor
can ever Contradict the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or right and sound
Reason; yet from hence it will not follow, that the Divine Revelations are to
be subjected to the Test either of the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or
of the Natural Reason of man, as to a more-noble, or certain Rule and
Touchstone. For this Divine Revelation and inward Illumination is that, which
is evident and clear of it self, forcing by its own Evidence and Clearness the
well-disposed understanding to Assent, irresistibly moving the same thereunto;
even as the common principles of natural Truths do move and incline the mind to
a natural Assent: As, That the whole is greater than its part: That two
Contradictories can neither be both true, nor both false.

I. IT is very probable, that many Carnal and Natural Christians will oppose
this Proposition, who, being wholly unacquainted with the Movings and Actings
of God's Spirit upon their hearts, Revelations by Apostate Christians Rejected.
judge the same nothing Necessary; and some are apt to flout at it, as
Ridiculous. Yea to that Height are the generality of all Christians
Apostatized and degenerated, that though there be not any thing more plainly
Asserted, more seriously Recommended, nor more certainly Attested to in all the
writings of the Holy Scriptures; yet nothing is less minded, and more rejected
by all sorts of Christians, than Immediate and Divine Revelation: in so much,
that once to lay Claim to it, is matter of Reproach. Whereas of old none were
ever judged Christians, but such, As had the Spirit of Christ; Romans 8.9. But
now many do boldly call themselves Christians, who make no difficulty of
confessing, They are without it; and laugh at such as say, they have it. Of old
they were accounted the Sons of God, who were led by the Spirit of God; ibid.
verse. 14. but now many aver themselves Sons of God, who know nothing of this
Leader: and he that affirms himself so led, is by the pretended Orthodox of
this Age presently proclaimed a Heretic. The Reason hereof is very manifest,
viz. Because many in these days under the name of Christians do experimentally
find, that they are not acted, nor led by God's Spirit; yea, many great
Doctors, Divines, Teachers and Bishops of Christianity (commonly so called)
have wholly shut their Ears from hearing, and their Eyes from seeing this
inward Guide, and so are become strangers unto it: whence they are, by their
own Experience, brought to this Strait, either to Confess, that they are as yet
Ignorant of God, and have only the shadow of knowledge, and not the true
knowledge of him; or that this knowledge is acquired without Immediate
Revelation.

For the better understanding then of this Proposition, we do distinguish
betwixt the Certain Knowledge of God, Knowledge Spiritual and Literal
distinguished.
and the Uncertain, betwixt the Spiritual Knowledge, and the Literal; the
Saving, heart-Knowledge, and soaring, airy, head-Knowledge. The last, we
Confess, may be diverse ways obtained; but the first by no other way, than the
Inward, Immediate Manifestation and Revelation of God's Spirit, shining in and
upon the heart, inlightning and opening the understanding.

II. Having then proposed to my self in these Propositions to Affirm those
things, which relate to the True and Effectual Knowledge, which brings Life
Eternal with it; therefore I have Affirmed, and that truly, That this Knowledge
is no otherways attained, and that none have any true ground to believe, they
have attained it, who have it not by this Revelation of God's Spirit.

The Certainty of which Truth is such, that it has been acknowledged by some
of the most Refined and Famous of all sorts of Professors of Christianity in
all ages; who being truly Vpright-hearted and Earnest Seekers of the Lord
(however stated under the disadvantages and Epidemical Errors of their several
Sects or Ages) the true Seed in them has been answered by God's Love, who has
had regard to the Good, and has had of his Elect ones among all, who, finding
a distaste and disgust in all other outward Means (even in the very Principles
and Precepts more particularly relative to their own Forms and Societies) have
at last concluded with one Voice, That there was no true Knowledge of God; but
that which is Revealed inwardly by his own Spirit. Whereof take these following
Testimonies of the Ancients.

1. It is the inward Master ( says Augustine) that teaches; it is Christ, that
teaches; Aug. ex Tract. Epist. Joh. 3.
it is Inspiration, that teaches: where this Inspiration and Unction is
wanting, it is in vain, that Words from without are beaten in. And thereafter:
For he, that Created us and Redeemed us, and called us by Faith, and dwells
in us by his Spirit, unless he speaks unto you inwardly, it is needless for
us to Cry out.

2. There is a difference ( says Clemens Alexandrinus) betwixt that, which any
one says of the Truth; and that, which the Truth it self, Interpreting it self
says. A Conjecture of Truth differs from the Truth it self; a Similitude of
a thing differs from the thing it self: It is one thing, Clem. Alex. Lib. 1.
Strom.
that is acquired by Exercise and Discipline; and another thing, which by Power
and Faith. Lastly, the same Clemens says, Truth is neither hard to be arrived
at, nor is it impossible to apprehend it; Paedag.
for it is most nigh unto us, even in our houses, as the most Wise Moses has
insinuated.

3. How is it, Tertullianus Lib. de Veland. Virginibus, Cap. 1.
( says Tertullian) that since the Devil always works and stirs up the
mind to Iniquity, that the work of God should either cease or desist to act?
Since for this end the Lord did send the Comforter, that because human Weakness
could not at once bear all things, Knowledge might be by little and little
directed, formed and brought to perfection by the holy Spirit, that Vicar of
the Lord. I have many things yet (says he) to speak unto you, but ye cannot as
yet bear them; but when that Spirit of Truth shall come, he shall lead you into
all Truth, and shall teach you these things, that are to come. But of his work
we have spoken above. What is then the Administration of the Comforter, but
that Discipline be derived, and the Scriptures Revealed, etc.

4. The Law ( says Hierom) is spiritual, Hieron. Epist. Paulin. 103.
and there is need of a Revelation to understand it. And in his Epistle 150. to
Hedibia, Quest. 11. he says, The whole Epistle to the Romans needs an
Interpretation, it being involved in so great Obscurities; that for the
understanding thereof we need the help of the holy Spirit, who through the
Apostle dictated it.

5. So great things ( says Athanasius) does our Savior daily: Athanasius, de
Incarnatione Verbi Dei.
he Draws unto Piety, Persuades unto Virtue, Teaches Immortality, Excites to
the desire of Heavenly things, Reveals Knowledge from the Father, Inspires
power against Death, and shows himself unto every one.

6. Gregory the Great upon these words [ He shall teach you all things] says;
That unless the same Spirit sit upon the heart of the Hearer, Greg. Mag. Hom.
30. upon the Gospel.
in vain is the Discourse of the Doctor: Let no man then ascribe unto the man,
that teaches, what he understands from the mouth of him that speaks; for
unless he that teaches, be within, the Tongue of the Doctor that is without,
labors in vain.

7. Cyrillus Alexandrinus plainly Affirms; That men know, Cyril. Alex. In
Thesauro Lib. 13. Cap. 3
that Jesus is the Lord by the Holy Ghost no otherwise, than they who taste
Honey know, that it is sweet even by its proper Quality.

8. Therefore ( says Bernard) we daily exhort you, Brethren, by speech,
Bernard. in Psalm. 84.
that ye walk the ways of the heart, and that your Soul be always in your
hands; that ye may hear, what the Lord says in you. And again, upon these
words of the Apostle, [Let him, that glories, glory in the Lord] with which
Threefold Vice (says he) all sorts of Religious men are less or more
dangerously affected, because they do not so diligently Attend with the Ears of
the Heart, to what the Spirit of Truth (which flatters none) inwardly speaks.

This was the very Basis and main Foundation, upon which the Primitive
Reformers walked.

Luther in his Book to the Nobility of Germany says: This is certain, Lutherus.
that no man can make himself a Doctor of the holy Scripture; but the holy
Spirit alone. And upon the Magnificat he says; No man can rightly understand
God, or the Word of God, unless he immediately receive it from the Holy Spirit;
neither can any one Receive it from the Holy Spirit, except he find it by
Experience in himself: and in this Experience the Holy Ghost teaches, as in
his proper School; out of which School nothing is taught, but mere Talk.

Philip Melanchthon in his Annotations upon John 6. Who hear only an outward
and bodily Voice, Phil. Melanchthon.
hear the Creature; but God is a Spirit, and is neither discerned, By the
Spirit alone God is known.
nor known, nor heard, but by the Spirit: and therefore to hear the Voice of
God, to see God, is to know and hear the Spirit. By the Spirit alone God is
known and perceived.

Which also the more Serious to this day do acknowledge, even all such, who
satisfy themselves not with the Superfice of Religion, and use it not as a
Cover or Art. Yea all those, who apply themselves effectually to Christianity,
and are not satisfied, until they have found its Effectual Work upon their
hearts redeeming them from sin, do feel; that no knowledge effectually prevails
to the producing of this, but that which proceeds from the warm Influence of
God's Spirit upon the heart, and from the comfortable shinings of his Light
upon their Understanding. And therefore to this purpose a late Modern Author
says well ( videlicet, Dr. Smith of Cambridge concerning Book-Divinity.
Dr. Smith of Cambridge in his Select Discourses) To seek our Divinity merely
in Books and Writings, is to seek the Living among the Dead. We do but in vain
many times seek God in these, where his Truth is too often not so much
Enshrined, as Entombed. Intra te quaere Deum, Seek God within thine own Soul,
he is best discerned (...) (as Plotinus phraseth it) by an Intellectual Touch
of him. We must see with our Eyes, and hear with our Eears, and our hands must
handle the Word of Life (to express it in S. John 's words) (...), etc. The
Soul it self has its Sense, as well as the Body. And therefore David, when he
would teach us to know, what the Divine Goodness is? calls not for Speculation;
but Sensation: Taste and see, how good the Lord is! That is not the best and
truest Knowledge of God, which is wrought out by the labor and sweat of the
brain; but that, which is kindled within us by an heavenly Warmth in our
hearts. And again: There is a knowing of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, as it is
in a Christ-like nature; as it is in that sweet, mild, humble and loving Spirit
of Jesus, which spreads it self, like a Morning Star, upon the Spirits of good
men full of Light and Life. It profits little, to know Christ himself after the
flesh; but he gives his Spirit to good men, that searches the deep things of
God. And again: It is but thin, airy Knowledge, that is got by mere
Speculation, which is ushered in by Syllogisms and Demonstrations; but that,
which springs forth from true Goodness, is (...) (as Origin speaks) It brings
such a Divine Light to the Soul, as is more clear and convincing, than any
Demonstration.

Method of the true Knowledge of God has been brought out of Use, has been
none of the least Devices of the Devil to secure Mankind to his Kingdom.
Apostasy and a false Knowledge Introduced.
For after the Light and Glory of the Christian Religion had prevailed over a
good part of the World, and dispelled the thick Mists of the Heathenish
Doctrine of the plurality of Gods, he that knew, there was no probability of
deluding the World any longer that way; did then puff man up with a false
Knowledge of the true God, setting him on work to seek God the wrong Way, and
persuading him to be content with such a Knowledge, as was of his own
Acquiring, and not of God's Teaching. And this Device has proved the more
successful, because accommodated to the Natural and Corrupt spirit and temper
of man, who above all things affects to Exalt himself: In which Self-Exaltation
as God is most greatly dishonored, so therein the Devil has his end; who is
not anxious, how much God be acknowledged in Words, provided himself be but
always served, he matters not, how great and high Speculations the Natural man
Entertains of God, so long as he serves his Lusts and Passions, and is obedient
to his Evil Suggestions and Temptations. ^^ristianity is become an Art acquired
by human Science and Industry.
Thus Christianity is become an Art Acquired by Human Science and Industry, as
any other Art or Science is: and men have not only assumed unto themselves the
Name of Christians; but even have procured to be esteemed as Masters of
Christianity by certain Artificial Tricks, though altogether Strangers to the
Spirit and Life of Jesus. But if we shall make a right Definition of a
Christian according to the Scripture, videlicet, That he is one, that has the
Spirit of Christ, and is led by it; How many Christians, yea, and of these
great Masters and Doctors of Christianity (so accounted) shall we justly Divest
of that Noble Title?

If then such, as have all the other Means of Knowledge, and are sufficiently
Learned therein (whether it be the Letter of the Scripture, the Traditions of
Churches, the Works of Creation and Providence, whence they are able to Deduce
strong and undeniable Arguments, which may be true in themselves) are yet not
to be Esteemed Christians according to the certain and infallible Definition
abovementioned; And if the Inward and Immediate Revelation of God's Spirit in
the heart in such, as have been altogether Ignorant of some, and but very
little skilled in others of these Means of attaining Knowledge, has brought
them to Salvation; Then it will necessarily and evidently follow, By Revelation
is the true Knowledge of God.
that Inward and Immediate Revelation is the only sure and certain Way to
attain the true and saving Knowledge of God. But the First is true: Therefore
the Last.

Now as this Argument does very strongly Conclude for this way of Knowledge,
and against such as deny it; so herein it is the more considerable, because the
Propositions, from which it is Deduced, are so Clear, that our very Adversaries
cannot deny them. For as to the first, it is acknowledged, that many Learned
men may be and have been damned: And as to the second, who will deny, but many
Illiterate men may be and are saved? Nor dare any Affirm, that none come to the
Knowledge of God and Salvation by the Inward Revelation of the Spirit without
these other outward Means; unless they be also so bold, as to exclude Abel,
Seth, Noah, Abraham, Job, Abel, Seth, Noah, etc. Instanced.
and all the holy Patriarchs from true Knowledge and Salvation.

IV. I would however not be understood, as if hereby I excluded those other
means of Knowledge from any use or service to man; it is far from me so to
Judge: as in the Next Proposition concerning the Scriptures shall more plainly
appear. The Question is not, What may be profitable or helpful? but What is
absolute Necessary? Many things may contribute to further a Work; which yet are
not that main thing, that makes the Work go on.

The sum then of what is said, amounts to this, that where the true, inward
Knowledge of God is through the Revelation of his Spirit, there is all; neither
is there any absolute necessity of any other: But where the best, highest and
most profound Knowledge is without this, there is nothing, as to the obtaining
of the great End of Salvation. This Truth is very effectually Confirmed by the
first part of the Proposition it self; which in few words comprehends diverse
unquestionable Arguments, which I shall in brief Subsume:

First, That there is no Knowledge of the Father, but by the Son.

That there is no Knowledge of the Son, but by the Spirit.

That by the Spirit God has always Revealed himself to his Children.

That these Revelations were the formal Object of the Saints Faith.

That the same continues to be the Object of the Saints Faith to this day.

Of each of these I shall speak a little particularly; and then proceed to the
latter part.

V. As to the first, viz. That there is no knowledge of the Father, but It will
not need much probation, being founded upon the plain words of Scripture;
Proved.
and is therefore a fit Medium, to draw the rest of our Assertions from.

For the Infinite and most Wise God, who is the Foundation, Root and Spring of
all Operation, has wrought all things by his Eternal Word and Son. This is
that WORD, that was in the beginning with God, and was God; John 1.1, 2, 3.
by whom all things were made, and without whom was not any thing made that was
made. Ephesians. 3.9.
This is that Jesus Christ, by whom God created all things, by whom and for
whom all things were created, that are in heaven and in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalitys, or powers,
Col. 1.16. Who therefore is called The Firstborn of every Creature, Col. 1.15.
As then that Infinite and Incomprehensible Fountain of Life and Motion
operateth in the Creatures by his own Eternal Word and Power; so no Creature
has Access again unto him, but in and by the Son: according to his own express
words; No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he, to whom the Son will
Reveal him, Matthew. 11.27. Luke 10.22. And again he himself says, I am the Way,
the Truth and the Life: no man comes unto the Father, but by me, Joh. 14.6.

Hence he is fitly called The Mediator betwixt God and Man: For having been
with God from all Eternity* being himself God, and also in Time partaking of
the Nature of man; through him is the goodness and love of God conveyed to
mankind, and by him again man receives and partaketh of these Mercies. Hence
is easily deduced the Probation of this first Assertion, thus: If no man
knows the Father, but the Son, and he, to whom the Son will Reveal him; then
there is no Knowledge of the Father, but by the Son: But

No man knows the Father, but the Son: Therefore

There is no knowledge of the Father, but by the Son.

The first part of the Antecedent are the plain words of Scripture: The
Consequence thereof is undeniable; except one would say, that he has the
knowledge of the Father, while yet he knows him not: which were an Absurd
Repugnance. Again -- If the Son be the Way, the Truth and the Life, and that no
man comes unto the Father, but by him, then there is no Knowledge of the
Father, but by the Son:

But the First is true: Therefore the Last.

The Antecedent are the very Scripture-words. The Consequence is very Evident.
For how can any know a thing, who uses not the Way, without which it is not
Knowable? But it is already proved, that there is no other Way, but by the Son;
so that whosoever uses not that Way, cannot Know him, neither Come unto him.

VI. Having then laid down this First Principle, I come to the Second, viz.
That there is no Knowledge of the Son, but by the Spirit, or that the
Revelation of the Son of God is by the Spirit.

Where it is to be noted, that I always speak of the saving, certain and
necessary Knowledge of God; which that it cannot be acquired otherways, than by
the Spirit, does also appear from many clear Scriptures. For Jesus Christ, in
and by whom the Father is Revealed, does also Reveal himself to his Disciples
and Friends in and by his Spirit; as his Manifestation was sometimes outward,
when he testified and witnessed for the Truth in this World, and approved
himself Faithful throughout; So being now withdrawn as to the outward man, he
does teach and instruct, mankind inwardly by his own Spirit: He stands at the
door, and knocks, and whosoever hears his Voice, and opens, he comes in to
such, Rev. 3.20. Of this Revelation of Christ in him Paul speaks, Gal. 1.16.
in which he places the Excellency of his Ministry, and the Certainty of his
Calling. And the Promise of Christ to his Disciples, Lo, I am with you to the
end of the World, Confirms this same thing; for this is an Inward Presence
and Spiritual, as all acknowledge: But what relates hereto, will again occur. I
shall deduce the Proof of this Proposition from Two manifest places of
Scripture. The first is, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. What man knows the Spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things, which are freely given us of God. The
Things of God are known by the Spirit of God.
The Apostle in the verses before speaking of the wonderful things, which are
prepared for the Saints, after he has declared, that the Natural man cannot
reach them, adds, That they are Revealed by the Spirit of God, verse. 9, 10.
giving this Reason, For the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things
of God. And then he brings in the Comparison (in the verses abovementioned)
very apt and answerable to our purpose and Doctrine, That as the things of a
man are only known by the spirit of man; so the things of God are only known by
the Spirit of God: that is, that as nothing below the Spirit of man (as the
spirit of Brutes, or any other Creatures) can properly reach unto, nor
comprehend the Things of a man, as being of a more noble and higher nature; so
neither can the spirit of man, or the natural man (as the Apostle in v. 14.
subsumes) receive nor discern the things of God, or the things that are
spiritual, as being also of a higher nature: which the Apostle himself gives
for the Reason, saying, Neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. So that the Apostle's words being reduced to an Argument, do very
well prove the matter under Debate, thus: If that, which appertains properly
to man, cannot be discerned by any lower or baser Principle, than the spirit of
man; then cannot these things, that properly relate unto God and Christ, be
known or discerned by any lower or baser thing, than the Spirit of God and
Christ: But

The First is true: therefore also the Second.

The whole strength of the Argument is contained in the Apostle's words
beforementioned: which therefore being Granted, I shall proceed to Deduce a
Second Argument, thus: That which is Spiritual, can only be known and discerned
by the Spirit of God: But --

The Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the true and saving Knowledge of him is
Spiritual: Therefore --

The Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the true and saving Knowledge of him can
only be known and discerned by the Spirit of God.



Scripture is also a saying of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say,
No man can call Jesus Lord, etc.
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The Scripture (which is full of
Truth and answers full well to the Enlightened Understanding of the Spiritual
and Real Christian) may perhaps prove very strange to the Carnal and pretended
follower of Christ, by whom perhaps it has not been so diligently remarked.
Here the Apostle does so much require the holy Spirit in the things, that
relate to a Christian; that he positively avers, we cannot so much as affirm
Jesus to be the Lord without it: Spiritual Truths are Lies spoken by Carnal men.
which insinuates no less, than that the Spiritual Truths of the Gospel are as
Lies in the mouths of Carnal and Vnspiritual men. For though in themselves they
be True, yet are they not True as to them; because not known nor uttered forth
in and by that Principle and Spirit, that ought to direct the Mind, and actuate
it in such things: they are no better, than the Counterfeit Representations of
things in a Comedy; neither can it be more truly and properly called a Real and
True Knowledge of God and Christ, than the Actings of Alexander the Great and
Julius Caesar, etc. (if now Transacted upon a Stage) might be called truly and
really Their Doings, or the Persons Representing them might be said truly and
really to have Conquered Asia, and overcome Pompey, etc.

This Knowledge then of Christ, which is not by the Revelation of his own
Spirit in the heart, is no more properly the Knowledge of Christ than the
prattling of a Parret, Like the prattling of a Parret.
which has been taught a few words, may be said to be the Voice of a man: for
as that or some other Bird may be taught to sound and utter forth a rational
Sentence, as it has Learned it by the outward ear, and not from any living
Principle of Reason actuating it; so just such is that Knowledge of the things
of God, which the natural and carnal man has gathered from the words or
writings of Spiritual men, which are not true to him, because conceived in the
natural spirit, and so brought forth by the wrong Organ; and not proceeding
from the Spiritual Principle; no more than the words of a man acquired by Art,
and brought forth by the mouth of a Bird, not proceeding from a rational
principle, are True with respect to the Bird, that utters them. Wherefore from
this Scripture I shall further add this Argument: If no man can say, Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, then no man can know Jesus to be the Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost. But

The First is true: Therefore the Second.

From this Argument there may be another Deduced, Concluding in the very Terms
of this Assertion: thus, If no man can know Jesus to be the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost, then can there be no Certain Knowledge or Revelation of him, but by
the Spirit: But

The First is true: Therefore the Second.



Third thing Affirmed is; That by the Spirit God always Revealed himself to his
Children.

Truth of this Assertion, it will be but needful, to consider God's Manifesting
himself toward and in relation to his Creatures from the Beginning; which
Resolves it self always herein. The First Step of all is Ascribed hereunto by
Moses, Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. I
think it will not be denied, that God's Converse with man all along from Adam
to Moses was by the Immediate Manifestation of his Spirit; and afterward
through the whole Tract of the Law he spoke to his Children no otherways: which
as it naturally follows from the Principles above proved; That Revelation is
by the Spirit of God.
so it cannot be denied by such, as acknowledge the Scriptures of Truth to have
been written by the Inspiration of the holy Ghost: For these Writings from
Moses to Malachy do declare, that during all that time God Revealed himself to
his Children by his Spirit.

But if any will Object, Object.
That after the Dispensation of the Law God's Method of speaking was Altered.

I Answer First; That God spoke always Immediately to the Jews, Immediately to
the High Priest from betwixt the Cherubims; who, when he entered into the Holy
of Holies, Sanctum Sanctorum.
returning did relate to the whole People the Voice and Will of God there
Immediately Revealed: So that this Immediate Speaking never Ceased in any Age.

Secondly, From this Immediate Fellowship were none shut out, who earnestly
sought after and waited for it; in that many besides the High Priest, who were
not so much as of the Kindred of Levi, nor of the Prophets, did Receive it and
Speak from it: as it is written, Numb. 11.25. where the Spirit is said to have
Rested upon the Seventy Elders: which Spirit also reached unto Two, that were
not in the Tabernacle, None shut out from this Immediate Fellowship.
but in the Camp; whom when some would have forbidden, Moses would not; but
Rejoiced, wishing All the Lord's People were Prophets, and that he would put
his Spirit upon them, verse 29.

This is also Confirmed Neh. 9. where the Elders of the People after their
Return from Captivity, when they began to Sanctify themselves by Fasting and
Prayer, in which numbering up the many Mercies of God toward their Fathers,
they say, v. 20. Thou gave also thy Good Spirit to Instruct them; and v. 30.
Yet many years did thou forbear and testify against them by thy Spirit in thy
Prophets. Many are the Sayings of Spiritual David to this purpose, as Psalm.
51.13. Take not thy Holy Spirit from me: uphold me with thy free Spirit. Psalm.
139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Hereunto does the Prophet Isaiah
Ascribe the Credit of his Testimony, saying, Chap. 48. v. 16. And now the Lord
God and his Spirit has sent me. And that God Revealed himself to his Children
under the New Testament, to wit, to the Apostles, Evangelists and Primitive
Disciples, is Confessed by all: How far now this yet Continues, and is to be
Expected, comes hereafter to be spoken to.

VIII. The Fourth thing Affirmed is, That these Revelations were Object of the
Saints Faith of old.

This will easily Appear by the Definition of Faith, Dive into the Curious and
Various Notions of the Schoolmen; but stay in the plain and positive words of
the Apostle Paul, who Hebr. 11. describes it Two ways. Faith (says he) is the
Substance of things hoped for, What Faith is?
and the Evidence of things not seen: which, as the Apostle illustrateth it in
the same Chapter by many Examples, is no other, but a Firm and Certain Belief
of the Mind, whereby it rests, and in a Sense possesses the Substance of
some things hoped for, through its confidence in the promise of God: And thus
the Soul has a most firm Evidence by its Faith of things not yet seen nor come
to pass. The Object of this Faith is the Promise, Word or Testimony of God
speaking to the Mind. Hence it has been generally Affirmed, that the Object of
Faith is DEVS LOQVENS, etc. that is, God speaking, etc. which is also manifest
from all those Examples Deduced by the Apostle throughout that whole Chapter;
whose Faith was founded neither upon any outward Testimony, The Object of
Faith, Deus loquens.
nor upon the Voice or Writing of man; but upon the Revelation of God's Will
manifest unto them and in them. As in the Example of Noah, v. 7. thus, By Faith
Noah being warned of God of things not seen, as yet moved with fear prepared an
Ark to the saving of his house; by the which he Condemned the World, and became
Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. What was here the Object of Noah's
Faith, Noah's Faith.
but God speaking unto him? He had not the Writings nor Prophecyings of any
going before, nor yet the Concurrence of any Church or People to strengthen
him; and yet his Faith in the Word, by which he Contradicted the whole World,
saved him and his House. Of which also Abraham is set forth as a singular
Example, being therefore called the Father of the Faithful; Abraham's Faith.
who is said Against hope to have believed in hope, in that he not only
willingly forsook his Father's Country, not knowing whether he went; In that he
believed concerning the Coming of Isaac, though Contrary to natural
Probability; but above all, In that he Refused not to offer him up, not
doubting, but God was able to raise him from the dead: of whom it is said, that
in Isaac shall thy Seed be called: And last of all, In that he rested in the
Promise, that his Seed should possess the Land, wherein himself was but a
Pilgrim; and which to them was not to be fulfilled, while diverse Ages after.
The Object of Abraham's Faith in all this was no other, but Inward and
Immediate Revelation, or God signifying his Will unto him inwardly and
immediately by his Spirit.

But because in this part of the Proposition we made also mention of External
Voices, Appearances and Dreams in the Alternative; I think also fit to speak
hereof, what in that respect may be Objected: to wit;

That those, who found their Faith now upon immediate and objective Revelation,
Object.
ought to have also outward Voices or Visions, Dreams or Appearances for it.

Ministry of Angels, who in the Appearance of men spoke outwardly to the Saints
of old; and that he did also Reveal some things to them in Dreams and Visions:
The Ministry of Angels: speaking in the Appearance of men to the Saints of old.
none of which we will affirm to be Ceased, so as to limit the power and
liberty of God in manifesting himself toward his Children. But while we are
considering the Object of Faith, we must not stick to that, which is but
circumstantially and accidentally so; but to that, which is universally and
substantially so.

Next again, we must distinguish betwixt that, which in it self is subject to
Doubt and Delusion, and therefore is received for and because of another; and
that, which is not subject to any Doubt, but is received simply for and because
of it self, as being Prima Veritas, the very first and original Truth.
Revelations by Dreams and Visions.
Let us then consider, how, or how far these outward Voices, Appearances and
Dreams were the Object of the Saints Faith? Was it, because they were simply
Voices, Appearances or Dreams? Nay, Certainly: We know, and They were not
ignorant, that the Devil can form a sound of words, and convey it to the
outward Ear; That he can easily deceive the outward Senses, by making things to
Appear, that are not. Yea, do we not see by daily Experience, that the Jugglers
and Mountebanks can do as much as all that, by their Legerdemain? God forbid
then, that the Saints Faith should be founded upon so fallacious a Foundation,
as man's outward and fallible Senses! What made them then give credit to these
Visions? Certainly nothing else, but the secret Testimony of God's Spirit in
their hearts, assuring them, that the Voices, Dreams and Visions were of and
from God. Abraham believed the Angels; but who told him, that these Men were
Angels? we must not think, his Faith then was built upon his outward Senses;
but proceeded from the secret Persuasion of God's Spirit in his heart. This
then must needs be acknowledged to be originally and principally the Object of
the Saints Faith, without which there is no true and certain Faith, and by
which many times Faith is begotten and strengthened, without any of these
outward or visible Helps: As we may observe in many passages of the Holy
Scripture, where it is only mentioned, And God said, etc. And the word of the
Lord came unto such and such, saying, etc.

But if any one should pertinaciously affirm, Object.
That this did Import an Outward, Audible Voice to the Carnal Ear.

I would gladly know, what other Argument such a one could bring for this his
Affirmation, saving his own simple Conjecture? It is said indeed, The Spirit
witnesses with our Spirit; but not to our outward Ears, Romans 8.16. And seeing,
the Spirit of God is within us, The Spirit speaks to the Spiritual Ear, not to
the Outward.
and not without us only, it speaks to our Spiritual, and not to our Bodily
Ear. Therefore I see no Reason, where it is so often said in Scripture, The
Spirit said, moved, hindered, called such or such a one to do or forbear such
or such a thing, That any have to Conclude, that this was not an Inward Voice
to the Ear of the Soul, rather than an outward Voice to the bodily Ear. If any
be otherwise minded, let them (if they can) produce their Arguments; and we may
further Consider of them. From all then, which is above-declared, I shall
deduce an Argument, to conclude the Probation of this Assertion, thus; That
which any one firmly believes, as the Ground and Foundation of his hope in God
and Life Eternal, is the formal Object of his Faith: But

The Inward and Immediate Revelation of God's Spirit speaking in and unto the
Saints, was by them believed, as the Ground and Foundation of their hope in God
and Life Eternal; Therefore

These Inward and Immediate Revelations were the formal Object of their Faith.



IX. That which now comes under Debate, is what we have Asserted last place,
to wit, That the same continues to be the Object of the Saints Faith unto this
day. Many will Agree, Differ from us herein.

There is nevertheless a very firm Argument Confirming the Truth of this
Assertion, included in the Proposition it self, to wit; That the Object of the
Saints Faith is the same in all Ages, though held forth under diverse
Administrations: Which I shall reduce to an Argument, and prove thus; First:
Where the Faith is one, the Object of the Faith is one: But --

The Faith is one: Therefore -- etc.

That the Faith is one, is the express words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.5. who
places the One Faith with the One God, importing no less, than that to Affirm
Two Faiths, is as Absurd, as to Affirm Two Gods.

Moreover, If the Faith of the Ancients were one and the same with ours, i. e.
agreeing in Substance therewith, and receiving the same Definition, it had been
impertinent for the Apostle, Hebr. 11. to have illustrated the Definition of
our Faith by the Examples of that of the Ancients; or to go about to move us by
the Example of Abraham, if Abraham's Faith were different in nature from ours:
Nor does hence any Difference arise, because they believed in Christ with
respect to his Appearance outwardly, The Faith of the Saints of old the same
with ours.
as future; and we, as already Appeared. For nor did they then so believe in
him to come, as not to feel him present with them, and witness him near; seeing
the Apostle says, They all drank of that spiritual Rock, which followed them,
which Rock was Christ: Nor do we so believe concerning his Appearance past, as
not also to feel and know him present with us, and to feed upon him; Except
Christ (says the Apostle) be in you, ye are Reprobates: so that both our Faith
is one, terminating in one and the same thing. And as to the other Part or
Consequence of the Antecedent, to wit, That the Object is one, where the Faith
is one; the Apostle also proves it in the forecited Chapter, where he makes
all the Worthies of old Examples to us. Now wherein are they Imitable, but
because they believed in God? and what was the Object of their Faith, but
inward and immediate Revelation, as we have before proved? Their Example can be
no ways applicable to us, except we believe in God, as they did, that is, by
the same Object. The Apostle clears this yet further by his own Example, Gal.
1.16. where he says, So soon as Christ was revealed in him, he consulted not
with flesh and blood, but forthwith believed and obeyed: The same Apostle Hebr.
13. verse. 7, 8. where he exhorts the Hebrews to follow the Faith of the
Elders, adds this Reason; Considering the end of their Conversation, Jesus
Christ, the same to day, yesterday and for ever: hereby notably insinuating,
that in the Object there is no Alteration.

Object.
If any now Object The diversity of Administration.

Answer; That alters not at all the Object: for the same Apostle mentions
this Diversity three times, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. centred always in the same
Object, the same Spirit, the same Lord, the same God.

But further: If the Object of Faith were not one and the same both to us and
to them, then it would follow, that we were to know God some other way, than by
the Spirit: But this were Absurd; Therefore, etc.

Lastly, This is most firmly proved from a Common and Received Maxim of the
Schoolmen, to wit, Omnis actus specificatur ab Objecto, Every Act is specified
from its Object: from which (if it be true, as they acknowledge; though for the
sake of many I shall not recur to this Argument, as being too nice and
Scholastic; neither lay I much stress upon those kind of things, as being
that, which commends not the Simplicity of the Gospel) If the Object were
different, then the Faith would be different also.

Such as deny this Proposition now adays, use here a Distinction, granting,
That God is to be known by his Spirit; but again denying, That it is Immediate
or Inward, but in and by the Scriptures, in which the mind of the Spirit (as
they say) being fully and amply expressed, we are thereby to know God, and be
led in all things.

As to the Negative of this Assertion, That the Scriptures are not sufficient,
neither were ever appointed to be the adequate and only Rule, nor yet can guide
or direct a Christian in all those things, that are needful for him to know, We
shall leave that to the next Proposition to be Examined: What is proper in this
place to be proved, is, That Christians now are to be led inwardly and
immediately by the Spirit of God, even in the same manner (though it befall not
to many to be led in the same measure) as the Saints were of old.

X. I shall prove this by diverse Arguments: and first from the Promise of
Christ in these words, Joh. 14.16. And I will pray the Father, and he will give
you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Verse. 17 Even the
Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but ye know him, Christians are now to be led by the
Spirit in the same manner as the Saints of old.
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. Again verse. 26. But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance. And
16.13. But when that Spirit of Truth shall come, he shall lead you into all
Truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, he
shall speak, and shall declare unto you things to come. We have here first, Who
this is? and that is diverse ways expressed: to wit, The Comforter, the Spirit
of Truth, the Holy Ghost, the Sent of the Father in the Name of Christ. And
hereby is sufficiently proved the Sottishness of those Socinians and other
Carnal Christians, who neither know nor acknowledge any internal Spirit or
Power, but that which is merely Natural; by which they sufficiently declare
themselves to be of the World, who cannot receive the Spirit, because they
neither see him nor know him. Secondly; Where this Spirit is to be? He dwells
with you, and shall be in you. And Thirdly, What his Work is? He shall teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, and guide you into
all Truth, (...).

As to the first: Most do acknowledge, that there is nothing else understood,
than what the plain words signify: Who is this Comforter?
Which is also Evident by many Scripture, that will hereafter occur; neither do
I see, how such as Affirm otherways, can avoid Blasphemy. For if the Comforter,
the Holy Ghost and Spirit of Truth be all one with the Scriptures, then it
would follow, that the Scriptures is God; seeing it is true, that the Holy
Ghost is God. If these men's Reasoning might take place, wherever the Spirit is
mentioned in relation to the Saints, thereby might be truly and properly
understood the Scriptures; Nonsensical Consequences from the Socinians belief
of the Scriptures being the Spirit.
Which what a Non-sensical Monster it would make of the Christian Religion,
will easily appear to all men. As where it is said, A manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, it might be rendered thus; A
manifestation of the Scriptures is given to every man to profit withal; What
notable Sense this would make, and what a Curious Interpretation, let us
consider by the Sequel of the same Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.9, 10, 11. To another the
gifts of healing by the same Spirit, to another the working of miracles, etc.
but all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man
severally, as he will: What would now these great Masters of Reason, the
Socinians, Judge if we should place the Scriptures here instead of the Spirit?
Would it answer their Reason which is the great guide of their Faith? Would it
be good and sound Reason, in their Logical Schools to affirm, That the
Scripture divides severally as it will, and gives to some the gift of
healing, to others the working of miracles? If then this Spirit, a
Manifestation whereof is given to every man to profit withal, be no other, than
that Spirit of Truth beforementioned, which guides into all Truth, this
Spirit of Truth cannot be the Scripture. I could infer an hundred more
Absurdities of this kind upon this sottish Opinion; but what is said, may
suffice: For even some of themselves being at times forgetful or ashamed of
their own Doctrine, do acknowledge, That the Spirit of God is another thing,
and distinct from the Scriptures to guide and influence the Saints.

Secondly, That this Spirit is inward, in my opinion needs no Interpretation,
nor Commentary. He dwells with you and shall be in you: This indwelling of
the Spirit in the Saints, as it is a thing most needful to be known and
believed, so it is as positively asserted in the Scripture, as any thing else
can be. If so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, says the Apostle Romans 8.9.
and again: Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, Where is his
place.
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 6.19. without this the
Apostle reckons no man a Christian. If any man (says he) have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. These words immediately follow those
abovementioned out of the Epistle to the Romans, But ye are not in the flesh,
if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you: The Context of which shows, The
Spirit within the main Token of a Christian.
that the Apostle reckons it the main Token of a Christian both positively
and negatively. For in the former verses he shows how the Carnal mind is
enmity against God; and that such, as are in the flesh, cannot please him:
Where subsuming he adds concerning the Romans, That they are not in the flesh,
if the Spirit of God dwell in them. What is this but to Affirm, that they, in
whom the Spirit dwells, are no longer in the flesh, nor of those, who please
not God; but are become Christians indeed? Again in the next verse he Concludes
Negatively, That if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his,
that is, he is no Christian. He then, that acknowledges himself Ignorant, and a
Stranger to the Inward In-being of the Spirit of Christ in his heart, does
thereby acknowledge himself to be yet in the Carnal mind, which is Enmity to
God; to be yet in the flesh, where God cannot be pleased: and in short
(whatever he may otherways know or believe of Christ, or however much skilled
or acquainted with the letter of the Holy Scripture) not yet to be
(notwithstanding all that) Attained to the least desire of a Christian, yea,
not once to have embraced the Christian Religion. For take but away the Spirit,
and Christianity remains no more Christianity, than the dead Carcass of a man,
when the Soul and Spirit is departed, remains a Man; which the living can no
more abide, but do bury out of their sight, as the noisome and useless thing,
however acceptable it has been, when actuated and moved by the Soul. Lastly,
Whatsoever Excellent, What is his Work?
whatsoever is Noble, whatsoever is Worthy, whatsoever is Desirable in the
Christian Faith, is Ascribed to this Spirit; without which it could no more
subsist, than the outward World without the Sun. Hereunto have all true
Christian in all Ages attributed their Strength and Life. It is by this Spirit,
that they avouch themselves to have been Converted to God; to have been
Redeemed from the world; to have been Strengthened in their Weakness; Comforted
in their Afflictions; Confirmed in their Temptations; Imboldened in their
Sufferings, and Triumphed in the midst of all their Persecutions. Yea, the
Writings of all true Christians are full of the Great and Notable things, The
Great and Notable Acts, that have been and are performed by the Spirit in all
Ages.
which they all affirm themselves to have done by the Power and Virtue, and
Efficacy of the Spirit of God working in them. It is the Spirit, that
quickens, Joh. 6.63. It was the Spirit, that gave them Utterance, Acts 2.4.
It was the Spirit, by which Stephen spoke, that the Jews were not able to
Resist, Acts 6.10. It is such, as walk after the Spirit, that receive no
Condemnation, Romans 8 1. It is the Law of the Spirit, that makes free, v. 2. It
is by the Spirit of God dwelling in us, that we are Redeemed from the Flesh and
from the Carnal mind, v. 9. It is the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, that
quickens our mortal bodies, v. 11. It is through this Spirit, that the deeds
of the body are Mortified, and Life Obtained, v. 13. It is by this Spirit, that
we are Adopted, and cry, ABBA Father, v. 15. It is this Spirit, that bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the Children of God, v. 16. It is this
Spirit, that helps our infirmities, and makes intercession for us with
groanings, which cannot be uttered, v. 26. It is by this Spirit, that the
glorious things, which God has laid up for us, which neither outward ear has
heard, nor outward eye has seen, nor the heart of man conceived (by all his
Reasonings) are Revealed unto us, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. It is by this Spirit, that
both Wisdom and Knowledge, and Faith and Miracles, and Tongues and Prophecies
are obtained, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. It is by this Spirit that we are all baptized
into one body, v. 13. In short, what thing relating to the Salvation of the
Soul, and to the Life of a Christian is rightly performed, or effectually
obtained without it? And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me, to
tell of all those things, which the holy Men of old have Declared, and the
Saints of this day do witness themselves to Enjoy by the virtue and power of
this Spirit dwelling in them: Truly, my Paper could not contain those many
Testimonies, whereby this Truth is Confirmed. Wherefore, besides what is
abovementioned out of the Fathers (whom all pretend to Reverence) and those of
Luther and Melanchthon, I shall deduce yet one observable Testimony out of
Calvin, because not a few of the followers of his Doctrine do refuse and deride
(and that, as it is to be feared, because of their own Non-experience thereof)
this way of the Spirit's In-dwelling, as uncertain and dangerous; that so, if
neither the Testimony of the Scripture, nor the Sayings of others, nor right
Reason can move them, they may at least be Reproved by the words of their own
Master, who says in the third Book of his Institutions, cap. 2. on this wise:

But they allege; It is a bold presumption for any one to pretend to an
undoubted Knowledge of God's Will; Calvin of the Necessity of the Spirit's
In-dwelling in us.
which ( says he) I should grant unto them, if we should ascribe so much to
our selves, as to subject the Incomprehensible Counsel of God to the Rashness
of our Understandings. But while we simply say with Paul, That we have received
not the spirit of this world; but the Spirit, which is of God, by whose
Teaching we know those things, that are given us of God? what can they prate
against it, without Reproaching the Spirit of God? For if it be a horrible
Sacrilege, to accuse any Revelation coming from him either of a Lie, of
Uncertainty, or Ambiguity; in Asserting its Certainty, wherein do we offend?
But they cry out, That it is not without great temerity, that we dare so boast
of the Spirit of Christ. Who would believe, that the Sottishness of these men
were so great (who would be Esteemed the Masters of the World) that they should
so fail in the first Principles of Religion? Verily, I could not believe it, if
their own Writings did not Testify so much. Paul accounts those the Sons of
God, who are acted by the Spirit of God; but these will have the Children of
God acted by their own Spirits without the Spirit of God. He will have us call
God Father, the Spirit dictating that Term unto us; which only can witness to
our spirits, that we are the Sons of God: These, though they cease not to Call
upon God, do nevertheless demit the Spirit, by whose guiding he is rightly to
be called upon. He denies them to be the Sons of God, or the Servants of
Christ, who are not led by his Spirit; but these feign a Christianity, that
needs not the Spirit of Christ. He makes no hope of the blessed Resurrection,
unless we feel the Spirit residing in us; but these feign a hope without any
such a feeling. But perhaps they will Answer, That they deny not, but that it
is necessary to have it; only of modesty and humility we ought to deny, and not
acknowledge it. What means he then, when he Commands the Corinthians to Try
themselves, if they be in the Faith? To examine themselves, whether they have
Christ? whom whosoever acknowledges not dwelling in him, is a Reprobate. By the
Spirit, which he has given us (says John) we know, that he abides in us: And
what do we then else, but call in question Christ his promise, while we would
be esteemed the Servants of God without his Spirit, Without the Spirit's
Presence Christianity must cease.
which he declared, he would pour-out upon all his? Seeing these things are the
first Grounds of Piety, it is miserable blindness to accuse Christians of
Pride, because they dare glory of the Presence of the Spirit, without which
glorying Christianity it self could not be. But by their Example they declare,
how truly Christ spoke, saying, That his Spirit was unknown to the World; and
that those only acknowledge it, with whom it remains. Thus far Calvin.

If therefore it be so, why should any be so Foolish, as to deny, or so Unwise,
as not to seek aster this Spirit, which Christ has promised shall dwell in his
Children? They then, that do suppose the Indwelling and Leading of this Spirit
to be Ceased, must also suppose Christianity to be Ceased, which cannot subsist
without it.

What the Work of this Spirit is, is partly before shown, which Christ
compriseth in two or three things; What is the Work of the Spirit?
He will Guide you into all Truth, he will Teach you all things, and bring all
things to your Remembrance. Since Christ has provided for us so good an
Instructor, what need we then lean so much to those Traditions and Commandments
of men, John 16.13. and 14.26.
wherewith so many Christians have burdened themselves? What need we set up
our own Carnal and Corrupt Reason for a Guide to us in matters Spiritual, The
Spirit the Guide.
as some will needs do? May it not be Complained of all such, as the Lord did
of old concerning Israel by the Prophets, Jer. 2.13. For my People have
committed two Evils, they have forsaken me, the Fountain of Living Waters, and
hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that hold no water. Have not many
Forsaken? Do not many Deride and Reject this Inward and Immediate Guide, this
Spirit, that leads into all Truth? and cast up to themselves other ways, broken
Ways indeed, which have not all this while brought them out of the Flesh, nor
out of the World, nor from under the Dominion of their own Lusts, and sinful
Affections, whereby Truth, which is only rightly learned by this Spirit, is so
much a Stranger in the Earth.

-- A perpetual Ordinance to Gods Church and People.
From all then, that has been mentioned concerning this Promise and these Words
of Christ, it will follow, That Christians are always to be led inwardly and
immediately by the Spirit of God dwelling in them; and that the same is a
standing and perpetual Ordinance as well to the Church in general in all Ages,
as to every Individual Member in particular; as appears from this Argument: The
Promises of Christ to his Children are Yea and Amen, and cannot fail, but must
of Necessity be fulfilled: But --

Christ has promised, That the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth
shall abide with his Children for ever, shall dwell with them, shall be in
them, shall lead them into all Truth, shall teach them all things, and bring
all things to their Remembrance; Therefore --

The Comforter, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth his Abiding with his
Children, etc. is Yea and Amen, etc.

Again: No Man is Redeemed from the Carnal Mind, which is at Enmity with God,
which is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be: No man is yet in the
Spirit, but in the Flesh, and cannot please God, except he, in whom the Spirit
of God dwells: But --

Every true Christian is (in measure) Redeemed from the Carnal Mind, is
gathered out of the Enmity, and can be subject to the Law of God; is out of the
Flesh, and in the Spirit, the Spirit of God dwelling in him; Therefore --

Every true Christian has the Spirit of God dwelling in him.

Again: Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his, that is, no
Child, no Friend, no Disciple of Christ. But --

Every true Christian is a Child, a Friend, a Disciple of Christ; Therefore --

Every true Christian has the Spirit of Christ.

Moreover: Whosoever is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, in him the Spirit of God
dwells and abides: But --

Every true Christian is the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Therefore --

Every true Christian has the Spirit of God dwelling and abiding in him.

But to Conclude: He, in whom the Spirit of God dwells, it is not in him a
lazy, dumb, useless thing; but it moves, actuateth, governs, instructs and
teaches him all things, whatsoever is needful for him to know, yea, brings
all things to his Remembrance: But --

The Spirit of God dwells in Every true Christian; Therefore --

The Spirit of God leads, instructs and teaches Every true Christian,
whatsoever is needful for him to know, etc.



XI. But there are some, that will Confess, Object.
That the Spirit does now lead and influence the Saints, but that he does it
only Subjectively, or in a blind manner, by inlightning their understandings to
understand and believe the Truth delivered in the Scriptures; but not at all by
presenting those Truths to the mind by way of Object, and this they call Medium
incognitum Assentiendi, as that, of whose Working a man is not sensible.

This Opinion, though somewhat more tolerable than the former, Truth, neither
does it reach the fullness of it.

First: Because there be many Truths, which, as they are Applicable to
Particulars and Individuals, and most needful to be known by them, are no wise
to be found in the Scripture, as in the following Proposition shall be shown.

Besides, the Arguments already adduced do prove, that the Spirit does not only
subjectively help us to discern Truths elsewhere delivered; but also
Objectively present those Truths to our minds. For that which teaches me all
things, and is given me for that end, without doubt presents those things to my
mind, which it teaches me: It is not said, It shall teach you, how to
understand those things, that are written; but, It shall teach you all things.
Again: That, which brings all things to my Remembrance, must needs present them
by way of Object, else it were improper to say, It brought them to my
Remembrance; but only that it helps to Remember the Objects brought from
elsewhere.

My second Argument shall be drawn from the Nature of the New Covenant, by
which (and those that follow) I shall prove, That we are led by the Spirit both
immediately and objectively. The Nature of the New Covenant is Expressed in
diverse places: and --

First, Isa. 59 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord;
My Spirit, that is upon thee, and my Words, which I have put into thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy Seed 's Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
The Leadings of the Spirit.
By the latter part of this is sufficiently expressed the Perpetuity and
Continuance of this Promise, It shall not depart, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. In the former part is the Promise it self, which is,
The Spirit of God being upon them, and the Words of God being put into their
mouths.

1. Immediate.
First: This was Immediate; for there is no mention made of any Medium: he says
not, I shall by the means of such and such Writings or Books convey such and
such words into your mouths; but my words I, even I, says the Lord, shall put
into your mouths.

2. Objective.
Secondly: This must be Objectively; for [ the Words put into the mouth] are the
Object presented by him. He says not, The words, which ye shall see written,
my Spirit shall only Inlighten your understandings to Assent unto; but
positively, My Words, which I have put into thy mouth, etc. From whence I Argue
thus: Upon whomsoever the Spirit remains always, and puts words into his
mouth, him does the Spirit Teach Immediately, Objectively and Continually: But
--

The Spirit is always upon the Seed of the Righteous, and puts words into
their mouths, neither departs from them: Therefore --

The Spirit teaches the Righteous Immediately, Objectively and Continually.



Secondly: The Nature of the New Covenant is yet more amply expressed Jer.
31.33. which is again repeated and re-asserted by the Apostle Hebr. 8.10. in
these words; For this is the Covenant, that I will make with the house of
Israel in those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and
write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to
me a People: And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man
his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least
to the greatest.

The Object here is God's Law placed in the Heart, and written in the Mind;
from whence they become God's People, and are brought truly to know him.

The Difference between the Outward and Inward Law.
In this then is the Law distinguished from the Gospel: The Law before was
Outward, written in Tables of Stone; but now it is Inward, written in the
Heart. Of old the People depended upon their Priests for the Knowledge of God;
but now they have all a Certain and Sensible Knowledge of him: concerning which
Augustine speaks well in his Book de Litera and Spiritu* from whom Aquinas
first of all seems to have taken occasion to move this Question, Whether the
New Law be a Written Law, or an Implanted Law? Lex scripta vel Lex indita?
Which he thus resolves, Affirming; That the New Law, or the Gospel is not
properly a Law written, as the old was* but Lex indita, an implanted Law* and
that the Old Law was written without* but the New Law is written within, on the
Table of the Heart.

How much then are they deceived, who, instead of making the Gospel preferrable
to the Law, have made the Condition of such, as are under the Gospel far worse?
For no doubt, it is a far better and more desirable thing to Converse with God
Immediately, than only Mediately, as being a higher and more glorious
Dispensation: and yet these men acknowledge, The Gospel Dispensation more
Glorious, than that under the Law.
that many under the Law had Immediate Converse with God; whereas they now cry,
It is Ceased.

Again: Under the Law there was the Holy of Holies, into which the High Priest
did enter, and received the Word of the Lord Immediately, from betwixt the
Cherubims; so that the People could then Certainly know the mind of the Lord:
But now (according to these men's Judgment) we are in a far worse Condition,
having nothing, but the Outward Letter of the Scripture to guess and divine
from; concerning one Verse of which scarce Two can be found to Agree. But Jesus
Christ has promised us better things (though many are so Unwise, as not to
believe him) even to Guide us by his own Unerring Spirit, and has rent and
removed the Vail, whereby not only one (and that once a year) may enter, but
All of us, at all times have Access unto him; as often as we draw near unto him
with pure hearts, He reveals his Will to us by his Spirit, and writes his Laws
in our Hearts. These things being then thus premised; I Argue: Where the Law of
God is put into the mind, and written in the heart, there the Object of Faith
and Revelation of the Knowledge of God is Inward, Immediate and Objective: But
--

The Law of God is put into the mind, and written in the heart of Every true
Christian under the New Covenant; Therefore --

The Object of Faith and Revelation of the Knowledge of God to Every true
Christian is Inward, Immediate and Objective.



The Assumption is the express words of Scripture: The Proposition then must
needs be True, except That which is put into the mind, and written in the
heart, were either not Inward, not Immediate, or not Objective; which is most
Absurd.

XII. The Third Argument is from these words of John, 1 John 2. But the
Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need not, that
any man teach you; The Anointing recommended as --
but the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is Truth, and no Lie:
and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him.

First: This could not be any special, 1. Common.
peculiar or extraordinary Privilege, but that, which is Common to all the
Saints; it being a general Epistle, directed to all them of that Age.

Secondly: The Apostle proposes this Anointing in them, 2. Certain.
as a more certain Touchstone for them, to discern and try Seducers by, even
than his own Writings: for having in the former verse said, that he had Written
some things to them concerning such as Seduced them; he begins the next Verse,
But the Anointing, etc. and ye need not, that any man Teach you, etc. Which
infers, that having said to them what can be said, he Refers them for all to
the Inward Anointing (which teaches all things) as the most firm, constant and
certain Bulwark against all Seducers.

And Lastly: That it is a Lasting and Continuing thing. 3. Lasting.
The Anointing which abides; if it had not been to Abide in them, it could not
have Taught them all things, neither Guides them against all hazard. From
which I Argue thus; He that has an Anointing abiding in him, which teaches
him all things, so that he needs no man to Teach him, has an Inward and
Immediate Teacher, and has some things inwardly and immediately Revealed unto
him: But --

The Saints have such an Anointing; Therefore, etc.



I could prove this Doctrine from many more places of Scripture; which for
brevities sake I omit: And now come to the Second Part of the Proposition,
where the Objections usually formed against it are Answered.

Object.
XIII. The most Usual is, That these Revelations are Uncertain;

Ignorance in the Opposers: for we distinguish betwixt the Thesis and the
Hypothesis; that is, betwixt the Proposition and Supposition. For it is one
thing to Affirm, That the true and undoubted Revelation of God's Spirit is
Certain and Infallible; and another thing to Affirm, That this or that
particular Person or People is led infallibly by this Revelation, in what they
speak or write, because they Affirm themselves to be so Led by the Inward and
Immediate Revelation of the Spirit: The first is only by us Asserted; the
latter may be called in Question. The Question is not, Who are, or are not so
Led? but Whether all ought not, or may not be so Led?

The Certainty of the Spirit's Guidance proved*
Seeing then, we have already proved, that Christ has promised his Spirit to
lead his Children, and that every one of them both ought, and may be Led by it;
If any depart from this certain Guide in deeds, and yet in words pretend to be
Led by it into things, that are not good, it will not from thence follow, that
the true Guidance of the Spirit is Uncertain, or ought not to be followed; no
more, than it will follow, that the Sun shows not Light, because a blind man,
or one who wilfully shuts his Eyes, falls into a Ditch at noon day for want of
Light: or, that no words are spoken, because a deaf man hears them not: or that
a Garden full of fragrant flowers has no sweet smell, because he, that has lost
his Smelling, does not smell it: The Fault then is in the Organ, and not in the
Object.

All these Mistakes therefore are to be ascribed to the weakness or wickedness
of men, and not to that Holy Spirit. Such as bend themselves most against this
certain and infallible Testimony of the Spirit, use commonly to allege the
Example of the Old Gnostics; and the late Monstrous and Mischievous Actings of
the Anabaptists of Munster: all which touches us nothing at all, neither
weakens a whit our most True Doctrine. Wherefore as a most sure Bulwark against
such kind of Assaults was subjoined that other part of our Proposition, thus;
Moreover these Divine and Inward Revelations, which we Establish as absolutely
Necessary for the founding of the true Faith, as they do not, so neither can
they at any time Contradict the Scriptures-Testimony, or sound Reason.

-- By Experience.
Besides the intrinsic and undoubted Truth of this Assertion We can boldly
Affirm it from our certain and blessed Experience. For this Spirit never
deceived us, never acted nor moved us to any thing, that was amiss; but is
clear and manifest in its Revelations, which are evidently discerned of us, as
we wait in that pure and undefiled Light of God (that proper and fit Organ) in
which they are Received. Therefore if any Reason after this manner; That --
Because some Wicked, Ungodly, Devilish Men have committed Wicked Actions, and
have yet more wickedly Asserted, that they were led into those things by the
Spirit of God: Therefore --

The Absurdity of the Consequence.
No man ought to lean to the Spirit of God, or seek to be led by it.

I utterly deny the Consequence of this Proposition; which, were it to be
received, as True, then would all Faith in God and Hope of Salvation become
Uncertain, and the Christian Religion be turned into mere Skepticism. For after
the same manner I might Reason thus; Because Eve was deceived by the Lying of
the Serpent;

Therefore she ought not to have trusted to the Promise of God.

Because the Old World was deluded by Evil Spirits:

Therefore ought neither Noah, nor Abraham, nor Moses to have trusted the
Spirit of the Lord.

Because a lying Spirit spoke through the four hundred Prophets, that persuaded
Achab to go up and fight at Ramoth Gilead;

Therefore the Testimony of the true Spirit in Micaiah was uncertain and
dangerous to be followed.

Because there were seducing Spirits crept into the Church of old:

Therefore it was not good, or Uncertain, to follow the Anointing, which taught
all things, and is Truth, and no Lie.

Who dare say, that this is a necessary Consequence? Moreover not only the
Faith of the Saints, and Church of God of old is hereby rendered Uncertain; but
also the Faith of all sorts of Christians now is liable to the like hazard;
even of those, who seek a Foundation for their Faith elsewhere, than from the
Spirit. For I shall prove by an Inevitable Argument Ab Incommodo, i. e. from
the Inconveniency of it, That if the Spirit be not to be followed upon that
account, and that men may not depend upon it, as their Guide, because some,
while pretending thereunto, commit great Evils; that then nor Tradition, nor
the Scriptures, nor Reason, which the Papists, Protestants and Socinians do
respectively make the Rule of their Faith, are any whit more Certain. 1.
Instances of Tradition.
The Romanists reckon it an Error to Celebrate Easter any other ways, than that
Church does; This can only be decided by Tradition: And yet the Greek Church,
which equally lays claim to Tradition with her self, does it otherwise. Yea,
so little effectual is Tradition to decide the Case, that Polycarpus, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 26.
the Disciple of John, and Anicetus the Bishop of Rome, who immediately
succeeded them (according to whose Example both sides Concluded, the Question
ought to be Decided) could not Agree: Here of necessity one behoved to Err, and
that following Tradition: Would the Papists now judge, we dealt fairly by them,
if we should thence Aver, That Tradition is not to be Regarded? Besides in a
matter of far greater Importance the same Difficulty will occur; to wit, in the
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome: for many do Affirm, and that by Tradition, That
in the first six hundred years the Roman Prelates never assumed the Title of
Universal Shepherd, nor were acknowledged as such. And (as that, which
altogether overturneth this Presidency) there are, that Allege, and that from
Tradition also, That Peter never saw Rome: and that therefore the Bishop of
Rome cannot be his Successor. Would ye Romanists think this Sound Reasoning, to
say, as ye do?

Many have been Deceived, and Erred grievously in trusting to Tradition:

Therefore we ought to reject all Traditions, yea even those, by which we
Affirm the Contrary, and, as we think, prove the Truth?

Lastly: In the Conc. Flor. Sess. 5. Docreto quodam Council. Ephesians. Act. 6. Sess.
11. and 12. Council. Flor. Sess. 18, 20. Council. Flor. Sess. 21. p. 480. and
seqq.
Council of Florence the Chief Doctors of the Romish and Greek Churches did
debate whole Sessions long, concerning the Interpretation of one Sentence of
the Council of Ephesus, and of Epiphanius and Basilius; neither could they ever
Agree about it.

Secondly, As to the Scripture, the same difficulty occurreth: the Lutherans
Affirm, they believe Consubstantiation by the Scripture, which the Calvinists
deny; as that which (they say) according to the same Scripture is a Gross
Error. The Calvinists again Affirm Absolute Reprobation, 2. Of Scripture.
which the Arminians deny, Affirming the Contrary: wherein both Affirm
themselves to be Ruled by the Scripture and Reason in the matter. Should I
Argue thus then to the Calvinists: Here the Lutherans and Arminians grossly Err
by following the Scriture;

Therefore the Scripture is not a good, nor certain Rule: and e contra.

Would either of them accept of this Reasoning, as good and sound? What shall I
lay of the Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists of Great
Britain, who are continually buffeting one another with the Scripture? To whom
the same Argument might be alleged; though they do all unanimously acknowledge
it to be the Rule.

3. of Reason.
And Thirdly, as to Reason, I shall not need to say much: for whence come all
the Controversies, The Debates hence arising betwixt the old and late
Philosophers.
Contentions and Debates in the World, but because every man thinks, he follows
Right Reason? Hence of old came the Jangles betwixt the Stoics, Platonists,
Peripateticks, Pythagoreans and Cynicks; as of late betwixt the Aristotelians,
Cartesians and other Naturalists: Can it be thence inferred, or will the
Socinians (those great Reasoners) allow us to Conclude, Because many, and that
very Wise men, have Erred by following (as they supposed) their Reason (and
that with what diligence, care and industry they could) to find out the Truth,
that therefore no man ought to make use of it at all, nor be positive, in what
he knows certainly to be Rational? And thus far as to Opinion: the same
Uncertainty is no less incident unto those other Principles.

Anabaptists for their Wild Practices, and Protestants and Papists for their
Wars and ^loodshed each pretending Scripture for it.
XIV. But if we come to Practices, though I confess, I do with my whole heart
abhor and detest those wild Practices, which are written concerning the
Anabaptists of Munster; I am bold to say, as bad, if not worse things have been
Committed by those, that lean to Tradition, Scripture and Reason: wherein also
they have averred themselves to have been Authorized by these Rules. I need but
mention all the Tumults, Seditions and horrible Bloodshed, wherewith Europe
has been Afflicted these diverse Ages, in which Papists against Papists,
Calvinists against Calvinists, Lutherans against Lutherans, and Papists,
assisted by Protestants against other Protestants assisted by Papists have
miserably shed ane onothers Blood, hiving and forcing men to kill one another,
who were Ignorant of the Quarrel and Strangers to one another: All mean while
pretending Reason for so doing, and pleading the Lawfulness of it from
Scripture.

For what have the Papists pretended for their many Massacres acted as well in
France, Tradition, Scripture, and Reason made a Cover for Persecution and
Murder.
as elsewhere, but Tradition, Scripture and Reason? Did they not say, that
Reason persuaded them, Tradition allowed them, and Scripture commanded them to
persecute, destroy and burn Heretics, such as denied this plain Scripture, Hoc
est Corpus me^m, This is my Body? And are not the Protestants Assenting to this
Bloodshed, who assert the same thing, and encourage them by burning and
banishing, while their Brethren are so treated for the same Cause? Are not the
Islands of Great Britain and Ireland (yea, and all the Christian World) a
lively Example hereof, which were diverse years together as a Theater of Blood,
where many lost their lives, and Numbers of Families were utterly destroyed and
ruined? For all which no other Cause was principally given, than the Precepts
of the Scripture. If we then compare these Actings with those of Munster, we
shall not find great difference: for both Affirmed and Pretended, they were
Called, and that it was lawful to Kill, Burn and Destroy the Wicked. We must
Kill all the Wicked, said those Anabaptists, that we that are the Saints, may
possess the Earth: We must burn obstinate Heretics, say the Papists, that the
holy Church of Rome may be purged of Rotten Members, and may live in peace: We
must cut off seducing Separatists, say the Prelatick Protestants, who trouble
the peace of the Church, and refuse the Divine Hierarchy and Religious
Ceremonies thereof. We must kill, say the Calvinistick Presbyterians, the
profane Malignants, who accuse the holy Consistorial and Presbyterian
Government, and seek to defend the Popish and Prelatick Hierarchy; as also
those other Sectaries, that trouble the Peace of our Church. What Difference, I
pray thee, Impartial Reader, see thou betwixt these.

If it be said, Object.
The Anabaptists went without and against the Authority of the Magistrate; so
did not the other.

I might easily Refute it, mutual Testimonies of these Sects against one
another: The Behavior of the Papists toward Henry the third and fourth of
France; Examples of Popish Cruelties.
Their Designs upon James the sixth in the Gunpowder Treason: as also their
Principle of the Pope's Power to depose Kings for the cause of Heresy, and to
absolve their Subjects from their Oath; and give them to others, proves it
against them.

And as to the Protestants, Protestant Violences and Persecutions in Scotland,
England and Holland.
how much their Actions differ from those other abovementioned, may be seen by
the many Conspiracies and Tumults, which they have been Active in both in
Scotland and England* and which they have Acted within these Hundred Years in
diverse Towns and Provinces of the Nether-Lands. Have they not often times
sought not only from the Popish Magistrates, but even from those that had begun
to Reform, or that had given them some Liberty of Exercising their Religion,
That they might only be permitted without trouble or hinderance to exercise
their Religion; promising, they would not hinder or molest the Papists in the
Exercise of theirs? And yet did they not on the Contrary so soon as they had
power, trouble and abuse those Fellow-Citizens, and turn them out of the City?
and which is worse, even such, who together with them had forsaken the Popish
Religion? Did they not these things in many places against the Mind of the
Magistrates? Have they not publicly with Contumelious speeches Assaulted their
Magistrates, from whom they had but just before sought and obtained the free
Exercise of their Religion? Representing them, so soon as they opposed
themselves to their Hierarchy, as if they had regarded neither God nor
Religion? Have they not by violent hands possessed themselves of the Popish
Churches (so called?) or by force against the Magistrates mind taken them away?
Have they not turned out of their Office and Authority whole Councils of
Magistrates, under pretense, that they were Addicted to Popery? Which Popish
Magistrates nevertheless they did but a little before acknowledge to be
Ordained by God, affirming themselves obliged to yield them obedience and
subjection not only for Fear, but for Conscience sake? To whom moreover the
very Preachers and Overseers of the Reformed Church had willingly sworn
Fidelity; and yet afterward have they not said, That the People is bound to
force a wicked Prince to the observation of God's Word? There are many other
Instances of this kind to be found in their Histories; not to mention many
worse things, which we know to have been acted in our time, and which for
brevities sake I pass by.

I might say much of the Lutherans, whose Tumultuous Actions against their
Magistrates not professing the Lutheran Profession, are testified of by several
Historians worthy of Credit. Lutheran Seditions against the Reformed Teachers,
and Assault upon the Marquess of Brandenburgh, etc. in Germany.
Among others I shall propose only one Example to the Reader's Consideration,
which fell out at Berlin, in the year 1615. Where the Seditious Multitude of
the Lutheran Citizens being stirred up by the daily Clamours of their
Preachers, did not only violently take up the Houses of the Reformed Teachers,
overturn their Libraries, and spoil their Furniture; but also with reproachful
words, yea, and with stones Assaulted the Marquess of Brandenburgh the
Elector's Brother, while he sought by smooth words to quiet the Fury of the
Multitude: they killed ten of his Guards, scarcely sparing himself; who at last
by Flight Escaped out of their hands.

All which sufficiently declares, that the Concurrence of the Magistrate does
not alter their Principles; but only their Method of Procedure. So that for my
own part I see no Difference betwixt the Actings of those of Munster, and these
others (whereof the one pretended to be led by the Spirit, the other by
Tradition, Scripture and Reason) save this; that the former were rash, heady
and foolish in their proceedings, and therefore were the sooner brought to
nothing, and so into Contempt and Derision: but the other being more politic
and wise in their generation, held it out longer; and so have Authorized their
Wickedness more with seeming Authority of Law and Reason. But both their
Actings being equally Evil, the Difference appears to me to be only like that,
which is betwixt a simple, silly Thief, that is easily Catched and hanged
without any more ado; and a Company of Resolute, bold Robbers, who being better
guarded, though their Offense be nothing less, yet by violence do (to evite the
danger) force their Masters to give them good Terms.

From all which then it evidently follows, that they Argue very ill, that
despise and reject any Principle, because men pretending to be led by it, do
evil; in case it be not the natural and consequential Tendency of that
Principle to lead unto those things, that are evil.

Again: It does follow, from what is above asserted, that if the Spirit be to
be Rejected upon this account, all those other Principles ought on the same
account to be Rejected. And for my part, as I have never a whit the lower
Esteem of the blessed Testimony of the Holy Scriptures; nor do the less respect
any solid Tradition, that is answerable and according to Truth; neither at all
despise Reason, that noble and excellent Faculty of the mind, Let none reject
the Certainty of the Unerring Spirit, because of false Pretenders to it.
because wicked men have abused the name of them to cover their wickedness, and
deceive the simple; so would I not have any reject or diffide the Certainty of
that Unerring Spirit, which God has given his Children, as that which can
alone guide them into all Truth; because some have falsely pretended to it.

XV. And because the Spirit of God is the Fountain of all Truth and sound
Reason, therefore we have well said, That it cannot Contradict neither the
Testimony of the Scripture, nor right Reason: yet (as the Proposition it self
Concludes, to whose last part I now come) it will not from thence follow, that
these Divine Revelations are to be subjected to the Examination either of the
outward Testimony of Scripture, or of the humane or natural Reason of man, as
to a more noble and certain Rule and Touchstone; for the Divine Revelation and
inward Illumination is that, which is evident by it self; forcing the
well-disposed understanding, and irresistibly moving it to Assent by its own
Evidence and Clearness, even as the Common Principles of Natural Truths do bow
the mind to a Natural Assent.

He that denies this part of the Proposition, must needs Affirm, That the
Spirit of God neither can, nor ever has manifested it self to man without the
Scripture, or a distinct discussion of Reason: or, That the Efficacy of this
Supernatural Principle working upon the Souls of men, is less Evident, than
natural Principles in their common Operations: Both which are false.

For First, through all the Scriptures we may observe, that the Manifestation
and Revelation of God by his Spirit to the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles
was Immediate and Objective, as is above proved; which they did not examine by
any other Principle, but their own Evidence and Clearness.

Secondly, To say, The Self Evidence of the Spirit.
that the Spirit of God has less Evidence upon the mind of man, than natural
Principles have, is to have too mean and low thoughts of it. How comes David to
invite us to Taste and see, that God is good, if this cannot be felt and
tasted? This were enough to overturn the Faith and Assurance of all the Saints
both now and of old. How came Paul to be persuaded, That nothing could separate
him from the love of God, but by that Evidence and Clearness, which the Spirit
of God gave him? The Apostle John, who knew well, wherein the Certainty of
Faith Consisted, judged it no ways Absurd, without further Argument to Ascribe
his Knowledge and Assurance, and that of all the Saints hereunto, in these
words; Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. and again John 5.6. It Is the Spirit, that
bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth.

Observe the Reason brought by him, Because the Spirit is Truth; Of whose
Certainty and Infallibility I have heretofore spoken. We then Trust to and
Confide in this Spirit, because we know and certainly believe, that it can only
Lead us a-right, and never Mis-lead us: and from this Certain Confidence it is
that we Affirm, The Spirit contradicts not Scripture, nor Right Reason.
That no Revelation coming from it, can ever Contradict the
Scriptures-Testimony, nor right Reason: not as making this a more Certain Rule
to our selves; but as Condescending to such, who not discerning the Revelations
of the Spirit, as they proceed purely from God, will Try them by these Mediums;
yet those, that have the Spiritual Senses, and can savor the things of the
Spirit, as it were in prima Instantia, i. e. at the first blush, can discern
them without, Natural Demonstrations from Astronomy and Geometry.
or before they Apply them either to Scripture or Reason. Just as a good
Astronomer can Calculate an Eclipse Infallibly, by which he can Conclude (if
the Order of Nature Continue, and some strange and Unnatural Revolution
Intervene not) there will be an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon such a day and such
an hour; yet can he not persuade an Ignorant Rustic of this, until he Visibly
see it: So also a Mathematician can Infallibly know by the Rules of Art, that
the Three Angles of a Right-angled Triangle are Equal to Two Right-Angles; yea,
can know them more certainly, than any man by measure. And some Geometrical
Demonstrations are by all acknowledged to be Infallible; which can be scarcely
discerned or proved by the Senses: Yet if a Geometer be at the pains to Certify
some Ignorant Man concerning the Certainty of this Art, by condescending to
measure it, and make it obvious to his Senses, it will not thence follow, that
that Measuring is so Certain, as the Demonstration it self; or that the
Demonstration would be Uncertain without it.

XVI. But to make an end, I shall add one Argument to prove, That this Inward,
Immediate, Objective Revelation, which we have pleaded for all along, is the
only, sure, certain and unmovable Foundation of all Christian Faith: which
Argument, when well weighed, I hope, will have weight with all sorts of
Christians; and it is this: That which all Professors of Christianity (of
whatsoever kind) are forced ultimately to recur unto, Immediate Revelation of
all Christian Faith, the Immovable Foundation.
when pressed to the last, That, for and because of which all other Foundations
are Recommended and Accounted worthy to be believed, and without which they are
granted to be of no weight at all; must needs be the only, most true, certain
and unmovable Foundation of all Christian Faith: But --

Inward, Immediate, Objective Revelation by the Spirit is that, which all
Professors of Christianity of whatsoever kind, are forced ultimately to recur
unto, etc.

Therefore, etc.

The Proposition is so Evident, that it will not be denied: The Assumption
shall be proved by parts.

Papists Foundation, their Church and Tradition, Why?
And first: As to the Papists, They place their Foundation in the Judgment of
the Church and Tradition. If we press them to say, Why they believe, as the
Church does? Their Answer is, Because the Church is always led by the
Infallible Spirit: So here the Leading of the Spirit is the utmost Foundation.
Again: If we ask them, Why we ought to trust Tradition? They Answer, Because
those Traditions were delivered us by the Doctors and Fathers of the Church;
which Doctors and Fathers by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost Commanded the
Church to observe them. Here again all lands in the Revelation of the Spirit.

And for the Protestants and Socinians, both which acknowledge the Scriptures
to be the Foundation and Rule of their Faith, Protestants and Socinians make
the Scriptures their Ground and Foundation, Why?
the one, as subjectively influenced by the Spirit of God to use them; the
other, as managing them with and by their own Reason: Ask both, or either of
them, Why they trust the Scriptures, and take them to be their Rule? Their
Answer is, Because we have in them the Mind of God delivered unto us by those,
to whom these things were inwardly, immediately and objectively Revealed by the
Spirit of God: And not because this or that man wrote them; but because the
Spirit of God dictated them.

Christians by Name and not by Nature hold Revelations ceased contrary to
Scripture.
It is strange then, that men should render that so Uncertain and Dangerous to
follow, upon which alone the Certain Ground and Foundation of their own Faith
is built. Or that they should shut themselves out from that holy fellowship
with God, which only is enjoyed in the Spirit, in which we are commanded both
to walk and live?

If any reading these things, find themselves moved by the strength of these
Scripture-Arguments to Assent and Believe such Revelations necessary, and yet
find themselves Strangers to them (which, as I observed in the beginning, is
the Cause, that this is so much gainsaid and contradicted) Let them know, that
it is not, because it is Ceased to become the Privilege of every Christian,
that they do not feel it; but rather because they are not so much Christians by
Nature, as by Name. And let such know, that the Secret Light, which shines in
the heart, and reproves Unrighteousness, is the small beginnings of the
Revelations of God's Spirit; which was first sent into the World to Reprove it
of sin, Joh 16.8. And as by forsaking Iniquity thou come to be acquainted
with that Heavenly Voice in thy heart, thou shall feel, as the Old Man, the
Natural Man, that savoureth not the things of God's Kingdom, is put off with
his evil and corrupt Affections and Lusts, I say, thou shall feel the New Man,
the Spiritual Birth and Babe Raised, which has its Spiritual Senses, and can
see, feel, taste, handle and smell the things of the Spirit: but till then, the
Knowledge of things Spiritual is but as an Historical Faith. Who wants his
Sight, sees not the Light.
But as the Description of the Light of the Sun, or of curious Colors to a
blind Man, who, though of the largest Capacity, cannot so well understand it by
the most acute and lively Description, as a Child can by Seeing them; So
neither can the Natural man of the largest Capacity, by the best words, even
Scripture words, so well understand the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, as the
least and weakest Child, who tastes them, by having them Revealed inwardly and
objectively by the Spirit.

Wait then for this in the small Revelation of that pure Light, which first
Reveals things more known; and, as thou becom'st fitted for it, thou shall
Receive more and more, and by a living Experience easily Refute their
Ignorance, who ask, How do thou know, that thou art acted by the Spirit of
God? which will appear to thee a Question no less Riculous, than to ask one,
whose Eyes are open, How he knows, the Sun shines at Noonday? And though this
be the surest and certainest way to answer all Objections; yet by what is
above-written, it may appear, that the mouths of all such Opposers, as deny
this Doctrine, may be shut by Unquestionable and Unanswerable Reasons.

PROPOSITION III. Concerning the Scriptures.
From these Revelations of the Spirit of God to the Saints have proceeded the
SCRIPTURES of TRUTH, which contain, I. A faithful Historical Account of the
Actings of God's People in diverse Ages; with many singular and remarkable
Providence attending them. II. A Prophetical Account of several things,
whereof some are already past, and some yet to come. III. A full and Ample
Account of all the Chief Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, held forth in
diverse precious Declarations, Exhortations and Sentences, which by the Moving
of God's Spirit were at several Times and upon sundry Occasions spoken and
written unto some Churches and their Pastors.


Nevertheless because they are only a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the
Fountain it self, therefore they are not to be Esteemed the Principal Ground of
all Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the Adequate, Primary Rule of Faith and
Manners: Yet because they give a true and faithful Testimony of the first
Foundation, they are and may be esteemed a Secondary Rule, Subordinate to the
Spirit, from which they have all their Excellency and Certainty. For as by the
Inward Testimony of the Spirit we do alone truly know them; so they Testify,
that the Spirit is that Guide, John 16.13. Romans 8.14.
by which the Saints are led into all Truth: Therefore, according to the
Scriptures, the Spirit is the First and Principal Leader. Seeing then, that we
do therefore receive and believe the Scriptures, because they proceeded from
the Spirit; for the very same Reason is the Spirit more originally and
principally the Rule: according to that received Maxim in the Schools, Propter
quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum magis est tale: That for which a thing
is such, the thing it self is more such.

I. THe former part of this Proposition, though it needs no Apology for it, The
Holy Scriptures the most Excellent Writings in the World.
yet is a good Apology for us; and will help to Sweep away that among many
other Calumnies, wherewith we are often loaded, as if we were Vilifiers and
Deniers of the Scriptures. For in that which we Affirm of them, it does appear,
at what high Rate we Value them; accounting them without all Deceit or
Equivocation the Most Excellent Writings in the World, to which not only no
other Writings are to be preferred, but even in diverse respects not Comparable
thereunto. For as we freely acknowledge, that their Authority does not depend
upon the Approbation or Canons of any Church or Assembly; so neither can we
subject them to the fallen, corrupt and defiled Reason of man: and therein as
we do freely Agree with the Protestants against the Error of the Romanists; so
on the other hand we cannot go the length of such Protestants, as make their
Authority to depend upon any Virtue or Power, that is in the Writings
themselves: but we desire to ascribe all to that Spirit, from which they
proceeded.

We Confess indeed, there wants not a Majesty in the Style, a Coherence in the
parts, a good Scope in the whole; but seeing, these things are nor discerned by
the Natural, but only by the Spiritual man, it is the Spirit of God, that must
give us that Belief of the Scriptures, which may satisfy our Consciences:
Therefore the Chiefest among Protestants both in their particular Writings, and
public Confessions are forced to acknowledge this.

Hence Calvin, though he says, He is able to prove, that if there be a God in
Heaven, Calvin's Testimony, That the Scriptures Certainty is from the Spirit.
these Writings have proceeded from him; yet he concludes Another Knowledge to
be necessary. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 7 sect. 4.

But if ( says he) we respect the Consciences, that they be not daily molested
with Doubts, and they stick not at every Scruple, it is Requisite, that this
Persuasion, which we speak of, be taken higher than Humane Reason, Judgment or
Conjectures, to wit, from the secret Testimony of the Holy Spirit. And again:
To those, that ask, That we prove unto them by Reason, that Moses and the
Prophets were Inspired of God to speak, I answer; that the Testimony of the
Holy Spirit is more Excellent, than all Reason. And again: Let this remain a
firm Truth, that he only, whom the Holy Ghost has persuaded, can Repose
himself on the Scripture with a true Certainty. And lastly: This then is a
Judgment, which cannot be begotten, but by a Heavenly Revelation, etc.

The same is also Affirmed in the first Public Confession of the French
Churches, published in the year 1559. Art. 4. We know these Books to be
Canonick, and the most ^ertain Rule of our Faith, The Confession of the French
Churches.
not so much by the Common Accord and Consent of the Church, as by the
Testimony and Inward Persuasion of the Holy Spirit.

Thus also in the fifth Article of the Confession of Faith of the Churches of
Holland, Confirmed by the Synod of Dort: Churches of Holland Assert the same.
We receive these Books only for Holy and Canonick, not so much because the
Church receives and approves them, as because the Spirit of God renders Witness
in our Hearts, that they are of God.

And lastly: The Divines (so called) at Westminster, Westminster Confession the
same.
who began to be afraid of, and guard against the Testimony of the Spirit,
because they perceived a Dispensation beyond that, which they were under,
beginning to Dawn and to Eclipse them; yet could they not get by this, though
they have laid it down neither so clearly, distinctly nor honestly, as they
that went before: It is in these words, Chap. 1. Sect. 5. Nevertheless our full
Persuasion and Assurance of the Infallible Truth thereof is from the Inward
Work of the Holy Spirit, bearing Witness by and with the Word in our heart.

By all which it appears, how Necessary it is, to seek the Certainty of the
Scriptures from the Spirit; and no where else: The Infinite Janglings and
Endless Contests of those, that seek their Authority elsewhere, do witness to
the Truth hereof.

For the Ancients themselves, Apocrypha
even of the First Centuries were not at one among themselves concerning them;
while some of them Rejected Books which we Approve: and others of them Approved
those, Council. Laod. Can. 59* in Cod Ecc. 163. Council. Laod. held in the Year
364. Excluded from the Canon Eccl the Wisdom of Solomon, Judith. Tobias, the
Maccabees, which the Council of Carthage held in the Year 399. Received.
which some of us Reject. It is not unknown to such, as are in the least
acquainted with Antiquity, what Great Contests are concerning the Second
Epistle of Peter, that of James, the Second and Third of John, and the
Revelations, which many, even very Ancient deny, to have been Written by the
Beloved Disciple and Brother of James, but by another of that name. What should
then become of Christians, if they had not received that Spirit, and those
Spiritual senses, by which they know, how to discern the True from the False?
It Is the Privilege of Christ's Sheep indeed, that they hear his Voice, and
refuse that of a Stranger: which Privilege being taken away, we are left a
Prey to all manner of Wolves.

II. Though then we do acknowledge the Scriptures to be a very Heavenly and
Divine Writing, the Use of them to be very Comfortable and Necessary to the
Church of Christ, and that we also admire and give Praise to the Lord for his
wonderful Providence in preserving these Writings so Pure and Uncorrupted, as
we have them, through so long a Night of Apostasy, to be a Testimony for his
Truth against the Wickedness and Abominations even of those, whom he made
Instrumental in preserving them; so that they have kept them to be a Witness
against themselves: yet we may not call them the Principal Fountain of all
Truth and Knowledge, nor yet the first Adequate Rule of Faith and Manners;
because the Principal Fountain of Truth must be the Truth it self, i. e. that,
whose Certainty and Authority depends not upon another. The Scriptures are not
the Principal Ground of Truth.
When we doubt of the Streams of any River or Flood, we recur to the Fountain
it self, and having found it, there we Sist; we can go no further: because
there it springs out of the Bowels of the Earth, which are Inscrutable: Even so
the Writings and Sayings of all men we must bring to the Word of God, I mean,
the Eternal Word; and if they Agree hereunto, we stand there: for this Word
always proceeds, and does Eternally proceed from God, in and by which the
Unsearchable Wisdom of God, and Unsearchable Counsel and Will Conceived in the
Heart of God is Revealed unto us. That then the Scripture is not the Principal
Ground of Faith and Knowledge, as it appears, by what is above spoken; so it is
provided in the latter part of the Proposition: which being Reduced to an
Argument, runs thus; That, the Certainty and Authority whereof depends upon
another, and which is received as Truth, because of its proceeding from
another; is not to be accounted the Principal Ground and Origin of all Truth
and Knowledge: But --

The Scriptures Authority and Certainty depends upon the Spirit, by which they
were dictated; and the Reason, why they were received as Truth, is, because
they proceeded from the Spirit: Therefore

They are not the Principal Ground of Truth.

To Confirm this Argument, I added the School-Maxime; Propter quod unumquodque
est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale: Which Maxim though I Confess, it does
not hold Universally in all things; yet in this it both does and will very well
hold: as by Applying it, as we have above Intimated, will appear.

Neither are they the Primary Rule of Faith and Manners.
The same Argument will hold as to the other Branch of the Proposition, That it
is not the Primary, Adequate Rule of Faith and Manners, thus; That which is not
the Rule of my Faith in believing the Scriptures themselves, is not the
Primary, Adequate Rule of Faith and Manners: But

The Scripture is not, nor can it be the Rule of that Faith, by which I believe
them, etc.

Therefore, etc.

But as to this part we shall produce diverse Arguments hereafter. As to what is
Affirmed, That the Spirit, and not the Scriptures is the Rule, it is largely
handled in the former Proposition; the Sum whereof I shall Subsume in one
Argument, thus; That the Spirit is the Rule.
If by the Spirit we can only come to the True Knowledge of God; If by the
Spirit we be to be led into all Truth, and so be Taught of all things; Then the
Spirit, and not the Scriptures is the Foundation and Ground of all Truth and
Knowledge, and the Primary Rule of Faith and Manners:

But the First is True: Therefore also the Last.



Next, The very Nature of the Gospel it self declares, that the Scriptures
cannot be the Only and Chief Rule of Christians; else there should be no
Difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel: As from the Nature of the New
Covenant by diverse Scriptures described in the former Proposition, is proved.

Wherein the Law and Gospel differ.
But besides these, which are beforementioned, herein does the Law and the
Gospel differ: In that the Law being outwardly written, brings under
Condemnation, but has not Life in it to save; whereas the Gospel, as it
declares and makes manifest the Evil, so it being an Inward, Powerful thing,
also gives Power to Obey, and delivers from the Evil: Hence it is called (...),
which is Glad Tidings. The Law or Letter, which is without us, kills; but the
Gospel, which is the Inward Spiritual Law, gives Life; for it consists not so
much in Words, as in Virtue: Wherefore such as come to know it, and be
acquainted with it, come to feel greater Power over their Iniquities, than all
Outward Laws or Rules can give them. Hence the Apostle concludes, Romans 6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace: This Grace then, that is inward, and not an outward Law, is to be the
Rule of Christians. Hereunto the Apostle Commends the Elders of the Church,
saying Acts 20.32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
all those, that are sanctified. He does not commend them here to Outward Laws,
or Writings; but to the Word of Grace, which is Inward, even the Spiritual Law,
which makes free; as he elsewhere Affirms Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. This
Spiritual Law is that, which the Apostle declares he preached and directed
People unto; which was not Outward, as Romans 10.8. is manifest, where
distinguishing it from the Law, he says, The Word is nigh thee, in thy heart
and in thy mouth, and this is the Word of Faith, which we preach. From what is
above said, I argue thus, The Principal Rule of Christians under the Gospel is
not an Outward Letter, nor Law outwardly written and delivered, but an Inward
Spiritual Law engraven in the heart, the Law of the Spirit of Life, the Word,
that is nigh in the heart and in the mouth: But

The Letter of the Scripture is Outward, of it self a dead thing, a mere
Declaration of good things, but not the Things themselves:

Therefore it nor is, nor can be the Chief or Principal Rule of Christians.



III. Thirdly: That which is given to Christians for a Rule and Guide, The
Scripture not the Rule.
must needs be so full, as it may clearly and distinctly Guide and Order them
in all things and occurrences, that may fall out: But in that there are many
hundred of things, with a regard to their Circumstances, particular Christians
may be concerned in, for which there can be no particular Rule had in the
Scriptures:

Therefore the Scriptures cannot be a Rule to them.



I shall give an Instance in two or three Particulars, for to prove this
Proposition. It is not to be doubted, but some men are particularly called to
some particular services, their being not found in which, though the Act be no
general, positive Duty, yet in so far as it may be Required of them, is a great
Sin to Omit, forasmuch as God is zealous of his Glory, and every Act of
Disobedience to his Will Manifested, is enough not only to hinder one greatly
from that Comfort and Inward Grace, which otherwise they might have; but also
brings Condemnation.

As for Instance: Some are Called to the Ministry of the Word: Paul says,
There was a Necessity upon him to preach the Gospel; Woe unto me, if I preach
not.

If it be Necessary, that there be now Ministers of the Church, as well as
then; then there is the same Necessity upon some, more than upon others to
occupy this place: which Necessity, as it may be Incumbent upon particular
persons, the Scripture neither does, nor can declare.

If it be said, Object.
That the Qualifications of a Minister are found in the Scripture; and by
applying these Qualifications to my self I may know, whether I be fit for such
a place, or no.

I Answer: The Qualifications of a Bishop or Minister, Epistle to Timothy and
Titus, are such as may be found in a private Christian; yea, which ought in
some measure to be in every True Christian: so that that gives a man no
Certainty. Every Capacity to an Office gives me not a Sufficient Call to it.

Next again: By what Rule shall I judge, if I be so Qualified? How do I know,
that I am sober, meek, holy, harmless? Is not the Testimony of the Spirit in my
Conscience that, which must Assure me hereof? And suppose, that I was Qualified
and Called; yet what Scripture-Rule shall Inform me, whether it be my Duty to
Preach in this or that place in France or England, Holland or Germany? Whether
I shall take up my time in Confirming the Faithful, Reclaiming Heretics, or
Converting Infidels, as also in Writing Epistles to this or that Church?

The general Rules of the Scripture, viz. To be diligent in my Duty; To do all
to the Glory of God, and for the good of his Church, Can give me no Light in
this thing: Seeing, Two different things may both have a respect to that way;
yet may I commit a great Error and Offense, in doing the one, when I am called
to the other. If Paul, when his face was turned by the Lord toward Jerusalem,
had gone back to Achaia or Macedonia, he might have supposed, he could have
done God more acceptable Service in Preaching and Confirming the Churches, than
in being shut up in Prison in Judea; but would God have been pleased herewith?
Nay certainly; Obedience is better than Sacrifice: and it is not our doing that
which is good simply, that pleases God; but that good, which he wills us to
do. Every Member has its particular place in the Body, as the Apostle shows,
1 Cor. 12. If then I being the Foot, should offer to exercise the Office of the
Hand; or being the Hand, that of the Tongue, my Service would be Troublesome,
and not Acceptable; and instead of helping the Body, I should make a Schism in
it: So that that, which is good for another to do, That which is good for one
to do, may be sinful to another.
may be sinful to me. For, as Masters will have their Servants to Obey them
according to their good pleasure, not only in blindly doing that, which may
seem to them to tend to their Master's Profit; whereby it may chance (the
Master having business both in the Field, and in the House) that the Servant,
that knows not his Master's Will, may go to the Field, when it is the Mind of
the Master he should stay, and do the business of the House: Would not this
Servant then deserve a Reproof for not answering his Master's Mind? And what
Master is so Sottish and Careless, as having many Servants, leaves them in such
Disorder, as not to Assign each his particular Station, and not only the
general term of doing that which is profitable, which would leave them in
various doubts, and, no doubt, land in Confusion?

Shall we then dare to ascribe unto Christ in the Ordering of his Churches and
Servants, that, which in Man might justly be accounted Disorder and Confusion?
The Apostle shows this Distinction well, Romans 12.6, 8. Diversities of Gifts.
Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace, that is given us, whether
Prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of Faith; or Ministry,
let us wait on our Ministrings; or he that Teaches, on Teaching; or he that
Exhorts, on Exhortation. Now what Scripture-Rule shows me, that I ought to
Exhort rather than Prophesy? or Minister rather than Teach? Surely, none at
all. Many more Difficulties of this kind occur in the Life of a Christian.

Of Faith and Salvation can the Scripture assure thee?
Moreover, that which of all things is most Needful for him to know, to wit,
Whether he really be in the Faith, and an heir of Salvation, or no? the
Scripture can give him no Certainty in; neither can it be a Rule to him. That
this Knowledge is exceeding Desirable and Comfortable, all do unanimously
acknowledge; besides that it is specially Commanded 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your selves. Know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? And 2 Pet.
1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure. Now I say, what Scripture-Rule can Assure me, that I have
True Faith? That my Calling and Election is sure?

If it be said, By Comparing the Scripture-marks of true Faith with mine?

I demand, wherewith shall I make this Observation? What shall ascertain me,
that I am not Mistaken? It cannot be the Scripture; That Is the Matter under
Debate.

If it be said, My own heart;

How Unfit a Judge is it in its own Case? and how like to be partial,
especially, if it be yet Unrenewed? Does not the Scripture say, The Heart of
Man is deceitful.
that it is Deceitful above all things? I find the Promises, I find the
Threatenings in the Scripture; but who tells me, that the one belongs to me,
more than the other? The Scripture gives me a mere Declaration of these things;
but makes no Application: so that the Assumption must be of my own making,
thus; as for Example: I find this Proposition in the Scripture; He that
believes, shall be saved? Thence I draw this Assumption,

But I, Robert Believe:

Therefore I shall be saved.

The Minor is of mine own making, not Expressed in the Scripture; and so a
humane Conclusion, not a Divine Position: so that my Faith and Assurance here
is not built upon a Scripture-Proposition, but upon an humane Principle; which,
unless I be sure of elsewhere, the Scripture gives me no Certainty in the
matter.

Again: If I should pursue the Argument further, and seek a New Medium out of
the Scripture, the same difficulty will occur; thus: He that has the true and
certain Marks of True Faith, has True Faith.

But I have those Marks:

Therefore I have True Faith.

For the Assumption is still here of my own making, and is not found in the
Scriptures? and by consequence the Conclusion can be no better, since it still
follows the Weaker Proposition. This is indeed so pungent, that the best of
Protestants, who plead for this Assurance, The Inward Testimony of the Spirit
the Seal of Scripture Promises.
ascribe it to the Inward Testimony of the Spirit; as Calvin in that large
Citation cited in the former Proposition: so that, not to seek further into the
Writings of the Primitive Protestants (which are full of such Expressions) even
the Westminster Confession of Faith affirms, Chap. 18. 12. This Certainty is
not a bare Conjecture and probable Persuasion grounded upon fallible Hope; but
an infallible Assurance of Faith founded upon the Divine Truth of the promise
of Salvation; the inward Evidences of these Graces, unto which these Promises
are made; the Testimony of the Spirit of Adoption, witnessing to our Spirits,
that we are the Children of God; which Spirit is the Earnest of our
Inheritance, whereby we are sealed to the day of Redemption.

Moreover the Scripture it self, wherein we are so earnestly pressed to seek
after this Assurance, does not at all affirm it self a Rule sufficient to give
it; but wholly ascribes it to the Spirit: as Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of God. 1 John 4.13.
Hereby do we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit: and Chapter 5.6. And it is the Spirit, that bears Witness, because
the Spirit is Truth.

IV. Lastly: That cannot be the only Principle, nor Chief Rule, which does not
Universally reach every Individual, that needs it, to produce the Necessary
Effect; and from the Use of which (either by some innocent and sinless Defect,
or natural, yet harmless and blameless Imperfection) many (who are within the
Compass of the Visible Church, That the Scriptures are not the Chief Rule.
and may without Absurdity, yea, with great Probability be accounted of the
Elect) are necessarily Excluded; and that either wholly, or at least from the
Immediate Use thereof. But it so falls out frequently concerning the Scriptures
in the Case of Deaf People, 1. Deaf People, Children and Idiots Instanced.
Children and Idiots, who can by no means have the Benefit of the Scriptures;
shall we then affirm, that they are without any Rule to Godward? or that they
are all Damned? As such an Opinion is in it self very Absurd and Inconsistent
both with the Justice and Mercy of God; so I know no sound Reason can be
alleged for it. Now, if we may suppose any such to be under the New
Covenant-Dispensation (as I know, none will deny, but that we may suppose it
without any Absurdity) we cannot suppose them without some Rule and Means of
Knowledge; seeing it is expressly Affirmed, They shall all be taught of God,
Joh. 6.45. And they shall all know me from the least to the greatest, Hebr.
8.11. But secondly, though we were rid of this Difficulty, how many Illiterate,
and yet Good men are there in the Church of God, who cannot Read a letter in
their own Mother's Tongue? which Imperfection, though it be Inconvenient, I
cannot tell, whether we may safely affirm it to be Sinful. These can have no
Immediate Knowledge of the Rule of their Faith: so their Faith must needs
depend upon the Credit of other men's Reading or Relating it unto them, where
either the altering, adding or omitting of a little word may be a foundation in
the poor Hearer of a very dangerous Mistake, whereby he may either continue in
an Iniquity ignorantly, or believe a Lie confidently. As for Example: 2.
Papists conceal the Second Commandment from the People.
the Papists in all their Catechisms and public Exercises of Examination,
toward the People have boldly Cut away the Second Command, because it seems so
expressly to hit against their Adoration and Use of Images; whereas many of
these People, in whom by this Omission this false Opinion is fostered, are
under a simple Impossibility, or at least a very great Difficulty to be
outwardly Informed of this Abuse. But further, suppose all could Read the
Scriptures in their own language, where is there One of a Thousand, that has
that Through-Knowledge of the Original Languages, in which they were written,
so as in that respect Immediately to receive the Benefit of them? Must not all
these here depend upon the honesty and faithfulness of the Interpreters? 3. The
Uncertainty of the Interpreters of the Scriptures, and their Adulterating it.
Which how Uncertain it is for a man to build his Faith upon, the many
Corrections, Amendments and various Essays, which even among Protestants have
been used (whereof the latter has constantly Blamed and Corrected the former,
as guilty of Defects and Errors) do sufficiently declare: And that even the
last Translations in the Vulgar Languages need to be Corrected (as I could
prove at large, were it proper in this place) Learned men do Confess. But last
of all, there is no less Difficulty even occurs to these Skilled in the
Original Languages, who cannot so immediately receive the Mind of the Authors
in these Writings, as that their Faith does not at least obliquely depend upon
the Honesty and Credit of the Transcribers, since the Original Copies are
granted by all not to be now Extant.

Hieron. Epist. 28. ad. Lucin. page 247.
Of which Transcribers Jerome in his time Complained, saying; That they wrote
not, what they Found, but what they Understood* And Epiphanius says, That in
the Good and Correct Copies of Luke it was written, That Christ wept, and that
Irenaeus does cite it; but that the Catholics blotted it out, fearing, lest
Heretics should have abused it. Other Fathers also declare, that whole Verses
were taken out of Mark, because of the Manichees.

But further, Epiph. in Anachor. Tom. 3. Oper.
the Various Lections of the Hebrew Character by reason of the Points, (which
some plead for as Cooevous with the first Writings, which others with no less
probability allege to be a latter Invention; The various Lections of the
Hebrew Character, etc.
) the disagreement of diverse Citations of Christ and the Apostles with those
passages in the Old Testament; the Appeal to the great Controversy among the
Fathers, whereof some most highly Approve the Greek Septuagint, decrying and
rendering very doubtful the Hebrew Copy, as in many places vitiated and altered
by the Jews; other some (and particularly Jerome) Exalting the Certainty of the
Hebrew, and rejecting, yea even deriding the History of the Septuagint, which
the Primitive Church chiefly made use of; and some Fathers, that lived
Centuries before him, affirmed to be a most- Certain thing: And the many
Various Lections in diverse Copies of the Greek, and the great Alterations among
the Fathers of the first three Centuries, (who had greater opportunity to be
better informed, than we can now lay claim to) concerning the Books to be
admitted or rejected, as above is observed; I say, all these and much more
which might be alleged, puts the Minds even of the Learned into Infinite
Doubts, Scruples and inextricable Difficulties. Whence we may very safely
Conclude, that Jesus Christ, who promised to be always with his Children, to
lead them into all Truth to guard them against the devices of the Enemy, and to
establish their Faith upon an unmovable Rock, left them not to be principally
ruled by that, which was subject in it self to many Uncertainties: and
therefore he gave them his Spirit, as their Principal Guide, which neither
Moths nor Time can wear out, nor Transcribers nor Translators Corrupt; which
none are so Young, none so Illiterate, none in so Remote a place, but they may
come to be Reached and rightly Informed by it.

Through and by the Clearness, which that Spirit gives us, it is, that we are
only best rid of those Difficulties, that occur to us concerning the
Scriptures: The real and undoubted Experience whereof I my self have been a
Witness of, with great Admiration of the love of God to his Children in these
latter days. For I have known some of my Friends, who profess the same Faith
with me, faithful Servants of the most-High God, and full of the Divine
Knowledge of his Truth, as it was immediately and inwardly Revealed to them by
the Spirit from a true and living Experience, who not only were ignorant of the
Greek and Hebrew, Wrong Translations of Scriptures discerned in the Spirit by
the Unlearned in Letters.
but even some of them could not Read their own Vulgar Language; who being
pressed by the Adversaries with some Citations out of the English Translation,
and finding them to disagree with the Manifestation of Truth in their hearts,
have boldly Affirmed, The Spirit of God never said so; and that it was
certainly wrong: for they did not believe, that any of the Holy Prophets or
Apostles had ever written so. Which when I on this Account seriously Examined,
I really found to be Errors and Corruptions of the Translators; who (as in most
Translations) do not so much give us the genuine Significations of the words,
as strain them to express that, which comes nearest with that Opinion and
Notion they have of Truth. And this seemed to me to suit very well with that
saying of Augustine, Epist. 19. ad Hen. Tom. 2. fol. 14. after he has said,
that he gives only that honor to those Books, which are called Canonical, as
to believe, that the Authors thereof did in writing not Err. He adds: And if I
shall meet with any thing in these Writings, that seems Repugnant to Truth, I
shall not doubt to say, that either the Volume is Faulty or Erroneous; that the
Expounder has not reached what was said; or that I have in no wise Understood
it. So that he supposes, that in the Transcription and Translation there may be
Errors.

V. If it be then asked me, Whether I think hereby to render the Scripture
altogether uncertain, Object.
or useless?

I Answer: Not at all. The Proposition it self declares, what Esteem Spirit
(from which they came) be but granted that place the Scriptures themselves give
it; I do freely Concede to the Scripture the Second Place, even whatsoever they
say of themselves. Which the Apostle Paul chiefly mentions in Two places, Romans
15.4. Whatsoever things were Written aforetime, were Written for our Learning,
that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17. The Holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto Salvation, through
Faith, which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture given by Inspiration from God,
is profitable for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good Work.

For though God do principally and chiefly lead us by his Spirit, yet he
sometimes conveys his Comfort and Consolation to us through his Children, whom
he raises up and Inspires to Speak or Write a Word in Season; whereby the
Saints are made Instruments in the hand of the Lord, to strengthen and
encourage one another: which do also tend to perfect and make them wise unto
Salvation. And such, as are led by the Spirit, cannot neglect, The Saints
Mutual Comfort is the same Spirit in all.
but do naturally love and are wonderfully cherished by that, which proceeds
from the same Spirit in another; because such mutual Emanations of the heavenly
Life tend to quicken the mind, when at any time it is overtaken with Heaviness*
Peter himself declares this to have been the End of his Writing, 2 Pet. 1.12,
13. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in Remembrance of those
things; though ye know them, and be Established in the present Truth: Yea, I
think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting
you in Remembrance.

God is Teacher of his People himself; and there is nothing more Express, than
that such, as are under the New Covenant, They need no man to Teach them: yet
it was a Fruit of Christ's Ascension, to send Teachers and Pastors for
perfecting of the Saints. So that the same Work is ascribed to the Scriptures,
as to Teachers; the one to make the Man of God perfect, the other for the
perfection of the Saints.

As then Teachers are not to go before the Teaching of God himself under the
New Covenant, but to follow after it; neither are they to Rob us of that great
Privilege, which Christ has purchased unto us by his Blood: so neither is the
Scripture to go before the Teaching of the Spirit, or to Rob us of it.

Secondly: God has seen meet, that herein we should, as in a Looking-glass see
the Conditions and Experiences of the Saints of old; that finding our
Experience Answer to theirs, The Scriptures a Looking-glass.
we might thereby be the more Confirmed and Comforted, and our Hope
Strengthened of obtaining the same End: that observing the Providence
attending them, seeing the Snares they were liable to, and beholding their
Deliverances, we may thereby be made Wise unto Salvation, and seasonably
Reproved, and Instructed in Righteousness.

This is the Great Work of the Scriptures and their Service to us, that we may
witness them fulfilled in us, and so discern the Stamp of God's Spirit and Ways
upon them, by the inward Acquaintance we have with the same Spirit and Work in
our hearts. The Scriptures Work and Service.
The Prophecies of the Scripture are also very comfortable and profitable unto
us, as the same Spirit Inlightens us to observe them fulfilled, and to be
fulfilled. For in all this it is to be observed, that it is only the Spiritual
man, that can make a right use of them: they are able to make the Man of God
perfect (so it is not the Natural Man) and whatsoever was written aforetime,
was written for Our Comfort, [Our] that are the Believers, [our] that are the
Saints; concerning such the Apostle speaks: For as for the other, the Apostle
Peter plainly declares, that the Unstable and Unlearned wrest them to their own
destruction. These were they, that were Unlearned in the Divine and Heavenly
Learning of the Spirit, not in Humane and School-literature; of which we may
safely presume, that Peter himself, being a Fisherman, had no great skill: for
it may be with great probability, yea certainly be affirmed, that he had no
knowledge of Aristotle's Logic, Logic.
which both Papists and Protestants (now degenerating from the Simplicity of
Truth) make Handmaid of Divinity (as they call it) and a necessary
Introduction to their Carnal, Natural and Humane Ministry. By the infinite,
obscure Labors of which kind of men, mixing-in their heathenish stuff, the
Scripture is rendered at this day of so little service to the simple people;
whereof if Jerome complained in his time, now twelve hundred years ago, saying,
Hierom. Ep. 134. ad Cypr. Tom. 3.
It is wont to befall the most part of Learned men, that it is harder to
understand their Expositions, than the Things, which they go about to Expound;
what may We say then, cosidering those great Heaps of Commentaries since, in
Ages yet far more Corrupted?

VI. In this respect abovementioned then we have shown, what Service and Use
the Holy Scriptures, as managed in and by the Spirit, are of to the Church of
God; wherefore we do account them a Secondary Rule. Moreover, because they are
commonly acknowledged by all, The Scriptures a Secondary Rule.
to have been written by the Dictates of the Holy spirit, and that the Errors,
which may be supposed by the Injury of times to have slipt-in, are not such,
but that there is a sufficient, clear Testimony left to all the Essentials of
the Christian Faith; we do look upon them, as the only fit outward Judge of
Controversies among Christians, and that whatever Doctrine is Contrary unto
their Testimony, may therefore justly be rejected, as False. And for our parts
we are very willing, that all our Doctrines and Practices be Tried by them;
which we never refused, nor ever shall in all Controversies with our
Adversaries, as the Judge and Test. We shall also be very willing to admit it
as a Positive, Certain Maxim, That whatsoever any do, pretending to the
Spirit, which is Contrary to the Scriptures, be accounted and reckoned a
Delusion of the Devil. For as we never lay claim to the Spirit's Leadings, that
we may Cover our selves in any thing, that is Evil; so we know, that as every
Evil Contradicts the Scriptures, so it does also the Spirit in the first place,
from which the Scriptures came; and whose Motions can never Contradict one
another, though they may appear sometimes to be Contradictory to the blind Eye
of the natural Man, as Paul and James seem to Contradict one another.

Thus far we have shown both what we believe, and what we believe not
concerning the Holy Scriptures; hoping, we have given them their due place. But
since they, that will needs have them to be the only, certain and principal
Rule, want not some show of Arguments even from the Scripture it self (though
it no where call it self so) by which they labor to prove their Doctrine; I
shall briefly lay them down by way of Objections, and Answer them, before I
make an End of this matter.

first Objection is usually drawn from Isaiah 8.20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them. Now this Law, Testimony and Word they plead to be the Scriptures.

To which I Answer; That that is to beg the thing in Question; and Vnproved.
Nor do I know, for what Reason we may not safely Affirm this Law and Word to be
Inward? But suppose it was Outward, it proves not the Case at all for them;
neither makes it against us. For it may be Confessed without any prejudice to
our Cause, that the Outward Law was more particularly to the Jews a Rule, and
more principally, than to us; seeing, their Law was Outward and Literal, but
ours under the New Covenant (as has been already said) is expressly Affirmed to
be Inward and Spiritual: To Try all things by what?
So that this Scripture is so far from making against us, that it makes for us.
For if the Jews were directed to Try all things by their Law, which was without
them, written in Tables of Stone; then if we will have this Advice of the
Prophet to reach us, we must make it hold Parallel to that Dispensation of the
Gospel, which we are under: So that we are to Try all things (in the first
place) by that Word of Faith, which is preached unto us, which the Apostle
says is In the heart; and by that Law, which God has given us, which the
Apostle says also expressly, is Written and placed in the Mind.

Lastly: If we look to this place according to the Greek Interpretation of the
Septuagint, our Adversaries shall have nothing from thence to Carp; yea, it
will favor us much: for there it is said, That the Law is given us for a help;
which very well agrees, with what is above Asserted.

Their second Objection is from Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc. Here
(say they) we are commanded by Christ himself, to search the Scriptures.

First: That the Scriptures ought to be Searched, we do not at all deny; but
are very willing to be Tried by them: as has been above declared. But the
Question is, Whether they be the only and principal Rule? which this is so far
from proving, that it proves the Contrary: for Christ Checks them here for too
high an Esteem of the Scriptures, and neglecting of him, that was to be
preferred before them, and to whom they bore Witness; as the following words
declare: For in them ye think ye have Eternal life, Search the Scriptures, etc.
and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come unto me, that ye
may have Life. This shows, that while they thought, they had Eternal Life in
the Scriptures, they neglected to come unto Christ to have Life, of which the
Scriptures bore Witness. This Answers well to our purpose, since our
Adversaries now do also Exalt the Scriptures, and think to have Life in them;
which is no more, than to look upon them as the only Principal Rule and Way to
Life, and yet refuse to come unto the Spirit, of which they Testify; even the
inward, Spiritual Law, which could give them Life. So that the Cause of this
People's Ignorance and Unbelief was not their Want of Respect to the
Scriptures; which though they knew, and had a high Esteem of, yet Christ
testifies in the former verses, that they had neither seen the Father, nor
heard his Voice at any time, neither had his Word abiding in them: which had
they then had, then they had believed in the Son.

Moreover, that place may be taken in the Indicative Mood, Ye search the
Scriptures; which Interpretation the Greek word will bear, and so Pasor
translateth it: which by the Reproof following seems also to be the more
genuine Interpretation; as Cyrillus long ago has observed.

VIII. Their Third Objection is from these words, Acts 17.11. These were more
noble, than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all
readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were
so.

Here, say they, The Beroeans are commended for Searching the Scriptures, and
making them the Rule.

I Answer: That the Scriptures either are the Principal or Only Rule, searching
the Scriptures, or being Commended for it, infer any such thing: for we
Recommend and Approve the use of them in that respect, as much as any; yet will
it not follow, that we Affirm them to be the Principal and Only Rule.

Secondly: It is to be Observed, that these were the Jews of Beroea, to
Scriptures, which were the Law and the Prophets, were more particularly a Rule;
and the thing under the Examination was, The Beroeans searching the Scriptures
makes them not the Only Rule to Try Doctrines.
Whether the Birth, Life, Works and Sufferings of Christ did answer to the
Prophecies, that went before of him? so that it was most proper for them, being
Jews, to Examine the Apostles Doctrine by the Scriptures, seeing, he pleaded it
to be a Fulfilling of them. It is said nevertheless in the first place, That
they received the Word with Cheerfulness; and in the second place, They
searched the Scriptures: not that they searched the Scriptures, and then
Received the Word; for then could not they have prevailed to Convert them, had
they not first minded the Word abiding in them, which opened their
Understandings: no more, than the Scribes and Pharisees, who (as in the former
Objection we observed) searched the Scriptures, and exalted them, and yet
remained in their Unbelief, because they had not the Word abiding in them.

But Lastly: If this Commendation of the Jewish Boereans might Infer, that the
Scriptures were the only and principal Rule to Try the Apostles by; what should
have become of the Gentiles? How should they ever come to have Received the
Faith of Christ, who neither knew the Scriptures, nor believed them? We see in
the end of the same Chapter, how the Apostle, preaching to the Athenians, took
another Method, The Athenians Instanced.
and directed them to somewhat of God within themselves, that they might feel
after him: He did not first go about to Proselyte them to the Jewish Religion,
and to the Belief of the Law and the Prophets; and from thence to prove the
Coming of Christ: Nay; he took a nearer Way. Now certainly, the principal and
only Rule is not different, One to the Jews, and another to the Gentiles; but
is Universal, reaching both: though Secondary and Subordinate Rules and Means
may be various and diversely suited, according as the People, they are used to,
are stated and circumstantiated. Even so we see, that the Apostle to the
Athenians used a Testimony of one of their own Poets, which he judged would
have Credit with them: and no doubt, such Testimonies, whose Authors they
Esteemed, had more Weight with them, than all the Sayings of Moses and the
Prophets, whom they neither knew, nor would have cared for. Now because the
Apostle used the Testimony of a Poet to the Athenians, will it therefore
follow, he made that the Principal or Only Rule to Try his Doctrine by? So
neither will it follow, that though he made use of the Scriptures to the Jews,
as being a Principle already believed by them, to Try his Doctrine, that from
thence the Scriptures may be accounted the Principal or Only Rule.

IX. The last, and which at first view seems to be the greatest Objection, is
this;

If the Scripture be not the Adequate, Principal and Only Rule, then it would
follow, that the Scripture is not Complete, nor the Canon filled; that if men
be now immediately led and ruled by the Spirit, they may add New Scriptures of
equal Authority with the Old; whereas every one that Adds, is Cursed: yea, what
Assurance have we, but that at this rate every one may bring-in a New Gospel
according to his Fancy?

dangerous Consequences Insinuated in this Objection were fully Answered in the
latter part of the last Proposition, in what was said a little before; offering
freely to Disclaim all pretended Revelations Contrary to the Scriptures.

it is not enough to deny these Consequences, if they naturally follow from
your Doctrine of Immediate Revelation, and denying the Scripture to be the Only
Rule.

I Answer: We have proved both these Doctrines to be True and Necessary,
Scriptures themselves; and therefore to fasten Evil Consequences upon them,
which we make appear do not follow, is not to Accuse us, but Christ and his
Apostles, who preached them.

But secondly, we have shut the door upon all such Doctrine in this very
Position, Affirming, That the Scriptures give a Full and Ample Testimony to all
the Principal Doctrines of the Christian Faith. For we do firmly believe, that
there is no other Gospel or Doctrine to be preached, but that which was
delivered by the Apostles; and do freely subscribe to that saying, Let him that
preaches any other Gospel, than that, which has been already preached by the
Apostles, Gal. 1.8.
and according to the Scriptures, be accursed.

A New Revelation is not a New Gospel.
So we distinguish betwixt a Revelation of a New Gospel and New Doctrines, and a
New Revelation of the good old Gospel and Doctrines; the last we plead for; but
the first we utterly deny. For we firmly believe, That no other Foundation can
any man lay, than that, which is laid already. But that this Revelation is
necessary, we have already proved; and this Distinction does sufficiently guard
us against the hazard insinuated in the Objection.

Books Canonical.
As to the Scriptures being a filled Canon, I see no necessity of believing it:
and if these men, that believe the Scripture to be the Only Rule, will be
consistent to their own Doctrine, they must needs be of my Judgment; seeing, it
is simply Impossible to prove the Canon by the Scriptures. For it cannot be
found in any Book of the Scripture, that these Books, and just these, and no
other are Canonical; as all are forced to acknowledge: How can they then Evite
this Argument?

That which cannot be proved by Scripture, is no Necessary Article of Faith:
But --

The Canon of the Scripture, to wit, that there are so many Books precisely,
neither more nor less, cannot be proved by Scripture: Therefore --

It is no Necessary Article of Faith.

the Admitting of any other Books to be now written by the same Spirit, might
infer the Admission of New Doctrines.

I deny that Consequence: for the Principal or Fundamental Doctrines of the
Christian Religion are contained in the Tenth Part of the Scripture: but it
will not follow thence, that the Rest are Impertinent or Useless. If it should
please God to bring to us any of these Books, which by the Injury of Time are
lost, which are mentioned in the Scripture, as, The Prophecy of Enoch, The Book
of Nathan, Books lost.
etc. or The Third Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians; I see no Reason, why we
might not Receive them, and place them with the rest. That which displeases
me, is, that men should first affirm, That the Scripture is the Only and
Principal Rule; And yet make a great Article of Faith of that, which the
Scripture can give us no Light in.

As for Instance: How shall a Protestant prove by Scripture to such, as deny
the Epistle of James to be Authentic, that it ought to be Received?

First: If he should say, Because it Contradicts not the Rest (besides that
there is no mention made of it in any of the Rest;) perhaps these men think, it
does Contradict Paul in relation to Faith and Works. Whether the Epistle of
James be Authentic, and how to know it?
But if that should be granted, it would as well follow, that Every Writer,
that Contradicts not the Scripture, should be put into the Canon; and by this
means these men fall into a greater Absurdity, than they fix upon us: For thus
they would Equal every one the Writings of their own Sect with the Scriptures;
for I suppose they judge, their own Confession of Faith does not Contradict the
Scriptures; Will it therefore follow, that it should be bound up with the
Bible? And yet it seems impossible, according to their Principles, to bring any
better Aagument, to prove the Epistle of James to be Authentic. There is then
this Unavoidable Necessity to say, We know it by the same Spirit, from which it
was written; or otherwise to step back to Rome, and say: We know by Tradition,
that the Church has declared it to be Canonical; and the Church is Infallible.
Let them find a Mids, if they can. So that out of this Objection we shall draw
an Unanswerable Argument ad hominem, to our purpose: That, which cannot Assure
me concerning an Article of Faith, necessary to be believed, is not the
Primary, Adequate, Only Rule of Faith: But

The Scripture cannot thus Assure me: Therefore, etc.

I prove the Assumption thus; That, which cannot Assure me concerning the Canon
of the Scripture, to wit, that such Books are only to be Admitted, and the
Apocrypha to be Excluded, Cannot Assure me of this:

Therefore, etc,



And lastly: As to these words, Rev. 22.18. that, If any man shall add I desire
they will show me, Particular Prophecy? It says not, Now the Canon of the
Scripture is filled up, no man is to write more from that Spirit. Yea, do not
all Confess, What it means to Add to the Scriptures.
that there have been Prophecies and true Prophets since? The Papists deny it
not. And do not the Protestants affirm, that John Huss prophesied of the
Reformation? Was he therefore Cursed? or did he therein Evil? I could give many
other Examples Confessed by themselves. But moreover the same was in Effect
Commanded long before, Prove. 30.6. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove
thee, and thou be found a liar: Yet how many Books of the Prophets were written
after? And the same was said by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not Add unto the
Word, which I command you, neither shall ye Diminish ought from it. So that,
though we should extend that of the Revelations beyond the particular Prophecy
of that Book, it cannot be understood, but of a New Gospel, or New Doctrines,
or of Restraining that he mix not his Humane Words with the Divine, and not of
a New Revelation of the Old, as we have said before.

PROPOSITION IV. Concerning the Condition of Man in the Fall.
All Adam's Posterity (or Mankind) both Jews and Gentiles as to the first Adam
(or Earthly Man) is fallen, degenerated and dead, deprived of the sensation (or
feeling) of this Inward Testimony, Romans 5.12, 15.
or Seed of God; and is subject unto the Power, Nature and Seed of the Serpent,
which he sows in men's hearts, while they abide in this Natural and Corrupted
Estate: from whence it comes, that not only their Words and Deeds, but all
their Imaginations are Evil perpetually in the sight of God, as proceeding from
this depraved and wicked Seed. Man therefore, as he is in this State, can know
nothing aright; yea, his Thoughts and Conceptions concerning God and things
Spiritual (until he be dis-joined from this Evil Seed, and united to the Divine
Light) are Unprofitable both to himself and others. Hence are Rejected the
Socinian and Pelagian Errors in the Exalting a Natural Light; as also the
Papists and most of Protestants, who Affirm, That man without the true Grace of
God, may be a True Minister of the Gospel. Nevertheless this Seed is not
imputed to Infants, until by Transgression they actually join themselves
therewith; for they are by Nature the Children of Wrath, who walk according to
the Power of the Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2.
and the Spirit, that now works in the Children of Disobedience, having their
Conversation in the Lusts of the Flesh, fulfilling the desires of the Flesh,
and of the Mind.

I. HItherto we have Discoursed, how the True Knowledge of God is Attained and
Preserved; also of what Use and Service the Holy Scripture is to the Saints.

We come now to Examine The State and Condition of Man, as he stands in the
Fall; what his Capacity and Power is? and how far he is able, as of himself to
Advance in relation to the things of God? Of this we touched a little in the
beginning of the Second Proposition; but the full, right and through
Understanding of it is of great Use and Service: because from the Ignorance and
Altercations, that have been about it, there have arisen great and dangerous
Errors both on the one hand, and the other. While some do so far Exalt the
Light of Nature, or the Faculty of the Natural man, as Capable of himself by
virtue of the Inward Will, Faculty, Light or Power, that pertains to his
Nature, to follow that which is good, and make real progress toward Heaven.
And of these are the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians of old, and of late the
Socinians, and diverse others among the Papists. Others again will needs run
into another Extreme (to whom Augustine among the Ancients first made way in
his Declining Age, Augustine 's Zeal against Pelagius.
through the heat of his zeal against Pelagius) not only Confessing men
Incapable of themselves to do good, and prone to evil; but that in his very
Mother's Womb, and before he Commits any Actual Transgression, he is
Contaminate with a Real Guilt, whereby he deserves Eternal Death: in which
respect they are not afraid to Affirm, That many poor Infants are Eternally
Damned, and for ever endure the Torments of Hell. Therefore the God of Truth,
having now again Revealed his Truth (that good and even Way) by his own Spirit,
has taught us to avoid both these Extremes.

That then, which our Proposition leads to Treat of, is,

First, What the Condition of Man is in the Fall? and how far Incapable to
meddle in the Things of God?

And Secondly, That God does not impute this Evil to Infants, until Actually
join with it: That so by Establishing the Truth we may overturn the Errors on
both parts.

And as for that Third thing Included in the Proposition it self, concerning
Teachers, which want the Grace of God; we shall refer that to the Tenth
Proposition, where that matter is more particularly handled.

II. As to the First, not to dive into the many Curious Notions, Condition of
Adam before the Fall: all Agree in this, that thereby he came to a very Great
Loss, Adam's Fall.
not only in the things, which related to the Outward Man; but in regard of
that true Fellowship and Communion he had with God. This Loss was signified
unto him in the Command; For in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
Die, Genesis 2.17. This Death could not be an Outward Death, or the Dissolution of
the Outward Man; for as to that, he did not Die yet many hundred years after:
so that it must needs respect his Spiritual Life and Communion with God. The
Consequence of this Fall, besides that which relates to the Fruits of the
Earth, is also expressed Genesis 3.24. So he drove out the man, and he placed at
the East of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, which turned
every way, to keep the way of the Tree of Life. Now whatsoever Literal
Signification this may have, we may Safely ascribe to this Paradise a Mystical
Signification, and truly account it that Spiritual Communion and Fellowship,
which the Saints obtain with God by Jesus Christ; to whom only these Cherubims
give way, and unto as many as Enter by him, who calls himself the Door. So that
though we do not Ascribe any whit of Adam's Guilt to men, Guilt not ascribed to
Adam 's Posterity.
until they make it theirs by the like Acts of Disobedience; yet we cannot
suppose, that men, who are come of Adam naturally, can have any good thing in
their Nature, as belonging to it: which he, from whom they derive their Nature,
had not himself to Communicate unto them.

If then we may Affirm, that Adam did not retain in his Nature (as belonging
thereunto) any Will or Light capable to give him Knowledge in Spiritual things;
then neither can his Posterity. For whatsoever Real good any man does, it
proceeds not from his Nature, as he is Man, or the Son of Adam; but from the
Seed of God in him, as a New Visitation of Life, in order to bring him out of
his Natural Condition: So that though it be In him, yet it is not Of him. And
this the Lord himself witnessed Genesis 6.5. where it is said, He saw, that every
Imagination of the Thoughts of his heart was only Evil continually: Every
Imagination of the Natural man is Evil.
which words, as they are very Positive, so are they very Comprehensive.
Observe the Emphasis of them: First, there is Every Imagination of the thoughts
of his heart: so that this admits of no Exception of any Imagination of the
Thoughts of his Heart. Secondly, Is only Evil Continually: it is neither in
some part evil continually, nor yet only evil at some times; but both only
evil, and always and continually evil: which certainly excludes any good, as a
proper Effect of man's heart, naturally: For that, which is Only Evil, and that
always, cannot of its own Nature produce any good thing. The Lord expresses
this again a little after, Chap. 8. v. 21. The Imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth: Thus inferring, how natural and proper it is unto him;
From which I thus Argue: If the Thoughts of man's heart be not only Evil, but
always Evil, then are they, as they simply proceed from his Heart, neither good
in part, nor at any time:

But the First is True:

Therefore also the Last.

Again: If man's Thoughts be always and only Evil, then are they altogether
useless and ineffectual to him in the things of God:

But the First is True:

Therefore also the Last.



Secondly, This appears clearly from that Saying of the Prophet Jeremiah, The
heart of man deceitful.
c. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. For
who can with any Color of Reason Imagine, that that which is so, has any
power of it self, or is any wise fit to lead a man to Righteousness; whereunto
it is of its own Nature directly Opposite? This is as Contrary to Reason, as it
is Impossible in Nature, that a Stone of its own Nature and proper Motion
should flee upwards. For as a Stone of its own Nature inclines and is prone to
Move down-wards toward the Center; so the heart of man is naturally prone and
inclined to Evil, some to one, and some to another. From this then I also thus
Argue: That, which is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, is
not fit, neither can it lead a man aright in things, that are good and honest:

But the Heart of man is such:

Therefore, etc,



Romans 3.10.
But the Apostle Paul describes the Condition of Men in the Fall at large,
Psalm. 14.3. and 53.2, etc.
taking it out of the Psalmist, There is none righteous, no not one: There is
none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. They are all
gone out of the way they are altogether become unprofitable; there is none,
Man's Estate i^ the Fall.
that does good, no not one. Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their
Tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their Lips: whose
Mouths are full of cursing and bitterness. Their Feet are swift to shed blood;
Destruction and misery are in their ways: and the way of peace have they not
known. There is no Fear of God before their Eyes. What more positive can be
spoken? He seems to be particularly Careful to avoid, that any good should be
ascribed to the Natural man; he shows, how he is polluted in all his ways; he
shows, how he is Void of Righteousness, of Understanding, of the Knowledge of
God; how he is out of the Way, and in short, Unprofitable: than which nothing
can be more fully said to Confirm our Judgment. For if this be the Condition of
the Natural man, or of man, as he stands in the Fall, he is unfit to make one
Right Step to Heaven.

If it be said, That is not spoken of the Condition of man in general; Object.
but only of some particulars, or at least that it comprehends not all.

The Text shows the clean Contrary in the foregoing Verses; himself, as he
stood in his natural Condition: What then, are we better than they? No, in no
wise; for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under
Sin, as it is written. And so he goes on: by which it is manifect, that he
speaks of Mankind in general.

If they Object that which the same Apostle says in the foregoing Chapter,
verse. 14. to wit, Object.
That the Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law; and so
consequently do by Nature, that which is good and acceptable in the sight of
God;

I Answer: This Nature must not, neither can be understood of Man's which is
Corrupt and Fallen; but of that Spiritual Nature, which proceeds from the
Seed of God in man, as it receives a new Visitation of God's Love, and is
quickened by it: By what Nature the Gentiles did do the things of the Law?
which clearly appears by the following words, where he says; These not having
a Law, (i. e. outwardly) are a Law unto themselves; which shows the Work of the
Law written in their hearts. These Acts of theirs then are an Effect of the Law
written in their hearts: but the Scripture declares, that the Writing of the
Law in the heart is a part, yea, and a great part too of the New
Covenant-Dispensation; and so no Consequence nor part of man's Nature.

Secondly: If this Nature here spoken of, could be understood, of man's own
Nature, which he has, as he is a Man, then would the Apostle Contradict
himself; since he elsewhere positively declares, That the Natural Man
discerns not the things of God, nor can. Now I hope, the Law of God is among
the Things of God, especially, The Natural Man discerns not, etc.
as it is written in the heart. The Apostle in Chap. 7. of the same Epistle
says, verse. 12. That the Law is holy, just and good; and verse. 14. That the
Law is Spiritual, but he is Carnal: Now, in what respect is he Carnal, be as he
stands in the Fall, Unregenerate? Now what Inconsistency would here be to say,
that he is Carnal, and yet not so of his own, Nature; seeing, it is from his
Nature, that he is so denominated? We see, the Apostle Contra-distinguisheth
the Law as Spiritual, from Man's Nature, as Carnal and Sinful. Wherefore as
Christ says, There can no Grapes be expected from Thistles, nor Figs of
Thorns; Matthew. 7 16.
so neither can the fulfilling of the Law, which is spiritual, holy and just,
be expected from that Nature, which is Corrupt, Fallen and Unregenerate. Whence
we Conclude with good Reason, that the Nature here spoken of, by which the
Gentiles are said to have done the Things contained in the Law, is not the
Common Nature of men, but that Spiritual Nature, The Gentiles Spiritual Nature
in doing the Law.
that arises from the Works of the Righteous and Spiritual Law that is written
in the heart. I confess, they of the other Extreme, when they are pressed with
this Testimony by the Socinians and Pelagians, as well as by us, when we use
this Scripture, to show them, how some of the Heathens by the Light of Christ
in their heart come to be saved, are very far to seek, giving this Answer; That
there were some Relics of the Heavenly Image left in Adam, by which the
Heathens could do some good things: Which, as it is in it self without proof,
so it Contradicts their own Assertions elsewhere; and gives away their Cause.
For if these Relics were of force to enable them to fulfill the righteous Law
of God, it takes away the necessity of Christ's Coming, or at least leaves them
a Way to be saved without him; unless they will say (which is worst of all)
That tho they really fulfilled the righteous Law of God, yet God damned them,
because of the want of that particular Knowledge, while he himself withheld all
Means of their Coming to him from them. But of this hereafter.

III. I might also here use another Argument from these words of the Apostle 1
Cor. 2. where he so positively Excludes the Natural Man from an Understanding
in the things of God; but because I have spoken of that Scripture in the
beginning of the Second Proposition, I will here avoid to Repeat, what is there
mentioned, Referring thereunto. Yet, because the Socinians exalting the Light
of the Natural Man.
Socinians and others, who exalt the Light of the Natural Man, or a Natural
Light in man, do Object against this Scripture; I shall Remove it, e're I make
an end.

Object.
They say, The Greek word (...) ought to be translated Animal, and not Natural,
else (say they) it would have been (...). From which they seek to infer, That
it is only the Animal man, and not the Rational, that is excluded here from the
discerning the things of God. Which shift, without disputing about the Word, is
easily Refuted; neither is it any wise consistent with the Scope of the place.
For

First, The Animal Life is no other, than that which man has Common with other
living Creatures; for as he is a mere man, he differs no otherwise from beasts,
than by the Rational Property. Now the Apostle deduceth his Argument in the
foregoing Verses from this Simile, The Animal Man is the same with Natural.
That as the things of a man cannot be known, but by the spirit of a man* so
the things of God no man knows, but by the Spirit of God: But I hope, these
men will Confess unto me, that the Things of a man are not known by the Animal
Spirit only, i. e. by that, which he has Common with the Beasts; but by the
Rational: so that it must be the Rational, that is here understood. Again, the
Subsumption shows clearly, that the Apostle had no such Intent, as these men's
gloss would make him to have; viz. So the things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God, according to their Judgment he should have said; The things of
God knows no man by his Animal spirit, but by his Rational spirit: for to
say, The Spirit of God here spoken of, is no other, than the Rational Spirit of
man, would border upon Blasphemy, since they are so often contra-distinguished.
Again* going on, he says not, that they are rationally, but spiritually
discerned.

Secondly: The Apostle throughout this Chapter shows, how the Wisdom of man is
unfit to Judge of the things of God, and Ignorant of them. Now I ask these men,
whether a man be called a Wise man from his Animal Property, or from his
Rational? If from his Rational, then it is not only the Animal, The Rational
Man in the Natural State excluded from discerning the things of God.
but even the Rational, as he is yet in the Natural State; which the Apostle
Excludes here, and whom he Contra-distinguisheth from the Spiritual, verse. 15.
But the spiritual man judges all things: this cannot be said of any man
merely, because Rational, or as he is a Man; seeing the men of greatest Reason
(if we may so Esteem men) whom the Scripture calls Wise, as were the Greeks of
old, not only may be, but often are Enemies to the Kingdom of God, while both
the Preaching of Christ is said to be Foolishness with the Wise men of this
World, and the Wisdom of this World is said to be Foolishness with God. Now
whether it be any ways probable, that either these Wise men, that are said to
account the Gospel Foolishness, are only so called with respect to their Animal
property, and not their Rational; or that that Wisdom, that is Foolishness with
God, is not meant of the Rational, but only the Animal Property, any Rational
Man, laying aside Interest, may easily Judge.

IV. I come now to the other part, to wit, That this Evil and Corrupt Seed is
not imputed to Infants, until they actually join with it. Infants, no Sin
imputed to them.
For this there is a Reason given in the End of the Proposition it self, drawn
from Ephesians. 2. for these are by nature Children of Wrath, who walk according to
the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children
of Disobedience: Here the Apostle gives Their evil walking, and not any thing,
that is not reduced to Act, as a Reason of their being Children of Wrath. And
this is suitable to the whole strain of the Gospel, where no man is ever
threatened or judged, for what Iniquity he has not Actually wrought: Such
indeed, as continue in Iniquity, and so do homologate the sins of their
Fathers, God will visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children*

Is it not strange then, that men should entertain an Opinion so Absurd in it
self, and so cruel and contrary to the Nature as well of God's Mercy, as
Justice, concerning the which the Scripture is altogether silent? But it is
manifest, that man has Invented this Opinion out of Self-love, The Absolute
Decree of Election springs from Self-love.
and from that bitter Root, from which all Errors spring: for the most part of
Protestants, that hold this, having (as they fancy) the Absolute Decree of
Election to secure them and their Children, so as they cannot miss of
Salvation; they make no great difficulty to send all others, both old and young
to Hell. For whereas Self-love (which always is apt to believe that, which it
desires) possesses them with a Hope, that their part is secure; they are not
solicitous, how they leave their Neighbors, which are the far greater part of
mankind, in these Inextricable Difficulties. The Papists again use this
Opinion, as an Art to Augment the Esteem of their Church, and Reverence of its
Sacraments; seeing they pretend, it is Washed away by Baptism: only in this
they appear to be a little more Merciful, in that they send not these
Unbaptized Infants to Hell; but to a certain Limbus, concerning which the
Scriptures are as silent, as of the other: This then is not only not Authorized
in the Scriptures, but Contrary to the express Tenor of it. The Apostle says
plainly, Romans 4.15. Where no Law is, there is no Transgression. And again,
5.13. But sin is not imputed, where there is no Law. To Infants there is no
Law, so no Transgression.
Than which Testimonies there is nothing more positive, since to Infants there
is no Law, seeing as such, they are utterly Incapable of it: the Law cannot
reach but such, as have in some measure, less or more, the Exercise of their
Understanding; which Infants have not. So that from thence I thus argue; Sin is
Imputed to none, where there is no Law; But --

To Infants there is no Law: Therefore Sin is not Imputed to them.

The Proposition is the Apostle's own words; the Assumption is thus proved:
Those, who are under a Physical Impossibility of either hearing, knowing or
understanding any Law, where the Impossibility is not brought upon them by any
Act of their own, but is according to the very Order of Nature appointed by
God, to such there is no Law: But

Infants are under this Physical Impossibility; Therefore, etc.



Secondly: What can be more positive, than that of Ezech. 18.20. The Soul that
sins, it shall die: the Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity? For the
Prophet here first shows, what is the Cause of man's Eternal Death; which he
says is in his Sinning: and then, as if he purposed Expressly to shut out such
an Opinion, he assures us, The Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity. From
which I thus argue; Infants bear not Adam's Transgression.
If the Son bear not the Iniquity of his Father, or of his Immediate Parents,
far less shall he bear the Iniquity of Adam:

But the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father: Therefore, etc.



V. Having thus far shown, how Absurd this Opinion is; I shall briefly Examine
the Reasons its Authors bring for it.

First: They say, Adam was a public person, and therefore all men sinned in
him, as being in his Loins: And for this they Allege that of Romans 5.12.
Wherefore, as by one man Sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, etc. These last words, say
they, may be translated, in whom all have sinned.

Adam is a public person, is not denied, and that through him there is a Seed
of Sin propagated to all men, which in its own Nature is sinful, and Inclines
men to Iniquity; yet will it not follow from thence, that Infants, who Join not
with this Seed, are guilty. As for these words in the Romans, the Reason of the
Guilt there alleged is, For that all have sinned: Now, no man is said to Sin,
unless he actually Sin in his own person: for the Greek words (...) may very
well relate to (...), which is the nearest Antecedent; so that they hold forth,
how that Adam by his Sin gave an Entrance to sin in the World. And so death
entered by sin, (...) i. e. upon which [viz. Occasion] or, in which [viz. Death]
all others have sinned, that is, actually, in their own persons; to wit, all
that were Capable of sinning: of which number that Infants could not be, the
Apostle clearly shows by the following Verse; Sin is not imputed, where there
is no Law: and since (as is above proved) there is no Law to Infants, they
cannot be here Included.

Second Objection is from Psalm 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in
sin did my Mother conceive me: Hence, they say, it appears, that Infants from
their Conception are guilty.

How they infer this Consequence, for my part I see not: The Iniquity and Sin
here appears to be far more Ascribable to the Parents, Child. It is said
indeed, In sin did my Mother Conceive me; not, My Mother did Conceive me a
sinner. Conceived in Sin, Answered.
Besides, that so Interpreted, Contradicts expressly the Scripture
beforementioned, in making Children guilty of the Sins of their Immediate
Parents, (for of Adam there is not here any mention) Contrary to the plain
words, The Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity.

Thirdly: They Object, That the Wages of Sin is death; and that, seeing
Children are subject to diseases and death, therefore they must be guilty of
sin.

Consequence of the Fall, and of Adam's Sin, is Confessed; but that that infers
necessarily a Guilt in all others, that are Subject to them, is denied. For
though the whole outward Creation suffered a Decay by Adam's Fall, Death the
Wages of Sin, Answered.
which groans under Vanity: according to which it is said in Job, That the
Heavens are not clean in the sight of God; yet will it not from thence follow,
that the Herbs, Earth and Trees are Sinners.

Next, Death, though a Consequent of the Fall incident to man's Earthly Nature,
is not the Wages of Sin in the Saints, but rather a Sleep, by which they pass
from Death to Life; which is so far from being Troublesome and Painful to them,
as all real punishments for sin are, that Apostle counts it Gain: To me, says
he, to die is Gain, Phil. 1.21.

Some are so foolish, as to make an Objection further, saying; Object.
That if Adam's sin be not imputed to those, who actually have not sinned, then
it would follow, that all Infants are saved.

But we are willing, Absurdity should be the Consequence of our Doctrine;
rather than that, which (it seems) our Adversaries reckon not Absurd; though
the undoubted and unavoidable consequence of theirs, viz. that Many Infants
Eternally perish, not for any sin of their own, but only for Adam 's Iniquity:
where we are willing to let the Controversy ^ist, commending both to the
Illuminated Understanding of the Christian Reader.

This Error of our Adversaries is both Denied and Refuted by Zwinglius, that
Eminent Founder of the Protestant Churches of Switzerland, in his Book De
Baptismo; for which he is Anathematized by the Council of Trent, in the fifth
Session. We shall only add this Information: That we Confess then, that a Seed
of Sin is Transmitted to all men from Adam (although Imputed to none, Original
Sin, no Scripture Phrase.
until by sinning they actually join with it) in which Seed he gave occasion to
all to sin; and it is the Origin of all Evil Actions and Thoughts in men's
hearts: (...) to wit, (...), as it is in Romans 5. i. e. in which death all
have sinned. For this Seed of Sin is frequently called Death in the Scriptures,
and The body of death, seeing indeed it is a Death to the Life of Righteousness
and Holiness. Therefore its Seed and its Product is called the Old Man, the Old
Adam, in which all Sin is; for which cause we use this name to express this
sin, and not that of Original sin, of which phrase the Scripture makes no
mention, and under which, Invented and Unscriptural Barbarism this Notion of
Imputed Sin to Infants, took place among Christians.

PROPOSITIONS V. and VI. Concerning the Universal Redemption by Christ, and
also the Saving and Spiritual Light, wherewith every Man is Enlightened.
PROPOSITION V.
GOD, out of his Infinite Love, Ezech. 18.32. and 33 11.
who delights not in the death of a sinner, but that all should live and be
saved, has so loved the World, that he has given his Only Son a LIGHT, that
whosoever believes in him should be saved, Joh. 3.16. who enlighteneth EVERY
man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. and makes manifest all things, that
are Reprovable, Ephesians. 5.13. and teaches all Temperance, Righteousness and
Godliness And this Light lighteneth the hearts of all in a Day in order to
Salvation; and this is it, which Reproves the sin of all Individuals, and would
work out the Salvation of all, if not Resisted: Nor is it less Universal, than
the Seed of Sin, being the purchase of his Death, who tasted Death for every
Man. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all shall be made alive, 1 Cor.
15.22.

PROPOSITION VI.
According to which Principle (or Hypothesis) all the Objections against the
Universality of Christ's Death are easily solved; neither is it needful to
recur to the Ministry of Angels, and those other Miraculous Means, which, they
say, God uses, to manifest the Doctrine and History of Christ's Passion unto
such (who living in the places of the World, where the outward preaching of the
Gospel is unknown) have well improved the first and common Grace. For as hence
it well follows, that some of the Old Philosophers might have been Saved; so
also may some (who by Providence are cast into those Remote Parts of the World,
where the knowledge of the History is wanting) be made partakers of the Divine
Mystery, if they Receive, and Resist not that Grace, 1 Cor. 12.7.
A Manifestation whereof is given to every Man to profit withal. This most
certain Doctrine being then received, that there is an Evangelical and Saving
Light and Grace in all, the Universality of the Love and Mercy of God toward
Mankind (both in the Death of his Beloved Son the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the
Manifestation of the Light in the heart) is established and confirmed against
all the Objections of such, as deny it. Therefore Christ has tasted Death for
every Man, Hebr. 2.9.
not only for all kind of men, as some vainly talk; but for every man of all
kinds: the benefit of whose Offering is not only extended to such, who have the
distinct, outward Knowledge of his Death and Sufferings, as the same is
declared in the Scriptures: but even unto those, who are necessarily Excluded
from the benefit of this Knowledge by some Inevitable Accident. Which Knowledge
we willingly Confess to be very Profitable and Comfortable; but not absolutely
Needful unto such, from whom God himself has withheld it: yet they may be
made partakers of the Mystery of his Death, though ignorant of the History, if
they suffer his Seed and Light enlightening their hearts, to take place, ( in
which Light Communion with the Father and the Son is enjoyed) so as of wicked
men to become holy, and lovers of that Power, by whose inward and secret
Touches they feel themselves turned from the Evil to the Good, and learn to do
to others, as they would be done by; in which Christ himself affirms all to be
Included. As They have then falsely and erroneously Taught, who have denied
Christ to have died for all men; so neither have They sufficiently Taught the
Truth, who affirming him to have died for all, have added the Absolute
Necessity of the outward Knowledge thereof, in order to obtain its Saving
Effect. Among whom the Remonstrants of Holland have been chiefly wanting, and
many other Assertors of Universal Redemption; in that they have not placed the
Extent of his Salvation in that Divine and Evangelical Principle of Light and
Life, wherewith Christ has enlightened Every man, that comes into the World:
which is excellently and evidently held forth in these Scriptures, Genesis 6.3.
Deuteronomy. 30.14. John 1.7, 8, 9, 16. Romans 10.8. Tit. 2.11.

HItherto we have Considered Man's fallen, lost, corrupted and degenerated
Condition.

Now is it fit to Inquire, How and by what means he may come to be Freed out of
this miserable and depraved Condition? Which in these Two Propositions is
declared and demonstrated: which I thought meet to place together because of
their Affinity; the one being, as it were, an Explanation of the other.

As for that Doctrine, which these Propositions chiefly strike at, to wit,
Absolute Reprobation, that horrible and blasphemus Doctrine, described.
Absolute Reprobation, according to which some are not afraid to Assert; That
God by an Eternal and Immutable Decree has predestined to Eternal Damnation
the far greater part of Mankind, not Considered as Made, much less as Fallen,
without any respect to their Disobedience or Sin; but only for the
demonstrating of the Glory of his Justice. And that for the bringing this
about, he has appointed these miserable Souls necessarily to walk in their
wicked ways, that so his Justice may lay hold on them. And that God does
therefore not only suffer them to be liable to this Misery in many parts of the
World, by withholding from them the preaching of the Gospel and knowledge of
Christ; but even in those places, where the Gospel is preached, and Salvation
by Christ is offered. Whom, though he publicly Invite them, yet he justly
Condemns for Disobedience, albeit he has withheld from them all Grace, by
which they could have laid hold on the Gospel, viz. because he has by a secret
Will unknown to all men ordained and decreed (without any respect had to their
Disobedience or Sin) that they shall not Obey, and that the Offer of the Gospel
shall never prove effectual for their Salvation; but only serve to Aggravate
and Occasion their greater Condemnation.

I say, as to this horrible and blasphemous Doctrine, our Cause is Common with
many others, who have both wisely and learnedly according to Scripture, Reason
and Antiquity Refuted it. Seeing then, that so much and so well is said already
against this Doctrine, that little can be superadded, except what has been
said already; I shall be short in this respect: Yet because it lies so in
Opposition to my Way, I cannot let it altogether pass.

I. We may safely call this Doctrine a Novelty, seeing the first four hundred
years after Christ there is no mention made of it: for as it is Contrary to the
Scriptures Testimony, This Doctrine, A Novelty.
and to the Tenor of the Gospel; so all the Ancient Writers, Teachers and
Doctors of the Church pass it over with a profound Silence. The first
foundations of it were laid in the latter Writings of Augustine, The Rise of it.
who in his heat against Pelagius let fall some Expressions, which some have
unhappily gleaned up to the establishing of this Error; thereby Contradicting
the Truth, and sufficiently gainsaying many others, and many more and freqent
Expressions of the same Aug^stine. Afterward was this Doctrine fomented by
Dominicus a Friar, and the Monks of his Order; and at last unhappily taken up
by John Calvin (otherwise a man in diverse respects to be Commended) to the
great staining of his Reputation, and Defamation both of the Protestant and
Christian Religion: which, though it received the Decrees of the Synod of Dort
for its Confirmation, has since lost ground, and begins to be Exploded by most
Men of Learning and Piety in all Protestant Churches. However we should not
quarrel it for the Silence of the Ancients, paucity of its Assertors, or for
the Learnedness of its Opposers, if we did observe it to have any Real Bottom
in the Writings or Sayings of Christ and the Apostles; and that it were not
highly Injurious to God himself, to Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer, and
to the Power, Virtue, Nobility and Excellency of his Blessed Gospel; and
lastly, unto all Mankind.

1. It Is highly Injurious to God in making him the Author of Sin.
II. First, It is highly Injurious to God, because it makes him the Author of
Sin; which of all things is most Contrary to his Nature. I Confess, the
Assertors of this Principle deny this Consequence; but that is but a pure
Illusion, seeing it so naturally follows from their Doctrine: and is equally
ridiculous, as if a man should pertinaciously deny, that one and two makes
Three. For if God has Decreed that the Reprobated ones shall perish without all
respect to their Evil Deeds, but only of his own pleasure; and if he has also
Decreed long before they were in Being, or in any Capacity to do good or evil,
that they would walk in those wicked Ways, by which, as by a secondary means,
they are led to that end, who, I pray, is the first Author and Cause thereof,
but God, who so willed and decreed? This is as natural a Consequence, as any
can be. And therefore, although many of the Preachers of this Doctrine have
sought out various, strange, strained and intricate distinctions to defend
their Opinion, and evite this Horrid Consequence; yet some, and that of the
most Eminent of them have been so plain in the matter, as they have put it
beyond all doubt. Of which I shall Instance a few among many passages. Calv. in
cap. 3 Genesis Id. 1. Inst c. 18 Sect. 1* Id. lib. de Praed. Idem lib de Provid.
Id. Inst. cap. 23. Sect. 1.
I say, that by the Ordination and Will of God Adam fell: God would have man to
Fall. Man is blinded by the Will and Commandment of God. We refer the Causes of
hardening us to God. The highest or remote Cause of hardening is the Will of
God. It follows, that the hidden Counsel of God is the cause of hardening:
These are Calvin's Expressions. Beza lib. de Praed.
God (says Beza) has predestined not only unto damnation, but also unto the
Causes of it, whomsoever he saw meet. Id. de Praed. ad Art. 1.
The Decree of God cannot be excluded from the Causes of Corruption. Zanch. de
Excaecat. q. 5. Idem l. 5. de Not. Dei cap. 2. de Praed.
It is certain, says Zanchius) that God is the First Cause of Obduration.
Reprobates are held so fast under God's Almighty Decree, that they cannot but
sin, and perish. Paraeus lib. 3 de Amiss. gratiae, cap. 2. Ibid. cap. 1.
It is the Opinion (says Paraeus) of our Doctors, that God did Inevitably
decree the Temptation and Fall of man. The Creature sins indeed necessarily
by the most just Judgment of God. Our men do most rightly Affirm, that the Fall
of man was necessary and inevitable by accident, because of God's decree.
Martyr. in Romans
God (says Martyr) does incline and force the wills of wicked men into great
sins. Zuing. lib. de Prove. cap. 5.
God (says Zwinglius) moves the Robber to kill: He kills, God forcing him
thereunto. But thou will say, he is forced to sin, I permit truly, that he is
forced. Resp. ad Vorst. part. 1* p. 120.
Reprobate persons (says Piscator) are absolutely ordained to this twofold
end, to undergo everlasting punishment, and necessarily to sin, and therefore
to sin, that they may be justly punished.

If these Sayings do not plainly and evidently Import, that God is the Author
of Sin, we must not then seek these men's Opinions from their Words, but some
way else: it seems, as if they had Assumed to themselves that Monstrous and
Twofold Will they feign of God; one, by which they declare their minds openly,
and another more secret and hidden, which is quite contrary to the other. Nor
does it at all help them to say, That Man sins willingly; since that
Willingness, proclivity and propensity to Evil is (according to their Judgment)
so necessarily imposed upon him, that he cannot but be Willing, because God
has willed and decreed him to be so. Which Shift is just, as if I should take
a Child incapable to Resist me, and throw it down from a great Precipice; the
Weight of the Child's body indeed makes it go readily down, and the Violence of
the Fall upon some Rock or Stone beats out its Brains, and kills it. Now then,
I pray, though the Body of the Child goes willingly down (for I suppose it, as
to its mind, is Incapable of any Will) and the weight of its Body, and not any
immediate stroke of my hand, who perhaps am at a great distance, makes it Die;
whether is the Child or I the proper Cause of its Death? Let any man of Reason
judge, if God's part be (with them) as great, yea, more Immediate in the Sins
of men (as by the Testimonies above brought does appear) whether does not this
make him not only the Author of Sin, but more Unjust, than the unjustest of men?

III. Secondly, This Doctrine is Injurious to God, because it makes him delight
in the Death of Sinners, yea, 2. It makes God delight in the Death of a Sinner.
and to will many to Die in their Sins, Contrary to these Scriptures, Ezech.
33.11. 1 Timothy 2.3. 2 Pet. 3.9. For if he has Created men only for this very
End, that he might show forth his Justice and Power in them, as these men
affirm; and for effecting thereof has not only withheld from them the means
of doing Good, but also predestined the Evil, that they might fall into it;
and that he inclines and forces them into great sins; certainly he must
necessarily delight in their death, and will them to die, seeing against his
own Will he neither does, nor can do any thing.

IV. Thirdly, It is highly Injurious to Christ our Mediator, and to the
Efficacy and Excellency of his Gospel: 3. It renders Christ's Mediation
Ineffectual.
for it renders his Mediation Ineffectual, as if he had not by his Sufferings
thoroughly broken down the Middle Wall, nor yet removed the Wrath of God, or
purchased the Love of God toward all Mankind; if it was before Decreed, that it
should be of no service to the far greater part of Mankind. It is to no purpose
to allege, that the Death of Christ was of Efficacy enough to have saved all
Mankind; if in Effect its virtue be not so far Extended, as to put all Mankind
into a Capacity of Salvation. 4. It makes the Gospel a Mock.


Fourthly, It makes the preaching of the Gospel a mere Mock and Illusion, if
many of these, to whom it is preached, be by an Irrevocable Decree Excluded
from being benefited by it: it wholly makes Useless the preaching of Faith and
Repentance, and the whole Tenor of the Gospel-Promises and Threatenings, as
being all relative to a former Decree and Means before appointed to such: which
because they cannot fail, Man needs do nothing, but wait for that Irresistible
Snatch; which will come, though it be but at the last hour of his Life, if he
be in the Decree of Election: And be his diligence and waiting what it can, he
shall never Attain it; if he belong to the Decree of Reprobation.

5. It makes the Coming of Christ an Act of Wrath.
Fifthly, It makes the Coming of Christ, and his propitiatory Sacrifice (which
the Scripture affirms to have been the Fruit of God's Love to the World, and
transacted for the Sins and Salvation of all men) to have been rather a
Testimony of God 's Wrath to the World, and one of the greatest Judgments and
severest Acts of God 's Indignation toward Mankind; it being only ordained to
save a very few, and for the hardening, obduring and augmenting the
Condemnation of the far greater Number of Men, because they believe not truly
in it: the Cause of which Unbelief again (as the Divines [so called] above
assert) is the hidden Counsel of God. Certainly, the Coming of Christ was never
to them a Testimony of God's love, but rather of his Implacable Wrath: and if
the World may be taken for the far greater Number of such as live in it, God
never loved the World according to this Doctrine; but rather hated it greatly,
in sending his Son to be Crucified in it.

6. It renders Mankind in a worse Condition, than the Devils --
V. Sixthly, This Doctrine is Highly Injurious to Mankind; for it renders them
in a far worse Condition, than the Devils in Hell. For these were sometimes in
a Capacity to have Stood, and to suffer only for their own Guilt; whereas many
Millions of men are for ever Tormented (according to them) for Adam's Sin,
which they neither knew of, nor ever were Accessory to. It renders them worse
than the Beasts of the Field, of whom the Master requires not more, than they
are able to perform; and if they be killed, death to them is the End of Sorrow:
whereas Man is for ever Tormented for not doing that, which he never was able
to do. It puts him into a far worse Condition, than Pharaoh put the Israelites:
for though he withheld Straw from them; Than the Israelites under Pharaoh.
yet by much labor and pains they could have gotten it: But from men they make
God to withhold all means of Salvation, so that they can by no means attain it.
Yea, they place Mankind in that Condition, Tantalus, his Condition.
which the Poets feign of Tantalus, who, oppressed with Thirst, stands in water
up to the Chin; yet can by no means reach it with his Tongue: and being
tormented with Hunger, has Fruit hanging at his very lips; yet so as he can
never lay^hold on them with his Teeth: and these things are so near him not to
Nourish him, but to Torment him. So do these men: They make the outward
Creation of the Works of Providence, the smitings of the Conscience sufficient
to Convince the Heathens of Sin, and so to Condemn and Judge them; but not at
all to Help them to Salvation. They make the preaching of the Gospel, the Offer
of Salvation by Christ, the Use of the Sacraments, of Prayer and good Works
sufficient to Condemn those they account Reprobates within the Church; serving
only to Inform them to beget a seeming Faith and vain Hope: yet because of a
secret Impotency, which they had from their Infancy, all these are wholly
Ineffectual to bring them the least step toward Salvation; and do only
Contribute to render their Condemnation the greater, and their Torments the
more Violent and Intolerable.

Having thus briefly Removed this false Doctrine (which stood in my way)
because they that are desirous, may see it both learnedly and piously Refuted
by many others; I come to the Matter of our Proposition, which is: That God out
of his Infinite Love, who delights not in the death of a sinner, but that all
should live and be saved, has sent his Only-begotten Son into the World, that
whosoever believes in him, might be Saved: Christ tasted Death for every man.
Which also is again affirmed in the sixth Proposition in these words; Christ
then tasted death for every man of all kinds. Such is the Evidence of this
Truth delivered almost wholly in the Express words of Scripture, that it will
not need much probation: also because our Assertion herein is Common with many
others, who have both earnestly and soundly according to the Scripture pleaded
for this Universal Redemption, I shall be the more brief in it; that I may come
to that, which may seem more singularly and peculiarly ours.

VI. This Doctrine of Universal Redemption, Christ's Redemption is Universal,
contrary to the Doctrine of Absolute REPROBATION.
or Christ's dying for all men, is of it self so Evident from the
Scripture-Testimony, that there is scarce found any other Article of the
Christian Faith so frequently, so plainly and so positively Asserted. It is
that, which makes the preaching of Christ to be truly termed the Gospel, or an
Annunciation of glad Tidings to all. Thus the Angel declared the Birth and
Coming of Christ to the Shepherds to be, Luke 2.10. Behold, I bring you good
Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all people: He says not, to a few
people. Now, if this Coming of Christ had not brought a possibility of
Salvation to all, it should rather have been accounted Bad Tidings of great
sorrow to most people; neither should the Angel have had reason to have sung
Peace on Earth, and good Will toward men, if the greatest part of Mankind had
been necessarily shut out from receiving any Benefit by it. How should Christ
have sent out His to Preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16.15. (a very
Comprehensive Commission) that is, To every son and daughter of Mankind without
all Exception? He Commands them to Preach Salvation to all, Repentance and
Remission of sins to all, Warning every one, and Exhorting every one, as Paul
did, Col. 1.28. Now, how couldd they have preached the Gospel to every man, The
Gospel is preached to Every man.
as became the Ministers of Jesus Christ, in much Assurance, if Salvation by
that Gospel had not been possible for all? What! If some of those had asked
them, or should now ask any of these Doctors, who deny the Universality of
Christ's Death, and yet preach it to all promiscuously, Has Christ died sor
me? How can they with confidence give a certain Answer to this Question? If
they give a Conditional Answer, as their Principle obliges them to do, and
say, If thou Repent, Christ has died for thee; does not the same Question
still Recur, Has Christ died for me, so as to make Repentance possible for me?
To this they can Answer nothing; unless they run in a Circle: whereas the Feet
of those, that bring the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace, are said to be
beautiful, for that they preach the Common Salvation, Repentance unto all,
offering a door of Mercy and Hope to all through Jesus Christ, who gave himself
a Ransom for all. The Gospel Invites all: and certainly, by the Gospel Christ
intended not to deceive and delude the greater part of Mankind, when he
Inviteth and Cries, saying; Come unto me all ye, that are weary and heavy
laden, and 'I will give you Rest. If All then ought to seek after him, and to
look for Salvation by him; he must needs have made Salvation possible to all:
for who is bound to seek after that, which is Impossible? Certainly, it were a
mocking of men to bid them do so. And such as deny, that by the Death of Christ
Salvation is made possible to all men, do most blasphemously make God mock the
World, in giving his Servants a Commission to preach the Gospel of Salvation
unto ALL; while he has before decreed, The Absurdity of that Doctrine of
Absolute Reprobation.
that it shall not be possible for them to Receive it. Would not this make the
Lord to send forth his Servants with a Lie in their mouths (which were
blasphemous to think!) commanding them to bid all and every one to believe,
that Christ died for them, and had purchased life and Salvation, whereas it is
no such thing, according to the forementioned Doctrine? But seeing Christ,
after he Arose, and perfected the work of our Redemption, gave a Commission to
preach Repentance, Remission of Sins and Salvation to all; it is manifest, that
he died for all. For he, that has Commissionated his Servants thus to preach,
is a God of Truth, and no mocker of poor Mankind; neither does he require of
any man that, which is simply Impossible for him to do: for that No man is
bound to do that, which is Impossible, is a principle of Truth engraven in
every man's mind. And seeing, he is both a most Righteous and Merciful God; it
cannot at all stand neither with his Justice, nor Mercy, to bid such men Repent
or Believe, to whom it is Impossible.

VII. Moreover, if we Regard the Testimony of the Scripture in this matter,
where there is not one Scripture, which I know of, that affirms, To Pray for
all, for Christ died for all --
Christ not to die for ALL; there are diverse, that positively and expressly
Assert, he did: as 1 Timothy 2.1, 3, 4, 6. I exhort therefore, that first of all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks be made for all men,
etc. for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will
have All men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth; who gave
himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Except we will have the
Apostle here to Assert quite another thing, than he intended; there can be
nothing more plain to Confirm, what we have Asserted: And this Scripture does
well answer to that manner of Arguing, which we have hitherto used. For first,
the Apostle here Recommends them to Pray for all men: And to obviate such an
Objection, as if he had said with our Adversaries, Christ prayed not for the
World, neither wills he us to pray for All; because he wills not, that All
should be saved: but has ordained many to be damned, that he might show forth
his Justice in them; He obviates, I say, such an Objection, telling them, That
it is good and acceptable in the sight of God, who will have all men to be
saved. I desire to know, what can be more Expressly Affirmed? -- And will have
all men to be saved.
or can any Two Propositions be stated in Terms more Contradictory, than these
Two, God wills not some to be saved, and God wills all men to be saved, or,
God will have no man perish? If we believe the last, as the Apostle has
Affirmed, the first must be destroyed; seeing of Contradictory Propositions the
one being placed, the other is destroyed. Whence (to Conclude) he gives us a
Reason of his Willingness, that All men should be saved, in these words; Who
gave himself a Ransom for all: as if he would have said; since Christ died for
all, since he gave himself a Ransom for all, therefore he will have all men to
be saved. This Christ himself gives as the Reason of God's Love to the World,
in these words, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his Only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
Everlasting life: Compared with 1 John 4.9. This [ whosoever] is an Indefinite
Term, from which no man is Excluded. From all which then I thus Argue; Arg. 1.
For whomsoever it is lawful to pray, to them Salvation is possible: But-

It Is lawful to pray for every Individual man in the whole World:

Therefore Salvation is possible unto them.

I prove the Major Proposition thus; No man is bound to pray for that, which is
impossible to be attained: But

Every man is bound and commanded to pray for all men: Therefore

It is not impossible to be obtained.

I prove also this Proposition further, thus: No man is bound to pray, but in
Faith: But --

He, that prays for that, which he judges simply Impossible to be obtained,
cannot pray in Faith: Therefore, etc.

Again: That which God wills, is not Impossible: But --

God wills all men to be saved: Therefore --

It is not Impossible.

And lastly; These, for whom our Savior gave himself a Ransom, to such
Salvation is possible: But --

Our Savior gave himself a Ransom for all: Therefore --

Salvation is possible unto them.



VIII. This is very positively Affirmed Hebr. 2.9. in these words, But we see
Jesus, who was made a little lower, than the Angels, for the suffering of Death
Crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God might taste death
for every man. He that will but open his Eyes, may see this Truth here
Asserted: If he tasted Death for Every man, then certainly, there is no man,
for whom he did not taste Death; then there is no man, who may not be made a
Sharer of the Benefit of it: For he came not to Condemn the World; but that the
World through him might be Saved, Joh. 3.17. He came not to Judge the World,
but to Save the World, Joh. 12.47. whereas, according to the Doctrine of our
Adversaries he behoved to come to Condemn the World, and Judge it, Our
Adversaries false Doctrine of a great part of Mankind being pre-ordained for
Damnation, Refuted.
and not that it might be Saved by him, or to save it. For if he never came to
bring Salvation to a great part of Mankind, but that his Coming, though it
could never do them good, yet shall augment their Condemnation, from thence it
necessarily follows, that he came not of Intention to Save, but to Judge and
Condemn the greater part of the World, contrary to his own Express Testimony.
And as the Apostle Paul in the words above cited does Assert Affirmatively,
That God wills the Salvation of all; so does the Apostle Peter Assert
Negatively, That he 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise,
as some men count slackness; but is long-suffering to usward, not willing, that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. And this is
Correspondent to that of the Prophet Ezechiel 33.11. As I live, says the Lord,
I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked; but that the Wicked turn from
his way and live: If it be safe to believe God, and trust in him, we must not
think, that he intends to Cheat us by all these Expressions through his
Servants; but that he was in good Earnest. And that this Will and Desire of his
has not taken Effect, the Blame is on our parts (as shall be after spoken of)
which could not be, if so be, we never were in any Capacity of Salvation, or
that Christ had never died for us; but left us under an Impossibility of
Salvation, what means all those Earnest Invitations? all those Serious
Expostulations? all those Regretting Contemplations, wherewith the Holy
Scriptures are full? As; Why will ye die, 0 house of Israel! why will ye not
come to me, that ye might have life? I have waited to be gracious unto you; I
have sought to gather you; I have knocked at the door of your hearts: Is not
your destruction of your selves? I have called all the day long. If Men, who
are so Invited, be under no Capacity of being Saved, if Salvation be Impossible
unto them; shall we suppose God in this to be no other, but like the Author of
a Romance, or the Master of a Comedy, who amuses and raises the various
Affections and Passions of his Spectators by diverse and strange Accidents?
sometimes leading them into hope, and sometimes into despair; all those Actions
in Effect being but a pure Illusion, while he has appointed, what the
Conclusion of all shall be.

Thirdly: This Doctrine is abundantly Confirmed by that of the Apostle 1 John
2.1, 2. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous: And he is the Propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole World. The way, Adversaries Comment upon the
Word, the Whole World.
which our Adversaries take to Evite this Testimony, is most foolish and
ridiculous: The World here, say they, is the World of Believers: For this
Commentary we have nothing, but their own Assertion; and so while it manifestly
destroys the Text, may be justly Rejected. For First, let them show me, if they
can, in all the Scripture, where the Whole world is taken for Believers only? I
shall show them, where it is many times taken for the quite Contrary: as; The
World knows me not; The World receives me not; I am not of this World: Besides
all these Scriptures Psalm. 17.14. Isa. 13.11. Matthew. 18.7. Joh. 7.7. 8.26.
12:19. 14:17. 15:18,19. 17:14,18,20. 1 Cor. 1.21. 2:12. 6:2. Gal. 6.14. James
1.27. 2 Pet. 2.20. 1 John 2.15. 3:1. and 4.4, 5. and many more. Secondly, The
Apostle in this very place Contra-distinguisheth the World from the Saints
thus; And not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole World: What means
the Apostle by [ ours] here? is not that the sins of Believers? was not he one
of those Believers? and was not this an Universal Epistle written to all the
Saints, that then were? So that according to these men's Comment, there should
be a very unnecessary and foolish Redundancy in the Apostle's words: as if he
had said; He is a Propitiation not only for the sins of all Believers, but for
the sins of all Believers: Is not this to make the Apostle's words void of good
sense? Let them show us, wherever there is such a manner of speaking in all the
Scripture, where any of the Penmen first name the Believers in Concreto with
themselves, and then Contra-distinguish them from some other whole World of
Believers? That Whole World, if it be of Believers, must not be the World we
live in. But we need no better Interpreter for the Apostle, than himself, who
uses the very same Expression and Phrase in the same Epistle, c. 5.19. saying;
We know, that we are of God, and the Whole World lies in Wickedness: there
cannot be found in all the Scripture two places, which run more parallel;
seeing in both, the same Apostle, in the same Epistle, to the same persons
Contra-distinguisheth himself, and the Saints to whom he writes, from the Whole
World; which according to these men's Commentary ought to be understood of
Believers: as if John had said, We know, particular Believers are of God; but
the whole World of Believers lies in wickedness: what Absurd Wresting of
Scripture were this? and yet it may be as well pleaded for, as the other; for
they differ not at all. Seeing then, that the Apostle John tells us plainly,
that Christ not only died for him, and for the Saints and Members of the Church
of God, to whom he wrote; but for the Whole World: Let us then hold it for a
Certain and Undoubted Truth, notwithstanding the Cavils of such, as Oppose.

This might also be proved from many more Scripture-Testimonies, if it were at
this Season needful. All the Fathers (so called) and Doctors of the Church for
the first four Centuries preached this Doctrine; according to which they boldly
held forth the Gospel of Christ, The Heathens invited to Salvation; none
predestined to Damnation.
and Efficacy of his Death, Inviting and Entreating the Heathens to Come and be
Partakers of the Benefits of it; showing them, how there was a Door open for
them ALL to be Saved through Jesus Christ: not telling them, that God had
predestined any of them to Damnation, or had made Salvation Impossible to
them, by withholding Power and Grace necessary to believe from them. But of
many of their Sayings, which might be Alleged, I shall only Instance a Few.

Augustine on Psalm 95. says; The Blood of Christ is of so great worth, that
it is of no less value, than the Whole World.

Prosper ad Gall. c. 9. The Testimonies of the Fathers and Doctors of the first
Church that Christ died for all.
The Redeemer of the World gave his Blood for the World, and the World would
not be Redeemed, because the Darkness did not receive the Light. He that says,
the Savior was not Crucified for the Redemption of the Whole World, looks not
to the virtue of the Sacrament, but to the part of Infidels; since the Blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ is the price of the Whole World: from which Redemption
they are Strangers, who either delighting in their Captivity would not be
Redeemed, or after they were Redeemed, Returned to the same Servitude. The same
Prosper in his Answer to Vincentius's first Objection: Seeing therefore,
because of one Common Nature and Cause in Truth undertaken by our Lord, all are
rightly said to be Redeemed, and nevertheless all are not brought out of
Captivity; the Property of Redemption without doubt belongs to those, from
whom the Prince of this World is shut out, and now are not Vessels of the
Devil, but Members of Christ: whose Death was so bestowed upon Mankind, that it
belonged to the Redemption of such, who were not to be Regenerated; but so that
that, which was done by the Example of one for all, might by a singular Mystery
be Celebrated in every one. For the Cup of Immortality, which is made up of our
Infirmity, and the Divine Power, has indeed that in it, which may profit all;
but if it be not Drunk, it does not Heal.

The Author de Vocat. Gentium, lib. 11. cap. 6. There is no Cause to doubt, but
that our Lord Jesus Christ died for sinners and wicked men; and if there can be
any found, who may be said not to be of this Number, Christ has not died for
all: he made himself a Redeemer for the Whole World.

Chrysostom on John 1. If he Inlightens every man coming into the World, how
comes it, that so many men remain without Light? For all do not so much as
Acknowledge Christ; how then does he Inlighten every man? He Illuminates
indeed, so far as in him is; but if any of their own Accord closing the Eyes of
their Mind, will not direct their Eyes unto the Beams of this Light, The Cause
of remaining in Darkness.
the Cause that they remain in Darkness, is not from the Nature of the Light,
but through their own Malignity; who willingly have rendered themselves Unworthy
of so great a Gift. But why believed they not? Because they would not: Christ
did his part.

The Arelatensian Synod held about the Year 490. pronounced him Accursed, who
should say, That Christ has not died for all; or that he would not have all
men to be saved.

Ambrose on Psalm. 118. Sermon. 8. The Mystical Sun of Righteousness is arisen to
all: he came to all, he suffered for all, and rose again for all: And therefore
he suffered, that he might take away the sin of the World. But if any one
Believe not in Christ, he Robbs himself of this general Benefit: even as if one
by Closing the Windows should hold out the Sunbeams, The Sunbeams shut out,
heat not.
the Sun is not therefore not Arisen to all, because such a one has so robbed
himself of its Heat; but the Sun keeps its prerogative: It is such a ones
Imprudence, that he shuts himself out from the Common Benefit of the Light.

The same man in his 11 th Book of Cain and Abel, cap. 13. says; Therefore he
brought unto all the Means of Health, that whosoever should perish, may ascribe
to himself the Causes of his Death, who would not be Cured, when he had the
Remedy, by which he might have Escaped.

IX. Seeing then, that this Doctrine of the Universality of Christ's Death is
so Certain and Agreeable to the Scripture's Testimony, and to the Sense of the
purest Antiquity; it may be wondered, how so many, some whereof have been
Esteemed not only Learned, but also Pious, have been Capable to Fall into so
gross and strange an Error! But the Cause of this does evidently appear, in
that the Way and Method, by which the Virtue and Efficacy of this Death is
Communicated to all men, has not been rightly understood; or indeed has been
Erroneously Affirmed. Pelagians Errors.
The Pelagians ascribing all to Man's Will and Nature, denied man to have any
Seed of Sin Conveyed to him from Adam; and the Semi-Pelagians making Grace, as
a Gift following upon Man's Merit, or right Improving of his Nature, according
to their known Principle, Facienti quod in se est, Deus non denegat gratiam:
This gave Augustine, Prosper and some others occasion, laboring in Opposition
to these Opinions to magnify the Grace of God, and paint out the Corruption of
Man's Nature (as the Proverb is of those, that seek to make straight a Crooked
Stick) to Incline to the other Extreme. Extremes fallen into by some, making
God the Author of Sin.
So also the Reformers, Luther and others, finding among other Errors the
strange Expressions used by some of the Popish Scholasticks concerning Free
Will, and how much the Tendency of their Principles is to Exalt Man's Nature,
and lessen God's Grace; having all those Sayings of Augustine and others for a
pattern, through the like Mistake ran upon the same Extreme. Though afterward
the Lutherans seeing, how far Calvin and his Followers drove this matter (who,
as a man of subtle and profound Judgment, foreseeing, where it would land,
resolved above board to Assert, That God had decreed the Means, as well as the
End, and therefore had Ordained men to sin, and Excites them thereto; Which he
labors earnestly to defend) and that there was no avoiding the making God the
Author of Sin; thereby received occasion to discern the falsity of this
Doctrine, and disclaimed it: as appears by the latter Writings of Melanchthon,
and the Mompelgartensian Conference, Epit. Hist. Eccl. Lucae Osiand. Cent. 16.
l. 4. cap. 32.
where Lucas Osiander, one of the Collocutors, terms it Impious, calls it a
Making God the Author of Sin; and a horrid and horrible Blasphemy. Yet because
none of those, who have Asserted this Universal Redemption since the
Reformation, have given a Clear, Distinct and Satisfactory Testimony, how it is
Communicated to all, and so have fallen short of fully declaring the perfection
of the Gospel Dispensation; others have been thereby the more strengthened in
their Errors: Which I shall Illustrate by one singular Example.

The Arminians and other Assertors of Universal Grace use this, as a Chief
Argument: That, which every man is bound to believe, is True: But --

Every man is bound to believe, that Christ died for them:

Therefore, etc.



Of this Argument the other Party deny the Assumption, saying; That they, who
never heard of Christ, are not obliged to believe in him: and seeing,
Remonstrants Opinion strengthens the precise Decree of Reprobation.
the Remonstrants (as they are commonly called) do generally themselves
acknowledge, that without the outward knowledge of Christ there is no
Salvation; that gives the other Party yet a stronger Argument for their Precise
Decree of Reprobation. For, say they, seeing we all see really and in Effect,
that God has withheld from many Generations, and yet from many Nations that
Knowledge, which is absolutely needful to Salvation, and so has rendered it
simply Impossible unto them; why may he not as well withold the Grace
necessary to make a saving. Application of that Knowledge, where it is
preached? For there is no ground to say, that this were Injustice in God, or
Partiality, more than his leaving those others in utter Ignorance; the one
being but a withholding Grace to apprehend the Object of Faith; the other a
withdrawing the Object it self. For Answer to this they are forced to draw a
Conclusion from their former Hypothesis of Christ dying for all, and God's
Mercy and Justice, saying; That if these Heathens, who live in these remote
places, where the Outward Knowledge of Christ is not, did improve that Common
Knowledge they have, to whom the Outward Creation is for an Object of Faith, by
which they may gather, that there is a God; then the Lord would by some
Providence either Send an Angel to tell them of Christ, or Convey the Scripture
to them, or bring them some way to an Opportunity to meet with such, as might
Inform them. Which, as it gives always too much to the power and strength of
Man's Will and Nature, and savours a little of Socinianism and Pelagianism, or
at lest of Semi-pelagianism; so since it is only built upon probable
Conjectures, neither has it Evidence enough to Convince any strongly tainted
with the other Doctrine, nor yet does it make the Equity and wonderful Harmony
of God's Mercy and Justice toward all so manifest to the Understanding. So
that I have often observed, that these Assertors of Universal Grace did far
more pithily and strongly Overturn the false Doctrine of their Adversaries,
than they did Establish and Confirm the Truth and Certainty of their own: And
though they have Proof sufficient from the Holy Scriptures to Confirm the
Universality of Christ's Death, and that none are precisely by any Irrevocable
Decree Excluded from Salvation; None by an Irrevocable Decree Excluded from
Salvation.
yet I find, when they are pressed in the respects abovementioned to show, how
God has so far Equally Extended the Capacity to Partake of the Benefit of
Christ's Death unto all, as to Communicate unto them a sufficient Way of so
doing, they are somewhat in a strait, and are put more to give us their
Conjectures from the Certainty of the former, presupposed Truth (to wit, that
because Christ has certainly died for all, and God has not rendered Salvation
Impossible to any, therefore there must be some way or other, by which they may
be saved; which must be by improving some Common Grace, or by gathering from
the Works of Creation and Providence) than by really Demonstrating by
Convincing and Spiritual Arguments, what that Way is?

X. It falls out then, that as Darkness, and the great Apostasy came not upon
the Christian World all at once, but by several Degrees, one thing making way
for another; until that thick and gross Vail came to be overspread, wherewith
the Nations were so blindly Covered from the seventh and eighth, until the
sixteenth Centuries: Even as the Darkness of the Night comes not upon the
outward Creation all at once, but by Degrees, according as the Sun declines in
each Horizon; so neither did that full and clear Light and Knowledge of the
Glorious Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ appear all at once; the work of
the first Witnesses being more to Testify against and Discover the Abuses of
the Apostasy, than to Establish the Truth in purity. He that comes to build a
New City, must first remove the Old Rubbish, before he can see to lay a New
Foundation; and he, that comes to a House greatly polluted and full of dirt,
will first sweep away and remove the filth, before he put up his own good and
New Furniture. The Dawning of the Day dispells the Darkness, and makes us see
the things, that are most Conspicuous; but the distinct Discovering and
Discerning of things, so as to make a certain and perfect observation, is
reserved for the Arising of the Sun, and its shining in full brightness. And we
can from a certain Experience boldly affirm, that the not waiting for this, but
building among, yea and with the Old Popish Rubbish, and setting up before a
full purgation, has been to most Protestants the foundation of many a Mistake,
and an occasion of unspeakable Hurt. Therefore the Lord God, who, as he sees
meet, does communicate and make known to man the more full, The more full
Discovery of the Gospel reserved to this our Age.
evident and perfect Knowledge of his Everlasting Truth, has been pleased to
Reserve the more full Discovery of this Glorious and Evangelical Disensation to
this our Age; albeit diverse Testimonies have thereunto been born by some noted
Men* in several Ages, as shall hereafter appear. And for the greater
augmentation of the Glory of his Grace, that no man might have whereof to
boast, he has raised up a few, Despicable and Illiterate Men, and for the most
part Mechanics, to be the Dispensators of it: by which Gospel all the
Scruples, Doubts* Hesitations and Objections abovementioned are easily and
evidently answered, and the Justice, as well as Mercy of God, according to
their Divine and heavenly Harmony Exhibited, Established and Confirmed.
According to which certain Light and Gospel, as the knowledge thereof has been
manifested to us by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in us, fortified by our own
sensible Experience, and sealed by the Testimony of the Spirit in our hearts,
we can confidently Affirm and clearly Evince, according to the Testimony of the
Holy Scriptures, the following Points.

XI. First; That GOD, who out of his Infinite Love sent his Son the Jesus
Christ into the World, who tasted Death for every man, has given to every man,
whether Jew or Gentile, Turk or Scythian, Indian or Barbarian, A Day of
Visitation to all.
of whatsoever Nation, Country or Place, a Certain Day or Time of Visitation;
during which Day or Time it is possible for them to be Saved, and to partake of
the Fruit of Christ's Death.

That for this end God has Communicated and given unto every man a Measure of
the Light of his own Son, a Measure of Grace, or a Measure of the Spirit; A
Measure of Light in all.
which the Scripture expresses by several names: as sometimes of the Seed of
the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.18, 19. The Light, that makes all things manifest, Ephesians.
5.13. The Word of God, Romans 10.18. or Manifestation of the Spirit given to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. A Talent, Matthew. 25.15. A little Leaven: The Gospel
preached in every Creature, Col. 1.23.

Thirdly; That God in and by this Light and Seed invites, calls, exhorts and
strives with every man in order to save them; which as it is received, and not
resisted, works the Salvation of all, even of those, who Death and Sufferings
of Christ, and of Adam's Fall, God's S^lvatation wrought by the Light in all.
both by bringing them to a sense of their own Misery, and to be sharers in the
Sufferings of Christ inwardly, and by making them partakers of his
Resurrection, in becoming holy, pure and righteous, and recovered out of their
sins. By which also are saved they, that have the Knowledge of Christ
outwardly; in that it opens their Understanding rightly to use and apply the
things delivered in the Scriptures, and to receive the Saving Use of them: But
that this may be Resisted and Rejected in both; in which then God is said to be
Resisted and Pressed down, and Christ to be again Crucified, and put to open
shame in and among men. And to those, as thus Resist and Refuse him, he becomes
their Condemnation.

First then, According to this Doctrine the Mercy of God is excellently; in
that none are necessarily shut out from Salvation: and his Justice is
demonstrated, in that he Condemns none, but such, to whom he really made Offer
of Salvation; affording them the Means sufficient thereunto.

Secondly, This Doctrine if well weighed, will be found to be the Foundation of
Christianity, Salvation and Assurance.

Thirdly, It agrees and answers with the Whole Tenor of the Gospel-Promises;
according to which the Gospel, Salvation, Repentance is commanded to be
preached to Every Creature, without respect of Nations, Kindreds, Families or
Tongues.

Fourthly, It magnifies and commends the Merits and Death of Christ, in
sufficient to save all; but declares them to be brought so nigh unto all, as
thereby to be put into the nearest Capacity of Salvation.

Fifthly, It Exalts above all the Grace of God, to which it attributes least
and smallest Actions, that are so; ascribing thereunto not only the first
beginnings and motions of good, but also the whole Conversion and Salvation of
the Soul.

Sixthly, It Contradicts, Overturns and Enervates the false Doctrine Pelagians,
Semi-Pelagians, Socinians and others, who exalt the Light of Nature, the
Liberty of Man's Will; in that it wholly excludes the natural man from having
any place or portion in his own Salvation, by any acting, moving or working of
his own, until he be first quickened, raised up and acted by God's Spirit.

Seventhly, As it Makes the whole Salvation of Man solely and alone to God, so
it makes his Condemnation wholly, and in every respect to be of himself: in
that he refused and resisted somewhat, that from God wrestled and strove in his
heart; and forces him to acknowledge God's just Judgment in rejecting him, and
forsaking of him.

Eighthly, It takes away all ground of Despair, in that it gives every Hope and
certain Assurance, that they may be saved; neither does feed any in Security,
in that none are certain, how soon their Day may Expire: and therefore it is a
constant Incitement and Provocation, and lively Encouragement to every man to
forsake evil, and close with that, which is good.

Ninthly, It wonderfully commends as well the Certainty of the Christian
Religion among Infidels, as it manifests its own Verity to all, in that it is
confirmed and established by the Experiences of all men: seeing, there was
never yet a man found in any place of the Earth, however barbarous wild, but
has acknowledged, that at some time or other, less or more, he has found
somewhat in his heart reproving him for some things Evil, which he has done:
threatening a certain horror, if he continued in them; as also promising and
communicating a certain peace and sweetness, as he has given way to it, and
not resisted it.

Tenthly, It wonderfully shows the excellent Wisdom of God, by which he has
made the means of Salvation so Universal and Comprehensive, that it is not
needful to recur to those miraculous and strange ways: seeing, according to
this most true Doctrine, the Gospel reaches all, of whatsoever Condition, Age
or Nation.

Eleventhly, It is Really and Effectively, though not in so many words,
established and confirmed by all the Preachers, Promulgators and Doctors of the
Christian Religion, that ever were, or now are, even by those, that otherways
in their Judgment Oppose this Doctrine; in that they all, wherever they have
been or are, or whatsoever People, Place or Country they come to, do preach to
the People, and to every Individual among them, That they may be saved;
Entreating and Desiring them to believe in Christ, who has died for them. So
that, what they deny in the general, they acknowledge of every particular;
there being no man, to whom they do not preach in order to Salvation, telling
him, Jesus Christ calls and wills him to believe and be saved; and that, if he
refuse, he shall therefore be Condemned: and that his Condemnation is of
himself. Such is the Evidence and Virtue of Truth, that it constrains its
Adversaries even against their wills to plead for it.

Lastly, According to this Doctrine, the former Argument used by the Arminians,
and Evited by the Calvinists, concerning Every man's being bound to believe,
that Christ died for him, is, by altering the Assumption, rendered Invincible:
thus; That, which every man is bound to believe, is True: But --

Every man is bound to believe, that God is merciful unto him:

Therefore, etc.

This Assumption no man can deny; seeing his Mercies are said to be over all
his Works. And herein the Scripture every where declares the Mercy of God to
be, in that he Invites and Calls sinners to Repentance, and has opened a way
of Salvation for them: so that, though those men be not bound to believe the
History of Christ's Death and Passion, who never came to know of it; yet they
are bound to believe, that God will be Merciful to them, if they follow his
Ways; and that he is Merciful unto them, in that he Reproves them for Evil, and
Incourages them to good. Neither ought any man to believe, that God is
unmerciful to him, or that he has from the beginning Ordained him to come into
the World, that he might be left to his own evil Inclinations, Our Adversaries
unmerciful Assertion of God.
and so do wickedly, as a means appointed by God to bring him to Eternal
Damnation; which, were it true, as our Adversaries affirm it to be of many
Thousands, I see no reason, why a man might not believe: for certainly, a man
may believe the Truth.

As it manifestly appears from the thing it self, that these good and excellent
Consequences follow from the belief of this Doctrine; so from the Probation of
them* it will yet more evidently appear. To which before I come, it is
requisite to speak somewhat concerning the State of the Controversy; which will
bring great light to the matter (For from the not right understanding of a
matter under Debate, sometimes both Arguments on the one hand, and Objections
on the other are brought, which do* no way hit the Case) and hereby also our
Sense and Judgment therein will be more fully understood and opened.

XII. First then, by this Day and Time of Visitation, which we say, God gives
unto all, during which they may be saved, The Stating of the Question.
we do not understand the Whole Time of every man's Life, though to some it may
be extended even to the very hour of Death; as we see in the Example of the
Thief Converted upon the Cross: but such a season at least, as sufficiently
exonerateth God of every man's Condemnation; which to some may be sooner, and
to others later, according as the Lord in his Wisdom sees meet. So that many
men may outlive this day; after which there may be no possibility of Salvation
to them: That many may outlive the Day of God's Visitation.
and God justly suffers them to be hardened, as a just punishment of their
Unbelief, and even raises them up as Instruments of Wrath, and makes them a
Scourge one against another. Whence to men in this Condition may be fitly
applied those Scriptures, which are abused to prove, That God incites men
necessarily to sin. This is notably expressed by the Apostle, Romans 1. from v.
17. to the end; but especially verse. 28. And even as they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a Reprobate Mind, to do
those things, which are not Convenient. That many may outlive this Day of
God's gracious Visitation unto them, is shown by the Example of Esau, Hebr.
12.16, 17. who sold his Birthright: so he had it once, and was capable to have
kept it; but afterward when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was
Rejected. This appears also by Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42.
saying; If thou had known in this thy day the things, that belong unto thy
peace; but now they are hid from thine Eyes: Which plainly imports a Time, when
they might have known them; which now was removed from them, though they were
yet alive. But of this more shall be said hereafter.

XIII. Secondly, By this Seed, Grace and Word of God, and Light, and has a
measure of it, which strives with them in order to Save them, and which may by
the stubbornness and wickedness of man's Will be quenched, bruised, wounded,
pressed-down, slain and crucified, we understand not the proper Essence and
Nature of God precisely taken; which is not Divisible into parts and measures,
as being a must Pure, Simple Being, void of all Composition or Division, and
therefore can neither be resisted, hurt, wounded, crucified or slain by all the
Efforts and Strength of men. The Light, what it is, and its Properties
described.
But we understand a Spiritual, Heavenly and Invisible Principle, in which God,
as Father, Son and Spirit dwells: a measure of which Divine and Glorious Life
is in all men, as a Seed, which of its own nature draws, invites and inclines
to God. And this we call Vehiculum Dei, or the Spiritual body of Christ,
Vehiculum DEI.
the flesh and blood of Christ, which came down from Heaven, of which all the
Saints do feed, and are thereby nourished unto Eternal Life. And as every
unrighteous Action is witnessed against, and reproved by this Light and Seed,
so by such Actions it is hurt, wounded and slain, and resiles or flees from
them; even as the flesh of men flees from that, which is of a contrary nature
to it. Now, because it is never separated from God, nor Christ, but wherever it
is, God and Christ are as wrapped up therein: therefore and in that respect, as
it is Resisted, God is said to be Resisted; and where it is born down, God is
said to be pressed, as a Cart under sheaves, and Christ is said to be slain and
crucified. And on the contrary, as this Seed is received in the heart, and
suffered to bring forth its natural and proper Effect, Christ comes to be
formed and raised: of which the Scripture makes so much mention, calling it the
New man; Christ within, the Hope of Glory. This is that Christ within, which we
are heard so much to speak and declare of; every where preaching him up, and
exhorting People to believe in the Light, and obey it, that they may come to
know Christ in them to deliver them from all sin.

But by this as we do not at all intend either to Equal our selves to that Holy
man the Lord Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, in whom all the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily; nor to Destroy the reality of his present
Existence; That the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, etc.
so neither do we, as some have falsely calumniated us. For though we Affirm,
that Christ dwells in us, yet not immediately, but mediately, as he is in that
Seed, which is in us; whereas he, to wit, the Eternal Word, which was with God,
and was God, dwelt Immediately in that holy man: He then is as the Head, and we
as the Members; he the Vine, and we the Branches. Now, as the Soul of man
dwells other ways, and in a far more immediate manner in the Head and in the
Heart, than in the Hands or Legs; and as the Sap, Virtue and Life of the Vine
lodges far otherwise in the Stock and Root, than in the Branches; so God
dwells otherwise in the Man Jesus, than in us. We also freely reject the
Heresy of Appollinarius, who denied him to have any Soul; but said, the Body
was only acted by the Godhead. As also the Error of Eutyches, who made the
Manhood to be wholly swallowed up of the Godhead; wherefore as we believe, he
was a true and a real Man, so we also believe, that he continues so to be
glorified in the Heavens, in Soul and Body; by whom God shall judge the World
in the great and general Day of Judgment.

XIV. Thirdly, We understand not this Seed, Light or Grace to be Accident, as
most men ignorantly do; but a Real, Spiritual Substance, which the Soul of man
is capable to feel and apprehend: That the Light is a Spiritual Substance which
may be felt in the Soul, and apprehended.
from which that Real, Spiritual, Inward Birth in Believers arises, called the
New Creature, the New Man in the heart. This seems strange to carnally minded
men, because they are not acquainted with it; but we know it, and are sensible
of it by a true and certain Experience; though it be hard for man in his
natural Wisdom to Comprehend it, until he come to feel it in himself; and if he
should, holding it in the mere Notion, it would avail him little. Yet we are
able to make it appear to be true, and that our Faith concerning it is not
without a solid Ground: for it is in and by this Inward and Substantial Seed in
our Hearts, as it comes to receive nourishment, and to have a Birth or Geniture
in us, that we come to have those Spiritual Senses raised, by which we are made
capable of tasting, smelling, seeing and handling the things of God: For a man
cannot reach unto those things by his natural spirit and senses, as is above
declared.

Next: We know it to be a Substance, because it subsists in the hearts of
Wicked Men, even while they are in their Wickedness; as shall be hereafter
proved more at large. Now, no Accident can be in a Subject, without it give the
Subject its own Denomination; as where Whiteness is in a Subject, there the
Subject is called White. So we distinguish betwixt Holiness, as it is an
Accident, which denominates man so, as the Seed receives a place in him; and
betwixt this holy, substantial Seed, which many times lies in man's heart, as a
naked grain in a stony ground. So also, as we may distinguish betwixt Health
and Medicine: Health cannot be in the Body, without the Body be called
Healthful; because Health is an Accident: but Medicine may be in a Body, that
is most Vnhealthful; for that it is a Substance. And, as when a Medicine begins
to work, The Degrees of its Operation in the Soul of man.
the Body may in some respect be called Healthful, and in some respect
Vnhealthful; so we acknowledge, as this Divine Medicine receives place in man's
Heart, it may denominate him in some part holy and good, though there remain
yet a corrupted, unmortified part, or some part of the evil humors unpurged
out: For where two contrary Accidents are in one Subject, as health and
sickness in a body, the Subject receives its denomination from the Accident,
which prevails most. So many men are called Saints, good and holy men, and that
truly, when this Holy Seed has wrought in them in a good measure, and has
somewhat leavened them into its Nature; though they may be yet liable to many
Infirmities and Weaknesses, yea, and to some Iniquities. For as the Seed of
Sin, and ground of Corruption, yea, and the capacity of yielding thereunto, and
sometimes actual falling does not denominate a good and holy man, Impious; so
neither does the Seed of Righteousness in evil men, and the possibility of
their becoming one with it, denominate them good or holy..

XV. Fourthly: We do not hereby Intend any ways to lessen or derogate from the
Atonement and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; but on the contrary Magnify and Exalt
it. That Remission of sins is only and alone by Christ.
For as we believe all those things to have been certainly Transacted, which
are Recorded in the Holy Scriptures concerning the Birth, Life, Miracles,
Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ; so we do also believe, that
it is the duty of every one to believe it, to whom it pleases God to Reveal the
same, and to bring to them the Knowledge of it. Yea, we believe, it were
damnable Unbelief, not to believe, when so declared; but to Resist that Holy
Seed: which as minded, would lead and incline every one to believe it, as it is
offered unto them; though it reveals not in every one the outwardly and
explicit Knowledge of it, nevertheless it always assenteth to it, ubi
declaratur, where it is declared. Nevertheless, as we firmly believe, it was
Necessary that Christ should come, that by his Death and Sufferings he might
offer up himself a Sacrifice to God for our sins, who his own self bore our
sins in his own Body on the Tree; so we believe, that the Remission of Sins,
which any partake of, is only in and by virtue of that most satisfactory
Sacrifice, and no otherwise: For it is by the Obedience of that One, that the
Free Gift is come upon all unto Justification. For we affirm, that as all men
partake of the fruit of Adam's Fall, in that by reason of that Evil Seed, which
through him is Communicated unto them, they are prone and inclined unto Evil,
though Thousands of Thousands be ignorant of Adam's Fall, neither ever knew of
the Eating of the Forbidden Fruit; so also many may come to feel the Influence
of this Holy and Divine Seed and Light, and be turned from evil to good by it,
though they knew nothing of Christ's Coming in the flesh, through whose
Obedience and Sufferings it is purchased unto them. And as we Affirm, it is
absolutely needful, The History is profitable with the Mystery.
that those do believe the History of Christ's outward Appearance, whom it
pleased God to bring to the Knowledge of it; so we do freely Confess, that even
that outward Knowledge is very Comfortable to such as are subject to and led by
the Inward Seed and Light. For not only does the sense of Christ's Love and
Sufferings tend to humble them; but they are thereby also strengthened in their
Faith, and encouraged to follow that Excellent Pattern, which he has left us,
Who suffered for us; as says the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21. Leaving us an
Example, that we should follow his steps: And many times we are greatly Edified
and Refreshed with the gracious Sayings, which proceed out of his Mouth. The
History then is profitable and comfortable with the Mystery, and never without
it: but the Mystery is and may be profitable without the explicit and outward
Knowledge of the History.

Fifthly, This brings us to another Question, to wit, Whether Christ be in all
men, or no? Which sometimes has been asked us, and Arguments brought against
it, because indeed, it is to be found in some of our Writings, How Christ is in
all men.
That Christ is in all men; and we are often heard in our public Meetings and
Declarations to desire every man to come to know and be acquainted with Christ
in them; telling them, that Christ is in them: It is fit therefore, for
removing of all Mistakes, to say something in this place concerning this
matter. We have said before, how that a Divine, Spiritual and Supernatural
Light is in all men; how that that Divine Supernatural Light or Seed is
Vehiculum Dei; how that God and Christ dwells in it, and is never separated
from it: also how that, as it is received and closed with in the heart, Christ
comes to be formed and brought forth; but we are far from ever having said,
That Christ is thus formed in all men, or in the Wicked: For that is a great
Attainment; which the Apostle traveled, that it might be brought forth in the
Galatians. Neither is Christ in all men by Way of Union, or indeed to speak
strictly, by way of Inhabitation; because this Inhabitation, as it is generally
taken, imports Union, or the Manner of Christ's being in the Saints: As it is
written, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. But in regard
Christ is in all men, as in a Seed, yea, and that he never is, nor can be
separate from that Holy, pure Seed and Light, which is in all men; therefore
may it be said in a larger sense, that he is In all, even as we observed
before. The Scripture says, Amos 2.13. God is pressed down, as a Cart under
sheaves; and Christ Crucified in the Ungodly: though to speak properly and
strictly, neither can God be pressed down, nor Christ, as God, be Crucified. In
this respect then, as he is in the Seed, which is in all men, we have said,
Christ is in all men, and have preached and directed all men to Christ in them,
who lies Crucified in them by their Sins and Iniquities; Christ Crucified in
man by Iniquities.
that they may look upon him; whom they have pierced, and Repent: whereby he,
that now lies as it were, slain and buried in them, may come to be raised, and
have Dominion in their hearts over all. And thus also the Apostle Paul preached
to the Corinthians and Galatians, 1 Cor. 2.2. Christ crucified in them, (...),
as the Greek, has it: This Jesus Christ was that, which the Apostle desired to
know in them, and make known unto them, that they might come to be sensible,
how they had thus been Crucifying Christ: that so they might Repent and be
Saved. And forasmuch as Christ is called that Light, that inlightens every man,
The Light of the World; Therefore the Light is taken for Christ: who truly is
the Fountain of all Light, and has his Habitation in it for ever. Thus the
Light of Christ is sometimes called Christ, i. e. that in which Christ is, and
from which ^e is never Separated.

XVI. Sixthly: It will manifestly appear, by what is avove-said, that we
Understand not this Divine Principle to be any part of Man's Nature, nor yet to
be any Relics of any good, which Adam lost by his Fall; in that we make it a
distinct, separate thing from man's Soul, and all the Faculties of it: Yet,
such is the malice of our Adversaries, that they cease not sometimes to
Calumniate us, as if we preached up a Natural Light, or the Light of man's
natural Conscience. Next: there are, that lean to the Doctrine of Socinus and
Pelagius, who persuade themselves through mistake, and out of no ill design to
Injure us, as if this, which we preach up, were some natural Power and Faculty
of the Soul; and that we only differ in the wording of it, and not in the thing
it self: Whereas there can be no greater Difference, than is betwixt us in this
matter. For we certainly know, that this Light, of which we speak, is not only
distinct, The Faculties of Man's Reason.
but of a different Nature from the Soul of man and its Faculties. Indeed, that
man, as he is a rational Creature, has Reason, as a Natural Faculty of his
Soul, by which he can discern things, that are Rational, we deny not; for this
is a Property Natural and Essential to him, by which he can know and learn many
Arts and Sciences, beyond what any other Animal can do by the mere Animal
Principle. Neither do we deny, but by this Rational Principle man may apprehend
in his Brain and in the Notion, a Knowledge of God and Spiritual things; yet,
that not being the right Organ (as in the second Proposition has more at
length been signified) it cannot profit him toward Salvation: but rather
hinders. And indeed, the great Cause of the Apostasy has been, that man has
sought to fathom the things of God in and by this natural and rational
Principle, and to build up a Religion in it, Antichrist in the Temple of God.
neglecting and overlooking this Principle and Seed of God in the heart: so
that herein, in the most universal and Catholic Sense, has Antichrist in
every man set up himself, and sits in the Temple of God, as God, and above
every thing, that is called God. For, men being the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
as says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.16. when the Rational Principle sets it self up
there above the Seed of God, to reign and rule as a Prince in Spiritual things,
while the Holy Seed is wounded and bruised, there is Antichrist in every man,
or somewhat Exalted above and against Christ. Neverthless we do not hereby
Affirm, as if Man had received his Reason to no purpose, or to be of no Service
unto him; in no wise: we look upon Reason, as fit to Order and Rule man in
things Natural. The Divine Light, and Natural Reason distinguished.
For as God gave two great Lights to Rule the outward World, the Sun and Moon,
the greater Light to rule the Day, and the lesser Light to rule the Night; so
has he given man the Light of his Son a Spiritual, Divine Light, to Rule him
in the things Spiritual; and the Light of Reason, to Rule him in things
Natural. And even as the Moon borrows her Light from the Sun, so ought men (if
they would be rightly and comfortably ordered in natural things) to have their
Reason enlightened by this Divine and pure Light. Which Enlightened Reason in
those, that obey and follow this true Light, we Confess may be Useful to man
even in Spiritual things, as it is still subservient and subject to the other;
Even as the Animal Life in man, regulated and ordered by his Reason, helps him
in going about things, that are Rational. The Light distinguished from Man's
natural Conscience.
We do further rightly distinguish this from man's natural Conscience: for
Conscience being that in man, which arises from the natural Faculties of man's
Soul, may be Defiled and Corrupted; it is said expressly of the Impure, Tit.
1.15. That even their Mind and Conscience is defiled: But this Light can never
be Corrupted, nor Defiled; neither did it ever Consent to Evil or Wickedness in
any: for it is said expressly, that it makes all things manifest, that are
reprovable, Ephesians. 5.13. and so is a faithful Witness for God against every
Unrighteousness in man. CONSCIENCE defined.
Now Conscience, to define it truly, comes from [ Conscire,] and is that
Knowledge, which arises in man's heart, from what agrees, contradicts, or
is contrary to any thing believed by him; whereby he becomes Conscious to
himself, that he transgresses, by doing that, which he is persuaded he ought
not to do: So that the Mind being once blinded, or defiled with a wrong belief,
there arises a Conscience from that Belief, which troubles him, when he goes
against it. Example of a Turk.
As for Example: A Turk, who has possessed himself with a false Belief, that
it is Unlawful for him to drink Wine; if he do it, his Conscience smites him
for it: but though he keep many Concubines, his Conscience troubles him not;
because that his Judgment is already defiled with a false Opinion, that it is
lawful for him to do the one, and unlawful to do the other. Whereas if the
Light of Christ in him were minded, it would Reprove him not only for
committing Fornication, but also as he became obedient thereunto, Inform him,
that Mahomet is an Impostor; as well as Socrates was informed by it in his day
of the falsity of the Heathens Gods.

Example of ^ Papist.
So if a Papist eat flesh in Lent, or be not diligent enough in Adoration of
Saints and Images, or if he should Contemn Images, his Conscience would smite
him for it; because his Judgment is already blinded with a false Belief
concerning these things: Whereas the Light of Christ never Consented to any of
those Abominations. Thus then man's natural Conscience is sufficiently
distinguished from it: for Conscience follows the Judgment, does not Inform
it; but this Light, as it is Received, removes the Blindness of the Judgment,
opens the Understanding, and rectifies both the Judgment and Conscience. So we
Confess also, that Conscience is an Excellent thing, where it is rightly
Informed and Enlightened: Wherefore some of us have fitly Compared it to a
Lanthorn; The natural Conscience compared to a Lanthorn, and the Light of
Christ, the Candle.
and the Light of Christ to the Candle: A Lanthorn is useful, when a Clear
Candle burns and shines in it; but otherwise of no use. To the Light of Christ
then in the Conscience, and not to man's natural Conscience it is, that we
continually Commend men; this, not that is it, which we preach up, and direct
People to, as to a most certain Guide unto Life Eternal.

Lastly: This Light, Seed, etc. appears to be no Power or natural Faculty of
man's Mind, because a Man, that is in his Health, can when he pleases, stir up,
move and exercise the Faculties of his Soul; he is absolute Master of them: and
except there be some natural Cause or Impediment in the way, he can use them at
his pleasure: but this Light and Seed of God in man he cannot Move and Stir up,
when he pleases; but it moves, blows and strives with man, as the Lord sees
meet. For though there be a possibility of Salvation to every man, during the
day of his Visitation; yet cannot a Man at any time when he pleases, or has
some sense of his Misery, The Waiting upon the Movings of the Light and Grace.
stir up that Light and Grace, so as to procure to himself Tenderness of heart;
but he must Wait for it: which comes upon all at certain times and seasons,
wherein it works powerfully upon the Soul, mightily tenders it, and breaks it;
at which time, if man Resist it not, but close with it, he comes to know
Salvation by it. Even as the Lake of Bethesda did not Cure all those, that
washed in it; but such only, as Washed first, after the Angel had moved upon
the waters: so God moves in love to mankind in his Seed in his heart at some
singular times, Setting his sins in order before him, and seriously Inviting
him to Repentance, offering to him Remission of Sins, and Salvation; which if
man accept of, he may be saved. Now, there is no man alive, and I am confident,
there shall be none, to whom this Paper shall come, who, if they will deal
faithfully and honestly with their own hearts, will not be forced to
acknowledge, but they have been sensible of this in some measure, less or more;
which is a thing, that man cannot bring upon himself with all his Pains and
Industry. This then, O Man and Woman, is the Day of God's gracious Visitation
to thy Soul, which thou shall be happy for ever, if thou Resist not: This is
the Day of the Lord, which, as Christ says, is like, the Lightning, Matt.
24.27. John 3.8.
that shines from the East unto the West, and the Wind or Spirit, which blows
upon the heart, and no man knows whither it goes, nor whence it comes.

XVII. And lastly, This leads me to speak concerning the manner of Seed or
Light's Operation in the hearts of all men; which will show yet more
manifestly, how we differ vastly from all those, that Exalt a natural Power or
Light in man, and how our Principle leads above all others, to attribute our
whole Salvation to the mere Power, Spirit and Grace of God.

To them then, that ask us after this matter, How do ye differ from the
Pelagians and Arminians? For if two men have equal sufficient Light and Grace,
and the one be saved by it, and the other not; is it not, because the one
improves it, the other not? Is not then the Will of man the Cause of the one's
Salvation beyond the other? I say, to such we thus Answer: That, as the Grace
and Light in all is sufficient to save all, and of its own nature would save
all; so it strives and wrestles with all for to save them: he that Resists its
strivings, is the Cause of his own Condemnation; The Light's Operation in order
to Salvation.
he that Resists it not, it becomes his Salvation. So that in him that is
saved, the working is of the Grace, and not of the Man; and it is a Passiveness,
rather than an Act: though afterward, as man is wrought upon, there is a Will
raised in him, by which he comes to be a Co-worker with the Grace: for
according to that of Augustine, He that made us without us, will not save us
without us. So that the first step is not by Man's Working, but by his not
Contrary Working: And we believe, that at these singular seasons of every man's
Visitation abovementioned, as man is wholly unable of himself to work with the
Grace, neither can he move one step out of the natural Condition, until the
Grace lay hold upon him; so it is possible to him to be passive, and not to
Resist it: as it is also possible for him to Resist it. So we say, The Grace of
God works in and upon man's Nature; which, though of it self wholly corrupted
and defiled, and prone to evil, yet is capable to be wrought upon by the Grace
of God. Even as Iron, though a hard, and cold Metal of it self, may we warmed
and softened by the heat of the fire; and Wax melted by the Sun: And as Iron or
Wax, when removed from the Fire or Sun, returns to its former Condition of
Coldness and Hardness; so man's Heart, as it Resists, or retires from the Grace
of God, returns to its former Condition again. I have often had the manner of
God's working, in order to Salvation toward all men, illustrated to my mind by
one or two clear Examples; which I shall here Add for the Information of others.

The First is, Of a man heavily diseased; to whom I Compare Man in his fallen
and natural Condition: I suppose, God, who is the great Physician, not only to
give this man Physic, after he has used all the Industry he can for his own
Health, by any skill or knowledge he has of his own (As those that say, If a
man Improve his Reason or natural Faculties, God will superadd Grace: Or as
others say; That he comes and makes Offer of a Remedy to this man outwardly,
The Example of a Diseased Man and the Physician.
leaving it to the liberty of Man 's Will either to receive it or reject it)
But He, even the Lord, this great Physician comes, and pours the Remedy into
his mouth, and as it were, lays him in his bed; so that, if the sick man be
but passive, it will necessarily work the Effect: but if he be stubborn and
untoward, and will needs rise up, and go forth into the Cold, or Eat such
fruits as are hurtful to him, while the Medicine should Operate, then, though
of its Nature it tends to cure him; yet it will prove Destructive to him,
because of those Obstructions, which it meets with. Now, as the Man, that
should thus undo himself, would certainly be the Cause of his own Death; so who
will say, that if Cured, he owes not his Health wholly to the Physician, and
not to any Deed of his own? seeing, his part was not any Action, but a
Passiveness.

The Example of Men lying stupefied in a dark pit, and their Deliverer.
The Second Example is, of diverse men lying in a dark pit together, where all
their senses are so stupefied, that they are scarce sensible of their own
misery: To this I Compare Man in his natural, corrupt, fallen Co^^dition. I
suppose not, that any of these men, wrestling to deliver themselves, do thereby
stir up or engage one able to deliver them, to give them his help, saying with
himself; I see one of these men willing to be delivered, and doing what in him
lies, therefore he deserves to be assisted: as say the Socinians, Pelagians and
Semi-Pelagians: Neither do I suppose, that this deliverer comes to the top of
the pit, and puts down a ladder, desiring them that will, to come up; and so
puts them upon using their own Strength and Will to come up; as do the Jesuits
and Arminians: yet, as they say, such are not delivered without the Grace;
seeing the Grace is that Ladder, by which they were delivered. But I suppose,
that the Deliverer comes at certain times, and fully Discovers and Informs them
of the great Misery and Hazard they are in, if they continue in that Noisome
and Pestiferous Place; yea, forces them to a certain sense of their Misery (for
the wickedest men at times are made sensible of their Misery by God's
Visitation) and not only so, but lays hold upon them, and gives them a Pull, in
order to lift them out of their Misery: which if they Resist not, will save
them; only they may Resist it: This being Applied as the former, does the same
way Illustrate the matter. Neither is the Grace of God frustrated, though the
Effect of it be diverse, according to its Object; being the Ministration of
Mercy and Love in those, that Reject it not, but receive it; Joh. 1.12. but the
Ministration of Wrath and Condemnation in those, A Simile of the Sun's Melting
and Hardening, etc. power.
that do Reject it, Joh. 3.19. Even as the Sun by one Act or Operation melts
and softeneth the Wax, and hardens the Clay; the Nature of the Sun is to
Cherish the Creation, and therefore the Living are Refreshed by it; and the
flowers send forth a good Savor, as it shines upon them; and the Fruits of the
Trees are ripened: yet cast forth a Dead Carcass, a thing without Life, and the
same Reflection of the Sun will cause it to stink, and putrify it; yet is not
the Sun said thereby frustrate of its proper Effect. So every man during the
day of his Visitation is shined upon by the Sun of Righteousness, and capable
of being Influenced by it, so as to send forth good Fruit and a good Savor,
and to be melted by it: but when he has sinned out his day, then the same Sun
hardneth him, as it does the Clay, and makes his Wickedness more to appear and
putrify, and send forth an Evil Savor.

XVIII. Lastly, As we truly Affirm, That God wills no man to perish, and
therefore has given to all Grace sufficient for Salvation; so we do not deny,
but that in a special manner he works in some, All have Grace sufficient for
Salvation given them of God.
in whom Grace so prevails, that they necessarily obtain Salvation: neither
does God suffer them to Resist. For it were Absurd to say, that God had not far
otherwise Extended himself toward the Virgin Mary and the Apostle Paul, than
toward many others: Neither can we Affirm, that God equally loved the beloved
Disciple John, and Judas the Traitor: In so far nevertheless, as none wanted
such a measure of Grace, by which they might have been saved; all are justly
Inexcusable. And also God working in those, to whom this prevalency of Grace is
given, does so hide himself to shut out all security and presumption, that such
may be humbled, and the Free Grace of God magnified, and all reputed to be of
the Free Gift; and nothing from the Strength of Self. Those also who perish,
when they remember those Times of God's Visitation toward them, wherein he
wrestled with them by his Light and Spirit, are forced to Confess, that there
was a Time, wherein the Door of Mercy was open unto them; and that they are
justly Condemned, because they Rejected their own Salvation.

Thus both the Mercy and Justice of God is Established, and the Will and
Strength of man is brought down and Rejected; his Condemnation is made to be of
himself, and his Salvation only to depend upon God. Also by these Positions two
great Objections, which often are brought against this Doctrine, are well
Solved.

The first is deduced from those places of Scripture, Object.
wherein God seems precisely to have Decreed and Predestined some to
Salvation; and for that end to have Ordained certain Means, which fall not out
to others: as in the Calling of Abraham, David and others, and in the
Conversion of Paul; for these being numbered among such, to whom this Prevalency
is given, the Objection is easily Loosed.

The second is drawn from those places, Predestination to Salvation, and
Preordination for Destruction Answered.
wherein God seems to have Ordained some wicked persons to destruction; and
therefore to have obdur'd their hearts to force them unto great sins, and to
have raised them up, that he might show in them his Power: who if they be
numbered amongst those men, whose Day of Visitation is past over, that Objection
is also Solved; as will more evidently appear to any one, that will make a
particular Application of those things, which I at this time, for Brevity's
sake, thought meet to pass over.

XIX. Having thus clearly and evidently Stated the Question, and opened our
Mind and Judgment in this matter, as diverse Objections are hereby prevented, so
will it make our Probation both the easier and the shorter.

The first thing to be proved is, That God has given to every man a Day or
Time of Visitation, wherein it is possible for him to be Saved. Day and Time
given, in which those might have been Saved, that actually Perish, the matter
is done: For none deny, but Saved, have a Day of Visitation. This then Appears
by the Regrets and Complaints, Those that perish, had a Day of Mercy offered
them.
which the Spirit of God throughout the whole Scriptures makes, even to those
that did perish; challenging them, for that they did not Accept of, nor close
with God's Visitation and Offer of Mercy to them. Thus the Lord expresses
himself then first of all to Cain, Genesis 4.6, 7. And the Lord said unto Cain,
why art thou wroth? and why is thy Countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? If thou do not well, sin lies at the door: This was
said to Cain, before he slew his brother Abel, Instances. 1. Cain.
when the Evil Seed began to Tempt him, and Work in his heart; we see, how God
gave warning to Cain in season, and in the Day of his Visitation toward him
Acceptance and Remission, if he did well: for this Interrogation, Shall thou
not be Accepted? imports an Affirmative, Thou shall be accepted, if thou do
well. So that, if we may trust God Almighty, the Fountain of all Truth and
Equity, it was possible in a Day, even for Cain to be Accepted: Neither could
God have proposed the doing of good, as a Condition, if he had not given Cain
sufficient strength, whereby he was capable to do good. This the Lord himself
also shows, even that he gave a Day of Visitation to the Old World, 2. The Old
World.
Genesis 6 3. And the Lord said; My Spirit shall not always strive in man (for so
it ought to be Translated) This manifestly Implies, that his Spirit did strive
with man, and does strive with them for a season; which season expiring, God
Cease to strive with them in order to save them: for the Spirit of God cannot
be said to strive with man, after the Day of his Visitation is expired; seeing
it naturally and without any Resistance works its Effect then, to wit,
Continually to Judge and Condemn them. From this Day of Visitation, that God
has given to every one, is it, that he is said to Wait to be gracious, Isa.
30.18. and to be Long-suffering, God is long-suffering, and long waiting to be
Gracious to all --
Exodus 34.6. Numb. 14.18. Psalm. 86.15. Jer. 15.15. Here the Prophet Jeremy in
his Prayer lays hold upon the Long-suffering of God, and in his Expostulating
with God, he shuts out the Objection of our Adversaries in the 18. verse; Why
is my pain perpetual? and my wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will thou altogether be unto me as a Liar, and as Waters, that fail? Whereas,
according to our Adversary's Opinion, the Pain of the most part of men is
Perpetual, and their Wound altogether Incurable. Yea the Offer of the Gospel
and of Salvation unto them is as a Lie, and as Waters that fail, being never
Intended to be of any Effect unto them. The Apostle Peter says expressly, that
this Long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah for those of the Old
World, 1 Pet 3.20. which being compared with that of Genesis 6.3.
beforementioned, does sufficiently hold forth our Proposition. And that none
may Object, -- In order to save them.
that this Long-suffering or striving of the Lord was not in order to save
them; the same Apostle says expressly, 2 Pet. 3.15. That the long-suffering of
God is to be accounted Salvation: and with this Long-suffering a little before
in the 9. verse he couples, That God is not willing any should perish. Where
taking himself to be his own Interpreter (as he is most fit) he holds forth,
that those, to whom the Lord is long-suffering (which he declares, he was to
the wicked of the Old World, and is now to all, not willing that any should
perish) they are to account this Long-suffering of God to them Salvation: Now,
how or in what respect can they account it Salvation, if there be not so much
as a possibility of Salvation conveyed to them therein? For it were not
Salvation to them, if they could not be saved by it. In this matter Peter
further refers to the Writings of Paul, Some things in Paul's Epistles hard to
be understood
holding forth, This to have been the Universal Doctrine: Where it is
observable, what he adds upon this occasion, How there are some things in Paul
's Epistles hard to be understood; which the unstable and unlearned wrest to
their own destruction: insinuating plainly this of those Expressions in Paul's
Epipistles, as Romans 9. etc. which some unlearned in Spiritual things did make
to Contradict the Truth of God's Long-suffering toward all, in which he
wills not, any of them should perish; and in which they all may be saved.
Would to God, many had taken more heed, than they have done, to this
Advertisement! That place of the Apostle Paul, which Peter seems here most
particularly to hint at, does much Contribute also to Clear the matter Romans
2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance? Paul speaks here to the Unregenerate, and to the Wicked, who (in
the following verse he says) Treasure up wrath unto the day of wrath: and to
such he Commends the Riches of the Forbearance and Long-suffering of God,
showing, that the Tendency of God's Goodness leads to Repentance. How could
it necessarily Tend to lead them to Repentance? how could it be called Riches
or Goodness to them, if there were not a Time, wherein they might Repent by it,
and come to be sharers of the Riches exhibited in it? From all which I thus
argue; If God plead with the Wicked from the Possibility of their being
accepted; If God's Spirit strive in them for a season in order to save them,
perish; If he wait to be gracious unto them; Gods Spirit strives in the wicked.
If he be long-suffering toward them; And if this long-suffering be Salvation
to them, while it endures; during which time God wills them not to perish,
but exhibiteth to them the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance to lead them
to Repentance; then there is a Day of Visitation, wherein such might have been,
or some such now may be saved, who have perished, and may, if they Repent, not
Perish:

-- But the First is true: Therefore also the Last.



XX. Secondly. This appears from the Prophet Isa. 5.4. What could for in
verse 2. he says; The Vineyard planted brought wild Grapes.
He has fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with
the Choicest Vine: and yet (says he) when I looked, it should have brought
forth Grapes, it brought forth Wild Grapes. Wherefore he calls the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judea to Judge betwixt him and his
Vineyard, saying; What could I have done more to my Vineyard, than I have done
in it? and yet (as is said) it brought forth Wild Grapes: Which was applied to
many in Israel, who refused God's Mercy. The same Example is used by Christ
Matthew. 21.33. Mark 12.1. Luke 20.9. where Jesus shows, how to some a Vineyard
was planted, and all things given necessary for them to get them fruit to pay
or restore to their Master; and how the Master many times waited to be Merciful
to them, in sending Servants after Servants, and passing by many Offenses,
before he determined to Destroy and Cast them out. First then, this cannot be
understood of the Saints, or of such as Repent and are Saved; for it is said
expressly, He will destroy them: Neither would the Parable any ways have
answered the End, for which it is alleged, if these men had not been in a
Capacity to have done good; yea, such was their Capacity, that Christ says in
the Prophet, What could I have done more? So that it is more than manifest,
that by this Parable Repeated in three sundry Evangelists, Christ holds forth
his Long-suffering toward men and their Wickedness; to whom means of Salvation
being afforded, do nevertheless Resist to their own Condemnation. To these also
are parallel these Scriptures, Prove. 1.24 -- 26. Jer. 18.9, 10. Matthew. 18.32 --
34. Acts 13.46.

Lastly: That there is a Day of Visitation given to the Wicked, wherein they
might have been Saved, and which being Expired, they are shut out from
Salvation, appears evidently by Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem expressed
in Three sundry places, Matthew. 23.37. Luke 13.34. and And when he was come
near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, Christ's Lamentation over Jerusalem.
saying; If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
that belong to thy peace: but now they are hid from thine eyes! Than which,
nothing can be said more Evident to prove our Doctrine. For first he
insinuates, that there was a Day, wherein the Inhabitants of Jerusalem might
have known those things, that belonged to their Peace. Secondly, that during
that Day he was willing to have gathered them, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickens: A familiar Example, yet very significative in this case; which shows,
that the Offer of Salvation made unto them was not in vain on his part; but as
really, and with as great Cheerfulness and Willingness, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens. Such as is the love and care of the hen toward her brood; such is
the Care of Christ to gather lost men and women, to Redeem them out of their
corrupt and degenerate state. Thirdly; That because they Refused, the things
belonging to their Peace were hid from their Eyes: Why were they hid? because
ye would not suffer me to gather you; ye would not see those things, that are
good for you in the season of God's Love toward you; and therefore now, that
Day being Expired, ye cannot see them: and for a further Judgment, God suffers
you to be hardened in Unbelief.

God hardens, when?
So it is after real Offer of Mercy and Salvation Rejected, that God hardens
men's hearts, and not before. Thus that saying is verified, To him that has,
shall be given, and from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that
which he has. This may seem a Riddle; yet is according to this Doctrine,
easily solved. He has not, because he has lost the season of using it; and so
to him it is now, as nothing: for Christ uses this Expression Matthew 25.26. upon
the occasion of taking the one Talent from the slothful Servant, The One Talent
was sufficient.
and giving it to him, that was diligent; which Talent was no ways Insufficient
of it self, but of the same nature with those given to the others; and
therefore the Lord had reason to exact the Profit of it proportionably, as well
as from the rest. So I say, it is after the Rejecting of the Day of Visitation,
that the Judgment of Obduration is inflicted upon men and women, as Christ
pronounces it upon the Jews, out of Isa. 6.9. which all the Four Evangelists
make mention of; Matthew. 13.14. Mark 4.12. Luke 8.10. John 12.40. And last of
all the Apostle Paul, after he had made offer of the Gospel of Salvation to the
Jews at Rome, pronounces the same, Acts 28.26. after that some believed not;
Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet unto our Fathers, saying, Go
unto this people, and say, hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and
seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: For the Heart of this people is
waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and their Eyes have they
closed, lest they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Heart, and should be Converted, and I should heal them:
So it appears, that God would have them to see, but they closed their Eyes; and
therefore they are justly hardened. Cyrill. Alex.
Of this matter Cyrillus Alexandrinus upon John, l. 6. c. 21. speaks well,
answering to this Objection: But some may say, if Christ be come into the
World, that those that see, may be blinded, their blindness is not to be
Imputed unto them; but it rather seems, that Christ is the Cause of their
blindness, who says, he is come into the World, that those that see, may be
blinded: But (says he) they speak not rationally, who object these things unto
God; and are not afraid to call him the Author of Evil. For, as the sensible
Sun is carried upon our Horizon, that it may Communicate the gift of its
Clearness unto All, and make its Light shine upon all; but if any one Close his
Eyelids, The Cause of Man's Remaining in Darkness, the Closing his Eyes.
or willingly turn himself from the Sun, refusing the benefit of its light, he
wants its Illumination, and remains in Darkness; not through defect of the Sun,
but through his own Fault. So that the true Sun, who came to Inlighten those
that sat in Darkness, and in the region of the shadow of death, visited the
Earth for this cause, that he might Communicate unto all the gift of Knowledge
and Grace, and illuminate the inward Eyes of all by a peculiar splendour: but
many reject this Gift of the Heavenly Light freely given to them, and have
closed the Eyes of their minds, lest so excellent an Illumination or
Irradiation of the Eternal Light should shine unto them. It is not then through
defect of the true Sun; but only through their own Iniquity and Hardness: for
as the wise man says (Wisdom 2.) Their Wickedness has blinded them. From all
which I thus argue; If there was a Day, The Obstinate Jews had a Day.
wherein the Obstinate Jews might have known the things, that belonged to their
Peace, which, because they Rejected it, was hid from their Eyes; If there was a
time, wherein Christ would have gathered them, who, because they Refused, could
not be Gathered; Then such as might have been saved, do actually perish, that
slighted the Day of God's Visitation toward them, wherein they might have been
Converted and Saved:

-- But the First is true: Therefore also the Last.



XXI, Secondly: That, which comes in the Second Place to be proved That whereby
God offers to work this Salvation during the day of every man's Visitation: and
that is, That he has given to every man a measure of saving, sufficient and
supernatural Light and Grace. This I shall do, by God's Assistance, by some
plain and clear Testimonies of the Scripture.

First, From that of John 1.9. That was the true Light, which Inlightneth The
Light enlightening every Man, etc. --
This place does so clearly favor us, that by some it is called The Quakers
Text: for it does evidently Demonstrate our Assertion; so that it scarce needs
either Consequence or Deduction, seeing it self is as a Consequence of two
Propositions Asserted in the former verses, from which it follows, as a
Conclusion in the very Terms of our Faith. The first of these Propositions is;
The Life, that is in him, is the Light of men: the second, The Light shines in
the darkness: And from these two he Infers; And he is the true Light that
lights every man, that comes into the World.

From whence I do in short Observe, that this Divine Apostle calls Christ the
Light of men, and gives us this as one of the Chief Properties, at least
considerably and especially to be Observed by us; seeing hereby, as he is the
Light, and as we walk with him in that Light, which he Communicates to us, we
come to have Fellowship and Communion with him: as the same Apostle says
elsewhere, 1 John 1.7. Secondly, that this Light shines in darkness, though
the darkness comprehend it not. Thirdly, that this true Light inlightneth every
man, -- Not but a certain Number of men, but every man.
that comes into the world. Where the Apostle, being directed by God's Spirit,
has carefully avoided their Captiousness, that would have Restricted this to
any certain Number: Where Every one is, there is None Excluded. Next, should
they be so obstinate (as sometimes they are) as to say, That this [Every man]
is only Every one of the Elect; these words following, Every man, that comes
into the world, would obviate that Objection. So that it is plain, there comes
no man into the World, whom Christ has not Enlightened in some measure, and in
whose dark heart this Light does not shine, though the darkness Comprehend it
not; yet it shines there, and the Nature thereof is to dispell the Darkness,
The Light dispelling Darkness begets Faith.
where men shut not their Eyes upon it. Now, for what End this Light is given,
is Expressed verse. 7. where John is said to Come for a Witness, to bear witness
to the Light, that all men through it might believe, to wit, through the Light
(...) which does very well Agree with (...), as being the nearest Antecedent;
though most Translators have (to make it suit with their own Doctrine) made it
Relate to John, as if all men were to believe through John: For which, as there
is nothing directly in the Text, so it is Contrary to the very Strain of the
Context. For, seeing Christ has lighted Every man with this Light, is it not,
that they may come to believe through it? All could not believe through John,
because all men could not know of John's Testimony; whereas Every man being
Lighted by this, may come there-through to believe. John shined not in the
Darkness; but this Light shines in the Darkness; that having dispelled the
Darkness, it may produce and beget Faith. And lastly: We must believe through
That, and become believers through That, by Walking in which, Fellowship with
God is known and enjoyed: but as has been above observed, it is by Walking in
this Light, that we have this Communion and Fellowship; not by Walking in John:
which were Nonsense. So that this Relative (...) must needs be Referred to the
Light, whereof John bears Witness; that through that Light, wherewith Christ
has lighted every man, all men might come to believe. Seeing then, this Light
is the Light of Jesus Christ, The Light is Supernatural, Saving and Sufficient.
and the Light through which men come to believe, I think it needs not be
doubted, but that it is a supernatural, saving and sufficient Light. If it were
not Supernatural, it could not be properly called the Light of Jesus: for
though all things be his, and of him, and from him; yet those things, which are
Common and Peculiar to our Nature, as being a part of them, we are not said in
so special a manner to have from Christ. Moreover the Evangelist is holding out
to us here the Office of Christ, as Mediator; and the Benefits, which from him,
as such, do Redound unto us.

Secondly, It cannot be any of the Natural Gifts or Faculties of our Soul,
whereby we are said here to be Enlightened, because this Light is said to shine
in the Darkness, and cannot be Comprehended by it. Now, this Darkness is no
other, The Darkness is Man's Natural State and Condition.
but man's Natural Condition and State, in which Natural State he can easily
Comprehend, and does Comprehend those things, that are peculiar and common to
him, as such. That Man in his Natural Condition is called Darkness, see Ephesians.
5.8. For ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord. And in
other places, as Acts 26.18. Col. 1.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. where the Condition of
man in his Natural State is termed Darkness: Therefore I say, this Light cannot
be any natural property or faculty of man's Soul; but a Supernatural Gift and
Grace of Christ.

It is Sufficient and Saving. That all men through it may believe, must needs
be Saving and Sufficient: That, by Walking in which, Fellowship with the
Saints, and the Blood of Christ, which cleanses from all sin, is possessed,
must be Sufficient:

But such is the LIGHT: 1 John 1.7. Therefore, etc.

Moreover; That, which we are Commanded to believe in, that we may become must
be a Supernatural, Sufficient and Saving Principle:

But we are Commanded to believe in this Light: Therefore, etc.



The Proposition cannot be denied. The Assumption is Christ's own words, Joh.
12.36. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the
Children of the Light.

To this they Object, Object.
That by [Light] here is understood Christ's outward Person, in whom he would
have them believe.

That they ought to have believed in Christ, that is, MESSIAH, that was to
come, is not denied; but how they Evince, that Christ intended that here, I see
not: nay, Whether Christ's ou^ward Person was the Light?
the place it self shows the Contrary by these words, While ye have the Light;
and by the verse going before, Walk, while ye have the Light, lest darkness
come upon you: Which words Import, that when that Light, in which they were to
Believe, was Removed, then they should lose the Capacity, or Season of
Believing: Now, this could not be understood of Christ's Person; else the Jews
might have believed in him; and many did savingly believe in him, as all
Christians do at this day, when the person, to wit, his bodily Presence or
outward man is far removed from them. So that this Light, The Light of Christ
is not Christ's outward Man or Person.
in which they were commanded to believe, must be that Inward, Spiritual Light,
that shines in their hearts for a season, even during the Day o^ man's
Visitation; which, while it continues to Call, Invite and Exhort, men are said
to have it, and may believe in it: but when men refuse to believe in it, and
Reject it, then it cease to be a Light to show them the Way; but leaves the
sense of their Unfaithfulness as a Sting in their Conscience: which is a Terror
and Darkness unto them and upon them, in which they cannot know, where to go
neither can work any ways profitably in order to their Salvation. And therefore
to such Rebellious ones, the Day of the Lord is said to be Darkness and not
Light, Amos 5.18.

From whence it appears, that though many Receive not the Light, (as the
Darkness comprehends it not) nevertheless this Saving Light shines in all, that
it may save them. Cyrill. Alex. Upon Joh. lib 1. cap. 11.
Concerning which also Cyrillus Alexandrinus says well, and defends our
Principle: With great Diligence and Watchfulness (says he) does the Apostle
John Endeavor to Anticipate and Prevent the vain Thoughts of men: for there is
here a wonderful Method of sublime things and Overturning of Objections. He had
just now called the Son the true Light, by whom he Affirmed, that every man
coming into the world was Enlightened; yea, that he was in the World, and the
World was made by him. One may then Object, If the Word of God be the Light,
and if this Light Inlighten the hearts of men, and suggest unto men piety and
the understanding of things; if he was always in the World, and was the Creator
or Builder of the World, why was he so long unknown unto the World? It seems
rather to follow, because he was unknown to the World* therefore the World was
not Enlightened by him, nor he totally Light. The World knew him not.
Lest any should so Object, he divinely infers [and the World knew him not.]
Let not the World (says he) Accuse the Word of God and his Eternal Light; but
its own Weakness: for the Son Inlightens, but the Creature Rejects the Grace,
that is given unto it, and abuses the sharpness of Understanding granted it, by
which it might have naturally known God, and, as a Prodigal, has turned its
sight to the Creatures, neglected to go forward, and through Laziness and
Negligence buried the Illumination, and despised this Grace. Which, that the
Disciple of Paul might not do, he was Commanded to Watch: therefore it is to be
imputed to their Wickedness, The Son Inlightens; but Man through Negligence
buries Illumination.
who are Illuminated, and not unto the Light. For as albeit the Sun rises upon
all, yet he that is blind, receives no benefit thereby; none thence can justly
accuse the brightness of the Sun, but will ascribe the Cause of not seeing to
the Blindness: So I judge, it is to be understood of the Only Begotten Son of
God: for he is the true Light, and sends forth his brightness upon all; but
the God of this World, as Paul says, has blinded the minds of those, that
believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4. that the Light of the Gospel shine not unto them. We
say then, that Darkness is come upon men, not because they are altogether
deprived of Light; for Nature retains still the strength of Understanding
divinely given it: but because man is dulled by an Evil Habit, and become
worse, and has made the measure of Grace in some respect to languish. When
therefore the like befalls to man, the Psalmist justly prays, crying, Open mine
Eyes, that I may behold the wonderful things of thy Law. For the Law was given,
that this Light might be kindled in us; the Blearedness of the Eyes of our
minds being wiped away, and the Blindness being removed, which detained us in
our former Ignorance. By these words then the World is accused as ungrateful
and unsensible, not knowing its Author, nor bringing forth the good fruit of
the Illumination: that it may now seem to be said truly of all, which was of
Old said by the Prophet of the Jews; I expected, that it should have brought
forth Grapes, but it brought forth wild Grapes. For the good Fruit of the
Illumination was the Knowledge of the Only Begotten, as a Cluster hanging from
a Fruitful Branch, etc.

From whence it appears, Cyrillus believed, that a Saving Illumination was
given unto all: For as to what he speaks of Nature, he understands it not of
the Common Nature of Man by it self, Grace, no natural Gift.
but of that Nature, which has the strength of Understanding Divinely given
it: for he understands this Universal Illumination to be of the same kind with
that Grace, of which Paul makes mention to Timothy, saying; Neglect not the
Grace, that is in thee. Now it is not to be believed, that Cyrillus was so
Ignorant, as to judge, that Grace to have been some Natural Gift.

Saving Light and Seed, or a Measure of it is given to all, Christ tells
expressly in the Parable of the Sower, Matthew. 13. from verse. 18. Mark 4. and
Luke 8.11. he says, that this Seed sown in those several sorts of Grounds, The
Seed of the Kingdom is sown in several sorts of Grounds without Distinction.
is the Word of the Kingdom, which the Apostle calls the Word of Faith, Romans
10.8. James 1.21. (...), the implanted, ingrafted Word, which is able to save
the Soul: the words themselves declare, that it is that which is Saving in the
nature of it; for in the good Ground it fructified abundantly.

Let us then observe, that this Seed of the Kingdom, this Saving, Supernatural
and Sufficient Word was really sown in the stony, thorny ground, and by the way
side, where it did not profit, but became useless as to these grounds: It was,
I say, the same Seed, that was sown in the good Ground. It is then the fear of
Persecution, and deceitfulness of Riches (as Christ himself interprets the
Parable) which hinders this Seed to grow in the hearts of many: Not but that
in its own Nature it is sufficient, being the same with that, which grows up
and prospers in the hearts of those, who receive it. So that, though all are
not saved by it, yet there is a Seed of Salvation planted and sown, in the
hearts of all by God, which would grow up and redeem the Soul, if it were not
choked and hindered. Concerning this Parable Victor Antiochenus (on Mark 4. as
he is cited by Vossius in his Pelagian History, Book 7.) says, That Our Lord
Christ has liberally sown the Divine Seed of the Word, and proposed it to all,
without respect of persons; and as he that sows, distinguishes not betwixt
ground and ground, but simply casts in the Seed without distinction; so our
Savior has offered the food of the Divine Word, so far as was his part;
although he was not ignorant, what would become of many. Lastly, he so behaved
himself, as he might justly say, What should I have done, than I have not done?
And to this Answers the Parable of the Talents; Matthew. 25. he, that had Two
Talents, was accepted, as well as he, that had Five; because he used them to
his Master's Profit: And he that had One, might have done so; his Talent was of
the same Nature with the rest: it was capable to have proportionably brought
forth its Interest, as the rest. And so though there be not a like proportion
of Grace given to all, to some Five Talents, to some Two Talents, and to some
but One Talent; yet there is given to all that, which is Sufficient: and no
more is required, than according to that, which is given. For unto whomsoever
much is given, from him shall much be required, Luke 12.48. He, that had the
Two Talents, was accepted for giving Four; nothing less than he, that gave the
Ten: so should he also, that gave the One, if he had given Two; and no doubt,
One was capable to have produced Two, as well as Five to have produced Ten, or
Two Four.

XXIII. Thirdly: This Saving Spiritual Light is the Gospel, which In Every
Creature under Heaven; even that very Gospel, whereof Paul was a Minister, Col.
1.23. The Light is the Gospel, the Power of God, preached in every Creature
under Heaven.
For the Gospel is not a mere Declaration of good things, being the Power of
God unto Salvation unto all those that believe, Romans 1.16. though the outward
Declaration of the Gospel be taken sometimes for the Gospel; yet it is but
figuratively, and by a Metonymy. For to speak properly, the Gospel is this
inward Power and Life, which preaches glad Tidings in the hearts of all men,
offering Salvation unto them, and seeking to Redeem them from their Iniquities;
and therefore it is said to be preached In every Creature under Heaven: whereas
there are many Thousands of men and women, to whom the outward Gospel was never
preached. Therefore the Apostle Paul, Romans 1. where he says, The Gospel is the
Power of God unto Salvation, adds, That therein is revealed the Righteousness
of God from Faith to Faith; and also the Wrath of God against such, as hold the
Truth of God in Unrighteousness: for this reason (says he) because that which
may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto them.
Now, that which may be known of God, is known by the Gospel, which was manifest
in them: for those, of whom the Apostle speaks, had no outward Gospel preached
unto them; so that it was by the Inward Manifestation of the Knowledge of God
in them: which is indeed the Gospel preached in man, that the righteousness of
God is revealed from Faith to Faith, that is, it Reveals to the Soul that,
which is just, good and righteous; and that as the Soul receives it and
believes, Righteousness comes more and more to be Revealed from one degree of
Faith to another. For though (as the following verse says) the outward
Creation declares the Power of God; yet that which may be known of him, is
manifest within: by which Inward Manifestation we are made capable to see and
discern the Eternal Power and Godhead in the outward Creation. So, were it not
for this Inward Principle, we could no more understand the Invisible things of
God by the outward, Visible Creation, than a blind man can see and discern the
variety of Shapes and Colors, or judge of the Beauty of the outward Creation.
Therefore he says first, That which may be known of God, is manifest in them,
and in and by that they may read and understand the Power and Godhead in those
things, that are Outward and Visible. And though any might pretend, that the
outward Creation does of it self without any Supernatural or Saving Principle
in the heart, even declare to the natural man, that there is a God; yet what
would such a Knowledge avail, if it did not also Communicate to me, what the
Will of God is, and how I shall do that, The Onward Creation may beget a
Persuasion in man of an Eternal Power and Virtue.
which is acceptable to him? For the outward Creation though it may beget a
Persuasion, that there is some Eternal Power or Virtue, by which the World has
had its Beginning; yet it does not tell me, nor does it Inform me of that which
is just, holy and righteous, how I shall be delivered from my Temptations and
Evil Affections, and come unto Righteousness; that must be from some Inward
Manifestation in my heart: whereas those Gentiles, of whom the Apostle speaks,
knew by that Inward Law and Manifestation of the Knowledge of God in them to
distinguish betwixt Good and Evil; as in the next Chapter appears; of which we
shall speak hereafter. The Prophet Micah speaking of man Indefinitely, or in
General, declares this, Mich. 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good:
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly, and to love Mercy,
and to walk Humbly with thy God? He does not say, God Requires; till he has
first assured, that he has showed unto them. Now, because this is showed unto
all men, and manifest in them; therefore (says the Apostle) Is the Wrath of
God revealed against them, for that they hold the Truth in Unrighteousness,
that is, the measure of Truth, the Light, the Seed, the Grace in them; for that
they Hide the Talent in the Earth, that is, in the Earthly and Unrighteous part
in their hearts, and suffer it not to bring forth fruit, but to be choked with
the sensual Cares of this Life, the Fear of Reproach, and the Deceitfulness of
Riches: as by the Parables abovementioned does appear. But the Apostle Paul
opens and illustrates this matter yet more, Romans 10. where he declares, That
the Word, which he preached (now the Word, which he preached and the Gospel,
which he preached and whereof he was a Minister, is one and the same) is not
far off, but nigh in the heart and in the mouth: This Divine Preacher (the Word
nigh) has sounded in the Ears and Hearts of all men.
which done, he frames (as it were) the Objection of our Adversaries in Verse.
12, 15. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? how shall
they hear without a Preacher? This he answers Verse 18. saying; But (I say)
have they not heard? yes verily, their Sound went forth into all the Earth, and
their Words unto the End of the World: insinuating, that this Divine Preacher
has sounded in the Ears and Hearts of all men; for of the outward Apostles
that saying was not true, neither then, nor many hundred years after: yea, for
ought we know, there may be yet great and spacious Nations and Kingdoms, who
never have heard of Christ, nor his Apostles, as outwardly. This Inward and
Powerful Word of God is yet more fully described in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
c. 4. v. 12, 13. For the Word of God is quick* and sharper than any two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the heart.
The Virtues of this Spiritual Word are here enumerated: It is Quick, because it
Searches and Tries the hearts of all; no man's Heart is Exempt from it: for the
Apostle gives this Reason of its being so in the following Verse; Before whom
all things are manifest.
But all things are naked and opened unto the Eyes of him, with whom we have to
do; and there is not any Creature, that is not manifest in his sight. Though
this ultimately and mediately be Referred to God; yet nearly and immediately it
relates to the Word or Light, which, as has been before proved, is in the
hearts of all: else it had been Improper to have brought it in here. The
Apostle shows, And every Thought and Intent of the heart.
how every Intent and Thought of the heart is discerned by the Word of God,
because all things are naked before God; which imports nothing else, but it is
in and by this Word, whereby God sees and discerns man's Thoughts; and so must
needs be in all men, because the Apostle says, There is no Creature, that is
not manifest in his sight. The Faithful Witness.
This then is that faithful Witness and Messenger of God, that bears Witness
for God and for his Righteousness in the hearts of all men: for he has not
left man without a Witness, Acts 14.17. and he is said to be given for a
Witness to the people, Isa. 55.4. And as this Word bears Witness for God, so
it is not placed in men only to Condemn them; for as he is given for a Witness,
so (says the Prophet) he is given for a Leader, and a Commander. A Leader and
Commander.
The Light is given, that all through it may believe, Joh 1.7. For Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by this Word of God, which is placed in man's Heart
both to be a Witness for God, and to be a Mean to bring man to God through
Faith and Repentance. It is therefore powerful, that it may divide betwixt the
Soul and the Spirit: It is like a Two-edged-sword, A Two-edged Sword.
that it may cut off Iniquity from him, and separate betwixt the precious and
the vile. And because man's heart is cold and hard, like Iron naturally,
therefore has God placed this Word in him, which is said to be like a Fire, A
Fire and a Hammer.
and like a Hammer, Jer. 23.29. that like as by the heat of the Fire the Iron,
of its own nature Cold, is warmed, and by the strength of the Hammer is softened
and framed, according to the mind of the Worker; so the Cold and Hard heart of
man is by the virtue and powerfulness of this Word of God near, and in the
heart, as it resists not, warmed and softened, and receives a Heavenly and
Celestial Impression and Image. The most part of the Fathers have spoken at
large touching this Word, Seed and Light, and Saving Voice calling all unto
Salvation, and able to save.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, lib. 2. Stromat. Clem. Alex.
The Divine Word has cried, calling all, knowing well those, that will not
obey. And yet because it is in our power either to obey, or not to obey, that
none may have a pretext of Ignorance, it has made a righteous Call, and
requires but that, which is according to the ability and strength of every
one. The self-same, in his Warning to the Gentiles: For as (says he) that
Heavenly Ambassador of the Lord, the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has
Appeared unto all, etc. This is the New Song Coming and Manifestation of the
Word, which now shows it self in us, which was in the beginning, and was first
of all. And again; Hear therefore ye, who are afar off, hear ye, who are near,
the Word is hid from none, the Light is common to all, and shines to all.
There is no darkness in the Word, The Gathering unto the One and alone Love.
let us hasten to Salvation, to the New birth, that we being many, may be
gathered unto the One alone Love. Ibid. he says; That there is Infused into
all, but principally into those, that are trained up in Doctrine, a certain
Divine Influence, (...). And again he speaks concerning the Innate Witness
worthy of belief, which of it self does plainly choose that which is most
honest. And again he says, That It is not Impossible to come unto the Truth,
and lay hold of it; seeing it is most near to us, in our own Houses (as the
most wise Moses declares) living in three parts of us, viz. in our Hands, in
our Mouth, and in our Heart, this (says he) is a most true badge of the Truth:
which is also fulfilled in three things, namely, in Counsel, in Action, in
Speaking. And again he says also unto the Unbelieving Nations; Receive Christ,
receive Light, receive Sight, to the end thou may rightly know both God and
Man. The Inlightning Word.
The Word, that has enlightened us, is more pleasant than Gold, and the Stone
of great value. And again he says; Let us receive the Light, that we may
receive God; let us receive the Light, that we may be the Scholars of the Lord.
And again he says to those Infidel Nations, The Heavenly Spirit helps thee
Resist and Flee Pleasure. Again, Lib. Strom. 5. he says; God forbid, that man
be not a partaker of Divine Acquaintance, (...), who in Genesis is said to be a
partaker of Inspiration. And Paed. lib. 1* cap 3. There is (says he) some
lovely and some desirable thing in man, which is called the In-breathing of
God, (...). The same man lib. 10. Strom. directs men unto the Light and Water
in themselves, who have the Eye of the Soul darkened or dimmed through Evil
up-bringing and Learning: let them Enter-in unto their own domestic Light, or
unto the Light, which is in their own house, (...), unto the Truth, which
manifests accurately and clearly these things, that have been written.

Just. Martyr.
Justin Martyr in his First Apology says, That the Word, which was and is, is
in all, even that very same Word, which through the Prophets foretold things to
come.

The Writer of the Calling of the Gentiles says, lib. 1. cap. 2. We Believe
according to the same (viz. Scripture) and most religiously Confess, Auth. de
Voc. Gent.
that God was never wanting in care to the generality of men: who although he
did lead by particular Lessons a people gathered to himself unto Godliness, yet
he withdrew from no Nation of men the Gifts of his own Goodness, that they
might be Convinced, that they had received the Words of the Prophets and Legal
Commands in services and testimonies of the First Principles. Cap. 7. he says,
That he believes, that the help of Grace has been wholly withdrawn from no
man. Lib. 2. cap. 1. Because, albeit Salvation is far from sinners, yet there
is nothing void of the presence and virtue of his Salvation. Cap. 2. But seeing
none of that people, over whom was set both the Doctrines, were justified, but
through Grace by the Spirit of Faith, who can question, but that they, who of
whatsoever Nation, in whatsoever Times could please God, were ordered by the
Spirit of the Grace of God: which albeit in fore-time it was more sparing and
hid, yet denied it self to no Ages; being in Virtue one, in Quantity different,
in Counsel unchangeable, in Operation multifarious.

Third Proposition, which ought to be proved, is: That it is by this Light, or
Grace, that God works the Salvation of all men; and many come to partake of the
benefit of Christ's Death and Salvation purchased by him. God's Salvation
wrought by the Light in all.
By the Inward and Effectual Operations of which, as many Heathens have come to
be partakers of the Promises, who were not of the Seed of Abraham after the
flesh; so may some now, to whom God has rendered the Knowledge of the History
Impossible, come to be saved by Christ. Having already proved, that Christ has
died for all; that there is a Day of Visitation given to all, during which
Salvation is possible unto them; and that God has actually given a measure of
Saving Grace and Light unto all, preached the Gospel to and in them, and placed
the Word of Faith in their hearts* the matter of this Proposition may seem to
be proved: Yet shall I a little (for the further satisfaction of all, who
desire to know the Truth, and hold it as it is Jesus) prove this from two or
three clear Scripture-Testimonies, and Remove the most-Common, as well as the
more-strong Objections usually brought against it.

Our Theme then has two parts; First, That those, that have the and Christ
outwardly preached unto them, are not saved, but by the working of the Grace
and Light in their hearts.

Secondly, That by the working and operations of this many have been, saved, to
whom the Gospel has never been outwardly preached, and who are utterly
ignorant of the outward History of Christ.

As to the First, though it be granted by most, yet because it is more words,
deeds (the more full discussing of which will fall-in in the next Proposition
concerning Justification) I shall prove it in few words. And first from the
words of Christ to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.3. Verily, verily I say unto thee, except
a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: Now this Birth comes
not by the outward preaching of the Gospel, The New Birth (or Regeneration)
comes not by the Outward Knowledge of Christ*
or knowledge of Christ, or historical Faith in him; seeing many have that, and
firmly believe it, who are never thus Renewed. The Apostle Paul also goes so
far, while he Commends the Necessity and Excellency of this New Creation, as in
a certain respect to lay aside the outward Knowledge of Christ, or the
Knowledge of him after the flesh, in these words, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. Wherefore
henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore if any man
be in Christ, he is a New Creature, old things are passed away; behold all
things are become new. Whence it manifestly appears, that he makes the
Knowledge of Christ after the flesh but as it were the Rudiments, which young
Children learn; which, after they are become better Scholars, are of less use
to them, because they have, and possess the very Substance of those first
Precepts in their minds. As all Comparisons halt in some part, so shall I not
affirm, this to hold in every respect; yet so far will this hold, that as
those, that go no further than the Rudiments, are never to be accounted
Learned, and as they grow beyond these things, so they have less use of them:
even so such, as go no further than the outward Knowledge of Christ, shall
never Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. But such as come to know this New Birth,
to be in Christ indeed, to be a New Creature, to have Old things past away, and
all things become New, may safely say with the Apostle; Though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Now, -- But by
the Work of Light and Grace in the heart.
this New Creature proceeds from the Work of this Light and Grace in the heart:
It is that Word, which we speak of, that is sharp and piercing, that Implanted
Word able to save the Soul, by which this Birth is begotten; and therefore
Christ has purchased unto us this Holy Seed, that thereby this Birth might be
brought forth in us: which is therefore also called The Manifestation of the
Spirit, given to every one to profit withal; for it is written, that by One
Spirit we are all baptized into One Body. And the Apostle Peter also ascribes
this Birth to this Seed and Word of God, which we have so much declared of,
saying; 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again not of Corruptible Seed, but of
Incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever. Though
then this Seed be small in its Appearance, so that Christ Compares it to a
grain of Mustard Seed, which is the least of all seeds, Matthew. 13.31, 32. and
that it be hid in the earthy part of man's heart; yet therein is Life and
Salvation toward the sons of men wrapped up: which comes to be Revealed, as they
give way to it. The Kingdom of God is in the Seed, in the hearts of all men.
And in this Seed in the hearts of all men is the Kingdom of God, as in
Capacity to be produced, or rather Exhibited, according as it receives depth,
is nourished, and not choked: Hence Christ says, that the Kingdom of God was
in the very Pharisees, Luke 17.20, 21. who did Oppose and Resist him, and were
justly accounted as Serpents, and a generation of Vipers. Now the Kingdom of
God could be no other ways in them, than in a Seed, even as the Thirty-fold and
the Hundredfold is wrapped up in a small Seed, lying in a barren ground, which
springs not forth, because it wants Nourishment: and as the whole body of a
great Tree is wrapped up potentially in the Seed of the Tree, and so is brought
forth in due season; and as the Capacity of a Man or a Woman is not only in a
Child, but even in the very Embryo; even so the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, yea
Jesus Christ himself, Christ within, who is the hope of glory, and becomes
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, is in Every man and
woman's heart, in that little Incorruptible Seed, ready to be brought forth, as
it is Cherished and Received in the love of it. For there can be no men worse,
than those rebellious and unbelieving Pharisees were; and yet this Kingdom was
thus within them, and they were directed to look for it there: so it is neither
lo here, nor lo there, in this or the other Observation that this is known; but
as this Seed of God in the heart is minded and entertained: And certainly,
hence it is (even because this Light, Seed and Grace, that appears in the heart
of man, is so little regarded, and so much overlooked) that so few know Christ
brought forth in them. Calvinists, Papists, Arminians and Socinians Errors,
denying the Light to be Saving.
The one sort, to wit, the Calvinists, they look upon Grace as an Irresistible
Power, and therefore neglect and despise this Eternal Seed of the Kingdom in
their hearts, as a low, insufficient, useless thing, as to their Salvation. On
the other hand the Papists, Arminians and Socinians, they go about to set up
their natural Power and Will, with one Consent denying, that this little Seed,
this small Appearance of the Light is that Supernatural, Saving Grace of God
given to Every man to save him: And so upon them is verified that saying of the
Lord Jesus Christ, This is the Condemnation of the World, that Light is come
into the World, but men love Darkness rather than Light (the reason is added)
because their Deeds are Evil. All Confess, they feel this; but they will not
have it to be of that virtue: Some will have it to be Reason; some a Natural
Conscience; some Certain Relics of God's Image, that remained in Adam: So
Christ, as he met with Opposition from all kinds of Professors in his Outward
Appearance, so does he now in his Inward. It was the Meanness of his outward
Man, The Meanness of Christ's Appearance in the flesh.
that made many despise him, saying; Is not this the Son of the Carpenter? are
not his Brethren and Sisters among us? Is not this a Galilean? and came there
ever a Prophet out of Galilea? and such like Reasonings. For they expected an
Outward Deliverer, who, as a Prince, should deliver them with great Ease from
their Outward Enemies; and not such a MESSIAH, as should be Crucified
shamefully, and as it were, lead them into many Sorrows, Troubles and
Afflictions. So the Meanness of this Appearance makes the Crafty Jesuits, the
pretended Rational Socinians, and the Learned Arminians overlook it; desiring
rather something, that they might exercise their Subtilty, Reason and Learning
about, and use the Liberty of their own Wills. And the Secure Calvinists, they
would have a Christ to Save them without any Trouble, to destroy all their
Enemies for them without them, and nothing, or little within; while they mean
while be at Ease to live in their Sins secure. Whence, when all is well
Examined, the Cause is plain, it is, because their deeds are evil, that with
one Consent they Reject this Light: The Nature of the Light.
for it Checks the Wisest of them all, and the Learnedest of them all in
secret, it Reproves them; neither can all their Logic silence it, nor can the
securest among them stop its Voice from Crying and Reproving them within, for
all their Confidence in the outward Knowledge of Christ, or of what he has
Suffered outwardly for them. For as has been often said, in a Day it strives
with all, wrestles with all; and it is the Unmortified Nature, the first Nature,
the old Adam yet alive in the Wisest, in the Learnedest, in the most-zealous
for the outward Knowledge of Christ, that denies this, that despises it, that
shuts it out to their own Condemnation. They come all under this Description,
Every one, that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest
his deeds should be Reproved, Joh. 3.20. so that it may be said now, and we can
say from a true and certain Experience, as it was said of old, Psalm. 118.22.
Matthew. 21.42. Mark 12.10. Luke 20.17. Acts 4.11. The Stone, which the Builders
of all kinds have Rejected, the same is become unto us the Head of the Corner.
Glory to God for ever! who has chosen us a First Fruits to himself in this
day, wherein he is arisen to plead with the Nations; and therefore has sent us
forth to preach this Everlasting Gospel unto all, Christ nigh to all, the Light
in all, the Seed sown in the Hearts of all, that men may come and apply their
minds to it. And we Rejoice, that we have been made to lay down our Wisdom and
Learning (such of us, as have had some of it) and our Carnal Reasoning, to
Learn of Jesus; and sit down at the feet of Jesus in our hearts, and hear him,
who there makes all things manifest, and reproves all things by his Light, Ephesians.
5.13. The Wise and Learned in the Notion, Crucifiers of Christ.
For many are Wise and Learned in the Notion, in the letter of the Scripture,
as the Pharisees were, and can speak much of Christ, and plead strongly against
Infidels, Turks and Jews, and it may be also against some Heresies; who in the
mean time are Crucifying Christ in the small Appearance of his Seed in their
Hearts. O! better were it to be Stripped naked of all, to account it as dross and
dung, and become a Fool for Christ's sake, thus knowing him to Teach thee in
thy heart, so as thou may witness him Raised there, feel the virtue of his
Cross there, and say with the Apostle, I glory in nothing, save in the Cross of
Christ, whereby I am Crucified to the World, and the World unto me: This is
better, than to write Thousands of Commentaries, and to preach many Sermons.
And it is thus to preach Christ, and direct people to his Pure Light in the
Heart, None are saved by the Knowledge of the History, but by the Operation of
the Light of Christ in the Mystery.
that God has raised us up; and for which the Wise Men of this World account
us Fools, because by the Operation of this Cross of Christ in our hearts, we
have denied our own Wisdom and Wills in many things, and have forsaken the vain
Worships, Fashions and Customs of this World. For these diverse Centuries the
World has been full of a dry, fruitless and barren Knowledge of Christ,
feeding upon the husk, and neglecting the kernel; following after the shadow,
but strangers to the Substance. Hence the Devil matters not, how much of that
Knowledge abounds; provided, he can but possess the heart, and rule in the
Will, Crucify the Appearance of Christ there, and so keep the Seed of the
Kingdom from taking Root. For he has led them abroad, lo here, and lo there,
and has made them wrestle in a false Zeal so much one against another,
contending for this outward Observation, Contentions about outward Observations
and Lo-here's etc.
and for the other outward Observation, seeking Christ in this and the other
External thing, as in Bread and Wine; contending one with another, how he is
there? while some will have him to be present therein this way, and some the
other way; and some in Scriptures, in Books, in Societies and Pilgrimages and
Merits. But some Confiding in an External, Barren Faith, think all is well, if
they do but firmly believe, that he died for their sins past, present and to
come; while in the mean time Christ lies Crucified and Slain, and is daily
Resisted and Gainsaid in his Appearance in their hearts. The Call of God to
blinded Christendom.
Thus from a sense of this Blindness and Ignorance, that is come over
Christendom, it is, that we are led and moved of the Lord so constantly and
frequently to Call all, Invite all, Request all to turn to the Light in them,
to mind the Light in them, to believe in Christ, as he is in them: And that in
the Name, Power and Authority of the Lord, not in School-Arguments and
Distinctions (for which many of the Wise men of this World account us Fools and
Madmen) we do Charge and Command them to lay aside their Wisdom, to come down
out of that proud, airy brain-knowledge, and to stop that mouth, how Eloquent
soever to the worldly Ear it may appear; and to be silent, and sit down as in
the Dust, and to mind the Light of Christ in their own Consciences: Which, if
it be minded, they would find as a sharp, two-edged Sword in their hearts, and
as a fire and a hammer, that would knock against and burn up all that Carnal,
gathered, natural Stuff, and make the stoutest of them all Tremble, and become
Quakers indeed. Which those, that come not to feel now, and kiss not the Son,
while the day lasts, but harden their hearts, will feel to be a certain
Truth, when it is too late. To conclude, as says the Apostle, All ought to
Examine themselves, whether they be in the Faith indeed; and Try their own
selves: for except Jesus be in them, they are certainly Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5.

Secondly. That which remains now to be proved, is, That by the operation of
this Light and Seed some have been, and may yet be saved, to whom the Gospel is
not outwardly preached, nor the History of Christ outwardly known. That many by
the Light may be saved, that have not the outward Knowledge of Christ.
To make this the easier, we have already shown, how that Christ has died for
all men; and consequently these are Enlightened by Christ, and have a measure of
Saving Light and Grace: yea, that the Gospel (though not in any outward
Dispensation) is preached to them, and in them; so that thereby they are stated
in a possibility of Salvation. From which I may thus Argue: Gospel, the Power
of God unto Salvation is manifest, they may be Saved, whatever Outward
Knowledge they want:

But this Gospel is preached in Every Creature, in which is certainly
comprehended many, that have not the Outward Knowledge;

Therefore of those, many may be saved.



But to those Arguments, by which it has been proved, that all men have a
measure of Saving Grace, I shall add one, and that very observable, not yet
mentioned, viz. that excellent saying of the Apostle Paul to Titus, c. 2. v.
11. The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching
us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World: Than which there can be nothing
more clear, it comprehending both the parts of the Controversy. First: It
Testifies, that it is no Natural Principle or Light; but says plainly, it
brings Salvation. Secondly: It says not, that it has appeared to a few; but
unto all men. The Fruit of it declares also, how Efficacious it is; seeing it
Comprehends the Whole Duty of Man: It both teaches us first, to forsake Evil,
The Saving Grace of God Teaching the Whole Duty of Man.
to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; and then it teaches us our Whole Duty.
First, To live Soberly: that comprehends Temperance, Chastity, Meekness, and
those things, that relate unto a Man's Self. Secondly, Righteously: that
Comprehends Equity, Justice and Honesty, and those things, which relate to our
Neighbors. And lastly, Godly: which Comprehends Piety, Faithfulness and
Devotion; which are the Duties relating to God. So then there is nothing
required of man, or needful to man, which this Grace Teaches not. Yet I have
heard a public Preacher (one of those, that are accounted Zealous men) to
Evite the strength of this Text, deny this Grace to be saving, and say; It was
only intended of Common Favors and Graces such as is the heat of the Fire and
outward light of the Sun: Such is the Darkness and Ignorance of those, that
Oppose the Truth! whereas the Text says expressly, that it is Saving. Others,
that cannot deny, but it is saving, Allege; This [All] comprehends not every
Individual, but only all kinds: The Absurdity of our Adversaries Comment upon
the word All, denying Grace to be Saving. Tit. 2.11.
But is a bare Negation sufficient to overturn the strength of a positive
Assertion? If the Scriptures may be so abused, what so Absurd, as may not be
pleaded for from them? or what so Manifest, as may not be denied? But we have
not reason to be staggered by their denying, so long as our Faith is found in
express Terms of the Scripture; they may as well seek to persuade us, that we
do not Intend that, which we Affirm, (though we know the Contrary) as make us
believe, that when the Apostle speaks forth our Doctrine in plain words, yet he
intends theirs; which is the quite Contrary. And indeed, can there be any thing
more Absurd, than to say, where the word is plainly [All,] few is only
Intended? For they will not have [ All] taken here for the greater number.
Indeed, as the Case may be sometimes, by a Figure [All] may be taken of Two
Numbers for the greater Number; but let them show us, if they can, either in
Scripture, or Profane or Ecclesiastical Writings, that any man, that wrote
sense, did ever use the word [ All] to express of two Numbers the lesser?
whereas they Affirm, that the far less Number have received Saving Grace; and
yet will they have the Apostle by [ All] to have signified so. Though this
might suffice; yet to put it further beyond all question, I shall Instance
another saying of the same Apostle, that we may use him as his own Commentator,
Romans 5.18. Therefore as by the Offense of One Judgment came upon all men to
Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of One, the Free Gift came upon all
men to Justification of life. Here no man of reason, except he will be
obstinately Ignorant, will deny, but this similitive particle [as] makes the [
all] which goes before, and comes after, to be of one and the same Extent: Or
else let them show us one Example, either in Scripture, or elsewhere among men,
that speak proper Language, where it is otherwise? We must then either Affirm,
that this Loss, which leads to Condemnation, has not come upon all; or say
that this Free Gift is come upon all by Christ. Whence I thus Argue; First: If
all men have received a Loss from Adam, which leads to Condemnation, then all
men have received a Gift from Christ, Justification.

But the First is true: Therefore also the Last.



From all which it naturally follows, that All men, even the Heathens may be
saved: for Christ was given as a Light to inlighten the Gentiles, Isa. 49.6.
Now to say, that though they might have been saved, yet none were; Even the
Heathens may be saved by the Light.
is to Judge too Uncharitably. I see not, what Reason can be alleged for it;
yea, though it were granted (which never can be) that none of the Heathens were
saved; it will not from thence follow, that they could not have been saved, or
that none now in their Condition can be saved. For A non esse ad non posse non
datur sequela, i. e. That Consequence is false, that Concludes, a thing cannot
be, because it is not.

Object.
But if it be Objected (which is the great Objection) That there is no Name
under heaven, by which Salvation is known, but by the Name JESUS: Therefore
they, not knowing this, cannot be saved.

I Answer: Though they know it not outwardly, yet if they know it inwardly,
virtue and power of it, the Name Jesus indeed, (which signifies a Savior) to
free them from Sin and Iniquity in their Hearts, they are saved by it. I
confess, there is no other Name to be Saved by; The Literal Knowledge of Christ
is not Saving, but the Real, Experimental.
but Salvation lies not in the Literal, but in the Experimental Knowledge:
albeit those, that have the literal Knowledge, are not saved by it, without
this Real, Experimental Knowledge. Yet those, that have the Real Knowledge, may
be saved without the External: as by the Arguments hereafter brought will more
appear. For if the outward, distinct Knowledge of him, by whose means I receive
Benefit, were necessary for me, before I could reap any Fruit of it; then by
the Rule of Contraries it would follow, that I could receive no Hurt, without I
had also the distinct Knowledge of him, that had occasioned it: whereas
Experience proves the Contrary. How many are Injured by Adam's Fall, that know
Nothing of ever there being such a Man in the World? or of his Eating the
Forbidden Fruit? why may they not then be saved by the Gift and Grace of Christ
in them, making them righteous and holy, though they know not distinctly, how
that was purchased unto them by the death and sufferings of Jesus, that was
Crucified at Jerusalem; especially seeing, God has made that Knowledge simply
Impossible to them? As many men are killed by poison Infused into their Meat,
though they neither know, what the poison was, nor who Infused it; so also on
the other hand, how many are cured of their diseases by good Remedies, who know
not, how the Medicine is prepared, what the Ingredients are, nor often times
who made it? The like may also hold in Spiritual things, as we shall hereafter
prove.

The Outward Knowledge not Essential to Salvation: Instance Infants and Deaf
persons.
XXVI. First. If there were such an Absolute Necessity for this Outward
Knowledge, that it were even of the Essentials of Salvation, then none could be
Saved without it; whereas our Adversaries deny not, but readily Confess, that
many Infants and deaf Persons are saved without it: So that here they break
that general Rule, and make Salvation possible without it. Neither can they
Allege, that it is, because such are free from sin; seeing they also Affirm,
that all Infants, because of Adam's sin deserve Eternal Condemnation, as being
really guilty in the sight of God: and of Deaf people it is not to be doubted;
and Experience shows us, that they are subject to many Common Iniquities, as
well as other men.

That these Children are the Children of Believing Parents.

Anws.
What then? They will not say, that they Transmit Grace to their Children. Do
they not Affirm, that the Children of Believing Parents are guilty of Original
Sin, and deserve death, as well as others? How prove they, that that makes up
the Loss of all Explicit Knowledge?

Object. 2.
If they say; Deaf people may be made sensible of the Gospel by signs.

Answ.
All the signs cannot give them any Explicit Knowledge of the History of the
Death, Sufferings and Resurrection of Christ. For what Signs can Inform a deaf
man, That the Son of God took on him Man's Nature? was born of a Virgin, and
suffered under Pontius Pilate?

And if they should further Allege, That they are within the Bosom of the
Visible Church, and partakers of the Sacraments;

All that gives no Certainty of Salvation: for as the Protestants Confess, they
Confer not Grace ex opere operato. And will not they acknowledge, many are in
the bosom of the Church, who are visibly no Members of it? But if this Charity
be Extended toward such, who are, where the Gospel is preached, so that they
may be judged Capable of Salvation, because they are under a simple
Impossibility of distinctly knowing the Means of Salvation; what reason can be
alleged, A Chinees or Indian excusable for not knowing the History of the
Death of Christ, etc.
why the like Charity may not be had to such, as though they can hear, yet are
under a simple Impossibility of hearing, because it is not spoken unto them? Is
not a man in China or in India as much to be Excused for not knowing a thing,
which he never heard of, as a deaf man here, who cannot hear? For as the deaf
Man is not to be blamed, because God has been pleased to suffer him to lie
under this Infirmity; so is the Chinees or the Indian as Excusable, because God
has withheld from him the Opportunity of Hearing. He that cannot Hear a
thing, as being necessarily Absent, and he that cannot Hear it, as being
naturally deaf, are to be placed in the same Category.

Secondly. This manifestly appears by that saying of Peter, Acts 10.34. Of a
truth I perceive, that God is no Respecter of persons; But in every Nation, he
that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. Peter was
before liable to that Mistake, that the rest of the Jews were in; judging, that
all were Unclean, except themselves, and that no man could be saved, except
they were proselyted to their Religion, and Circumcised: But God showed Peter
other ways in a Vision, and taught him to Call nothing Common or Unclean. And
therefore seeing, God regards the prayers of Cornelius, a Stanger to the Law.
that God regarded the prayers of Cornelius, who was a stranger to the Law and
to Jesus Christ, as to the outward; yet Peter saw, that God had accepted him;
and he is said to fear God, before he had this outward Knowledge; therefore
Peter Concludes, that every one, that in every Nation, without respect of
persons, fears God, and works Righteousness, is Accepted of him. So he
makes the Fear of God and the working of Righteousness, and not an outward,
Historical Knowledge, the Qualification: They then, that have this, wherever
they be, they are saved. Now we have already proved, that to Every man that
Grace is given, whereby he may live God-likely and Righteously; and we see,
that by this Grace Cornelius did so, and was accepted; and his prayers came up
for a Memorial before God, before he had this outward Knowledge. Also was not
Job a perfect and upright man, that feared God and eschewed evil? Who taught
Job this? From what Scripture did Job learn his Excellent Knowledge?
how knew Job Adam's Fall? And from what Scripture learned he that Excellent
Knowledge he had, and that Faith, by which he knew, his Redeemer lived? (for
many make him as Old as Moses) Was not this by an Inward Grace in the heart?
was it not that Inward Grace, that taught Job to eschew Evil, and to fear God?
and was it not by the Workings thereof that he became a Just and Upright man?
how does he Reprove the Wickedness of men, Chap 24? and after he has numbered
up their Wickedness, does he not Condemn them ( verse. 13.) for rebelling
against this Light? for not knowing the Way thereof, nor abiding in the Paths
thereof? It appears then, Job believed, that men had a Light; and that because
they Rebelled against it, therefore they knew not its Way, and abode not in its
Paths: even as the Pharisees, who had the Scriptures, are said to Err, not
knowing the Scriptures. And also Job's Friends, though in some things wrong,
Job's Friends, their Excellent Sayings.
yet who taught them all those Excellent Sayings and Knowledge, which they had?
Did not God give it them in order to save them? or was it merely to Condemn
them? Who taught Elihu, That the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding? That the Spirit of God made him, and the Breath of the Almighty
gave him life? And did not the Lord accept a Sacrifice for them? And who dare
say, that they are Damned? But further, the Apostle puts this Controversy out
of doubt; for if we may believe his plain Assertions, he tells us Rom 2. That
the Heathens did the things contained in the Law. From whence I thus Argue: In
every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is Accepted:

Many of the Heathens feared God, and wrought Righteousness;

Therefore They were Accepted.

The Minor is proved from the Example of Cornelius: But I shall further prove
it thus; He that does the things contained in the Law, fears God, and works
Righteousness: But --

The Heathens did the things contained in the Law: Therefore --

The Heathens feared God, and wrought Righteousness.



Can there be any thing more Clear? For if to do the things contained in the
Law be not to Fear God, and work Righteousness, ^hen what can be said to do so,
seeing the Apostle calls the Law^ spiritual, holy, just and good? But this
appears manifestly by another Medium taken out of the same Chapter, verse. 13.
So that nothing can be more Clear. The words are; The doers of the Law shall be
justified: From which I thus Argue, without Adding any word of my own; The
doers of the Law shall be justified: But --

The Gentiles do the things contained in the Law.



The Gentiles Justified in doing the Law.
All, that know but a Conclusion, do easily see, what follows from these Express
Words of the Apostle. And indeed, He through that whole Chapter labors, as if
he were Contending now with our Adversaries to Confirm this Doctrine, verse. 9,
10, 11. Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of man, that does evil, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile: For there is no respect of persons with
God. Where the Apostle clearly homologates the Sentence of Peter
beforementioned, and shows, that Jew and Gentile, or as he himself explains in
the following verses, both they that have an outward Law, and they that have
none, when they do good, shall be Justified. And to put us out of doubt, in the
very following verses he tells, That the doers of the Law are Justified; and
that the Gentiles did the Law. So that except we think, he spoke not what he
intended, we may safely Conclude, that such Gentiles were Justified, and did
partake of that honor, glory and peace, which comes upon Every one that does
good; even the Gentiles, that are without the Law, when they work good: seeing
with God there is no Respect of persons. So as we see, that it is not the
having of the Outward Knowledge, that does save, without the Inward; so neither
does the Want of it to such, to whom God has made it Impossible, who have the
Inward, bring Condemnation. And many, that have wanted the Outward, have had a
Knowledge of this Inwardly, by virtue of that Inward Grace and Light given to
every man, working in them, by which they forsook Iniquity, and became Just and
Holy, as is above proved; who, though they knew not the History of Adam's Fall,
yet were sensible in themselves of the Loss, that came by it, Many wanting the
History were sensible of the Loss by Adam, and Salvation come by Christ in
themselves.
feeling their Inclinations to sin, and the Body of Sin in them: and though
they knew not the Coming of Christ, yet were sensible of that Inward Power and
Salvation, which came by him, even before as well as since his Appearance in
the flesh. For I question, whether these men can prove, that all the Patriarchs
and Fathers before Moses had a distinct Knowledge either of the one or the
other, or that they knew the History of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
and of Adam's Eating the forbidden Fruit; far less, that Christ should be Born
of a Virgin, should be Crucified, and treated in the manner he was. For it is
justly to be believed, that what Moses wrote of Adam and of the first times,
was not by Tradition, but by Revelation: yea, we see, that not only after the
Writing of Moses, but even of David and all the Prophets, who prophesied so
much of Christ, how little the Jews, How little the Jews knew Christ, mistaking
the Prophets.
that were expecting and wishing for the Messiah, could thereby Discern him,
when he came, that they Crucified him as a Blasphemer, not as the Messiah, by
mistaking the Prophecies concerning him: for Peter says expressly ( Acts 3.17.)
to the Jews, that both They and their Rulers did it through Ignorance. And Paul
says, 1 Cor. 2.8. That had they known it, they would not have Crucified the
Lord of Glory. Yea Mary her self, to whom the Angel had spoken, and who had
laid up all the Miraculous things accompanying his Birth in her heart, she did
not understand How, when he disputed with the Doctors in the Temple, that he
was about his Father's business. And the Apostles that had believed him,
Conversed daily with him, and saw his Miracles, could not understand neither
believe those things, which related to his Death, Sufferings and Resurrection,
but were in a certain respect stumbled at them.

XXVII. So we see, how that it is the Inward Work, and not the Outward History
and Scripture, that gives the True Knowledge; The Heathens were sensible of the
Loss received by Adam.
and by this Inward Light many of the Heathen-Philosophers were sensible of the
Loss received by Adam, though they knew not the outward History. Hence Plato
asserted, That Man's Soul was fallen into a dark Cave, where it only conversed
with shadows. Pythagoras says, Man wandereth in this world, as a stranger,
banished from the Presence of God. Heathen-Philosophers Divine Knowledge.
Plato. Pythag. Ploti^.
And Plotinus compares man's Soul fallen from God, to a Cinder or dead Coal,
out of which the fire is extinguished. Some of them said, That the Wings of the
Soul were clipped or fallen of, so that they could not fly unto God. All
which, and many more such Expressions, that might be gathered out of their
Writings, show, they were not without a sense of this Loss. Also they had a
Knowledge and Discovery of Jesus Christ Inwardly, as a Remedy in them to
deliver them from that Evil Seed, and the Evil Inclinations of their own
hearts, though not under that particular Denomination.

Some called him a Holy Spirit, as Seneca Epist. 41. who said, There is a Holy
Spirit in us, that treats us, as we treat him. Cicero calls it an Innate
Light.

Lactan. In Sect.


Cicero calls it an Innate Light, in his Book de Republica, cited by
Lactantius 6. Instit. where he calls this Right Reason given unto all, Constant
and Eternal, calling unto duty by Commanding, and deterring from deceit by
Forbidding: Adding, that it cannot be abrogated, neither can any be freed from
it neither by Senate nor People; that it is One Eternal, and the same always to
all Nations, so that there is not one at Rome, and another at Athens: who so
obey it not, must flee from himself; and in this is greatly tormented, although
he should escape all other punishment. Plotinus also calls him Light saying;
That as the Sun cannot be known, but by its own Light; so God cannot be known,
but with his own Light: and as the Eye cannot see the Sun, but by receiving its
Image; so man cannot know God, but by receiving his Image: and that it behoved
man to come to purity of heart, before he could know God; Calling him also
Wisdom, a name frequently given him in Scripture: see Prove. 1.20. to the end,
and Prove. 8.9, 34. where Wisdom is said to Cry, Entreat and Invite all to come
unto her, and learn of her. And what is this Wisdom, but Christ? Hence such as
came among the Heathen to forsake Evil, Philosophers, Whence Called?
and cleave to Righteousness, were called Philosophers; that is, Lovers of
Wisdom: They knew, this Wisdom was nigh unto them, and that the best knowledge
of God and Divine Mysteries was by the Inspiration of the Wisdom of God.
Phocylides.
Phocylides affirmed, That the Word of the Wisdom of God was the best: His
words in the Greek are, (...).

And much more of this kind might be Instanced; by which it appears they knew
Christ, and by his Work working in them were brought from Unrighteousness to
Righteousness, and to love that Power, by which they felt themselves Redeemed:
So that, as says the Apostle, They show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, and did the things contained in the Law; and therefore as all doers of
the Law are, were, no doubt, Justified and Saved thus by the Power of Christ in
them. And as this was the Judgment of the Apostle, so was it of the primitive
Christians. Hence Just. Martyr stuck not to call Socrates a Christian, saying;
That all such, as lived according to the Divine Word in them, Socrates a
Christian, etc.
which was in all men, were Christians, such as Socrates and Heraclitus, and
others among the Greeks, etc. That such as live with the Word, are Christians
without fear or anxiety.

Clem. Alexand.
Clemens Alexandrinus says, Apol. 2. Strom. lib. 1. That this Wisdom or
Philosophy was necessary to the Gentiles, and was their Schoolmaster to lead
them unto Christ, by which of old the Greeks were Justified.

Augustine. de Civ. Dei.
Nor do I think (says Augustine, in his Book of the City of God, lib. 18. c.
47.) that the Jews dare affirm, that none belonged unto God, but the
Israelites. Ludovic. Vives.
Upon which place Ludovicus Vives says, That thus the Gentiles not having a
Law, were a Law unto themselves; and the Light of so living is the Gift of God,
and proceeds from the Son: of whom it is written, that he Inlighteneth every
man, that comes into the World.

The Platonists saw the Word in the beginning; which was Light.
Augustine also Testifies in his Confessions, l. 7. c. 9. That he had read in
the Writings of the Platonists, though not in the very same words, yet that
which by many and multiplied Reasons did persuade, that in the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God; this was in the beginning with God, by
which all things were made, and without which nothing was made, that was made:
In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men; and the Light shined in the
darkness, and the darkness did not Comprehend it. And albeit the Soul gives
Testimony concerning the Light, yet it is not the Light, but the Word of God:
for GOD is the true LIGHT, which inlightneth every man, that comes into the
World; and so Repeats to verse. 14. of John 1. adding, These things have I there
read.

Yea, there is a Book translated out of the Arabic, which gives an account of
one Hai Eben Yokdan, Hai Eben Yokdan.
who without Converse of man, living in an Island alone, attained to such a
profound Knowledge of God, as to have Immediate Converse with him, and to
affirm, That the best and most certain Knowledge of God is not that, which is
attained by Premises premised, and Conclusions deduced; but that which is
enjoyed by Conjunction of the mind of man with the Supreme Intellect, The
Supreme Intellect enjoyed in the Mind of Man.
after the mind is purified from its Corruptions, and is separated from all
bodily Images, and is gathered into a profound Stilness!

XXVIII. Seeing then, it is by this Inward Gift, Grace and Light, that both
those, that have the Gospel preached unto them, come to have Jesus brought
forth in them, and to have the saving and sanctified Use of all outward Helps
and Advantages; and also by this same Light, that all may come to be saved; and
that God calls, invites and strives with all in a Day, and saves many, to whom
he has not seen meet to Convey this outward Knowledge: Therefore we having the
Experience of the Inward and Powerful Work of this Light in our hearts, even
Jesus Revealed in us, cannot cease to Proclaim the Day of the Lord, that it is
Arisen in it, The Day of the Lord proclaimed.
crying-out with the Woman of Samaria; Come and see One, that has told me all
that ever I have done: Is not this the Christ? That others may come, and feel
the same in themselves, and may know, that that little small thing* that
Reproves them in their hearts, however they have despised it, and neglected it,
is nothing less, than the Gospel preached in them, Christ the Wisdom and Power
of God, being in and by that Seed seeking to save their Souls.

Of this Light therefore Augustine speaks in his Confessions, lib. 11. c. 9. In
this beginning, O God! thou made the Heaven and the Earth in thy Word, in thy
Son, in thy Virtue, in thy Wisdom, wonderfully saying, and wonderfully doing,
who shall Comprehend it? who shall Declare it? Augustine Trembled at the
In-shinings of the Light unto him: and why?
What is that, which shineth-in unto me, and smites my heart without hurt, at
which I both Tremble, and am Inflamed? I Tremble, in so far as I am unlike unto
it; and I am Inflamed, in so far as I am like unto it? It is Wisdom, which
shineth-in unto me, and dispelleth my Cloud, which had again Covered me, after
I was departed from that darkness and rampire of my punishments. And again he
says lib. 10. cap. 27. It is too late, that I have loved thee, O thou
Beautifulness so Ancient, and so New! late have I loved thee! and behold thou
wast within, and I was without, and there was seeking thee: thou did call,
thou did cry, thou did break my deafness; thou glancedst, thou did shine,
thou chasedst away my darkness.

Of this also our Countryman George Buchanan speaks thus, in his Book De
Jure Regni apud Scotos: Truly, Buchanan testifying to the Light.
I understand no other thing at present, than that Light, which is divinely
Infused into our Souls. For when God formed man, he not only gave him Eyes to
his Body, by which he might shun those things, that are hurtful to him, and
follow those things, that are profitable; but also has set before his mind, as
it were, a certain Light, by which he may discern things that are Vile, from
things that are Honest: Some call this Power, Nature, others the Law of Nature;
I truly judge it to be Divine: and am persuaded, that Nature and Wisdom never
say different things. Moreover God has given us a Compend of the Law, which in
few words comprehends the whole, to wit; That we should Love Him from our
hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves? And of this Law all the Books of the
Holy Scriptures, which pertain to the forming of manners, contain no other, but
an Explication.

This is that Universal, Evangelical Principle, in and by which this Salvation
Jew and Gentile, Scythian and Barbarian, partakers of the Salvation of Christ.
of Christ is exhibited to all men, both Jew and Gentile, Scythian and
Barbarian, of whatsoever Country or Kindred he be. And therefore God has
raised up unto himself, in this our Age, faithful Witnesses and Evangelists to
preach again his Everlasting Gospel, and to direct all, as well the high
Professors, who boast of the Law and the Scripture, and the outward Knowledge
of Christ, as the Infidels and Heathens, that know not him that way, that they
may all come to mind the Light in them, and know Christ in them, the Just One,
(...)* whom they have so long killed, and made merry over, and he has not
Resisted, James 5.6. and give up their sins, iniquities, false faith,
professions and outside righteousness to be Crucified by the Power of his
Cross in them; so as they may know Christ within to be the Hope of Glory, and
may come to walk in his Light, and be saved, who is that True Light, that
inlightneth Every man, that comes into the world.

PROPOSITION VII. Concerning Justification.
As many as Resist not this Light, but Receive the same, it becomes in them a
Holy, Pure and Spiritual Birth, bringing forth Holiness, Righteousness, Purity
and all those other blessed Fruits, which are acceptable to God: by which holy
Birth, to wit, Jesus Christ formed within us, and working his Works in us, as
we are sanctified, so are we justified in the sight of God, according to the
Apostle's words; But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Therefore it is not by our Works wrought in our Will, nor yet by good Works,
considered as of themselves; but by Christ, who is both the Gift and the Giver,
and the Cause producing the Effects in us: who, as he has Reconciled us, while
we were Enemies; does also in his Wisdom save us, and justify us after this
manner, as says the same Apostle elsewhere: According to his Mercy he has
saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3.5.

I. THE Doctrine of Justification comes well in order after the Discussing of
the Extent of Christ's Death, and of the Grace thereby Communicated; some of
the sharpest Contests concerning this having from thence their Rise. Many are
the Disputes among those called Christians concerning this point; and indeed,
if all were truly minding that, which justifies, there would be less noise
about the Notions of Justification. I shall briefly review this Controversy, as
it stands among others, and as I have often seriously observed it; then in
short State the Controversy, as to us, and open our Sense and Judgment of it:
and Lastly, prove it (if the Lord will) by some Scripture-Testimonies, and the
certain Experience of all, that ever were truly Justified.

Doctrine of Justification has been, and is greatly vitiated in the Church of
Rome, is not by us questioned: though our Adversaries (who for want of better
Arguments do often make Lies their Refuge) have not spared in this respect to
stigmatize us with Popery; The Method of Justification taken by the Church of
Rome.
but how untruly, will hereafter appear. For to speak little of their Meritum
ex Condigno, which was (no doubt) a very common Doctrine of the Romish Church,
especially before Luther, though most of their modern Writers, especially in
their Controversies with Protestants do partly deny it, partly qualify it, and
seem to state the matter only, as if they were Propagators, and Pleaders for
Good Works by the others denied. Yet if we look to the Effects of this Doctrine
among them, as they appear in the generality of their Church Members, not in
things disapproved, but highly approved and commended by their Father the Pope,
The Pope's Doctrine of Merits, the most beneficial of all his Revenues.
and all his Clients, as the most beneficial Casuality of all his Revenue, we
shall find, that Luther did not without great ground oppose himself to them in
this matter; and if he had not himself run into another Extreme (of which
hereafter) his Work would have stood the better: For in this, as in most other
things he is more to be Commended, for what he pulled down of Babylon, than for
what he built of his own. Whatever then the Papists may pretend, or even some
good men among them may have thought, Experience shows, and it is more than
manifest by the universal and approved Practice of their people, that they
place not their Justification so much in Works, that are truly and morally
good, and in the being truly renewed and sanctified in the mind, as in such
things as are either nor good, nor evil, or may truly be called Evil, and can
no otherways be reckoned Good, Papists Justification depends upon the Pope's
Bulls.
than because the Pope pleases to call them so. So that if the matter be well
sifted, it will be found, that the greatest part of their Justification depends
upon the Authority of his Bulls, and not upon the Power, Virtue and Grace of
Christ Revealed in the heart, and Renewing of it. As will appear First, from
their Principle concerning Sacraments, which, they say, Confer Grace ex opere
operato. Their Sacraments.
So that if a man partake but of them, he thereby obtains Remission of sin,
though he remain as he was; the Virtue of the Sacraments making up the want,
that is in the man. So that this Act of Submission and Faith to the Laws of the
Church, and not any Real, Inward Change is that, which justifies him. As for
Example: If a man make use of the Sacrament (as they call it) of Penance, so as
to Tell over his Sins to a Priest, Papists Penance.
though he have not true Contrition (which the Lord has made absolutely
necessary for penitent sinners) but only Attrition (a figment of their own)
that is, If he be sorry he has sinned, not out of any love to God or his Law,
which he has Transgressed, but for fear of punishment; yet does the Virtue of
the Sacrament (as they affirm) procure to him Remission of Sins: so that being
Absolved by the Priest, he stands accepted and Justified in the sight of God.
This man's Justification then proceeds not from his being truly Penitent, and
in any measure inwardly Changed and Renewed by the working of God's Grace in
his heart: but merely from the Authority of the Priest, and Virtue of the
Sacrament, who has pronounced him Absolved: so that his Justification is from
somewhat without him, and not within him.

Secondly: This will yet more appear in the matter of Indulgences, Remission of
all Sins not only past, Papist-Indulgences.
but for Years to come is annexed to the Visiting such and such Churches and
Relics, saying such and such Prayers: so that the person, that so does, is
presently Cleared from the guilt of his sin, and justified and accepted in the
sight of God. As for Example; He that in the great Jubilee will go to Rome, and
present himself before the Gate of Peter and Paul, and there receive the Pope's
Blessing; or he that will go a Pilgrimage to James's Sepulcher in Spain, or to
Mary of Loretta, is upon the Performance of those things promised forgiveness
of Sins. Now if we ask them the Reason, how such things, as are not morally
good in themselves, come to have Virtue? they have no other Answer, but because
of the Church and Pope's Authority; who being the great Treasurer of the
Magazine of Christ's Merits, lets them out upon such and such Conditions. Thus
also the Invention of Saying Mass is made a Chief Instrument of Justification;
Papists Mass, what it is?
for in it they pretend to Offer Christ daily to the Father a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead: so that a man for Money can
procure Christ thus to be Offered for him, when he pleases, by which Offering
he is said to obtain Remission of Sins, and to stand Justified in the sight of
God. From all which, and much more of this Nature, which might be mentioned, it
does appear, that the Papists place their Justification not so much in any Work
of Holiness really brought forth in them, and real forsaking of Iniquity, as in
the mere Performance of some Ceremonies, and a blind Belief, which their
Teachers have begotten in them; that the Church and the Pope having the
Absolute Dispensation of the Merits of Christ, have power to make these Merits
Effectual for the Remission of sins and Justification of such as will perform
those Ceremonies. This is the true and real Method of Justification taken by
the generality of the Church of Rome, and highly Commended by their public
Preachers, especially the Monks in their Sermons to the People; of which I my
self have been an Ear- and an Eyewitness: However some of their Modern Writers
have labored to qualify it in their Controversies. Luther and the Protestants
opposing the Pope's Doctrine of Works, fell into the other Extreme of No good
Works necessary to Justification.
This Doctrine Luther and the Protestants then had good Reason to deny and
oppose; though many of them ran into another Extreme, so as to deny good Works
to be necessary to Justification, and to preach up not only Remission of sins,
but Justification by Faith alone, without all Works however good. So that men
do not obtain their Justification, according as they are inwardly sanctified
and renewed, but are justified merely by believing, that Christ died for them;
and so some may perfectly be Justified, though they be lying in gross
Wickedness: as appears by the Example of David, whom they say was fully and
perfectly Justified, while he was lying in the gross sins of Murder and
Adultery. As then the Protestants have sufficient ground to quarrel and confute
the Papists concerning those many Abuses in the matter of Justification,
showing, how the Doctrine of Christ is thereby vitiated and overturned, and the
Word of God made void by many and useless Traditions, the Law of God neglected,
while foolish and needless Ceremonies are prized and followed, through a false
Opinion of being Justified by the Performance of them; and the Merits and
Sufferings of Christ (which is the Only Sacrifice appointed by God for
Remission of sins) derogated from, by the setting up of a Daily Sacrifice never
appointed by God, Papists Device to get Money.
and chiefly devised out of Covetousness to get money by; so the Protestants on
the other hand, by not rightly establishing and holding forth the Doctrine of
Justification, according as it is delivered in the Holy Scriptures, have opened
a door for the Papists to accuse them, as if they were Neglecters of good
Works, Enemies to Mortification and Holiness, such as esteem themselves
Justified, while lying in great sins: by which kind of Accusations (for which
too great ground has been given out of the Writings of some Rigid Protestants)
the Reformation has been greatly defamed and hindered, and the Souls of many
Ensnared. Whereas who will narrowly look into the matter, may observe these
Debates to be more in specie, than in genere, seeing both do upon the matter
land in one, and like two men in a Circle, who, though they go sundry ways, yet
meet at the last in the same Center.

For the Papists, they say: They obtain Remission of Sins, and are justified by
the Merits of Christ, as the same are Applied unto them in the use of the
Sacraments of the Church: Papists Belief of Justification meets in the same
Center with the --
and are dispensed in the Performance of such and such Ceremonies, Pilgrimages,
Prayers and Performances, though there be not an inward Renewing of the mind,
nor knowing of Christ inwardly formed; yet they are remitted, and made
Righteous ex opere operato, because of the Power and Authority accompanying the
Sacraments and the Dispensators of them.

The Protestants say, That they obtain Remission of Sins, -- Protestants Belief.

So says the Westminster-Conf. of Faith, Chap. 11. Sect. 1.


and stand Justified in the sight of God by Virtue of the Merits and Sufferings
of Christ, not by Infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their
sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous; they resting
on him and his righteousness by Faith, which Faith, the Act of believing, is
not imputed unto them for Righteousness.

So the Justification of neither here is placed in any Inward Renewing of the
Mind, or by virtue of any Siritual Birth or Formation of Christ in them; but
only by a bare Application of the Death and Sufferings of Christ outwardly
performed for them: whereof the one lays hold on a Faith resting upon them, and
hoping to be Justified by them alone; the other by the saying of some outward
Prayers and Ceremonies, which they judge makes the Death of Christ Effectual
unto them. I Except here (being unwilling to wrong any) what things have been
said as to the necessity of inward Holiness either by some Modern Papists, or
some Modern Protestants, who in so far as they have labored after a Midst
betwixt these two Extremes, have come near to the Truth; as by some Citations
out of them hereafter to be mentioned, will Appear: Though this Doctrine has
not since the Apostasy (so far as ever I could observe) been so distinctly and
evidently held forth according to the Scriptures-Testimony, as it has pleased
God to Reveal it, and preach it forth in this day by the Witnesses of his
Truth, whom he has raised to that end. Which Doctrine, though it be briefly
held forth and Comprehended in the Thesis it self; English state of
Controversy.
yet I shall a little more fully Explain the State of the Controversy, as it
stands betwixt us, and those that now Oppose us.

III. First then, as by the Explanation of the former Thesis appears, Natural
Power and Ability in our selves, in order to bring us out of our lost and
fall^n Condition and first Nature: Justification springs of and from the Love
of God.
and Confess, that as of our selves we are able to do nothing, that is good; so
neither can we procure Remission of Sins, or Justification by any Act of our
own, so as to merit it, or draw it as a Debt from God due unto us: but we
acknowledge all to be of and from his Love, which is the Original and
Fundamental Cause of our Acceptance.

Secondly. God manifested this love toward us in the sending of his Beloved
Son the Lord Jesus Christ into the World, who gave himself for us an Offering
and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor: Christ giveing himself a
Sacrifice for us.
and having made peace through the blood of his Cross, that he might Reconcile
us unto himself, and by the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot unto
God, and suffered for our Sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
unto God.

Thirdly then; Forasmuch as all men, who have come to man's Estate, (the Man
Jesus only Excepted) have sinned, therefore all have need of this Savior to
remove the Wrath of God from them due to their Offenses, in this respect he is
truly said to have born the Iniquities of us all in his Body on the Tree; and
therefore is the Only Mediator, having qualified the Wrath of God toward us:
so that our former sins stand not in our way, being by virtue of his most
satisfactory Sacrifice Removed and pardoned. To Remission of Sins.
Neither do we think, that Remission of Sins is to be expected, sought, or
obtained any other way, or by any Works or Sacrifice whatsoever: (though as has
been said formerly, they may come to partake of this Remission, that are
Ignorant of the History.) So then Christ by his Death and Sufferings has
Reconciled us to God, The only Mediator betwixt God and Man.
even while we are Enemies, that is, he offers Reconciliation unto us, we are
put into a Capacity of being Reconciled, God is willing to forgive us our
Iniquities, and to accept us; as is well expressed by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them, and has put in us the Word of Reconciliation. And
therefore the Apostle, in the next verses entreats them in Christ's stead to be
Reconciled to God, intimating, that the Wrath of God being removed by the
Obedience of Christ Jesus, he is willing to be Reconciled unto them, and ready
to Remit the sins that are past, if they Repent.

A Twofold Redemption.
We Consider then our Redemption in a twofold Respect or State, both which in
their own nature are perfect; though in their Application to us, the one is
not, nor cannot be without respect to the other.

I. The Redemption of Christ without us.
The first is the Redemption performed and accomplished by Christ for us in his
Crucified Body without us. The other is the Redemption wrought by Christ in us:
which no less properly is called and accounted a Redemption, than the former.
The first then is that, whereby man, as he stands in the Fall, is put into a
Capacity of Salvation, and has conveyed unto him a measure of that Power,
Virtue, Spirit, Life and Grace, that was in Christ Jesus; which, as the Free
Gift of God, is able to Counter-ballance, Overcome and Root-out the Evil Seed,
wherewith we are naturally, as in the Fall, leavened.

II. The Redemption wrought by Christ in us.
The second is that, whereby we Witness and Know this pure and perfect
Redemption in our selves, purifying, cleansing and redeeming us from the power
of Corruption, and bringing us into Unity, Favor and Friendship with God. By
the first of these two, we that were lost in Adam, plunged in the bitter and
Corrupt Seed, unable of our selves to do any good thing, but naturally joined
and united to Evil, forward and propense to all Iniquity, Servants and Slaves
to the power and spirit of Darkness, are notwithstanding all this so far
Reconciled to God by the death of his Son, while Enemies, that we are put into
a Capacity of Salvation; having the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace offered
unto us: and God is Reconciled unto us in Christ, calls and invites us to
himself, in which respect, we understand these Scriptures; Ephesians. 2.15. 1 John
4.10. Ezech. 16.6. 1 Pet. 2.22, 24. and 3.18.
He slew the Enmity in himself. He loved us first, seeing us in our blood, he
said unto us live; he, who did not sin his own self, bare our sins in his own
body on the Tree, and he died for our sins, the Just for the Unjust.

By the second we witness this Capacity brought into Act, whereby receiving,
and not resisting the purchase of his death, to wit, the Light, Spirit and
Grace of Christ Revealed to us, we witness and possess a real, true and inward
Redemption from the power and prevalency of sin, and so come to be truly and
really Redeemed, Justified and made Righteous, and to a sensible Union and
Friendship with God. Thus he died Tit. 2.14. Phil. 3.10.
for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity; and thus we know him and
the Power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made
conformable to us. This last follows the first in order, and is a Consequence
of it, proceeding from it as an Effect from its Cause: So as none could have
enjoyed the last, without the first had been, (such being the Will of God;) so
also can none now partake of the first, but as he witnesses the last.
Wherefore as to us, they are both Causes of our Justification: The first the
Procuring Efficient, the other the Formal Cause.

Fourthly: We understand not by this Justification by Christ, barely the good
works, even as wrought by the Spirit of Christ; for they, as Protestants truly
affirm, are rather an Effect of Justification, than the Cause of it. The
Formation of Christ in us begets Good Works.
But we understand the Formation of Christ in us, Christ born and brought forth
in us, from which good Works as naturally proceed, as Fruit from a fruitful
Tree. It is this Inward Birth in us bringing forth Righteousness and Holiness
in us, that does Justify us; which having removed and done away the Contrary
Nature and Spirit, that did bear Rule, and bring Condemnation, now is in
Dominion over all in our hearts. Those then, that come to know Christ thus
formed in them, do enjoy him wholly and undivided; who is the LORD our
RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23.6. This is to be Clothed with Christ and to have put
him on, whom God therefore truly accounts Righteous and Just. This is so far
from being the Doctrine of Papists, that as the generality of them do not
Understand it; so the Learned among them oppose it, and dispute against it: and
particularly Bellarmine. Thus then (as I may say) the formal Cause of
Justification is not the Works, to speak properly, they being but an Effect of
it; but this Inward Birth, this Jesus brought forth in the heart: who is the
Well-beloved, whom the Father cannot but Accept, and all those, who thus are
sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, and washed with it. By this also comes that
Communication of the goods of Christ unto us, by which we come to be made
partakers of the Divine Nature, as says Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. and are made one
with him, as the Branches with the Vine, and have a Title and Right to what he
has done and suffered for us: Christ's Obedience, Righteousness, Death and
Sufferings are ours.
So that his Obedience becomes Ours, his Righteousness ours, his Death and
Sufferings ours. And by this Nearness we come to have a Sense of his
Sufferings, and to suffer with his Seed, that yet lies pressed and crucified in
the hearts of the ungodly; and so travel with it, and for its Redemption, and
for the Repentance of those Souls, that in it are Crucifying as yet the Lord of
Glory. Even as the Apostle Paul, who by his Sufferings is said to fill up that,
which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ for his Body, which is the Church:
Though this be a Mystery sealed up from all the Wise men, that are yet Ignorant
of this Seed in themselves, and oppose it; nevertheless some Protestants speak
of this Justification by Christ inwardly put-on; as shall hereafter be recited
in its place.

Lastly: Though we place Remission of Sins in the Righteousness and Obedience
of Christ performed by him in the flesh, as to what pertains to the Remote
procuring Cause; and that we hold our selves formally Justified by Christ Jesus
formed and brought forth in us; yet can we not (as some Protestants have
unwarily done) Exclude Works from Justification: Good Works are not excluded
Justification.
for though properly we be not Justified for them, yet are we Justified in
them; and they are necessary, even as Causa sine qua non, i. e. the Cause,
without which none are justified. For the denying of this, as it is contrary to
the Scriptures Testimony, so it has brought a great Scandal to the
ProProtestant Religion, opened the mouths of Papists, and made many too secure,
while they have believed to be justified without good works: Moreover, though
it be not safe to say, They are Meritorious; yet seeing they Rewarded, many of
those, called the Fathers, have not spared to use the word [ Merit] which some
of us have perhaps also done, in a qualified Sense, but no ways to infer the
Popish Abuses abovementioned. And lastly; If we had that notion of good works,
which most Protestants have, we could freely agree to make them not only not
necessary, but Reject them, as hurtful: viz. That the best works, even of the
Saints, are defiled and polluted. For though we judge so of the best Works
performed by man, endeavoring a Conformity to the outward Law by his own
strength, and in his own will; yet we believe, that such works as naturally
proceed from this Spiritual Birth and Formation of Christ in us, are pure and
holy, even as the Root, from which they come: and therefore God Accepts them,
Justifies us in them, and Rewards us for them of his own Free Grace. The State
of the Controversy being thus stated, these following Positions do hencefrom
arise, in the next place to be proved.

That the Obedience, Sufferings and Death of Christ is that, by which the Soul
obtains Remission of Sins, and is the procuring Cause of that Grace, by whose
inward workings Christ comes to be formed inwardly, and the Soul to be made
Conformable unto him, and so just and justified. And that therefore in respect
of this Capacity and Offer of Grace, God is said to be Reconciled, not as if he
were actually Reconciled, or did actually Justify, or account any Just, so long
as they remain in their Sins, really Impure and Unjust.

Secondly; That it is by this Inward Birth of Christ in man, that man is made
Just; and therefore so accounted by God: Wherefore, to be plain, we are
thereby, and not till that be brought forth in us, formally (if we must use
that word) Justified in the sight of God; because Justification is both more
properly and frequently in Scripture taken in its proper signification, for
making one Just, and not reputing one merely such, and is all one with
Sanctification.

Thirdly, That since good Works as naturally follow from this Birth, as heat
from fire; therefore are they of Absolute Necessity to Justification, as Causa
sine qua non, i. e. though not as the Cause for which, yet as that, Good Works
are Causa sine qua non -- of Justification.
in which we are, and without which we cannot be Justified. And though they be
not Meritorious, and draw no Debt upon God; yet he cannot but Accept and Reward
them: for it is contrary to his Nature to deny his own; since they may be
perfect in their kind, as proceeding from a Pure, Holy Birth and Root.
Wherefore their Judgment is false, and against the Truth, that say, That the
holiest Works of the Saints are defiled and sinful in the sight of God: for
those Good Works are not the Works of the Law, excluded by the Apostle from
Justification.

first, I prove it from Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of
Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Here the Apostle holds
forth the Extent and Efficacy of Christ's Death, The Efficacy of Christ's Death
to Redeem man out of Evil.
showing, that thereby and by Faith therein, Remission of sins that are past,
is obtained; as being that, wherein the forbearance of God is exercised toward
Mankind. So that, though men for the Sins they daily Commit, deserve Eternal
Death, and that the Wrath of God should lay hold upon them; yet by virtue of
that most-satisfactory Sacrifice of Christ Jesus, the Grace and Seed of God
moves in love toward them during the day of their Visitation: yet not so, as
not to strike against the Evil (for that must be burned-up and destroyed) but
to Redeem man out of the Evil.

Secondly: If God were perfectly Reconciled with men, Just, while they are
actually Unjust, and do Continue in their Sins; then should God have no
Controversy with them: I do not only speak concerning men before Conversion,
who afterward are Converted, whom yet some of our Antagonists, called
Antinomians, do aver were Justified from the beginning; but also touching
those, who according to the common Opinion of Protestants have been Converted:
whom albeit they confess, they persist always in some Misdeeds and sometimes in
heinous Sins, as is manifest in David's Adultery and Murder; yet they assert to
be perfectly and wholly Justified.
How comes he then so often to Complain, to Expostulate so much throughout the
whole Scripture with such, as our Adversaries Confess to be Justified, telling
them, That their sins separate betwixt him and them? Isa. 59.2. For where there
is a perfect and full Reconciliation, there is no Separation. Yea, from this
Doctrine it necessarily follows, either that such, for whom Christ died, and
whom he has thus Reconciled, never Sin; or that, when they do so, they are
still Reconciled, and their Sins make not the least Separation from God: yea,
that they are Justified in their Sins. From whence also would follow this
Abominable Consequence, That the good Works and greatest Sins of such are alike
in the sight of God, seeing neither the one serves to Justify them, nor the
other to break their Reconciliation: which occasions great Security, and opens
a door to every lewd Practice.

Proof III.
Thirdly: This would make void the whole practical Doctrine of the Gospel, and
make Faith it self Needless. For if Faith and Repentance, and the other
Conditions called for throughout the Gospel, be a Qualification upon our part
necessary to be performed; then before this be performed by us, we are either
fully reconciled to God, or but in a Capacity of being Reconciled to God; he
being ready to Reconcile and Justify us, as these Conditions are performed:
Which latter, if granted, is according to the Truth we profess. And if we are
already perfectly Reconciled and Justified, before these Conditions are
performed (which Conditions are of that Nature, that they cannot be performed
at one time, but are to be done all one's life time; then can they not be said
to be absolutely Needful: Which is contrary to the very express Testimony of
Scripture, which is acknowledged by all Christians. For Hebr. 11.6. John 3.18.
Luke 13.3. Apoc. 2.5. Romans 8.13.
without Faith it is Impossible to please God: They that believe not, are
Condemned already, because they believe not in the Only begotten Son of God.
Except ye Repent, ye cannot be Saved: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die. And of those, that were Converted: I will Remove your Candlestick from
you, unless ye Repent -- Should I mention all the Scriptures, that positively
and evidently prove this, I might transcribe much of all the Doctrinal Part of
the Bible. For since Christ said, It is finished, and did finish his Work
sixteen hundred years ago and upwards, if he so fully perfected Redemption
then, and did then actually Reconcile every one, that is to be Saved, not
simply opening a Door of Mercy for them, A Door of Mercy opened by Christ, upon
Repentance.
offering the Sacrifice of his Body, by which they may obtain Remission of
their Sins, when they Repent, and Communicating unto them a measure of his
Grace, by which they may see their sins, and be able to Repent; but really make
them to be Reputed as Just, The Antinomians Opinion of Reconciliation and
Justification.
either before they believe (as say the Antinomians) or after they have
Assented to the Truth of the History of Christ, or are sprinkled with the
Baptism of Water, while nevertheless they are actually Unjust, so that no part
of their Redemption is to be wrought by him now, as to their Reconciliation and
Justification; then the whole doctrinal Part of the Bible is useless and of no
profit: in vain were the Apostles sent forth to preach Repentance and Remission
of Sins; and in vain do all the Preachers bestow their labor, spend their
lungs, and give forth Writings; yea, much more in vain do the people spend
their money, which they give them for preaching; seeing it is all but Actum
agere, but a vain and uneffectual Essay to do that, which is already perfectly
done without them.

lastly: To pretermit their humane Labors, as not worth the disputing, whether
they be needful or not, since (as we shall hereafter show) themselves Confess,
the Best of them is Sinful; this also makes void the present Intercession of
Christ for men. What shall become of that great Article of Faith, Christ's
daily making Intercession for us.
by which we Affirm, That he sits at the right hand of God, daily making
Intercession for us; and for which end the Spirit it self makes Intercession
for us with groanings, which cannot be uttered? For Christ makes not
Intercession for those, that are not in a possibility of Salvation; that is
absurd: Our Adversaries will not admit, that he prayed for the World at all;
and to pray for those, that are already Reconciled, and perfectly Justified, is
to no purpose: To pray for Remission of Sins is yet more Needless, if all be
Remitted past, present and to come. Indeed, there is not any solid Solving of
this, but by acknowledging* according to the Truth, that Christ by his Death
removed the Wrath of God, so far as to obtain Remission of sins for as many, as
Receive that Grace and Light, that he communicates unto them, and has
purchased for them by his Blood: which as they believe in, they come to know
Remission of sins past, and power to save them from sin, and to wipe it away,
so often as they may fall into it by unwatchfulness or weakness, if applying
themselves to this Grace, they truly Repent. For to as many as receive him, he
gives power to become the sons of God: So none are sons, none are justified,
none reconciled, until they thus receive him in that little Seed in their
hearts; and life Eternal is offered to those, who by patient continuance in
well-doing seek glory, honor and immortality: For if the righteous man depart
from his righteousness, his righteousness shall be remembered no more. And
therefore on the other part, none are longer Sons of God, and justified, than
they patiently continue in righteousness and well-doing. And therefore Christ
lives always making Intercession during the day of every man's Visitation, that
they may be Converted: and when men are in some measure Converted, he makes
Intercession, that they may Continue, and go-on, and not faint, nor go back
again. Much more might be said to Confirm this Truth; but I go on to take
notice of the Common Objections against it, which are the Arguments made use of
to propagate the Errors Contrary to it.

VI. The First and Chief is drawn from that saying of the Apostle
beforementioned, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ: God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not Imputing
their Trespasses unto them.

That Christ fully perfected the Work of Reconciliation, while he was on Earth.

I Answer: If by [ Reconciliation] be understood the Removing of Wrath, and the
Purchase of that Grace, Reconciled, we Agree to it; but that that place speaks
no more, appears from the place it self. For when the Apostle speaks in the
perfect Time, saying, He has Reconciled us, The Difference between Reconciled
to Christ, and Reconciling.
he speaks of himself and the Saints; who having received the Grace of God
purchased by Christ, were through Faith in him actually Reconciled: But as to
the World, he says [ Reconciling] not [ Reconciled] which Reconciling, though
it denote a time somewhat past, yet it is by the Imperfect Time, denoting, that
the thing begun was not perfected. For this Work Christ began toward all in
the days of his flesh, yea, and long before; for he was the Mediator from the
beginning, and the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world* But in his
flesh, after he had perfectly fulfilled the Law, and the Righteousness thereof,
and Rent the Vail, and made way for the more clear and universal Revelation of
the Gospel to all, both Jew and Gentile, he gave up himself a most satisfactory
Sacrifice for Sin* which becomes Effectual to as many, as receive him in his
Inward Appearance in his Light in the heart. Again, this very place shows,
that no other Reconciliation is intended, but the Opening of a Door of Mercy
upon God's part, and a removing of Wrath for sins, that are past; so as men,
notwithstanding their Sins, are stated in a Capacity of Salvation. For the
Apostle in the following verse says; Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
Reconciled to God. For if their Reconciliation had already been perfectly
accomplished, what need any Entreating then to be Reconciled? Ambassadors are
not sent, after a peace already perfected, and Reconciliation made, to Entreat
for a Reconciliation; for that implies a manifest Contradiction.

Secondly: They object, verse 21. of the same Chapter; For he has made him to
be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God
in him.

From whence they Argue; That as our sin is Imputed to Christ, who had

But this Interpretation is easily Rejected. For though Christ bare our sins,
and suffered for us, and was among men accounted a sinner, and numbered among
Transgressors; yet that God reputed him a Sinner, is no where proved. For it is
said, He was found before him holy, harmless and undefiled, neither was there
found any guile in his mouth. Hebr. 7.26. 1 Pet. 2.22.
That We deserved these things, and much more for our Sins, which he endured in
Obedience to the Father, and according to his Counsel, is true; but that ever
God Reputed Him a sinner, is denied: Neither did he ever die, that we should be
Reputed Righteous, though no more Really such, Men's Imputed Righteousness
solidly Refuted.
than he was a sinner (as hereafter appears.) For indeed, if this Argument
hold, it might be stretched that length, as to become very pleasing to wicked
men, that love to abide in their Sins: For if we be made Righteous, as Christ
was made a Sinner, merely by Imputation, then as there was no sin, not in the
least in Christ, so it would follow, that there needed no more Righteousness,
no more Holiness, no more inward Sanctification in us, than there was Sin in
him. So then by his [ being made Sin for us] must be understood his Suffering
for our Sins, that we might be made partakers of the Grace purchased by him; by
the Workings whereof we are made the Righteousness of God in him. For that the
Apostle understood here a being made really Righteous, and not merely a being
Reputed such, appears by what follows, seeing in verse. 14, 15, 16. of the
following Chapter he argues largely against any supposed Agreement of Light and
Darkness, Righteousness and Unrighteousness; which must needs be admitted, if
men be to be reckoned Ingrafted in Christ, and real Members of him merely by an
Imputative Righteousness, wholly without them, while they themselves are
actually Unrighteous. And indeed, it may be thought strange, how some men have
made this so fundamental an Article of their Faith, which is so contrary to the
whole strain of the Gospel: A thing, Christ in none of all his Sermons and
gracious Speeches ever willed any to Rely upon; always recommending to us
Works, as Instrumental in our Justification: and the more it is to be Admired
at, because that that Sentence or Term (so frequent in their mouths, and so
often pressed by them, as the very Basis of their Hope and Confidence) to wit,
Christ's Imputed Righteousness not found in all the Bible.
The Imputed Righteousness of Christ, is not to be found in all the Bible, at
least as to my Observation. Thus have I past through the first part, and that
the more briefly, because many, who Assert this Justification by bare
Imputation, do neverthelss Confess, that even the Elect are not Justified,
until they be Converted, that is, not until this Imputative Justification be
applied to them by the Spirit.

Second thing proposed by me, which is; That it is by this Inward Birth, By
Christ formed within we are Justified.
or Christ formed within, that we are (so to speak) formally Justified in the
sight of God. I suppose, I have said enough already to demonstrate, how much we
ascribe to the Death and Sufferings of Christ, as that, whereby Satisfaction is
made to the Justice of God, Remission of Sins obtained, and this Grace and Seed
purchased; by and from which this Birth proceeds: The thing now to be proved
is, That by Christ Jesus formed in us we are Justified, or made Just. Let it be
marked, I use Justification in this sense upon this occasion.

First then I prove this by that of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Justified, i. e. being made Just
really, not by Imputation.
and by the Spirit of our God. First, This [ Justified] here understood must
needs be a Being really made Just, and not a Being merely Imputed such; else [
Sanctified] and [ Washed] might be reputed a being Esteemed so, and not a being
Really so: and then it overturns the whole intent of the Context. For the
Apostle showing them in the preceding verses, how the Unrighteous cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, and descending to the several Species of
Wickedness, subsumes; That they were sometimes such, but now are not any more
such. Wherefore, as they are now Washed and Sanctified, so are they Justified:
For if this Justification were not Real, then it might be alleged, that the
Corinthians had not forsaken these Evils, but were, though still they Continued
in them, notwithstanding Justified: Which as in it self it is most Absurd, so
it luculently overturneth the very Import and Intent of the place, as if the
Corinthians turning Christians had not wrought any real Change in them; but had
only been a Belief of some barren Notions, which had wrought no Alteration in
their Affections, Will, or Manner of Life. For my own part I neither see any
thing, nor could ever yet hear or read any thing, that with any color of
Reason did evince [ Justified] in this place to be understood any other ways,
than in its own proper and genuine Interpretation of being made Just. And for
the more clear understanding hereof let it be Considered, The Derivation of the
word Justify Considered, etc.
that this word [ Justify] is derived either from the Substantive Justice, or
the Adjective Just: both which words Import the Substantive, that true and Real
Virtue in the Soul, as it is in it self, to wit, it signifies really, and not
suppositively that Excellent Quality expressed and understood among men by the
word JUSTICE; and the Adjective [ Just] as applied, signifies a man or woman,
who is Just, that is, in whom this Quality of Justice is stated: For it would
not only be great Impropriety, but also manifest falsity, to call a man Just
merely by supposition; especially if he were really Unjust. Now this word [
Justify] formed or from Justice, or Just, does beyond all question signify a
Making Just; it being nothing else, but a Composition of the Verb facio, and
the Adjective Justus, which is nothing else than thus, Justifico, i. e. justum
facio, to make just: and [ Justified] of justus and fio, as justus fio, I
become just, and justificatus, i. e. justus factus, I am made just. Thus also
is it with Verbs of this kind, as sanctifico, from sanctus holy, and facio;
honorifico from honor and facio; sacrifico from sacer and facio: all which are
still understood of the Subject really and truly endued with that virtue and
quality, from which the Verb is derived. Therefore as none are said to be
sanctified, Justified none are, while they actually* remain Unjust.
that are really unholy, while they are such; so neither can any be truly said
to be Justified, while they actually remain Unjust. Only this Verb Justify has
in a Metaphorical and Figurative sense been otherways taken, to wit, in a
Law-sense; as when a man really guilty of a Crime is freed from the punishment
of his sin, he is said to be Justified, that is, put in the place, as if he
were Just: For this use of the word has proceeded from that true supposition,
That none ought to be acquitted, but the Innocent. Hence also that manner of
speaking, I will Justify such a man, or I will justify this or that, is used
from the supposition, that the person and thing is really Justifiable: And
where there is an Error and Abuse in the matter, so far there is also in the
Expression.

This is so manifest and apparent, that Paraeus, Paraeus de Just. cont. Bell.
l. 2. c. 7. p. 469.
a Chief Protestant (and a Calvinist also in his Opinion) acknowledges this; We
never at any time said (says he) nor thought, that the Righteousness of Christ
was Imputed to us, that by him we should be named formally Just, and be so, as
we have diverse times already showed; for that would no less soundly fight with
right Reason, than if a guilty man absolved in Judgment should say, that he
himself were formally Just by the Clemency of the Judge granting him his life.
Now is it not strange, that men should be so facile in a matter of so great
Concernment, as to build the stress of their Acceptance with God upon a mere
borrowed and Metaphorical Signification, to the excluding, or at lest esteeming
that not necessary, without which the Scripture says expressly, No man shall
ever see God? Holiness required: therefore good Works are.
For if Holiness be requisite and necessary, of which this is said, then must
good Works also; unless our Adversaries can show us a holy man without good
works. But moreover, [ Justified] in this figurative sense is used for
Approved, and indeed for the most part, if not always in Scripture, when the
word [ Justify] is used, it is taken in the worst part, that is, that as the
Use of the word that way is an Usurpation, so it is spoken of such as Vsurp the
thing to themselves, while it properly does not belong unto them: as will
appear to those, that will be at the pains to Examine these places, Exodus 23.7.
Job 9.20: 27.5 Prove. 17.15. Isa. 5.23. Jer. 3.11. Ezech. 16.51, 52. Luke 10.29:
16.15. which are all spoken of men justifying the Wicked, or of Wicked men
justifying themselves, that is, Approving themselves in their Wickedness. If it
be at any time in this Signification taken in good part, it is very seldom
Comparatively; and that so obvious and plain by the Context, as leaves no
scruple. But the Question is not so much of the Use of the word, where it is
passingly or occasionally used; as where the very Doctrine of Justification is
handled. Where indeed to mistake it, viz. in its proper place, so as to content
our selves with an Imaginary Justification, while God requires a Real, is of
most dangerous Consequence. For the Disquisition of which let it be considered,
that in all these places to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians and elsewhere,
where the Apostle handles this Theme, the word may be taken in its own proper
signification without any Absurdity. As, where it is often asserted in the
abovementioned Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, That a man cannot be
justified by the Law of Moses, nor by the Works of the Law, there is no
Absurdity nor Danger in understanding it according to its own proper
signification, Justified, its proper signification.
to wit, That a man cannot be Made just by the Law of Moses; seeing this so
well agrees with that saying of the same Apostle, That the Law makes nothing
perfect. And also where it is said, We are Justified by Faith, it may very well
be understood of being Made just; seeing it is also said, that Faith purifies
the heart, and no doubt, the pure in heart are just, and The just live by
faith. Again where it is said, We are justified by Grace, We are justified by
Christ, We are Justified by the Spirit, it is no ways absurd to understand it
of being Made Just, seeing by his Spirit and Grace he does make men Just: But
to understand it universally the other way, merely for Acceptance and
Imputation, would infer great Absurdities; as may be proved at large: But
because I judged, it would be acknowledged, I forbear at present for brevity's
sake. But further, in the most weighty places, where this word Justify is used
in Scripture with an Immediate Relation to the Doctrine of Justification, our
Adversaries must needs acknowledge it to be understood of making just,
Justification signifies a making Just.
and not barely in the Legal Acceptance. As first in that of 1 Cor. 6.11. But
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, as I before have
proved; which also many Protestants are forced to acknowledge. Neither diffide
we (says Thysius) because of the most great and strict Connection, Thysius
Disp. de Just. These. 3.
that Justification does sometimes seem also to Comprehend Sanctification, as a
Consequence, as in Romans 8.30. Tit. 3.7. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such sometimes were
ye, Zanchius in cap. 2. ad Ephesians. ver. 4. loc. de Just.
but ye are washed, etc. Zanchius having spoken concerning this sense of
Justification, adds saying; There is another signification of the word, viz.
for a man from Unjust to be made Just, even as sanctified, signifies from
unholy to be made holy: In which signification the Apostle said (in the place
above cited) And such were some of you, etc. that is, of unclean ye are made
holy, and of unjust ye are made just by the Holy Spirit, for Christ's sake, in
whom ye have believed. Of this signification is that Rev. 22.11. Let him that
is just, be just still, that is, really from just become more just, even as
from unjust he became just. And according to this signification the Fathers,
and especially Augustine, have Interpreted this word. H. Bullinger.
Thus far he. H. Bullinger on the same place 1 Cor. 6. speaks thus; By diverse
words (says he) the Apostle signifies the same thing, when he says, ye are
washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified.

Secondly: In that Excellent Saying of the Apostle so much observed, Romans 8.30.
Whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified them he also
glorified: This is commonly called the Golden Chain, as being acknowledged to
Comprehend the Method and Order of Salvation. And therefore, if [ Justified]
were not understood here in its proper signification, of being made just,
Sanctification would be excluded out of this Chain. Righteousness, the only
Medium, by which from our Calling we pass to Glorification.
And truly, it is very worthy of observation, that the Apostle in this succinct
and compendious Account makes the word [ Justified] to comprehend all betwixt
Calling and Glorifying; thereby clearly insinuating, that the being really
Righteous is that only Medium, by which from our Calling we pass to
Glorification. All for the most part do acknowledge the word to be so taken in
this place; and not only so, but most of those, who oppose, are forced to
acknowledge, that as this is the most proper, so the most common Signification
of it: thus diverse famous Protestants do acknowledge? We are not (says D.
Chamierus) such Impertinent Esteemers of words, as to be ignorant, nor yet such
importunate Sophists, as to deny, that the words of Justification and
Sanctification do infer one another; yea we know, that the Saints are chiefly
for this Reason so called, D. Chamier. Tom. 3. de Sanct. l. 10. c. 1.
because that in Christ they have received Remission of Sins: and we read in
the Revelation, Let him, that is just, be just still; which cannot be
understood, except of the fruit of Inherent Righteousness. Nor do we deny, but
perhaps in other places they may be promiscuously taken, especially by the
Father: I take, says Beza, the name of Justification largely, Beza in cap. 3.
ad Tit. verse. 7.
so as it comprehends, whatsoever we acquire from Christ, as well by
Imputation, as by the Efficacy of the Spirit in sanctifying us. So likewise is
the word of Justification taken, Romans 8.30. Melanchthon says, Melancht. in
Apol. Confess. Aug.
that to be justified by Faith signifies in Scripture not only to be pronounced
Just, but also of Unrighteous to be made Righteous. Also some Chief
Protestants, though not so clearly, yet in part hinted at our Doctrine, whereby
we ascribe unto the Death of Christ Remission of Sins, and the work of
Justification unto the Grace of the Spirit acquired by his Death. Boraeus, in
Genesis c. 15. ad verb* Credidit Abraham Deo, page 161.
Martinus Boraeus explaining that place of the Apostle, Romans 4.25. Who was
given for our sins, and rose again for our Justification, says: There are two
things beheld in Christ, which are necessary to our Justification; the one is
his Death, the other is his Arising from the dead. By his Death the sins of
this World behoved to be Expiated: By his Rising from the dead, it pleased the
same goodness of God to give the Holy Spirit, whereby both the Gospel is
believed, and the Righteousness lost by the fault of the first Adam, is
restored. And afterward he says; The Apostle expresses both parts in these
words, Who was given for our sins, etc. In his Death is beheld the Satisfaction
for sin; in his Resurrection the Gift of the Holy Spirit, by which our
Justification is perfected. And again the same man says elsewhere; Idem lib.
3. Reg. cap. 9. v. 4. page 681.
Both these kinds of Righteousness are therefore contained in Justification;
neither can the one be separate from the other. So that in the Definition of
Justification, the Merit of the Blood of Christ is included both with the
Remission of sins, and with the gift of the Holy Spirit of Justification and
Regeneration. Martinus Bucerus says; Seeing by one sin of Adam the world was
lost, Bucerus in Romans 4. ad ver. 16.
the Grace of Christ has not only abolished that one sin, and death which came
by it; but has together taken away those infinite sins, and also led into full
Justification, as many as are of Christ: so that God now not only Remits unto
them Adam 's sin and their own, but also gives them therewith the Spirit of a
solid and perfect Righteousness, Righteousness, a Conformity to the Image of
the First-begotten.
which renders us Conform unto the Image of the First-Begotten. And upon these
words [by Jesus Christ] he says; We always judge, that the whole benefit of
Christ tends to this, that we might be strong through the Gift of
Righteousness, being rightly and orderly adorned with all virtue, that is,
restored to the Image of God. And lastly, William Forbes our Countryman, W.
Forbes in Considerat. Modest. de Just. lib. 2. Sect 8.
Bishop of Edinburgh says; Whenever the Scripture makes mention of the
Justification before God, as speaks Paul, and from him (besides others)
Augustine, it appears, that the word [Justify] necessarily signifies not only to
pronounce Just in a Law- sense; but also really and inherently to make Just,
because that God does otherways justify a wicked man, than Earthly Judges. For
he, when he Justifies a wicked or unjust man, How God justifies the Wicked.
does indeed pronounce him, as these also do; but by pronouncing him Just,
because his Judgment is according to Truth, he also makes him really of Unjust
to become Just. And again the same man upon the same occasion, answering the
more rigid Protestants, who say, That God first justifies, and then makes just;
he adds: But let them have a care, lest by too great and empty subtilty,
unknown both to the Scriptures and the Fathers, they lessen and diminish the
weight and dignity of so great and Divine a Benefit so much celebrated in the
Scripture, to wit, Justification of the Wicked. For if to the formal Reason of
Justification of the Ungodly does not at all belong his Justification, ( so to
speak) i. e. his being made Righteous, then in the Justification of a sinner,
although he be justified, yet the stain of sin is not taken away, but remains
the same in his Soul, as before Justification. And so notwithstanding the
benefit of Justification, he remains as before, Unjust and a Sinner; and
nothing is taken away, but the Guilt and obligation to Pain, and the Offense
and Enmity of God through non-Imputation. But both the Scriptures and Fathers
do affirm, that in the Justification of a sinner their sins are not only
remitted, forgiven, covered, not imputed, but also taken away, blotted out,
cleansed, washed, purged and very far removed from us, as appears from many
places of the Holy Scriptures. The same Forbes shows us at length in the
following Chapter, that this was the Confessed Judgment of the Fathers out of
the Writings of those, who hold the contrary Opinion; some whereof out of him I
shall note. Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 11. 15.
As First: Calvin says; That the Judgment of Augustine, or at lest his manner
of speaking is not throughout to be received, who although he took from man all
praise of Righteousness, and ascribed all to the Grace of God; yet he refers
Grace to Sanctification, by which we are Regenerate through the Spirit unto
newness of life. Chemnitius says, That they do not deny, but that the Fathers
take the word [Justify] for Renewing, Chemnitius in Exam. Council. Trid. de
Just. p. 129.
by which works of Righteousness are wrooght in us by the Spirit. And p. 130. I
am not ignorant, that the Fathers indeed often use the word [Justify] in this
signification, to wit, of making just. Zanchius says, That the Fathers, and
chiefly Augustine interpret the word [Justify] according to this signification,
Zanchius in cap. 2. ad Ephesians. ver. 4. loc. de Just. These. 1.5.
to wit, of making Just, so that according to them, to be Justified was no
other, than of Unjust to be made Just through the Grace of God for Christ. He
mentions more, but this may suffice to our purpose.

Justification is to be understood a really being made Righteous, I do boldly
affirm, and that not only from a Notional Knowledge, Christ revealed and formed
in the Soul of a man, is the formal Cause of man's Justification.
but from a real inward, experimental Feeling of the thing, that the Immediate,
Nearest, or Formal Cause (if we must in Condescendence to some use this word)
of a man's Justification in the sight of God is, the Revelation of Jesus Christ
in the Soul, changing, altering and renewing the mind, by whom (even the Author
of this inward Work) thus formed and revealed, we are truly justified and
accepted covered and clothed with him, in whom the Father is always
well-pleased, that we may draw near to God, and stand with Confidence before
his Throne, being purged by the blood of Jesus inwardly poured into our Souls,
and clothed with his life and righteousness therein revealed. And this is that
Order and Method of Salvation held forth by the Apostle in that Divine saying,
Romans 5.10. For if, when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death
of his Son; much more being Reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. For the
Apostle first holding forth the Reconciliation wrought by the Death of Christ,
wherein God is near to receive and redeem man, holds forth his Salvation and
Justification to be by the Life of Jesus: Now, that this Life is an Inward,
Spiritual thing revealed in the Soul, whereby it is renewed and brought forth
out of Death, where it naturally has been by the Fall, and so quickened and made
alive unto God, the same Apostle shows, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in
Sins and Trespasses, he has quickened us together in Christ (by whose Grace ye
are saved) and has raised us up together. Now, this none will deny to be the
Inward Work of Renovation; and therefore the Apostle gives that Reason of their
being saved by Grace, which is the inward Virtue and Power of Christ in the
Soul: but of this place more hereafter. Of the Revelation of this Inward Life
the Apostle also speaks 2 Cor. 4.10. That the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our bodies; and v. 11. That the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our mortal flesh. Now, this inward Life of Jesus is that,
whereby* as is before observed, he says, We are saved.

Secondly: That it is by this Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the New in Us,
that we are Justified, does evidently appear from that Excellent Saying of the
Apostle included in the Proposition it self, Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy
he has saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy
Ghost, etc. Now that, whereby we are saved, that we are also no doubt Justified
by, which words are in this respect Synonymous. The Immediate Cause of
Justification is the inward Work of Regeneration.
Here the Apostle clearly ascribes the Immediate Cause of Justification to this
inward work of Regeneration, which is Jesus Christ Revealed in the Soul; as
being that, which formally states us in a capacity of being Reconciled with
God: the Washing or Regeneration being that inward Power and Virtue, whereby
the Soul is cleansed and clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, so as to be
made fit to appear before God.

Thirdly: This Doctrine is manifest from 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your own It
appears here, how earnest the Apostle was, that they should know Christ in
them; so that he presses this Exhortation upon them, and inculcates it three
times. Secondly, The Cause of Reprobation is Christ not known by Inward
Revelation.
he makes the Cause of Reprobation or Not-justification the Want of Christ thus
Revealed and known in the Soul: whereby it necessarily follows by the Rule of
Contraries, where the parity is alike (as in this case it is evident) that,
Where Christ is inwardly known, there the persons subjected to him are Approved
and Justified. For there can be nothing more plain than this, that if we must
know Christ in us, except we be Reprobates, or Vnjustified persons; that if we
do know him in us, we are not Reprobates, and consequently Justified ones. Like
unto this is that other saying of the same Apostle, Gal. 4.19. My little
Children, of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you; and
therefore the Apostle terms this Christ within, the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.27,
28. Now that, which is the hope of glory, can be no other, than that which we
immediately and most nearly Rely upon for our Justification, and that whereby
we are really and truly made Just. And as we do not hereby deny, but the
Original and Fundamental Cause of our Justification is the love of God
manifested in the Appearance of Jesus Christ in the flesh, who by his life,
death, Christ by his Death and Sufferings has opened a way for our
Reconciliation.
sufferings and obedience made a way for our Reconciliation, and became a
Sacrifice for the Remission of sins that are past, and purchased unto us this
Seed and Grace, from which this Birth arises, and in which Jesus Christ is
inwardly Received, formed and brought forth in us, in his own pure and holy
Image of Righteousness; by which our Souls live unto God, and are clothed with
him, and have put him on, even as the Scripture speaks, Ephesians. 4.23, 24 Gal.
3.27. We stand Justified and Saved in and by him, and by his Spirit and Grace,
Romans 3.24. 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.7. So again reciprocally we are hereby made
partakers of the fullness of his Merits, and his cleansing Blood is near, to
wash away every Sin and Infirmity, and to heal all our backslidings, as often
as we turn toward him by unfeigned Repentance, and become Renewed by his
Spirit. Those then, that find him thus Raised and Ruling in them, have a true
ground of Hope to believe, that they are Justified by his Blood. But let not
any deceive themselves, so as to foster themselves in a vain Hope and
Confidence, that by the Death and Sufferings of Christ they are Justified, so
long as sin lies at their door, Genesis 4.7. Iniquity prevails, and they remain
yet Unrenewed and Unregenerate; lest it be said unto them, I know you not. Let
that saying of Christ be remembered, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord* shall
enter, but he, that does the Will of my Father, Matthew. 7.21. To which let these
excellent sayings of the beloved Disciple be added; Little Children, let no man
deceive you, he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous:
He that commits sin, is of the Devil, because if our heart condemn us, God
is greater than our heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.7. and 20.

Many famous Protestants bear witness to this inward Justification by Christ
inwardly Revealed and Formed in man. Borhaeus in Genesis page 162.
As 1. M. Borhaeus: In the Imputation (says he) wherein Christ is Ascribed and
Imputed to believers for Righteousness, the Merit of his Blood, and the Holy
Ghost given unto us by virtue of his Merits, are equally Included. And so it
shall be Confessed, The Testimonies of Famous Protestants of Inward
Justification.
that Christ is our Righteousness as well from his Merit, Satisfaction and
Remission of sins obtained by him, as from the Gifts of the Spirit of
Righteousness. And if we do this, we shall consider the whole Christ proposed
to us for our Salvation, and not any single part of him. The same man p. 169.
In our Justification then Christ is considered, who breaths and lives in us, to
wit, by his Spirit put-on by us; concerning which putting-on the Apostle says,
Ye have put on Christ. And again, p. 171. We endeavor to Treat in
Justification not of part of Christ, but him wholly, in so far as he is our
Righteousness every way. And a little after; As then blessed Paul in our
Justification, when he says, Whom he Justified, them he Glorified, comprehends
all things, which pertain to our being Reconciled to God the Father, and our
Renewing, which fits us for attaining unto Glory, such as Faith, Righteousness,
Christ, and the Gift of Righteousness exhibited by him, whereby we are
Regenerated to the fulfilling of the Justification, which the Law requires: so
we also will have all things comprehended in this cause, which are contained in
the Recovery of Righteousness and and Innocence. And p. 181. The Form (says
he) of our Justification is the Divine Righteousness it self, by which we are
formed just and good. This is Jesus Christ, who is esteemed our Righteousness
partly from the Forgiveness of sins, and partly from the Renewing and the
Restoring of that Integrity, which was lost by the fault of the first Adam: so
that this New and Heavenly Adam being put-on by us (of which the Apostle says,
Ye have put on Christ) ye have put him on, I say, as the Form, so the
Righteousness, Wisdom and Life of God. So also affirms Claudius Alberius
Inuncunanus: Inuncunanus.
see his Orat. Apodict. Lausaniae Excus. 1587. Orat. 2. p. 86, 87. Zuinglius
also in his Epistle to the Princes of Germany, as cited by Himmelius, Zuinglius.
c. 7. p. 60. says, That the Sanctification of the Spirit is true
Justification, Essius.
which alone suffices to Justify. Essius upon 1 Cor. 6.11. says, Lest
Christian Righteousness should be thought to consist in the Washing alone, that
is, in the Remission of Sins, he adds the other Degree or part, [but ye are
sanctified] that is, Ye have attained to Purity, so that ye are now truly holy
before God. Lastly, expressing the sum of the Benefit received in one word,
which includes both the parts; But ye are Justified (the Apostle adds) in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ (that is, by his Merits) and in the Spirit of our
God (that is, the Holy Spirit proceeding from God, and communicated to us by
Christ.) And lastly R. Baxter, R. Baxter.
a famous English Preacher (who yet lives) in his Book called Aphorisms of
Justification, p. 80. says, That some ignorant Wretches gnash their Teeth at
this Doctrine, as if it were flat Popery* not understanding the nature of the
Righteousness of the New Covenant; which is all out of Christ in our selves,
tho wrought by the Power of the Spirit of Christ in us.

IX. The Third thing proposed to be considered is, Concerning Good I suppose
there is enough said before to clear us from any Imputation of being Popish in
this matter. Good Works.


But if it be queried; Whether we have not said, or will not affirm, that a man
is Justified by Works?

I answer: I hope none need, neither ought to take Offense, plain language of
the Holy Scripture, which says expressly in Answer hereunto, James 2.24. Ye see
then, That Works are necessary to Justification.
how that by Works a man is Justified, and not by Faith only. I shall not offer
to prove the Truth of this saying, since what is said in this Chapter by the
Apostle, is sufficient to Convince any man, that will read and believe it; I
shall only from this derive this one Argument: If no man can be Justified
without Faith, and no Faith be living, Justification without Works, Then Works
are necessary to Justification:

But the First is true: Therefore also the Last.

For this Truth is so apparent and evident in the Scriptures, that for the
proof of it we might transcribe most of the Precepts of the Gospel. I shall
Instance a few, which of themselves do so clearly Assert the thing in Question,
that they need no Commentary, nor further Demonstration. And then I shall
answer the Objections made against this; which indeed are the Arguments used
for the Contrary Opinion, Hebr. 12.14. Not the Sayers, but the Doers are
blessed.
Without holiness no man shall see God. Matthew. 7.21. Not every one, that says
unto me, Lord, Lord! shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven; but he that does
the Will of my Father, which is in heaven. Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things,
happy are ye, if ye do them. 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the Commandments of God. Rev.
22.14. Blessed are they, that do his Commandments, that they may have right to
the Tree of Life, and through the Gates may enter into the City: And many more,
that might be Instanced: From all which I thus Argue; If those only can Enter
into the Kingdom, do the Will of the Father; If those be accounted only the
Wise builders and happy, that do the sayings of Christ; If no Observations
avail, but only the keeping of the Commandments; and if they be blessed, that
do the Commandments, and thereby have right to the Tree of Life, and Entrance
through the Gate into the City, Then Works are absolutely necessary to
Salvation and Justification.

But the First is true: And therefore also the Last.

The Consequence of the Antecedent is so clear and evident, that I think no man
of sound Reason will call for a proof of it.

X. Object. 1.
But they Object, that Works are not necessary to Justification, First; Because
of that saying of Christ, Luke 17.10. When ye shall have done all these things,
that are Commanded you, say We are unprofitable servants, etc.

Answer: As to God, we are indeed Unprofitable, for he needs nothing; neither
can we Add any thing unto him: Unprofitable Servants.
but as to our selves, we are not Unprofitable; else it might be said, that it
is not profitable for a man to keep God's Commandments: Absurd, and would
Contradict Christ's Doctrine throughout. God needs nothing.
Does not Christ, Matthew. 5. through all those Beatitudes pronounce men blessed
for their purity, for their meekness, for their peaceableness, etc? And is not
then that, for which Christ pronounces men blessed, profitable unto them?
Moreover Matthew. 25.21, 23. does not Christ pronounce the men good and faithful
servants, Those that had improved their Talents, were called Good and Faithful
Servants.
that Improved their Talents? Was not their doing of that then profitable unto
them? And verse. 30. it is said of him, that hid his Talent, and did not Improve
it; Cast ye the Unprofitable servant into utter darkness. If then their not
improving of the Talent made the man Unprofitable, and he was therefore cast
into utter darkness, it will follow by the Rule of Contraries, so far at least,
that the Improving made the other profitable; seeing, if our Adversaries will
allow us to believe Christ's words, this is made a Reason, and so at least a
Cause Instrumental of their Acceptance, Well done good and faithful Servant,
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many
things, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

Secondly, They object those sayings of the Apostle, where he excludes the
deeds of the Law from Justification, as first; Romans 3.20. Because by the deeds
of the Law there shall be no flesh justified in his sight: and v. 28. Therefore
we conclude, that a man is Justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law.

Answ. We have shown already, what place we give to Works, even to best of
Works in Justification; and how we ascribe its Immediate and Formal Cause to
the Worker brought forth in us, The Works of the Gospel or Grace distinguished
from the Works of the Law.
but not to the Works. But in answer to this Objection I say, There is a great
difference betwixt the works of the Law, and those of Grace or of the Gospel:
The first are excluded, the second not, but are necessary. The first are those,
which are performed in man's own will and by his strength, in a conformity to
the outward Law and Letter; and therefore are man's own Imperfect Works, or
works of the Law, which makes nothing perfect: And to this belong all the
Ceremonies, Purifications, Washings and Traditions of the Jews. The second are
the works of the Spirit of Grace in the heart wrought in Conformity to the
Inward and Spiritual Law: which Works are not wrought in man's Will, nor by his
power and ability, but in and by the Power and Spirit of Christ in us, and
therefore are pure and perfect in their kind; as shall hereafter be proved: and
may be called Christ's Works, for that he is the Immediate Author and Worker of
them. Such Works we affirm absolutely Necessary to Justification, so that a man
cannot be Justified without them; and all Faith without them is dead and
useless, as the Apostle James says. Now that such a Distinction is to be
admitted, and that the Works excluded by the Apostle in the matter of
Justification, are of the first kind, will appear, if we consider the Occasion
of the Apostle mentioning this, as well here, as throughout in his Epistle to
the Galatians, where he speaks of this matter and to this purpose at large:
which was this; That, whereas many of the Gentiles, that were not of the Race
nor Seed of Abraham as concerning the flesh, were come to be Converted to the
Christian Faith and believe in him, some of those, that were of the Jewish
Proselytes, thought to subject the faithful and believing Gentiles to the Legal
Ceremonies and Observations, as necessary to their Justification: The Occasion
of the Apostles speaking of the Works of the Law, which are Excluded.
This gave the Apostle Paul occasion at length in his Epistle to the Romans,
Galatians, and elsewhere, to show the Use and Tendency of the Law and of its
Works, and to Contradistinguish them from the Faith of Christ and Righteousness
thereof; showing, how the former was Ceased, and become Ineffectual; the other
Remaining, and yet Necessary. And that the Works excluded by the Apostle are of
this kind of Works of the Law, appears by the whole strain of his Epistle to
the Galatians, Chap. 1, 2, 3 and 4. For after (in Chap. 4.) he upbraideth them
for their returning unto the Observation of days and times and that (in the
beginning of Chap. 5.) he shows them their Folly, and the Evil Consequence of
adhering to the Ceremonies of Circumcision, then he adds v. 6. For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails, but Faith, which
works by love; and thus he concludes again, chapter 6. v. 15. For in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision avails, nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature. From
which places appears that distinction of Works aforementioned, whereof the
one is excluded, the other necessary to Justification. For the Apostle shows
here, that Circumcision (which word is often used to comprehend the whole
Ceremonies and legal Performances of the Jews) is not Necessary, nor does
avail. Here are then the Works, which are excluded, by which no man is
Justified; but Faith, which works by love, but the New Creature, this is
that, which avails, which is Absolutely necessary: for Faith, that works by
love, cannot be without Works; for as is said in the same 5 Chap. v. 22. Love
is a Work of the Spirit: Also the New Creature, if it avail and be necessary,
cannot be without Works; seeing it is natural for it to bring forth Works of
Righteousness. Again, that the Apostle no ways intends to exclude such good
Works, appears, in that in the same Epistle he Exhorts the Galatians to them,
The Usefulness and Necessity of good Works.
and holds forth the Usefulness and Necessity of them, and that very plainly,
c. 6. v. 7, 8, 9. Be not deceived, says he, God is not mocked; for whatsoever
man sows, that shall he also reap: for he that sows to the flesh shall of
the flesh reap corruption; but he, that sows in the Spirit* shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting. And let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due
season we shall reap, if we faint not. Does it not hereby appear, how necessary
the Apostle would have the Galatians know, that he esteemed good Works to be?
to wit, not the outward Ceremonies and Traditions of the Law, but the fruits of
the Spirit mentioned a little before; by which Spirit he would have them to be
led, and walk in those good Works: As also how much he ascribes to these good
Works, by which he affirms Life Everlasting is Reaped. Now that cannot be
useless to man's Justification, which Capacitates him to Reap so rich a Harvest.

But lastly* for a full Answer to this Objection, and for the Establishing of
Doctrine of good Works, I shall instance another saying of the same Apostle
Paul, which our Adversaries also in the blindness of their Minds make use of
against us, to wit, Tit. 3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness, Justified not by
our legal performances, but the fruits of the Spirit.
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy Ghost. It is generally granted by all,
that [ Saved] is here all one, as if it had been said [ Justified:] Now, there
are two kinds of Works here mentioned, one by which we are not saved, that is,
not Justified; and another by which we are saved, or justified. The first, the
Works of Righteousness, which we have wrought, that is, which we in our first,
fallen Nature, by our own strength have wrought, our own legal performances;
and therefore may be truly and properly called ours, whatever specious
Appearances they may seem to have. And that it must needs, and ought so to be
understood, does appear from the other part, But by the washing of Regeneration
and Renewing of the Holy Ghost; seeing Regeneration is a Work comprehensive of
many good Works, even of all those, which are called the Fruits of the Spirit.

Object.
Now, in case it should be objected, That these may also be called Ours, because
wrought in us, and also by us many times, as Instruments.

former. For in the first we are yet alive in our own natural State, unrenewed,
working of our selves, seeking to save our selves, by imitating and
endeavoring a Conformity to the outward Letter of the Law, and so wrestling
and striving in the Carnal Mind, that is Enmity to God, and in the Cursed Will
not yet subdued. But in this second we are Crucified with Christ, we are become
dead with him, have partaken of the fellowship of his sufferings, are made
Conformable to his death, and our first man, our old man with all his deeds, as
well the openly wicked, as the seeming righteous, our Legal Endeavors and
foolish Wrestlings are all buried and nailed to the Cross of Christ: and so it
is no more We, Not We, but Christ in us is the worker of Righteousness.
but Christ alive in us, the Worker in us. So that though it be We in a sense,
yet it is according to that of the Apostle to the same Gal. c. 2. v. 2O. I am
crucified, yet nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; not I,
but the Grace of Christ in me. These Works are especially to be ascribed to the
Spirit of Christ, and Grace of God in us, as being immediately thereby acted
and led in them, and enabled to perform them. And this manner of Speech is not
strained, but familiar to the Apostles, as appears Gal. 2.8. For he, that
wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same
was mighty in me, etc. Phil. 2.13. For it is God, which works in you both to
will and to do, etc. So that it appears by this place, that since the Washing
of Regeneration is necessary to Justification, and that Regeneration
comprehends Works, Works are necessary; and that these Works of the Law, that
are excluded, are different from these, that are necessary and admitted.

XI. Thirdly they Object, That no Works, yea not the Works of Christ in us can
have place in Justification, because nothing that is impure, can be useful in
it; and all the Works wrought in us, are Impure. For this they allege that
saying of the Prophet Isaiah, c. 64. v. 6. All our righteousness are as filthy
Rags; adding this reason, That seeing we are Impure, so must our Works be;
which, though good in themselves, yet as performed by us, they receive a
tincture of Impurity, even as a clean Water passing through an unclean Pipe is
defiled.

Impure Works are useful to Justification, is Confessed; but that all the Works
wrought in the Saints are such, is Denied: And for answer to this the former
Distinction will serve. We Confess, that the first sort of Works
abovementioned, are Impure; but not the second: because the first are wrought
in the unrenewed State, but not the other. And as for that of Isaiah, it must
relate to the first kind; for though he says, What sort of Righteousness is as
filthy Rags.
All our Righteousness are as filthy Rags, yet that will not Comprehend the
Righteousness of Christ in us, but only that, which we work of and by our
selves. For should we so Conclude, then it would follow, that we should throw
away all Holiness and Righteousness, since that which is filthy Rags, and as a
menstruous Garment, ought to be thrown away; yea, it would follow, that all the
fruits of the Spirit mentioned Gal. 4. were as filthy Rags: whereas on the
contrary, some of the Works of the Saints are said to have a Sweat savor in
the nostrils of the Lord; are said to be an Ornament of great price in the
sight of God; are said to Prevail with him, and to be Acceptable to him; which
filthy Rags and a menstruous Garment cannot be. Yea many famous Protestants
have acknowledged, that this place is not therefore so to be understood.
Calvin's and others their sense concerning Isa. 64 6. of our Righteousness.
Calvin upon this place says, That it is used to be cited by some, that they
may prove, there is so little Merit in our Works, that they are before God
filthy and defiled: but this seems to me to be different from the Prophet's
Mind, (says he) seeing he speaks not here of all Mankind. Musculus upon this
place says, Musculus.
That it was usual for this people to presume much of their legal
Righteousness, as if thereby they were made Clean; nevertheless they had no
more Cleanness, than the unclean Garment of a man. Others expone this place
concerning all the Righteousness of our flesh; that Opinion indeed is true: Yet
I think that the Prophet did rather accommodate these sayings to the Impurity
of that people in legal Terms. The Author (commonly supposed Bertius) speaking
concerning the True Sense of Chap. 7. of the Epistle to the Romans, ( Bertius)
Epistolae praefixae dissert. ann.
has a Digression touching this of Isaiah, saying; This place is commonly
corrupted by a pernicious wresting: for it is still alleged, as if the meaning
thereof inferred the most Excellent Works of the best Christians, etc. Ja.
Coret Apolog. Impress. Paris. ann. 1597^ page 78.
James Coret a French Minister in the Church of Basil, in his Apology
concerning Justification, against Alescales says; Nevertheless according to
the Counsel of certain good men I must admonish the Reader, that it never come
into our minds to abuse that saying of Isa. 64.6. against good Works, in which
it is said, that all our Righteousness are as filthy Rags, as if we would have
that, which is good in our good Works, and proceeds from the Holy Spirit, to
be esteemed as a filthy and unclean thing.

XII. As to the other part, That seeing the best of men are still Impure and
Imperfect, therefore their Works must be so; It is to beg the question, and
depends upon a Proposition denied: and which is to be discussed at further
length in the next Proposition. But though we should suppose a man not
thoroughly perfect in all respects, yet will not that hinder, but good and
perfect Works in their kind may be brought forth in them by the Spirit of
Christ: Neither does the Example of Water going through an unclean Pipe hit the
matter; because, though Water may be capable to be tinctured with Uncleanness,
yet the Spirit of God cannot, whom we assert to be the Immediate Author of
those Works, that avail in Justification: and therefore Jesus Christ his Works
in his Children are pure and perfect, and he works in and through that pure
thing of his own forming and creating in them. Moreover if this did hold
according to our Adversaries supposition, That no man ever was or can be
perfect, it would follow, that the very Miracles and Works of the Apostles,
which Christ wrought in them, Were the Miracles and Works of the Apostles
wrought by the power of Christ in them, Impure and Imperfect?
and they wrought in and by the Power, Spirit and Grace of Christ, were also
Impure and Imperfect: such as their Converting of the Nations to the Christian
Faith; their gathering of the Churches, their writing of the Holy Scriptures,
yea, and their Offering up and Sacrificing of their Lives for the Testimony of
Jesus. What may our Adversaries think of this Argument, whereby it will follow,
that the Holy Scriptures, whose Perfection and Excellency they seem so much to
magnify, are proved to be Impure and Imperfect, because they came through
Impure and Imperfect Vessels? It appears by the Confessions of Protestants,
that the Fathers did frequently attribute unto Works of this kind, that
Instrumental Work, which we have spoken of in Justification (albeit some
ignorant persons cry out, that it is Popery) and also diverse, and that famous
Protestants do of themselves Confess it. Amandus Polanus in his Symphonia
Catholica, Am. Polanus.
c. 27. de Remissione Peccatorum, Our Doctrine of Justification and Works, is
not Popery.
p. 651. places this These as the Common Opinion of Protestants, most agreeable
to the Doctrine of the Fathers. We obtain the Remission of Sins by Repentance,
Confession, Prayers and Tears proceeding from Faith, but do not Merit, to speak
properly; and therefore we obtain Remission of Sins not by the Merit of our
Repentance and Prayers, but by the Mercy and Goodness of God. Gentiletus Ex.
Impressi. Genev. 151^.
Innocentius Gentiletus (a Lawyer of great fame among Protestants) in his
Examen of the Council of Trent, p. 66, 67. of Justification, having before
spoken of Faith and Works, adds these words: But seeing, the one cannot be
without the other, we call them both conjunctly Instrumental Causes. Zanchius.
Zanchius in his 5. Book de Natura Dei says, We do not simply deny that good
Works are the Cause of Salvation, to wit, the Instrumental, rather than the
Efficient Cause, which they call [sine qua non] And afterward, Good Works are
the Instrumental Cause of the possession of Life Eternal, for by these, as by a
means and a lawful way, G. Ames. in Medulla S. Theologiae, l. 2. c. 1. These. 30.
God leads unto the possession of Life Eternal. G. Amesius says, That our
Obedience, albeit it be not the Principal and Meritorious Cause of Life
Eternal, is nevertheless a Cause in some respect administering, helping and
advancing toward the possession of the Life. R. Baxter.
Also R. Baxter in the Book above cited, p. 155. says, That we are Justified
by Works in the same kind of Causality, as by Faith, to wit, as being both
Causes sine qua non, or Conditions of the New Covenant on our part requisite to
Justification. And p. 195. he says, It is needless to teach any Scholar, who
has read the writings of Papists, how this Doctrine differs from them.

Of the Merit and Reward of Works.
But lastly, because it is fit here to say something of the Merit and Reward of
Works, I shall add something in this place of our Sense and Belief concerning
that matter. We are far from thinking or believing, that man Merits any thing
by his Works from God, all being of Free Grace; and therefore do we, and always
have denied that Popish Notion of Meritum ex Condigno. Nevertheless we cannot
deny, but that God out of his Infinite goodness, wherewith he has loved
mankind, after he Communicates to him his holy Grace and Spirit, does,
according to his own Will, Recompense and Reward the good Works of his
Children: and therefore this Merit of Congruity or Reward, God Rewards the good
Words of his Children.
in so far as the Scripture is plain and positive for it, we may not deny;
neither wholly Reject the Word, in so far as the Scripture makes use of it. For
the same Greek (...), which signifies [ Merit] is also in those places, where
the Translators express it Worth, or Worthy, as Matthew. 3.8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 8. concerning which R. Baxter says in the above cited Book, p. 8.
But in a larger sense, as Promise is an Obligation, and the thing Promised is
said to be Debt, so the Performers of the Conditions are called Worthy, and
that, which they Perform, Merit; although properly all be of Grace, and not of
Debt. Also those, who are called the Fathers of the Church, frequently used
this word of Merit, whose sayings concerning this matter I think not needful to
insert; because it is not doubted, but evident, that many Protestants are not
averse from this word, in the sense that we use it. The Apology for the
Augustan Confession, Art. 20. has these words; We agree, that Works are truly
Meritorious, not of Remission of Sins, or Justification, but they are
Meritorious of ^ther rewards Corporal and Spiritual, which are indeed as well
in this life, as after this life. And further, Seeing Works are a certain
fulfilling of the Law, they are rightly said to be Meritorious; it is rightly
said, that a Reward is due to them.

In the Acts of the Conference of Oldenburgh the Electoral Divines (p. 110. and
265.) say, Conference of Oldenburgh.
In this sense our Churches also are not Averse from the word [Merit] used by
the Fathers; neither therefore do they defend the Popish Doctrine of Merit.

G. Vossius, G. Vossius of the word Merit.
in his Theological These concerning the Merits of Good Works says; We have
not adventured to condemn the word [Merit] wholly, as being that, which both
many of the Ancients use, and also the Reformed Churches have used in their
Confessions. Now that God judges and accepts men according to their Works,
is beyond doubt to those, that seriously will read and consider these
Scriptures, Matthew. 17.26. Romans 2.6, 7, 10. 2 Cor. 5.10. James 1.25. Hebr.
10.35. 1 Pet. 1.17. Rev. 22.12.

XIII. And to conclude this Theme, let none be so bold as to mock God,
supposing themselves Justified and Accepted in the sight of God by virtue of
Christ's Death and Sufferings, while they remain unsanctified and unjustified
in their own hearts, and polluted in their sins; left their Hope prove that of
the Hypocrite, which perishes. Neither let any foolishly Imagine, Job 8.13.
that they can by their own Works, or by the performance of any Ceremonies or
Traditions, or by the giving of Gold or Money, or by afflicting their Bodies in
Will Worship and voluntary Humility, or foolishly striving to Conform their Way
to the ouward Letter of the Law, flatter themselves, that they Merit before
God, or draw a Debt upon him, The Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, but Grace
is to the Humble.
or that any man or men have power to make such kind of things Effectual to
their Justification; lest they be found foolish Boasters and Strangers to
Christ and his Righteousness indeed. But blessed for ever are they, that having
truly had a sense of their own Unworthiness and Sinfulness, and having seen all
their own Endeavors and Performances fruitless and vain, and beheld their own
Emptiness, and the vanity of their vain Hopes, Faith and Confidence, while they
remained inwardly pricked, pursued and condemned by God's Holy Witness in their
hearts, and so having applied themselves thereto, and suffered his Grace to
work in them, are become changed and renewed in the spirit of their minds, past
from death to Life, and know Jesus arisen in them, working both the Will and
the Deed; and so having put on the Lord Jesus Christ, in Effect are Clothed
with him, and partake of his Righteousness and Nature: such can draw near to
the Lord with Boldness, and know their Acceptance in and by him; in whom, and
in as many as are found in him, the Father is well-pleased.

PROPOSITION VIII. Concerning Perfection.
In whom this Pure and Holy Birth is fully brought forth, the body of Death and
Sin comes to be Crucified, and Removed, and their Hearts united and subjected
to the Truth; so as not to obey any Suggestions or Temptations of the Evil one,
to be free from Actual Sinning and Transgressing of the Law of God, and in that
respect perfect: yet does this Perfection still admit of a Growth; and there
remains always in some part a Possibility of Sinning, where the mind does not
most diligently and watchfully Attend unto the Lord.

I. SInce we have placed Justification in the Revelation of Jesus Christ formed
and brought forth in the heart, there working his Works of Righteousness, and
bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit; The question is, How far he may
prevail in us, while we are in this life, or we over our Soul's Enemies in and
by his strength? Those that plead for Justification wholly without them, merely
by Imputative Righteousness, denying the Necessity of being clothed with real
and inward Righteousness, do consequently affirm; These are the words of the
Westminster larger Catechism.
That it is Impossible for a man, even the best of men to be Free of Sin in
this life, which, they say, no man ever was: but on the contrary, that none can
neither of himself, nor by any Grace received in this life (O wicked Saying
against the power of God's Grace!) keep the Commandments of God perfectly; but
that every man does break the Commandments in thought, word and deed. Whence
they also affirm (as was a little before observed) That the very best Actions
of the Saints, their prayers, their worships are impure and polluted. Whether
it is possible to keep the Commandments of God?
We on the contrary, though we freely acknowledge this of the Natural, Fallen
Man in his first state, whatever his profession or pretense may be, so long as
he is Unconverted and Unregenerate; yet we do believe, that those, in whom
Christ comes to be formed, and the New brought forth, and born of the
Incorruptible Seed, as that Birth and man in Union therewith naturally does the
Will of God; so it is possible, so far to keep to it, Controversy stated.
as not to be found daily Transgressors of the Law of God. And for the more
clear Stating of the Controversy, let it be considered:

First: That we place not this possibility in Man's own Will and Capacity,
Notional Knowledge.
as he is a Man, the son of fallen Adam, or as he is in his natural State,
however wise or knowing, or however much endued with a Notional and Literal
Knowledge of Christ; thereby endeavoring a Conformity to the Letter of the
Law, as it is outward.

Secondly: That we attribute it wholly to man, as he is Born again, renewed in
his mind, The New Birth.
raised by Christ, knowing Christ alive reigning and ruling in him, and guiding
and leading him by his Spirit, and revealing in him the Law of the Spirit of
Life; which not only manifests and reproves sin, but also gives power to come
out of it.

Thirdly: That by this we understand not such a Perfection, as may not daily
admit of a Growth, Growth in Perfection.
and consequently mean not, as if we were to be as pure, holy and perfect, as
God in his Divine Attributes of Wisdom, Knowledge and Purity; but only a
Perfection proportionable and answerable to man's Measure, whereby we are kept
from Transgressing the Law of God, and enabled to answer what he Requires of
us: He that Improved his Two Talents, was nothing less accepted than he with
the Five.
Even as he, that improved his Two Talents, so as to make four of them,
perfected his work, and was so accepted of his Lord, as to be called a good and
faithful servant; nothing less than he, that made his Five, Ten. Even as a
little Gold is perfect Gold in its kind, as well as a great Mass: and a Child
has a perfect Body, as well as a Man, though it daily grow more and more. Thus
Christ is said Luke 2.52. to have Increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in
favor with God and Man; though before that time he had never sinned, and was
(no doubt) perfect in a true and proper sense.

Fourthly: Though a man may witness this for a season, and therefore all ought
to press after it; Wiles of the Enemy.
yet we do not affirm, but those that have attained it in a measure, may by the
wiles and temptations of the Enemy fall into Iniquity, and lose it sometimes,
if he be not watchful, and diligently attend not to that of God in the heart.
And we doubt not, but many good and holy men, who have not arrived to
Everlasting Life, have had diverse Ebbings and Flowings of this kind: Every Sin
weakens a man in his Spiritual Condition, but does not destroy him altogether.
for though every sin weaken a man in his Spiritual Condition, yet it does not
so as to destroy him altogether, or render him Incapable of rising again.

Lastly: Righteousness made Natural.
Though I affirm, that after a man has arrived to such a Condition, in which a
man may not sin, he yet may sin; I will nevertheless not deny, but there may be
a State attainable in this life, in which to do Righteousness Others may
perhaps speak more certainly of this State, as having Arrived to it; for me I
shall speak modestly, as acknowledging my self not to have Arrived at it: yet
dare I not deny it, for that it seems so positively to be asserted by the
Apostle in these words, 1 John 3.9. He, that is born of God, sins not,
neither can he, because the Seed of God remains in him.

The Controversy being thus Stated, which will serve to obviate Objections;
first to show the Absurdity of that Doctrine, that pleads for sin for term of
live, even in the Saints.

Secondly, Prove this Doctrine of Perfection from many pregnant Testimonies
Holy Scripture.

And lastly, Answer the Arguments and Objections of our Opposers.

III. The Doctrine of pleading for sin Term of life, Absurd.
First then: This Doctrine, viz that the Saints nor can, nor ever Is
Inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, glorious Power and Majesty, who is of
purer eyes, than to behold iniquity Habb. 1.13^
; who having purposed in himself to gather to him, that should Worship him, and
be Witnesses for him on Earth, a Chosen People, does also no doubt sanctify and
purify them. For God has no delight in Iniquity; but abhors Transgression: and
though he regard man in Transgression, so far as to pity him, and afford him
means to come out of it; yet he loves him not, neither delights in him, as he
is Joined thereunto. Wherefore if man must always be Joined to Sin, then God
should always be at a Distance with them, as it is written, Isa. 59.2. Your
Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you; whereas, on the contrary, the Saints are said to partake, even
while here, of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and to be one spirit with the
Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. Now no unclean thing can be so. It is expressly written, That
there is no Communion betwixt Light and Darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. But God is
Light, and every sin is Darkness in a measure: What greater stain then can
there be, than this upon God's Wisdom, Has God's Wisdom been wanting to
prepare a Means to serve and Worship him perfectly?
as if he had been wanting to prepare a Means, whereby his Children might
perfectly serve and worship him? or had not provided a Way, whereby they might
serve him in any thing; but that they must withal still serve the Devil, no
less, yea, more than himself? For he that sins, is the servant of sin, Romans
6.16. and every Sin is an Act of Service and Obedience to the Devil: So then,
if the Saints sin daily in thought, word and deed, yea, if the very Service
they offer to God, be Sin; surely, they serve the Devil more than they do God.
For besides that they give the Devil many entire Services, without mixture of
the least grain to God; they give God not the least Service, in which the Devil
has not a large share: and if their Prayers, and all their Spiritual
Peuformances be Sinful, the Devil is as much served by them in these, as God,
and in most of them much more; since they Confess, That many of them are
performed without the Leadings and Influence of God's Spirit. Now, who would
not account him a foolish Master among men, who being able to do it, and also
desirous that it might be so, yet would not provide a Way, whereby his Children
and Servants might serve him more entirely, than his avowed Enemy, or would not
guard against their serving of him; but be so Imprudent and Unadvised in his
Contrivance, that whatever Way his Servants and Children served him, they
should no less, yea often much more serve his Enemy? What may we then think of
that Doctrine, that would infer this Folly upon the Omnipotent and Only wise
GOD?

Secondly: It is Inconsistent with the Justice of God. For since he requires
Purity from his Children, Its Inconsistency with the Justice of God.
and Commands them to abstain from every Iniquity so frequently and precisely,
as shall hereafter appear; and since his Wrath is revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; it must needs follow, that he has
Capacitated man to answer his Will, or else that he Requires more, than he has
given power to perform: which is to declare him openly Unjust, and with the
slothful servant to be a Hard Master. We have elsewhere spoken of the Injustice
these men ascribe to God, in making him to damn the Wicked, to whom they
allege he never afforded any means of being good: But this is yet an
Aggravation more Irrational and Inconsistent, to say, That God will not afford
to those, whom he has Chosen to be his own (whom they confess he loves) the
Means to please him: What can follow then from so strange a Doctrine? This
Imperfection in the Saints either proceeds from God, or from themselves: If it
proceed from them, it must be, because they are short in Improving or making
use of the Power given them, whereby they are Capable to Obey; and so it is a
thing possible to them (as indeed it is by the help of that Power;) but this
our Adversaries deny: They are then not to be blamed for their Imperfection and
Continuing in sin, since it is not possible to them to do otherwise. If it be
not of themselves, it must be of God, who has not seen meet to allow them
Grace in that degree to produce that Effect: And what is this, but to attribute
to God the Height of Injustice, to make him require his Children to forsake
sin, and yet not to afford them sufficient means for so doing? Surely, this
makes God more Unrighteous, than Wicked men, Who will give their Children a
Stone instead of Bread?
Who if (as Christ says) Their Children require bread of them, will not give
them a stone, or instead of a fish a serpent; but these men confess, We ought
to seek of God power to Redeem us from Sin, and yet believe, They are never to
Receive such a power: such Prayers then cannot be in Faith, but are all vain.
Is not this to make God as Unjust to his Children, as Pharaoh was to the
Israelites, in requiring brick, and not giving them straw? But blessed be God,
he deals not so with those, that truly Trust in him, and Wait upon him, as
these men vainly imagine; for such Faithful ones find of a truth, that his
Grace is sufficient for them, and know, how by his power and Spirit to overcome
the Evil one.

Thirdly: This Evil Doctrine is highly Injurious to Jesus Christ, and greatly
derogates from the Power and Virtue of his Sacrifice, and renders his Coming
and Ministry, The great and principal End of Christ's Coming and Appearance was
for the removing of Sin, and to redeem us from all Iniquity.
as to the great End of it, Ineffectual. For Christ (as for other Ends) so
principally he appeared for the Removing of Sin, for gathering a righteous
Generation, that might serve the Lord in purity of mind, and walk before him in
fear, and bring-in Everlasting Righteousness, and that Evangelical Perfection,
which the Law could not do: Hence he is said Tit. 2.14. to have Given himself
for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good Works; This is certainly spoken of the Saints,
while upon Earth. But contrary thereunto these men Affirm, That we are never
Redeemed from all Iniquity; and so make Christ's giving of himself for us void
and ineffectual, and give the Apostle Paul the Lie plainly, by denying, That
Christ purifieth to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. How are
they Zealous of Good works, who are ever committing Evil ones? How are they a
Purified people, that are still in Impurity; as are they, that daily sin,
unless sin be accounted no Impurity? Moreover it is said expressly, 1 John.. 3.5,
8. That for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil; and ye know, that he was manifested to take away our
sins: But these men make this purpose of none Effect; for they will not have
the Son of God to destroy the works of the Devil in his Children in this World:
Neither will they at all believe, that he was manifest to take away our sins;
seeing they plead a necessity of always living in them. And lest any should
wrest this place of the Apostle, as if it were spoken only of Taking away the
guilt of sin, as if it related not to this life, the Apostle as of purpose to
obviate such an Objection, adds in the two following verses, Whosoever abides
in him, sins not, etc. I hope then, they sin not daily in thought, word and
deed. Let no man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is Righteous, even as
he is Righteous; he that commits sin, is of the Devil: But he, that sins
daily in thought, word and deed, commits sin; how comes such a one then to
be the Child of God? And if Christ was manifest to take away sin, how strangely
do they overturn the Doctrine of Christ, that deny, that it is ever taken away
here? And how Injurious are they to the Efficacy and Power of Christ's
Appearance? Came not Christ to gather a people out of Sin into Righteousness,
out from the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of the Dear Son of God? and are
not they, that are thus gathered by him, his Servants, his Children, his
Brethren, his Friends? Who as he was, so are they to be in this World holy,
pure and undefiled. And does not Christ still Watch over them, Stand by them,
Pray for them, Preserve them by his Power and Spirit, Walk in them, and Dwell
among them; The Devil dwells among the Reprobates.
even as the Devil on the other hand does among the Reprobate ones? How comes
it then, that the Servants of Christ are less his Servants, than the Devil's
are his? or is Christ unwilling to have his Servants thoroughly pure? which were
gross Blasphemy to assert, contrary to many Scriptures. Or is he not able by
his Power to preserve, and enable his Children to serve him? which were no less
blasphemous to affirm of him, concerning whom the Scriptures declare, that he
has Overcome sin, death, hell and the grave, and Triumphed over them openly;
and that all power in heaven and earth is given to him. But certainly, if the
Saints sin daily in thought, word and deed, as these men Assert, they serve the
Devil daily, and are subject to his power; and so he prevails more than Christ
does, and holds the Servants of Christ in bondage, whether Christ will, or not.
But how greatly then does it Contradict the End of Christ's Coming? as it is
expressed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water, by the word: That he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be
holy and without blemish. Now if Christ has really thus answered the thing he
Came for, then the Members of this Church are not always sinning in thought,
word and deed; or there is no difference betwixt being sanctified and
unsanctified, clean and unclean, holy and unholy, being daily blemished with
sin, and being without blemish.

VI. Fourthly: This Doctrine renders the Work of the Ministry, the Preaching of
the Word, the Writing of the Scriptures, and the Prayers of the holy men
altogether Useless and Ineffectual. As to the first, Ephesians. 4.11. Pastors and
Teachers are said to be given for the perfection of Saints, etc. till we all
come in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto a measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: Now, if
there be a Necessity of sinning daily, and in all things, then there can be no
perfection; for such as do so, cannot be esteemed perfect. And if for
Effectuating this perfection in the Saints, the Ministry be appointed and
disposed of God, Pastors, Teachers and Scriptures are given for the Perfecting
of the Saints.
do not such, as deny the possibility hereof, render the Ministry Useless, and
of no profit? seeing there can be no other true Use assigned, but to lead
people out of sin into righteousness. If so be these Ministers assure us, that
we need never expect to be delivered from it, do not they render their own Work
needless? what needs Preaching against sin, for the reproving of which all
preaching is, if it can never be forsaken? Our Adversaries are Exalters of the
Scriptures in words, much crying up their usefulness and perfection: Now the
Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 3.17 that the Scriptures are for making the man of God
perfect; and if this be denied to be Attainable in this life, then the
Scriptures are of no profit: For in the other life we shall not have use for
them. It renders the Prayers of the Saints altogether Useless; seeing
themselves do Confess, they ought to pray daily, that God would deliver them
from evil, and free them from sin by the help of his Spirit and Grace, while in
this world: But though we might suppose this Absurdity to follow, that their
Prayers are without Faith; yet were not that so much, if it did not infer the
like upon the holy Apostles, who prayed earnestly for this End, and therefore
(no doubt) believed it Attainable, Col 4.12. Laboring fervently for you in
prayers, that ye may stand perfect, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. and. 5.23. etc.

Fifthly: This Doctrine is Contrary to Common Reason and Sense. For the Two
opposite Principles, whereof the one Rules in the Children of Darkness,
Darkness and Light, Sin and Righteousness Inconsistent together.
the other in the Children of Light, are Sin and Righteousness: And as they are
respectively leavened and acted by them, so they are accounted either as
Reprobated, or Justified: seeing it is Abomination in the sight Prove. 17.15.
of God either to Justify the Wicked, or Condemn the Just. Now to say, that men
cannot be so leavened with the one, as to be delivered from the other, is in
plain words to affirm, that Sin and Righteousness are Consistent, and that a
man may be truly termed Righteous, though he be daily sinning in every thing he
does. And then what difference betwixt Good and Evil? Is not this to fall into
that great abomination of Putting Light for darkness, and calling good evil,
and evil good? since they say, The very best Actions of God's Children are
defiled and polluted; and that Those, that sin daily in thought, word and deed,
are good men and women, the Saints and holy Servants of the Holy Pure God: Can
there be any thing more repugnant, than this to Common Reason? Since the
Subject is still denominated from that Accident, that does most Influence it.
As a Wall is called White, when there is much Whiteness; and black, when there
is much blackness, and such like: But when there is more Unrighteousness in a
man, than Righteousness; that man ought rather to be denominated unrighteous,
than righteous. If all daily sin, where is the Righteous man then spoken of in
Scripture?
Then surely, if every man sin daily in thought, word and deed, and that in his
Sins there is no Righteousness at all, and that all his Righteous Actions are
polluted and mixed with sin, then there is in every man more Unrighteousness,
than Righteousness; and so no man ought to be called Righteous, no man can be
said to be sanctified or washed. Where are then the Children of God? Where are
the purified ones? where are they, who were sometimes Unholy, but now Holy?
That sometimes were Darkness, but now are Light in the Lord? There can none
such be found then at this rate, except that Unrighteousness be esteemed so.
And is not this to fall into that abomination abovementioned of Justifying the
Ungodly? This certainly lands in that horrid Blasphemy of the Ranters, that
affirm, There is no difference betwixt good and evil, and that all is one in
the sight of God. I could show many more Gross Absurdities, Evil Consequences,
and manifest Contradictions plied in this sinful Doctrine; but this may suffice
at present, by which also, in a good measure, The Blasphemy of the Ranters or
Libertines.
the probation of the Truth we affirm is Advanced. Yet nevertheless for the
further Evidencing of it, I shall proceed to the second thing proposed by me,
to wit, To prove this from several Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures.

VIII. And first, I prove it from the peremptory, positive Command of Christ
and his Apostles; seeing this is a Maxim engraven in every man's naturally,
That no man is bound to that, which is Impossible. Since then Christ and his
Apostles have commanded us to keep all the Commandments, and to be perfect in
this respect, it is possible for us so to do. Be ye Perfect, etc. Ke^p my
Commandments.
Now that this is thus Commanded without any Commentary or Consequence, is
evidently apparent from these plain Testimonies, Matthew. 5.48:7.21. John 13.17.
1 Cor. 7.19. 2 Cor. 13.11. 1 John 2.3, 4, 5, 6. and 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. These Scriptures intimate a positive Command for it; they declare the
Absolute Necessity of it; and therefore, as if they had purposely been written
to answer the Objections of our Opposers, they show the Folly of those, that
will esteem themselves Children or Friends of God, while they do otherwise.

Secondly: It is Possible, because we receive the Gospel and Law thereof
Effect, and it is expressly promised to us, as we are under Grace, as appears by
these Scriptures, Romans 6.14. The possibility of it.
Sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace. And Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through
the flesh, God sending his own Son, etc. That the Righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, etc. For if this were not a Condition both requisite,
necessary and attainable under the Gospel, there were no difference betwixt the
Bringing-in of a better Hope, and the Law, which made nothing perfect: The
Difference of the Law and Gospel.
neither betwixt those, which are under the Gospel, or who under the Law
enjoyed and walked in the Life of the Gospel, and mere Legalists. Whereas the
Apostle throughout that whole sixth to the Romans argues not only the
Possibility, but Necessity of being Free from sin, from their being under the
Gospel, and under Grace, and not under the Law; and therefore states himself,
and those to whom he wrote, in that Condition in these verses 2 -- 7. and
therefore in the 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18 verses he argues both the Possibility
and Necessity of this Freedom from sin, almost in the same manner we did a
little before: and in the 22th he declares them in measure to have Attained
this Condition, in these words; But now being made free from sin, and become
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting
Life. Perfection and Freedom from sin Attained and made possible by the Gospel.
And as this Perfection or Freedom from Sin is Attained and made Possible,
where the Gospel and inward Law of the Spirit is received and known; so the
Ignorance hereof has been and is an occasion of Opposing this Truth. For man
not minding the Light and Law within his heart, which not only discovers sin,
but leads out of it, and so being a stranger to the new Life and Birth, that is
born of God, which naturally does his Will, and cannot of its own Nature
Transgress the Commandments of God, does, I say, in his Natural State look at
the Commandments, as they are without him in the Letter; The Letter kills, and
makes not alive.
and finding himself Reproved and Convicted, is by the Letter killed, but not
made alive. So man finding himself wounded, and not applying himself Inwardly
to that which can heal, labors in his own Will after a Conformity to the Law,
as it is without him; which he can never obtain: but finds, the more he
wrestles, the more he falls short. So this is the Jew still in Effect, with
his Carnal Commandment, with the Law without, in the first Covenant-state,
which makes not the Comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience,
Hebr. 9.9. though they may have here a Notion of Christianity, and an External
Faith in Christ. This has made them strain and wrest the Scriptures for an
Imputative Righteousness wholly without them, to cover their Impurities; and
this has made them imagine an Acceptance with God possible, though they
suppose it Impossible ever to Obey Christ's Commands. But alas! O deceived
Souls! That will not avail in the Day, wherein God will judge every man
according to his Works, whether good or bad. It will not save thee to say, It
was necessary for thee to sin daily in thought, word and deed; for such as do
so, have certainly obeyed unrighteousness: And what is provided for such, but
Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath, even as glory, honor and
peace, Immmortality and Eternal life to such as have done good, and patiently
continued in well-doing. So then, if thou desire to know this Perfection and
Freedom from sin possible for thee, Turn thy mind to the Light and Spiritual
Law of Christ in the heart, and suffer the Reproofs thereof; bear the Judgment
and Indignation of God upon the unrighteous part in thee, as therein it is
Revealed, which Christ has made Tolerable for thee; and so suffer Judgment in
thee to be brought forth into Victory: How we partake of Christ's Sufferings,
and are made Conformable unto his Death.
and thus come to partake of the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, and be made
Conformable unto his Death, that thou may feel thy self Crucified with him
to the World by the Power of his Cross in thee; so that that life, that
sometimes was alive in thee to this World, and the love and lusts thereof, may
die, and a New Life be raised, by which thou may live hence-forward to God,
and not to or for thy self; and with the Apostle thou may say, Gal. 2.20. It
is no more I, but Christ alive in me: and then thou will be a Christian indeed,
and not in name only, as too many are. Then thou will know, what it is to have
put off the old man with his deeds, who indeed sins daily in thought, word and
deed; and to have put on the New Man, that is renewed in holiness after the
Image of him, that has Created him, Ephesians. 4.24. and thou will witness thy self
to be God's Workmanship Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works; Matthew. 11.30.
1 John 5.3.
and so not to sin always. And to this New Man Christ's yoke is Easy and his
burden is light; though it be heavy to the Old Adam: yea, the Commandments of
God are not unto this grievous; for it is his meat and drink to be found
fulfilling the Will of God.

Lastly: This Perfection or Freedom from sin is possible, because many have
attained it; according to the express Testimony of the Scripture. Some before
the Law, Many have Attained Perfection.
and some under the Law, through witnessing and partaking of the benefit and
effect of the Gospel; and much more many under the Gospel. As first; It is
written of Enoch, Genesis 5.22, 24. that he walked with God: Enoch walked with
God, and was Perfect.
which no man, while sinning, can; nor does the Scripture record any feeling of
his. It is said of Noah, Genesis 6.9. and of Job 1.8. and of Zacharias and
Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. That they were perfect: But under the Gospel, besides that
of the Romans abovementioned, see what the Apostle says of many Saints in
general; Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love,
wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ (by Grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together,
and made us fit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, etc. I judge,
while they were sitting in these heavenly places, they could not be daily
sinning in thought, word and deed, neither were all their Works, which they did
there, as filthy Rags, or as a menstruous Garment: See what is further said to
the Hebrews 12.22, 23. Spirits of just men made perfect. And to Conclude, let
that of the Revelations c. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. be considered; where though their
being found without fault, be spoken in the present time, yet is it not without
respect to their Innocence while upon earth: and their being Redeemed from
among men, and no guile found in their mouth, is expressly mentioned in the time
past. But I shall proceed now in the Third place, to answer the Objections,
which indeed Arguments of our Opposers.

IX. I shall begin with their chief and great Argument, Joh. 1.8. If we say,
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us: This
they think Invincible.

But is it not strange to see men so blinded with partiality! How many
Scriptures tenfold more plain do they Reject, and yet stick so tenaciously to
this, that can receive so many Answers? As first, [If we say, we have no sin,
etc.] will not import, the Apostle himself to be included: If we say, we have
no sin, etc. objected.
Sometimes the Scripture uses this manner of Expression, when the person
speaking cannot be Included; which manner of speech the Grammarians call
Metaschematismus. Thus James 3.9, 10. speaking of the Tongue, says; Therewith
bless we God, and therewith curse we men: adding, these things ought not so to
be: Who from this will conclude, that the Apostle was one of those Cursers? But
Secondly, this Objection hitteth not the matter: he says not, We sin daily in
thought, word and deed; far less, that the very good works, which God works in
us by his Spirit, are sin. Yea, the next verse clearly shows, that upon
Confession and Repentance we are not only forgiven, but also cleansed; He is
faithful to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness:
Here is both a Forgiveness and Removing of the guilt, and a Cleansing or
removing of the Filth; for to make forgiveness and cleansing to belong both to
the removing of the Guilt, as there is no reason for it from the Text, so it
were a most violent forcing of the words, and would imply a Needless Tautology.
The Apostle having shown, how that not the Guilt only, but even the Filth also
of sin is removed, subsumes his words in the time past, in verse 10. If we say,
we have not sinned, we make him a liar. Thirdly, as Augustine well observed in
his Exposition upon the Epistle to the Galatians; It is one thing not to sin,
another thing The Apostle's words are not, If we say we sin not, It is one
thing, not to sin; and another thing, not to have sin.
or commit not sin daily; but if we say, we have no sin: And betwixt these two
there is a manifest difference; for in respect all have sinned, as we freely
acknowledge, all may be said in a sense to have sin. Again, Sin may be taken
for the Seed of Sin, which may be in those, that are Redeemed from actual
Sinning: but as to the Temptations and Provocations proceeding from it, being
Resisted by the Servants of God, and not yielded to, they are the Devil's Sin,
that tempts; not the man's, that is preserved. Fourthly, this being
considered, as also how positive and how plain once and again the qualified and
subsumed in the time past, to contradict not only other positive Expressions of
his, but the whole Tendency of his Epistle, and of the rest of the holy
Commands and Precepts of the Scripture?

Secondly, second Objection is from Two places of Scripture much of one
signification: The one is, 1 Kings 8.46. For there is no man, that sins not.
The other is Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a Just man upon earth, that does
good, and sins not.

I Answer, first: These affirm nothing of a daily and continual sinning, so as
never to be Redeemed from it; but only, that all have sinned, or that there is
none, that does not sin, though not always; so as never to cease to sin: and in
this lies the Question. Yea, in that place of the Kings he speaks, two verses,
of the Returning of such with all their Souls and hearts; Diversity of Seasons
and Dispensations respected.
which implies a Possibility of leaving off sin. Secondly: There is a respect
to be had to the seasons and dispensations. For if it should be granted, that
in Solomon's time there was none, that sinned not; it will not follow, that
there are none such now, or that it is a thing is not now Attainable by the
Grace of God under the Gospel: for A non esse ad non posse non valet sequela.
And lastly; This whole Objection hangs upon a false Interpretation: (...) --
that sins not, or who may not sin.
for the Hebrew word (...) may be read in the Potential Mood, thus, There is no
man, who may not sin, as well as in the Indicative: so both the old Latin,
Junius and Tremellius, and Vatablus have it; and the same word is so used,
Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy Word in my heart, (...) that is to say, that I may
not sin against thee, in the Potential Mood, and not in the Indicative, as it
is in the English; which being more answerable to the universal scope of the
Scriptures, the Testimony of the Truth, and the sense almost of all
Interpreters, doubtless ought to be so understood, and the other Interpretation
rejected as spurious.

Thirdly: They object some Expressions of the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.19. For the
good, that I would, I do not; but the evil, which I would not, that I do. And
verse 24. O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?

Apostle here were speaking of his own Condition; and not rather in the person
of others, or what he himself had sometimes born: which is frequent in
Scripture, as in the case of Cursing in James, beforementioned. But there is
nothing in the Text, that does clearly signify the Apostle to be speaking of
himself, or of a Condition he was then under, or was always to be under; yea,
on the contrary in the former Chapter (as before is at large shown) he declares,
They were Dead to sin; demanding, how such should yet live any longer therein?
Paul personates the Wretched man, to show them the Redeemer.
Secondly: It appears, that the Apostle only personated one not yet come to a
Spiritual Condition, in that he says, verse. 14. But I am carnal, sold under
sin. Now, is it to be Imagined, that the Apostle Paul, as to his own proper
Condition, when he wrote that Epistle, was a Carnal man, who in Chap. 1.
testifies of himself, that he was Separated to be an Apostle, Capable to impart
to the Romans Spiritual gifts? and Chapter 8. verse. 2. That the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus had made him free from the Law of sin and death?
so then he was not Carnal. And seeing, there are Spiritual men in this life, as
our Adversaries will not deny, and is intimated through this whole 8 Chapter to
the Romans; it will not be denied, but the Apostle was one of them. So then, as
his calling himself Carnal in Chap. 7. cannot be understood of his own proper
state; neither can the rest, of what he speaks there of that kind, be so
understood: yea, after verse 24. where he makes that Exclamation, he adds in
the next verse; I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; signifying, that by
him he witnessed deliverance: and so goes on, showing, how he had obtained it,
in the next Chapter, viz. 8. v. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? and verse. 37. But in all these things we are more than Conquerors: And
in the last verse, Nothing shall be able to separate us, etc. But wherever
there is a Continuing in sin, there is a separation in some degree; seeing
every Sin is contrary to God, and (...), i. e. Trangression of the Law, I Joh.
3.4. and whoever commits the least Sin, is overcome of it; and so in that
respect is not a Conqueror, Whom sin has Conquered, is no Conqueror.
but Conquered. This Condition then, which the Apostle plainly testified, he
with Some others had obtained, could not consist with Continual Remaining and
Abiding in Sin.

Obj. IV.
Fourthly: They object the Faults and Sins of several Eminent Saints, as Noah,
David, etc.

I Answer: That does not at all prove the Case. For the question is not,
Whether good men may not fall into sin, which is not denied; Whether it be not
possible for them not to sin? It will not follow, because these men sinned,
that therefore they were never free of sin, but always sinned: For at this rate
of arguing it might be urged according to this Rule, Contrariorum par ratio, i.
e. The reason of Contraries is alike, That if, because a Good man has sinned
once or twice, he can never be free from sin, Can they that sin, be never freed
from sin?
but must always be daily and continually a sinner all his life long; then by
the Rule of Contraries, If a Wicked man have done good once or twice, he can
never be free from Righteousness, but must always be a Righteous man all his
life time: which as it is most Absurd in it self, so it is Contrary to the
plain Testimony of the Scripture, Ezech. 33.12. to the 18 th.

Lastly they Object, That if Perfection or Freedom from sin be Attainable,
Mortification of Sin useless, and make the Blood of Christ of no service to us,
neither need we any more pray for forgiveness of sins.

I Answer: I had almost omitted this Objection, Absurdity of it. For can
Mortification of sin be useless, where the End of it is obtained? seeing there
is no attaining of this perfection, but by mortification. Does the hope and
belief of Overcoming render the Fight unnecessary? Let rational men judge,
which has most sense in it, to say, as our Adversaries do: It is necessary,
that we fight and wrestle, Who fights, and not in hopes to Overcome his Foe?
but we must never think of overcoming; We must resolve still to be overcome:
Or to say, Let us fight, because we may overcome? Whether do such as believe,
they may be Cleansed by it, or those that believe they can never be Cleansed by
it, render the Blood of Christ most effectual? If Two Men were both grievously
diseased, and applied themselves to a Physician for Remedy, which of those do
most Commend the Physician and his Cure? he that believes, he may be Cured by
him, and as he feels himself Cured, confesses, that he is so; and so can say,
This is a skilful Physician, This is good Medicine, behold! I am made whole by
it? or he, that never is Cured, nor ever believes that he can, so long as he
lives? As for praying for forgiveness, we deny it not, Praying for Forgiveness
of Sin.
for that all have sinned; and therefore all need to pray, that their sins past
may be blotted out, and that they may be daily preserved from sinning. And if
hoping or believing to be made free from sin, hinders praying for forgiveness
of sin; it would follow by the same Inference, that men ought not to forsake
Murder, Adultery or any of these gross Evils, seeing, the more men are sinful,
the more plentiful occasion there would be of asking forgiveness of sin, and
the more work for Mortification: But the Apostle has sufficiently refuted such
sin-pleasing Cavils, in these words, Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we continue in sin,
that Grace may abound? God forbid!

But Lastly, It may be easily answered by a Retortion to those, that press this
from the words of the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our debts, that this militates
no less against perfect Justification, than against perfect Sanctification. For
if all the Saints, the least as well as the greatest, be perfectly Justified in
that very hour, wherein they are Converted, as our Adversaries will have it;
then they have Remission of sins long before they die: May it not then be said
to them; What need have ye to pray for Remission of Sin, who are already
Justified, whose sins are long ago forgiven, both past and

X. But this may suffice. Concerning this Possibility Jerome speaks clearly
enough, Testimonies of the Fathers concerning Perfection or Freedom from Sin
lib. 3. adver. Pelagium: This we also say, that a man may not sin, if he will,
for a time and place, according to his bodily weakness, so long as his mind is
Intent, so long as the Cords of the Cythar relax not by any Vice: And again in
the same Book; Which is that, that I said, that it is put in our power (to wit,
being helped by the Grace of God) either to sin, Jerome.
or not to sin. For this was the Error of Pelagius, which we indeed reject and
abhor, and which the Fathers deservedly withstood, that man by his natural
strength, without the help of God's Grace, could attain to that state,
Augustine.
so as not to sin. And Augustine himself, a great Opposer of the Pelagian
Heresy, did dot deny this possibility, as Attainable by the help of God's
Grace, as in his Book de Spiritu and Litera, cap. 2. and his Book de Natura and
Gratia against Pelagius, cap. 42, 50, 60, and 63. de Gestis Concilii
Palaestini, Gelasius.
cap. 7. and II. and de Peccato Originali, lib. 2. cap. II. Gelasius also in
his Disputation against Pelagius says; But if any affirm, that this may be
given to some Saints in this life, not by the Power of man's strength, but by
the Grace of God, he does well to think so confidently, and hope it faithfully:
That by the Gift of God all things are possible.
for by the Gift of God all things are possible. That this was the Common
Opinion of the Fathers, appears from the words of the Aszansik Council, Canon
last, We believe also this, according to the Catholic Faith, that all, that
are baptized through Grace by Baptism received, and Christ helping them, and
Co-working, may and ought to do whatsoever belongs to Salvation, if they will
faithfully labor.

Conclusion.
XI. Blessed then are they, that believe in him, who is both able and willing
to Deliver, as many as come to him through True Repentance from all Sin; and do
not resolve, as these men do, to be the Devil's Servants all their life time:
Phil. 3.14.
but daily go on forsaking unrighteousness, and forgetting those things that
are behind, Press forwards to the Mark, the Prize, an Overcoming.
press forwards toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in
Christ Jesus. Such shall not find their Faith and Confidence to be in vain; but
in due time shall be made Conquerors through him, in whom they have believed:
and so Overcoming, shall be established as pillars in the house of God, so as
they shall go no more out, Rev. 3.12.

PROPOSITION IX. Concerning Perseverance, and the possibility of Falling from
Grace.
Although this Gift and inward Grace of God be sufficient to work out
Salvation, yet in those, in whom it is Resisted, it both may and does become
their Condemnation. Moreover they, in whose hearts it has wrought in part to
purify and sanctify them in order to their further perfection, may by
disobedience fall from it, The Grace of God is lost by Disob^dience.
turn it to wantonness, 1 Timothy 1.19. make shipwreck of faith, and after having
tasted the heavenly Gift, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, again fall
away, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6* yet such an Increase and Stability in the Truth may in
this life be attained, from which there cannot be a Total Apostasy.

I. THe first Sentence of this Proposition has already been treated of in the
fifth and sixth Propositions, where it has been shown, that that Light, which
is given for Life and Salvation, becomes the Condemnation of those, that Refuse
it; and therefore is already proved in those places, where I did demonstrate
the possibility of man's Resisting the Grace and Spirit of God: And indeed it
is so apparent in the Scriptures, that it cannot be denied by such, as will but
seriously consider these Testimonies, Prove. 1.24, 25, and 26. John 3.18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. Acts 7.51. and 13.46. Romans 1.18. As for the other part of it,
That they, in whom this Grace may have wrought in a good measure in order to
purify and sanctify them, tending to their further perfection, may afterward
through disobedience fall away, etc. the Testimonies of the Scripture included
in the Proposition it self, are sufficient to prove it to men of unbiassed
Judgments: But because as to this part our Cause is Common with many other
Protestants, I shall be the more brief in it. For it is not my design to do
that, which is done already; neither do I covet to appear knowing by writing
much: but simply purpose to present to the World a faithful Account of our
Principles; and briefly to let them understand, A falling from Grace by
Disobedience, Evinced.


II. From these Scriptures then included in the Proposition (not to mention
many more, which might be urged) I argue thus: If men may turn the Grace of God
into Wantonness, then they must once

But the First is true: Therefore also the Second.

If men may make shipwreck of Faith, they must once have had it; neither Faith
without the Grace of God.

But the First is true: Therefore also the Last.

If men may have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and been made partakers, Holy
Spirit, and afterward fall away, they must needs have known in measure the
operation of God's Saving Grace and Spirit, without which no man could taste
the heavenly Gift, nor yet partake of the Holy Spirit:

But the First is true: Therefore also the Last.



Secondly. Seeing, the Contrary Doctrine is built upon this false Hypothesis,
Grace is not given for Salvation to any, but to a certain Elect Number, which
cannot lose it; The Doctrine of Election and Reprobation is Inconsistent with
Preaching, and daily Exhortation.
and that all the rest of mankind by an absolute Decree are debarred from Grace
and Salvation; that being destroyed, this falls to the ground. Now as that
Doctrine of theirs is wholly Inconsistent with the daily Practice of those,
that Preach it, in that they Exhort people to believe and be saved, while in
the mean time, if they belong to the Decree of Reprobation, it is simply
Impossible for them so to do: and if to the Decree of Election, it is needless;
seeing, it is as Impossible to them to miss of it, as has been before
demonstrated: So also in this matter of Perseverance, their Practice and
Principle are no less Inconsistent and Contradictory. For while they daily
Exhort people to be Faithful to the end, showing them, if they Continue not,
they shall be Cut off, and fall short of the Reward: which is very true; but no
less Inconsistent with that Doctrine, that affirms, There is no hazard,
because no possibility of departing from the least measure of true Grace: Which
if true, it is to no purpose to beseech them to Stand, to whom God has made it
Impossible to Fall. I shall not longer insist upon the probation of this,
seeing what is said, may suffice to answer my design; and that the thing is
also abundantly proved by many of the same Judgment. That this was the Doctrine
of the primitive Protestants, thence appears, that the Augustane Confession
Condemns it as an Error of the Anabaptists, to say, That who once are
Justified, they cannot lose the Holy Spirit: Many such like sayings are to be
found in the Common Places of Philip Melanchthon. Vossius, in his Pelagian
History lib. 6. testifies, The Opinion of the Fathers concerning falling from
Grace.
That this was the Common Opinion of the Fathers: In the Confirmation of the
twelfth These, page 587. he has these words; That this, which we have said,
was the common Sentiment of Antiquity, those at present can only deny, who
other ways perhaps are men not Unlearned, but nevertheless in Antiquity
altogether strangers, etc. These things thus observed, I come to the Objections
of our Opposers.

Allege, That those places mentioned of making shipwreck of Faith, is only
understood of seeming Faith, and not of a real, true Faith.

This Objection is very weak, and apparently Contrary to the Text, 1 Timothy 1.19.
Faith a good Conscience, by way of Complaint: A good and evil Conscience.
whereas, if their Faith had been only seeming and hypocritical, the men had
been better without it, than with it; neither had they been worthy of blame for
losing that, which in it self was Evil. But the Apostle expressly adds [ and of
a good Conscience,] which shows, it was Real: neither can it be supposed, that
men could truly attain a good Conscience without the operation of God's Saving
Grace; far less, that a good Conscience does consist with a seeming, false and
hypocritical Faith. Again, these places of the Apostle, being spoken by way of
Regret, clearly Import, that these Seize they had fallen from, were good
and real, not false and deceitful; else he would not have Regretted their
falling from them: And so he says positively, They tasted of the heavenly
Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. not that they seemed to
be so. Which shows, this Objection is very frivolous.

Secondly they Allege, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing* that
etc. and 1 Pet. 1.5. who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation.

Scriptures, as they do not affirm any thing positively Contrary to us, so they
cannot be understood otherwise, than as the Condition is performed upon our
part; seeing Salvation is no otherways proposed there, but upon certain,
Salvation is proposed upon certain Conditions by us to be performed.
necessary Conditions to be performed by us; as has been above proved, and as
our Adversaries also acknowledge, as Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh,
ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body,
ye shall live. And Hebr. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the
beginning of our Confidence steadfast unto the end. For if these places of the
Scripture, upon which they build their Objection, were to be admitted without
these Conditions, it would manifestly overturn the whole Tenor of their
Exhortations throughout all their Writings. Some other Objections there are of
the same nature, which are solved by the same Answers: which also, because
largely treated of by others, I omit; to come to that Testimony of the Truth,
which is more especically ours in this matter: and is contained in the latter
part of the Proposition in these words; Yet such an Increase and Stability in
the Truth may in this life be attained, from which there cannot be a total
Apostasy.

IV. As in the Explanation of the fifth and sixth Propositions I observed, that
some, that had denied the Errors of others concerning Reprobation, and affirmed
the Universality of Christ's Death, did notwithstanding fall short in
sufficiently holding forth the Truth; and so gave the contrary party an
occasion by their defects to be strengthened in their Errors: so may it be said
in this Case. The two Extremes some run into by Asserting a final falling or
not falling from Grace Impossible.
As upon the one hand they Err, that affirm, That the least degree of true and
Saving Grace cannot be fallen from; so do they Err upon the other hand, that
deny any such Stability to be attained, from which there cannot be a total and
final Apostasy. And betwixt these Two Extremes lies the Truth apparent in the
Scriptures, which God has Revealed unto us by the Testimony of his Spirit; and
which also we are made sensible of by our own sensible Experience. And even as
in that former Controversy was observed, so also in this the defense of Truth
will readily appear to such, as seriously weigh the matter: for the Arguments
upon both hands rightly applied, will as to this hold good; and the Objections,
which are strong, as they are respectively urged against the two opposite,
false Opinions, are hereby easily solved by the establishing of this Truth. For
as the Arguments, which these allege, that affirm, There can be no falling
away, may well be received upon the one part, as of those, who have attained to
this Stability and Establishment, and their Objections solved by this
Concession; so upon the other hand the Arguments alleged from
Scripture-Testimonies by those, that affirm the possibility of falling away,
may well be received of such, as are not come to this Establishment; though
having attained a measure of true Grace. Thus then the contrary Batterings of
our Adversaries, who miss the Truth, do Concur the more strongly to Establish
it, while they are destroying each other. But lest this may not seem to suffice
to satisfy such, as judge it always possible for the best of men, before they
die, to fall away; I shall add for the proof of it some Brief Considerations
from some few Testimonies of the Scripture.

V. And first; I freely acknowledge, that it is good for all to be Humble, and
in this respect not over-Confident, so as to lean to this, Watchfulness and
Diligence is of Indispensible necessity to all.
to foster themselves in Iniquity, or lie down in Security, as if they had
attained this Condition; seeing Watchfulness and Diligence is of indispensible
necessity to all mortal men, so long as they breath in this World: for God will
have this to be the Constant Practice of a Christian, that thereby he may be
the more fit to serve him, and the better armed against all the daily
Temptations of the Enemy. For since the Wages of sin is death, there is no man,
while he sins, and is subject thereunto, but may lawfully suppose himself
capable of perishing: Hence the Apostle Paul himself says, 1 Cor. 9.27. But I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; least that by any means, when
I have preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway. Here the Apostle
supposes it possible for him to be a Castaway; and yet it may be judged, he
was far more advanced in the Inward Work of Regeneration, when he wrote that
Epistle, than many, who now adays too presumptuously suppose, they cannot fall
away, because they feel themselves to have attained some small degree of true
Grace. But the Apostle makes use of this Supposition, or possibility of his
being a Castaway (as I before observed) as an Inducement to him to be
Watchful: I keep under my body, lest, etc. Nevertheless the same Apostle at
another time, in the sense and feeling of God's Holy Power, and in the Dominion
thereof, finding himself a Conqueror there-through over sin and his Soul's
Enemies, makes no difficulty to affirm, Romans 8.38. For I am persuaded, that
neither death nor life, etc. which clearly shows, that he had Attained a
Condition, from which he knew, he could not fall away.

But secondly; It appears such a A Condition attainable in this life, from
which there is no falling away.
Condition is Attainable, because we are Exhorted to it: and as has been
proved before, the Scripture never proposes to us things Impossible. Such an
Exhortation we have from the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather,
Brethren, give diligence to And though there be a Condition here proposed, yet
since we have already proved, that it is possible to fulfill this Condition,
then also the Promise annexed thereunto may be attained. And since, where
Assurance is wanting, there is still a place left for Doubtings and Despairs;
if we should affirm it never attainable, then should there never be a place
known by the Saints in this World, wherein they might be free of Doubting and
Despair: Which as it is most Absurd in it self, so it is Contrary to the
manifest Experience of Thousands.

Thirdly; God has given to many of his Saints and Children, and is ready to
give unto all a full and certain Assurance, A Certain Assurance and
Establishment given of God to many of his Saints and Children.
that they are his; and that no power shall be able to pluck them out of his
hand. But this Assurance would be no Assurance, if those, who are so Assured,
were not Established, and Confirmed beyond all Doubt and Hesitation: If so,
then surely, there is no possibility for such to miss of that, which God has
Assured them of. And that there is such Assurance attainable in this life, the
Scripture abundantly declares both in general, and as to particular persons.
As first: Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of
my God, and he shall go no more out, etc. which contains a general Promise
unto all. Hence the Apostle speaks of some, that are sealed, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who
has also sealed us, and given the Earnest of his Spirit in our hearts:
wherefore the Spirit so sealing is called the Earnest or Pledge of our
Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye were sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise.
And therefore the Apostle Paul not only in that of the Romans above-noted
declares himself to have Attained that Condition; but 2 Timothy 4.7. he affirms
in these words, I have fought a good fight, etc. which also many good men have,
and do witness. And therefore as there can be nothing more manifest, than that,
which the manifest Experience of this time shows, and therein is found
agreeable to the Experience of former times; so we see, there have been both of
old and of late, that have turned the Grace of God into Wantonness, and have
fallen from their Faith and Integrity: thence we may safely conclude such a
falling away possible. We also see, that some of old and of late have Attained
a certain Assurance some time before they departed, that they should Inherit
Eternal Life; and have accordingly died in that good hope: Of and concerning
whom the Spirit of God Testified, that they are saved. Wherefore we also see,
that such a State is Attainable in this life, from which there is not a Falling
away: For seeing, the Spirit of God did so Testify, it was not possible, that
they should perish; concerning whom he, who cannot lie, thus bare Witness.

PROPOSITION X. Concerning the Ministry.
As by this Light or Gift of God all true Knowledge in things Spiritual is
received and revealed, so by the same, as it is manifested and received in the
heart, by the strength and power thereof every true Minister of the Gospel is
ordained, prepared and supplied in the Work of the Ministry: and by the
leading, moving and drawing hereof ought every Evangelist and Christian Pastor
to be led and ordered in his labor and work of the Gospel, both as to the
place Where, as to the persons to whom, and as to the time, wherein he is to
Minister. Moreover who have this Authority, may and ought to preach the Gospel,
though without Humane Commission or Literature; as on the other hand, who want
the Authority of this Divine Gift, however Learned or Athorized by the
Commission of Men and Churches, are to be esteemed but as Deceivers, and not
true Ministers of the Gospel. The Gospel to be preached freely. Matthew. 10.8.
Also who have received this holy and unspotted Gift, as they have freely
received it, so are they freely to give it, without hire or bargaining; far
less to use it as a Trade to get money by: yet, if God has called any one from
their Emploiments or Trades, by which they acquire their Livelihood; it may be
lawful for such, according to the liberty which they feel given them in the
Lord, to receive such Temporals (to wit, what may be needful for them for Meat
and Clothing) as are given them freely and cordially by those, to whom they
have Communicated Spirituals.

I. HItherto I have treated of those things, which relate to the Christian
Faith and Christians, as they stand each in his private and particular
Condition; and how and what way every man may be a Christian indeed, and so
abide. Now I come in order to speak of those things, that relate to Christians,
as they are stated in a Joint-Fellowship and Communion, and come under a
Visible and Outward Society: which Society is called the Church of God, The
Church of God is the Spiritual Body of Christ.
and in Scripture compared to a Body; and therefore named the Body of Christ.
As then in the Natural Body there be diverse Members, all concurring to the
common end of preserving and confirming the whole Body so in this Spiritual and
Mystical Body there are also diverse Members, according to the different
measures of Grace and of the Spirit, diversely administered unto each Member: and
from this Diversity arises that distinction of persons in the visible Society
of Christians, as of Apostles, Pastors, Evangelists, Ministers, etc. That which
in this Proposition is proposed, is, What makes or constitutes any a Minister
of the Church? what his Qualifications ought to be? and how he ought to behave
himself? But because it may seem somewhat preposterous, to speak of the
distinct Offices of the Church, until something be said concerning the Church
in general, though nothing positively be said of it in the Proposition; yet as
here implied, I shall briefly premise something thereof, and then proceed to
the particular Members of it.

II. It is not in the least my design to meddle with those tedious and many
Controversies, wherewith the Papists and Protestants do Tear one another
concerning this thing; but only according to the Truth manifested to me, and
Revealed in me by the Testimony of the Spirit, according to that proportion of
Wisdom given me, briefly to hold forth, as a necessary Introduction both to
this matter of the Ministry, and of Worship, which follows those things,
which I, together with my Brethren, do believe concerning the Church.

The [ Church] then, according to the Grammatical signification of the word, as
it is used in the Holy Scripture, signifies An Assembly or Gathering of many
into one place; The Etymology of the word (...) (the Church) and signification
of it.
for the Substantive (...) comes from the word (...) I call out of, and
originally from (...) I call: and indeed, as this is the Grammatical sense of
the word, so also it is the real and proper signification of the thing, the
Church being no other thing, but the Society, Gathering or Company of such, as
God has called out of the World and worldly spirit, to walk in his LIGHT and
LIFE. The Church then so defined, is to be considered, as it comprehends all,
that are thus called and gathered truly by God, both such as are yet in this
Inferior World, and such, as having already laid down the Earthly Tabernacle,
are passed into their heavenly Mansions; which together do make up the One
Catholic Church: (concerning which there is so much Controversy.) Out of which
Church we freely acknowledge, No Salvation without the Church.
there can be no Salvation; because under this Church and its Denomination are
comprehended all and as many, of whatsoever nation, kindred, tongue or people
they be, (though outwardly strangers and remote from those, who profess Christ
and Christianity in words, and have the benefit of the Scriptures) as become
obedient to the Holy Light and Testimony of God in their hearts, so as to
become sanctified by it, What the Church is?
and cleansed from the evils of their ways. For this is the Universal or
Catholic Spirit, by which many are called from all the four Corners of the
Earth, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: By this the secret
Life and Virtue of Jesus is conveyed into many, that are afar off; even as by
the Blood, that runs into the Veins and Arteries of the natural Body, the Life
is conveyed from the head and heart unto the extremest parts. There may be
Members therefore of this Catholic Church both among Heathens, Turks and Jews
may become Members of this Church.
Turks, Jews, and all the several sorts of Christians, men and women of
Integrity and Simplicity of heart, who though blinded in something in their
Understanding, and perhaps burdened with the Superstitions and Formality of
the several Sects, in which they are Engrossed; yet being upright in their
hearts before the Lord, chiefly aiming and laboring to be delivered from
Iniquity, and loving to follow Righteousness, are by the secret Touches of this
Holy Light in their Souls inlivened and quickened, thereby secretly united to
God, and there-through become true Members of this Catholic Church. Now the
Church in this respect has been in being in all Generations; For God never
wanted some such Witnesses for him, though many times slighted, and not much
observed by this World: And therefore this Church, though still in being, has
been oftentimes, as it were, Invisible, in that it has not come under the
Observation of the men of this World, being, as says the Scripture Jer. 3.14.
One of a City, and two of a Family. And yet though the Church thus considered,
may be, as it were, hid from wicked men, as not then gathered into a visible
Fellowship, yea, and not observed even by some, that are Members of it; yet may
there notwithstanding many belong to it: as when Elias complained, he was left
alone, 1 Kings 19.18. God answered unto him; I have reserved to my self seven
thousand men, who have not bowed their knees to the Image of Baal: whence the
Apostle argues, Romans 11. the being of a Remnant in his day.

III. Secondly: The Church is to be considered, as it signifies a Certain
Number of persons gathered by God's Spirit, and by the Testimony of some of his
Servants (raised up for that end) unto the belief of the true Principles and
Doctrines of the Christian Faith: who through their hearts being united by the
same Love, and their understanding informed in the Truths, gather, The
Definition of the Church of God, as Gathered into a Visible Fellowship.
meet and assemble together to Wait upon God to worship him, and to bear a
joint-Testimony for the Truth against Error, suffering for the same; and so
becoming through this fellowship as one family and household in certain
respects, do each of them watch over, teach, instruct and care for one another,
according to their several measures and seize: Such were the Churches of
the primitive Times gathered by the Apostles; whereof we have diverse mentioned
in the Holy Scriptures. And as to the Visibility of the Church in this respect,
there has been a great Interruption since the Apostles days, by reason of the
Apostasy; as shall hereafter appear.

IV. To be a Member then of the Catholic Church, How to become a Member of
that Church?
there is need of the Inward Calling of God by his Light in the heart, and a
being leavened into the Nature and Spirit of it, so as to forsake
Unrighteousness, and be turned to Righteousness; and in the Inwardness of the
mind to be cut out of the wild Olive Tree of our own first fallen Nature, and
ingrafted into Christ by his Word and Spirit in the heart. And this may be done
in those, who are strangers to the History (God not having pleased to make them
partakers thereof) as in the fifth and sixth Proposition has already been
proved.

To be a Member of a particular Church of Christ, The Outward Profession of the
Members of the True Church.
as this inward Work is indispensibly necessary, so is also the outward
Profession of, and Belief in Jesus Christ, and those holy Truths delivered by
his Spirit in the Scriptures: seeing, the Testimony of the Spirit recorded in
the Scriptures, does answer the Testimony of the same Spirit in the heart, even
as face answers face in a glass. Hence it follows, that the Inward work of
Holiness, and forsaking Iniquity is necessary in every respect, to the being a
Member in the Church of Christ; and that the outward Profession is necessary to
be a Member of a particular, gathered Church, but not to the being a Member of
the Catholic Church; yet it is absolutely necessary, where God affords the
opportunity of knowing it: And the outward Testimony is to be believed, where
it is presented and revealed; the sum whereof has upon other occasions been
already proved.

V. But contrary hereunto the Devil, The Members of the Antichristian Church
in the Apostasy their Empty Profession.
that works and has wrought in the Mystery of Iniquity, has taught his
followers to affirm, That no man, however holy, is a Member of the Church of
Christ without the outward Profession; and that he be Initiated thereunto by
some outward Ceremonies. And again; That men, who have this outward Profession,
though inwardly unholy, may be Members of the true Church of Christ, yea, and
ought to be so esteemed: This is plainly to put Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light: as if God had a greater regard to words, than actions; and
were more pleased with vain professions, than with real holiness: But these
things I have sufficiently Refuted heretofore. Only from hence let it be
observed, that upon this false and rotten Foundation Antichrist has built his
Babylonish Structure, and the Antichristian Church in the Apostasy has hereby
reared her self up to that Height and Grandeur she has attained; so as to
Exalt her self above all, that is called God, and sit in the Temple of God, as
God.

For the particular Churches of Christ gathered in the Apostles days, The Decay
of the Church.
soon after beginning to decay as to the inward Life, came to be overgrown
with several Errors; and the hearts of the Professors of Christianity to be
leavened with the old Spirit and Conversation of the World. Yet it pleased God
for some Centuries to preserve that life in many, whom he imboldned with zeal
to stand and suffer for his Name through the Ten Persecutions: But these being
over, the Meekness, Gentleness, Love, Long-suffering, Goodness and Temperance
of Christianity came to be lost. For, after that the Princes of the Earth came
to take upon them that Profession, When Men became Christians by Birth, and not
by Conversion, Christianity came to be lost.
and that it ceased to be a Reproach to be a Christian, but rather became a
means to Preferment; men became such by Birth and Education, and not by
Conversion and Renovation of Spirit: then there was none so Vile, none so
Wicked, none so Profane, who became not a Member of the Church. And the
Teachers and Pastors thereof becoming the Companions of Princes, and so being
enriched by their Benevolence, and getting Vast Treasures and Estates, became
puffed up, and as it were, drunken with the vain pomp and glory of this world:
and so Marshalled themselves in manifold Orders and Degrees; not without
innumerable Contests and Altercations, who should have the As was betwixt the
Bp of Rome and the Bp. of Constantinople.
Precedence. So the virtue, life, substance and kernel of the Christian
Religion came to be lost; and nothing remained, but a Shadow and Image: which
dead Image or Carcass of Christianity (to make it take the better with the
superstitious Multitude of Heathens, that became Engrossed in it not by any
inward Conversion of their hearts, or by becoming less wicked or superstitious;
but by a little Change in the Object of their Superstition) not having the
inward Ornament and life of the Spirit, became decked with many outward and
visible Orders, and beautified with the gold, silver, precious stones, and the
other splendid Ornaments of this perishing world: so that this was no more to
be accounted the Christian Religion and Christian Church, notwithstanding the
outward profession, than the dead body of man is to be accounted a living man;
which, however cunningly Embalmed and Adorned with ever so much gold or silver,
or most precious stones, or sweet ointments, is but a dead body still without
sense, In the Church of Rome are no less Superstitions and Ceremonies
Introduced, than were either among Jews or Heathens.
life or motion. For that Apostate Church of Rome has introduced no less
Ceremonies and Superstitions into the Christian Profession, than was either
among Jews, or Heathens; and that there is and has been as much, yea, and more
pride, covetousness, unclean lust, luxury, fornication, profanity and Atheism
among her Teachers and Chief Bishops, as ever was among any sort of people,
none need doubt, that have read their own Authors, to wit, Platina and others.

Now though Protestants have Reformed from her in some of the most gross points
and absurd Doctrines relating to the Church and Ministry; Whether, and what
difference there is betwixt the Protestants and Papists in Superstitions?
yet (which is to be regretted) they have but lopt the Branches, but retain and
plead earnestly for the same Root, from which these Abuses have sprung. So that
even among them, though all that Mass of Superstition, Ceremonies and Orders be
not again Established, yet the same pride, covetousness and sensuality is found
to have overspread and leavened their Churches and Ministry; and the life,
power and virtue of true Religion is lost among them, and the very same death,
barrenness, dryness and emptiness is found in their Ministry. So that in Effect
they differ from Papists but in Form and some Ceremonies; being with them
Apostatized from the life and power, the true primitive Church and her Pastors
were in: so that of both it may be said truly (without breach of Charity) that
having only a Form of Godliness (and many of them not so much as that) they are
Deniers of, yea, Enemies to the power of it. And this proceeds not simply from
their not walking answerable to their own principles, and so degenerating that
way, (which also is true;) but which is worse, their setting down to
themselves, and adhering to Certain Principles, which naturally, as a cursed
Root, bring forth these bitter Fruits: these therefore shall afterward be
Examined and Refuted, as the Contrary Positions of Truth in the Proposition are
Explained and Proved.

For as to the Nature and Constitution of a Church (abstract from their
Disputes concerning its constant Visibility, Infallibility, The Protestant
Church, how they become Members thereof.
and the Primacy of the Church of Rome) the Protestants as in practice, so in
principles differ not from Papists; for they ingross within the compass of
their Church whole Nations, making their Infants Members of it, by sprinkling a
little Water upon them: so that there is none so wicked or profane, who is not
a Fellow-member; no evidence of Holiness being required to constitute a Member
of the Church. And look through the Protestant Nations, and there shall no
difference appear in the Lives of the generality of the one, more than of the
other; but he, who rules in the Children of Disobedience, reigning in both: so
that the Reformation through this defect is but in holding some less gross
Errors in the Notion, but not in having the heart Reformed and Renewed,
Christianity chiefly consists in the Renewing of the heart.
in which mainly the Life of Christianity consists.

VI. But the Popish Errors concerning the Ministry, A Popish, Corrupt Ministry
all Evils follow.

Like Priest, like People.


which they have retained, are most of all to be Regretted; by which chiefly
the life and power of Christianity is barred out among them, and they kept in
death, barrenness and dryness: there being nothing more hurtful, than an Error
in this respect. For where a false and corrupt Ministry enters, all other
manner of Evils follows upon it; according to the Scripture-Adage, Like People,
like Priest: For by their Influence, Hosea 4.9.
instead of ministering Life and Righteousness, they minister Death and
Iniquity. The whole backslidings of the Jewish Congregations of Old is hereto
ascribed: The Leaders of my people have caused them to Err. The whole writings
of the Prophets are full of such Complaints; and for this Cause under the New
Testament we are so often warned and guarded to Beware of false Prophets, and
false Teachers, etc. What may be thought then, where all, as to this, is out of
order; where both the Foundation, Call, Qualifications, Maintenance and whole
Discipline is different from, and opposite to the Ministry of the primitive
Church; yea, and necessarily tends to the shutting out a Spiritual Ministry,
and the in-bringing and establishing a Carnal? This shall appear by parts.

VII. That then, which comes first to be questioned in this matter, is Call of
a Minister, to wit; What makes, or how comes a man to be a Minister, Pastor
or Teacher in the Church of Christ?

We Answer: By the inward power and virtue of the Spirit of God. Having
received the true knowledge of things Spiritual by the Spirit of God, The Call
of a Minister, and wherein it consists?
(without which they cannot be known) and being by the same in measure purified
and sanctified, he comes thereby to be called and moved to Minister to others;
being able to speak from a living Experience, of what he himself is a Witness:
and therefore knowing the Terror of the Lord, he is fit to persuade men, etc. 2
Cor. 5.11. and his Words and Ministry proceeding from the inward power and
virtue, reaches to the heart of his Hearers, and makes them approve of him, and
be subject unto him. Our Adversaries are forced to confess, that this were
indeed desirable and best; but this they will not have to be absolutely
necessary. Object.
I shall first prove the Necessity of it; and then show, how much they Err in
that, which they make more necessary, than this Divine and Heavenly Call.

First: That which is necessary to make a man a Christian, so as without it he
cannot be truly one, must be much more necessary to make a man a Minister of
Christianity; seeing the one is a degree above the other, and has it included
in it: nothing less than he, that supposes a Master, Scholar. 1. The necessity
of an Inward Call to make a man a Christian.
They that are not Christians, cannot be Teachers or Ministers among Christians:

But this Inward Call, Power and Virtue of the Spirit of God is necessary to
make a man a Christian, as we have abundantly proved before in the second
Proposition, according to these Scriptures; He that has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of his: As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons
of God.

Therefore this Call, Moving and Drawing of the Spirit must be much more
Necessary to make a Minister.

2. The Ministry of the Spirit requires the Operation and Testimony of the
Spirit
Secondly: All Ministers of the New Testament ought to be Ministers of the
Spirit, and not of the Letter, according to that 2 Cor. 3.6. and as the old
Latin has it, not by the Letter, but by the Spirit: But how can a man be a
Minister of the Spirit, who is not inwardly Called by it, and who looks not
upon the Operation and Testimony of the Spirit as Essential to his Call? As he
could not be a Minister of the Letter, who had thence no ground for his Call,
yea, that were altogether a Stranger to, and unacquainted with it; so neither
can he be a Minister of the Spirit, who is a Stranger to it, and unacquainted
with the Motions thereof, and knows it not to draw, act and move him, and go
before him in the Work of the Ministry. I would willingly know, how those that
take upon them to be Ministers (as they suppose) of the Gospel, merely from an
outward Vocation, without so much as being any ways sensible of the Work of the
Spirit, or any Inward Call therefrom, can either satisfy themselves or others,
that they are Ministers of the Spirit, or wherein they differ from the
Ministers of the Letter? For --

3. Under the Law the People needed not to doubt, who should be Priests and
Ministers.
Thirdly: If this Inward Call or Testimony of the Spirit were not Essential and
Necessary to a Minister, then the Ministry of the New Testament should not only
be no ways preferrable to, but in diverse respects far Worse than that of the
Law. For under the Law there was a certain Tribe allotted for the Ministry, and
of that Tribe certain Families set apart for the Priesthood and other Offices
by the Immediate Command of God to Moses; so that the people needed not be in
any doubt, who should be Priests and Ministers of the holy things: yea, and
besides this God called forth by the Immediate Testimony of his Spirit several,
at diverse times to Teach, Instruct and Reprove his people; as Samuel, Nathan,
Elias, Elisa, Jeremiah, Amos and many more of the Prophets: But now under the
New Covenant, where the Ministry ought to be more Spiritual, the Way more
Certain, and the Access more Easy unto the Lord, our Adversaries by denying
the Necessity of this Inward and Spiritual Vocation, make it quite other ways.
For there being now no certain Family or Tribe, to which the Ministry is
limited, we are left in Uncertainty to choose and have Pastors at a venture,
without all Certain Assent of the Will of God; having neither an outward Rule
nor Certainty in this affair to walk by: for that the Scripture cannot give any
Certain Rule in this matter, has in the Third Proposition concerning it been
already shown.

4. Christ, the Door.
Fourthly: Christ proclaims them all Thieves and Robbers, that enter not by
him, the Door into the Sheepfold, but climb up some other way; whom the sheep
ought not to hear: John 10.1.
but such as come in without the Call, Movings and Leadings of the Spirit of
Christ, wherewith he leads his Children into all Truth, come in certainly not
by Christ, who is the Door, but some other way; and therefore are not True
Shepherds.

VIII. To all this they Object The Succession of the Church, alleging; Object.
That since Christ gave a Call to his Apostles and Disciples, they have
conveyed that Call to their Successors, Succession pleaded by the false Church
from Christ and his Apostles.
having power to Ordain Pastors and Teachers; by which power the Authority of
Ordaining and making Ministers and Pastors, is successively conveyed to us: so
that such, who are Ordained and Called by the Pastors of the Church, are
therefore true and lawful Ministers; and others, who are not so Called, are to
be accounted but Intruders. Hereunto also some Protestants add a Necessity,
though they make it not as a thing Essential; that besides this Calling of the
Church, every one being Called, ought to have the Inward Call of the Spirit,
inclining him so chosen to his Work: but this they say is subjective, and not
objective; of which before.

As to what is subjoined of the Inward Call of the Spirit, Essential to a True
Call, but a Supererogation, as it were; it shows, how little they set by it:
since those they admit to the Ministry, are not so much as questioned in their
Trials, whether they have this, or not? Yet in that it has been often
mentioned, The Call of the Spirit preferred to any other by Primitive
Protestants
especially by the primitive Protestants in their Treatises of this Subject, it
shows, how much they were secretly Convinced in their minds, that this Inward
Call of the Spirit was most Excellent, and preferrable to any other; and
therefore in the most noble and heroic Acts of the Reformation they laid claim
unto it: so that many of the primitive Protestants did not scruple both to
despise and disown this Outward Succession.
Call, when urged by the Papists against them. But now Protestants having gone
from the Testimony of the Spirit, plead for the same Succession; and being
pressed (by those, Modern Protestants denying the Call by the Spirit.
whom God now raises up by his Spirit to Reform these many Abuses, that are
among them) with the Example of their Forefathers practice against Rome, they
are not at all ashamed utterly to deny, that their Fathers were Called to their
Work by the Inward and Immediate Vocation of the Spirit; clothing themselves
with that Call, which they say their Forefathers had, as Pastors of the Roman
Church. For thus (not to go further) affirms Who gives himself out Doctor and
Professor of the Sacred Theology at Franequer.
Nicolaus Arnoldus in a Pamphlet written against the same Propositions, called,
A Theologick Exercitation, Sect. 40. averring; That they pretended not to an
Immediate Act of the Holy Spirit; but Reformed by the virtue of the Ordinary
Vocation, which they had in the Church, as it then was, to wit, that of Rome,
etc.

IX. Many Absurdities do Protestants fall into by deriving their Ministry thus
through the Church of Rome. As first, Absurdities, Protestants fall into by
deriving their Ministry through the Church of Rome.
They must acknowledge her to be a True Church of Christ, though only Erroneous
in some things; which Contradicts their Forefathers, so frequently and yet
truly calling her Antichrist. Secondly: They must needs acknowledge, that the
Priests and Bishops of the Romish Church are True Ministers and Pastors of the
Church of Christ, as to the Essential part; else they could not have been fit
Subjects for that Power and Authority to have resided in, neither could they
have been Vessels capable to receive that power, and again Transmit it to their
Successors. Thirdly: It would follow from this, that the Priests and Bishops of
the Romish Church are yet really true Pastors and Teachers: for if
Protestant-Ministers have no Authority, but what they received from them; and
since the Church of Rome is the same, she was at that time of the Reformation
in doctrine and manners; and she has the same power now, she had then; and if
the power lie in the Succession; then these Priests of the Romish Church now,
which derive their Ordination from those Bishops, that Ordained the First
Reformers, have the same Authority, which the Successors of the Reformed have;
and consequently are no less Ministers of the Church, than they are. But how
shall this Agree with that Opinion, which the primitive Protestants had of the
Romish Priests and Clergy to whom Luther did not only deny any Power or
Authority, Luther affirmed, that a Woman might be a Preacher.
but contrariwise affirmed, That it was wickedly done of them, to assume to
themselves only this Authority to Teach, and be Priests and Ministers, etc.?
For he himself affirmed, That every good Christian (not only men, but even
women also) is a Preacher.

X. But against this Vain Succession, as asserted either by Papists or
Protestants, The pretended Succession of Papists and Protestants Exploded.
as a necessary thing to the Call of a Minister, I Answer; That such as plead
for it, as a sufficient or necessary thing to the Call of a Minister, do
thereby sufficiently declare their Ignorance of the Nature of Christianity, and
how much they are strangers to the Life and Power of a Christian Ministry,
which is not entailed to Succession, as an outward Inheritance: and herein, as
has been often before observed, they not only make the Gospel not better than
the Law, but even far short of it. For Jesus Christ, as he regards not any
distinct, particular Family or Nation in the gathering of his Children, but
only such as are joined to, and leavened with his own pure and righteous Seed;
so neither regards he a bare, outward Succession, where his pure, immaculate
and righteous Life is wanting: for that were all one. He took not in the
Nations within the New Covenant, that he might suffer them to fall into the Old
Errors of the Jews, or to approve them in these Errors; but that he might
gather unto himself a pure people out of the Earth. The Jews Error of Abraham's
outward Succession.
Now, this was the great Error of the Jews, to think, they were the Church and
People of God, because they could derive their Outward Succession from Abraham;
whereby they reckoned themselves the Children of God, as being the Offspring
of Abraham, who was the Father of the Faithful: But how severely does the
Scripture rebuke this vain and frivolous pretense? Telling them, That God is
able of the stones to raise Children unto Abraham; and that not the outward
Seed, but those that were found in the Faith of Abraham, are the true Children
of faithful Abraham. Far less then can this Pretense hold among Christians,
seeing Christ rejects all outward Affinity of that kind: Matthew. 12.48, etc.
Mark 3 33. etc.
These, says he, are my Mother, Brethren and Sisters, who do the Will of my
Father, which is in heaven: And again; He looked round about him, and said, who
shall do the Will of God, these (said he) are my Brethren. So then, such as do
not the Commands of Christ, as are not found Clothed with his Righteousness,
are not his Disciples; and That which a man has not, he cannot give to
another: and its clear, that no Man nor Church, though truly Called of God, and
as such, having the Authority of a Church and Minister, can any longer retain
that Authority, than they retain the power, The Form (of Godliness) is entailed
to the Power and Substance, and not the Substance to the Form.
life and righteousness of Christianiy: for the Form is entailed to the Power
and Substance; and not the Substance to the Form. So that when a Man cease
inwardly in his heart to be a Christian (where his Christianity must lie) by
turning to Satan, and becoming a Reprobate; he is no more a Christian, though
he retain the Name and Form, than a dead man is a man, though he have the Image
and Representation of one; or than the Picture or Statue of a man is a man: And
though a dead man may serve to a Painter to retain some Imperfect
Representation of the man, that sometimes was alive, and so one Picture may
serve to make another by; yet none of those can serve to make a true living man
again, neither can they Convey the life and spirit of the man; it must be God,
that made the man at first, that alone can Revive him. As Death then makes such
Interruption of an outward, natural Succession, that no Art nor outward Form
can uphold; and as a dead man, after he is dead, can have no Issue; Succession
interrupted.
neither can dead Images of men make living men: so that it is the living, that
are only capable to Succeed one another; and such as die, so soon as they die,
cease to succeed, or to transmit Succession. So it is in Spiritual things; It
is the life of Christianity taking place in the heart, that makes a Christian:
and so it is a Number of such being Alive, The Living Members make the Church:
Life lost, the Church is ceasing.
joined together in the life of Christianity, that make a Church of Christ; and
it is all those, that are thus alive and quickened, Considered together, that
make the Catholic Church of Christ: Therefore where this Life cease in one,
then that one cease to be a Christian; and all power, virtue and Authority,
which he had as a Christian, cease with it: so that if he has been a
Minister or Teacher, he cease to be so any more; and though he retain the
Form, and hold to the Authority in Words, yet that signifies no more, nor is it
of any more real Virtue or Authority, than the mere Image of a dead man. And as
this is most agreeable to Reason, so is it to the Scriptures Testimony: for it
is said of Judas, Acts 1.25. Judas fell from his Ministry by Transgression.
That Judas fell from his Ministry and Apostleship by Transgression; so his
Transgression caused him Cease to be an Apostle any more: whereas had the
Apostleship been Entailed to his person, so that Transgression could not cause
him to lose it, until he had been formally degraded by the Church (which Judas
never was, so long as he lived) Judas had been as really an Apostle, after he
betrayed Christ, as before. And as it is of one, so of many, yea, of a whole
Church: for seeing, nothing makes a man truly a Christian, but the life of
Christianity inwardly ruling in his heart; so nothing makes a Church, but the
gathering of several true Christians into one body. Now, where all these
Members lose this life, there the Church cease to be; though they still
uphold the Form, and retain the Name: for when that, which made them a Church,
and for which they were a Church, cease; then they cease also to be a Church:
and therefore the Spirit speaking to the Church of Laodicea, because of her
Luke-warmness, Rev. 3.16. threatens to spue her out of his mouth. Now, The
Luke-warmness of the Church of Laodicea.
suppose the Church of Laodicea had continued in that Luke-warmness and had
come under that Condemnation and Judgment, though she had retained the Name and
Form of a Church, and had had her Pastors and Ministers, as no doubt she had at
that time; yet surely, she had been no true Church of Christ, nor had the
Authority of her Pastors and Teachers been to be regarded because of any
outward Succession, though perhaps some of them had it Immediately from the
Apostles. From all which I infer, that since the Authority of the Christian
Church and her Pastors is always United, and never Separated from the inward
power, virtue and righteous life of Christianity; where this cease, that
cease also. But our Adversaries acknowledge, That many, if not most of those,
by and through whom they derive this Authority, were altogether destitute of
this life and virtue of Christianity; Therefore they could neither receive,
have, nor transmit any Christian Authority.

But if it be Objected, Object.
That though the generality of the Bishops and Priests of the Church of Rome,
during the Apostasy, were such wicked men; yet Protestants affirm, and thou thy
self seem to acknowledge, that there were some good men among them, whom the
Lord regarded, and who were true Members of the Catholic Church of Christ:
might not they then have Transmitted this Authority?

I Answer; This says nothing in respect Protestants do not at all lay claim to
their Ministry, as Transmitted to them by a direct line of such good men; which
they can never show, nor yet pretend to: but generally place this Succession as
Inherent in the whole Pastors of the Apostate Church. plead their Call to be
good and valid, because they can derive it through a line of good men, The
Protestants plead a Succession Inherent.
separate and observably distinguishable from the rest of the Bishops and
Clergy of the Romish Church; but they derive it as an Authority residing in the
whole: For they think it Heresy to Judge, that the Quality or Condition of the
Administrator any ways invalidates or prejudiceth his Work.

This Vain and Pretended Succession not only militates against, and fights with
the very manifest purpose and intent of Christ in the gathering and calling of
his Church; but makes him (so to speak) more blind and less prudent, then
natural men are in Conveying and Establishing their outward Inheritances. An
Estate void of Heirship devolves to the Prince, none Claims it, but whom he to
give it sees meet; so the Heirship of Life is Enjoyed from Christ, the true
Heir.
For where an Estate is Entailed to a certain Name and Family, when that Family
wears out, and there is no lawful Successor found of it, that can make a just
Title appear, as being really of blood and affinity to the Family; it is not
lawful for any one of another Race or Blood, because he assumes the Name or
Arms of that Family, to possess the Estate, and Claim the Superiorities and
Privileges of the Family: but by the Law of Nations the Inheritance devolves
into the Prince, as being Vltimus Haeres; and so he gives it again
immediately, to whom he sees meet, and makes them bear the Name and Arms of
the Family: who then are entitled to the Privileges and Revenues thereof. So
in like manner the True Name and Title of a Christian, by which he has Right
to the heavenly Inheritance, and is a Member of Jesus Christ, is inward
Righteousness and Holiness, and the mind Redeemed from the Vanities, Lusts and
Iniquities of this World; and a Gathering or Company made up of such Members,
makes a Church. Where this is lost, the Title is lost; and so the true Seed, to
which the promise is, and to which the Inheritance is due, becomes extinguished
in them, and they become dead as to it: and so it retires, and devolves it self
again into Christ, who is the righteous heir of Life; and he gives the Title
and true Right again immediately, to whom it pleases him, even to as many as
being turned to his Pure Light in their Consciences, come again to walk in his
righteous and innocent Life, and so become true Members of his Body, which is
the Church. So the Authority, power and heirship is not annexed to persons, as
they bear the bare Names, or retain a Form, holding the mere shell or shadow of
Christianity; but the promise is to Christ, and to the Seed, in whom the
Authority is Inherent, and in as many as are one with him, and united unto him
by purity and holiness, and by the inward Renovation and Regeneration of their
minds.

Moreover, this pretended Succession is contrary to Scripture-definitions and
nature of the Church of Christ, and of the true Members. For first; The Church
is the house of God, the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. But according
to this Doctrine the house of God is a polluted Nest of all sort of Wickedness
and Abominations, 1. The House of God is no polluted Nest, no Atheist nor
Pretender here can rest.
made up of the most ugly, defiled and perverse Stones, that are in the Earth;
where the Devil rules in all manner of Unrighteousness: For so our Adversaries
Confess, and History informs the Church of Rome to have been, as some of their
Historians acknowledge: and if that be truly the House of God, what may we call
the House of Satan? or may we call it therefore the House of God,
notwithstanding all this Impiety, because they had a bare Form, and that
vitiated many ways also? and because they pretended to the Name of
Christianity, though they were Antichristian, Devilish, and Atheistical in
their whole practice and spirit, and also in many of their principles? Would
not this infer yet a greater Absurdity, as if they had been something to be
accounted of, because of their Hypocrisy and Deceit, and false pretenses?
whereas the Scripture looks upon that as an Aggravation of Guilt, and calls it
Blasphemy, Rev. 2.9. Of two wicked men he is most to be abhorred, who covers
his Wickedness with a vain pretense of God and Righteousness: even so these
abominable Beasts and fearful Monsters, who look upon themselves to be Bishops
in the Apostate Church, were never a whit the better, that they falsely
pretended to be the Successors of the Holy Apostles; unless to Lie be
commendable, and that Hypocrisy be the Way to Heaven. Yea, were not this to
fall into that Evil condemned among the Jews? Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in lying
words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord are these; but thoroughly amend your ways, etc. as if such outward
Names and things were the thing the Lord regarded, and not Inward Holiness? or
can that then be the Pillar and Ground of Truth, which is the very Sink and Pit
of Wickedness; from which so much Error, Superstition, Idolatry and all
Abomination springs? Can there be any thing more contrary both to Scripture and
Reason?

Secondly: The Church is defined To be the Kingdom of the Dear Son of God, into
which the Saints are Translated; 2. Christ is the Head, his Body undefiled.
being delivered from the power of darkness. It is called the Body of Christ,
which from him by Joints and Bands having nourishment ministered, and knit
together increases with the Increase of God, Col. 2.19. But can such Members,
such a Gathering, as we have demonstrated that Church and Members to be (among
whom they allege their pretended Authority to have been preserved, and through
which they derive their Call) can such, I say, be the Body of Christ, or the
Members thereof? or is Christ the Head of such a corrupt, dead, dark,
abominable, stinking Carcass? If so; then might we not as well affirm against
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14. That Righteousness has fellowship with
Unrighteousness? that Light has communion with Darkness? What Fellowship has
Christ with Belial?
that Christ has Concord with Belial? that a Believer has part with an
Infidel? and that the Temple of God has Agreement with Idols? Moreover, no man
is called the Temple of God, nor of the Holy Ghost, but as his Vessel is
purified, and so he fitted and prepared for God to dwell in: and many thus
fitted by Christ, become his body, in and among whom he dwells and walks,
according as it is written; I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my people. It is therefore, that we may become
the Temple of Christ, and people of God, that the Apostle in the following
verse exhorts, saying out of the Prophet; Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you; and I will be a Father unto you; and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. But to what purpose is all this
Exhortation? and why should we separate from the Unclean, if a mere outward
Profession and Name be enough to make the True Church; and if the Unclean and
Polluted were both the Church and lawful Successors of the Apostles, inheriting
their Authority, and transmitting it to others? Yea, how can the Church be the
Kingdom of the Son of God, as contra-distinguished from the Kingdom and Power
of Darkness? and what need, yea, what possibility of being Translated out of
the one into the other, if those, that make up the Kingdom and Power of
Darkness, be real Members of the True Church of Christ; and not simple Members
only, but the very Pastors and Teachers of it? But how do they Increase in the
Increase of God, and receive Spiritual Nourishment from Christ the that are
Enemies of him in their hearts by wicked works, and openly go into perdition?
Verily, as no Metaphysical and nice Distinctions, (that though they were
practically, Priests frivolous Distinction of Enemies to God by Practice, and
Members of his Church by Office.
as to their own private states Enemies to God and Christ, and so Servants of
Satan; yet they were by virtue of their Office, Members and Ministers of the
Church, and so able to Transmit the Succession) I say, as such invented and
frivolous Distinctions will not please the Lord God, neither will he be deluded
by such, nor make up the glorious Body of his Church with such mere outside,
Hypocritical Shows, nor be beholden to such painted Sepulchers for to be
Members of his Body, which is sound, pure and undefiled (and therefore he needs
not such false and corrupt Members to make up the Defects of it) so neither
will such Distinctions satisfy truly tender and Christian Consciences:
especially considering, the Apostle is so far from desiring us to Regard that,
as that we are expressly commanded to Turn away from such as have a Form of
godliness, but deny the Power of it. For we may well Object against these, as
the poor man did against the proud Prelate, The Answer of a poor Rustic to a
proud Prelate.
that went about to cover his vain and unchristian-like Sumptuousness, by
distinguishing, That it was not as Bishop, but as Prince, he had all that
splendour: To which the poor Rustic wisely is said to have answered; When the
Prince goes to Hell, what shall become of the Prelate? And indeed, this were
to suppose the Body of Christ to be defective; and that to fill up these
defective places, he puts counterfeit and dead Stuff instead of real, living
Members; like such as lose their Eyes, Arms, or Legs, make Counterfeit ones of
Timber or Glass instead of them. But we cannot think so of Christ, neither can
we believe for the Reasons above adduced, that either we are to account, or
that Christ does account any man or men a whit the more Members of his Body,
because though they be really Wicked, they hypocritically and deceitfully
Cloth themselves with his Name pretended to it; for this is contrary to his
own Doctrine, where he says expressly, Joh. 15.1 -- 6, etc. That he is the
Vine, and his Disciples are the Branches: that except they abide in him, they
cannot bear fruit; and if they be unfruitful, they shall be cast forth as a
branch, and wither. Now I suppose, these Cut and Withered Branches are no more
true Branches, A Withered Branch can draw no Nourishment; so has no life nor
virtue.
nor Members of the Vine, they can draw no more Sap nor Nourishment from it,
after that they are Cut off, and so have no more Virtue, Sap nor Life: What
have they then to Boast or Glory of any Authority, seeing they want that life:
virtue and nourishment, from which all Authority comes? So such Members of
Christ, as are become dead to him through Unrighteousness, and so derive no
more virtue nor life from him, are Cut Off by their sins, and Wither; and have
no more any true or real Authority: and their Boasting of any is but an
Aggravation of their Iniquity by hypocrisy and deceit. But further, would not
this make Christ's Body a mere shadow and phantasm? Yea, would it not make him
the Head of a lifeless, rotten, stinking Carcass, having only some little,
outward, false show, while inwardly full of rottenness and dirt? A Living Head
upon a Lifeless Body, what Monster would that be?
And what a Monster would these men make of Christ's Body, by assigning it a
real, pure, living, quick Head, full of virtue and life, and yet tied to such a
dead, lifeless Body, as we have already described these Members to be, which
they allege to have been the Church of Christ? Again, the Members of the
Church of Christ are specified by this definition, to wit, as being the
Sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. But this notion of Succession supposes
not only some unsanctified Members to be of the Church of Christ, but even the
Whole to consist of unsanctified Members; yea, that such as were professed
Necromancers, and open Servants of Satan, were the true Successors of the
Apostles, and in whom the Apostolic Authority Vessels, through whom this
Succession is Transmitted: though many of them, as all Protestants, and also
some Papists Confess, attained these Offices in the (so called) Church, not
only by such means as Simon Magus sought it; but by much worse, even by
Witchcraft, Murder, Traditions, Money and Treachery; which Platina himself
confesses In the life of Benedict. 4. of Joh. 16. of Silvester 3. of Boniface
8. of Steph. 6. of Jean 8. Also Onuphrius Annotations upon this Papass (or
Popess) toward the end
of diverse Bishops of Rome.

XI. But such, as Object not this Succession of the Church, (which yet most
Protestants begin now to do) distinguish in this matter, affirming; That in a
great Apostasy, such as was that of the Church of Rome, God may raise up some
singularly by his Spirit, who from the Testimony of the Scriptures perceiving
the Errors, into which such as bear the name of Christians, are fallen, may
instruct and teach them; and then become Authorized by the people's joining
with, and accepting of their Ministry only. Most of them also will affirm, That
the Spirit herein is subjective, and not objective.

But they say; Object.
That where a Church is Reformed (such as they pretend the Protestant Churches
are) there an ordinary, orderly Call is necessary; and that of the Spirit, as
extraordinary, is not to be sought after: alleging; that Res aliter se habet
in Ecclesia Constituenda quam in Ecclesia Constituta, that is, There is a
difference in the Constituting of a Church, and after it is Constitute.

I Answer: This Objection as to us says nothing; seeing we Accuse, Scriptures
to prove the Protestants guilty of gross Errors, and needing Reformation, as
well as they did, and do the Papists: A Difference Objected between a
Constituting Church, and one as Constituted.
and therefore we may justly lay claim, if we would, to the same Extraordinary
Call, having the same Reason for it, and as good Evidence to prove ours, as
they had for theirs. As for that Maxim, viz. That the Case is different in a
Constituting Church, and a Church Constituted, I do not deny it; and therefore
there may be a greater measure of power required to the one, than to the other:
and God in his Wisdom distributes the same, as he sees meet. But that the same
Immediate Assistance of the Spirit is not necessary for Ministers in a gathered
Church, as well as in gathering one, I see no solid Reason alleged for it. For
sure, Christ's promise was, To be with his Children to the end of the world;
and they need him no less to preserve and guide his Church and Children, than
to gather and beget them. Nature taught the Gentiles this Maxim, Non minor est
Virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. Englished thus, For to Defend what you
Attain,
Requires no less strength, than to Gain.
For it is by this inward and immediate Operation of the Spirit (which Christ
promised to Lead his Children with into all Truth, and to Teach them all
things) that Christians are to be lead in all steps (as well last as first)
which relate to God's Glory, and their own Salvation; as we have heretofore
sufficiently proved, and therefore need not now Repeat it. And truly, this
Device of Satan, It Is a Device of Satan for Men to put the Spirit's Leadings
far off to former times.
whereby he has got people to put the Immediate Guidings and Leadings of God's
Spirit, as an Extraordinary thing afar off, which their Forefathers had, but
which they now are neither to Wait for, nor Expect, is a great Cause of the
growing Apostasy upon the many gathered Churches; and is one great reason, why
a dry, dead, barren, lifeless, spiritless Ministry, which leavens the people
into the same death, does so much abound, and is so much over-spreading, even
the Protestant Nations, that their Preachings and Worships, as well as whole
Conversation is not to be discerned from Popish by any fresh, living zeal, or
lively Power of the Spirit accompanying it; but merely by the difference of
some Notions and Opinions.

Object.
XII. Some unwise and unwary Protestants do sometimes Object to us, That if we
have such an immediate Call, as we lay claim to, we ought to Confirm it by
Miracles.

Objection once and again objected to the primitive Protestants by the Papists,
we need but in short return the Answer to it, that they did to the Papists,
Whether Miracles be now necessary to Confirm the Gospel?

John Baptist and diverse Prophets did none.


to wit; That we need not Miracles, because we preach no new Gospel, but that,
which is already Confirmed by all the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles: and
that we offer nothing but that, which we are ready and able to Confirm by the
Testimony of the Scriptures, which both already acknowledge to be true: And
that John the Baptist, and diverse of the Prophets did none, that we hear of;
and yet were both immediately and extraordinarily sent. This is the Common
Protestant Answer, therefore may suffice in this place; though if need were, I
could say more to this purpose, but that I study Brevity.

XIII. There is also another sort of Protestants, to wit; The English
Independents: The Constitution of the Independent Church.
who differing from the Calvinistical Presbyterians, and denying the Necessity
of this Succession* or the Authority of any National Church, take another way,
affirming; That such as have the benefit of the Scriptures, any Company of
People agreeing in the Principles of Truth, as they find them there declared,
may Constitute among themselves a Church, without the Authority of any other;
and may Choose to themselves a Pastor: who by the Church thus Constitute and
Consenting, is Authorized; requiring only the Assistance and Concurrence of the
Pastors of the Neighboring Churches (if any be) not so much as absolutely
Necessary to Authorize, as Decent for Order's sake. Also they go so far as to
affirm, That in a Church so Constitute, Gifted Brethren.
any gifted Brother (as they call them) if he find himself qualified thereto,
may Instruct, Exhort and Preach in the Church; though as not having the
Pastoral Office, he cannot Administer, that they Call, their Sacraments.

To this I Answer: That this was a good step out of the Babylonish Darkness;
and no doubt, did proceed from a Real Discovery of the Truth, and from the
sense of a great Abuse of the promiscuous, National gatherings. Also this
Preaching of the Gifted Brethren (as they called them) did proceed at first
from certain, Their Loss and Decay.
lively Touches and Movings of the Spirit of God upon many: But (alas!) because
they went not forward, that is much decayed among them; and the Motions of
God's Spirit begin to be denied and rejected among them now, as much as by
others.

The Scripture gives no Call to persons Individual.
But as to their pretended Call from the Scripture, I Answer: The Scripture
gives a mere declaration of true things, but no Call to particular Persons: so
that though I believe the things there written to be true, and deny the Errors,
which I find there Testified against; yet as to these things, which may be my
particular duty, I am still to seek. And therefore I can never be Resolved in
the Scripture, whether I such a one by name ought to be a Minister? And for the
Resolving this doubt, I must needs recur to the Inward and Immediate Testimony
of the Spirit; as in the Proposition concerning the Scriptures more at large is
shown.

XIV. From all this then we do firmly Conclude, that not only in a general
Apostasy it is needful, men be extraordinarily Called, and Raised up by the
Spirit of God; but that even when several Assemblies or Churches are gathered
by the Power of God (not only into the belief of the Principles of Truth, so as
to deny Errors and Heresies, but also into the Life, Spirit and Power of
Christianity, so as to be the Body and House of Christ indeed, and a fit Spouse
for him) that he who gathers them, does also for the preserving them in a
lively, fresh and powerful Condition, raise up and move among them by the
inward, immediate Operation of his own Spirit, Ministers and Teachers to
Instruct and Teach, and Watch over them: True Ministers Qualifications, Call
and Title.
who being thus Called, are Manifest in the hearts of their Brethren, and their
Call is thus verified in them; who by the feeling of that life and power, that
passes through them, being inwardly built up by them daily in the most holy
Faith, become the Seals of their Apostleship. And this is answerable to another
saying of the same Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ
speaking in me, which to you wards is not weak, but is mighty in you. So this
is that, which gives a true, substantial Call and Title to a Minister, whereby
he is a Real Successor of the Virtue, Life and Power, that was in the Apostles,
and not of the bare Name: Their Laying on of hands a Mock of God and Man, a
Keeping up the Shadow, whilst Substance is a-wanting.
and to such Ministers we think the outward Ceremony or Ordination, or laying
on of hands not necessary; neither can we see the Use of it: seeing our
Adversaries, who use it, acknowledge, that the Virtue and Power of
Communicating the Holy Ghost by it, is Ceased among them. And is it not then
foolish and ridiculous for them, by an Apish Imitation to keep up the Shadow,
where the Substance is wanting? And may not they by the same Rule, where they
see blind and lame men, in Imitation of Christ and his Apostles bid them see
and walk? yea, is it not in them a mocking of God and Men, to put-on their
hands, and bid men Receive the Holy Ghost; while they believe the thing
Impossible, and Confess, that that Ceremony has no real Effect? Having thus
far spoken of the Call, I shall proceed next to treat of the Qualifications and
Work of a true Minister.

XV. As I have placed the True Call of a Minister in the Motion of Holy Spirit,
so is the power, life and virtue thereof, The Qu^lifications of a Minister.
and the pure Grace of God, that comes therefrom, the Chief and most Necessary
Qualification; without which he can no ways perform his Duty neither acceptably
to God, nor beneficially to men. Our Adversaries in this case affirm, that
three things go to the making up of a Minister, viz. 1. Natural Parts, I.
Philosophy and School Divinity will never make a Gospel Ministry.
that he be not a fool. 2. Acquired Parts, that he be Learned in the Languages,
in Philosophy and School Divinity. 3. The Grace of God.

The Two first They reckon Necessary to the being of a Minister, so as a man
cannot be one without them: the Third they say, goes to the well-being of one,
but not to the being; so that a man may truly be a lawful Minister without it,
and ought to be heard and received as such. But we (supposing a natural
Capacity, that one be not an Idiot) judge the Grace of God indispensibly
Necessary to the very being of a Minister, as that without which any can
neither be a true, nor lawful, nor good Minister. As for Letter-Learning, we
judge it not so much necessary to the well-being of one; though accidentally
sometimes in certain respects it may Concur, but more frequently it is hurtful,
then helpful: as appeared in the Example of Taulerus, who being a Learned man,
A poor Laick Instructed the Learned Taulerus.
and who could make an Eloquent preaching, needed nevertheless to be Instructed
in the way of the Lord by a poor Laick. I shall first speak of the Necessity of
Grace; and then proceed to say something of that Literature, which they judge
so needful.

First then, as we said in the Call, so may we much more here. If the Grace of
God be a necessary Qualification to make one a true Christian, it must be a
Qualification much more necessary to Constitute a true Minister of
Christianity. That Grace is necessary to make up a true Christian, I think will
not be questioned; since it is By Grace, we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. it is the
Grace of God, God's Grace alone does constitute a true and lawful Teacher.
that teaches us to deny ungodliness, and the lusts of this World; and to live
godly and righteously, Tit. 2.11. yea, Christ says expressly, that Without him
we can do nothing, John 15.5. and the Way, whereby Christ helps, assisteth
and works with us, is by his Grace. Hence says he to Paul, My Grace is
sufficient for thee. A Christian without Grace is indeed no Christian, but an
Hypocrite, and a false pretender: Then I say* If Grace be necessary to a
private Christian, far more to a Teacher among Christians, who must be as a
Father and Instructor of others; seeing this dignity is bestowed upon such as
have attained a greater measure, than their Brethren* Even Nature it self may
teach us, that there is more required in a Teacher, than in those, that are
Taught; and that the Master must be above and before the Scholar in that Art or
Science, which he Teaches others. Since then Christianity cannot be truly
enjoyed, neither any man denominated a Christian without the true Grace of God;
Therefore neither can any man be a true nor lawful Teacher of Christianity
without it.

Secondly: No man can be a Minister of the Church of Christ, which is his Body,
unless he be a Member of the Body, and receive of the Virtue and Life of the
Head; Arg*


Who first must be a Member of the Body, and then Life is received and Virtue
from the Head.
But he that has not true Grace, can neither be a Member of the Body, neither
receive of that Life and Nourishment, which comes from the Head:

Therefore far less can he be a Minister to Edify the Body.

That he cannot be a Minister, who is not a Member, is Evident; because who is
not a Member, is shut out and cut off, and has no place in the Body: whereas
the Ministers are counted among the most-Eminent Members of the Body. But no
man can be a Member, unless he receive of the Virtue, Life and Nourishment of
the Head: for the Members, that receive not this life and nourishment, decay
and wither; and then are Cut Off. And that every true Member does thus receive
Nourishment and Life from the Head, the Apostle Expressly affirms, Ephesians. 4.16.
From whom the whole body being fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes Increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in
Love. Now this, that thus is Communicated, and which thus uniteth the whole, is
no other than the Grace of God; and therefore the Apostle in the same Chapter,
v. 7. affirms, But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the measure
of the gift of Christ: and verse. 11. he shows, how that by this Grace and
Gift both Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers are given for
the work of the Ministry and edifying of the Body of Christ. And certainly, no
man destitute of this Grace is fit for this Work, seeing that all that Christ
gives, are so qualified; and those that are not so qualified, are not given,
The Sheep of Christ nor ought nor will not hear the Stranger's Voice.
nor sent of Christ: and who are not given and sent of Christ, are not to be
heard, nor received, nor acknowledged as Ministers of the Gospel; because his
sheep neither ought, nor will hear the voice of a Stranger. This is also clear
from 1 Cor. 12. throughout: For the Apostle in that Chapter treating of the
diversity of Gifts and Members of the Body, shows, how by the working of the
same Spirit in different Manifestations or Measures in the several Members the
whole Body is edified, saying; verse. 13. That we are all baptized by the One
Spirit into one Body: and then verse. 28. he numbers out the several
Dispensations thereof, which by God are set in the Church through the various
Working of his Spirit, for the Edification of the whole. Then if there be no
true Member of the Body, which is not thus Baptized by this Spirit, neither any
thing, that works to the Edifying of it, but according to a measure of Grace
received from the Spirit, surely, without Grace none ought to be admitted to
work or labor in the Body; because their labor and work without this Grace
and Spirit would be but Ineffectual.

XVI. Thirdly: That this Grace and Gift is a necessary Qualification to a
Minister, is clear from that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every
man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the Ability, which God
gives: that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom
be praise and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. From which it appears, that
those that Minister, must Minister according to the Gift and Grace received;
but they, that have not such a Gift, The Ministering must be by Gift and Grace
received.
cannot Minister according thereunto. Secondly; As good stewards of the
manifold Grace of God: But how can a man be a good steward, of that which he
has not? Can ungodly men, that are not gracious themselves, be good stewards
of the manifold Grace of God? Good stewardship, of what? of God's abounding
Grace; which is the Ability and Stewardship received.
And therefore in the following verses he makes an Exclusive limitation of
such, as are not thus furnished, saying; If any man speak, let him speak as the
Oracles of God; and if any man Minister, let him do it as of the Ability that
God gives: which is as much as if he had said; They that cannot thus speak,
and thus Minister, ought not to do it: for this [ If] denotes a necessary
Condition. Now what this Ability is, is manifest by the former words, to wit,
the Gift received, and the Grace, whereof they are Stewards; as by the
immediate Context and dependency of the words does appear: neither can it be
understood of a mere Natural Ability; because man in this condition is said not
to know the things of God, and so he cannot Minister them to others. And the
following words show this also, in that he immediately subjoineth; That God in
all things may be glorified: but surely, God is not glorified, but greatly
dishonored, when Natural Men from their mere natural Ability meddle in
Spiritual things, which they neither know nor understand.

Fourthly: That Grace is a most Necessary Qualification for a Minister,
Qualifications, which the Apostle expressly requires, 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1. etc.
where he says: A Bishop must be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behavior,
apt to teach, patient, a lover of good men, just, holy, temperate, as the
steward of God, holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught: Upon
the other hand, He must neither be given to wine, nor a striker, nor covetous,
nor proud, nor self-willed, nor soon angry. Now I ask, If it be not Impossible,
that a man can have all these abovenamed Virtues, How can a Bishop have these
Virtues without the Grace of God?
and be free of all these Evils without the Grace of God? If then these Virtues
(for the producing of which in a man Grace is absolutely necessary) be
necessary to make a true Minister of the Church of Christ according to the
Apostles judgment, surely, Grace must be necessary also.

Concerning this thing a Learned Man, and well-skilled in Antiquity, about the
time of the Reformation writes thus; Whatsoever is done in the Church without
the Ministry of God's Spirit, is vain and wicked.
Whatsoever is done in the Church either for Ornament or Edification of
Religion, whether in choosing Magistrates, or instituting Ministers of the
Church, except it be done by the Ministry of God's Spirit, which is, as it
were, the Soul of the Church, it is vain and wicked. For whoever has not been
called by the Spirit of God to the great Office of God and Dignity of
Apostleship, as Aaron was, and has not entered in by the door, which is Christ;
but has otherways risen in the Church by the Window, by the favors of men,
etc. truly, such a one is not the Vicar of Christ and the Apostles, but a Thief
and a Robber, and the Vicar of Judas Iscariot Who is Judas Iscariot's Vicar?
and Simon the Samaritan. Hence it was so strictly appointed concerning the
Election of Prelates ( which holy Dionysius calls the Sacrament of Nomination)
that the Bishops and Apostles, who should Oversee the service of the Church,
should be men of most entire manners and life, powerful in sound doctrine to
give a reason for all things. So also Franciscus Lambertus Avenionensis in his
Book concerning Prophecy, Learning, Tongues and the Spirit of Prophecy.
Argentorat. excus. anno 1516 de prove. cap 24.
another about the same time writes thus; Therefore it can never be, that by
the Tongues or Learning any can give a sound Judgment concerning the Holy
Scriptures, and the Truth of God. Lastly (says he) the sheep of Christ seek
nothing, but the voice of Christ, which he knows by the holy Spirit,
wherewith he is filled: he regards not Learning, Tongues or any outward thing,
so as therefore to believe this or that to be the Voice of Christ his true
shepherd; he knows, that there is need of no other thing, but the Testimony
of the Spirit of God.

Absolute Necessity of Grace they Object; That if all Ministers had the Saving
Grace of God, then all Ministers should be Saved; seeing none can fall away
from, or lose Saving Grace.

Objection is built upon a false Hypothesis purely denied by us: and we have in
the former Proposition concerning Perseverance already Refuted it.

Secondly: It may be objected to us; That since we affirm, that every man has
a measure of True and Saving Grace, there needs no singular Qualification
neither to a Christian, nor Minister; for seeing, every man has this Grace,
then no man needs forbear to be a Minister for want of Grace.

Necessary to the making a Minister a special and particular Call from the
Spirit of God: which is something besides the Universal Dispensation of Grace
to all; according to that of the Apostle: Hebr. 5.4.
No man takes this honor unto himself, but he, that is Called of God, as was
Aaron. Moreover we understand by Grace, as a Qualification to a Minister, All
have God's Grace, which calls to Righteousness; but all are not so leavened in
its Nature to bring forth fruits, a blameless, holy life.
not the mere measure of Light, as it is given to Reprove, and Call him to
Righteousness; but we understand Grace, as it has Converted the Soul, and
Operateth powerfully in it: as hereafter concerning the Work of Ministers will
further appear. So we understand not men simply, as having Grace in them, as a
Seed, (which we indeed affirm all have in a measure) but we understand men,
that are gracious, leavened by it into the Nature thereof; so as thereby to
bring forth these good fruits of a blameless Conversation, and of Justice,
holiness, patience and temperance, which the Apostle requires as Necessary in a
true Christian Bishop and Minister.

Secondly: They So Nic. Arnoldus sect. 32. upon These 4.
object the Example of the false Prophets, of the Pharisees, and of Judas.

But first; As to the false Prophets, there can nothing be more foolish and
ridiculous: as if because there were false Prophets truly false, without the
Grace of God, therefore Grace is not necessary to a true Christian Minister.
true Prophets wanted this Grace, The false, not the true Prophets want the
Grace of God.
they had said something; but what have false Prophets common with true
Ministers, but that they pretend falsely that, which they have not? And because
false Prophets want true Grace, will it therefore follow, that true Prophets
ought not to have it, that they may be true, and not false? The Example of the
Pharisees and Priests under the Law will not answer to the Gospel Times;
because God set apart a particular Tribe for that Service, and particular
Families, to whom it belonged by a Lineal Succession: and also their Service
and Work was not purely Spiritual, but only the performance of some outward and
carnal Observations and Ceremonies; which were but a shadow of the Substance,
that was to come: The Service under the Law was not purely Spiritual, but
Figurative; for the performance of which, as they behoved to be purified from
their outward Pollutions, so the Ministers of the Gospel must be inwardly
without blemish.
and therefore their Work made not the Comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining
to the Conscience; seeing, they were appointed only according to the Law of a
carnal Commandment, and not according to the Power of an endless Life.
Notwithstanding, as in the Figure they behoved to be without blemish, as to
their outward man, and in the performance of their Work they behoved to be
Washed and Purified from their outward pollutions; so now under the
Gospel Times the Ministers in the Antitype must be inwardly without blemish in
their Souls and Spirits, being as the Apostle requires, blameless, and in their
work and service must be pure and undefiled from their inward pollutions; and
so clean and holy, that they may offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. As to Judas, the Season of his Ministry was
not wholly Evangelical, as being before the Work was finished, and while Christ
himself, The Ministry of the Disciples of Christ before the Work was finished,
was more Legal, than Evangelical.
and his Disciples were yet subject to the Jewish Observances and
Constitutions: and therefore his Commission, as well as that which the Rest
received with him at that time, was only to the house of Israel, Matthew. 10.5,
6. which made, that by virtue of that Commission the Rest of the Apostles were
not Empowered to go forth and preach after the Resurrection, until they had
waited at Jerusalem for the pouring-forth of the Spirit: So that it appears,
Judas's Ministry was more Legal, than Evangelical. Secondly: Judas's Case, as
all will acknowledge, was singular and extraordinary; Judas was Immediately
Called of Christ, and preached freely, which our Adversaries will not do;
although they make of him a Pattern of their Graceless Ministry, saying, he had
not the least Measure of God's Grace at that time.
he being Immediately Called by Christ himself, and accordingly furnished and
empowered by him to Preach, and do Miracles: which Immediate Commission our
Adversaries do not so much as pretend to; and so fall short of Judas, who
trusted in Christ's Words, and therefore went forth and preached without Gold
or Silver, or Scrip for his Journey, Giving freely, as he had freely received:
which our Adversaries will not do; as hereafter shall be observed. Also that
Judas at that time had not the least measure of God's Grace, I have not as yet
heard proved: But is it not sad, that even Protestants should lay aside the
Eleven good and faithful Apostles, and all the Rest of the holy Disciples and
Ministers of Christ, and betake them to that one, of whom it was testified,
that he was a Devil, for a Pattern* and Example to their Ministry? Alas! it is
to be Regretted, that too many of them resemble this Pattern over much!

Another Objection is usually made against the Necessity of Grace, Object.
Ibid. Nic. Arnoldus.
That in case it were necessary, then such as wanted it, could not truly
administer the Sacrament: and consequently the people would be left in doubts
and infinite scruples, as not knowing certainly, whether they had truly
received them; because not knowing infallibly, whether the Administrators were
truly gracious men.

But this Objection hitteth us not at all: Nature of that Spiritual and
Christian Worship, which we according to the Truth plead for, is such, as is
not necessarily attended with these carnal and outward Institutions, from the
administering of which the Objection arises; and so has not any such Absurdity
following upon it: as will afterward more Clearly appear.

XVIII. Though then we make not Humane Learning necessary, II. What True
Learning is?
yet we are far from Excluding true Learning, to wit, that Learning, which
proceeds from the Inward Teachings and Instructions of the Spirit, whereby
the Soul learneth the secret Ways of the Lord, becomes acquainted with many
inward Travels and Exercises of the Mind, and learneth by a living Experience,
how to overcome Evil and the Temptations of it, by following the Lord, and
walking in his Light, and waiting daily for Wisdom and Knowledge immediately
from the Revelation thereof: and so lays up these Heavenly and Divine Lessons
in the good Treasure of the heart, as honest Mary did the sayings which she
heard, and things which she observed; and also out of this Treasure of the
Soul, as the good Scribe, brings forth things new and old, according as the
same Spirit moves, and gives a true Liberty, and as need is for the Lord's
Glory, whose the Soul is; and for whom, and with an Eye to whose Glory she,
which is the Temple of God, The good Learning, which is necessary to a true
Minister.
learneth to do all things. This is that Good Learning, which we think
necessary to a true Minister, by and through which Learning a man can well
Instruct, Teach and Admonish in due season; and Testify for God from a certain
Experience, as did David, Solomon and the holy Prophets of old, and the blessed
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, who testified of what they had seen, heard,
felt and handled of the Word of Life, 1 John 1.1. ministering the Gift,
according as they had received the same, as good stewards of the manifold Grace
of God: and preached not the uncertain Rumors of others by hearsay, which they
had gathered merely in the Comprehension, while they were strangers to the
thing in their own Experience in themselves; as to Teach people how to believe,
while themselves were unbelieving; or how to overcome sin, while themselves are
slaves to it, as all Ungracious men are; or to believe and hope for an Eternal
Reward, which themselves have not as yet Arrived at, etc.

Literature is first the Knowledge of Latin, Greek and Hebrew to the
Scriptures.
XIX. But let us Examine this Literature, which they make so necessary to the
being of a Minister: as in the first place, the Knowledge of the Tongues, at
least of the Latin, Greek and Hebrew. The reason for this is, that they may
Read the Scriptures, which is their Only Rule, in the Original Languages; and
thereby be the more capable to Comment upon it, and Interpret it, etc. That
also, which made this Knowledge be the more prized by the primitive
Protestants, was indeed that dark Barbarity, that was over the World in the
Centuries immediately preceding the Reformation; Before the Reformation the
Prayers of the people were performed in the Latin Tongue.
the Knowledge of the Tongues being about that time (until it was even then
Restored by Erasmus and some others) almost lost and Extinct. And this
Barbarity was so much the more Abominable, that the whole Worship and Prayers
of the people was in the Latin Tongue: and among that vast Number of Priests,
Monks and Friars scarce one of a Thousand understood his Breviary, or that
Mass, that he daily read and repeated; the Scriptures being not only to the
people, but to the greater part of the Clergy even as to the Literal Knowledge
of it, as a Sealed Book. I shall not at all discommend the Zeal, that the first
Reformers had against this Babylonish Darkness, The Zeal and Endeavors of the
first Reformers commended.
nor their pious Endeavors to Translate the Holy Scriptures; but I do truly
believe, according to their Knowledge, that they did it Heartily: and therefore
to answer the just desires of those, that desire to Read them, and for other
very good Reasons, as maintaining a Commerce and Understanding among diverse
Nations by these Common Languages and other of that kind, The Knowledge of
Languages Commendable, and Schools necessary.
we judge it Necessary and Commendable, there be Public Schools for the
Teaching and Instructing Youth, as are inclinable thereunto, in the Languages.
All although that Papal Ignorance deserved justly to be abhorred and
abominated; we see nevertheless that the True Reformation consists not in that
Knowledge: because, although since that time the Papists, stirred up through
Emulation of the Protestants, have more applied themselves unto Literature, and
it now more flourishes in their Universities and Cloisters, than before
(especially in the Ignatian or Jesuitick Sect;) they are as far now, as ever,
from a True Reformation, and more obdured in their pernicious Doctrines. The
Papists Literature and Knowledge, especially the Jesuits.
But all this will not make this a Necessary Qualification to a Minister; far
less a more necessary Qualification, than the Grace of God and his Spirit:
because the Spirit and Grace of God can make up this Want in the most-Rustick
and Ignorant; but this Knowledge can no ways make up the Want of the Spirit in
the most-Learned and Eloquent. For all that, The Spirit is the truest
Interpreter of the Scriptures, whether from the Original Languages, or without
them.
which man by his own Industry, Learning and Knowledge in the Languages can
Interpret of the Scriptures, or find out, is nothing without the Spirit; he
cannot be certain of it, and may still miss of the sense of it: but a poor man,
that knows not a Letter, when he hears the Scriptures read, by the same
Spirit he can say, this is true, and by the same Spirit he can understand, open
and interpret it, if need be: yea, he finding his Condition to answer the
Condition and Experience of the Saints of old, knows and possesses the
Truths there delivered, because they are sealed and witnessed in his own heart
by the same Spirit. And this we have plentiful Experience of in many of those
Illiterate Men, whom God has raised up to be Ministers in his Church in this
day; so that some such by his Spirit have Corrected some of the Errors of the
Translators, as in the Third Proposition concerning the Scriptures I before
observed. Yea, I know my self a poor Shoo-maker, that cannot Read a word, A
poor Shoo-maker that could not read, refutes a Professor of Divinity's false
Assertions from Scripture.
who being Assaulted with a false Citation of Scripture from a public
Professor of Divinity before the Magistrate of a City, when he had been taken
preaching to some few, that came to hear him; I say, I know such a one (and he
yet lives) who, though the Professor (who also is esteemed a Learned Man)
constantly Asserted his saying to be a Scripture-Sentence, yet affirmed not
through any certain Letter-Knowledge he had of it, but from the most- certain
Evidence of the Spirit in himself, that the Professor lied; and that the Spirit
of God never said any such thing, as the other affirmed: and the Bible being
brought, it was found, as the poor Shoo-maker had said.

XX. The second part of their Literature is Logic and Philosophy, 2. The
Logic and Philosophy not needful to a Preacher.
an Art so little needful to a true Minister, that if one, that comes to be a
true Minister, has had it, it is safest for him to forget and lose it; for it
is the Root and Ground of all Contention and Debate, and the way to make a
thing a great deal Darker, than Clearer. For under the pretense of Regulating
man's Reason into a certain Order and Rules, that he may find out (as they
pretend) the Truth, it leads into such a Labyrinth of Contention, as is far
more fit to make a Sceptick, than a Christian, far less a Minister of Christ;
yea, it often hinders man from a clear Understanding of things, that his own
Reason would give him: and therefore through its manifold Rules and diverse
Inventions it often gives occasion for a man, that has little Reason,
foolishly to speak much to no purpose. Seeing a man, that is not very Wise, may
notwithstanding be a perfect Logician: and then if ye would make a man a fool
to purpose (that is, not very Wise) do but teach him Logic and Philosophy; and
whereas before he might have been fit for something, he shall then be good for
nothing, but to speak Nonsense: for these Notions will so swim in his head,
that they will make him extremely Busy about nothing. The Use, The Use of
Logic is to see its Emptiness.
that Wise men and solid make of it, is, To see the EMPTINESS thereof:
therefore says one; It is an Art of Contention and Darkness, by which all
other Sciences are rendered more obscure, and harder to be understood.

Inst.
If it be urged, That thereby the Truth may be Maintained and Confirmed, and
Heretics Confuted;

I answer: The Truth in men truly Rational needs not the Help thereof; and
such as are obstinate, this will not Convince: for by this they may learn
twenty Tricks and Distinctions, how to shut out the Truth; and the Truth
proceeding from an honest heart, Virtue and Spirit of God, will have more
Influence, and take sooner and more effectually, than by a Thousand
Demonstrations of Logic. As that Lucae Osiandri Epit. H^st. Eccles. lib. 2.
cap. 5. Cent. 4.
Heathen Philosopher acknowledged, who disputing with the Christian An
Heathen-Philosopher disputing with the Bishops in the Council of Nice, was
Converted to the Christian Faith by an Ignorant Old Man, whom they could not.
Bishops in the Council of Nice, was so subtle, that he could not be overcome
by them: but yet by a few words spoken by a simple, old Rustic, was presently
Convinced by him, and Converted to the Christian Faith. And being Inquired, how
he came to yield to that Ignorant Old Man, and not to the Bishops? he said;
That they contended with him in his own way; and he could still give words for
words: but there came from the Old Man that virtue, which he was not able to
Resist. This secret Virtue and Power ought to be the Logic and Philosophy,
wherewith a true Christian Minister ought to be furnished; and for which they
need not be beholden to Aristotle. As to Natural Logic, Natural Logic useful.
by which Rational men without that Art and Rules, or Sophistical Learning
deduce a certain Conclusion out of true Propositions, which scarce any man of
Reason wants, we deny not the Use of it; and I have sometimes used it in this
Treatise: which also may serve without that Dialectical Art. As for the other
part of Philosophy, which is called Moral, 3. Ethics, or the Manner-Rules to
Christians not needful.
or Ethics, it is not so necessary to Christians; who have the Rules of the
Holy Scriptures, and the Gift of the Holy Spirit, by which they can be much
better Instructed. The 4. Physics and the Metaphysics make no Preachers of
the Truth.
Physical and Metaphysical part may be reduced to the Arts of Medicine, and the
Mathematics; which have nothing to do with the Essence of a Christian
Minister. And therefore the Apostle Paul, who well understood, what was good
for Christian Ministers, and what hurtful, thus exhorted the Colossians, Col.
2.8. Beware, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit: And to
his beloved Disciple Timothy he writes also thus, 1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy, keep
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and
oppositions of Science, falsely so called.

III. The Learned School Divinity obnoxious a Monster.

A Letter-Knowledge Heatheniz'd.


XXI. The Third and main part of their Literature is School Divinity, a Monster
made up betwixt some Scriptural Notions of Truth, and the Heathenish Terms and
Maxims; being, as it were, the Heathenish Philosophy Christianized, or rather
the Literal External Knowledge of Christ Heathenized. It is man in his first,
fallen, natural State, with his Devilish Wisdom, pleasing himself with some
Notions of Truth, and adorning them with his own Serpentine and Worldly Wisdom;
because he thinks the simplicity of the Truth too low and mean a thing for him:
and so despises that simplicity, wheresoever it is found; that he may set up
and Exalt himself, puffed up with this his monstrous Birth. It is the Devil
darkning, obscureing and vailing the Knowledge of God with his sensual and
carnal Wisdom, that so he may the more securely deceive the hearts of the
simple, and make the Truth, as it is in it self, despicable, and hard to be
known and understood, by multiplying a Thousand hard and needless Questions,
and Endless Contentions and Debates. All which whosoever perfectly knows, he is
not a whit less the Servant of Sin, than he was; but ten times more, in that he
is Exalted and Proud of Iniquity, and so much the further from Receiving,
understanding or learning the Truth, as it is in its own naked Simplicity;
because he is full, learned, rich and wise in his own Conceit: And so those,
that are most skilled in it, wear out their Day, and spend their precious Time
about the Infinite and Innumerable Questions they have feigned and invented
concerning it. A certain Learned Man called it a Twofold Discipline, as of the
Race of the Centaurs, partly proceeding from Divine Sayings, partly from
Philosophical Reasons. A Thousand of their Questions they confess themselves to
be no ways necessary to Salvation; and yet many more of them they could never
Agree upon, Its needless Questions and endless Janglings.
but are and still will be in endless Janglings about them. The Volumes, that
have been written about it, a man in his whole Age, though he lived very Old,
could scarce Read; and when he has Read them all, he has but wrought himself a
great deal more Vexation and Trouble of Spirit, than he had before. These
certainly are the Words multiplied without knowledge, by which Counsel has
been darkened, Job 38.2. They make the Scripture the Text of all this Mass; and
it is concerning the Sense of it, that their Voluminous Debates arise. But a man
of a good upright heart may learn more in half an hour, and be more certain of
it by Waiting upon God and his Spirit in the heart, than by reading a Thousand
of their Volumes; which by filling his Head with many needless Imaginations may
well stagger his Faith, but never Confirm it: and indeed those, that give
themselves most to it, are most capable to fall into Error; as appears by the
Example of Origin, who by his Learning was one of the first, that falling into
this way of Interpreting the Scriptures, wrote so many Volumes, and in them so
many Errors, as very much troubled the Church. Whereby Arrius fell into Error
and Schism?
Also Arrius led by this Curiosity and Humane Scrutiny, despising the
Simplicity of the Gospel, fell into his Error; which was the Cause of that
horrible Heresy, which so much troubled the Church. Methinks, the Simplicity,
Plainness and Brevity of the Scriptures themselves should be a sufficient
Reproof for such a Science; and the Apostles being honest, plain, illiterate
men, may be better understood by such kind of men now, than with all that Mass
of Scholastic Stuff, which neither Peter, nor Paul, nor John ever thought of.

XXII. But this Invention of Satan, wherewith he began the Apostasy, The
Apostasy, and its dangerous Consequence.
has been of dangerous Consequence: For thereby he at first spoiled the
simplicity of Truth, by keeping up the Heathenish Learning; which occasioned
such Uncertainty even among those called Fathers, Many of the Fathers not only
Contradict each other, but themselves also, and why?
and such Debate, that there are few of them to be found, who by reason of this
Mixture, do not only frequently Contradict one another, but themselves also.
And therefore, when the Apostasy grew greater, he, as it were, buried the Truth
with this Vail of Darkness, wholly shutting out people from true Knowledge, and
making the Learned (so accounted) busy themselves with idle and needless
Questions; while the weighty Truths of God were neglected, and as it were, went
into desuetude. Now, though the grossest of these Abuses be swept away by
Protestants, yet the evil Root still remains, and is nourished and upheld, and
upon the growing hand; that this Science is still kept up, and deemed Necessary
for a Minister: for while the pure Learning of the Spirit of Truth is despised
and neglected, and made Ineffectual, man's fallen, Earthly Wisdom is upheld;
and so in that he labors and works with the Scriptures, being out of the Life
and Spirit those that wrote them were in; by which they are only rightly
understood and made use of. And so he, that is to be a Minister, Merchandising
with the Scriptures, What it is?
must learn this Art or Trade of Merchandising with the Scriptures, and be
that, which the Apostle would not be, to wit, a Trader with them; 2 Cor. 2.17.
See also 2 Pet. 2.3.
That he may acquire a Trick from a Verse of Scripture, by adding his own
barren Notions and Conceptions to it, and his uncertain Conjectures, and what
he has stoll'n out of Books (for which end he must have of necessity a good
many by him;) and may each Sabbath Day (as they call it) or oftener make a
Discourse for an Hour long. And this is called the Preaching of the Word:
whereas the Gift, Grace and Spirit of God to teach, And this they call the
Preaching of the Word.
open and instruct, and to preach a word in season is neglected; and so man's
Arts and Parts, and Knowledge and Wisdom, which is from below, set up Thus
Antichrist is Established above the Seed of the Kingdom
and established in the Temple of God, yea, and above the little Seed: which in
effect is Antichrist working in the Mystery. And so the Devil How the Devil
may be a Minister of the Priest's Gospel.
may be as good and able a Minister, as the best of them; for he has better
skill of Languages, and more Logic, Philosophy and School Divinity, than any
of them, and knows the Truth in the Notion, better than they all, and can talk
more Eloquently, than all those Preachers. But what avails all this? Is it
not all but as Death? as a Painted Sepulcher, and dead Carcass without the
Power, Life and Spirit of Christianity, which is the marrow and substance of a
Christian Ministry? And he, that has this, and can speak from it, though he be
a poor Shepherd, or a Fisherman, and Ignorant of all that Learning, and of all
those Questions and Notions, yet speaking from the Spirit, his Ministry will
have more Influence toward the Converting of a Sinner unto God, than all of
them Learned after the flesh; as in that Example of the Old Man at the Council
of Nice did appear.

The Power of God by weak Instruments restoring the Simplicity of Truth.
XXIII. And if in any Age since the Apostles days God has purposed to show his
Power by Weak Instruments, for the battering down of that Carnal and Heathenish
Wisdom, and restoring again the Ancient Simplicity of Truth, this is it. For in
our Day God has raised up Witnesses for himself, as he did Fishermen of Old;
many, yea most of whom are Laboring and Mechanic men: who altogether without
that Learning have by the Power and Spirit of God struck at the very Root and
Ground of Babylon; and in the Strength and Might of this Power have gathered
Thousands (by reaching their Consciences) into the same Power and Life, who, as
to the outward part, have been far more knowing than they, yet not able to
Resist the Virtue, that proceeded from them. Of which I my self am a true
Witness; and can declare from a certain Experience, because my heart has been
often greatly broken and tendered by that virtuous Life, that has proceeded
from the powerful Ministry of those Illiterate men: The Powerful Ministry of
Illiterate Men.
so that by their very Countenance, as well as Words I have felt the Evil in me
often Chained down, and the good Reached to and Raised. What shall I then say
to you, who are Lovers of Learning, and Admirers of Knowledge? Was not I also a
Lover and Admirer of it, who also sought after it according to my Age and
Capacity? But it pleased God in his unutterable Love early to withstand my vain
Endeavors, while I was yet but Eighteen years of Age; The Time of the Author's
first Convincement.
and made me seriously to consider (which I wish also may befall others) That
without Holiness Job 28.28.
and Regeneration no man can see God: and that the Fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom, and to depart from Iniquity, a good Understanding; and how
much Knowledge puffs up, and leads away from that Inward Quietness,
Stilness and Humility of Mind, where the Lord appears, and his heavenly Wisdom
is Revealed. If ye consider these things, then will ye say with me, that all
this Learning* Wisdom and Knowledge gathered in this fallen Nature is but as
Dross and Dung in comparison of the Cross of Christ; especially being destitute
of that Power, Life and Virtue, which I perceived these Excellent (though
despised, because Illiterate) Witnesses of God to be filled with: and therefore
seeing, that in and among them I with many others have found the heavenly Food,
that gives Contentment, let my Soul seek after this Learning, and Wait for it
for ever.

XXIV. Having thus spoken of the Call and Qualifications of a Gospel Minister;
that which comes next to be considered is, What his proper Work is? How, and by
what Rule he is to be Ordered? Our Adversaries Outward, The Work of a Minister.
and therefore have Certain prescribed Rules and Methods contrived according to
their humane and earthly Wisdom: We on the contrary, walk still upon the same
Foundation, and lean always upon the Immediate Assistance and Influence of that
The Holy Spirit a Spirit of Order, and not of Confusion.
Holy Spirit, which God has given his Children to teach them all things, and
lead them in all things; which Spirit, being the Spirit of Order and not of
Confusion, leads us, and as many as follow it, into such a Comely and Decent
Order, as becomes the Church of God. But our Adversaries, having shut
themselves out from this Immediate Counsel and Influence of the Spirit, have
run themselves into many Confusions and Disorders, seeking to establish an
Order in this matter. For some will have first a Chief Bishop or Pope to Rule,
and be Prince over all; and under him by degrees Cardinals, Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons; Popish Orders and Offices, etc.
and besides these Acoluthi, Tonsorati, Ostiarii, etc. And in their Theology
(as they call it) Professors, Batchelors, Doctors, etc. And others are to have
every Nation Independent of another, having its own Metropolitan or Patriarch;
and the rest in order Subject to him, as before. Others again are against all
Precedence among Pastors, and constitute their Subordination not of persons,
but of powers: as first the Consistory, or Session; then the Class, or
Presbytery: then the Provincial; and then the National Synod or Assembly. Thus
do they Tear one another, and Contend among themselves concerning the Ordering,
Distinguishing and making their several Orders and Offices; concerning which
there has been no less Contest not only by way of Verbal Dispute, but even by
Fighting, Tumults, Wars, Wars and Bloodshed about Church Government.
Vastations and Bloodshed, than about the Conquering, Overturning and
Establishing of Kingdoms. And the Histories of late times are as full of the
various Tragedies acted upon the account of this Spiritual and Ecclesiastic
Monarchy and Commonwealth, as the Histories of Old times, that gave account of
the Wars and Contests, that fell out both in the Assyrian, Persian, Greek and
Roman Empires: These last upon this account, though among those that are called
Christians, have been no less Bloody and Monstrous, than the former among
Heathens concerning their outward Empires and Governments. The Ground and Cause
thereof.
Now all this both among Rapists and Protestants proceeds, in that they seek
in Imitation to uphold a Form and Shadow of things; though they want the Power,
Virtue and Substance: though for many of their Orders and Forms they have not
so much as the Name in the Scripture. But in Opposition to all this Mass of
Formality and heap of Orders, Rules and Governments we say, the Substance is
chiefly to be sought after, and the Power, Virtue and Spirit is to be known and
waited for, which is One in all the different Names and Offices the Scripture
makes use of; as appears by 1 Cor. 12.4. (often beforementioned) There are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. And after the Apostle throughout the
whole Chapt. has shown, how one and the self same Spirit works in and
quickneth each Member, then in verse. 28. he shows, how thereby God has set
in the Church first Apostles, secondly Prophets, Teachers, etc. And likewise to
the same purpose Ephesians. 4.11. he shows, how by these Gifts he has given some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, etc.
Now it was never Christ's purpose, nor the Apostles, that Christians should
without this Spirit and Heavenly Gift set up a shadow and form of these Orders,
and so make several Ranks and Degrees to establish a Carnal Ministry of men's
making, without the Life, Power and Spirit of Christ; this is that Work of
Antichrist and Mystery of Iniquity, The Work of Antichrist and Mystery of
Iniquity.
that has got up in the dark night of Apostasy. But in a true Church of Christ
gathered together by God, not only unto the belief of the Principles of Truth,
but also into the Power, Life and Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of God is the
Orderer, Ruler and Governor, as in each particular, so in the general. And
when they Assemble together to wait upon God, and Worship and Adore him; then
such as the Spirit sets apart to the Ministry, Such as the Spirit sets apart to
the Ministry, their brethren hear them.
by its Divine Power and Influence opening their mouths, and giving them to
Exhort, Reprove and Instruct with virtue and power, these are thus of God
Ordained and Admitted into the Ministry; and their Brethren cannot but hear
them, receive them, and also honor them for their works sake. And so this is
not Monopolized to a certain kind of men, as the Clergy (who are to that
purpose Educated and brought up, The Clergy and Laics.
as other Carnal Artists) and the rest to be despised, as Laics; but it is
left to the free Gift of God to choose any, whom he sees meet thereunto,
whether Rich or Poor, Servant or Master, Young or Old, yea, Male or Women may
preach.
Female. And such as have this Call, verify the Gospel by preaching not in
speech only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much fullness, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. and cannot but be received and heard by the sheep of Christ.

Object.
XXV. But if it be objected here, That I seem hereby to make no distinction at
all betwixt Ministers, and others; which is contrary to the Apostle, saying: 1
Cor. 12.29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? etc. from
thence they insinuate, That I also Contradict his Comparison in that Chapter,
of the Church of Christ with a Humane Body; as where he says verse. 17. If the
whole Body were an Eye, where were the Hearing? If the whole were Hearing,
where were the Smelling? etc. Also the Apostle not only thus distinguishes the
Ministers of the Church in general from the rest of the Members; but also among
themselves, as naming them distinctly and separately Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, etc.

last part of this Objection, to which I shall first Answer, it is apparent,
that this Diversity of Names is not for to distinguish separate Offices;
Diversity of Names makes no distinct Offices; but which may Coincide or be
together in one person.
but to denote the different and various Operations of the Spirit, a manner of
speech frequent with the Apostle Paul, wherein he sometimes exspatiates to the
illustrating of the glory and praise of God's Grace: as in particular Romans
12.6. Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace, that is given to us,
whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith; Or
Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that Teaches, on Teaching; Or
he that exhorts, on Exhortation. Now none will say from all this, that these
are distinct Offices, or do not or may not coincide in one person, as may all
these other things mentioned by him in the subsequent verses, viz. of loving,
being kindly affectioned, fervency of spirit, hospitality, diligence, blessing,
rejoicing, etc. Which yet he numbers forth as different Gifts of the Spirit,
and according to this Objection might be placed, as distinct and separate
Offices, which were most Absurd.

( Secondly.) In these very places mentioned it is clear, that it is no Real
Distinction of separate Offices: because all acknowledge, that Pastors and
Teachers (which the Apostle there no less separateth and distinguishes, than
Pastors and Prophets, or Apostles) are one and the same, and Coincide in the
same office and person; and therefore so may be said of the rest. For [
Prophecy] as it signifies the foretelling of things to come, is indeed a
distinct Gift, but no distinct Office; and therefore our Adversaries do not
place it among their several Orders: neither will they deny, but that both may
be, and have been given of God to some, Prophecy and Prophesying, its twofold
signification.
that not only have been Pastors and Teachers, and that there it has Coincided
in one person with these other Offices; but also to some of the Laics: and so
it has been found, according to their own Concession, without the Limits of
their Clergy. Prophecy in the other sense, to wit, as it signifies a Speaking
from the Spirit of Truth, is not only peculiar to Pastors and Teachers, To
Prophesy, a Privilege of Teachers, and of all the Saints.
who ought so to Prophesy; but even a Common Privilege to the Saints. For
though to Instruct, Teach, and Exhort be proper to such, as are more
particularly called to the Work of the Ministry; yet it is not so Proper to
them, as not to be (when the Saints are met together, as any of them are moved
by the Spirit) Common to others: for some Acts belong to all in such a
Relation: but not only to those within that Relation; Competunt omni, sed non
soli. Thus to see and hear, are proper acts of a man, seeing it may be properly
predicated of him, that he hears and sees; yet are they Common to other
Creatures also. So to Prophesy in this sense is indeed proper to Ministers and
Teachers; yet not so, but that it is also Common and Lawful to other Saints,
when moved thereunto, though it be not proper to them by way of Relation:
because notwithstanding that Motion, they are not particularly called to the
Work of the Ministry; as appears by 1 Cor. 14. where the Apostle at large
declaring the Order and ordinary Method of the Church, says verse. 30, 31. But
if any thing be Revealed to another, that sits by, let the first hold his
peace; for we may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted: which shows, that none is here Excluded. But yet that there is a
Subordination, according to the various measures of the Gift received, the next
verse shows; And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: For
God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace. Now that Prophesying in this
sense may be Common to all Saints, appears by verse 39. of the same Chapter;
where speaking to [ all] in general, he says; Therefore, Brethren, Covet to
Prophesy: and verse 1. he exhorts them, saying; Covet Spiritual Gifts, but
rather that ye may Prophesy.

Secondly: As to Evangelists the same may be said. Who are Evangelists? and
whether any may term themselves so now adays.
For whoever preaches the Gospel, is really an Evangelist; and so consequently
every true Minister of the Gospel is one: else what proper Office can they
assign to it, unless they should be so foolish, as to affirm, that None were
Evangelists, but Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, who wrote the Account of
Christ's Life and Sufferings? And then it were neither a particular Office,
seeing John and Matthew were Apostles, Mark and Luke Pastors and Teachers; so
that there they Coincided in one: And indeed, it is Absurd to think, that upon
that particular Account the Apostle used the word [Evangelist.] Calvin
acknowledges, that such as preach the Gospel in purity after some time of
Apostasy, may be truly called Evangelists; and therefore says, That there were
Apostles in his time; and hence the Protestants at their first Coming forth
termed themselves Evangelici, or Evangeliks.

Lastly: An Apostle, if we look to the Etymology of the word, Who is an Apostle?
signifies One that is sent; and in respect Every true Minister is sent of God,
in so far is he an Apostle: though these Twelve, because of their being
specially Sent of Christ, were therefore called Apostles (...), They were not
Limited to such a Numbe^*
or per Eminentiam, i. e. by way of Excellency. And yet that there was no
Limitation to such a Number, as some foolishly imagine, it appears; because
after that Number was filled up, the Apostle Paul was afterward so Called:
therefore we judge, that these are no distinct, separate Offices, but only
Names used upon occasions to express the more eminent Arising and Shining forth
of God's Grace. Whether any man be Called an Apostle this day.
As if any Minister of Christ should now proselyte or turn a whole Nation to
the Christian Faith, though he had no distinct Office; yet I doubt not, but
both Papists and Protestants would judge it tolerable, to call such an one an
Apostle, or an Evangelist. For some of the Jesuits call of their Sect Apostles
of India, and of Japan, upon this alleged account; and Calvin testifies, that
there were Apostles and Evangelists in his time upon the account of the
Reformation: upon which account we have known John Knox often called the
Apostle of Scotland. Upon what Account John Knox was called the Ap^stle of
Scotland.
So that we conclude, that Ministers, Pastors or Teachers do Comprehend all;
and that the Office is but one. And therefore in that respect we judge, there
ought to be no Precedence among them: to prove which I shall not insist, seeing
it is shown largely, and treated of by such, as have denied the Diocesian
Episcopacy, as they call it.

first part of the Objection, viz. That I seem to make no distinction betwixt
the Minister and People; I Answer: If it be understood of a Liberty to speak or
prophesy by the Spirit, Liberty to Prophesy all have, by the Spirit.
I say, all may do that, when moved thereunto; as above is shown. But we do
believe and affirm, that some are more particularly called to the Work of the
Ministry; and therefore are fitted of the Lord for that purpose: whose Work is
more constantly and particularly to Instruct, Exhort, Admonish, Oversee and
Watch over their Brethren; and that as there is something more incumbent upon
them in that respect, than upon every Common Believer, so also as in that
relation, there is due to them from the Flock such Obedience and Subjection, as
is mentioned in these Testimonies of the Scripture, Hebr. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12,
13. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Pet. 5.5. Also besides these, who are thus particularly
Called to the Ministry, and constant Labor in the Word and Doctrine, The
Elders take Care for the Widows, the Poor, and Fatherless.
there are also the Elders: who, though they be not moved to a frequent
Testimony by way of Declaration in words; yet as such, as are grown up in the
Experience of the blessed work of Truth in their hearts, Watch over and
privately Admonish the young, Care for the Widows, the Poor and Fatherless; and
care and look, that nothing be wanting; but that Peace, Love, Unity, Concord
and Soundness be preserved in the Church of Christ: and this answers to the
Deacons mentioned Acts 6.

The distinction of Clergy and Laity not to be found in Scripture.
That which we Oppose, is the distinction of Laity and Clergy (which in the
Scripture is not to be found;) whereby none are admitted unto the work of the
Ministry, but such as are Educated at Schools on purpose, and Instructed in
Logic and Philosophy, etc. and so are at their Apprentiship to learn the Art
and Trade of Preaching, even as a man learns any other Art: whereby all other
honest Mechanic men, who have not got this Heathenish Art, are Excluded from
having this privilege. And so he, that is a Scholar thus bred up, must not
have any honest Trade, whereby to get him a Livelihood, if he once intend for
the Ministry; but he must see to get him a Place: and then he has his set Hire
for a Livelihood to him. He must also be distinguished from the rest by the
Color of his Clothes; Their Garb.
for he must only wear Black, and must be a Master of Arts: but more of this
hereafter.

XXVII. As this manner of Separating men for the Ministry, is nothing like the
Church in the Apostles days; so great Evils have and do follow upon it. For
first; Parents seeing both the honor and profit that attends the Clergy, do
allot their Children sometimes from their Infancy to it; and so breed them up
on purpose. And others come to Age upon the same Account, betake them to the
same Trade; and having these natural and acquired Parts, that are judged the
Necessary Qualifications of a Minister, are thereby Admitted: and so are bred
up in Idleness and Pleasure, thinking it a disgrace for them to work with their
hands; only if they study a little out of their Books to make a Discourse once
or twice in a week, During the Running of an Hour glass: whereas the Gift, The
Clergy's Study out of Books: the Gift of God Neglected.
Grace and Spirit of God to call, gift and qualify for the Ministry, is
neglected and overlooked. And many Covetous, Corrupt, Earthly, Carnal men,
having a mere show and form, but strangers to and utterly ignorant of the
inward work of Grace upon their hearts, are Brought-in and Intrude themselves;
and so through them death, barrenness and darkness, and by consequence
Superstition, Error and Idolatry has entered and leavened the Church. And they,
that will narrowly observe, shall find, that it was thus the Apostasy came to
take place: of the truth of which I could give many Examples; which for
brevity's sake I omit. For so the Office, Reverence and Respect due to it was
annexed to the mere Name: so that, when once a man was Ordained a Bishop or a
Priest, he was heard and believed; though he had nothing of the Spirit, Power
and Life, that the true Apostles and Ministers were in: that in a short time
the Succession came to be of the Name and Title; and the Office was thereto
annexed, and not of the nature, virtue and life. Which in effect made them to
Cease to be the Ministry and Ministers of Christ; but only a Shadow and vain
Image of it: The Marred Church Compared to Thesci pieced Boat.
which also decaying, was in some Ages so Metamorphosed, that not only the
Substance was lost; but the very Form wholly vitiated, alterated and marred:
that it may be far better said of the pretended, Christian Church, as was
disputed of Theseus's Boat, (which by the piecing of many new pieces of timber
was wholly Altered) whether indeed it were the same or another? But in case
that the first had been of Oak, and the last pieces put in but of rotten Fir;
and that also the Form had been so far changed, as to be nothing like the
first; I think it would have suffered no Dispute, but might have easily been
concluded to be quite another, retaining nothing but the Name, and that also
Unjustly. Secondly, The Abuse following the Distinction of Laity and Clergy.
from this distinction of Laity and Clergy this Abuse also follows, that good,
honest mechanic men and others, who have not learned the Art and Trade of
Preaching, and so are not Licentiated according to these Rules they prescribe
unto themselves; such, I say, being possessed with a false Opinion, that it is
not lawful for them to meddle with the Ministry, nor that they are any ways fit
for it because of the defect of that Literatur; do thereby neglect the Gift in
themselves, and quench many times the pure breathings of the Spirit of God in
their hearts: which, if given way to, might have proved much more for the
Edification of the Church, than many of the Cunned Sermons of the Learned. And
so by this means the Apostles Command and Advice is slighted, who exhorts 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20. Not to quench the Spirit, nor despise prophesying. Both
Protestants and Papists exclude Mechanic men from Preaching, who greatly
contributed to Reformation.
And all this is done by men pretending to be Christians, who glory, that the
first Preachers and Propagators of their Religion were such kind of plain,
Mechanic men, and Illiterate: And even Protestants do, no less than Papists,
Exclude such kind of men from being Ministers among them; and thus limit the
Spirit and Gift of God, though their Fathers in opposition to Papists asserted
the contrary: and also their own Historys declare, how that kind of Illiterate
men did without Learning, by the Spirit of God, greatly contribute in diverse
places to the Reformation.

By this it may appear, that as in Calling and Qualifying, so in Preaching and
Praying, and the other particular steps of the Ministry, every true Minister is
to know the Spirit of God by its virtue and Life to accompany and assist him:
But because this relates to Worship, I shall speak of it more largely in the
next Proposition; which is concerning Worship. The last thing to be considered
and inquired into is, concerning the Maintenance of a Gospel-Minister: But
before I proceed, I judge it fit to speak something in short concerning the
Preaching of Women, and to declare, what we hold in that matter.

Seeing Male and Female are one in Christ Jesus, and that he gives his Spirit no
less to the one, Women's public Preaching and Praying Asserted.
than to the other, when God moves by his Spirit in a Woman, we judge it no
ways unlawful for her to preach in the Assemblies of God's People. Neither
think we that of Paul, 1 Cor. 14.34. to reprove the Inconsiderate and Talkative
Women among the Corinthians, who troubled the Church of Christ with their
unprofitable Questions; or that 1 Timothy 2.11. That Women ought to learn in all
silence, not usurping authority over the man, any ways Repugnant to this
Doctrine; because it is clear, that Women have Prophesied and Preached in the
Church, else had the saying of Joel been badly applied by Peter, Acts 2.17. And
seeing, Paul himself in the same Epistle to the Corinthians gives Rules, how
Women should behave themselves in their public preaching and praying, it would
be a manifest Contradiction, if that place were other ways taken in a larger
sense: and the same Paul speaks of a Woman, that labored with him in the work
of the Gospel, and it is written, that Philip had four Daughters, that
prophesied. Acts 21.9.
And lastly, it has been observed, that God has effectually in this day
Converted many Souls by the Ministry of Women, and by them also Comforted the
Souls of his Children; which manifest experience puts the thing beyond all
Controversy: Ministers Maintenance.
but now I shall proceed to speak of the Maintenance of Ministers.

The Ministers Food and their Maintenance Stated.
XXVIII. We freely acknowledge (as the Proposition holds forth) that there is
an Obligation upon such, to whom God sends, or among whom he raises up a
Minister, that, if need be, they Minister to his necessities. Secondly: That it
is lawful for him to receive, what is necessary and convenient. To prove this,
I need not insist, for our Adversaries will readily grant it to us: for the
thing we affirm, is, that this is all, that these Scripture-Testimonies
relating to this thing, do grant, Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy
5.16. That which we then oppose in this matter, is First, That it should be
Constrained and Limited. Secondly, That it should be Superfluous, Chargeable
and Sumptuous. And Thirdly: The manifest Abuse hereof: Of which I shall also
briefly Treat.

Adversarys are forced to recurr to the Example of the Law; Against Constrained
Maintenance.
a Refuge they use in defending most of their Errors and Superstitions, which
are contrary to the nature and purity of the Gospel.

Object.
They say; God appointed the Levites the Tithes; therefore they belong also to
such, as Minister in holy things under the Gospel.

Priests had a Maintenance allowed them under the Law, so also the Ministers
and Preachers under the Gospel; Tithes were appointed for the Levites, not for
Gospel-Preachers.
which is not denied: but the Comparison will not hold, that they should have
the very same; since First, there is no Express Gospel-Command for it neither
by Christ, nor his Apostles. Secondly: The parity does no ways hold betwixt the
Levites under the Law, and the Preachers under the Gospel: because the Levites
were one of the Tribes of Israel, and so had a Right to a part of the
Inheritance of the Land, as well as the rest of their Brethren; and having
none, had this allotted to them in lieu of it. Next: The Tenth of the Tithes
was only allowed to the Priests, that served at the Altar; the rest being for
the Levites: and also to be put up in Storehouses for entertaining of the
Widows and Strangers: But these preachers, notwithstanding they Inherit what
they have by their Parents, as well as other men, yet claim the whole Tithes;
allowing nothing either to Widow or Stranger. But as to the Tithes I shall not
insist; because diverse others have clearly and learnedly Treated of it apart;
and also diverse Protestants do confess them not to be jure Divino: and the
parity, as to the quota, does not hold; but only in general as to the
Obligation of a Maintenance. Which Maintenance, though the Hearers be obliged
to give, and fail of their Duty, if they do not; yet that it ought received,
nor yet forced, I prove: because Christ, when he sent forth his Apostles, said;
Freely ye have received, freely give, The Gospel freely to be preached without
so much a year.
Matthew. 10.8. and yet they had liberty to Receive Meat and Drink from such as
offered them to supply their Need. Which shows, that they were not to seek or
require any thing by force, or to stint, or make a Bargain before hand, as the
Preachers as well among Papists as Protestants do in these days, who will not
preach to any, until they be sure first of so much a year: but on the contrary,
these were to do their Duty, and freely to Communicate (as the Lord should
order them) what they had received, without seeking or expecting a Reward.

The Answer of this, given by Nicolaus Arnoldus, Nic. Arnold his Answer to-
Freely ye have received, etc.
Exercit. Theolog. Sect. 42.43. is not to be forgotten; but indeed to be kept
upon Record for a Perpetual Remembrance of him and his Brethren: for he frankly
answers after this manner; We have not freely received, and therefore are not
bound to give it freely. The Answer I confess, is Ingenuous and good: For if
those, that Receive freely, are to Give freely, it would seem to follow by the
Rule of Contraries, that those, who Receive not freely, ought not to Give
freely; and I shall grant it. Only they must grant me, that they preach not by
and according to the Gift and Grace of God Received; nor can they be Good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, as every true Minister ought to be: or
then they have gotten this Gift or Grace by Money, as Simon Magus would have
been compassing it, Simon Magus.
since they think themselves not bound to give it without Money again. But to
be plain, I believe he intended not, that it was from the Gift or Grace of God
they were to Preach; but from their Acquired Arts and Studies, which has Cost
them much Labor, and also some Money at the University. And therefore as he,
that puts his Stock in the public Bank, expects Interest again; so these
Scholars having spent some Money, learning the Art of Preaching, think, they
may boldly say, They have it not freely, for it has cost them both Money and
Pains; and therefore they expect both Money and Ease again. And therefore as
Arnoldus gets Money for teaching his Young Students the Art and Trade of
Preaching, so he intends they should be Repayed, before they give it again to
others. It was of old said, Omnia venalia Romae, i. e. All things are set out
to sale at Rome; All things are set to sale at Rome, To Franque Applied.
but now the same proverb may be applied to Franequer: And therefore Arnoldus's
Students, when they go about to Preach, may safely Seek and Require hereby,
telling their Hearers their Master's Maxim, Nos gratis non accepimus, ergo
neque gratis dare tenemur. But then they may answer again, that they find them
and their Master to be none of his Ministers, who, when he sent forth his
Disciples, gave them this Command, Freely ye have received, freely give; and
therefore we will have none of your Teaching, because we perceive you to be of
the number of those, that look for their Gain from their Quarter. Jes. 56.11.


XXIX. Secondly: The Scripture-Testimonies, that urge this, are in the same
nature of these, that press Charity and Liberality toward the Poor, and
command hospitality, etc. But these are not, nor can be stinted to a certain
Quantity, because they are deeds merely Voluntary, where the Obedience good
will of the Giver, and not in the matter of the thing given; Mere Voluntary
Deeds no man can stint them.
as Christ shows in the Example of the Widow's Mite. So that, though there be
an Obligation upon Christians to minister of outward things to their Ministers,
yet there can be no Definition of the Quantity, but by the givers own Consent:
and a little from one may more truly fulfill the Obligation, than a great deal
from another. And therefore as Acts of Charity and Hospitality can neither be
limited nor forced; so neither can this.

If it be Objected, That Ministers may and ought to exhort, persuade, yea, and
earnestly press Christians (if they find them defective therein) to acts of
Charity and Hospitality, Object.
and so may they do also to the giving of Maintenance.

stinted and forced Maintenance, for which there cannot so much as the show of
one solid Argument be brought from Scripture. I confess, Ministers may use
Exhortation in this, as much as in any other case; Paul's Labor was, a Gospel
free of Charge.
even as the Apostle did to the Corinthians, showing them their Duty: but it
were fit for Ministers, that do so, that their Testimony might have the more
Weight, and be the freer of all suspicion of Covetousness and Self-interest,
that they might be able to say truly in the sight of God, that which the same
Apostle subjoins upon the same occasion, 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 17, 18. But I have
used none of these things. Neither have I written these things, that it should
be so done unto me: For it were better for me to die, than that any man should
make my glorying void. For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory
of; for necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the
Gospel. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward; but if against my
will, a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. What is my Reward
then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ
without Charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel.

Thirdly: As there is neither Precept nor Example for this forced and stinted
Maintenance in the Scripture, so the Apostle in his solemn farewell to the
Pastors and Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Paul Coveted no body's Silver or
Gold.
guards them against it, Acts 20.33, 34, 35. But if the thing had been either
lawful, or practiced, he would rather have Exhorted them to be Content with
their stinted Hire, and not to Covet more; whereas he shows them first by his
own Example, that they were not to Covet or expect any man's silver or Gold.
Secondly; That they ought to Work with their hands for an honest livelihood,
as he had done. And lastly, he exhorts them so to do from the words of Christ,
Because it is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive; showing, that it
is so far from a thing, that a true Minister ought to aim at, or expect, that
it is rather a Burden to a true Minister and Cross to him, to be brought upon
Necessity so to lack.

Fourthly: If a forced and stinted Maintenance were to be supposed, it would
make the Ministers of Christ just one with those Hirelings, whom the Prophets
cried out against. No Hireling fitting the Gospel of Christ.
For certainly, if a man make a Bargain to preach to people for so much a year,
so as to refuse to preach, unless he have, and seek to force the people to give
it by Violence; it cannot be denied, that such a one preaches for Hire, and so
looks for his gain from his quarter; Mich. 3:5.
yea, and prepares war against such, as put not into his mouth: but this is the
particular, special Mark of a false Prophet, and a Hireling, and therefore can
no ways compete to a True Minister of Christ.

Next: That a superfluous Maintenance, that is, more than in reason is needful,
ought not to be received by Christian Ministers, will not need much proof,
seeing the more moderate and sober both among Papists and Protestants readily
confess it; who with one voice Exclaim against the excessive Revenues of the
Clergy. And that it may not want a proof from Scripture, Moderate Protestants
and Papists exclaim against the Excess of the Clergy's Revenues.
what can be more plain, than that of the Apostle to Timothy? 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9,
10. where he both shows, wherewith we ought to be content; and also the hazard
of such, as look after more: and indeed, since that very obligation of giving
Maintenance to a Minister is founded upon their Need, and such as have
opportunity to Work, are Commended rather in Not receiving, than in Receiving;
it can no ways be supposed lawful for them to Receive more than is sufficient.
And indeed, were they truly pious and right, though Necessitate, they would
rather incline to take too little, than to be gaping after too much.

XXXI. Now that there is great Excess and Abuse hereof among Christians, the
Vast Revenues, which the Bishops and Priests have, The Excess of the Priests
and the Bishops Revenues.
both Papist and Protestant, do declare; since I judge, it may be said without
any Hyperbole, that some particular persons have more paid them yearly, than
Christ and his Apostles made use of their whole life time: who yet wanted not,
what was needful as to the outward man; and no doubt, deserved it far better,
than those that Enjoy that Fullness. But it is manifest, these Bishops and
Priests love their fat Benefices, and the Pleasure and Honor that attend them,
so well, that they purpose neither to follow Christ, nor his Apostles Example
nor Advice in this matter.

But it is usually Objected; That Christians are become so hard-hearted, Object.
and generally so little heed Spiritual things, that if Ministers had not a
settled and stinted Maintenance secured them by Law, they and their families
might starve for want of bread.

I Answer: Objection might have some weight as to a Carnal Ministry, made up of
natural men, who have no life, power, nor virtue with them; and so may
insinuate some need of such a Maintenance for such a Ministry: but it says
nothing as to such, as are called and sent of God, They wanted nothing, whom
God sent; they labored with their hands.
who sends no man away faring upon his own Charges: and so go forth in the
Authority and Power of God, to turn people from darkness to Light: for such can
trust to him, that sends them, and do believe, that he will Provide for them;
knowing, that he requires nothing of any, but what he gives power to perform:
and so when they return, if he Inquire, can say, They wanted nothing. And such
also, when they stay in a place, (being Immediately furnished by God, and not
needing to borrow and steal what they preach, from books, and take up their
time that way) fall a working of their lawful Imploiments, and labor with
their hands, as Paul did, when he gathered the Church of Corinth. And indeed,
if this Objection had any weight, the Apostles and primitive Pastors should
never had gone forth to Convert the Nations for fear of Want. Does not the
doctrine of Christ teach us to Venture all, and part with all to serve God? Can
they then be accounted Ministers of Christ, who are afraid to preach him, lest
they get not Money for it? or will not do it, until they be sure of their
payment? What-for serves the Ministry, but to perfect the Saints, and so to
Convert them from that hard-heartedness?

But thou will say: I have labored and preached to them, Object.
and they are hard-hearted still, and will not give me any thing.

Then surely, thou have either not been Sent to them of God, Ministry and
Preaching has not been among them in the Power, Virtue and Life of Christ, and
so thou deserve nothing; or else they have Rejected thy Testimony, and so are
not Worthy: and from such thou ought not to Expect, yea, nor yet to Receive
any thing, if they would give thee; but thou ought to shake off the dust
from thy feet, and leave them. And how frivolous this Objection is, Matthew.
10.14.
appears, in that in the Darkest and most-Superstitious times the Priests
Revenues Increased most, If they reject thy Testimony shake the Dust from off
thy feet.
and they were most richly Rewarded, though they Deserved least. So that he,
that is truly sent of God, as he needs not, so neither will he be afraid of
Want, so long as he serves so good a Master; neither will he ever forbear to do
his Work for that cause. And indeed, such as make this Objection, show truly,
that they serve not the Lord Christ, but their own belly; and that makes them
so Anxious for Want of Food to it.

lastly, as to the Abuses of this kind of Maintenance, indeed he, The many
Abuses, Priests Maintenanc^ brings.
that would go through them all, though he did it passingly, might make of it
alone an huge Volumn, they are so great and numerous. For this Abuse, as
others, Crept-in with the Apostasy; there being nothing of this in the
primitive-times: Then the Ministers claimed no Tithes, neither sought they a
stinted or forced Maintenance; but such as Wanted, had their Necessity supplied
by the Church, and others Wrought with their hands. But the Persecutions being
over, and the Emperors and Princes coming under the Name of Christians, the
Zeal of those Great Men was quickly Abused by the Covetousness of the Clergy,
who soon learned to change their Cottages with the Palaces of Princes; and
rested not, until by degrees some of them came to be Princes themselves,
nothing Inferior to them in Splendour, Luxury and Magnificence: a Method of
living, that honest Peter and John the Fishermen, and Paul the Tent-maker
never coveted; and perhaps as little imagined, that men pretending to be their
Successors, should have arrived to these things. And so soon as the Bishops
were thus Seated and Constitute, forgetting the Life and Work of a Christian,
they went usually by the Ears together about the Precedence and Revenues, The
Protestants having forsaken the Pope, yet would not forsake the Rich Popish
Revenues.
each Coveting the Chiefest and Fattest Benefice. It is also to be Regretted to
think, how soon this Mischief Crept-in among Protestants: who had scarce well
appeared, when the Clergy among them began to speak at the old rate, and show,
that though they had forsaken the Bishop of Rome, they were not resolved to
part with their Old Benefices. And therefore so soon as any Princes or States
shook off the Pope's Authority, and so demolished the Abbeys, Nunneries and
other Monuments of Superstition; the Reformed Clergy began presently to cry out
to the Magistrates to beware of meddling with the Churches patrimony, severely
exclaiming against making a lawful Use of those Vast Revenues, that had been
Superstitiously bestowed upon the Church (so called) to the good and benefit of
the Commonwealth, as no less than Sacrilege.

But by keeping up of this kind of Maintenance for the Ministry and Clergymen
(so called) there is first a bait laid for Covetousness, 1. The Clergy's
Covetousness.
which is Idolatry, and of all things most hurtful; so that for Covetousness
sake many, being led by the desire of filthy Lucre, do apply themselves to be
Ministers, that they may get a Livelihood by it. If a man have several
Children, he will allot one of them to be a Minister; which if he can get him
to be, he reckons it as good, as a Patrimony: so that a Fat Benefice has
always many Expectants; and then what Bribing, what Courting, what Industry and
shameful Actions are used to acquire these things, is too openly known, and
needs not be proved.

The Scandal, that here-through is raised among Christians, is so manifest,
that it is become a proverb, that The KIRK is always GREEDY: Whereby the Gift
and Grace of God being neglected, they have for the most part no other Motive
or Rule, in applying themselves to one Church more than another, but the
Greater Benefice. The Greedy Kirk, A Proverb.
For though they hypocritically pretend at their Accepting of and Entering unto
their Church, that they have nothing before them, but the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of Souls; yet if a richer Benefice offer it self, they presently find
it more for God's Glory to remove from the first, and go thither. And thus they
make no difficulty often to Change, while notwithstanding they accuse us, that
we allow Ministers to go from place to place, and not to be tied to one place;
but we allow this not for the gaining of Money, but as moved of God. For if a
Minister be called to Minister in a particular place, he ought not to leave it,
except God Call him from it; and then he ought to Obey: for we make the Will of
God inwardly Revealed, and not the Love of Money and More Gain the ground of
Removing.

Secondly: From this Abuse has proceeded that Luxury and Idleness, 2 The
Clergy's Luxury.
that most of the Clergy live in, even among Protestants, as well as Papists,
to the great Scandal of Christianity. For not having lawful Trades to work with
their hands, and being so superfluously and sumptuously provided for, they live
in Idleness and Luxury: and there does more Pride, Vanity, and worldly Glory
appear in their Wives and Children, than in most others; which is open and
evident to all.

Thirdly: They become hereby so Glued to the Love of Money, 3 The Clergy's
Cruelty.
that there is none like them in Malice, Rage and Cruelty: if they be denied
their Hire, they Rage like drunken men, fret, fume, and as it were go mad. A
man may sooner satisfy the Severest Creditor, than them; The general Voice of
the poor does Confirm this. For indeed, they are far more Exact in taking up
the Tithes of Sheep, Geese, Swine, and Eggs, etc. and look more narrowly to it,
than to the Members of their Flock: they will miss the least mite; Poor Widows
Mite cannot escape the Priest's most Greedy hands.
and the poorest Widow cannot escape their avaritious Hands. Twenty Lies they
will hear Vnreproved; and as many Oaths a man may Swear in their hearing
without offending them: and greater Evils than all this, they can overlook. But
if thou Ow'st them ought, and refuse to Pay it, then nothing but War will they
Thunder against thee, and they will stigmatize thee with the horrible title of
Sacrilege, and send thee to Hell without mercy; as if thou had committed the
Sin against the Holy Ghost. The Work of Antichrist is Fury, Envy, Malice.
Of all people we can best bear witness to this: for God having shown us this
Corrupt and Antichristian Ministry, and called us out from it, and gathered us
unto his own Power and Life to be a Separate People, so that we dare not Join
with, nor Hear these Antichristian Hirelings, neither yet put into their
mouths, or feed them* O! what Malice, Envy and Fury has this raised in their
hearts against us! That though we get none of their Wares, neither will buy
them, as knowing them to be Naught; yet will they force us to give them Money:
and because we cannot for Conscience sake do it, our Sufferings have upon that
account been Unutterable. Yea, to give account of their Cruelty and several
sorts of Inhumanity used against us, would make no small History. These
Avaritious Hirelings have come to that degree of Malice and Rage, that several
poor laboring men have been carried hundreds of Miles from their own
dwellings, and shut up in prison, some two, some three, yea some seven years
together, for the value of one pound sterling, and less. I know my self a poor
Widow, that for the Tithes of her Geese A Widow for the Tithes of Geese about
four years in prison.
which amounted not to five shillings, was about four years kept in prison,
thirty miles from her house. Yea, they by Violence for this cause have
plundered of men's goods the hundredfold; and prejudiced much more: yea,
hundreds have hereby spilt their Innocent blood, by dying in the filthy, noisome
holes and prisons. And some of the Priests have been so Enraged, Some lost
their Lives in nasty Holes, some wounded by the Priest, etc*
that goods thus ravished could not satisfy them; but they must also satisfy
their fury by beating, knocking and wounding with their hands Innocent men and
women, for refusing (for Conscience sake) to put into their Mouths.

The only way then soundly to Reform and remove all these Abuses, and take away
the Ground and Occasion of them, is to take away all stinted and forced
Maintenance and Stipend: and seeing, those Revenues were anciently given by the
people, that they Return again into the public Treasure; and thereby the
people may be greatly benefited by them, for that they may supply for these
public Taxations and Impositions, that are put upon them, and may Ease
themselves of them. And whoever Call or Appoint Teachers to themselves, Whosoever
heap Teachers to themselves, let them provide their Stipend.
let them accordingly Entertain them: And for such as are Called and Moved to
the Ministry by the Spirit of God, those that receive them, and taste of the
good of their Ministry, will no doubt provide things needful for them; and
there will be no need of a Law to force a Hire for them: for he that sends
them, will take care for them; and they also having Food and Raiment, will
therewith be Content.

The Difference between the Ministry of the Quakers, and their Adversaries.
XXXIII. The Sum then of what is said, is, That the Ministry that we have
pleaded for, and which also the Lord has raised up among us, is in all its
parts like the true Ministry of the Apostles and Primitive Church: Whereas the
Ministry our Adversaries seek to uphold and plead for, as it does in all its
parts differ from them; so on the other hand, it is very like the false
Prophets and Teachers testified against, and condemned in the Scripture: as may
be thus briefly Illustrated.

1. The true Ministers Call.
1. The Ministry and Ministers we plead for, are such, as are Immediately called
and sent forth by Christ and his Spirit unto the Work of the Ministry: so were
the holy Apostles and Prophets; as appears by these places, Matthew. 10. verse
1.5. Ephesians. 4.11. Heb. 5.4.

1. But the Ministry and Ministers our Opposers plead for, are such, as have no
Immediate Call from Christ; to whom the Leading and Motion of the Spirit is not
reckoned necessary: but who are called, sent forth and ordained by wicked and
ungodly men. Such were of old the false Prophets and Teachers, as appears by
these places, Jer. 14.14, 15. item Chap. 23.21. and 27.15.

2. True Ministers Guide.
2. The Ministers we plead for, are such, as are acted and led by God's Spirit,
and by the Power and Operation of his Grace in their hearts, are in some
measure Converted and Regenerate; and so are good, holy and gracious men. Such
were the Holy Prophets and Apostles, as appears from 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.

2. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such, to whom the Grace of
God is no needful qualification; and so may be true Ministers according to
them, though they be ungodly, unholy, and profligate men. Such were the false
Prophets and Apostles; as appears from Mic. 3.5, 11. 1 Timothy 6.5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
2 Timothy 3.2. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.

3. True Ministers Work.
3. The Ministers we plead for, are such, as act, move and labor in the Work of
the Ministry, not from their own mere natural Strength and Ability, but as they
are acted, moved, under-propped, assisted and influenced by the Spirit of
Christ; and minister according to the Gift received, as good stewards of the
manifold Grace of God. Such were the holy Prophets and Apostles, 1 Pet. 4.10,
11. 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.3, 4, 5, 13. Act. 2.4. Matthew. 10.20. Mark 13.11. Luke
12. v. 12. 1 Cor. 13.2.

3. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such, as wait not for, nor
expect, nor need the Spirit of God, to Act and Move them in the Work of the
Ministry; but what they do, they do from their own mere natural strength and
ability, and what they have gathered and stolen from the letter of the
Scripture, and other Books, and so speak it forth in the strength of their own
Wisdom and Eloquence, and not in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit
and of Power. Such were the false Prophets and Apostles, as appears Jer. 23.30,
31, 32, 34, etc. 1 Cor. 4.18. Jude 16.

4. The Ministers we plead for, are such, as being holy and humble, True
Ministers Humility.
Contend not for Precedence and Priority; but rather strive to prefer one
another, and serve one another in love: neither desire to be distinguished from
the rest by their Garments and large Phylacteries, nor seek the Greetings in
the Marketplaces, nor uppermost Rooms at Feasts, nor the Chief Seats in the
Synagogues, nor yet to be called of men MASTER, etc. Such were the holy
Prophets and Apostles, as appears from Matthew. 23.8, 9, 10. and 20.25, 26, 27.

4. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such as strive and contend
for Superiority, and claim Precedence over one another; affecting and
ambitiously seeking after the forementioned things. Such were the false
Prophets and Apostles in time past, Matthew. 23.5, 6, 7.

5. The Ministers we plead for, are such, as having freely received, True
Ministers Free Gift.
freely give* who covet no man's silver, gold or garments; who seek no man's
goods, but seek them, and the Salvation of their Souls: whose hands supply
their own necessities, working honestly for Bread to themselves and their
Families. And if at any time they be called of God, so as the Work of the Lord
hinder them from the use of their Trades, take what is freely given them by
such, to whom they have communicated Spirituals; and having Food and Raiment,
are therewith content. Such were the holy Prophets and Apostles, as appears
from Matthew. 10.8. Act. 20.33, 34, 35. 1 Timothy 6.8.

5. But the Ministers our Adversaries plead for, are such, as not having freely
received, will not freely give; but are Covetous, doing that which they ought
not, for filthy lucre's sake: as to preach for Hire, and divine for Money, and
look for their gain from their Quarter, and prepare War against such, as put
not into their Mouths, etc. Greedy dogs, which can never have enough;
Shepherds, who feed themselves, and not the flock; eating the fat, and
clothing themselves with the Wool, making Merchandise of Souls, and following
the Way of Balaam, that loved the Wages of Unrighteousness. Such were the false
Prophets and Apostles, Isa. 56.11. Ezech. 34.2, 3, 8. Mic. 3.5, 11. Tit. 1.10,
11. 2 Pet. 2. verses 1, 2, 3, 14, 15.

And in a word, We are for a holy, Spiritual, pure and living Ministry, True
Ministers Life and Qualification.
where the Ministers are both called, qualified and ordered, acted and
influenced in all the steps of their Ministry by the Spirit of God; which being
wanting, we judge they Cease to be the Ministers of Christ.

But they judging this Life, Grace and Spirit no Essential part of their
Ministry, are therefore for the upholding of an humane, carnal, dry, barren,
fruitless and dead Ministry; of which (alas!) we have seen the fruits in the
most part of their Churches: of whom that saying of the Lord is certainly
verified, Jer. 23.32. -- I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they
shall not profit this people at all, says the LORD.

PROPOSITION XI. Worship.
All true and acceptable Worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate
moving and drawing of his own Spirit, What the true Worship is, that is
Acceptable to God.
which is neither limited to places, times nor persons. For though we be to
worship him always, and that we are continually to Fear before him: yet as to
the outward signification thereof in Prayers, Praises or Preachings, we ought
not to do it in our own will, where and when we will; but where and when we are
moved thereunto by the stirring and secret Inspiration of the Spirit of God in
our hearts: How to be performed.
which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move us thereunto,
when need is; of which he himself is the alone proper Judge. All other Worship
then, both praises, prayers or preachings, Superstition and Will Worship.
which man sets about in his own Will, and at his own Appointment, which he can
both begin and end at his pleasure, do, or leave undone, as himself sees meet,
whether they be a prescribed Form, as a Liturgy, etc. or prayers conceived
extempore by the natural strength and faculty of the mind, they are all but
Superstitions, Will Worship, and abominable Idolatry in the sight of God,
Idolatry.
which are now to be denied and rejected, and separated from in this day of his
Spiritual Arising. However it might have pleased him (who winked at the Times
of Ignorance, with a respect to the Simplicity and Integrity of some, and of
his own innocent Seed, which lay, as it were, buried in the hearts of men under
that Mass of Superstition) to blow upon the dead and dry bones, and to raise
some Breathings of his own, and Answer them; and that until the Day should more
clearly dawn and break forth.

I. THE Duty of man toward God lies chiefly in these Two Generals. 1. In an
holy Conformity to the pure Law and Light of God, so as both to forsake the
evil, and be found in the practice of these perpetual and moral precepts of
righteousness and equity: And 2. In rendering that Reverence, Honor and
Adoration to God, that he requires and demands of us: which is comprehended
under Worship. Of the former we have already spoken, as also of the different
Relations of Christians, as they are distinguished by the several measures of
Grace received, and given to every one; and in that respect have their several
Offices in the body of Christ, which is the Church. Now I come to speak of
Worship, or of those Acts, whether private, or public; general, or particular;
whereby man renders to God that part of his Duty, which relates immediately to
him: And as Obedience is better than Sacrifice, so neither is any Sacrifice
acceptable, but that, which is done according to the Will of him, to whom it is
offered. But men, finding it Easier to sacrifice in their own wills, than obey
God's Will, have heaped up Sacrifices without Obedience; and thinking to
deceive God, as they do one another, True Worship and Duty to Godward
Corrupted.
give him a show of Reverence, Honor and Worship, while they are both inwardly
estranged and alienated from his holy and righteous life, and wholly strangers
to the pure Breathings of his Spirit, in which the acceptable Sacrifice and
Worship is only offered up. Hence it is, that there is not any thing relating
to Man's Duty toward God, which among all sorts of people has been more
Vitiated, and in which the Devil has more prevailed, than in abusing man's
mind concerning this thing: and as among many others, so among those called
Christians, nothing has been more out of order, and more Corrupted; as some
Papists, and all Protestants do acknowledge. As I freely Approve, whatsoever
the Protestants have Reformed from Papists in this respect; so I meddle not at
this time with their Controversies about it: only it suffices me with them to
deny, as no part of the true Worship of God, that abominable Superstition and
Idolatry, the Popish Mass, The Popish Mass (Idolatry) denied with all their
Trumpery.
the Adoration of Saints and Angels, the Veneration of Relics, the Visitation
of Sepulchers, and all these other superstitious Ceremonies, Confraternities,
and endless Pilgrimages of the Romish Synagogue. Which all may suffice to
Evince to Protestants, that Antichrist has wrought more in this, than in any
other part of the Christian Religion; and so it concerns them narrowly to
Consider, whether herein they have made a clear and perfect Reformation? If
Protestants have made a perfect Reformation?
as to which stands the Controversy betwixt them, and us. For we find many of
the branches lopped off by them, but the Root yet remaining; to wit, a Worship
acted in and from man's will and spirit, and not by and from the Spirit of God:
for the true Christian and Spiritual Worship of God has been so early lost,
and man's Wisdom and Will has so quickly and thoroughly mixed it self herein,
that both the Apostasy in this respect has been greatest, and the Reformation
here-from, as to the evil Root, most difficult. Therefore let not the Reader
suddenly stumble at the account of our Proposition in this matter, but hear us
patiently in this respect Explain our selves; and I hope (by the Assistance of
God) to make it appear, that though our manner of Speaking and Doctrine seem
most singular and different from all other sorts of Christians; yet it is most
according to the purest Christian Religion, and indeed most needful to be
observed and followed. And that there be no ground of Mistake, (for that I was
necessitate to speak in few words, and therefore more obscurely and dubiously
in the Proposition it self) it is fit in the first place to Explain and hold
forth our Sense, and Clear the State of the Controversy.

II. And first let it be considered, that what is here affirmed, I. What
Worship here is spoken to.
is spoken of the Worship of God in Gospel Times, and not of the Worship that
was under or before the Law: For the particular Commands of God to men then,
are not sufficient to Authorize us now to do the same things; else we might be
supposed at present acceptably to offer Sacrifice, as they did; which all
acknowledge to be Ceased. So that what might have been both commendable and
acceptable under the Law, may justly now be charged with Superstition, yea, and
Idolatry. So that impertinently in this respect does Arnoldus rage against this
Proposition, ( Exercit. Theolog. Sect. 44.) saying; That I deny all public
Worship, and that, according to me, such as in Enoch 's time publicly began to
call upon the Name of the Lord, and such as at the Command of God went twice up
to Jerusalem to Worship, and that Anna, Simeon, Mary, etc. were Idolaters,
because they used the public Worship of these times: Such a Consequence is
most Impertinent, and no less foolish and absurd, than if I should infer from
Paul's Expostulating with the Galatians, for their returning to the Jewish
Ceremonies, that he therefore Condemned Moses and all the Prophets, as foolish
and ignorant, Ceremonies under the Law were not Essential to true Worship.
because they used those things: the forward man, not heeding the different
Dispensations of times, ran into this Impertinency. Though a Spiritual Worship
might have been, and no doubt was practiced by many under the Law in great
simplicity; yet will it not follow, that it were no Superstition to use all
those Ceremonies, that they used, which were by God dispensed to the Jews, not
as being Essential to true Worship, or Necessary as of themselves for
transmitting and entertaining an holy Fellowship betwixt him and his people;
but in Condescension to them, who were inclinable to Idolatry. Albeit then in
this, as in most other things, the Substance was enjoyed under the Law by such
as were Spiritual indeed; yet was it Veiled and surrounded with many Rites and
Ceremonies, which is no ways lawful for us to use now under the Gospel.

II. True Worship is not limited to time, to place or persons.
III. Secondly: Albeit I say, that this Worship is neither limited to times,
places, nor persons, yet I would not be understood, as if I intended the
putting away of all set Times and Places to Worship; God forbid, I should think
of such an Opinion. Nay, we are none of those, that forsake the Assembling of
our selves together; but have even certain Times and Places, in which we
carefully Meet together (nor can we be driven therefrom by the Threats or
Persecutions of men) to Wait upon God, Necessity of Meetings.
and Worship him. To meet together we think necessary for the people of God,
because, so long as we are clothed with this outward Tabernacle, there is a
necessity to the entertaining of a Joint and Visible Fellowship, and bearing of
an outward Testimony for God, and seeing of the faces one of another, that we
concur with our persons, as well as spirits: To be accompanied with that inward
love and unity of spirit, does greatly tend to encourage and refresh the Saints.

But the Limitation we condemn is, that whereas the Spirit of God should be the
immediate Actor, 1. Will Worship does limit the Spirit of God.
Mover, Perswader and Influencer of man in the particular Acts of Worship, when
the Saints are met together, this Spirit is limited in its Operations, by
setting up a particular man, or men to preach and Pray in man's Will; and all
the rest are excluded from so much as believing, that they are to Wait for
God's Spirit to move them in such things: and so they neglecting that, which
should quicken them in themselves, and not Waiting to feel the pure breathings
of God's Spirit, so as to obey them, are led merely to depend upon the
Preacher, and hear, what he will say.

Secondly: In that these peculiar men come not thither to Meet with the Lord,
2* True Teaching of the Word of God.
and to Wait for the inward Motions and Operations of his Spirit, and so to
pray, as they feel the Spirit to breath through them, and in them, and to
preach, as they find themselves acted and moved by God's Spirit, and as he
gives utterance; so as to speak a word in season, to refresh weary Souls, and
as the present Condition and State of the peoples hearts requires; suffering
God by his Spirit both to prepare peoples hearts, and also give the Preacher to
speak, what may be fit and seasonable for them. But he has hammered together
in his Closet, according to his own Will, Priests Preach by hap-hazzard their
studied Sermons.
by his humane Wisdom and Literature, and by stealing the words of Truth from
the letter of the Scriptures, and patching together other men's writings and
observations, so much as will hold him speaking an Hour, while the glass runs;
and without Waiting or feeling the inward Influence of the Spirit of God, he
declaimes that by hap-hazzard, whether it be fit or seasonable for the peoples
Condition, or no: and when he has ended his Sermon, he says his Prayer also in
his own Will; and so there is an end of the business. Which Customary Worship,
as it is no ways acceptable to God, so how unfruitful it is and unprofitable to
those, that are found in it, the present Condition of the Nations does
sufficiently declare. It appears then, that we are not against set Times for
Worship, as Arnoldus against this Proposition, sect. 45. no less impertinently
alleges; offering needlessly to prove that, which is not denied: only these
Times being Appointed for outward Convenience, we may not therefore think with
the Papists, that these Days are Holy, and lead people into a superstitious
Observation of them; being persuaded, Whether Days are Holy.
that all days are alike holy in the sight of God. And albeit it be not my
present purpose to make a long digression concerning the Debates among
Protestants concerning the first day of the Week, commonly called the Lord's
day; yet forasmuch as it comes fitly in here, I shall briefly signify our
sense thereof.

IV. We not seeing any ground in Scripture for it, Of the first day of the
Week, commonly called the Lord's Day.
cannot be so superstitious, as to believe, that either the Jewish Sabbath now
continues, or that the First Day of the Week is the Antitype thereof, or the
true Christian Sabbath; which with Calvin we believe to have a more Spiritual
sense: and therefore we know no moral Obligation by the fourth Command or
elsewhere, to keep the first day of the Week more as any other, or any Holiness
Inherent in it. But first, forasmuch as it is most necessary, that there be
some Time set apart for the Saints to Meet together to Wait upon God; and that
secondly, it is fit at some times they be freed from their other outward
Affairs; and that Thirdly, Reason and Equity does allow, that servants and
beasts have some time allowed them, to be eased from their continual labor;
and that fourthly it appears, that the Apostles and primitive Christians did
use the First Day of the Week for these purposes; We find our selves
sufficiently moved for these Causes to do so also, without superstitiously
straining the Scriptures for another Reason: which that it is not to be there
found, many Protestants, yea Calvin himself upon the fourth Command has
abundantly evinced. And though we therefore Meet, and abstain from Working upon
this day; yet does not that hinder us from having Meetings also for Worship at
other Times.

V. Thirdly: Though according to the Knowledge of God revealed unto us by the
Spirit, through that more full Dispensation of Light, which we believe the Lord
has brought about in this day, we judge it our duty to hold forth that Pure
and Spiritual Worship, which is acceptable to God, and answerable to the
Testimony of Christ and his Apostles; and likewise to Testify against, and deny
not only manifest Superstition and Idolatry, but also all formal Will Worship,
which stands not in the Power of God: yet I say, we do not deny the whole
Worship of all those, The Worship in the Apostasy.
that have born the Name of Christians even in the Apostasy, as if God had
never heard their prayers, nor accepted any of them; God forbid, we should be
so void of Charity! The latter part of the Proposition shows the Contrary.
And as we would not be so Absurd on the one hand to conclude, because of the
Errors and Darkness, that many were covered and surrounded with in Babylon,
that none of their Prayers were heard or accepted of God; so will we not be so
unwary on the other, as to conclude, that because God heard and pityed them so,
we ought to continue in these Errors and Darkness, and not come out of Babylon,
when it is by God discovered unto us. The Popish Mass and Vespers I do believe
to be, The Popish Mass and Vespers.

Bernard and Bonavent, Taulerus, Thomas a Kempis have tasted of the Love of God.


as to the matter of them, Abominable Idolatry and Superstition, and so also
believe the Protestants; yet will either I or they affirm, that in the darkness
of Popery no upright-hearted men, though zealous in these Abominations, have
been heard of God, or accepted of him? Who can deny, but that both Bernard and
Bonaventur, Taulerus, Thomas a Kempis, and diverse others have both known and
tasted of the love of God, and felt the Power and Virtue of God's Spirit
working with them for their Salvation? And yet ought we not to forsake and deny
those Superstitions, which they were found in? The Calvinistical Presbyterians
do much upbraid (and I say, not without Reason) the formality and deadness of
the Episcopalian and Lutheran Liturgies; The Bishops Liturgy.
and yet as they will not deny, but there have been some good men among them,
so neither dare they refuse, but that when that good step was brought in by
them of turning the public prayers into the vulgar Tongues, though continued
in a Liturgy, it was acceptable to God, and sometimes accompanied with his
Power and Presence: yet will not the Presbyterians have it from thence
concluded, that the Common Prayers should still continue: so likewise, though
we should confess, that through the mercy and wonderful Condescension of God,
there have been Upright in heart both among Papists and Protestants, yet can we
not therefore Approve of their Way in the general, or not go on to the
upholding of that Spiritual Worship, which the Lord is calling all to, and so
to the testifying against, whatsoever stands in the way of it.

VI. Fourthly: To come then to the State of the Controversy, as to the Public
Worship, Assemblies of Worship in public, described.
we judge it the Duty of all, to be diligent in the Assembling of themselves
together, (and what we have been, and are in this matter, our Enemies in Great
Britain, who have used all means to hinder our Assembling together to worship
God, may bear witness. And when Assembled, the great Work of one and all ought
to be to Wait upon God; and returning out of their own Thoughts and
Imaginations, to feel the Lord's Presence, and know a gathering into his Name
indeed, where he is in the midst, according to his Promise. And as every one is
thus gathered, and so Met together inwardly in their spirits, as well as
outwardly in their persons, there the secret Power and Virtue of Life is known
to refresh the Soul; and the pure motions and breathings of God's Spirit are
felt to arise, from which as words of Declaration, prayers or praises arise,
the acceptable Worship is known, which edifies the Church, and is well-pleasing
to God. And no man here limits the Spirit of God, nor brings forth his own
cunned and gathered Stuff; but every one puts that forth, Its Glorious
Dispensation.
which the Lord puts into their hearts: and it is uttered forth not in man's
Will and Wisdom, but in the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power. Yea, though there be not a word spoken, yet is the true Spiritual
Worship performed, and the Body of Christ edified: yea, it may and has often
fallen out among us, that diverse Meetings have past without one word; and yet
our Souls have been greatly edified and refreshed, and our hearts wonderfully
overcome with the secret sense of God's Power and Spirit, which without words
has been ministered from one Vessel to another. This is indeed strange and
incredible to the mere natural and carnally-minded men, who will be apt to
judge all time lost, where there is not something spoken, that is obvious to the
outward senses; and therefore I shall insist a little upon this subject; as
one, that can speak from a Certain Experience, and not by mere hearsay of this
wonderful and glorious Dispensation; which has so much the more of the Wisdom
and Glory of God in it, as it is contrary to the nature of man's Spirit, Will
and Wisdom.

The silent Waiting upon God obtained.
VII. As there can be nothing more opposite to the Natural Will and Wisdom of
man, than this silent-Waiting upon God; so neither can it be obtained, nor
rightly comprehended by man, but as he lays down his own Wisdom and Will, so
as to be content to be thoroughly subject to God. And therefore it was not
preached, nor can be so practiced, but by such as find no outward Ceremony, no
Observations, no Words, yea, not the best and purest Words, even the Words of
Scripture able to satisfy their weary and afflicted Souls: because where all
these may be, the life, power and virtue, which make such things effectual, may
be wanting. Such, I say, were necessitate to cease from all outward, and to be
silent before the Lord: and being directed to that Inward Principle of Life and
Light in themselves, as the most-excellent Teacher, which can never be removed
into a Corner, came thereby to be Learned to Wait upon God in the measure of
Life and Grace received from him, and to Cease from their own forward words and
actings in the natural willing and comprehension, and feel after this inward
Seed of Life; that as it moves, they may move with it, and be acted by its
Power, and influenced, whether to pray, preach or sing. And so from this
Principle of man's being Silent, and not acting in the things of God of
himself, until thus acted by God's Light and Grace in the heart, did naturally
spring that manner of Sitting silent together, and Waiting together upon the
Lord. For many thus principled, Meeting together in the pure fear of the Lord,
did not apply themselves presently to speak, pray or sing, etc. being afraid to
be found acting forwardly in their own wills; but each made it their work to
Retire inwardly to the measure of Grace in themselves, not only being silent as
to Words, but even abstaining from all their own Thoughts, Imaginations and
Desires. So Watching in a holy dependence upon the Lord, and meeting together
not only outwardly in one place, What it is to meet in Jesus Name.
but thus inwardly in One Spirit, and in One Name of Jesus, which is his Power
and Virtue, they came thereby to enjoy and feel the arisings of this Life,
which, as it prevails in each particular, becomes as a flood of Refreshment,
and over-spreads the whole Meeting. For man and man's Part and Wisdom being
denied and chained down in every Individual, and God exalted, and his Grace in
dominion in the heart, thus his Name comes to be One in all, and his Glory
breaks forth, and covers all; and there is such a holy Awe and Reverence upon
every Soul, that if the natural part should arise in any, or the wise part, or
what is not one with the Life, it would presently be Chained down and Judged
out. And when any are through the breaking forth of this Power, constrained to
utter a Sentence of Exhortation or Praise, or to breath to the Lord in Prayer,
Prove. 27. ver. 19.
then all are sensible of it: for the same Life in them answers to it, as in
water Face answers to Face. This is that Divine and Spiritual Worship, which
the World neither knows, nor understands, which the Vulture-Eye sees not
into. Yet many and great are the Advantages, Advantages of silent Meetings.
which my Soul with many others has tasted of hereby; and which would be found
of all such, as would seriously Apply themselves hereunto. For when people are
gathered thus together, not merely to hear men, nor depend upon them; but all
are inwardly taught to stay their Minds upon the Lord, Isa. 10.20.26.3.
and wait for his appearance in their hearts; thereby the forward working of
the spirit of man is stayed and hindered from mixing it self with the Worship
of God: and the Form of this Worship is so naked and void of all outward and
worldly splendour, that all occasion for man's Wisdom to be exercised in that
Superstition and Idolatry, has no lodging here; and so there being also an
inward Quietness and Retiredness of mind, the Witness of God arises in the
heart, and the Light of Christ shines, whereby the Soul comes to see its own
Condition. And there being many joined together in this same Work, there is an
inward Travel and Wrestling; and also, as the measure of Grace is abode in, an
Overcoming of the power and spirit of darkness. And thus we are often greatly
strengthened and renewed in the spirits of our minds without a word; and we
enjoy and possess the holy Fellowship and Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. ver. 23.
by which our inward man is nourished and fed: Which makes us not to dote upon
outward Water, and Bread and Wine in our Spiritual things. Now as many thus
gathered together, grow up in the strength, power and virtue of Truth, and as
Truth comes thus to have Victory and Dominion in their Souls, then they receive
an Utterance, Speaking to Edification.
and speak steadily to the Edification of their Brethren; and the pure Life
has a free passage through them: and what is thus spoken, Edifieth the Body
indeed. Such is the evident Certainty of that Divine Strength, that is
communicated by thus Meeting together, and Waiting in silence upon God; that
sometimes, when one has come in, that has been Vnwatchful, and Wandering in
his Mind, or suddenly out of the Hurry of outward Business, and so not inwardly
gathered with the rest, so soon as he retires himself inwardly, this Power
being in a good measure raised in the whole Meeting, will suddenly lay hold
upon his Spirit, and wonderfully help to raise up the good in him, and beget
him into the sense of the same Power, to the melting and warming of his heart:
even as the Warmth would take hold upon a man, that is Cold, coming into a
Stove; or as a Flame will lay hold upon some little Cumbustible Matter being
near unto it. Yea, if it fall out, that several Met together be straying in
their minds, though outwardly silent, and so wandering from the measure of
Grace in themselves, (which through the working of the Enemy, and Negligence of
some, may fall out) if either one come in, or may be in, who is Watchful, and
in whom the Life is raised in a great measure, as that one keeps his place, he
will feel a secret Travel for the rest, in a Sympathy with the Seed, which is
oppressed in the other, and kept from arising by their Thoughts and Wanderings.
A secret Travel one for another in Silent Meetings.
And as such a Faithful one waits in the Light, and keeps in this Divine Work,
God oftentimes answers the secret Travel and Breathings of his own Seed through
such a one; so that the rest will find themselves secretly smitten without
words: and that one will be as a Midwife, through the secret Travel of his
Soul, to bring forth the Life in them, just as a little Water thrown into a
Pump, brings up the rest; whereby Life will come to be raised in all, and the
vain Imaginations brought down: and such a one is felt by the rest to Minister
Life unto them without words. Yea sometimes, when there is not a word in the
Meeting, but all are silently Waiting, if one come in, that is Rude and Wicked,
and in whom the power of darkness prevails much, perhaps with an intention to
Mock, or do Mischief; if the whole Meeting be gathered into the Life, and it be
raised in a good measure, The Mocker struck with Terror, when no word is spoken.
it will strike Terror into such an one, and he will feel himself unable to
resist, but by the secret strength and virtue thereof the power of darkness in
him will be chained down: and if the day of his Visitation be not expired, it
will reach to the measure of Grace in him, and raise it up to the Redeeming of
his Soul. And this we often bear witness of; so as we had hereby frequent
occasion in this respect, since God has gathered us to be a people, to renew
this old saying of many, Is Saul also among the Prophets? 1 Samuel 10.12.
For not a few have come to be Convinced of the Truth after this manner: of
which I my self in a part am a true Witness, who not by strength of Arguments,
or by a particular Disquisition of each Doctrine, The true Convincement.
and Convincement of my Understanding thereby, came to receive and bear witness
of the Truth; but by being secretly reached by this Life. For when I came into
the Silent Assemblies of God's people, I felt a secret power among them, which
touched my heart; and as I gave way unto it, I found the Evil weakening in me,
and the Good raised up: and so I became thus knit and united unto them,
hungering more and more after the Increase of this Power and Life, whereby I
might feel my self perfectly redeemed. And indeed, this is the surest Way to
become a Christian; to whom afterward the knowledge and understanding of
principles will not be wanting; but will grow up, so much as is needful, as the
natural Fruit of this good Root: and such a knowledge will not be barren nor
unfruitful. After this manner therefore we desire all, that come among us, to
be proselyted; knowing, that though Thousands should be Convinced in their
understandings of all the Truths we maintain, yet if they were not sensible of
this inward Life, and their Souls not Changed from Unrighteousness to
Righteousness, they could add nothing to us: for this is that Cement, whereby
we are Joined as to the Lord, so to one another; and without this none can
Worship with us. Yea, 1 Cor. 6. ver. 17.
if such should come among us, The Life of Righteousness does join us to the
Lord.
and from that Understanding and Convincement they have of the Truth, speak
ever so true things, and utter them forth with ever so much Excellency of
Speech, if this Life were wanting, it would not Edify us at all; but be as
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1.

VIII. Our Work then and Worship is, when we Meet together, Our Work and
Worship in our Meetings.
for every one to Watch, and Wait upon God in themselves, and to be gathered
from all Visibles thereinto. And as every one is thus stated, they come to find
the Good arise over the Evil, and the Pure over the Impure, in which God
reveals himself, and draws near to every Individual, and so he in the midst
in the general: Whereby each not only partakes of the particular Refreshment
and Strength, which comes from the good in himself; but is a sharer of the
whole Body, as being a living Member of the Body, having a joint- Fellowship
and Communion with all. And as this Worship is steadfastly preached and kept to,
it becomes Easy; though it be very hard at first to the Natural Man, whose
roving Imaginations, and running, worldly Desires are not so easily brought to
silence. And therefore the Lord oftentimes, when any turn toward him, and
have true desires thus to Wait upon him, and find great difficulty through the
unstayedness of their minds, does in Condescension and Compassion cause his
Power to break forth in a more strong and powerful manner. And when the Mind
sinks down, and waits for the appearance of Life, and that the power of
darkness in the Soul wrestles and works against it, then the good Seed, as it
arises, will be found to work as Physic in the Soul; especially, if such a
Weak one be in the Assembly of diverse others, in whom the Life is arisen in
greater dominion: and through the contrary Workings of the power of darkness
there will be found an inward striving in the Soul, as really in the Mystery,
as ever Esau and Jacob strove in Rebekkah's Womb. And from this Inward Travel,
while the Darkness seeks to obscure the Light, Esau and Jacob strove in
Rebeccah's Womb.
and the Light break through the Darkness (which always it will do, if the Soul
give not its strength to the Darkness) there will be such a painful Travel
found in the Soul, that will even work upon the outward man; so that
oftentimes through the working thereof, the Body will be greatly shaken, and
many Groans, and Sighs and Tears, even as the Pangs of a Woman in Travail, will
lay hold upon it. Yea, and this not only as to one: but when the Enemy (who,
when the Children of God Assemble together, is not wanting to be present, to
see, if he can let their Comfort) has prevailed in any measure in a whole
Meeting, and strongly works against it by spreading and propagating his dark
Power, and by drawing out the minds of such as are Met, from the Life in them;
as they come to be sensible of this power of his, that Works against them, and
to wrestle with it by the armor of Light, sometimes the Power of God will
break forth into a whole Meeting, The Travel crowned with a victorious song.
and there will be such an Inward Travel, while each is seeking to Overcome the
Evil in themselves, that by the strong contrary Workings of these opposite
Powers, like the going of two contrary Tides, every Individual will be strongly
exercised, as in a Day of Battle, and thereby Trembling; and a Motion of Body
will be upon most, if not upon all: which, as the Power of Truth prevails, will
from pangs and groans end with a sweet Sound of Thanksgiving and Praise. The
name of Quakers whence it sprung.
And from this the name of Quakers, i. e. Tremblers, was first reproachfully
cast upon us: which, though it be none of our Choosing, yet in this respect we
are not Ashamed of it; but have rather reason to Rejoice therefore, even that
we are sensible of this Power, that has oftentimes laid hold upon our
Adversaries, and made them yield unto us, and join with us, and confess to the
Truth, before they had any distinct or discursive Knowledge of our Doctrines.
So that sometimes many at one Meeting have been thus Convinced: and this Power
would sometimes also reach to, and wonderfully Work even in little Children, to
the Admiration and Astonishment of many.

IX. Many are the blessed Experiences, which I could relate of this Silence and
manner of Worship: Yet silence is no Law; but words may follow.
yet do I not so much commend and speak of Silence, as if he had a Law in it to
shut out praying or preaching, or tied ourselves thereunto; not at all: for as
our Worship consists not in the words, so neither in silence, as silence; but
in an holy dependence of the mind upon God, from which dependence Silence
necessarily follows in the first place, until words can be brought forth, which
are from God's Spirit. And God is not wanting to move in his Children to bring
forth Words of Exhortation or Prayer, when it is needful: so that of the many
Gatherings and Meetings of such, as are Convinced of the Truth, there is scarce
any, in whom God raises not up some or other to Minister to his Brethren; that
there are few Meetings, that are altogether silent. For when many are Met
together in this one Life and Name, it does most naturally and frequently
excite them to pray to, and praise God, and stir up one another by mutual
Exhortation and Instructions: yet we judge it needful, there be in the first
place, some times of Silence, during which every one may be gathered inward to
the Word and Gift of Grace, from which he that Ministers, may receive Strength
to bring forth what he Ministers; and that they that hear, may have a sense to
discern betwixt the precious and the vile: and not to hurry into the Exercise
of these things, so soon as the Bell rings, as other Christians do. Yea, and we
doubt not, but assuredly know, that the Meeting may be good and refreshful,
though from the sitting down to the rising up thereof, there has not been a
word, as outwardly spoken; and yet Life may have been known to abound in each
Particular, and an inward growing up therein, No absolute Necessity for words,
tho from the life, at times.
and thereby; yea, so as words might have been spoken acceptably, and from the
life: yet there being no absolute Necessity laid upon any so to do, all might
have chosen rather quietly and silently to possess and enjoy the Lord in
themselves. Which is very sweet and comfortable to the Soul, that has thus
learned to be gathered out of all its own thoughts and workings, to feel the
Lord to bring forth the Will and the Deed; which many can declare by a blessed
Experience. Though indeed, it cannot but be hard for the Natural man to receive
or believe this doctrine: and therefore it must be rather by a sensible
Experience, and by coming to make proof of it, than by Arguments, that such can
be Convinced of this thing; seeing it is not enough to believe it, if they come
not also to enjoy and possess it. Yet in Condescension to, and for the sake of
such, as may be the more willing to Apply themselves to the practice and
experience hereof, that they found their understandings Convinced of it, and
that it is founded upon Scripture and Reason, I find a freedom of mind to add
some few Considerations of this kind for the Confirmation hereof, besides what
is before mentioned of our Experience.

X. That to wait upon God, and to watch before him, To Wait and Watch,
Commanded in the Scriptures.
is a Duty incumbent upon all, I suppose none will deny; and that this also is
a Part of Worship, will not be called in question: since there is scarce any
other so frequently commanded in the Holy Scriptures, as may appear from Psalm.
27.14: 37. v. 7. and 34. Prove. 20.22. Isai. 30.18. Hosea 12.6. Zach. 3.8.
Matthew. 24.42: 25.13: 26.41. Mark 13.33: 35. and 37. Luke 21.36. Acts 1.4:
20.31. 1 Cor. 16.13. Col. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7. Also this
Duty is often recommended with very great and precious Promises, as Psalm. 25.3:
37.9: 69.6. Isai. 40.31.42: 23. Lam. 3.25, 26. They that wait upon the Lord,
shall renew their strength, etc. Now, how is this Waiting upon God or Watching
before him, but by his Silence, of which we have spoken? Which, as it is in it
self a great and principal Duty, so it necessarily in Order both of Nature and
Time preceedeth all other. But that it may be the better and more perfectly
understood, as it is not only an outward Silence of the Body, but an inward
Silence of the Mind from all its own Imaginations and self-Cogitations, let it
be considered according to Truth and to the Principles and Doctrines heretofore
affirmed and proved, that Man is to be considered in a twofold respect, to wit,
in his Natural, unregenerate and fallen State; and in his Spiritual and Renewed
Condition: from whence arises that distinction of the Natural and Spiritual
man, so much used by the Apostle, and heretofore spoken of. Also these two
Births of the mind proceed from the two Seeds in man respectively, to wit, the
Good Seed and the Evil: And from the Evil Seed does not only proceed all manner
of Gross and abominable Wickedness and Profanity, but also Hypocrisy, and these
Wickednesses, which the Scripture calls spiritual, Whence wickednesses rise,
that are spirituals*
because it is the Serpent working in and by the natural man in things that are
spiritual, which having a show and appearance of good, are so much the more
hurtful and dangerous, as it is Satan transformed and transforming himself into
an Angel of Light. And therefore does the Scripture so pressingly and
frequently (as we have heretofore had occasion to observe) shut out and exclude
the Natural man from meddling with the things of God, denying his Endeavors
therein; though acted and performed by the most eminent of his parts, as of
Wisdom and Utterance.

Also this spiritual Wickedness is of two sorts, though both one in kind, as
proceeding from one Root, yet different in their Degrees, and in the Subjects
also sometimes. The one is, From whence all Heresies did spring?
when as the Natural man is meddling in, and working in the things of Religion,
does from his own Conceptions and Divinations affirm or propose Wrong and
Erroneous Notions and Opinions of God and things spiritual, and invent
superstitions, ceremonies, observations and rites in Worship: from whence have
sprung all the Heresies and Superstitions, that are among Christians: The other
is, when as the Natural Man, from a mere Conviction of his understanding, does
in the forwardness of his own Will, and by his own natural strength, without
the influence and leading of God's Spirit, go about either in his understanding
to imagine, conceive or think of the things of God, or actually to perform them
by preaching or praying. The first is a missing both in Matter and Form; The
second is a retaining of the Form without the Life and Substance of
Christianity: True Christianity wherein it not consists.
because Christian Religion consists not in a mere belief of true Doctrines,
or a mere performance of Acts good in themselves; or else the bare letter of
the Scripture, though spoken by a Drunkard or a Devil, might be said to be
Spirit and Life, which I judge none will be so absurd as to affirm: and also it
would follow, that where the Form of Godliness is, there the Power is also;
which is contrary to the express words of the Apostle. For the Form of
Godliness cannot be said to be, where either the Notions and Opinions believed
are erroneous and ungodly, or the Acts performed evil and wicked; for then it
would be the Form of Ungodliness, and not of Godliness: But of this further
hereafter, when we shall speak particularly of preaching and praying. Now,
though this last be not so bad, as the former, yet has it made way for it: for
men having first departed from the Life and Substance of true Religion and
Worship, to wit, from the inward Power and Virtue of the Spirit, so as therein
to act, and thereby to have all their actions enlivened; have only retained the
Form and Show, to wit, the true words and appearance: and so acting in their
own natural and unrenewed Wills in this Form, the Form could not but quickly
decay and be vitiated. For the working and active Spirit of man could not
contain it self within the simplicity and plainness of Truth; but giving way to
his own numerous Inventions and Imaginations, began to vary in the Form, and
adapt it to his own Inventions; until by degrees the Form of Godliness for the
most part came to be lost, Idolatry does hug his own Conceivings.
as well as the Power. For this kind of Idolatry, whereby man loves, idolizeth
and huggeth his own Conceptions, Inventions, and Product of his own Brain, is
so incident unto him, and seated in his fallen Nature, that so long as his
natural Spirit is the first Author and Actor of him, and is that, by which he
only is guided and moved in his Worship toward God, so as not first to Wait
for another Guide to direct him; he can never perform the pure Spiritual
Worship, nor bring forth any thing, but the fruit of the first, fallen, natural
and corrupt Root. Wherefore the time appointed of God being come, wherein by
Jesus Christ he has been pleased to restore the true Spiritual Worship, and
the outward Form of Worship, No Form of Worship, but the Spirit, is prescribed
by Christ.
which was appointed by God to the Jews, and whereof the manner and time of its
performance was particularly determined by God himself, being come to an end,
we find, that Jesus Christ, the Author of the Christian Religion, prescribes no
set Form of Worship to his Children under the more pure administration of the
New Covenant; If any object here, That the Lord's Prayer is a prescribed Form
of Prayer, and therefore of Worship, given by Christ to his Children.

I answer: First, This cannot be objected by any sort of Christians, that I
know, because there are none, who use not other Prayers, or that limit their
Worship to this. Secondly, This was commanded to the Disciples, while yet Weak,
before they had received the dispensation of the Gospel; not that they should
only use it in praying, but that he might show them by one Example, how that
their Prayers ought to be short, and not like the long Prayers of the
Pharisees. And that this was the Use of it, appears by all the Prayers, which
diverse Saints afterward made use of, whereof the Scripture makes mention: for
none made use of this, neither repeated it; but used other words, according as
the thing required, and as the Spirit gave utterance. Thirdly, That this ought
so to be understood, appears from Rom 8.26. of which afterward mention shall
be made at greater length, where the Apostle says, We know not, what we should
pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, etc.
But if this Prayer had been such a prescribed Form of Prayer to the Church,
that had not been true; neither had they been Ignorant, what to pray, nor
should they have needed the help of the Spirit to teach them.


save that he only tells them, that the Worship now to be performed, is
Spiritual, and in the Spirit. And it is especially to be observed, that in the
whole New Testament there is no Order nor Command given in this thing, but to
follow the Revelations of the Spirit, save only that general, of Meeting
together, a thing dearly owned, and diligently practiced by us; as shall
hereafter more appear. True it is, mention is made of the Duties of Praying,
Preaching and Singing; Pray, Preach and Sing in Spirit.
but what Order or Method should be kept in so doing, or that presently they
should be set about, so soon as the Saints are gathered, there is not one word
to be found: yea, these Duties (as shall afterward be made appear) are always
annexed to the assistance, leadings and motions of God's Spirit. Since then man
in his natural state is thus excluded from acting or moving in things
Spiritual, To Wait on God, by what it is performed?
how or what way shall he exercise this first and previous duty of Waiting upon
God, but by Silence, and by bringing that natural part to silence? Which is no
other ways, but by abstaining from his own Thoughts and Imaginations, and from
all the self-workings and motions of his own Mind, as well in things materially
good, as evil; that he being silent, God may speak in him, and the Good Seed
may arise. This, though hard to the natural man, is so answerable to Reason, and
even natural Experience in other things, that it cannot be denied. He that
comes to learn of a Master, if he expect to hear his Master, A Simile of a
Master and his Scholar.
and be instructed by him, must not continually be speaking of the matter to be
taught, and never be quiet; otherwise how shall his Master have time to
instruct him? Yea, though the Scholar were never so earnest to learn the
Science, yet would the Master have Reason to Reprove him, as untoward and
indocile, if he would always be meddling of himself, and still speaking, and
not Wait in silence patiently to hear his Master instructing and teaching him;
who ought not to open a mouth, until by his Master he were commanded and
allowed so to do. So also, if one were about to Attend a great Prince, Of a
Prince and his Servant.
he would be thought an impertinent and imprudent Servant, who, while he ought
patiently and readily to Wait, that he might Answer the King, when he speaks,
and have his Eye upon him to observe the least Motions and Inclinations of his
Will, and to do accordingly, would be still deafening him with Discourse,
though it were in praises of him; and running to and fro, without any
particular and immediate Order to do things, that perhaps might be good in
themselves, or might have been Commanded at other times to others; Would the
Kings of the Earth accept of such Servants, or Service? Since then we are
Commanded to Wait upon God diligently, and in so doing it is promised, that our
Strength shall be renewed; this Waiting cannot be performed, but by a Silence,
To Wait in Silence.
or Cessation of the natural part on our side: since God manifests himself not
to the outward man or senses so much, as to the inward, to wit, to the Soul and
Spirit. If the Soul be still thinking and working in her own Will, The thinking
busy Soul excludes the Voice of God.
and busily exercised in her own Imaginations, though the matters, as in
themselves, may be good concerning God; yet thereby she incapacitates her self
from discerning the still, small Voice of the Spirit, and so hurts her self
greatly, in that she neglects her Chief Business of Waiting upon the Lord.
Nothing less, than if I should busy my self, crying out and speaking of a
Business, while in the mean time I neglect to hear one, who is quietly
Whispering into my Ear, and informing me in these things, which are most
needful for me to hear and know concerning that Business. And since it is the
Chief Work of a Christian to know the natural Will in its own proper motions
Crucified, that God may both move in the Act and in the Will; the Lord chiefly
regards this profound Subjection and Self-denial. For some men please
themselves as much, and gratify their own sensual Wills and Humors in high and
curious Speculations of Religion, Religious Speculations.
affecting a Name and Reputation that way; or because those things by Custom,
or other ways, are become pleasant and habitual to them, though not a whit more
Regenerated, or inwardly Sanctified in their Spirits; Sensual Recreations.
as others gratify their Lusts in Actions of Sensuality: and therefore both are
alike hurtful to men, and sinful in the sight of God, it being nothing, but the
mere Fruit and Effect of man's natural and unrenewed Will and Spirit. Yea,
should one (as many no doubt do) from a sense of sin and fear of punishment,
seek to terrify themselves from Sin by multiplying thoughts of Death, Hell and
Judgment, and by presenting to their Imaginations the Happiness and Joys of
Heaven, The Thoughts of Death and Hell to keep out sin, are Fig Leaves.
and also by multiplying Prayers and other Religious Performances; as these
things could never deliver him from one Iniquity, without the secret and inward
Power of God's Spirit and Grace, so would they signify no more, than the
Fig Leaves, wherewith Adam thought to cover his Nakedness. And seeing, it is
only the Product of man's own natural Will, proceeding from a Self-Love, and
seeking to save himself, and not arising purely from that Divine Seed of
Righteousness, which is given of God to all for Grace and Salvation, it is
Rejected of God, and no ways acceptable unto him; since the natural man, as
natural, while he stands in that State, is with all his Arts, Parts and Actings
Reprobated by him. This great Duty then of Waiting upon God must needs be
exercised in man's denying self both inwardly and outwardly, Denial of ones
self.
in a still and mere dependence upon God, in abstracting from all the Workings,
Imaginations and Speculations of his own mind, that being emptied, as it were,
of himself, and so thoroughly Crucified to the natural products thereof, he may
be fit to Receive the Lord, who will have no Copartner nor Corrival of his
Glory and Power. And man being thus stated, the little Seed of Righteousness,
which God has planted in his Soul, and Christ has purchased for him, even the
measure of Grace and Life, (which is burdened and crucified by man's natural
thoughts and imaginations) receives a place to arise, and becomes a holy Birth
and geniture in man; The Holy Birth.
and is that Divine Air, in and by which man's Soul and Spirit comes to be
leavened: And by Waiting therein, he comes to be accepted in the sight of God,
to stand in his presence, hear his Voice, and observe the Motions of his Holy
Spirit. And so man's place is, to Wait in this: and as hereby there are any
Objects presented to his mind concerning God, or things relating to Religion,
his Soul may be exercised in them without hurt, and to the great profit both of
himself and others; because those things have their rise not from his own Will,
but from God's Spirit. And therefore as in the arisings and movings of this his
mind is still to be exercised in thinking and meditating, so also in the more
obvious acts of preaching and praying. No Quakers are against a Meditating Mind.

From Nature's Thoughts all Errors rise, we find.


And so it may hence appear, we are not against Meditation, as some have sought
falsely to infer from our Doctrine; but we are against the thoughts and
imaginations of the natural man in his own Will, from which all Errors and
Heresies concerning the Christian Religion in the whole World have proceeded.
But if it please God at any time, when one or more are Waiting upon him, not to
present such Objects, as gives them occasion to exercise their Minds in
Thoughts and Imaginations, but purely to keep them in this holy Dependence, and
as they persist therein, to cause his secret Refreshment and the pure Incomes
of his holy Life to flow in upon them; then they have good reason to be
Content, because by this (as we know by good and blessed Experience) the Soul
is more strengthened, renewed and confirmed in the love of God, and armed
against the Power of sin, than any ways else: The Soul Renewed, by what? the
holy Life of God.
this being a Foretaste of that real and sensible Enjoyment of God, which the
Saints in Heaven daily possess; which God frequently affords to his Children
here for their Comfort and Encouragement, especially, when they are Assembled
together to Wait upon him.

XI. For there are Two contrary Powers or Spirits, to wit, Whatever Man does
Act without the power of God, is not Accepted.
the Power and Spirit of this World, in which the Prince of Darkness bears
rule, and over as many as are acted by it, and work from it; and the Power or
Spirit of God, in which God works and bears rule, and over as many as Act
in and from it. So whatever be the things, that a man thinks of, or acts
in, however Spiritual or Religious, as to the notion or form of them, so long
as he acts and moves in the natural and corrupt Spirit and Will, and not
from, in and by the Power of God, he sins in all, and is not accepted of
God. Prove. 21. ver. 4.
For hence both The ploughing and praying of the wicked is sin: as also
whatever a man acts in and from the Spirit and Power of God, having his
Understanding and Will influenced and moved by it, whether it be Actions
Religious, Civil, or even Natural, he is accepted in so doing in the sight of
God, and is blessed in them. From what is said, it does appear, Ja. 1.25.
how frivolous and impertinent their Objection is, that say, They Wait upon God
in praying and preaching; To pray and preach without the Spirit, is Offense to
God.
since Waiting does of it self imply a passive Dependence rather than an
Acting. And since it is, and shall yet be more shown, that preaching and
praying without the Spirit is an Offending of God, not a Waiting upon him; and
that praying and preaching by the Spirit pre-supposes necessarily a silent
Waiting, for to feel the motions and influence of the Spirit to lead thereunto;
and lastly, that in several of these places, where praying is commanded, as
Matthew. 26.41. Mark 13.33. Luke 21.36. 1 Pet. 4.7. Watching is specially
prefixed, as a previous preparation thereunto; so that we do well and certainly
conclude, that since Waiting and Watching is so particularly commanded and
recommended, and this cannot be truly performed, but in this inward Silence of
the mind from men's own Thoughts and Imaginations; This Silence is, and must
necessarily be a special and principal part of God's Worship.

XII. But Secondly: II. This silent Waiting the Devil cannot counterfeit.
The Excellency of this silent Waiting upon God does appear, In that it is
impossible for the Enemy, viz. the Devil, to Counterfeit it, so as for any Soul
to be deceived or deluded by him in the Exercise thereof. Now, in all other
matters he may mix himself-in with the natural Mind of Man, and so, by
transforming himself, he may deceive the Soul, by busying it about things
perhaps innocent in themselves, while yet he keeps them from beholding the Pure
Light of Christ; and so from knowing distinctly his Duty, and doing of it. For
that Envious Spirit of man's Eternal Happiness knows well, how to accommodate
himself, and fit his Snares for all the several Dispositions and Inclinations
of men: if he find one not fit to be engaged with gross Sins or worldly Lusts,
but rather averse from them, and Religiously inclined; he can fit himself to
beguile such an one, by suffering his Thoughts and Imaginations to run upon
Spiritual matters, and so hurry them to work, act and meditate in their own
Wills. For he well knows, that so long as Self bears rule, and the Spirit of
God is not the principal and chief Actor, Man is not put out of his reach: so
therefore he can accompany Priest to the Altar, the Preacher to the Pulpit, the
Zelot to his Prayers, yea, the Doctor and Professor of Divinity to his Study;
and there he can cheerfully suffer him to labor and work among his Books,
Altar, Prayers, Pulpit, Study cannot shut the Devil out.
yea, and help him to find out and invent subtle Distinctions and Quiddities,
by which both his mind, and others through him may be kept from heeding God's
Light in the Conscience, and waiting upon him. There is not any Exercise
whatsoever, wherein he cannot enter, and have a chief place, so as the Soul
many times cannot discern it, except in this alone; for he can only work in and
by the natural man, and his Faculties, by secretly acting upon his Imaginations
and Desires, etc. and therefore, when he (to wit, the natural man) is silent,
there he must also stand. And therefore when the Soul comes to this Silence,
and, as it were, is brought to Nothingness as to her own workings, then the
Devil is shut out; for the pure Presence of God, and shining of his Light he
cannot abide, because so long as a man is thinking and meditating as of
himself, he cannot be sure, but the Devil is Influencing him therein; but when
he comes wholly to be silent, as the Pure Light of God shines in upon him, then
he is sure, that the Devil is shut out; for beyond the Imaginations he cannot
go, which we often find by sensible Experience. For he that of Old is said to
have come to the gathering together of the Children of God is not wanting to
come to our Assemblies. And indeed he can well enter and work in a Meeting,
that is Silent only as to words, either by keeping the Minds in various Thoughts
and Imaginations, or by stupifying them, so as to overwhelm them with a spirit
of heaviness and slothfulness: but when we Retire out of all, and are Turned
in, both by being diligent and watchful upon the one hand, and also silent and
retired out of all our Thoughts upon the other; as we abide in this sure place,
we feel our selves out of his Reach. Yea, oftentimes the Power and Glory of
God will break forth and appear, just as the bright Sun through many Clouds and
Mists, to the dispelling of that Power of Darkness; which will also be sensibly
felt seeking to cloud and darken the Mind, and wholly to keep it from purely
Waiting upon God.

XIII. Thirdly: The Excellency of this Worship does appear, in that It can
neither be stopped, III. The Worship of the Quakers not stopped nor interrupted
by Men nor Devils.
nor interrupted by the malice of Men or Devils; as all others can. Now
Interruptions and Stoppings of Worship may be understood in a twofold respect,
either as we are hindered from Meeting, as being outwardly by Violence
separated one from onother; or when permitted to Meet together, as we are
interrupted by the Tumult, Noise and Confusion, which such as are malicious,
may use, to molest or distract us. Now in both these respects this Worship does
greatly overpass all others: For how far soever people be separate or hindered
from coming together, yet as every one is inwardly gathered to the measure of
Life in himself, there is a secret Unity and Fellowship enjoyed, which the
Devil and all his Instruments can never break or hinder. But Secondly, it does
as well appear as to these Molestations, which occur, when we are met together,
what advantage this true and Spiritual Worship gives us beyond all others;
seeing in despite of a Thousand Interruptions and Abuses, one of which were
sufficient to have stopped all other sorts of Christians, we have been able,
through the Nature of this Worship, to keep it Uninterrupted as to God, and
also at the same time to show forth an Example of our Christian patience
toward all, even oftentimes to the reaching and convincing of our Opposers.
For there is no sort of Worship used by others, which can subsist, (though they
be permitted Meet) unless they be either Authorized and Protected by the
Magistrate, or defend themselves with the Arm of Flesh; but we at the same time
exercise Worship toward God, and also patiently bear the Reproaches and
Ignominies, which Christ prophesied should be so incident and frequent to
Christians. For how can the Papists say their Mass, if there be any there to
disturb and interrupt them? Do but take away the Mass Book, The Worship of the
Papists soon Interrupted.
the Calice, the Host, or the Priest's Garments; yea, do but spill the Water,
or the Wine, or blow out the Candles, (a thing quickly done) and the whole
Business is marred, and no Sacrifice can be offered. The Protestants the like
and Anabaptists.
Take from the Lutherans or Episcopalians their Liturgy, or Common prayer book,
and no service can be said. Remove from the Calvinists, Arminians, Socinians,
Independents or Anabaptists the Pulpit, the Bible and the Hourglass, or make
but such a Noise, as the Voice of the Preacher cannot be heard; or disturb him
but so, before he come; or strip him of his Bible and his Books, and he must be
dumb: for they all think it an Heresy to Wait to speak, as the Spirit of God
gives utterance; and thus easily their Whole Worship may be marred. But when
people Meet together, and their Worship consists not in such outward Acts,
and they depend not upon any one's speaking, but merely sit down to Wait upon
God, and to be gathered out of all Visibles, and to feel the Lord in Spirit,
none of these things can hinder them; of which we may say of a truth, we are
sensible Witnesses. For when the Magistrates, stirred up by the Malice and Envy
of our Opposers, have used all means possible (and yet in vain) to deter us
from Meeting together, and that openly and publicly in our own hired Houses
for that purpose; both Death, Banishments, Imprisonments, Finings, Beatings,
Whippings, The Sufferings of the Quakers for their Religious Meetings.
and other such Devilish Inventions have proved ineffectual to Terrify us from
our holy Assemblies. (I say) And we having thus oftentimes purchased our
liberty to Meet by deep Sufferings, our Opposers have then taken another way,
by turning in upon us the worst and wickedest People, yea, the very
Off-scowrings of men, who by all manner of inhumane, beastly and brutish
behavior have sought to provoke us, weary us, and molest us; but in vain. It
would be almost incredible to declare, and indeed a Shame, that among men
pretending to be Christians it should be mentioned, what things of this kind
men's Eyes have seen, and I my self, with others, have shared of in suffering.!
There they have often beaten us, and cast water and dirt upon us; there they
have danced, leaped, sung and spoken all manner of profane and ungodly Words;
offered Violence and shameful Behavior to grave Women and Virgins; jeered,
mocked and scoffed, asking us, If the Spirit was not yet come? And much more,
which were tedious here to relate: and all this, while we have been seriously
and silently sitting together, and waiting upon the Lord. So that by these
things our Inward and Spiritual Fellowship with God, and one with another in
the pure life of Righteousness has not been hindered: But on the contrary the
Lord knowing our Sufferings and Reproaches for his Testimony's sake, has
caused his Power and Glory more to abound among us, and has mightily Refreshed
us by the sense of his love, which has filled our Souls; and so much the
rather as we found our selves gathered into the Name of the Lord, which is the
strong Tower of the Righteous, Prove. 18.10.
whereby we felt our selves sheltered from receiving any inward Hurt through
their malice: and also that he had delivered us from that Vain Name and
profession of Christianity, under which our Opposers were not ashamed to bring
forth these bitter and cursed Fruits. Yea, sometimes in the midst of this
Tumult and Opposition God would powerfully move some or other of us by his
Spirit, both to Testify of that Joy, which notwithstanding their Malice we
enjoyed, and powerfully to declare in the Evidence and Demonstration of the
Spirit against their Folly and Wickedness; so as the Power of Truth has
brought them to some measure of Quietness and Stilness, and stopped the
impetuous Streams of their Fury and Madness: The Rod of Moses did Divide the
Sea: through Raging waves the Spirit makes way.
that as ever of old Moses by his Rod divided the Waves of the Red Sea, that
the Israelites might pass; so God has thus by his Spirit made a way for us in
the midst of this Raging Wickedness, peaceably to enjoy and possess him, and
accomplish our Worship to him: So that sometimes upon such occasions several of
our Opposers and Interrupters have hereby been Convinced of the Truth, and
gathered from being Persecutors to be Sufferers with us. And let it not be
forgotten, but let it be inscribed and abide for a constant Remembrance of the
thing, What Brutish Pranks did not commit that young Fry of the Clergy?
that in these beastly and brutish pranks, used to molest us in our Spiritual
Meetings, none have been more Busy, than the Young Students of the
Universities, who were learning Philosophy and Divinity (so called) and many of
them preparing themselves for the Ministry. Should we commit to Writing all the
Abominations committed in this respect by the young Fry of the Clergy, it would
make no small Volume; as the Churches of Christ, gathered into his Pure Worship
in Oxford and Cambridge in England, and Edinburgh and Aberdeen in Scotland,
where the Universities are, can well bear witness.

How the Old Covenant-worship does differ from the New.
XIV. Moreover in this we know, that we are partakers of the New Covenant's
Dispensation, and Disciples of Christ indeed, sharing with him of that
Spiritual Worship, which is performed in the Spirit and in Truth, because as he
was, so are we in this World. For the Old Covenant-Worship had an outward
Glory, Temple and Ceremonies, and was full of outward Splendour and Majesty,
having an outward Tabernacle, and Altar beautified with gold, silver and
precious Stones, and their Sacrifices were tied to an outward, particular
place, even the outward Mount Zion; and those that prayed, behoved to pray with
their Faces toward that outward Temple: And therefore all this be hoved to be
protected by an outward Arm. Nor could the Jews peaceably have enjoyed it, but
when they were secured from the Violence of their outward Enemies: and
therefore when at any time their Enemies prevailed over them, their Glory was
darkened, and their Sacrifices stopped; and the Face of their Worship marred:
Hence they complain, lament and bewail the destroying of the Temple, as a Loss
Irreparable. But Jesus Christ, the Author and Institutor of the New
Covenant-Worship testifies, The New Covenant-Worship is Inward. John 18.36.
that God is neither to be Worshipped in this, nor that place, but in the
Spirit and in Truth; and forasmuch as his Kingdom is not of this world, neither
does his Worship consist in it, or need either the Wisdom, Glory, Riches or
Splendour of this World to beautify or adorn it; nor yet the outward Power or
Arm of flesh to maintain, uphold or protect it; but it is and may be performed
by those, that are spiritually minded, notwithstanding all Opposition, Violence
and Malice of men: because it being purely Spiritual, it is out of the reach of
Natural men to interrupt or molest it. Even as Jesus Christ, the Author
thereof, did enjoy and possess his Spiritual Kingdom, while oppressed,
persecuted and rejected of men, and as in despite of the Malice and Rage of the
Devil, he spoiled principalities and powers, Triumphing over them, and through
death destroyed him, that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; so also
all his Followers both can and do Worship him, Col. 2.15.
not only without the Arm of flesh to protect them, but even when oppressed.
For their Worship being Spiritual, is by the Power of the Spirit defended and
maintained; but such Worships, as are carnal, and consist in carnal and outward
Ceremonies and Observations, Carnal Worships cannot stand without the Arm of
Flesh.
need a Carnal and outward Arm to protect them, and defend them, else they
cannot stand and subsist. And therefore it appears, that the several Worships
of our Opposers both Papists and Protestants are of this kind, and not the
true, Spiritual and New Covenant-worship of Christ; because, as has been
observed, they cannot stand without the Protection or Countenance of the
outward Magistrate, neither can be performed, if there be the least Opposition:
For they are not in the Patience of Jesus, to serve and worship him with
sufferings, ignominies, calumnies and reproaches. And from hence have sprung
all those Wars, Fightings and Bloodshed among Christians, while each by the
Arm of flesh endeavored to defend and protect their own Way and Worship: and
from this also sprung up that Monstrous Opinion of Persecution; of which we
shall speak more at length hereafter.

XV. But Fourthly: The Nature of this Worship, IV. True Worship in Spirit
Established by Christ.
which is performed by the Operation of the Spirit, the Natural man being
silent, does appear from these words of Christ, Joh. 4.23, 24. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to Worship him. God is a
Spirit and they that Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. This
Testimony is the more specially to be observed, for that it is both the first,
chiefest and most ample Testimony, which Christ gives us of his Christian
Worship, as different and contradistinguished from that under the Law. For
first, he shows, that the Season is now come, wherein the Worship must be in
Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to Worship him: so then it is
no more a Worship consisting in outward Observations, to be performed by man at
set Times or Opportunities, which he can do in his own will, and by his own
natural strength; for else it would not differ in Matter, but only in some
Circumstances from that under the Law. Next, as for a Reason of this Worship we
need not to give any other, and indeed none can give a better, than that which
Christ gives, The Reason Christ gives for a Worship in Spirit.
which I think should be sufficient to satisfy every Christian, to wit; GOD is
a SPIRIT, and they that Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.
As this ought to be received, because it is the words of Christ; so also it is
founded upon so clear a Demonstration of Reason, as sufficiently evidenceth its
Verity. For Christ excellently argues from the Analogy, that ought to be
betwixt the Object, and the Worship directed thereunto: God is a Spirit;

Therefore he must be worshipped in Spirit.



This is so certain, that it can suffer no Contradiction; yea, and this Analogy
is so necessary to be minded, that under the Law, when God instituted and
appointed that Ceremonial Worship to the Jews, because that Worship was
Outward, that there might be an Analogy, he saw it necessary to Condescend to
them as in a special manner, to dwell betwixt the Cherubims within the
Tabernacle, and afterward to make the Temple of Jerusalem in a sort his
habitation, and cause something of an outward Glory and Majesty to appear, by
causing Fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices, The Glory of the Outward
Temple.
and filling the Temple with a Cloud: Through and by which Mediums, Visible to
the outward Eye, he manifested himself proportionably to that outward Worship,
which he had Commanded them to perform. So now under the New Covenant, he
seeing meet in his heavenly Wisdom to lead his Children in a path more Heavenly
and Spiritual, and in a Way both more easy and familiar, and also purposing to
disappoint Carnal and Outward Observations, that his may have an Eye more to an
Inward Glory and Kingdom, than to an Outward, he has given us for an Example
hereof the Appearance of his Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, who (instead
that Moses delivered the Israelites out of their outward Bondage, Like Moses
did from Outward, so Christ delivers his from Inward Slavery.
and by outwardly destroying their Enemies) has delivered and does deliver us
by suffering, and dying by the hands of his Enemies; thereby Triumphing over
the Devil, and his, and our inward Enemies, and delivering us therefrom. He
has also instituted an Inward and Spiritual Worship: so that God now tieth not
his people to the Temple of Jerusalem, nor yet unto outward Ceremonies and
Observations; but takes the Heart of every Christian for a Temple to dwell-in,
and there immediately appears, and gives him directions, how to serve him in
any outward Acts: Since, as Christ argues, God is a Spirit, he will now be
Worshipped in the Spirit, where he reveals himself; and dwells with the
Contrite in heart. Now, since it is the Heart of Man, that now is become the
Temple of God, in which he will be Worshipped, and no more in particular,
Outward Temples, (since, as blessed Stephen said out of the Prophet to the
professing Jews of old, The Most High dwells not in Temples made with hands)
as, before the Glory of the Lord descended to fill the outward Temple, it
behoved to be purified and cleansed, and all polluted stuff removed out of it;
yea, and the place for the Tabernacle was overlaid with Gold, the most
precious, clean and clearest of Metals; so also, before God be Worshipped in
the Inward Temple of the Heart, it must also be purged of its own filth, and
all its own Thoughts and Imaginations, that so it may be fit to receive the
Spirit of God, and to be acted by it: and does not this directly lead us to
that Inward Silence, of which we have spoken, and exactly pointed out? And
further, This Worship must be in Truth; intimating, that this Spiritual Worship
thus acted is only and properly a true Worship, as being that, which for the
Reasons above observed, cannot be Counterfeited by the Enemy, nor yet Performed
by the Hypocrite.

XVI. And though this Worship be indeed very different from the diverse
established, Invented Worships among Christians, and therefore may seem strange
to many; yet has it been testified of, commended and practiced by the most
pious of all sorts in all Ages; as by many evident Testimonies might be proved.
So that from the professing and practicing thereof, the Name of Mysticks has
arisen, as of a Certain Sect generally commended by all; A certain Sect of
Mysticks among the Papists, their Inward Exercise.

See Sancta Sophia* Printed Ad. Dom. 1657.


whose Writings are full both of the Explanation and of the Commendation of
this sort of Worship, where they plentifully assert this Inward Introversion,
and Abstraction of the Mind (as they call it) from all Images and Thoughts, and
the Prayer of the Will. Yea, they look upon this as the height of Christian
Perfection; so that some of them, though professed Papists, do not doubt to
affirm, that such, as have attained this Method of Worship, or are aiming at
it, (as in a Book, called Sancta Sophia, put out by the English Benedictines,
printed at Dovay Anno 1657. Tract. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 5.) need not, The English
Benedictines Testimony for the Spiritual Worship, against their Masses and set
Devotions.
nor ought to trouble or busy themselves with frequent and unnecessary
Confessions, with exercising Corporal Labors and Austerities, the using of
Vocal, Voluntary Prayers, the hearing of a Number of Masses or set Devotions,
or Exercises to Saints, or Prayers for the Dead, or having solicitous and
distracting Cares to gain Indulgences by going to such and such Churches, or
adjoining ones self to Confraternities, or entangling ones self with Vows and
Promises; because such kind of things hinder the Soul from observing the
Operations of the Divine Spirit in it, and from having liberty to follow the
Spirit, whither it would draw her. And yet who knows not, but that in such kind
of Observations the very Substance of the Popish Religion consists? Yet
nevertheless it appears by this and many other passages, which out of their
Mystic Writers might be mentioned, how they look upon this Worship as
Excelling all other, and that such as arrived hereunto, had no absolute Need of
the others; yea, (see the Life of Balthazar Alvares, in the same Sancta Sophia,
Tract 3. Sect. 1. cap. 7.) such as tasted of this, quickly Confessed, that the
other Forms and Ceremonies of Worship were useless as to them; neither did they
perform them as things necessary, but merely for Order or Example's sake. And
therefore, though some of them were so Over-clouded with the common darkness of
their Profession, yet could they affirm, that this Spiritual Worship was still
to be retained and sought for; though there be a necessity of omitting their
outward Ceremonies. Hence Bernard, Bernard preferring the Spirit above Popish
Orders.
as in many other places, so in his Epistle to one William, Abbot of the same
Order, says, Take heed to the Rule of God; the Kingdom of God is within you:
and afterward saying, That their outward Orders and Rules should be observed,
he adds; But otherwise when it shall happen, that one of these two must be
omitted in such a Case, these are much rather to be omitted, than those former:
For by how much the Spirit is more excellent and noble, than the Body, by so
much Spiritual Exercises are more profitable, than Corporal. Is not that then
the best of Worships, which the best of Men in all Ages and of all Sects have
commended, and which is most suitable to the Doctrine of Christ? I say, is not
that Worship to be followed and performed? And so much the rather, as God has
raised a People to Testify for it, and Preach it to their great Refreshment and
Strengthening in the very Face of the World, and notwithstanding much
Opposition; who do not, as these Mysticks, Those Mysticks did confine that
Mystery to Cloisters.
make of it a Mystery only to be attained by a few Men or Women in a Cloister,
or, as their Mistake was, after wearying themselves with many Outward
Ceremonies and Observations, as if it were the Consequence of such a Labor:
but who in the free Love of God (who respects not Persons, and was near to hear
and reveal himself as well to Cornelius, a Centurion and a Roman, as to Simeon
and Anna; and who discovered his Glory to Mary, a poor Handmaid, and to the
poor Shepherds rather, than to the Highpriests and devout Proselytes among the
Jews) in and according to his free Love finding, that God is revealing and
establishing this Worship, and making many poor Tradesmen, yea, young Boys and
Girls Witnesses of it, Do Entreat and beseech all to lay aside all their own
Will-Worships and voluntary Acts performed in their own Wills, and by their own
mere natural Strength and Power, without retiring out of their own vain
Imaginations and Thoughts, or feeling the pure Spirit of God to move and stir
in them; that they may come to practice this acceptable Worship, which is in
Spirit and in Truth. But against this Worship they Object --

XVII. First: It seems to be an unprofitable Exercise for a Man to be

I Answer: That is not Unprofitable, which is of absolute Necessity, before any
other Duty can be acceptably performed; Waiting to be. Moreover, those have but
a carnal and gross Apprehension of God, and of the things of his Kingdom, that
imagine, that Men please him by their own Workings and Actings; whereas, as
has been shown, the first step for Man to fear God is, To cease from his own
thoughts and imaginations, Isa. 1.16, 17.
and suffer God's Spirit to work in him. For we must Cease to do evil, ere we
learn to do well; and this meddling in things Spiritual by man's own natural
Understanding is one of the greatest and most dangerous Evils, We must Cease to
do ill, ere we learn to do well.
that man is incident to, being that, which occasioned our first Parents Fall,
to wit, a Forwardness to desire to know things, and a meddling with them both
without and contrary to the Lord's Command.

Secondly some Object; If your Worship merely consist in inwardly retiring to
the Lord, and feeling of his Spirit arise in you, and then to do outward Acts,
Set times and places for Meetings.
as ye are led by it; what need ye have public Meetings at set times and
places, since every one may enjoy this at home? Or should not every one stay at
home, until they be particularly moved to go to such a place at such a time;
since to meet at set times and places seems to be an Outward Observation and
Ceremony, contrary to what ye at other times Assert.

Answer first: To meet at set times and places is not any Religious Act, or
part of Worship in it self, but only an outward Coveniency, necessary for our
seeing one another, Public Meetings their Use and its Reason Asserted.
so long as we are clothed with this outward Tabernacle: and therefore our
Meeting at set times and places is not a part of our Worship, but a preparatory
Accommodation of our outward man, in order to a public visible Worship; since
we set not about the Visible Acts of Worship, when we Meet together, until we
be led thereunto by the Spirit of God. Secondly: God has seen meet, so long as
his Children are in this World, to make use of the outward Senses, not only as
a means to Convey Spiritual Life, as by speaking, praying, praising, etc. which
cannot be done to mutual Edification, but when we hear and see one another, but
also for to entertain an outward, visible Testimony for his Name in the World:
He causes the Inward Life (which is also many times not conveyed by the
outward Senses) the more to abound, when his Children Assemble themselves
diligently together to Wait upon him; that as Iron sharpeneth Iron, so the
seeing of the Face one of another, Prove. 27. v. 17.
when both are inwardly gathered unto the Life, gives occasion for the Life
secretly to arise, and pass from Vessel to Vessel. And as many Candles lighted
and put in one place, do greatly augment the light, and make it more to shine
forth; so when many are gathered together into the same Life, there is more of
the Glory of God, and his Power appears to the Refreshment of each Individual;
for that he partakes not only of the Light and Life raised in himself, but in
all the rest. And therefore Christ has particularly promised a Blessing to
such, as Assemble together in his Name, seeing he will be in the midst of them,
Matthew. 18.20. and the Author to the Hebrews does precisely prohibit the Neglect
of this Duty, as being of very dangerous and dreadful Consequence, in these
words; Heb. 10.24. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to
good works; Assembling of our selves is not to be neglected.
not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is;
-- For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the
Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sins. And therefore the Lord has
shown, that he has a particular Respect to such, as thus Assemble themselves
together, because that thereby a public Testimony for him is upheld in the
Earth, and his Name is thereby glorified; and therefore such as are right in
their Spirits, are naturally drawn to keep the Meetings of God's People, and
never want a Spiritual Influence to lead them thereunto: And if any do it in a
mere Customary Way, they will no doubt suffer Condemnation for it. Yet cannot
the Appointing of Places and Times be accounted a Ceremony and Observation done
in man's Will in the Worship of God; seeing none can say, that it is an Act of
Worship, but only a mere presenting of our Persons in order to it, as is
abovesaid. Which that it was practiced by the Primitive Church and Saints, all
our Adversaries do acknowledge.

Lastly, some object; That this manner of Worship in Silence is not to

I Answer; We make not Silence to be the sole matter of our Worship; Meetings,
In Waiting for the Spirits Guidance, Selence is supposed.
which are seldom (if ever) altogether Silent, some or other are still moved
either to preach, pray, and praise: and so in this our Meetings cannot be but
like the Meetings of the Primitive Churches recorded in Scripture, since our
Adversaries confess, that they did preach and pray by the Spirit. And then what
Absurdity is it to suppose, that at some times the Spirit did not move them to
these outward Acts, and that then they were Silent? since we may well conclude,
they did not speak, until they were moved; and so no doubt had sometimes
Silence. Act. 2.1. before the Spirit came upon them, it is said, -- They were
all with one accord in one place: and then it is said, The Spirit suddenly came
upon them; but no mention is made of any one speaking at that time; and I would
willingly know, what Absurdity our Adversaries can infer, should we conclude,
they were a while Silent?

But if it be urged, Inst.
That a whole Silent Meeting cannot be found in Scripture.

I Answer: Supposing such a thing were not recorded, not lawful; seeing it
naturally follows from other Scripture-Precepts, as we have proved this does.
For seeing the Scripture commands to Meet together, and when Met, Silent
Meetings are proved from Scripture and Reason.
the Scripture prohibits prayers or preachings, but as the Spirit moves
thereunto: if people Meet together, and the Spirit move not to such Acts, it
will necessarily follow, that they must be Silent. But further, there might
have been many such things among the Saints of Old, though not recorded in
Scripture; and yet we have enough in Scripture, signifying, that such things
were. For Job sat silent seven days with his Friends together; Here was a Long
Silent Meeting: See also Ezra c. 9.4. and Ezechiel c. 1.14. and 20.1. Thus
having shown the Excellency of this Worship, proved it from Scripture and
Reason, and answered the Objections, which are commonly made against it; which,
though it might suffice to the Explanation and Probation of our Proposition,
yet I shall add something more particularly of Preaching, Praying and Singing,
and so proceed to the following Proposition.

I. What reaching is with Protestants and Papists?

A studied Talk an hour or two.


XVIII. Preaching, as it is used both among Papists and Protestants, is for One
Man to take some Place or Verse of Scripture, and thereon speak for an hour or
two, what he has studied and premeditated in his Closet, and gathered together
from his own Inventions, or from the Writings and Observations of others; and
then having got it by heart, (as a Schoolboy does his Lesson) he brings it
forth, and repeats it before the People. And how much the fertiler and stronger
a Man's Invention is, and the more industrious and laborious he is in
Collecting such Observations, and can utter them with the Excellency of Speech
and Humane Eloquence, so much the more is he accounted an Able and Excellent
Preacher.

To this we Oppose, that when the Saints are met together, and every one
gathered to the Gift and Grace of God in themselves, True Preaching by the
Spirit.
he that Ministers, being acted thereunto by the arising of the Grace in
himself, ought to speak forth, what the Spirit of God furnishes him with; not
minding the Eloquence and Wisdom of Words, but the Demonstration of the Spirit
and of Power: and that either in the Interpreting some part of Scripture, in
case the Spirit, which is the good Remembrancer, lead him so to do; or
otherwise Words of Exhortation, Advice, Reproof and Instruction, or the sense
of some Spiritual Experiences: all which will still be agreeable to the
Scripture, though perhaps not relative to, nor founded upon any particular
Chapter or Verse, as a Text. Now let us Examine and Consider, which of these
two sorts of Preaching be most agreeable to the Precepts and Practice of Christ
and his Apostles, and the Primitive Church recorded in Scripture? For First, as
to their Preaching upon a Text, if it were not merely Customary or
Premeditated, but done by the Immediate Motion of the Spirit, we should not
blame it; but to do it, as they do, there is neither Precept nor Practice, that
ever I could observe in the New Testament, as a part of the Instituted Worship
thereof.

Object.
But they Allege, That Christ took the Book of Isaiah, and Read out of it, and
Spoke therefrom: and that Peter preached from a sentence of the Prophet Joel.

Answer, That Christ and Peter did it not, but as Immediately acted and moved
thereunto by the Spirit of God, and that without Premeditation; 1. Christ's and
Peter's speaking was not by Premeditation.
which, I suppose, our Adversaries will not deny: in which case we willingly
approve of it. But what is this to their Customary, Conned Way, without either
Waiting for, or expecting the Movings or Leadings of the Spirit? Moreover, that
neither Christ nor Peter did it, as a settled Custom or Form, to be constantly
practiced by all the Ministers of the Church, appears, in that most of all the
Sermons recorded by Christ and his Apostles in Scripture, were without this; as
appears from Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, Matthew. 5.1, etc. Mark 4.1, etc.
and Paul's Preaching to the Athenians, and to the Jews, etc. As then it
appears, that this Method of preaching is not grounded upon any
Scripture-precept, so the Nature of it is contrary to the preaching of Christ
under the New Covenant, as expressed and recommended in Scripture. For Christ in
sending forth his Disciples, expressly mentions, that they are not to speak of
or from themselves, or to forecast before hand; but that which the Spirit in
the same hour shall teach them: as is particularly mentioned in the Three
Evangelists, Matthew. 10.20. Mark 13.11. Luke 12.12. Now, if Christ gave this
Order to his Disciples, before he departed from them, as that, which they were
to practice during his Abode outwardly with them; much more were they to do it
after his Departure, since then they were more specially to receive the Spirit
to lead them in all things, and to bring all things to their remembrance, Joh.
14.26. And if they were to do so, when they appeared before the Magistrates and
Princes of the Earth, much more in the Worship of God, when they stand
specially before him; seeing, as it is above shown, his Worship is to be
performed in Spirit: and therefore after their receiving of the Holy Ghost it
is said, Acts 2.4. They spoke as the Spirit gave them Utterance; not what they
studied and gathered from Books in their Closets in a premeditated Way.
Franciscus Lambertus (before cited) speaks well, Franc. Lambertus his
Testimony against the Priests studied Inventions and Figments.
and shows their Hypocrisy, Tract. 5. of Prophecy, Chap. 3. saying; Where are
they now, that glory in their Inventions, who say, A brave Invention, A brave
Invention! This they call Invention, which themselves have made up; but what
have the Faithful to do with such kind of Inventions? It is not Figments, nor
yet Inventions, that we will have; but things that are Solid, Invincible,
Eternal and Heavenly, not which men have Invented, but which God has Revealed:
for if we believe the Scripture, our Invention profits nothing, but to
provoke God to our Ruin. And afterward; Beware (says he) that thou determine
not precisely to speak, what before thou have meditated, whatsoever it be: for
though it be lawful to determine the Text, which thou art to Expound, yet not
at all the Interpretation; lest if thou so do, thou take from the Holy Spirit
that, which is his, to wit, to direct thy speech, that thou may prophesy in
the Name of the Lord, denuded of all Learning, Meditation and Experience, and
as if thou had studied nothing at all; committing thy heart, thy tongue and
thy self wholly unto his Spirit, and trusting nothing to thy former studying or
meditation, but saying with thy self in great confidence of the Divine promise,
The Lord will give a word with much power unto those, that preach the Gospel.
But above all things be careful, thou follow not the manner of Hypocrites, who
have written almost word by word, what they are to say, as if they were to
Repeat some Verses upon a Theater, have learned all their preaching, as they
do, that act Tragedies. And afterward, when they are in the place of
prophesying, pray the Lord to direct their Tongue; but in the mean time
shutting up the way of the Holy Spirit, they determine to say nothing, but what
they have written. O unhappy kind of Prophets, yea, and truly Cursed, which
depend not upon God's Spirit, but upon their own Writings or Meditation! Why
prayest thou to the Lord, thou false Prophet, to give thee his Holy Spirit, by
which thou may^st speak things profitable, and yet thou repell'st the Spirit?
Why prefer'st thou thy Meditation or study to the Spirit of God? otherwise why
committ'st thou not thy self to the Spirit?

XIX. Secondly: This manner of Preaching, as used by them, 2. The words man's
Wisdom brings, beget not Faith.
considering that they also affirm, That it may be and often is performed by
men, who are Wicked, or void of true Grace, Cannot only not Edify the Church,
nor beget or nourish true Faith, but is destructive to it, being directly
contrary to the nature of the Christian and Apostolic Ministry mentioned in
the Scriptures. For the Apostles preached the Gospel not in the Wisdom of
words, lest the Cross of Christ should be of none effect, 1 Cor. 1.17. But this
Preaching not being done by the actings and movings of God's Spirit, but by
man's Invention and Eloquence in his own will, and through his natural and
acquired parts and Learning, is in the Wisdom of words; and therefore the Cross
of Christ is thereby made of none effect. The Apostles Speech and Preaching was
not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and
of Power; That the Faith of their Hearers should not stand in the Wisdom of
men, but in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.3, 4, 5. But this preaching having
nothing of the Spirit and Power in it, both the Preachers and Hearers
confessing, they Wait for no such thing, nor yet are oftentimes sensible of
it, must needs stand in the Enticing Words of man's Wisdom; since it is by the
mere Wisdom of man it is sought after, and the mere Strength of man's Eloquence
and Enticing words it is uttered: and therefore no wonder, if the Faith of
such, as hear and depend upon such preachers and preachings, stand in the
Wisdom of Men, and not in the Power of God. The Apostles declared, that they
spoke not in the words, which man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. But these Preachers confess, that they are Strangers to
the Holy Ghost, his Motions and Operations, neither do they Wait to feel them;
and therefore they speak in the words, which their own natural Wisdom and
Learning teaches them, mixing them in and adding them to such words, as they
steal of the Scripture and other Books, and therefore speak not, what the Holy
Ghost teaches.

Thirdly: This is contrary to the Method and Order of the primitive Church
mentioned by the Apostle, 3. True Church's method was to speak by Revelation.
1 Cor. 14.30, etc. where in Preaching every one is to Wait for his Revelation,
and to give place one unto another, according as things are Revealed. But here
there is no waiting for a Revelation, but the Preacher must speak, and not that
which is Reveald unto him, but what he has prepared and premeditated
beforehand.

Lastly: By this kind of Preaching the Spirit of God, which should be the Chief
Instructor and Teacher of God's People, 4. The Spirit is shut out by Priests to
be the Teacher.
and whose influence is that only, which makes all Preaching effectual and
beneficial for the edifying of Souls, is Shut out, and man's natural Wisdom,
Learning and Parts set up and Exalted; which (no doubt) is a great and chief
reason, why the Preaching among the generality of Christians is so Unfruitful
and Vnsuccessful: yea, according to this doctrine the Devil may preach, and
ought to be Heard also; seeing he both knows the Truth, and has as much
Eloquence as any. But what availes Excellency of speech, if the Demonstration
and Power of the Spirit be wanting, which touches the Conscience? We see, that
when the Devil confessed to the Truth, yet Christ would have none of his
Testimony: And as these pregnant Testimonies of the Scripture to prove this
part of Preaching to be contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; so do they also
prove that of ours, before affirmed, to be Conform thereunto.

Object.
XX. But if any Object after this manner, Have not many been Benefitted, yea,
and both Converted and Edified by the Ministry of such as have Premeditated
their Preachings; yea, and has not the Spirit often concurred by its Divine
Influence with preachings thus premeditated, so as they have been powerfully
born in upon the Souls of the Hearers to their Advantage.

I answer: Though that be granted, which I shall not deny; it will not infer,
that the thing was good in it self; more than, because Paul was met with by
Christ to the Converting of his Soul, riding to Damascus to persecute the
Saints, that he did well in so doing: Neither particular Actions, whole
Congregations (as we above observed) are to be measured by the Acts of God's
Condescension in times of Ignorance. But besides, Paul Persecuting was
Converted; is therefore Persecuting good?
it has oftentimes fallen out, that God, having a regard to the Simplicity
and Integrity either of the Preacher, or Hearers, has fallen in upon the heart
of a Preacher by his Power and holy Influence, and thereby has led them to
speak things, which were not in his premeditated Discourse, and which perhaps
he never thought of before: and those passing Ejaculations, and unpremeditated,
but living Exhortations have proved more beneficial and refreshful both to
Preacher and Hearers, than all their premeditated Sermons. But all that will
not allow them to Continue in these things, which in themselves are not
approved, but contrary to the practice of the Apostles, when God is raising up
a people to serve him according to the primitive purity and spirituality; yea,
such acts of God's Condescension in times of Darkness and Ignorance, should
engage all more and more to follow him, according as he Reveals his most
perfect and Spiritual Way.

XXI. Having hitherto spoken of Preaching, II. Of Prayer, how the Outward is
distinguished from the Inward.
now it is fit to speak of Praying, concerning which the like Controversy
arises. Our Adversaries, whose Religion is all for the most part Outside, and
such, whose Acts are the mere products of man's natural Will and Abilities, as
they can Preach, so can they Pray when they please, and therefore have their
set particular Prayers, I meddle not with the Controversies among themselves
concerning this; some of them being for set Prayers, as a Liturgy, others for
such, as are ex tempore Conceived: it suffices me, that all of them agree in
this, that the Motions and Influence of the Spirit of God are not Necessary to
be previous thereunto; and therefore they have Set Times in their public
Worship, as before and after preaching, The Priests set times to Preach and
Pray deny's the Spirit.
and in their private Devotion, as Morning and Evening, and before and after
meat, and other such occasions, at which they precisely set about the
performing of their Prayers, by speaking words to God, whether they feel any
Motions or Influence of the Spirit or not: so that some of the Chiefest have
confessed, that they have thus Prayed without the Motions or Assistance of the
Spirit, acknowledging, that they sinned in so doing; yet they said, they look
upon it as their Duty to do so, though to Pray without the Spirit be Sin. We
freely Confess, that Prayer is both very profitable, and a necessary Duty
commanded, and fit to be practiced frequently by all Christians; but as we can
Do nothing without Christ, so neither can we Pray without the concurrence and
assistance of his Spirit. But that the State of the Controversy may be the
better understood, let it be considered, First, That Prayer is twofold, Inward
and Outward. Inward Prayer is that Secret turning of the mind toward God,
whereby, What Inward Prayer is?
being secretly touched and awakened by the Light of Christ in the Conscience,
and so bowed down under the sense of its Iniquities, Unworthiness and Misery,
it looks up to God; and joining issue with the secret Shinings of the Seed of
God, it breaths toward him, and is constantly breathing forth some secret
Desires and Aspirations toward him. It is in this sense, that we are so
frequently in Scripture commanded to Pray continually, Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. Ephesians. 6.18. Luke 21.36. which cannot be understood of Outward Prayer,
because it were impossible, that men should be always upon their Knees,
expressing words of Prayer; and this would hinder them from the Exercise of
those Duties, no less positively Commanded. Outward Prayer is, when as the
Spirit (being thus in the Exercise of Inward Retirement, and feeling the
Breathing of the Spirit of God to arise powerfully in the Soul) receives
strength and liberty, What Outward Prayer is?
by a supperadded Motion and Influence of the Spirit, to bring forth either
audible Sighs, Groans or Words, and that either in public Assemblies, or in
private, or at Meat, etc.

As then Inward Prayer is necessary at all times, so, so long as the Day of
every man's Visitation lasts, Inward Prayer necessary at all times.
he never wants some Influence, less or more for the practice of it; because he
no sooner retires his Mind, and considers himself in God's Presence, but he
finds himself in the Practice of it.

Outward Prayer does require a superadded Influence.
The Outward Exercise of Prayer, as needing a greater and superadded Influence
and Motion of the Spirit, as it cannot be continually practiced, so neither can
it be so readily, so as to be effectually performed, until his Mind be some
time acquainted with the Inward; therefore such as are diligent and watchful in
their minds, and much retired in the Exercise of this Inward Prayer, are more
capable to be frequent in the use of the Outward, because that this holy
Influence does more constantly attend them, and they being better acquainted
with, and accustomed to the Motions of God's Spirit, can easily perceive and
discern them. And indeed, as such who are most diligent, have a near Access to
God, and he takes most delight to draw them by his Spirit to Approach and Call
upon him; so when many are gathered together in this watchful Mind, God does
frequently pour forth the Spirit of Prayer among them, and stir them thereunto,
to the edifying and building up of one another in Love. But because this
Outward Prayer depends upon the Inward, as that which must follow it, and
cannot be acceptably performed, but as attended with a superadded Influence and
Motion of the Spirit, therefore cannot we prefix set Times to pray outwardly,
We cannot fix set times to Speak and Pray to Tempe God.
so as to lay a necessity to speak words at such and such times, whether we
feel this heavenly Influence and Assistance, or no; for that we judge were a
Tempting of God, and a coming before him without due Preparation. We think it
fit for us to present our selves before him by this Inward Retirement of the
Mind, and so to proceed further, as his Spirit shall help us, and draw us
thereunto: and we find, that the Lord accepts of this, yea, and sees meet
sometimes to exercise us in this Silent place, for the Trial of our Patience,
without allowing us to speak further; that he may teach us not to Rely upon
outward performances, or satisfy our selves, as too many do, with the Saying
of our Prayers, and that our dependence upon him may be the more firm and
constant, to Wait for the holding out of his Scepter, and for his allowance to
draw near unto him, and with greater freedom and enlargement of Spirit upon our
hearts toward him. Yet nevertheless we do not deny, but sometimes God upon
particular occasions very suddenly, yea, upon the very first Turning-in of the
Mind, may give power and liberty to bring forth Words or Acts of outward
Prayer, so as the Soul can scarce discern any previous Motion, but the
Influence and Bringing forth thereof may be, as it were, simul and semel;
nevertheless that saying of Bernard is true, that All prayer is tepid, Such
Sin, as are neglecting Prayer.
which has not an Inspiration prevening it. Though we affirm, that none ought
to go about Prayer without this Motion: yet we do not deny, but such Sin, as
neglect Prayer; but their Sin is, in that they come not to that place, where
they may feel that, that would lead them thereunto. And therefore we question
not, but many, through neglect of this Inward Watchfulness and Retiredness of
Mind, miss many precious opportunities to Pray, and thereby are guilty in the
sight of God; yet would they Sin, if they should set about the Act, until they
first felt the Influence. For as he grossly offends his Master, that lies in
his Bed and sleeps, and neglects to do his Master's Business; A Forward and a
Careless Servant answer not their plight.
yet if such a one should suddenly get up, and without putting on his Clothes,
or taking along with him those necessary Tools and Instruments, without which
he could not possibly Work, should forwardly fall a doing to no purpose, he
would be so far thereby from Repairing his former Fault, that he would justly
incur a new Censure: and as one, that is Careless, and other ways Busied, may
miss to hear one speaking unto him, or even not hear the Bell of a Clock,
though striking hard by him; so may many through negligence miss to hear God
oftentimes calling upon them, and giving them access to pray unto him: yet
will not that allow them, without his liberty: in their own wills to fall to
Work.

And lastly: Though this be the only true and proper Method of Prayer, as that
which is alone acceptable to God; yet shall we not deny, but he oftentimes
answered the Prayers, and concurred with the Desires of some, especially in the
times of Darkness, In times of Darkness God did often hear their Prayers.
who have greatly Erred herein, so that some, that have sat down in formal
Prayer, though far wrong in the matter, as well as manner, without the
Assistance or Influence of God's Spirit, yet have found him to take occasion
there-through to break in upon their Souls, and wonderfully Tender and Refresh
them: yet, as in preaching and elsewhere has before been observed, that will
not prove any such Practices, or be a just Let to hinder any from coming to
practice that Pure, Spiritual and Acceptable Prayer, which God is again
restoring and leading his people into, out of all Superstitions and mere Empty
Formalities. The State of the Controversy, and our Sense thereof being thus
clearly stated, will both obviate many Objections, First* Spiritual Prayer
proved from Scripture.
and make the Answer to others more Brief and Easy. I shall first prove this
Spiritual Prayer by some short Considerations from Scripture; and then Answer
the Objections of our Opposers: which will also serve to Refute their Method
and Manner thereof.

XXII. And First, I. God's Spirit must be felt to move the Mind to Prayer.
That there is a Necessity of this Inward Retirement of the Mind, as previous
to Prayer, that the Spirit may be felt to draw thereunto, appears, for that in
most of those places, where Prayer is commanded, Watching is prefixed
thereunto, as necessary to go before; as Matthew. 24.42. Mark 13.33.14:38. Luke
21.36. From which it is evident, that this Watching was to go before Prayer.
Now to what end is this Watching, or what is it, but a Waiting to feel God's
Spirit to draw unto Prayer, that so it may be done acceptably? Ephesians. 6.1^.
For since we are to Pray always in the Spirit, and cannot Pray of our selves
without it Acceptably, This Watching must be for this end recommended to us, as
preceding Prayer, that we may Watch and Wait for the seasonable time to Pray,
which is, when the Spirit moves thereunto.

Secondly, II. We know not how to Pray, but as the Spirit helps.
This Necessity of the Spirit's Moving and Concurrence appears abundantly from
that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for, as we ought; but the
Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be
uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows, what is the Mind of the
Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of
God. Which first holds forth the Incapacity of Men, as of themselves, to Pray
or Call upon God in their own Wills, even such as have received the Faith of
Christ, and are in measure sanctified by it; as was the Churcb of Rome, to whom
the Apostle then wrote. Secondly: It holds forth that, which can only help and
assist Men to Pray, to wit, the Spirit, as that, without which they cannot do
it acceptably to God, nor beneficially to their own Souls. Thirdly, The Manner
and Way of the Spirit's Intercession; With sighs and groans, which are
unutterable. And Fourthly, That God receives graciously the Prayers of such,
as are presented and offered unto himself by the Spirit, knowing it to be
according to his Will. Now, it cannot be conceived, but this Order of Prayer
thus asserted by the Apostle, is most consistent with those other Testimonies
of Scripture, commending and recommending to us the Use of Prayer: From which I
thus argue; pray, neither can do it without the help of the Spirit, then it is
to no purpose for him, but altogether unprofitable to pray without it.

But the first is true; Therefore also the last.



III. Pray always ^n the Spirit, and Watching thereunto.
Thirdly: This Necessity of the Spirit to true Prayer appears from Ephesians. 6.
verse 18. and Jude ver. 20. where the Apostle commands to Pray always in the
Spirit, and Watching thereunto; which is as much, as if he had said, that we
were never to Pray without the Spirit, or Watching thereunto. And Jude shows
us, that such Prayers, as are in the Holy Ghost, only tend to the Building up
of our selves in our most holy Faith.

Fourthly: The Apostle Paul says expressly, 1 Cor. 12.3. That no man can say,
IV. Man cannot call Christ Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost: If then Jesus cannot be thus
rightly Named, but by the Holy Ghost; far less can he be acceptably Called
upon. Hence the same Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 14.15. That he will Pray with the
Spirit, etc. A clear Evidence, that it was none of his Method to Pray without
it.

V. God will not hear the Prayer of the Wicked.
But Fifthly, All Prayer without the Spirit is Abomination; such as are the
Prayers of the Wicked, Prove. 28.9. And the Confidence, that the Saints have,
that God will hear them, is, if they Ask any thing according to his Will, 1
John 5. verse 14: So, if the Prayer be not according to his Will, there is no
ground of Confidence, that he will hear. Now our Adversaries will acknowledge,
that Prayers without the Spirit are not according to the Will of God; and
therefore such, as Pray without it, have no ground to expect an Answer: For
indeed, to bid a Man Pray without the Spirit, is all one, as to bid one See
without Eyes, Work without Hands, or Go without Feet. And to desire a Man to
fall to Prayer, ere the Spirit in some measure less or more Move him thereunto,
is to desire a Man to See, before he Open his Eyes; or to Walk, before he Rise
up; or to Work with his Hands, before he Move them.

VI. All Sacrifice is Sin, not offered by the Spirit.
XXIII. But lastly; From this false Opinion of Praying without the Spirit, and
not judging it Necessary to be Waited for, as that, which may be felt to Move
us thereunto, has proceeded all the Superstition and Idolatry, that is among
those, called Christians, and those many Abominations, wherewith the Lord is
provoked, and his Spirit grieved: so that many deceive* themselves now, as the
Jews did of old, thinking it sufficient, if they pay their daily Sacrifices,
and offer their customary Oblations; from thence thinking all is well, and
creating a false peace to themselves, as the Whore in the Proverbs; because
they have Offered up their Sacrifices of Morning and Evening-Prayers. And
therefore it is manifest, that their constant Use of things does not a whit
influence their Lives and Conversations; Prove. 7.14.
but they remain, for the most part, as bad as ever. Yea, it is frequent both
among Papists and Protestants, for them first, to Leap, as it were, out of
their vain, light and profane Conversations at their set Hours and Seasons, and
fall to their Customory Devotion; and then, when it is scarce finished, and the
Words to God scarce out, the former profane Talk comes after it: so that the
same Wicked, Profane Spirit of this World acts them in both. If there be any
such thing, as Vain Oblations or Prayers, that are Abomination, which God
hears not, (as is certain there are, and the Scripture testifies, Isa. 66.3.
Jer. 14.12.) certainly, such Prayers as are acted in Man's Will, and by his own
Strength without God's Spirit, must be of that number.

XXIV. Let this suffice for Probation. Now I shall proceed to Answer their
Objections, when I have said something concerning Joining in Prayer with
others. Those that Pray together with one accord, [Concerning Joining in Prayer
with others.
use not only to Concur in their Spirits, but also in the Gesture of their
Body; which we also willingly approve of: It becomes those, who approach
before God to Pray, that they do it with bowed Knees, and with their Heads
uncovered; which is our practice.

But here arises a Controversy; Whether it be lawful to Join with Pray
formally, neither Waiting for the Motion of the Spirit, nor judging it
necessary.

We Answer, Not at all: Testimony in this thing we have suffered not a little.
For when it has fallen out, that either Accidentally, or to witness against
their Worship, How with Idolaters we cannot Join in Prayer.
we have been present during the same, and have not found it lawful for us to
Bow with them thereunto, they have often persecuted us not only with
Reproaches, but also with Strokes and cruel Beatings. For this Cause they use
to accuse us of Pride, Profanity and Madness, as if we had no Respect or
Reverence to the Worship of God, and as if we judged none could pray, or were
heard of God, but our selves. Unto all which, and many more Reproaches of this
kind we Answer briefly and modestly: That it suffices us, that we are found so
doing neither through Pride, nor Madness, nor Profanity; but merely, lest we
should hurt our Consciences: The Reason of which is plain and evident; for
since our Principle and Doctrine obliges us to believe, that the Prayers of
those, who themselves confess, they are not acted by the Spirit, are
Abominations; how can we, with a safe Conscience Join with them?

If they urge, That this is the Height of Incharitableness and Arrogance, Pray
by the Spirit's Motion, but they never; as if we were never deceived by Praying
without the Motion of the Spirit, and that they were never acted by it: seeing,
albeit they judge not the motion of the Spirit always necessary, they confess
nevertheless, that it is very profitable and comfortable, and they feel it
often influencing them; which that it sometimes falls out, we cannot deny.

To all which I Answer distinctly: If it were their known and avowed Doctrine,
not to Pray without the motion of the Spirit, and that seriously holding
thereunto, they did not bind themselves to Pray at certain, prescribed Times
precisely (at which Times they determine to Pray, though without the Spirit,
Incharitableness and Pride, Shall we confirm the Hypocrite when praying?
if we never Joined with them; and if they so taught and practiced, I doubt not
but it should be lawful for us so to do; unless there should appear some
manifest and evident Hypocrisy or Delusion. But seeing they profess, that they
pray without the Spirit, and seeing God has persuaded us, that such Prayers
are abominable, how can we with a safe Conscience join with an Abomination?
That God sometimes Condescends to them, we do not deny, (albeit now, when the
Spiritual Worship is openly proclaimed, and all are invited unto it, the Case
is otherwise, than in those Old Times of Apostasy and Darkness) and therefore
albeit any should begin to Pray in our presence, not expecting the Motion of
the Spirit, yet if it manifestly appear, that God in Condescension did concur
with such a one, then according to God's Will, we should not refuse to Join
also: But this is rare, lest thence they should be Confirmed in their false
Principle. And albeit this seem hard in our Profession, nevertheless it is so
Confirmed by the Authority both of Scripture and right Reason, that many
Convinced thereof, have embraced this Part before other Truths, which were
Easier, and as they seemed to some, Clearer. Among whom is memorable of late
years Alexander Skein, a Magistrate of the City of Aberdeen, a man very modest,
and very averse from giving Offense to others; who nevertheless, being overcome
by the Power of Truth in this matter, behoved for this Cause to separate
himself from the Public Assemblies and Prayers, and join himself unto us: Who
also gave the Reason of his Change, and likewise succinctly, but yet
substantially comprehended this Controversy concerning Worship in some short
Questions, which he offered to the public Preachers of the City, which I think
meet to insert in this place.

Whether or not should any Act of God's Worship be gone about, without the
Motions, Some Questions of A. Skein proposed to the Preachers, that are in
Aberd^en.
leadings and actings of the Holy Spirit?

2. If the Motions of the Spirit be necessary to every particular Duty, whether
should he be waited upon, that all our acts and words may be, according as he
gives utterance and assistance?

3. Whether every one, that bears the Name of a Christian, or professes to be a
Protestant, has such an uninterrupted measure thereof, that he may without
Waiting go immediately about the Duty?

4. If there be an Indisposition and Unfitness at some times for such
Exercises, at least as to the Spiritual and lively Performance thereof, whether
ought they to be performed in that case, and at that time?

5. If any Duty be gone about under pretense, that it is in Obedience to the
External Command, without the Spiritual Life and Motion necessary, whether such
a Duty thus performed, can in Faith be expected to be accepted of God, and not
rather reckoned as a bringing of strange fire before the Lord; Levit. 16.1.
seeing it is performed (at best) by the strength of Natural and Acquired
Parts, and not by the strength and assistance of the Holy Ghost, which was
Typified by the Fire, that came down from Heaven, which alone behoved to
consume the Sacrifice, and no other?

6. Whether Duties gone about in the mere strength of Natural and Acquired
Parts, (whether in public or in private) be not as really, upon the Matter, an
Image of Man's Invention, as the Popish Worship, though not so gross in the
outward appearance? And therefore whether it be not as real Superstition to
countenance any Worship of that nature, as it is to countenance Popish Worship,
though there be a difference in the Degree?

7. Whether it be a ground of Offense, or just Scandal, to countenance the
Worship of those, whose professed principle it is, neither to speak for
Edification, nor to Pray, but as the Holy Ghost shall be pleased to assist them
in some measure less or more; without which they rather choose to be silent,
than to speak without this Influence?

Unto these they answered but very coldly and faintly; whose Answers likewise
long ago he Refuted.

Seeing then, God has called us to his Spiritual Worship, and to testify
against the humane and voluntary Worships of the Apostasy, if we did not this
way stand Immovable to the Truth Revealed, but should Join with them, both our
Testimony for God would be weakened and lost, We must not loose our Witnessing
for God.
and it would be impossible steadily to propagate this Worship in the World,
whose Progress we dare neither retard nor hinder by any act of ours; though
therefore we should lose not only worldly Honor, but even our Lives. And
truly, many Protestants through their Vnsteadiness in this thing, for Politic
ends complying with the Popish Abominations, have greatly scandalized their
profession, and hurt the Reformation: as appeared in the example of the Elector
of Saxony; who, Elector of Saxony his Scandal given to Protestants.
in the Convention at Augsburg in the year 1530, being commanded by the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, to be present at the Mass, that he might carry the
Sword before him according to his place: which when he justly scrupled to
perform, his Preachers, taking more care for their Prince's Honor, than for
his Conscience, persuaded him, that it was Lawful to do it, against his
Conscience. Secondly: Objections against Spiritual Prayer, Answered.
Which was both a very bad Example, and great Scandal to the Reformation, and
displeased many; as the Author of the History of the Council of Trent in his
first book well observes. But now I hasten to the Objections of our Adversaries
against this Method of Praying.

XXV. First, They Object; That if such particular Influences were outward Acts
of Worship, then they should also be needful to inward Acts, as to wait, desire
and love God:

But this is absurd; Therefore also that from whence it follows.

I answer: That which was said in the State of the Controversy, general Duties,
there never wants an Influence, so long as the Day of a man's Visitation
lasts; during which time God is always near to him, and wrestling with him
by his Spirit to turn him to himself, so that, if he do but stand still, and
cease from his evil thoughts, the Lord is near to help him, etc. But as to the
outward Acts of Prayer, they need a more special Motion and Influence, as has
been proved.

Secondly, they Object; That it might be also alleged, that men ought not
Moral Duties, as Children to honor their Parents, men to do right to their
Neighbors, except the Spirit moved them to it.

I Answer, general Dutys betwixt man and man, and the particular express Acts
of Worship toward God; these are merely Spiritual, and commanded by God to be
performed by his Spirit, the other answer their End, as to them, whom they are
immediately directed to, and concern, though done from a mere natural Principle
of Self-love: even as Beasts have natural Affections one to another, and
therefore may be thus performed. Though I shall not deny, but that they are not
Works accepted of God, or beneficial to the Soul, but as they are done in the
fear of God, and in his blessing, in which his Children do all things; and
therefore are Accepted and Blessed, in whatsoever they do.

Thirdly, they Object; That, if a wicked man ought not to pray without a Motion
of the Spirit, because his prayer would be sinful; neither ought he to plough
by the same reason, Prove. 21.4.
because the ploughing of the wicked, as well as his praying is sin.

Objection is of the same nature with the former, and therefore may be answered
the same way; seeing there is a great difference betwixt Natural Acts, How Acts
of Nature differ from the Spirit's.
such as eating, drinking, sleeping, and seeking for sustenance for the body
(which things man has common with beasts) and Spiritual Acts. And it does not
follow, because man ought not to go about Spiritual acts without the Spirit,
that therefore he may not go about Natural acts without it: The Analogy holds
better thus, and that for the proof of our Affirmation, That as man for the
going about Natural acts needs his Natural Spirit; so to perform Spiritual acts
he needs the Spirit of God. That the Natural acts of the wicked and
unregenerate are Sinful, is not denied, though not as in themselves, but in so
far as man in that State is in all things Reprobated in the sight of God.

Fourthly, they Object; That wicked men may, according to this doctrine,
forbear to Pray for years together, alleging, they want a Motion to it.

false pretenses of Wicked men do nothing invalidate the Truth of this
Doctrine: for at that rate there is no Doctrine of Christ, which men might not
turn by. That they ought not to Pray without the Spirit, is granted; but then
they ought to come to that place of Watching, That wicked Men neglect the
Motions of the Spirit to Pray.
where they may be capable to feel the Spirit's Motion. They Sin indeed in not
Praying; but the Cause of this Sin is their not Watching: So their neglect
proceeds not from this doctrine, but from their disobedience to it; seeing if
they did Pray without this, it would be a double sin, and no fulfilling of the
Command to Pray: nor yet would their Prayer without this Spirit be useful unto
them. And this our Adversaries are forced to acknowledge in another case: for
they say, It is a duty incumbent on Christians to frequent the Sacrament of the
Lord's supper (as they call it;) Yet they say, No man ought to take it
unworthily: yea they plead, that such as find themselves unprepared, must
abstain; and therefore do usually Excommunicate them from the Table. Now though
according to them it be necessary to partake of this Sacrament, yet it is also
necessary, that those that do it, do first Examine themselves, lest they Eat
and Drink their own Condemnation: and though they reckon it sinful for them to
forbear, yet they account it more sinful for them to do it without this
Excommunication.

Fifthly, they Object Acts 8.22. where Peter commanded Simon Magus, that wicked
Sorcerer, to Pray; from thence inferring, That wicked men may and ought to Pray.

Answer: That in the citing of this place, as I have often observed, they Omit
the first and chiefest part of the verse, which is thus, Acts 8. v. 22. The
Sorcerer may Pray, but not without Repentance.
Repent therefore of this thy Wickedness, and Pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee. So here he bids him first Repent: now the
least measure of true Repentance cannot be without somewhat of that inward
Retirement of the Mind, which we speak of; and indeed, where true Repentance
goes first, we do not doubt, but the Spirit of God will be near to Concur
with, and Influence such to Pray to, and Call upon God.

And Lastly they Object, That many Prayers begun without the Spirit, have
proved effectual; and that the Prayers of wicked men have been heard and
Achab's.

This Objection was before solved: Acts of God's Compassion and Indulgence at
some times and to some persons, upon singular, extraordinary occasions, are not
to be a Rule of our Actions: For if we should make that the Measure of our
Obedience, great Inconveniences would follow; as is evident, and will be
acknowledged by all. Next, we do not deny, but Wicked men are sensible of the
Motions and Operations of God's Spirit oftentimes, before their Day be
expired, from which they may at times Pray acceptably; not as remaining
altogether Wicked, but as entering into piety, from whence they afterward fall
away.

XXVI. As to the singing of Psalms, there will not be need of any long
Discourse; for that the Case is just the same, as in the Two former of
Preaching and Prayer. We confess this to be a part of God's Worship, Of Singing
Psalms.
and very sweet and refreshful, when it proceeds from a true sense of God's
love in the heart, and arises from the Divine Influence of the Spirit; which
leads Souls to breath forth either a sweet Harmony, A Sweet harmonious Sound.
or words suitable to the present Condition, whether they be words formerly
used by the Saints, and recorded in Scripture, such as the Psalms of David, or
other words: as were the Hymns and Songs of Zacharias, Simeon and the blessed
Virgin Mary. But as for the formal, Customary Way of singing, But formal
Singing has no Scripture-Ground.
it has in Scripture no foundation, nor any Ground in true Christianity: yea
besides all the Abuses incident to Prayer and Preaching, it has this more
peculiar, that oftentimes great and horrid lies are said in the sight of God:
For all manner of wicked, Profane Singing of David's Conditions Rejected.
profane people take upon them to personate the Experiences and Conditions of
blessed David, which are not only false, as to them, but also as to some of
more Sobriety, who utter them forth. As where they will sing sometimes, Psalm.
22.14. My heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels: And verse
15. My Strength is dried up like a pot-sherd: and my Tongue cleaves to my
Jaws; and thou have brought me into the dust of death: And Psalm. 6.6. I am
weary with my groanings all the night make I my bed to swim: I water my Couch
with my tears: And many more, which those that speak, know to be false, as to
them; And sometimes will confess just after in their Prayers, that they are
Guilty of the Vices opposite to those Virtues, which but just before they have
asserted themselves Endued with. Who can suppose, that God accepts of such
Juggling? And indeed such Singing does more please the Carnal Ears of Men, than
the pure Ears of the Lord, who abhors all Lying and Hypocrisy.

That Singing then, that pleases him, must proceed from that, which is PVRE in
the heart, (even from the Word of Life therein) in and by which richly dwelling
in us, spiritual Songs and Hymns are returned to the Lord, according to that of
the Apostle, Col. 3.16.

But as to their Artificial Music, either by Organs, Artificial Music.
or other Instruments, or Voice, we have neither Example nor Precept for it in
the New Testament.

XXVII. But Lastly, The great Advantage of this true Worship of God, which we
profess and practice, is, that it consists not in Man's Wisdom, Arts or
Industry, neither needs the Glory, Pomp, Riches nor Splendour of this World to
beautify it; as being of a Spiritual and Heavenly and therefore too simple and
contemptible to the Natural Mind and Will of Man, that has no delight to abide
in it, because he finds no room there for his Imaginations and Inventions, No
Splendour of this World attends this Inward Worship.
and has not the opportunity to gratify his outward and carnal Senses: so that
this Form being observed, is not like to be long kept pure without the Power;
for it is of it self so naked without it, that it has nothing in it to invite
and tempt Men to Dote upon it, further than it is accompanied with the Power.
Whereas the Worship of our Adversaries being performed in their own Wills, The
Carnal Worship pleases Self.
is self-pleasing, as in which they can largely exercise their Natural Parts
and Invention: and (as to most of them) having somewhat of an Outward and
Worldly Splendour, delectable to the Carnal and Worldly Senses, they can
pleasantly continue in it, and satisfy themselves, though without the Spirit
and Power, which they make no ways Essential to the performance of their
Worship; and therefore neither wait for, nor expect it.

The Worship of the Quakers.
XXVIII. So that to conclude, The Worship, preaching, praying and singing,
which we plead for, is such, as proceeds from the Spirit of God, and is
always accompanied with its Influence; being begun by its Motion, and carried
on by the Power and Strength thereof: and so is a Worship purely Spiritual,
such as the Scripture holds forth, Joh. 4.23, 24. 1 Cor. 14.15. Ephesians. 6.18, etc.

Our Adversaries Worship.
But the Worship, preaching, praying and singing, which our Adversaries plead
for, and which we oppose, is a Worship, which is both begun, carried on and
concluded in Man's own Natural Will and Strength, without the motion or
influence of God's Spirit; which they judge they need not Wait for, and
therefore may be truly acted both as in the matter and manner, by the Wickedest
of Men. Such was the Worship and vain Oblations, which God always rejected, as
appears from Isa. 66.3. Jer. 14.12, etc. Isa. 1.13. Prove. 15.29. Joh. 9.31.

PROPOSITION XII. Concerning Baptism.
As there is one Lord, and one Faith, so there is one Baptism; which is not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience before
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And this Baptism is a Pure and
Spiritual thing, Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 6.4. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. John
3.30. 1 Cor. 1.17.
to wit, the Baptism of the Spirit and Fire, by which we are buried with him;
that being washed and purged from our Sins, we may walk in newness of Life: Of
which the Baptism of John was a Figure, which was Commanded for a time, and not
to continue for ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere Humane
Tradition, for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the
Scripture.

I. I Did sufficiently demonstrate in the Explanation and Probation of the
former Proposition, how greatly the Professors of Christianity, as well
Protestants as Papists, were degenerated in the matter of Worship, and how much
strangers to, and averse from that true and acceptable Worship, that is
performed in the Spirit of Truth, because of Man's Natural Propensity in his
fallen State to exalt his own Inventions, and to intermix his own Work and
Product in the Service of God: and from this Root sprung all the idle Worships,
Idolatries, From whence Idolatries and Heathen-Superstitions did spring.
and numerous Superstitious Inventions among the Heathens. For when God in
Condescension to his chosen people, the Jews, did prescribe to them by his
Servant Moses many Ceremonies and Observations, as Types and Shadows of the
Substance, which in due time was to be Revealed; which consisted for the most
part in Washings, outward Purifications and Cleansings, which were to continue,
until the time of the Reformation, until the Spiritual Worship should be set
up, and that God by the more powerful pouring forth of his Spirit, and guiding
of that Anointing, should lead his Children into all Truth, and teach them to
Worship him in a way more Spiritual and acceptable to him, though less
agreeable to the Carnal and Outward Senses. Yet notwithstanding God's
Condescension to the Jews in such things, we see, that that part in man, which
delights to follow its own Inventions, could not be restrained, nor yet
satisfied with all these Observations; but that oftentimes they would be
either declining to the other Superstitions of the Gentiles, or adding some New
Observations and Ceremonies of their own: To which they were so devoted, that
they were still apt to prefer them before the Command of God, and that under
the Notion of Zeal and Piety. This we see abundantly in the Example of the
Pharisees, The Pharisees the Chiefest Sect among the Jews.
the Chiefest Sect among the Jews, whom Christ so frequently reproves for
making void the Commandments of God by their Traditions, Matthew. 15.6, 9, etc.
This Complaint may at this day be no less justly made, as to many bearing the
Name of Christians, who have introduced many things of this kind, partly
borrowed from the Jews, Many things in Christendom are borrowed from the Jews
and Gentiles.
which they more tenaciously stick to, and more earnestly contend for, than for
the weightier Points of Christianity; because that Self yet alive and ruling in
them, loves their own Inventions better, than God's Commands. But if they can
by any means stretch any Scripture-practice, or Conditional precept or
permission, fitted to the Weakness or Capacity of some, or appropriate to some
particular Dispensation, to give some Color for any of these their Inventions,
they do then so tenaciously stick to them, and so obstinately and
obstreperously plead for them, that they will not patiently hear the most-solid
Christian Reasons against them. Which Zeal, if they would but seriously Examine
it, they would find to be but the prejudice of Education, and the Love of Self,
more than of God, or his Pure Worship. Of Sacraments so many Controversies.
This is verified concerning those things, which are called Sacraments; about
which they are very ignorant in Religious Controversies, who understand not,
how much Debate, Contention, Jangling and Quarrelling there has been among
those called Christians: So that I may safely say, the Controversy about them,
to wit, about their Number, Nature, Virtue, Efficacy, Administration and other
things, has been more than about any other Doctrine of Christ, whether as
betwixt Papists and Protestants, or among Protestants betwixt themselves. And
how great prejudice these Controversies have brought to Christians, is very
obvious; whereas the things contended for among them, are for the most part but
Empty Shadows, and mere Outside things: as I hope hereafter to make appear to
the patient and unprejudicate Reader.

II. That which comes first under Observation, is the Name [ Sacrament,] which
is strange, that Christians should stick to, and Contend so much for, since it
is not to be found in all the Scripture; but was borrowed from the Military
Oaths among the Heathens, from whom the Christians, The Name of Sacrament (not
found in Scripture) is borrowed from the Heathens.
when they began to Apostatize, did borrow many superstitious Terms and
Observations, that they might thereby Ingratiate themselves, and the more
easily gain the Heathens to their Religion: which practice, though perhaps
intended by them for good, yet, as being the fruit of Humane Policy, and not
according to God's Wisdom, has had very pernicious Consequences. I see not, how
any, whether Papists or Protestants, especially the latter, can in reason
quarrel with us for denying this Term, which it seems the Spirit of God saw not
meet to inspire the Penmen of the Scriptures to leave unto us.

But if it be said, That it is not the Name, but the Thing they Contend

I Answer: Let the Name then, as not being Scriptural, be laid aside, and we
shall see at first Entrance, Benefit will redound by laying aside this
Traditional Term, and betaking us to plainness of Scripture Language. For
presently the great Contest about the Number of them will evanish; seeing there
is no Term used in Scripture, that can be made use of, whether we call them
Institutions, Ordinances, Precepts, Commandments, Appointments or Laws, etc.
that would afford ground for such a Debate; since neither Papists will affirm,
that there are only Seven, or Protestants only Two of any of these
forementioned.

If it be said, That this Controversy arises from the Definition of the Thing,
as well as from the Name;

Definition of a Sacrament, whether as an outward, visible Sign, whereby inward
Grace is conferred, The Definition of Sacraments agrees to many other things.
or only signified, This Definition will agree to many things, which neither
Papists nor Protestants will acknowledge to be Sacraments. If they be expressed
under the Name of Sealing Ordinances, as some do, I could never see neither by
Reason nor Scripture, how this Title could be appropriate to them, more than to
any other Christian, Religious Performance: for that must needs properly be a
Sealing Ordinance, which makes the persons receiving it infallibly certain of
the Promise, What Sealing Ordinance does mean?
or Thing sealed to them.

It is so to them, that are faithful.

I Answer: So is praying and preaching, and doing of every good work: Seeing
the partaking or performing of the one gives not to any a more certain Title to
Heaven, Reason to call them so, more than the other.

Besides, we find not any thing called the Seal and Pledge of our Inheritance,
but the Spirit of God; it is by that we are said to be sealed, Ephesians. 1.14. and
4.30. which is also termed the Earnest of our Inheritance, 2 Cor. 1.22. and not
by outward Water or Eating and Drinking; which as the Wickedest of Men may
partake of, so many that do, do notwithstanding it go to Perdition. The outward
Washing does not cleanse the Heart
For it is not outward Washing with Water, that makes the Heart clean, by
which Men are fitted for Heaven: And as that which goes into the mouth, does
not defile a man, because it is put forth again, and so goes to the Dunghill;
neither does any thing, which Man eats, purify him, or fit him for Heaven.
What is said here in general, may serve for an Introduction not only to this
Proposition, but also to the other concerning the Supper. Of these Sacraments
(so called) Baptism is always first numbered, which is the Subject of the
present Proposition; in whose Explanation I shall first demonstrate and prove
Our Judgment; and then Answer the Objections, and Refute the Sentiments of our
Opposers. As to the first part, these things following, which are briefly
comprehended Proposition, come to be proposed and proved.

III. First: That there is but one Baptism, as well as but One Lord, etc.

Secondly, That this one Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is Water, but
a being baptized by the Spirit.

Thirdly: That the Baptism of John was but a Figure of this, and therefore,
Figure, to give place to the Substance; which though it be to continue, yet the
other is Ceased.

As for the first, viz. That there is but one Baptism, there needs no other
Text, Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; where the Apostle positively
and plainly affirms, One Baptism proved.
that as there is but One Body, One Spirit, One Faith, One God, etc. so there
is but One Baptism.

As to what is commonly alleged by way of Explanation upon the Text, That the
Baptism of Water and of the Spirit make up this One Baptism by virtue of the
Sacramental Union.

I Answer; This Exposition has taken place, Testimony of the Scripture, but
because it wrests the Scripture, to make it suit to their Principle of
Water Baptism: Whether Two Baptisms do make up the One?
and so there needs no other Reply, but to deny it, as being repugnant to the
plain words of the Text, which says not, That there are Two Baptisms, to wit,
one of Water, the other of the Spirit, which do make up the One Baptism; but
plainly, that there is One Baptism, as there is One Faith and One God. Now
there goes not Two Faiths, nor Two Gods, nor Two Spirits, nor Two Bodies,
whereof the one is Outward and Elementary, and the other Spiritual and pure, to
the making up of the One Faith, the One God, the One Body, and the One Spirit;
so neither ought there to go Two Baptisms to make up the One Baptism.

But Secondly: If it be said, The Baptism is but One, whereof Water is the one
part, to wit, the Sign; and the Spirit, the thing signified, the

I Answer: This yet more confirms our Doctrine: Water be only the Sign, it is
not the Matter of the One Baptism (as shall further hereafter by its Definition
in Scripture appear) and we are to take the One Baptism for the Matter of it,
not for the Sign, or Figure and Type, If Water be the Type, the Substance must
remain.
that went before. Even as where Christ is called the One Offering in
Scripture, though he was Typified by many Sacrifices and Offerings under the
Law, we understand only by the One Offering his Offering himself upon the
Cross: whereof though those many Offerings were Signs and Types; yet we say
not, that they go together with that Offering of Christ, to make up the One
Offering: so neither though Water Baptism was a Sign of Christ's Baptism, will
it follow, that it goes now to make up the Baptism of Christ. If any should be
so Absurd, as to affirm, That this One Baptism here were the Baptism of Water,
and not of the Spirit: that were foolishly to contradict the positive Testimony
of the Scripture, which says the contrary; as by what follows will more
amply appear.

Secondly: That this One Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a
Washing with Water, appears first, from the Testimony of John, the proper and
peculiar Administrator of Water Baptism, Matthew. 3.11. I indeed baptize you with
Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after Here John mentions two manners
of Baptisings, That had John's Baptism, had not therefore Christ's.
and two different Baptisms, the one with Water, and the other with the Spirit;
the one whereof he was the Minister of, the other whereof Christ was the
Minister of: and such as were baptized with the first, were not therefore
baptized with the second: I indeed baptize you, but he shall baptize you.
Though in the present time they were baptized with the Baptism of Water; yet
they were not as yet, but were to be baptized with the Baptism of Christ. From
all which I thus Argue, If those that were baptized with the Baptism of Water,
were not therefore baptized with the Baptism of Christ, Then the Baptism of
Water is not the Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

And again, If he, that truly and really administered the Baptism of Water, did
notwithstanding declare, That he neither could, nor did baptize with the
Baptism of Christ, Then the Baptism of Water is not the Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Therefore, etc.

And indeed to understand it otherwise, would make John's Words void of good
sense: For if their Baptisms had been all one, why should he have so precisely
Contradistinguished them? Why should he have said, that those whom he had
already baptized, should yet be baptized by another Baptism?

Object.
If it be urged, That Baptism with Water was the one part, and that with the
Spirit the other part, or Effect only of the former:

One Baptism is no Part nor Effect of the other.
I Answer: This Exposition contradicts the plain words of the Text. For he says
not, I baptize you with Water; and he, that comes after, shall produce the
Effects of this my Baptism in you by the Spirit, etc. or he shall accomplish
this Baptism in you; but he shall Baptize you. So then, if we understand the
word truly and properly, when he says, I Baptize you, as consenting, that
thereby is really signified, that he did baptize with the Baptism of Water; we
must needs, unless we offer Violence to the Text, understand the other part of
the sentence the same way; that where he adds presently, But he shall baptize
you, etc. that he understood it of their being truly to be baptized with
another Baptism, than what he did baptize with: Else it had been Nonsense for
him thus to have Contradistinguished them.

Secondly: This is further confirmed by the Saying of Christ himself, Acts 1.4,
5. Who were (...)
But wait for the promise of the Father, which (says he) ye have heard of me:
For John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence. There can scarce Two places of Scripture run more
parallel, than this does with the former a little before mentioned, and
therefore concludes the same way, as did the other. For Christ there grants
fully, that John completed his Baptism, as to the matter and substance of it:
John, says he, truly baptized with Water; which is as much as if he had said,
John did truly and fully Administer the Baptism of Water; But ye shall be
Baptized with, etc. This shows, that they were to be Baptized with some other
Baptism, than the Baptism of Water, and that, although they were formerly
Baptized with the Baptism of Water, yet not with that of Christ, which they
were to be Baptized with.

Thirdly; Peter observes the same distinction, Acts 11.16. Then remembered The
Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and that with Water differ.
John indeed Baptized with Water; but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost.
The Apostle makes this Application upon the Holy Ghost's falling upon them;
whence he infers, that they were then Baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit:
As to what is urged from his Calling afterward for Water, to it shall be
hereafter spoken. From all which Three Sentences relative one to another, first
of John, Secondly of Christ, and Thirdly of Peter, it does evidently follow,
that such, as were truly and really Baptized with the Baptism of Water, were
notwithstanding not Baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit; which is that of
Christ: and such as truly and really did administer the Baptism of Water, did
in so doing, not administer the Baptism of Christ. So that, if there be now but
One Baptism, as we have already proved, we may safely conclude, that it is that
of the Spirit, and not of Water; else it would follow, that the One Baptism,
which now continues, were the Baptism of Water, i. e. John's Baptism, and not
the Baptism of the Spirit, i. e. Christ's, which were most Absurd.

If it be said further, That though the Baptism of John, Object.
before Christ's was administered, was different from it, as being the Figure
only; yet now that both it as the Figure, and that of the Spirit as the
Substance, is necessary to make up the One Baptism.

I Answer: This urges nothing, unless it be granted also, both of them belong
to the Essence of Baptism; so that Baptism is not to be accounted as truly
Administered, where both are not: which none of our Adversaries will
acknowledge; but on the contrary account not only all those truly Baptized with
the Baptism of Christ, Water Baptism is not the true Baptism of Christ.
who are Baptized with Water, though they be uncertain, whether they be
Baptized with the Spirit, or not; but they even account such truly Baptized
with the Baptism of Christ, because Sprinkled, or Baptized with Water, though
it be manifest and most certain, that they are not Baptized with the Spirit, as
being Enemies thereunto in their hearts by wicked Works. So here by their own
Confession Baptism with Water is without the Spirit: Wherefore we may far safer
conclude, that the Baptism of the Spirit, which is that of Christ, is and may
be without that of Water; as appears in that Acts 11. where Peter testifies of
these men, that they were Baptized with the Spirit, though not then Baptized
with Water. And indeed, the Controversy in this, as in most other things,
stands betwixt us and our Opposers, in that they not only oftentimes prefer
the Form and Shadow to the Power and Substance, by denominating persons, as
Inheritors and Possessors of the thing, from their having the Form and Shadow,
though really wanting the Power and Substance; and not admitting those to be so
denominated, who have the Power and Substance, if they want the Form and
Shadow. This appears evidently, in that they account those truly Baptized with
the One Baptism of Christ, who are not baptized with the Spirit (which in
Scripture is particularly called the Baptism of Christ) if they be only batized
with Water; which themselves yet Confess to be but the Shadow, or Figure. The
Baptism of the Spirit needs no Sprinkling or Dipping in Water.
And moreover, in that they account not those, who are surely baptized with the
Baptism of the Spirit, baptized, neither will they have them so denominate,
unless they be also Sprinkled with, or Dipped in Water: But we on the Contrary
do always prefer the Power to the Form, the Substance to the Shadow; and where
the Substance and Power is, we doubt not to denominate the person accordingly,
though the Form be wanting. And therefore we always seek first and plead for
the Substance and Power, as knowing that to be indispensibly necessary; though
the Form sometimes may be dispensed with, and the Figure or Type may cease,
when the Substance and Antitype comes to be enjoyed; as it does in this Case,
which shall hereafter be made appear.

Fourthly: That the One Baptism of Christ is not a Washing with Water, appears
from 1 Pet. 3.21. The like Figure, whereunto even Baptism does also now save
us, The plainest Definition of the Baptism of Christ in all the Bible.
(not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. So plain a
definition of Baptism is not in all the Bible: and therefore, seeing it is so
plain, it may well be preferred to all the coined definitions of the
Schoolmen. The Apostle tells us first, Negatively, what it is not, viz. Not a
putting away of the filth of the flesh; then surely it is not a Washing with
Water, since that is so. Secondly, he tells us Affirmatively, what it is? viz.
The Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: where he Affirmatively Defines it to be the Answer (or Confession, as
the Syriack Version has it) of a good Conscience. Now, this Answer cannot be,
but where the Spirit of God has purified the Soul, and the Fire of his
Judgment has burned up the unrighteous nature; and those, in whom this Work is
wrought, may be truly said to be baptized with the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of
the Spirit and of Fire. Whatever way then we take this Definition of the
Apostle of Christ's Baptism, it confirms our sentence: for if we take the
first or Negative part, viz. That it is not a putting away of the filth of the
flesh; Water Baptism shut out from the Baptism of Christ.
then it will follow, that Water Baptism is not it, because that is a putting
away of the filth of the flesh. If we take the second and Affirmative
definition, to wit, That it is the Answer, or Confession of a good Conscience,
etc. then Water Baptism is not it; since, as our Adversaries will not deny,
Water Baptism does not always imply it, neither is it any necessary Consequence
thereof. Moreover, the Apostle in this place does seem especially to guard
against those, that might esteem Water Baptism the true Baptism of Christ;
because, (lest by the Comparison induced by him in the preceding verse,
betwixt the Souls that were saved in Noah's Ark, and us, that are now saved by
Baptism, lest, I say, any should have thence hastily concluded, that because
the former were saved by Water, this place must needs be taken to speak of
Water Baptism) to prevent such a mistake, he plainly affirms, that it is not
that, but another thing. He says not, that it is the Water, or the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, as accompanied with the Answer of a good
Conscience, whereof the one, viz. the Water, is the Sacramental Element
administered by the Minister; and the other, the Grace or thing signified,
Conferred by Christ; but plainly, That it is the putting away, etc. than which
there can be nothing more manifest to men unprejudicate and judicious.
Moreover, Peter calls this here, which saves, the (...), the Antitype or the
thing figured, whereas it is usually translated, as if the like Figure did now
save us; thereby insinuating, that as they were Saved by Water in the Ark, so
are we now by Water Baptism. But this Interpretation crosses his sense, he
presently after declaring the Contrary as has above been observed: and
likewise it would Contradict the Opinion of all our Opposers. The Protestants
deny Water Baptism its absolute necessity to men's Salvation: Although the Papists
say, none can be Saved without it, yet grant Exceptions.
For Protestants deny it to be absolutely necessary to Salvation: And though
Papists say, None are saved without it; yet in this they admit an Exception, as
of Martyrs, etc. and they will not say, that all that have it, are Saved by
Water Baptism: which they ought to say, if they will understand by Baptism (by
which the Apostle says, we are Saved) Water Baptism* for seeing we are saved
by this Baptism, as those that were in the Ark, were Saved by Water, and that
all those, that were in the Ark, were Saved by Water; it would then follow,
that all those, that have this Baptism, are Saved by it. Now this Consequence
would be false, if it were understood of Water Baptism; because many, by the
Confession of all, are baptized with Water, that are not saved: but this
Consequence holds most true, if it be understood, as we do, of the Baptism of
the Spirit; since none can have this Answer of a good Conscience, and abiding
in it, not be Saved by it.

Fifthly: That the One Baptism of Christ is not a Washing with Water, as
Definition of the One Baptism, The Effects and Fruits of the Baptism of Christ.
so it is also manifest from the Necessary Fruits and Effects of it, which are
three-times particularly expressed by the Apostle Paul: As first, Romans 6.3, 4.
where he says, That so many of them, as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death; buried with him by Baptism into death, that they
should walk in Newness of Life: Secondly, to the Gal. 3.27. he says
positively, For as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ: and Thirdly, to the Col. 2.12. he says, That they were Buried with him
in Baptism, and Risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God. It is
to be observed here, that the Apostle speaks generally, without any Exclusive
Term, but Comprehensive of all: he says not, Some of you, that were baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ; but As many of you: which is as much, as if he
had said, Every one of you, that has been baptized into Christ, has put on
Christ. Whereby it is evident, that this is not meant of Water Baptism, but of
the Baptism of the Spirit; because else it would follow, that, Which Efects
Water Baptism wants.
whosoever had been baptized with Water Baptism, had put on Christ, and were
Risen with him; which all acknowledge to be most Absurd. Now supposing, all the
Visible Members of the Churches of Rome, Galatia and Coloss had been outwardly
baptized with Water, (I do not say, they were; but our Adversaries will not
only readily grant it, but also contend for it) suppose (I say) the Case so,
they will not say, they had all put on Christ; since diverse Expressions in
these Epistles to them show the contrary. So that the Apostle cannot mean
Baptism with Water; and yet that he means the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the
Spirit, cannot be denied; or that the Baptism, wherewith these were baptized
(of whom the Apostle here testifies, that they had put on Christ) was the One
Baptism, I think none will call in question. Now admit, as our Adversaries
Contend, that many in these Churches, who had been baptized with Water, had not
put on Christ; it will follow, that notwithstanding that Water Baptism, they
were not baptized into Christ, or with the Baptism of Christ; seeing as many of
them, as were baptized into Christ, had put on Christ, etc. From all which I
thus Argue; If the Baptism with Water were the One Baptism, i. e. the Baptism
of Christ, as many as were baptized with Water, would have put on Christ.

But the last is false;

Therefore also the first.

And again; Since as many, as are baptized into Christ, i. e. with the One
Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, have put on Christ; Then Water Baptism
is not the One Baptism, viz. the Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

last.



Thirdly: Since John's Baptism was a Figure, and seeing, the Figure gives way
to the Substance, albeit the thing figured remain, to wit, the One Baptism of
Christ, yet the other cease, which was the Baptism of John.

I. John's Baptism was of Christ's a Figure.
That John's Baptism was a Figure of Christ's Baptism, I judge will not readily
be denied; but in case it should, it can easily be proved from the Nature of
it. John's Baptism was a being baptized with Water; but Christ's is a baptising
with the Spirit: Therefore John's Baptism must have been a Figure of Christ's.
But further, that Water Baptism was John's Baptism, will not be denied: That
Water Baptism is not Christ's Baptism, is already proved. From which does arise
the Confirmation of our Proposition, thus; Baptism to continue now, but the One
Baptism of Christ.

Therefore Water Baptism is not to continue now; because it is not the Baptism
of Christ.



II. John's Baptism is Ceased, our Opposers confess.
That John's Baptism is Ceased, many of our Adversaries confess: but, if any
should allege it otherwise, it may be easily proved by the express words of
John, not only as being insinuated there, where he Contradistinguisheth his
Baptism from that of Christ; but particularly where he says Joh. 3.30. He
[Christ] must Increase, but I [John] must Decrease. From whence it clearly
follows, that the Increasing or taking place of Christ's Baptism is the
Decreasing or abolishing of John's Baptism: so that, if Water Baptism was a
particular part of John's Ministry, and is no part of Christ's Baptism, as we
have already proved, it will necessarily follow, that it is not to Continue.

If Water Baptism had been to continue a Perpetual Ordinance of Christ in his
Church, he would either have practiced it himself, or Commanded his Apostles so
to do:

But that he Practiced it not, the Scripture plainly affirms, John 4.2. And
that he Commanded his Disciples to baptize with Water, I could never yet read.
[As for what is alleged, that Matthew. 28.19, etc. (where he bids them baptize)
is to be understood of Water Baptism, that is but to beg the Question, and the
grounds for that shall be hereafter examined.]

Therefore to baptize with Water is no Perpetual Ordinance of Christ to his
Church.

This has had the more Weight with me, because I find not any standing
Ordinance or Appointment of Christ necessary to Christians, for which we have
not either Christ's own Practice, or Command, as to obey all the Commandments,
which comprehend both our Duty toward God and Man, etc. and where the Gospel
requires more than the Law; which is abundantly signified in the 5 th and 6 th
Chapters of Matthew, and elsewhere. Besides as to the Duties of Worship, he
exhorts us to Meet, promising his Presence; commands to Pray, Preach, Watch,
etc. and gives Precepts concerning some Temporary things, as the Washing of one
another Feet, the breaking of Bread, hereafter to be discussed: only for this
one thing of baptising with Water (though so earnestly contended for) we find
not any Precept of Christ.

VI. But to make Water Baptism a necessary Institution of the Christian
Religion, which is pure and Spiritual, and not carnal and ceremonial, is to
derogate from the New Covenant-Dispensation, and set up the Legal Rites and
Ceremonies, of which this of Baptism, or Washing with Water was one; III. The
Gospel puts an end to Carnal Ordinances.
as appears from Heb. 9.10. where the Apostle speaking thereof, says, that it
stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse Baptisms, and Carnal Ordinances
imposed, until the time of Reformation: If then the Time of Reformation, or the
Dispensation of the Gospel, which puts an end to the Shadows, be come, then
such Baptisms and Carnal Ordinances are no more to be imposed. For how Baptism
with Water comes now to be a Spiritual Ordinance more than before in the time
of the Law, does not appear; seeing it is but Water still, and a Washing of the
Outward Man, and a putting away of the filth of the flesh still: and as before
those, that are so Washed, were not thereby made perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience, neither are they at this day; as our Adversaries must needs
acknowledge, and Experience abundantly shows. So that the matter of it, which
is a Washing with Water, and the Effects of it, which is only an Outward
Cleansing, being still the same, how comes Water Baptism to be less a Carnal
Ordinance now, than before?

If it be said, That God confers inward Grace upon some, that are now

So no doubt he did also upon some, Baptisms among the Jews.

Or if it be said; Because it is commanded by Christ now under the New

I Answer First, That Is to beg the Question; of which hereafter.

But Secondly, We find, That where the Matter of Ordinances is the same, and
the End the same, they are never accounted more or less Spiritual, because of
their different times. Now, was not God the Author of the Purifications and
Baptisms under the Law? Was not Water the Matter of them, which is so now? Was
not the End of them to signify an Inward Purifying by an Outward Washing? And
is not that alleged to be the End still? And are the necessary Effects or
Consequences of it any better now, Men are no more now than before by
Water Baptism inwardly cleansed.
than before, since men are now by virtue of Water Baptism, as a necessary
Consequence of it, no more than before made Inwardly Clean? And if some by
God's Grace, that are baptized with Water, are inwardly purified, so were some
also under the Law: so that this is not any Necessary Consequence nor Effect
neither of this nor that Baptism. It is then plainly Repugnant to Right Reason,
as well as to the Scripture-Testimony, to affirm that to be a Spiritual
Ordinance now, which was a Carnal Ordinance before, if it be still the same
both as to its Author, Matter and End, however made to vary in some small
Circumstances: The Spirituality of the New Covenant, and of its Worship
established by Christ, consisted not in such superficial Alterations of
Circumstances; but after another manner. Therefore let our Adversaries show us,
if they can, (without begging the Question, and building upon some one or other
of their own Principles denied by us) wherever Christ appointed or ordained any
Institution or Observation under the New Covenant, as belonging to the Nature
of it, or such a necessary part of its Worship, as is perpetually to Continue,
which being one in Substance and Effects, (I speak of necessary not accidental
Effects) yet because of some small difference in Form or Circumstance, was
before Carnal, notwithstanding it was commanded by God under the Law, but now
is become Spiritual, became commanded by Christ under the Gospel? And if they
cannot do this, then if Water Baptism was once a Carnal Ordinance, as the
Apostle positively affirms it to have been, it remains a Carnal Ordinance
still; and if a Carnal Ordinance, then no necessary part of the Gospel, or New
Covenant-Dispensation and if no necessary part of it, then not needful to
Continue, nor to be Practiced by such, as live and walk under this
Dispensation. But in this, as in most other things (according as we have often
observed) our Adversaries Judaize, and renouncing the Glorious and Spiritual
Privileges of the New Covenant, are sticking in, and cleaving to the Rudiments
of the Old, both in Doctrine and Worship, as being more suited and agreeable to
their Carnal Apprehensions and Natural Senses. But we on the contrary travel
above all to lay hold upon, and cleave unto the Light of the Glorious Gospel
Revealed unto us: And the Harmony of the Truth we profess in this, The Law
distinguished from the Gospel.
may appear, by briefly observing, how in all things we follow the Spiritual
Gospel of Christ, as contradistinguished from the Carnality of the Legal
Dispensation; while our Adversaries through rejecting this Gospel, are still
laboring under the burden of the Law, which neither they, nor their Fathers
were able to bear.

For the Law and Rule of the Old Covenant and Jews was Outward, written in
Tables of Stone and Parchments: The Outward Baptism, Worship, Law, distinguished
from the Inward.
So also is that of our Adversaries. But the Law of the New Covenant is Inward
and Perpetual, written in the heart; So is ours.

The Worship of the Jews was Outward and Carnal, limited to set Times, Places
and Persons, and Performed according to Set, Prescribed Forms and Observations;
so is that of our Adversaries. But the Worship of the New Covenant is neither
limited to Time, Place nor Person, but is performed in the Spirit, and in
Truth, and is not acted according to set Forms and Prescriptions, but as the
Spirit of God immediately acts, moves and leads, whether it be to Preach, Pray,
or Sing; and such is also our Worship.

So likewise the Baptism among the Jews under the Law was an outward Washing
with outward Water, only to Typifie an inward Purification of the Soul, which
did not necessarily follow upon those that were thus baptized: But the Baptism
of Christ under the Gospel, is the Baptism of the Spirit and of Fire; not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God: and such is the Baptism, that we labor to be baptized withal, and
contend for.

Water Baptism had been an Ordinance of the Gospel, then the Apostle Paul would
have been sent to Administer it; but he declares positively 1 Cor. 1.17. That
Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel. The Reason of that
Consequence is undeniable, because the Apostle Paul's Commission was as large,
as that of any of them, and consequently he being in special manner the Apostle
of Christ to the Gentiles, IV. That Water Baptism is no Badge of Christians,
like Circumcision of the Jews.
if Water Baptism (as our Adversaries contend) be to be accounted the badge of
Christianity, he had more need than any of the rest to be sent to baptize with
Water, that he might Mark the Gentiles Converted by him, with that Christian
Sign. But indeed, the Reason holds better thus: that since Paul was the Apostle
of the Gentiles, and that in his Ministry he does through all (as by his
Epistles appears) labor to wean them from the former Jewish Ceremonies and
Observations, (though in so doing he was sometimes undeservedly judged by others
of his brethren, who were unwilling to lay aside those Ceremonies; therefore
his Commission (though as full, as to the Preaching of the Gospel and New
Covenant-Dispensation, as that of the other Apostles) did not require of him,
that he should lead those Converts into such Jewish Observations, and Baptisms,
however that Practice was Indulged in, and Practiced by the other Apostles
among their Jewish Proselytes: for which cause he thanks God, that he baptized
so few; 1 Cor. 1.14.
intimating, that what he did therein, he did not by virtue of his Apostolic
Commission, but rather in Condescendence to their Weakness; Paul was not sent
to baptize.
even as at another time he Circumcised Timothy.

Our Adversaries, to evade the Truth of this Testimony, usually allege, That
by this is only to be understood, that he was not sent principally to baptize,
not that he was not sent at all.

But this Exposition, since it Contradicts the positive Words of the Text,
Affirmation of its Assertors, is justly rejected as spurious, until they bring
some better Proof for it: He says not, I was not sent principally to baptize;
but, I was not sent to baptize.

As for what they urge by way of Confirmation from other places of Scripture,
where [ not] is to be so taken, as where it is said, Confir.
I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, which is to be understood, Matthew. 9 13.
Hos. 6.6.
that God requires principally Mercy, not excluding Sacrifices*

I say, Refu^.
this Place is abundantly Explained by the following words [ and the knowledge
of God more than burnt-Offerings:] by which it clearly appears, that
burnt-Offerings, which are one with Sacrifices, are not Excluded. But there is
no such word added in that of Paul, and therefore the Parity is not
demonstrated to be alike, and consequently the Instance not sufficient; unless
they can prove, that it ought so to be admitted here: else we might interpret
by the same Rule all other Places of Scripture the same way. As where the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.5. That your Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of
Men, but in the Power of God; it might be understood, it shall not stand
Principally so. How might the Gospel by this liberty of Interpretation be
Perverted?

If it be said, That the Abuse of this Baptism among the Corinthians, in
dividing themselves according to the Persons, by whom they were baptized, made
the Apostle speak so; but that the Abuse of a thing does not abolish it.

I Answer; it is true, it does not, provided the thing be lawful and necessary;
Abuse abovesaid gave the Apostle occasion so to write: But let it from this be
considered, how the Apostle excludes Baptizing, not Preaching, tho the Abuse
[mark] proceeded from that no less, than from the other. For these Corinthians
did denominate themselves from those different Persons, by whose preaching (as
well as from those, by whom they were baptized) they were Converted, as by the
4, 5, 6, 7, and ver. of the 3 d Chapter may appear; and yet for to remove that
Abuse, the Apostle does not say, That Preaching is a standing Ordinanc^, and
not to be forborne.
he was not sent to preach; nor yet does he rejoice, that he had only preached
to a few; because preaching being a standing Ordinance in the Church, is not
because of any Abuse, that the Devil may tempt any to make of it, to be
forborne, by such as are called to perform it by the Spirit of God; wherefore
the Apostle accordingly Chap. 3.8, 9. informs them as to that, how to Remove
that Abuse: But as to Water Baptism, for that it was no standing Ordinance of
Christ, but only practiced as in Condescendence to the Jews, and by some
Apostles to some Gentiles also, there so soon as the Apostle perceived the
Abuse of, he let the Corinthians understand, how little stress was to be laid
upon it; by showing them that he was glad, that he had administered this
Ceremony to so few of them, and by telling them plainly that it was no part of
his Commission, neither that, which he was sent to Administer.

how we know, that Baptizing here is meant of Water, and not of the Spirit?
which if it be, then it will exclude Baptism of the Spirit, as well as of Water.

Water Baptism; which is more than manifest. For since the Apostle Paul's
Message was To turn people from Darkness to Light, and Convert them to God;
That which Converts to Christ, is Baptism of the Spirit.
and that as many as are thus turned and converted (so as to have the Answer of
a good Conscience toward God, and to have put on Christ, and be arisen with
him in Newness of Life) are baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit; but who
will say, that only these few mentioned there to be baptized by Paul, were come
to this? or that to turn or bring them to this Condition, was not (even
admitting our Adversaries Interpretation) as principally a part of Paul's
Ministry, as any other? Since then our Adversaries do take this place for
Water Baptism (as indeed it is) we may lawfully, taking it so also, urge it
upon them. Why the word Baptism and baptizing is used by the Apostle, where
that of Water, and not of the Spirit, is only understood, shall hereafter be
spoken to. I come Reasons alleged by such as plead for Water Baptism; which
are also the Objections used against the Discontinuance of it.

First, some Object, That Christ, who had the Spirit above measure was
notwithstanding baptized with Water. As Nic. Arnold. against this These, John
2.34.
Sect. 46 of his Theological Exercitation.

Circumcised; it will not follow from thence, that Circumcision is to Continue.
For it behoved Christ to fulfill all righteousness, Why Christ was baptized by
John.
not only the Ministry of John, but the Law also; therefore did he observe the
Jewish Feasts and Rites, and kept the Passover: it will not then follow, that
Christians ought to do so now. And therefore Christ Mat. 3.15. gives John this
reason of his being baptized, desiring him to Suffer it to be so now: whereby
he sufficiently intimates, that he intended not thereby to Perpetuate it, as an
Ordinance to his Disciples.

Secondly, they Object Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

great Objection, and upon which they build the Whole Superstructure: Whereunto
the first general and sound Answer is, by granting the whole; but putting them
to prove, that Water is here meant, since the Text is silent of it. What
Baptism Christ does mean in Matthew. 28?
And though in reason it be sufficient upon our part, that we Concede the whole
expressed in the place, but deny, that it is by Water, which is an Addition to
the Text; yet I shall premise some Reasons, why we do so; and then consider the
Reasons alleged by those, that will have Water to be here understood.

The First is a Maxim yielded to by all, that We ought not to go from the
literal signification of the Text, except some urgent necessity force us
thereunto:

But no urgent Necessity in this place forces us thereunto:

Therefore we ought not to go from it.

Secondly: That Baptism, which Christ commanded his Apostles, was the one
Baptism, id est, his own Baptism:

But the one Baptism, which is Christ's Baptism, is not with Water (as we have
already proved)

Therefore the Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles, was not
Water Baptism.

Thirdly: That Baptism, which Christ commanded his Apostles, was such, that as
many as were therewith baptized, did put on Christ:

But this is not true of Water Baptism;

Therefore, etc.

Fourthly: The Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles, was not John's
Baptism:

But Baptism with Water was John's Baptism: Therefore, etc.



But First, they allege, That Christ's Baptism, though a Baptism with did
differ from John 's, because John only baptized with Water unto Repentance, but
Christ commands his Disciples to baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; reckoning, that in this Form there lies a great difference betwixt
the Baptism of John, and that of Christ.

I Answer, as to that, John's Baptism was unto Repentance, Difference lies not
there, because so is Christ's also. For our Adversaries will not deny, but that
Adult Persons, that are baptized, ought, ere they be admitted to it, to Repent
and Confess their Sins; yea, and that Infants with a respect to, and
consideration of their Baptism, ought to Repent and Confess: So that the
difference lies not here; since this of Repentance and Confession agrees as
well to Christ's, as to John's Baptism. But in this our Adversaries are
divided: for Calvin will have Christ's and John's to be all one; Inst. lib. 4.
cap. 15. Sect. 7, 8. Yet they do differ, and the difference is, in that the one
is by Water, the other not, etc.

Secondly: As to what Christ says, in commanding them to baptize in the Name
of the Father, Son and Spirit, I confess that states the Difference, and it is
great; but that lies not only in admitting Water Baptism in this different
Form, by a bare expressing of these words: for as the Text says no such thing,
neither do I see, how it can be inferred from it. For the Greek is (...), that
is, into the Name; Of the Name of the Lord, how taken in Scripture.
now the Name of the Lord is often taken in Scripture for something else, than
a bare sound of words, or literal Expression, even for his Virtue and Power, as
may appear from Psalm. 54.3. Cant. 1.3. Prove. 18.10. and in many more. Now, that
the Apostles were by their Ministry to baptize the Nations into this Name,
Virtue and Power, and that they did so, is evident, by these Testimonies of
Paul above mentioned, where he says, That as many of them, as were baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ: The Baptism into the Name what it is?
this must have been a baptizing into the Name, i. e. Power and Virtue, and not
a mere formal Expression of words adjoined with Water Baptism; because, as has
been above observed, it does not follow, as a natural or necessary Consequence
of it. I would have those, who desire to have their Faith built upon no other
foundation, than the Testimony of God's Spirit, and Scriptures of Truth,
thoroughly to Consider, whether there can be any thing further alleged for this
Interpretation, than what the prejudice of Education and influence of Tradition
has imposed: perhaps it may stumble the unwary and inconsiderate Reader, as if
the very Character of Christianity were abolished, to tell him plainly, that
this Scripture is not to be understood of baptizing with Water, and that this
form of baptizing in the Name of Father, Son and Spirit, has no warrant from
Matthew. 28, etc.

For which, Whether Christ did prescribe a Form of Baptism in Matthew. 28?
besides the Reason taken from the Signification of [ the Name] as being the
Virtue and Power above expressed, let it be considered, that, if that had been
a Form prescribed by Christ to his Apostles, then surely, they would have made
use of that Form in the administering of Water Baptism to such, as they baptized
with Water; but though particular mention be made in diverse places of the Acts,
Who were baptized, and how? and though it be particularly expressed, that they
baptized such and such, as Acts 2.41:8.12, 13, 38:9.18:10.48:16.15:18.8. yet
there is not a word of this Form. And in two places, Acts 8.16:19.5. it is said
of some, that they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; by which it yet
more appears, that either the Author of this History has been very defective,
who having so often occasion to mention this, yet omitteth so substantial a
part of Baptism, (which were to accuse the Holy Ghost, by whose guidance Luke
wrote it) or else that the Apostle did no ways understand, that Christ by his
Commission Matthew. 28. did injoin them such a Form of Water baptism, seeing they
did not use it. And therefore it is safer to conclude, that what they did in
administering Water Baptism, they did not by virtue of that Commission; else
they would have so used it: for our Adversaries, I suppose, would judge it
great a Heresy to Administer Water Baptism without that, or only in the Name of
Jesus, without mention of Father or Spirit, as it is expressly said they did, in
the two places above cited.

Secondly, they say: If this were not understood of Water Baptism, it would be
a Tautology, and all one with Teaching.

How Teaching and Baptising differ.
I say, Nay: Baptizing with the Spirit is somewhat further, than Teaching or
Informing the Understanding; for it imports a Reaching to, and melting the
Heart, whereby it is turned, as well as the Understanding informed. Besides, we
find often in the Scripture, that Teaching and Instructing are put together
without any Absurdity or needless Tautology; and yet these two have a greater
Affinity, than teaching and baptizing with the Spirit.

Thirdly, they say; Baptism in this Place must be understood with Water,
because it is the Action of the Apostles; and so cannot be the Baptism of the
Spirit, which is the work of Christ, and his Grace, not of Man, etc.

Baptism with the Spirit, though not wrought without Christ and his Grace, is
Instrumentally done by Men fitted of God for that purpose; and therefore no
Absurdity follows, The Baptism with the Spirit Ascribed to Godly Men as
Instruments.
that Baptism with the Spirit should be expressed, as the Action of the
Apostles: for though it be Christ by his Grace, that gives Spiritual Gifts, yet
the Apostle, Romans 1.11. speaks of his Imparting to them Spiritual Gifts; and he
tells the Corinthians, that he had begotten them through the Gospel, 1 Cor.
4.15. And yet to beget People unto the Faith, is the work of Christ and his
Grace, not of Men. To Convert the Heart is properly the Work of Christ; and yet
the Scripture oftentimes ascribes it to Men, as being the Instruments: And
since Paul's Commission was To turn People from Darkness to Light, though that be
not done without Christ cooperating by his Grace, so may also baptizing with
the Spirit be expressed, as performable by Man, as the Instrument, tho the Work
of Christ's Grace be needful to concur thereunto: so that it is no Absurdity to
say, that the Apostles did Administer the Baptism of the Spirit.

Lastly, they say, That since Christ says here, that he will be with his
Disciples to the end of the World, therefore Water Baptism must continue so
long.

If he had been speaking here of Water Baptism, then that might have been
urged; false, nothing from thence can be gathered; He speaking of the Baptism
of the Spirit, which we freely confess does remain to the End of the World,
yea, so long as Christ's Presence abides with his Children.

Thirdly, they Object the Constant Practice of the Apostles in the Primitive
Church, who, they say, did always Administer Water Baptism to such, as they
Converted to the Faith of Christ; And hence also they further urge, that of
Matthew. 28. to have been meant of Water, or else the Apostles did not understand
it, in that in baptizing they used Water; or that in so doing they walked
without a Commission.

I Answer: That it was the Constant Practice of the Apostles, is denied; for we
have shown in the Example of Paul, that it was not so; since it were most
absurd to judge, that he Converted only these few, even of the Church of
Corinth, whom he says he baptized; nor were it less absurd to think, that that
was a constant Apostolic Practice, which he, that was not inferior to the
Chiefest of the Apostles, and who declares, he labored as much as they all,
rejoices, he was so little in. But further, the Conclusion inferred from the
Apostles Practice of baptizing with Water, to evince, How the Apostles Baptized.
that they understood Matthew. 28. of Water Baptism, does not hold: for tho they
baptized with Water, it will not follow, that either they did it by virtue of
that Commission, or that they mistook that place; nor can there be any Medium
brought, that will infer such a Conclusion. As to the other insinuated
Absurdity, That they did it without a Commission; It is none at all: for they
might have done it by a Permission, as being in use, before Christ's Death; and
because the people nursed up with Outward Ceremonies, could not be weaned
wholly from them. And thus they used other things, as Circumcision, and legal
Purifications, which yet they had no Commission from Christ to do, (to which we
shall speak more at length in the following Proposition concerning the Supper).

But if from the Sameness of the Word, because Christ bids them baptize, Object.
and they afterward in the Use of Water are said to baptize, it be judged
probable, that they did understand that Commission, Matthew. 28. to authorize
them to baptize with Water, and accordingly practiced it.

Although it should be granted, that for a season they did so far mistake it,
Water belonged to that Baptism, (which however I find no necessity of granting)
yet I see not any great Absurdity would thence follow. For it is plain, they
did mistake that Commission, as to a main part of it, for a Season; as where he
bids them, Go teach all Nations, since some time after they judged it unlawful
to Teach the Gentiles: yea, Peter himself scrupled it, until by a Vision
constrained thereunto; for which after he had done it, he was for a season
(until they were better informed) judged by the rest of his Brethren. Now, if
the Education of the Apostles, The Apostles did scruple the Teaching the
Gentiles.
as Jews, and their Propensity to adhere and stick to the Jewish Religion, did
so far influence them, that even after Christ's Resurrection and the pouring
forth of the Spirit, they could not receive nor admit of the Teaching of the
Gentiles, though Christ in his Commission to them, commanded them to Preach to
them; what further Absurdity were it to suppose, that through the like Mistake
the Chiefest of them, having been the Disciples of John, and his Baptism being
so much prized there among the Jews, that they also took Christ's Baptism,
intended by him of the Spirit, to be that of Water, which was John's, and
accordingly practiced it for a season, it suffices us, that, if they were so
mistaken (though I say not, that they were so) they did not always remain under
that Mistake: else Peter would not have said of the Baptism, which now says,
that it is not a putting away of the filth of the flesh; which certainly
Water Baptism is.

But further they urge much Peter's baptising Cornelius: in which they press
two things; First, That Water Baptism is used even to those, that had received
the Spirit. Secondly, That it is said positively, he commanded them to be
baptized, Acts 10.47, 48.

But neither of these does necessarily infer Water Baptism to belong to the New
Covenant-Dispensation, nor yet to be a Perpetual standing Ordinance in the
Church. Whether Peter's Baptizing some with Water makes it a standing Ordinance
to the Church?
For first, all that this will amount to, was, That Peter at that time baptized
these Men; but that he did it by virtue of that Commission, Matthew. 28. remains
yet to be proved. And how does the baptising with Water, after the receiving of
the Holy Ghost prove the Case more, than the use of Circumcision and other
Legal Rites acknowledged to have been acted by him afterward? Also no wonder,
if Peter, that thought it so strange (notwithstanding all that had been
professed before and spoken by Christ) that the Gentiles should be made
Partakers of the Gospel, and with great difficulty, not without a very
extraordinary Impulse thereunto, was brought to come to them, and eat with
them, was apt to put this Ceremony upon them; which being, as it were, the
particular Dispensation of John, the Forerunner of Christ, seemed to have
greater Affinity with the Gospel, than the other Jewish Ceremonies then used by
the Church: but that will no ways infer our Adversaries Conclusion. Secondly:
As to these Words, And he commanded them to be baptized, it declares matter of
Fact, not of Right; and amounts to no more, than that Peter did at that time
pro hic and nunc, Command those persons to be baptized with Water; which is not
denied: but it says nothing, that Peter commanded Water Baptism to be a
Standing and Perpetual Ordinance to the Church; neither can any Man of sound
Reason say (if he heed what he says) that a Command in matter of Fact to
Particular Persons, does infer the thing commanded to be of general obligation
to all, if it be not other ways bottomed upon some Positive Precept. Why does
Peter's Commanding Cornelius and his Household to be baptized at that time,
infer Water Baptism to Continue, more than his Constraining (which is more than
Commanding) the Gentiles in general to be Circumcised, and observe the Law? We
find, that at that time, when Peter baptized Cornelius, it was not yet
determined, whether the Gentiles should not be Circumcised; but on the
contrary, it was the most general Sense of the Church, that they should: And
therefore no wonder, if they thought it needful at that time, that they should
be baptized, which had more Affinity with the Gospel, and was a Burden less
grievous.

Fourthly, they Object from the Signification of the Word [baptize,] which is
as much as to Dip and Wash with Water, alleging thence, that the very Word
imports a being baptized witb Water.

Objection is very weak. For since baptizing with Water was a Rite among the
Jews, as Paulus Riccius shows, even before the coming of John; Baptizing
signifies Dipping or Washing with Water.
therefore that Ceremony received that Name from the Nature of the Practice, as
used both by the Jews and by John. Yea we find, that Christ and his Apostles
frequently make use of these Terms to a more Spiritual Signification:
Circumcision was only used and understood among the Jews, to be that of the
Flesh; but the Apostle tells us of the Circumcision of the Heart and Spirit,
made without hands. So that, tho Baptism was used among the Jews, only to
signify a Washing with Water, yet both John, Christ and his Apostles speak of a
being baptized with the Spirit and with Fire, which they make the Peculiar
Baptism of Christ, as contradistinguished from that of Water, which was John's
(as is above-shewen.) So that, tho Baptism among the Jews was only understood
of Water, yet among Christians it is very well understood of the Spirit without
Water; as we see Christ and his Apostles spiritually to understand things,
under the Terms of what had been Shadows before. Thus Christ speaking of his
Body, (tho the Jews mistook him) said, he would Destroy this Temple, and build
it again in three days; and many more, that might be instanced. But if the
Etymology of the Word should be tenaciously adhered to, it would militate
against most of our Adversaries, as well as against us. For the Greek (...)
signifies immergo, that is, to plunge and dip in, and that was the proper use
of Water Baptism among the Jews, and also by John, (...) immergo, intingo, to
plunge and dip in.
and the Primitive Christians, who used it; whereas our Adversaries for the
most part only Sprinkle a little Water upon the Forehead, which does not at
all answer to the word [ Baptism.] Yea those of old among Christians, Those
that of old used Water Baptism, were dipped and plunged; and those that were only
sprinkled, were not admitted to any Office in the Church: and why?
that used Water Baptism, thought this dipping and plunging so needful, that
they thus dipped Children: and forasmuch as it was judged, that it might prove
hurtful to some weak Constitutions, Sprinkling, to prevent that hurt, was
introduced; yet then it was likewise appointed, that such, as were only
sprinkled, and not dipped, should not be admitted to have any Office in the
Church, as not being sufficiently baptized. So that, if our Adversaries will
stick to the word, they must alter their Method of Sprinkling.

Fifthly, they object Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again of Water and of the
Spirit, etc. hence inferring the necessity of Water Baptism, as well as of the
Spirit.

But if this prove any thing, Water Baptism to be of absolute Necessity: and
therefore Protestants rightly affirm, The Water that Regenerates, is Mystical
and Inward.
when this is urged upon them by Papists, to evince the absolute Necessity of
Water Baptism, that [ Water] is not here understood of Outward Water; but
mystically of an Inward Cleansing and Washing. Even as where Christ speaks of
being baptized with Fire, it is not to be understood of outward material Fire,
but only of Purifying, by a Metonymy; because to purify is a proper Effect of
Fire, as to Wash and make clean is of Water. Therefore the Scripture alludes to
Water, where it can as little be so understood: As where we are said to be
Saved by the Washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Yea, Peter says expressly in
the place often cited, as In the 4 th Book of his Instit. chap. 15.
Calvin well observes; That the Baptism, which saves, is not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh: so that, since [ Water] cannot be understood of
outward Water, this can serve nothing to prove Water Baptism.

If it be said, that [Water] imports here necessitatem Praecepti, Object.
though not Medii.

I answer; That is first to take it for granted, outward Water is here
understood; the contrary whereof we have already proved. Next, Water and the
Spirit are placed here together, Necessitas Praecepti and Medii, urged.
[ Except a man be born of Water and the Spirit] where the Necessity of the one
is urged, as much as of the other. Now if the Spirit be absolutely necessary,
so will also Water: and then we must either say, that To be born of the Spirit,
is not absolutely necessary, which all acknowledge to be false; or else that
Water is absolutely necessary, which, as Protestants, we affirm and have
proved, is false: else we must confess, that Water is not here understood of
outward Water. For to say, that when Water and the Spirit are placed here just
together, and in the same manner, tho there be not any difference or ground for
it visible in the Text, or deduceable from it, That the necessity of Water is
here Praecepti, but not Medii, but the necessity of the Spirit is both Medii
and Praecepti; is indeed confidently to affirm, but not to prove.

Obj. VI.
Sixthly, and lastly they Object; That the Baptism of Water is a visible Sign
or Badge, to distinguish Christians from Infidels, even as Circumcision did the
Jews.

Answ.
I Answer; This says nothing at all, unless it be proved to be a necessary
Precept, or part of the New Covenant-Dispensation; it not being lawful to us to
impose outward Ceremonies and Rites, and say, they will distinguish us from
Infidels. Circumcision was positively commanded, and said to be a Seal of the
first Covenant; Circumcision a Seal of the first Covenant.

Water Baptism falsely called a Badge of Christianity.

Which is the Badge of Christianity?


but as we have already proved, that there is no such Command for Baptism, so
there is not any Word in all the New Testament, calling it a Badge of
Christianity, or Seal of the New Covenant: and therefore to conclude, it is so,
because Circumcision was so, (unless some better Proof be alleged for it, is
miserably to beg the Question. The professing of Faith in Christ, and a holy
Life answering thereunto, is a far better Badge of Christianity, than any
outward Washing; which yet answers not to that of Circumcision, since that
affixed a Character in the flesh, which this does not: so that a Christian is
not known to be a Christian by his being baptized, especially when he was a
Child; unless he tell them so much. And may not the Professing Faith in Christ
signify that as well? I know, there are diverse of those, called Fathers, that
speak much of Water Baptism, What the Fathers say of Water Baptism, and of the
Sign of the Cross.
calling it Character Christianitatis; But so did they also of the Sign of the
Cross, and other such things, justly rejected by Protestants. For the Mystery
of Iniquity, which began to work even in the Apostles days, soon spoiled the
Simplicity and Purity of the Christian Worship; so that not only many Jewish
Rites were retained, but many Heathenish Customs and Ceremonies introduced into
the Christian Worship; Heathenish Ceremonies introduced into the Christian
Worship.
as particularly that word [ Sacrament.] So that it is great folly, especially
for Protestants, to plead any thing of this from Tradition or Antiquity; for we
find, that neither Papists nor Protestants use these Rites exactly, as the
Ancients did, who in such things not walking by the most certain Rule of God's
Spirit, but doting too much upon Outward, were very Uncertain. For most of
them all, in the Primitive Time did wholly plunge and dip those they Baptized;
which neither Papists nor Protestants do: yea, several of the Fathers accused
some as Heretics in their Days, for holding some Principles common with
Protestants, concerning it; as particularly Augustine does the Pelagians, for
saying, That Infants dying Unbaptized, may be saved. And the Manichees were
Condemned, for denying, that Grace is universally given by Baptism; and Julian
the Pelagian by Augustine, for denying Exorcism and Insufflation in the use of
Baptism: All which things Protestants deny also. Exorcism or Adjuration.
So that Protestants do but foolishly to upbraid us, as if we could not show
any among the Ancients, that denied Water Baptism; seeing they cannot show any,
whom they acknowledge not to have been Heretical in several things, to have
used it, nor yet, who using it, did not use also the Sign of the Cross, and
other things with it, which they deny. There were some nevertheless in the
darkest Times of Popery, The Sign of the Cross.
who testified against Water Baptism. For one Alanus, page 103, 104, 107.
speaks of some in his Time, Many in former Ages testified against Water Baptism.
that were burnt for the denying of it: for they said, that Baptism had no
Efficacy either in Children or Adult Persons; and therefore Men were not
obliged to take Baptism: Particularly Ten Canonicks (so called) were burnt for
that Crime, by the Order of King Robert of France; as P. Pithaeus tells in his
Fragments of the History of Guienne. Which is also confirmed by one Johannes
Floracensis, a Monk (who was famous at that Time) in his Epistle to Oliva,
Abbot of the Ausonian Church: I will (says he) give you to understand
concerning the Heresy, that was in the City of Orleans on Childer-mass-day: for
it was true, if ye have heard any thing, that King Robert caused to be burnt
alive nigh Fourteen of that City, of the Chief of their Clergy, and the more
Noble of their Laics, who were hateful to God, and abominable to Heaven and
Earth; Ten Canonicks burnt at Orleans, and why?
for they did stiffly deny the Grace of Holy Baptism, and also the Consecration
of our Lord's Body and Blood. The time of this Deed is noted in these words by
Papir. Masson. in his Annals of France, lib. 3. in Hugh and Robert, Actum
Aureliae public^ Anno Incarnationis Domini 1022. Regni Roberti Regis 28.
Indictione 5. quando Stephanus Haeresiarcha and Accomplices ejus damnati sunt and
exusti Aureliae.

Now for their calling them Heretics and Manichees, we have nothing but the
Testimony of their Accusers; which will no more invalidate their Testimony for
this Truth against the use of Water Baptism, or give more ground to charge us,
as being one with Manichees, than because some, called by them Manichees, do
agree with Protestants in some things, that therefore Protestants are Manichees
or Heretics: which Protestants can no ways shun. For the Question is, Whether,
in what they did, they walked according to the Truth testified of by the Spirit
in the Holy Scriptures? So that the Controversy is brought back again to the
Scriptures, according to which I suppose I have formerly discussed it.

As for the latter part of the Thesis, The Baptism of Infants an Humane
Tradition.
denying the Use of Infant Baptism, it necessarily follows, from what is
abovesaid. For if Water Baptism be Ceased, then surely Baptising of Infants is
not warrantable. But those that take upon them to Oppose us in this matter,
will have more to do, as to this latter part: for after they have done, what
they can, to prove Water Baptism; it remains for them to prove, that Infants
ought to be Baptized. For he that proves Water Baptism Ceased, proves, that
Infant Baptism is vain: But he that should prove, that Water Baptism continues,
has not thence proved, that Infant Baptism is necessary; That needs something
further. And therefore it was a pitiful Subterfuge of Nic. Arnoldus against
this, to say, That the denying of Infant Baptism belonged to the Gangrene of
Anabaptists; without adding any further Probation.

PROPOSITION XIII. Concerning the Communion or Participation of the Body and
Blood of Christ.
The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is Inward and Spiritual, which
is the Participation of his Flesh and Blood, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Jo. 6.32, 33,
35. 1 Cor. 5.18.
by which the Inward Man is daily nourished in the Hearts of those, in whom
Christ dwells. Of which things the Breaking of Bread by Christ with his
Disciples was a Figure; which they even used in the Church for a time, who had
received the Substance, for the sake of the Weak. Even as Abstaining from
things strangled, and from Blood, Acts 15.20. John 13.14. Ja. 5.14.
the Washing one another Feet, and the Anointing of the Sick with Oil: All
which are commanded with no less Authority and Solemnity, than the former; yet
seeing they are but the Shadows of better things, they Cease in such, as have
obtained the Substance.

I. THE Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is a Mystery hid from all
natural men in their first, fallen and degenerate State; Partakers of it, nor
yet are they able to Discern the Lord's Body. And forasmuch as the Christian
World (so called) for the most part has been still laboring, working,
conceiving and imagining in their own natural and unrenewed Understandings
about the things of God and Religion, therefore has this Mystery much been hid
and sealed up from them, while they have been contending, quarrelling and
fighting one with another about the mere Shadow, Outside and Form, but
strangers to the Substance, Life and Virtue.

II. The Body then of Christ, which Believers partake of, is Spiritual, and not
Carnal; The Body and Blood of Christ is Spiritual.
and his Blood, which they drink of, is pure and Heavenly, and not humane or
Elementary, as Augustine also affirms of the Body of Christ, which is Eaten, in
his Tractat. Psalm. 98. Except a man eat my flesh, he has not in him Life
Eternal: And he says; The Words, which I spaek unto you, are Spirit and Life,
understand spiritually what I have spoken. Ye shall not eat of this Body, which
ye see, and drink this Blood, which they shall spill, that Crucify me -- I am
the Living Bread, which have descended from Heaven; he called himself the
Bread, who descended from heaven, exhorting that we might believe in him, etc.

asked then, What that Body, What that Flesh and Blood is?

answer: It is that Heavenly Seed, that Divine, Spiritual, Celestial Substance,
of which we spoke before in the 5 and 6 Propositions. This is that Vehiculum
Dei, What the heavenly Seed is, whereby formerly and also now Life and
Salvation was and is Communicated.
or Spiritual Body of Christ, whereby and where-through he communicates Life
to men, and Salvation to as many as believe in him, and receive him; and
whereby also man comes to have Fellowship and Communion with God. This is
proved from the 6 of John, from verse 32. to the end, where Christ speaks more
at large of this matter, than in any other place: and indeed, this Evangelist
and beloved Disciple, who lay in the Bosom of our Lord, gives us a more full
account of the Spiritual Sayings and Doctrine of Christ: and it is observable,
that though he speaks nothing of the Ceremony used by Christ, of Breaking Bread
with his Disciples, neither in his Evangelical Account of Christ's life and
sufferings, nor in his Epistles; yet he is more large in this account of the
Participation of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, than any of them all. For
Christ in this Chapter perceiving, that the Jews did follow him for Love of the
Loaves, desires them ( ver. 27.) to labor not for the Meat, which perishes,
but for that Meat, which endures for ever: but forasmuch as they, being Carnal
in their Apprehensions, and not understanding the Spiritual language and
Doctrine of Christ, did judge the Manna, which Moses gave their Fathers, to be
the most Excellent Bread, as coming from heaven; Christ, to rectify that
mistake, and better inform them, affirms First, That it is not Moses, but his
Father, that gives the true Bread from heaven, ver. 32. and 48. The Origin,
Nature and Effects of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ.
Secondly, This Bread he calls himself, ver. 35. I am the bread of Life: And
ver. 51. I am the living bread, which came down from heaven: Thirdly he
declares, that this Bread is his flesh, ver. 51. The bread, that I will give,
is my flesh: And ver. 55. For my flesh is meat indeed; and my blood is drink
indeed: Fourthly, The Necessity of partaking thereof, ver. 53. Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you? And
lastly, ver. 33. the blessed Fruits and necessary Effects of this Communion of
the Body and Blood of Christ; This Bread gives Life to the World, ver. 50. He
that eats thereof, dies not; ver. 58. He, that eats of this Bread, shall
live for ever, ver. 51. Whosoever eats this flesh, and drinks this blood, shall
live for ever, ver. 54. and he dwells in Christ, and Christ in him; ver. 56.
and shall live by Christ; ver. 57. From this large Description of the Origin,
Nature and Effects of this Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ it is apparent, that
it is Spiritual, and to be understood of a Spiritual Body, and not of that Body
or Temple of Jesus Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and in which he
walked, lived and suffered in the land of Judea; because that it is said, both
that it came down from Heaven, yea, that it is He, that came down from heaven.
Now all Christians at present generally acknowledge, that the outward Body of
Christ came not down from heaven, neither was it that part of Christ, which
came down from heaven. And to put the matter out of doubt, when the Carnal Jews
would have been so understanding it, he tells them plainly, ver. 63. It is the
Spirit, that quickens, but the flesh profits nothing. This is also founded
upon most sound and solid Reason; Solid Reasons, that it is his Spiritual Body,
Christ speaks of.
because that it is the Soul, not the Body, that is to be nourished by this
Flesh and Blood. Now outward flesh cannot nourish nor feed the Soul; there is
no proportion, nor Analogy betwixt them; neither is the Communion of the Saints
with God by a Conjunction and mutual Participation of Flesh, but of the Spirit:
He that is joined to the Lord, is One Spirit, not one Flesh. 1 Cor. 6.17.
For the Flesh (I mean outward flesh, even such as was that, wherein Christ
lived and walked, when upon earth; and not flesh, when transposed by a
Metaphor, to be understood Spiritually) can only partake of Flesh, as Spirit of
Spirit: As the Body cannot feed upon Spirit, neither can the Spirit feed upon
Flesh. And that the Flesh here spoken of, is spiritually understood, appears
further, in that that, which feeds upon it, shall never dye: but the Bodies
of all men once dye, yea it behoved the Body of Christ himself to dye. That
this Body and Spiritual Flesh and Blood of Christ is to be understood of that
Divine and Heavenly Seed before spoken of by us, appears both by the Nature and
Fruits of it. First it is said, It is that, which comes down from Heaven, and
gives life unto the World: now, this answers to that Light and Seed, which is
testified of Joh. 1. to be the Light of the world, and the Life of men. The
Spiritual Light and Seed is as Bread to the Hungry Soul.
For that Spiritual Light and Seed, as it receives place in men's hearts, and
room to spring up there, is as Bread to the hungry and fainting Soul, that is
(as it were) buried and dead in the lusts of the World, which receives life
again; and revives, as it tastes and partaketh of this heavenly Bread: and
they that partake of it, are said to Come to Christ; neither can any have it,
but by Coming to him, and believing in the appearance of his Light in their
hearts; by receiving which, and believing in it, the Participation of this Body
and Bread is known. And that Christ understands the same thing here by his
Body, Flesh and Blood, which is understood Joh. 1. by the Light inlightening
every man, and the Life, etc. appears, for the Light and Life spoken of Joh. 1.
is said to be Christ; he is the true Light: and the Bread and Flesh, etc.
spoken of in this 6 of John, is called Christ; I am the bread of Life, says
he. Again, They that received that Light and Life, John 1.12. obtained power to
become the Sons of God, by believing in his Name: so also here, Joh. 6.35. He,
that comes unto this Bread of Life, shall not Hunger; and he, that believes in
him, who is this Bread, shall never Thirst. So then, Christ's Outward and
Spiritual Body distinguished.
as there was the outward visible Body and Temple of Jesus Christ, which took
its Origin from the Virgin Mary; so there is also the Spiritual Body of Christ,
by and through which he, that was the Word in the beginning with God, and was
and is GOD, did Reveal himself to the Sons of men in all Ages, and whereby men
in all Ages come to be made partakers of Eternal Life, and to have Communion
and Fellowship with God and Christ. Of which Body of Christ, The Patriarchs did
eat of the Body, and Flesh and Blood of Christ.
and Flesh and Blood, if both Adam, and Seth, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham,
and Moses, and David, and all the Prophets and holy men of God had not eaten,
they had not had Life in them, nor could their inward Man have been nourished
Now, as the outward Body and Temple was called Christ, so was also this
Spiritual Body no less properly, and that long before that outward Body was in
Being. Hence the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4 that the Fathers did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: (for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock, that followed them; and that Rock was Christ.
This cannot be understood otherwise than of this Spiritual Body of Christ:
which Spiritual Body of Christ, tho it was the saving Food of the Righteous
both before the Law, and under the Law, yet under the Law it was veiled and
shadowed, and covered under diverse Types, Ceremonies and Observations; yea and
not only so, but it was veiled and hid, in some respect, under the outward
Temple and Body of Christ, or during the continuance of it; so that the Jews
could not understand Christ's Preaching about it, while on Earth: And not the
Jews only, but many of his Disciples judged it an hard saying, murmured at it*
and many from that time went back from him, and walked no more with him. Joh.
6.60, 66.
I doubt not, but there are many also at this day professing to be Disciples of
Christ, that do as little understand this matter, as those did, and are as apt
to be offended and stumble at it, while they are gazing and following after the
outward Body; and look not to that, by which the Saints are daily fed and
nourished. For as Jesus Christ, in obedience to the Will of the Father, did by
the Eternal Spirit offer up that Body for a Propitiation for the Remission of
Sins, and finished his Testimony upon Earth thereby, in a most perfect Example
of Patience, Resignation and Holiness, that all might be made Partakers of the
Fruit of that Sacrifice; so has he likewise poured forth into the Hearts of
all men a measure of that Divine Light and Seed, The Divine Light of Christ
does make the Saints Partakers of his Body.
wherewith he is Clothed, that thereby reaching unto the Consciences of all,
he may Raise them up out of Death and Darkness by his Life and Light; and they
thereby may be made Partakers of his Body, and there-through come to have
Fellowship with the Father and with the Son.

How and after what manner Man comes to partake of it, and to be fed by it?

I am the bread of Life, (says he) he that comes to me, shall never hunger;
he that believes in me, shall never thirst: Joh. 6.35. and 55.
And again; For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. So
whosoever thou art, that ask this Question, or read'st these lines, whether
thou account'st thy self a Believer, or really feel'st by a certain and sad
Experience, that thou art yet in the Unbelief, and find'st, that the outward
Body and Flesh of Christ is so far from thee, that thou can not reach it, nor
feed upon it: yea, tho thou have often swallowed down and taken-in that which
the Papists have persuaded thee to be the Real Flesh and Blood of Christ, The
Lutherans and Calvinians Opinion of the Flesh and Blood of Christ in the Supper
(so called.)
and have believed it to be so; tho all thy Senses told thee the Contrary: Or
(being a Lutheran) have taken that Bread, in and with, and under which the
Lutherans have assured thee, that the Flesh and Blood of Christ is: Or (being a
Calvinist) have partaken of that, which the Calvinists say (tho a Figure only
of the Body) gives them that take it, a Real Participation of the Body, Flesh
and Blood of Christ, though they neither know how, nor what way; I say, if for
all this, thou find'st thy Soul yet barren, yea hungry, and ready to starve for
want of something thou longest for; Know, that that Light, that discovers thy
Iniquity to thee, that shows thee thy Barrenness, thy Nakedness, thy Emptiness,
is that Body, that thou must partake of, and feed upon: but that till by
forsaking Iniquity thou turn'st to it, come unto it, receiv'st it, tho thou
may hunger after it, thou can not be Satisfied with it; for it has no
Communion with Darkness: 2 Cor. 6.14:
Nor can thou drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, and be
Partaker of the Lord's Table, and the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21? But as
thou suffer'st that small Seed of Righteousness to arise in thee, and to be
formed into a Birth, How the Inward Man is nourisht.
that New Substantial Birth, that is brought forth in the Soul, naturally feeds
upon, and is nourished by this Spiritual Body: yea, as this Outward Birth lives
not, but as it sucks-in Breath by the Outward Elementary Air; so this New Birth
lives not in the Soul, but as it draws-in and breathes by that Spiritual Air or
Vehicle: and as the Outward Birth cannot subsist without some Outward Body to
feed upon, some Outward Flesh, and some Outward Drink; so neither can this
Inward Birth, without it be fed by this Inward Body, by this Inward Flesh and
Blood of Christ, which answers to it after the same manner, by way of Analogy.
And this is most agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ concerning this matter.
For as without Outward Food the Natural Body has not Life; so also says
Christ, John 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you: And as the Outward Body eating Outward Food, lives thereby; so
Christ says, That he that eats him, shall live by him. John 6.57.
So it is this Inward Participation of this Inward Man, of this Inward and
Spiritual Body, by which Man is united to God, and has Fellowship and Communion
with him. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood (says Christ)
dwells in me, and I in him; John 6.56.
This cannot be understood of Outward Eating of Outward Bread: And as by this
the Soul must have Fellowship with God, so also in so far as all the Saints are
Partakers of this One Body, and this One Blood, they come also to have a
Joint-Communion. Hence the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.17. in this respect says, That
they being many, are One Bread, and One Body: And to the Wise among the
Corinthians he says, The Bread, which we break, is the Communion of the Body
of Christ. Ver. 16.
This is the True and Spiritual Supper of the Lord, which Men come to partake
of by hearing the Voice of Christ, and opening the Door of their Hearts, The
True Spiritual Supper of the Lord.
and so letting him in in the manner abovesaid, according to the plain words
of the Scripture, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock; if any man
hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him,
and he with me. So that the Supper of the Lord, and the Supping with the Lord,
and partaking of his Flesh and Blood, is no ways limited to the Ceremony of
Breaking Bread and Drinking Wine at particular times; but is truly and really
Enjoyed, as often as the Soul retires into, the Light of the Lord, and feels
and partakes of that Heavenly Life, by which the Inward Man is nourished: which
may be, and is often witnessed by the Faithful at all times; tho more
particularly, when they are Assembled together to Wait upon the Lord.

IV. But what Confusion the Professors of Christianity have run into concerning
this matter, is more than obvious; who (as in most other things they have done)
for want of a true Spiritual Understanding, have sought to Tie this Supper of
the Lord to that Ceremony Man is not tied to the Ceremony of Breaking Bread and
Drinking Wine, which Christ did use with his Disciples; This only was a Shadow.
(used by Christ before his Death) of Breaking Bread and Drinking Wine with his
Disciples. And tho they for most part agree in this general, yet how do they
Contend and Debate one against another? How strangely are they pinched, pained,
and straightened to make this Spiritual Mystery agree to that Ceremony? And what
monstrous and wild Opinions and Conceivings have they invented, to enclose or
affix the Body of Christ to their Bread and Wine? From which Opinion not only
the greatest, and fiercest, and most hurtful Contests, both among the
Professors of Christianity in general, and among Protestants in particular have
arisen; but also such Absurdities, irrational and blasphemous Consequences have
ensued, What makes the Christian Religion hateful to Jews, Turks and Heathens?

The Papists Faith of Christ his Flesh and Blood.


as make the Christian Religion odious and hateful to Jews, Turks and Heathens.
The Professors of Christianity do chiefly divide in this matter into Three
Opinions:

The first is of those that say: The Substance of the Bread is
Transubstantiated into the very Substance of that same Body, Flesh and Blood of
Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified by the Jews: so that
after the Words of Consecration (as they call them) it is no more Bread, but
the Body of Christ.

The Second is of such as say; The Substance of the Bread remains; but that
also that Body is in, The Lutherans Faith.
and with, and under the Bread: so that both the Substance of the Bread, and
the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ is there also.

The Calvinists Faith.
The Third is of those, that (denying both these) do affirm, That the Body of
Christ is not there Corporally, or Substantially; but yet that it is Really and
Sacramentally received by the Faithful, in the use of Bread and Wine: but how,
or what way it is there, they know not, nor can they tell; only we must believe
it is there, yet so, that it is only properly in Heaven.

It is not my Design to enter into a Refutation of these Several Opinions for
each of their Authors and Assertors have sufficiently Refuted one another; and
are all of them no less Strong both from Scripture and Reason, in Refuting each
their contrary Party's Opinion, than they are Weak in Establishing their own.
For I often have seriously observed in reading their respective Writings (and
so it may be have others) that all of them do notably, in so far as they Refute
the contrary Opinions; but that they are mightily pained, when they come to
Confirm and Plead for their own: Hence I necessarily must conclude, that none
of them had attained to the Truth and Substance of this Mystery. Let us see, if
Calvin, Inst. lib 4. cap. 17.
after he has Refuted the two former Opinions, be more successful, in what he
affirms and asserts for the Truth of his Opinion; who, after he has much
labored in overturning and Refuting the two former Opinions, plainly
confesses, that he knows not, what to affirm instead of them. For after he has
spoken much, and at last Concluded, That the Body of Christ is there, and that
the Saints must needs partake thereof; at last he lands in these words, ( Sect.
32.) But if it be asked me, J. Calvin's Faith of Christ his Flesh and Blood
Uncertain.
how it is? I shall not be ashamed to confess, that it is a Secret, too high
for me to comprehend in my Spirit, or explain in Words. Here he deals very
ingenuously; and yet who would have thought, that such a Man would have been
brought to this Strait in the Confirming of his Opinion? considering but a
little before, in the same Chapter ( Sect. 15.) he accuses the Schoolmen
among the Papists, (and I Confess truly) In that they neither Understand, The
like the Papists.
nor Explain to others, how Christ is in the Eucharist; which shortly after he
Confesses himself, he cannot do. If then the Schoolmen among the Papists do
neither Understand, nor yet can Explain to others their Doctrine in this
matter, nor Calvin can Comprehend it in his Spirit, (which I judge is as much,
as not to understand it) nor Express it in Words (and then surely he cannot
Explain it to others) then no Certainty is to be had from either of them. There
have been great Endeavors used for Reconcilement in this matter, both betwixt
Papists and Lutherans, Lutherans and Calvinists, yea, and Calvinists and
Papists, but all to no purpose: and many Forms and Manners of Expressions drawn
up, to which all might yield; which in the end proved in vain, seeing every one
understood them, and interpreted them their own way: and so they did thereby
but Equivocate and Deceive one another. The Reason of all this Contention is,
because they all wanted a clear Understanding of the Mystery, and were doting
about the Shadow and the Externals. For both the Ground and Matter of their
Contest lies in things extrinsick from, and unnecessary to the main Matter;
Satan busies people in outward Signs, Shadows and Forms, whilst they neglect
the Substance.
and this has been often the Policy of Satan to busy people, and amuse them
with outward Signs, Shadows and Forms, making them Contend about that; while in
the mean time the Substance is neglected. Yea, and in Contending for these
Shadows, he stirs them up to the practice of Malice, Heat, Revenge and other
Vices, by which he establishes his Kingdom of Darkness among them, and ruins
the Life of Christianity: for there has been more Animosity and Heat about this
one Particular, and more Bloodshed and Contention, than about any other. And
surely, they are little acquainted with the State of Protestants Affairs, What
has been hurtful to the Reformation.
who know not, that their Contentions about this have been more hurtful to the
Reformation, than all the Opposition they met with from their common
Adversaries. Now all these uncertain and absurd Opinions, and the Contentions
therefrom arising have proceeded from their all agreeing in Two General Errors
concerning this thing: Which being denied and receded from, as they are by us,
there would be an Easy Way made for Reconciliation, and we should all meet in
the one Spiritual and true Understanding of this Mystery; and as the
Contentions, so would also the Absurdities, which follow from all the Three
forementioned Opinions, Cease and fall to the ground.

The First of these Errors is, Two Errors the ground of the Contentions about
the Supper.
in making the Communion or Participation of the Body, Flesh and Blood of
Christ to relate to that outward Body, Vessel or Temple, that was born of the
Virgin Mary, and walked and suffered in Judea; whereas it should relate to the
Spiritual Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, even that Heavenly and Celestial
Light and Life, which was the Food and Nourishment of the Regenerate in all
Ages, as we have already proved.

The Second Error is, In tying this Participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ to that Ceremony, used by him with his Disciples in the breaking of
bread, etc. as if it had only a Relation thereto, or were only enjoyed in the
use of that Ceremony; which it neither has, nor is. For this is that Bread,
which Christ in his Prayer teaches to call for, terming it (...), i. e. the
supersubstantial Bread, as the Greek has it; and which the Soul partakes of,
without any relation or necessary respect to this Ceremony, as shall be
hereafter proved more at length.

These Two Errors being thus laid aside, and the Contentions arising therefrom
buried, all are agreed in the main Positions, viz. First, That the body, flesh
and blood of Christ is necessary for the nourishing of the Soul: Believers
Souls do really feed upon the Flesh and Blood of Christ.
Secondly, That the Souls of believers do really and truly partake and feed
upon the body, flesh and blood of Christ. But while Men are not content with
the Spirituality of this Mystery, going in their own Wills, and according to
their own Inventions, to strain and wrest the Scriptures, for to Tie this
Spiritual Communion of the flesh and blood of Christ, to outward Bread and
Wine, and such like Carnal Ordinances, no wonder, if by their carnal
Apprehensions they run into Heaps and Confusion, But because it has been
generally supposed, that the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ had some
special relation to the Ceremony of breaking Bread, I shall first Refute that
Opinion, and then proceed to consider the Nature and Use of that Ceremony; and
whether it be now necessary to Continue, answering the Reasons and Objections
of such as plead its Continuance, as a necessary and standing Ordinance of
Jesus Christ.

V. First, it must be understood, that I speak of a Necessary and Peculiar
Relation otherwise, I. That the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ has
no special Relation to the Ceremony of breaking Bread, neither by Nature, nor
Precept.
than in a general Respect: for, forasmuch as our Communion with Christ is, and
ought to be our greatest and chiefest work, we ought to do all other things
with a Respect to God, and our Fellowship with him; but a special and necessary
Respect or Relation is such, as where the two things are so tied and united
together, either of their own Nature, or by the Command of God, that the one
cannot be enjoyed, or at least is not (except very extraordinarily) without the
other. Thus Salvation has a necessary respect to Holiness, because without
Holiness no Man shall see God: And the Eating of the flesh and blood of Christ
has a necessary respect to our having Life, because if we eat not his flesh,
and drink not his blood, we cannot have Life: and our Feeling of God's Presence
has a necessary respect to our being sound Meeting in his Name, by Divine
Precept, because he has promised, Where two or three are Met together in his
Name, he will be in the midst of them: In like manner our receiving benefits
and blessings from God, has a necessary respect to our Praying, because if we
Ask, he has promised we shall Receive. Now the Communion or Participation of
the flesh and blood of Christ has no such necessary relation to the breaking
of Bread and drinking of Wine; For if it had any such necessary relation, it
would either be from the Nature of the Thing, or from some Divine Precept: But
we shall show, it is from neither; Therefore, etc. First, It is not from the
Nature of it, because to partake of the flesh and blood of Christ is a
Spiritual Exercise; and all confess, that it is by the Soul and Spirit, that we
become real Partakers of it, as it is the Soul, and not the Body, that is
nourished by it: but to eat Bread and drink Wine, is a natural Act, which in it
self adds nothing to the Soul, neither has any thing, that is Spiritual, in it;
because the most carnal Man that is, can as fully, as perfectly and as wholly
eat Bread and drink Wine, as the most Spiritual. Secondly, Their relation is
not by Nature, else they would infer one another: but all acknowledge, that
many eat of the Bread, and drink of the Wine, even that, which they say, is
Consecrate and Transubstantiate into the very Body of Christ, who
notwithstanding have not Life Eternal, have not Christ dwelling in them, nor do
live by him, The Patriarchs and Prophets without this Ceremony's Use were true
Partakers of Christ's Flesh and Blood.
as all do, who truly partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, without the Use
of this Ceremony; as all the Patriarchs and Prophets did, before this Ordinance
(as they account it) was Instituted. Neither was there any thing under the Law,
that had any direct or necessary Relation hereunto; tho to partake of the Flesh
and Blood of Christ in all Ages was indispensibly necessary to Salvation. For
as for the Paschal The Paschal Lamb (...) End^
Lamb, the whole End of it is signified particularly Exodus 13.8, 9. to wit, that
the Jews might thereby be kept in remembrance of their deliverance out of
Egypt. Secondly: It has no relation by Divine Precept; for if it had, it would
be mentioned in that, which our Adversaries account the Institution of it, or
else in the Practice of it by the Saints recorded in Scripture: but so it is
not. For as to the Institution, or rather Narration of Christ's Practice in
this matter, we have it recorded by the Evangelists Matthew, Mark and Luke. In
the first two there is only an Account of the matter of Fact, to wit, That
Christ brake Bread, and gave it his Disciples to eat, saying, This is my Body;
Matthew. 26 26. Mark 14.22 Luke 22.19.
and blessing the Cup, he gave it them to drink, saying, This is my Blood; but
nothing of any desire to them to do it. In the last, The Institution of the
Supper, or Narration of Christ's Practice therein.
after the Bread (but before the blessing or giving them the Wine) he bids them
do it in Remembrance of him: what we are to think of this Practice of Christ,
shall be spoken of hereafter. But what necessary Relation has all this to the
Believers partaking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ? The End of this for which
they were to do it (if at all) is to Remember Christ; which the Apostle yet
more particularly expresses 1 Cor. 11.26. To show forth the Lord's Death: But
to Remember the Lord, or Declare his Death, which are the special and
particular Ends annexed to the Use of this Ceremony, is not at all to partake
of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, neither have they any more necessary Relation
to it, than any other two different Spiritual Duties. For tho they, that
partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, cannot but Remember him; yet the Lord
and his Death may be Remembered (as none can deny) where his Flesh and Blood is
not truly partaken of. So that, since the very particular and express End of
this Ceremony may be witnessed (to wit, the Remembrance of the Lord's Death)
and yet the Flesh and Blood of Christ not partaken of, it cannot have had any
necessary Relation to it, else the partaking thereof would have been the End of
it, and could not have been attained without this Participation. But on the
contrary we may well infer hence, that since the positive End of this Ceremony
is not the partaking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, and that whoever
partakes of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, cannot but Remember him; that
therefore such need not this Ceremony to put them in Remembrance of him.

But if it be said, That Jesus Christ calls the Bread here his Body, Object.
and the Wine his Blood; therefore he seems to have had a special relation to
his Disciples partaking of his Flesh and Blood in the use of this thing.

I Answer; His calling the Bread his Body, and the Wine his Blood, Jesus Christ
in all things he did, yea and from the use of all Natural things, took occasion
to raise the Minds of his Disciples and Hearers to Spirituals. Hence from the
Woman of Samaria her drawing Water, The Woman of Samaria. John 4.14.
he took occasion to tell her of that Living Water, which whosoever drinks of,
shall never Thirst; which indeed is all one with his Blood here spoken of: Yet
it will not follow, that that Well or Water had any necessary relation to the
Living Water, The Well, the Loaves, the Bread and Wine Christ takes occasion
from to show the Inward Feeding.
or the Living Water to it, etc. So Christ takes occasion from the Jews
following him for the Loaves, to tell them of this Spiritual Bread and Flesh of
his Body, which was more necessary for them to feed upon; It will not therefore
follow, that their following him for the Loaves had any necessary relation
thereunto. So also Christ here being at Supper with his Disciples, takes
occasion from the Bread and Wine, which was before them, to signify unto them,
that as That Bread, which he brake unto them, and That Wine, which he blessed
and gave unto them, did contribute to the preserving and nourishing of their
Bodies; so was he also to give his Body, and shed his Blood for the Salvation
of their Souls: And therefore the very End proposed in this Ceremony, to those
that observe it, is to be a Memorial of his Death.

But if it be said, that the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.16. Calls the Bread which he
brake, the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup, the Communion of his
Blood.

I do most willingly subscribe unto it; but do deny, that this is understood of
the outward Bread, neither can it be evinced, but the Contrary is manifest from
the Context: for the Apostle in this Chapter speaks not one word of that
Ceremony. For having in the beginning of it shown them, how the Jews of Old
were made partakers of the Spiritual Food and Water; which was Christ, and how
several of them, through Disobedience and Idolatry fell from that good
Condition, he exhorts them by the Example of those Jews, whom God destroyed of
Old, to flee those Evils; showing them, that they (to wit, the Corinthians) are
likewise partakers of the body and blood of Christ, of which Communion they
would Rob themselves, if they did Evil, because they could not drink of the Cup
of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, and partake of the Lord's Table and of the
Table of Devils: ver. 21. Which shows, that he understands not here the using
of outward Bread and Wine; because those, that do Drink the Cup of Devils, and
Eat of the Table of Devils (yea, The Wickedest may take the outward Bread and
Wine.
the Wickedest of Men) may partake of the outward Bread and outward Wine. For
there the Apostle calls the bread One, ver. 17. and he says, We being many,
are One bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that One bread: Now if
the bread be One, it cannot be the Outward, or the Inward would be excluded;
whereas it cannot be denied, but that it is the partaking of the Inward bread,
and not the Outward, that makes the Saints truly One body and One bread. And
whereas they say, that the One bread here comprehends both the Outward and
Inward by virtue of the Sacramental Union; The Sacramental Union pretended, is
a Figment.
that indeed is to affirm, but not to prove. As for that Figment of a
Sacramental Union, I find not such a thing in all the Scripture, especially in
the New Testament: nor is there any thing can give a rise for such a thing in
this Chapter, where the Apostle, as is above observed, is not at all treating
of that Ceremony; but only from the Excellency of that Privilege, which the
Corinthians had, as believing Christians, To partake of the flesh and blood of
Christ, dehorts them from Idolatry, and partaking of the Sacrifices offered to
Idols, so as thereby to offend or hurt their weak brethren.

Object.
But that, which they most of all Cry out for in this matter, and are always
Noising, is from 1 Cor. 11. where the Apostle is particularly treating of this
matter; and therefore from some words here they have the greatest Appearance of
Truth for their Assertion: As ver. 27. where he calls the Cup, the Cup of the
Lord, and says; That they who eat of it, and drink it unworthily, are guilty
of the body and blood of the Lord, and ver. 26. Eat and drink their own
Damnation: intimating hence, that this has an immediate or necessary relation
to the body, flesh and blood of Christ.

Unwary Reader; yet being well considered, it does no ways Evince the matter in
Controversy. As for the Corinthians being in the Use of this Ceremony, why they
were so, and how that obliges not Christians now to the same, shall be spoken
of hereafter: it suffices at this time to consider, that they were in the Use
of it. Secondly, That in the Use of it they were guilty of, and committed
diverse Abuses. Thirdly: That the Apostle here is giving them Directions, how
they may do it aright, in showing them the right and proper Use and End of it.

These things being premised, let it be observed, that the very express and
particular Use of it, according to the Apostle is, To show forth the Lord's
Death, etc. But to show forth the Lord's Death, and partake of the flesh and
blood of Christ, are different things: He says not, As often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye partake of the Body and Blood of Christ; but, Ye
show forth the Lord's Death. So I acknowledge, that this Ceremony, by those
that practice it, has an Immediate Relation to the outward Body and Death of
Christ upon the Cross, as being properly a Memorial of it; but it does not
thence follow, that it has any inward or immediate Relation to Believers
communicating or partaking of the Spiritual Body and Blood of Christ, or that
Spiritual Supper spoken of Rev. 3.20. For though in a general way, as every
Religious Action in some respect has a common relation to the Spiritual
Communion of the Saints with God; so we shall not deny, but this has a
relation to others. Now for his calling the Cup, the Cup of the Lord, and
saying, They are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eat their own
Damnation, in not discerning the Lord's Body, etc. I answer, that this infers
no more Necessary Relation, than any other Religious Act; and amounts to no
more than this, that since the Corinthians were in the Use of this Ceremony,
Christ's Act of Bread and Wine is not Obliging others.
and so performed it as a Religious Act, they ought to do it Worthily, else
they should bring Condemnation upon themselves. Now, this will not more infer
the thing so practiced by them, to be a necessary, Religious Act, obligatory
upon others, than when Romans 14.6. the Apostle says, He that regards the Day,
regards it unto the Lord, it can be thence inferred, that the Days that some
esteemed and observed, did lay an obligation upon others to do the same. But
yet as he, that Esteemed a Day, and placed Conscience in keeping it, was to
Regard it to the Lord, and so it was to him, in so far as he dedicated it unto
the Lord, the Lord's Day, he was to do it Worthily; and if he did it
Unworthily, he would be guilty of the Lord's Day, and so keep it to his own
Damnation: so also such as observe this Ceremony of Bread and Wine, it is to
them the Bread of the Lord, and the Cup of the Lord, because they Use it as a
Religious Act: and forasmuch as their End therein is To show forth the Lord's
Death, and to Remember his Body, that was Crucified for them, and his Blood,
that was shed for them; If notwithstanding they believe, it is their Duty to do
it, and make it a matter of Conscience to forbear, if hey do it without that
due Preparation and Examination, which every Religious Act ought to be
performed in, then instead of truly Remembering the Lord's Death, and his Body
and his Blood, they render themselves Guilty of it, as being in one Spirit with
those, that Crucified him, and shed his Blood. The Pharisees Guilt of the Blood
of the Prophets.
though pretending with Thanksgiving and Joy to Remember it. Thus the Scribes
and Pharisees of Old, though in Memory of the Prophets they garnished their
Sepulchers, yet are said by Christ to be Guilty of their Blood. And that no
more can be hence inferred, appears from another saying of the same Apostle,
Romans 14.23. He that doubts, is damned, if he eat, etc. where he, speaking of
those that judged it unlawful to Eat flesh, etc* says, If they eat doubting,
they eat their own Damnation. Now it is manifest for all this, that either the
doing or forbearing of this, was to another, that placed no Conscience in it,
of no moment; so I say, he that Eats that, which in his Conscience he is
persuaded is not lawful for him to Eat, does Eat his own Damnation: so he also,
that places Conscience in Eating bread and wine, as a Religious Act, if he do
it Unprepared, and without that due Respect, wherein such Acts should be gone
about, he Eats and Drinks his own Damnation, not discerning the Lord's
Body, i. e. not minding what he does, to wit, with a special Respect to the
Lord, and by way of a special Commemoration of the Death of Christ.

VI. I having now sufficiently shown, what the True Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ is, how it is partaken of, and how it has no necessary Relation
to that Ceremony of bread and wine used by Christ with his Disciples; it is fit
now to consider the Nature and Constitution of that Ceremony (for as to the
proper Use of it, we have had occasion to speak of before) whether it be a
standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, obligatory upon all; II. Whether
this Ceremony be a necessary Part of the New Covenant, and Obligatory?
or indeed, whether it be any necessary part of the Worship of the New
Covenant-dispensation, or has any better or more binding Foundation, than
several other Ceremonies appointed and practiced about the same time, which the
most of our Opposers acknowledge to be ceased, and now no ways binding upon
Christians? We find this Ceremony only mentioned in Scripture in four places,
to wit, Matthew, Mark and Luke, and by Paul to the Corinthians: If any would
infer any thing from the frequency of the mentioning of it, that will add
nothing; for it being a matter of Fact, is therefore mentioned by the
Evangelists: and there are other things lets Memorable as often, yea oftener
mentioned. Matthew and Mark give only an Account of the matter of Fact, Mat.
26.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23.
without any Precept to do so afterward; simply declaring, that Jesus at that
time did desire them to Eat of the Bread, and Drink of the Cup: To which Luke
adds these words; This do in Remembrance of me. If we consider this Action of
Christ with his Apostles, there will appear nothing singular in it, for a
Foundation to such a strange Superstructure, as many in their Airy Imaginations
have sought to build upon it; for both Matthew and Mark press it as an Act done
by him, as he was Eating: Matthew says, And as they were Eating; The breaking
of Bread was no singular thing, but a Custom to Jews.

P. Riccius.


and Mark, And as they did Eat, Jesus took bread, etc. Now this Act was no
singular thing, neither any solemn Institution of a Gospel-Ordinance, because
it was a Constant Custom among the Jews (as Paulus Riccius observes at length
in his Celestial Agriculture); That when they did Eat the Passover, the Master
of the Family did take Bread, and bless it, and breaking it gave of it to the
rest; and likewise taking Wine, did the same: so that there can nothing further
appear in this, than that Jesus Christ, who fulfilled all Righteousness, and
also observed the Jewish Feasts and Customs, used this also among his Disciples
only, that, as in most other things he labored to draw their Minds to a
further thing; so in the use of this he takes occasion to put them in mind of
his Death and Sufferings, which were shortly to be: which he did the oftener
Inculcate unto them, for that they were Averse from believing it. And as for
that Expression of Luke; What it is, To do this in Remembrance of Christ?
Do this in Remembrance of me; it will amount to no more, than being the last
time, that Christ did Eat with his Disciples, he desired them, that in their
Eating and Drinking they might have regard to him; and by the Remembering of
that opportunity be the more stirred up to follow him diligently through
Sufferings and Death, etc. But what man of Reason, laying aside the Prejudice
of Education, and the Influence of Tradition, will say, that this Account of
the Matter of Fact given by Matthew and Mark, or this Expression of Luke, to do
that in Remembrance of him, will amount to these Consequences, which the
generality of Christians have sought to draw from it; as calling it
Augustissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum, Venerabile Altaris Sacramentum, The
Principal Seal of the Covenant of Grace, by which all the Benefits of Christ's
Death are sealed to Believers, and such like things? But to give a further
Evidence, how these Consequences have not any bottom from the Practice of that
Ceremony, nor from the words following, Do this, etc. let us consider another
of the like Nature, as it is at length expressed by John, c. 13. v. 3, 4, 8,
13, 14, 15. Jesus rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garments, and took a
Towel, and girded himself: After that he poured Water into a Basin, and began
to Wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel, wherewith he was
girded. Peter says unto him, Thou shall never Wash my Feet: Jesus answered
him, If I Wash thee not, thou have no part with me. Christ's Washing of Feet,
and its Manner related.
So after he had Washed their Feet, -- he said, Know ye, what I have done to
you? If I then your Lord and Master have Washed your Feet, ye also ought to
Wash one another Feet: For I have given you an Example, that ye should do, as
I have done to you. As to which let it be observed, that John relates this
Passage to have been done at the same time, with the other of breaking Bread,
both being done the Night of the Passover, after Supper. If we regard the
Narration of this, and the Circumstances attending it, it was done with far
more Solemnity, and prescribed far more punctually and particularly, than the
former. It is said only, As he was Eating, he took Bread; Compared with the
Breaking of Bread.
so that this would seem to be but an Occasional business: But here he rose up,
he laid by his garments, he girded himself, he poured out the Water, he Washed
their Feet, he wiped them with the Towel; He did this to all of them: which are
Circumstances surely far more observable, than those noted in the other. The
former was a Practice common among the Jews, used by all Masters of Families
upon that occasion; but this, as to the Manner and Person acting it, to wit,
for the Master to rise up, and Wash the Feet of his Servants and Disciples, was
more singular and observable. In the breaking of Bread, and giving of Wine it
is not pleaded by our Adversaries, nor yet mentioned in the Text, that he
particularly put them into the hands of all; but breaking it, and blessing it,
gave it the nearest, and so they from hand to hand: But here it is mentioned,
that he Washed not the Feet of one or two, but of many. He says not in the
former, that if they do not eat of that Bread, and drink of that Wine, they
shall be prejudiced by it; but here he says expressly to Peter, that if he Wash
not him, he has no part with him: which being spoken upon Peter's Refusing to
let him Wash his Feet, would seem to Import no less, than not the Continuance
only, but even the Necessity of this Ceremony. In the former he says, as it
were passingly, Do this in Remembrance of me; but here he sits down, again
he desires them to consider, what he has done, tells them positively, that as
he has done to them, so ought they to do to one another: The Washing one
another Feet was left, as an Example.
and yet again he redoubles that Precept, by telling them, he has given them an
Example, that they should do so likewise. If we respect the Nature of the
thing, it has as much in it, as either Baptism or the breaking of Bread,
seeing it is an outward Element of a cleansing Nature, applied to the outward
man, by the Command and the Example of Christ, to signify an inward purifying.
I would willingly propose this seriously to men, that will be pleased to make
use of that Reason and Understanding, that God has given them, and not be
Imposed upon, nor Abused by the Custom or Tradition of others, Whether this
Ceremony, if we respect either the Time, that it was Appointed in, or the
Circumstances, wherewith it was performed, or the Command enjoining the use of
it, has not as much to Recommend it for a standing Ordinance of the Gospel, as
either Water Baptism, or Bread and Wine, or any other of that kind? I wonder
then, what Reason the Papists can give, why they have not numbered it among
their Sacraments, except merely Voluntas Ecclesiae and Traditio Patrum.

But if they say, That it is used among them, Object.
in that the Pope and some other Persons among them use to do it Once a year to
some poor people.

I would willingly know, what Reason they have, All, as well as that of the
Eucharist (as they term it;) or whence it appears from the Text, that [ Do this
in remembrance of me] should be interpreted, that the Bread and Wine were every
day to be taken by all Priests, or the Bread every day, or every week by the
people; and that that other Command of Christ, Ye ought to do, as I have done
to you, etc. is only to be understood of the Pope, or some other persons, to be
done only to a few, and that once a Year? Surely, there can be no other Reason
for this difference assigned from the Text. The Protestants use not the Washing
of Feet.
And as to Protestants, who use not this Ceremony at all, if they will but open
their Eyes, they may see, how that by Custom and Tradition they are abused in
this matter, as were their Fathers in diverse Popish Traditions. For if we look
into the plain Scripture, what can be thence inferred to urge the one, which
may not be likewise pleaded for the other; or for laying aside the one, which
may not be likewise said against the Continuance of the other? If they say,
That the former of Washing the Feet, was only a Ceremony; What have they,
whence they can show, that this breaking of bread is more? If they say, That
the former was only a Sign of Humility and Purifying; What have they to prove,
that this was more? If they say, The one was only for a Time, and was no
Evangelical Ordinance: What has this to make it such, that the other wanted?
Surely, there is no way of Reason to evite this, neither can any thing be
alleged, that the one should Cease, and not the other; or the one Continue,
and not the other; but the mere Opinion of the Affirmers, which by Custom,
Education and Tradition has begotten in the hearts of people a greater
Reverence for and Esteem of the one, than the other: which, if it had fallen
out to be as much recommended to us by Tradition, would, no doubt, have been as
tenaciously pleaded for, as having no less Foundation in the Scripture. But
since the former, to wit, the Washing of one another Feet, is justly laid
aside, as not binding upon Christians, so ought also the other for the same
Reason.

VII. Bur I strange, that those, that are so clamarous for this Ceremony, The
breaking of Bread not used now in the same Manner, as Christ did.
and stick so much to it, take liberty to dispense with the Manner or Method,
that Christ did it in; since none, that ever I could hear of, who now do it,
use it in the same way, that he did it. Christ did it at Supper, while they
were Eating; but they do it in the Morning only by it self; What Rule walk they
by in this Change?

If it be said, These are but Circumstances, and not the Matter; and if the
Matter be kept to, Object.
the alteration of Circumstances is but of small moment.

Whole is but a Circumstance, which fell out at that time, when Christ did Eat
the Passover? For if we have regard to that, which alone can be pleaded for an
Institution, viz. these words, Do this in Remembrance of me; it does as
properly relate to the Manner, as Matter. For how may or can they Evince in
Reason, that these Words, Do this, only signify, Eat Bread, and drink Wine,
but it is no matter, when ye eat, nor how ye eat it; and not, as ye have seen
me eat at Supper with you, who take Bread, and break it, and give it you; and
take the Cup, and bless it, and give it you, so do ye likewise? And seeing
Christ makes no distinction in those words, Do this, it cannot be judged in
Reason, but to relate to the whole: Which if it do, all those, that at present
use this Ceremony among Christians, have not yet obeyed this Precept, nor
fulfilled this Institution for all their Clamors concerning it.

Object.
If it be said, That the Time and Manner of doing it by Christ was but
Accidentally, as being after the Jewish Passover, which was at Supper.

That the Whole was Accidental, as being the Practice of a Jewish Ceremony, as
is above observed; May it not the same way be urged, that the Drinking of Wine
was Accidental, as being the Natural Product of that Country? and so be
pleaded, that in those Countries, where Wine does not grow, as in our Nation of
Scotland, we may make use of Beer or Ale in the use of this Ceremony, The
breaking of Bread was a Jewish Ceremony.
or Bread made of other Grain, than that which Christ used? And yet would not
our Adversaries judge this an Abuse, and not right performing of this
Sacrament? Yea, have not Scruples of this kind occasioned no little Contention
among the Professors of Christianity? Contests between the Greek and Latin
Churches concerning the Leavened and Vnleaven'd Bread in the Supper.
What great Contest and Strife has been betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches
concerning the Bread? While the one will have it Unleavened, reckoning, because
the Jews made use of Unleavened Bread in the Passover, that it was such kind of
Bread, that Christ did break to his Disciples; the other Leavened: therefore
the Lutherans make use of Unleavened Bread, the Calvinists of Leavened? And
this Contest was so hot, when the Reformation was beginning at Geneva, that
Calvin and Farellus were forced to flee for it. Farellus.
But do not Protestants by these Uncertainties open a Door to Papists for their
excluding the People from the Cup? Will not [ Do this] infer positively, that
they should do In the same Manner, and at the same Time, which Christ did it,
as well as that they should use the Cup, and not the Bread only? Or what Reason
have they to dispense with the one, more than the Papists have to do with the
other? O! What strange Absurdities and Inconveniences have Christians brought
upon themselves, by superstitiously adhereing to this Ceremony! The Clergy
Taking Bread, do Bless and Give it; The Laity must Take and Eat, not Bless it.
Out of which Difficulties it is impossible for them to extricate themselves,
but by Laying it aside, as they have done others of the like Nature. For
besides what is abovementioned, I would gladly know, how from the words they
can be certainly Resolved, that these words [ Do this] must be understood to
the Clergy, Take, bless and break this Bread, and give it to others; but to the
Laity only, Take and eat, but do not bless, etc?

If it be said, That the Clergy was only present. Object.


Then will not that open a Door for the Popish Argument against the
Administration of the Cup to the People? That only the Clergy ought to partake
of this Ceremony, because they were only those present, to whom it was said, Do
this? But if this [ Do this] be extended to all, how comes it, all have not
liberty to obey it in both Blessing, Breaking and Distributing, as well as
Taking and Eating? Besides all these, even the Calvinian Protestants of Great
Britain could never yet accord among themselves about the Manner of Taking it,
Hot Contests about the Manner of Taking it, and to whom to Give it?
whether sitting, standing, or kneeling* whether it should be given to the
Sick, and those that are ready to Die, or not? Which Controversies, tho they
may be esteemed of small moment, yet have greatly contributed, with other
things, to be the occasion not only of much Contention, but also of Bloodshed
and Devastation: so that in this last respect the Prelatick Calvinists have
termed the Presbyterians Schismatical and Pertinacious, and they them again
Superstitious, Idolatrous and Papistical. Who then, that will open their Eyes,
but may see, that the Devil has stirred up this Contention and Zeal, to busy
men about things of small Moment, that greater Matters may be neglected, while
he keeps them in such a-do about this Ceremony; while they lay aside others of
the like Nature, as positively Commanded, and as punctually Practiced, and from
the Observation of which, half so many Difficulties will not follow?

VIII. How then? Have we not Reason, not finding the Nature of this Practice to
be Obligatory upon us, more than those other our Adversaries have laid aside,
to avoid all this Confusion, since those that use it, can never agree, neither
concerning the Nature, Efficacy, nor Manner of doing it? And this proceeds,
because they take it not plainly, as it lies in the Scripture; but have so much
mixed in their own Inventions: For would they take it, as it lies, it would
Import no more, than that Jesus Christ at that time did thereby signify unto
them, that his Body and Blood was to be Offered for them; and desired them,
that whenever they did eat or drink, they might do it in Remembrance of him,
or with a Regard to him, whose Blood was shed for them. Now that the Primitive
Church, gathered immediately after his Ascension, did so understand it, does
appear from their Use and Practice, if we admit those places of the Acts, where
Breaking of Bread is spoken of, to have relation hereto; which as our
Adversaries do, so we shall willingly agree to. As first, Acts 2.42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, etc. This cannot be understood of any other, than of their Ordinary
Eating; for as nothing else appears from the Text, By Breaking of Bread they
had all things in Common; Remembering the Lord.
so the Context makes it plain; for they had all things in common: and
therefore it is said, Ver. 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart. Who will not wilfully close their Eyes, may
see here, that their Breaking being joined with their Eating, shows, that
nothing else is here expressed, but that, having all things in Common, and so
continuing together, they also did Break their Bread, and Eat their Meat
together: In doing whereof I shall not doubt, but they Remembered the Lord, to
follow whom they had with so great Zeal and Resignation betaken themselves.
This is further manifest from Act. 6.26. For the Apostle having the Care and
Distribution of that Money, which the Believers having sold their Possessions
gave unto them, finding themselves overcharged with that Burden, appointed
Deacons for that business, that they might give themselves continually to
Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word; not leaving that, to serve Tables.
This cannot be meant of any Sacramental Eating, Deacons appointed for serving
at Tables.
or Religious Act of Worship; seeing our Adversaries make the distributing of
that the proper Act of Ministers, not of Deacons: and yet there can be no
Reason alleged, that that Breaking of Bread, which they are said to have
Continued in, and to have done from house to house, was other, than those
Tables, that the Apostles served; but here gave over, as finding themselves
overcharged with it. Now as the Increase of the Disciples did Incapacitate the
Apostles anymore to manage this; so it would seem, their further Increase and
Dispersing in diverse places hindered the Continuance of that Practice of having
things in common: But notwithstanding, so far at least to Remember or Continue
that ancient Community, they did at Certain Times Come together and Break Bread
together. Hence it is said Act. 20.7. that Paul coming to Troas, And upon the
first day of the week, At Troas the Supper till Midnight deferred.
when the Disciples came together to Break Bread, Paul preached unto them,
ready to depart on the Morrow, and continued his Speech until Midnight: Here is
no mention made of any Sacramental Eating, but only, that Paul took occasion
from their being together, to Preach unto them. And it seems, it was a Supper
they intended (not a Morning-bit of Bread and Sup of Wine;) else it is not very
probable, that Paul would from the Morning have preached, until Midnight. But
the 11 th Verse puts the matter out of Dispute, which is thus; When he
therefore was come up again, and had broken Bread, and eaten, and talked a long
while, even till break of day, so he departed: This shows, that the Breaking of
Bread was deferred till that time; for those words [ and when he had broken
Bread, and eaten] do show, that it had a relation to the Breaking of Bread
aforementioned, and that that was the time he did it. Secondly; These words
joined together, [ and when he had broken Bread, and eaten, and talked] show,
it was no Religious Act of Worship, They only did Eat for refreshing the Body;
but only an Eating for bodily Refreshment, for which the Christians used to
Meet together some time: and doing it in God's Fear and Singleness of Heart,
does notwithstanding difference it from the Eating or Feasting of profane
persons. And this by some is called a Love-Feast, By some called a Love-Feast.
or a being together not merely to feed their Bellies, or for outward Ends; but
to take thence occasion to Eat and Drink together in the Dread and Presence of
the Lord, as his people: which Custom we shall not Condemn; but let it be
observed, that in all the Acts there is no other, nor further mention of this
matter. But if that Ceremony had been some Solemn Sacrifice, as some will have
it, or such a Special Sacrament, as others plead it to be, it is strange, that
that History, that in many lesser things gives a particular Account of the
Christians Behavior, should have been so silent in the matter: Only we find,
that they used sometimes to Meet together to Break Bread and Eat. Now as the
Primitive Christians began by degrees to depart from that Primitive Purity and
Simplicity, so as to accumulate Superstitious Traditions, The Christians began
by degrees to depart from the Primitive Purity.
and vitiate the Innocent Practices of their Predecessors, by the intermixing
either of Jewish or Heathenish Rites; so also in the Use of this, very early
Abuses began to creep in among Christians, so that it was needful for the
Apostle Paul to Reform them, and Reprove them therefore, as he does at large, 1
Cor. 11. from ver. 17. to the End: 1 Cor. 11.17. Concerning the Supper (of the
Lord, so called) Explained.
which place we shall particularly Examine, because our Adversaries lay the
chief Stress of their matter upon it; and we shall see, whether it will infer
any more, than we have above granted. 1 st; because they were apt to use that
Practice in a superstitious mind beyond the true Use of it, as to make of it
some Mystical Supper of the Lord, he tells them, v. 20. That their Coming
together into one place is not to Eat the Lord's Supper; he says not, This is
not the right Manner to Eat, but, This is not to Eat the Lord's Supper; because
the Supper of the Lord is Spiritual, and a Mystery. 2 ly; he blames them, in
that they come together for the worse, and not for the better: the Reason he
gives of this, is v. 21. For in Eating every one has taken before his own
Supper; and one is hungry, and another is drunken: Here it is plain, that the
Apostle Condemns them for that, Why the Custom of Supping in Common was used
among Christians?
because this Custom of Supping in general was used among Christians for to
increase their Love, and as a Memorial of Christ's Supping with the Disciples,
that they should have so vitiated it, to Eat it apart, and to come full, who
had abundance, and hungry who had little at home; whereby the very Use and End
of this Practice is lost and perverted: And therefore he blames them, that they
do not either Eat this in Common at home, or reserve their Eating, till they
come all together to the Public Assembly. This appears plainly by the
following verse 22. Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye
the Church of God, and shame them, that have not? Where he blames them for
their Irregular Practice herein, in that they despised to Eat orderly, or
reserve their Eating to the Public Assembly, and so shaming such as not having
Houses, nor Fullness at home, came to partake of the Common Table; who, being
hungry, thereby were ashamed, when they observed others come thither full and
drunken. Those that without prejudice will look to the place, will see, this
must have been the Case among the Corinthians: For supposing the Use of this to
have been then, as now used either by Papists, Lutherans or Calvinists, it is
hard making sense of the Apostle's words, or indeed to conceive, what was the
Abuse the Corinthians committed in this thing? Having thus observed, what the
Apostle said above, because this Custom of Eating and Drinking together some
time, Tee Rise of that Custom.
had its rise from Christ's Act with the Apostles the Night he was betrayed;
therefore the Apostle proceeds, ver. 23. to give them an Account of that: For I
have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus, the same Night, in which he was betrayed, took Bread, etc. Those, that
understand the difference betwixt a Narration of a thing, and a Command, cannot
but see, if they will, that there is no Command in this place, but only an
Account of Matter of Fact: He says not, I received of the Lord, that as he
took Bread, so I should command it to you to do so also; there is nothing like
this in the place: yea, on the contrary ver. 25. where he repeats Christ's
Imperative Words to his Apostles, he places them so, as they import no
Command; This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me: That [ as
often] imports no Command of this Supper.
And then he adds; For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lord's Death, till he come: But these words [ as often] imports no
more a Command, than to say, As often as thou go to Rome, see the Capitol,
will infer a Command to me, to go thither.

But whereas they urge the last words, Ye show forth the Lord's Death, till he
come, Object.
insinuating, That this imports a necessary Continuance of that Ceremony, until
Christ come at the end of the World to Judgment.

Answer: They take Two of the Chief Parts of the Controversy here for granted,
without proof. First, that [ as often] imports a Command, the contrary whereof
is shown; neither will they ever be able to prove it. Secondly; Christ's
Outward and Inward Coming.
That this Coming is understood of Christ's last outward Coming, and not of his
Inward and Spiritual, that remains to be proved; whereas the Apostle might well
understand it of his Inward Coming and Appearance, which perhaps some of those
Carnal Corinthians, that used to come drunken together, had not yet known: and
others, being Weak among them, and inclinable to dote upon Outward, this might
have been Indulged to them for a season, and even used by those, who knew
Christ's Appearance in Spirit, (as other things were, of which we shall speak
hereafter) especially by the Apostle, who became Weak to the Weak, and All to
All, that he might save some. Now those Weak and Carnal Corinthians might be
permitted the Use of this, To Remember Christ's Death till he Come.

To Arise in the Heart.


to Show forth or Remember Christ's Death, till he come to Arise in them; for
tho such need those outward things to put them in mind of Christ's Death, yet
such, as are dead with Christ, and not only dead with Christ, but buried, and
also arisen with him, need not such Signs to Remember him. And to such
therefore the Apostle says, Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God:
but Bread and Wine are not these things, that are above; but are things of the
Earth. But that this whole matter was a mere Act of Indulgence and
Condescendence of the Apostle Paul to the Weak and Carnal Corinthians, appears
yet more by the Syriack And likewise the other Oriental Versions, as the
Araebick and Aethiopick, have it the same way.
Copy, which ver. 17. in his entering upon this matter, has it thus: In that,
concerning which I am about to command you (or instruct you,) I commend you
not, because ye have not gone forward, but are descended unto that, which is
less, (or of less Consequence:) Clearly importing, that the Apostle was
grieved, that such was their Condition, that he was forced to give them
Instructions concerning those Outward things; and doting upon which they show,
they were not gone forward in the Life of Christianity, but rather sticking in
beggarly Elements. And therefore ver. 20. the same Version has it thus; When
then ye meet together, ye do not do it* as* it is just ye should do in the day
of the Lord, ye eat and drink: Thereby showing to them, that To Meet together
to eat and drink Outward Bread and Wine, was not the Labor and Work of that
Day of the Lord. But since our Adversaries are so zealous for this Ceremony,
because used by the Church of Corinth, (though with how little ground, is
already shown) how come they to pass over far more positive Commands of the
Apostles, To abstain from things strangled.
as matters of no moment? As First, Acts 15.26. where the Apostles peremptorily
Command even the Gentiles, as that, which was the Mind of the Holy Ghost, To
abstain from things strangled, and from Blood? And Ja. 5.14. where it is
expressly Commanded, The Anointing with Oil.
That the Sick be Anointed with Oil in the Name of the Lord.

If they say, These were only Temporary things, but not to Continue. Object.


What have they more to show for this, there being no express Repeal of them?

If they say; The Repeal is implied, because the Apostle says, Object.
We ought not to be jugded in Meats and Drinks.

I admit the Answer; other Practice? Surely not at all: nor can there be any
thing urged for the one, more than for the other, but Custom and Tradition.

And for that of James, they say, There followed a Miracle upon it, Object.
to wit, the Recovery of the Sick; But this being Ceased, so should the
Ceremony.

Though this might many ways be answered, to wit; Prayer then might as well be
forborne, A Ceremony ought to Cease, its Virtue failing.
to which also the saving of the Sick is there ascribed: yet I shall accept of
it, because I judge indeed, that Ceremony is Ceased; only methinks, since our
Adversaries (and that rightly) think, a Ceremony ought to Cease, where the
Virtue fails, they ought by the same Rule, to forbear the laying on of Hands,
in imitation of the Apostles, since the Gift of the Holy Ghost does not follow
upon it. Thus Laying on of Hands.


IX. But since we find, that several Testimonies of Scripture do sufficiently
show, that Such External Rites are no necessary part of the New
Covenant-Dispensation, therefore not needful now to Continue, however they were
for a season practiced of old; I shall instance some few of them, whereby from
the Nature of the thing, as well as those Testimonies it may appear, that the
Ceremony of Bread and Wine is Ceased, as well as those other things, confessed
by our Adversaries to be so. The Ceremony of Bread and Wine is Ceased.
The first is Romans 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but
Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: Here the Apostle evidently
shows, that the Kingdom of God, or Gospel of Christ stands not in Meats and
Drinks, and such like things, but in Righteousness; as by the Context does
appear, where he is speaking of the Guilt and Hazard of judging one another
about Meats and Drinks. So then, if the Kingdom of God stand not in them* nor
the Gospel, nor Work of Christ, then the Eating of Outward Bread and Wine can
be no necessary part of the Gospel Worship, nor any perpetual Ordinance of it.
Another is yet more plain of the same Apostle, Col. 2.
Col. 2.16. the Apostle throughout this whole Second Chapter does clearly plead
for us, and against the Formality* and Superstition of our Opposers: for in the
beginning he holds forth the great Privileges Christians have by Christ, who
are come indeed to the Life of Christianity; and therefore he desires them,
ver. 6. As they have received Christ, so to walk in him, and to beware, lest
they be spoiled through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Rudiments or
Elements of the World, because that in Christ, whom they have received, is all
Fullness: And that they are Circumcised with the Circumcision made without
Hands (which he calls the Circumcision of Christ) and being buried with him by
Baptism, are also arisen with him through the Faith of the Operation of God.
Here also they did partake of the True Baptism of Christ; and being such, as
are Arisen with him, let us see, whether he thinks it needful, they should make
use of such Meat and Drink, as Bread and Wine, to put them in Remembrance of
Christ's Death? or whether they ought to be judged, that they did it not, ver.
16. Let no man therefore judge you in Meat or Drink? Is not Bread and Wine,
Meat and Drink? But why? Which are a Shadow of things to come: But the Body is
of Christ. Then since our Adversaries Confess, It Is but a Sign and Shadow, they
confess.
that their Bread and Wine is a Sign or Shadow, therefore, according to the
Apostle's Doctrine, we ought not to be Judged in the Observation of it. But is
it not fit for those, that are Dead with Christ, to be subject to such
Ordinances? See what he says, ver. 20. Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ
from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are ye
subject to Ordinances? (Touch not, taste not, handle not: Which all are to
perish with the Using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men: And which
do perish with the Using.
What can be more plain? if this serve not to take away the Absolute Necessity
of the use of Bread and Wine, what can it serve to take away? Sure I am, the
Reason here given is applicable to them, which all do perish with the using;
since Bread and Wine perishes with the using, as much as other things. But
further, if the use of Water, and Bread and Wine were that, wherein the very
Seals of the New Covenant stood, and did pertain to the Chief Sacraments of the
Gospel and Evangelical Ordinances, (so called) then would not the Gospel differ
from the Law, The Law was Meats and Drinks; not so the Gospel.
or be preferrable to it? Whereas the Apostle shows the difference, Heb. 9.10.
in that such kind of Observations of the Jews were as a Sign of the Gospel, for
that this stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings. And now, if the
Gospel Worship and Service stand in the same, where is the difference?

Object.
If it be said, These under the Gospel have a Spiritual Signification.

Law, God was the Author of those, as well as Christ is pretended to be the
Author of these. But does not this contending for the use of Water, Bread and
Wine, as necessary Parts of the Gospel Worship, destroy the Nature of it, as if
the Gospel were a Dispensation of Shadows, and not of the Substance; whereas
the Apostle in that of the Colossians abovementioned argues against the Use of
these things, as needful to those, that are dead and arisen with Christ,
because they are but Shadows? And since through the whole Epistle to the
Hebrews, The Law has Shades, the Gospel brings the Substance.
he argues with the Jews to Wean them from their Worship, for this Reason,
because it was Typical and Figurative; Is it agreeable to right Reason to bring
them to another of the same Nature? What ground from Scripture or Reason can
our Adversaries bring us to evince, that one Shadow or Figure should point to
another Shadow or Figure, and not to the Substance? And yet they make the
Figure of Circumcision to point to Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb to Bread
and Wine. But was it ever known, that one Figure was the Antitype of the other,
especially, seeing Protestants make not these their Antitypes to have any more
Virtue or Efficacy, than the Type had? For since, as they say, and that truly,
That their Sacraments confer not Grace, Their Sacraments confer not Grace.
but that is conferred according to the Faith of the Receiver; it will not be
denied, but the Faithful among the Jews received also Grace in the Use of their
Figurative Worship. And tho Papists boast, that their Sacraments confer Grace
ex opere operato, yet Experience abundantly proves the contrary.

X. But supposing, the Use of Water Baptism, Opposers claim a Power to give
their Sacraments; from whence do they derive it?
and Bread and Wine to have been in the Primitive Church, as was also that of
Abstaining from things strangled, and from Blood; the Use of Legal
Purifications, Acts 21.23, 24, 25. and Anointing of the Sick with Oil, for the
Reasons and Grounds beforementioned: Yet it remains for our Adversaries to
show us, how they come by Power or Authority to Administer them? It cannot be
from the Letter of the Scripture, else they behoved also to do those other
things, which the Letter declares also they did, and which in the Letter have
as much Foundation. Then their Power must be derived from the Apostles either
Mediately or Immediately; but we have shown before, in the Tenth Proposition,
that they have no Mediate Power, because of the Interruption made by the
Apostasy: And for an Immediate Power or Command by the Spirit of God, to
Administer these things, none of our Adversaries pretend to it. We know, that
in this, as in other things, they make a Noise of the Constant Consent of the
Church, and of Christians in all Ages: Tradition no sufficient Ground for Faith.
but as Tradition is not a sufficient ground for Faith, so in this matter
especially it ought to have but small Weight, for that in this Point of
Ceremonies and Superstitious Observations, the Apostasy began very early; as
may appear in the Epistles of Paul to the Galatians and Colossians: and we have
no ground to Imitate them in those things, whose Entrance the Apostle so much
withstood, so heavily regretted, and so sharply reproved. But if we look to
Antiquity, we find, that in such kind of Observances and Traditions they were
very uncertain and changeable; so that neither Protestants nor Papists do
observe this Ceremony, as They did, both in that they gave it to Young Boys and
to Little Children: and for ought can be learned, The Supper they gave to Young
Boys and Children.
the Use of this and Infant Baptism are of a-like Age; though the one be laid
aside both by Papists and Protestants, and the other, to wit, Baptism of
Infants be stuck to. And we have so much the less Reason to lay Weight upon
Antiquity, for that, if we consider their Profession of Religion, especially as
to Worship, and the Ceremonial Part of it, we shall not find any Church now,
whether Popish or Protestant, who differ not widely from them in many things;
as Daleus, in his Treatise concerning the Use of the Fathers, well observes
and demonstrateth. Daleus.
And why they should Obtrude this upon us, because of the Ancients Practice,
which they themselves follow not, or why we may not Reject this, as well as
they do other things, no less zealously practiced by the Ancients, no
sufficient Reason can be assigned.

I shall not nevertheless doubt, but many, whose Understandings have been
Clouded with these Ceremonies, have notwithstanding by the Mercy of God had
some Secret Sense of the Mystery, which they could not clearly understand,
because it was Veiled from them, by their sticking to such Outward things; and
that through that secret Sense diving in their Comprehensions, they ran
themselves into these Carnal Apprehensions, as imagining, the Substance of the
Bread was Changed, or that, if the Substance was not Changed, yet the Body was
there, etc. And indeed, Calvin's ingenuous Confession Commended.
I am inclinable very favorably to Judge of Calvin in this particular, in that
he deals so ingenuously to confess, he neither Comprehends, nor can Express it
in Words; but yet by a feeling Experience can say, The Lord is spiritually
present. Now as I doubt not, but Calvin sometimes had a Sense of this Presence
without the Use of this Ceremony, so as the Understanding given him of God,
made him justly reject the false Notions of Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, though he knew not, what to establish instead of them; if he
had fully Waited in that Light, Ephesians. 5.13.
that makes all things manifest, and had not labored in his own Comprehension,
to settle upon that External Ceremony, by affixing the Spiritual Presence as
chiefly or principally, though not only (as he well knew by Experience) there,
or especially to relate to it; he might have reached further unto the Knowledge
of this Mystery, than many, that went before him.

XI. Lastly: If any now at this day, from a true Tenderness of Spirit, In
tenderness of Conscience at Ignorance God winketh.
and with real Conscience toward God, did practice this Ceremony in the same
Way, Method and Manner, as did the Primitive Christians recorded in Scripture
(which yet none, that I know, now do) I should not doubt to affirm, but they
might be Indulged in it; and the Lord might regard them, and for a season
Appear to them in the Use of these things; as many of us have known him to do
to us in the Time of our Ignorance: providing always, they did not seek to
Obtrude them upon others, nor Judge such as found themselves Delivered, or that
they do not pertinaciously Adhere to them. For we certainly know, that the Day
is Dawned, in which God has arisen, and has dismissed all those Ceremonies
and Rites, The Day is Dawned, that God is Risen, and Worshipped in Spirit.
and is only to be Worshipped in Spirit; and that he Appears to them who Wait
upon him: and that to Seek God in these things is, with Mary at the Sepulcher,
To seek the Living among the Dead. For we know, that he is Arisen, and Revealed
in Spirit, leading his Children out of these Rudiments; that they may Walk with
him in his Light: To whom be Glory for ever! Amen.

PROPOSITION XIV. Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in Matters
purely Religious, and pertaining to the Conscience.
Since God has assumed to himself the Power and Dominion of the Conscience,
who alone can rightly instruct and govern it, therefore it is not lawful for
any whosoever, by virtue of any Authority or Principality they bear in the
Government of this World, Luke 9.55, 56. Matthew. 7.12, 13, 29. Tit. 3.10.
to force the Consciences of others; and therefore all Killing, Banishing,
Fining, Imprisoning, and other such things, which are inflicted upon Men for
the alone exercise of their Conscience or Difference in Worship or Opinion,
proceeds from the Spirit of Cain, the Murderer, and is contrary to the
Truth: Providing always, That no Man, under the Pretense of Conscience,
prejudice his Neighbor in his Life or Estate, or do any thing destructive to,
or inconsistent with Human Society, in which Case the Law is for the
Transgressor, and Justice is to be administered upon all without respect of
Persons.

. I. LIberty of Conscience from the Power of the Civil Magistrate has been of
late Years so largely and learnedly handled, that I shall not need but to be
brief in it; yet it is to be lamented, that few have walked answerable to this
Principle, each pleading it for themselves, but scarce allowing it to others;
as hereafter I shall have occasion more at length to observe.

It will be fit in the first Place, for clearing of Mistakes, to say something
of the State of the Controversy, that what follows, may be the more clearly
understood.

By CONSCIENCE then (as in the Explanation of the Fifth and Sixth Propositions
I have observed,) is to be understood That Persuasion of the Mind, which arises
from the Vnderstanding's being possessed with the Belief of the Truth, or
Falsity of any thing: Which, though it may be False or Evil upon the Matter,
yet if a Man should go against his Persuasion or Conscience, he should commit a
Sin; because what a Man does contrary to his Faith, though his Faith be wrong,
is no ways acceptable to God. Hence the Apostle says; Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is Sin; and he that doubts, Romans 14.23.
is damned, if he eat: Though the thing might have been lawful to another; and
that this doubting to eat some kind of Meats (since all the Creatures of God
are good, and for the Use of Man, if received with Thanksgiving) might be a
Superstition, or at least a Weakness, which were better removed. Hence Ames de
Cas. Cons. says; The Conscience, although erring, does evermore bind; so as
that he sins, who does contrary to his Conscience, because he does contrary
to the Will of God, although not materially and truly, yet formally and
interpretatively.

So the Question is, First, Whether the Civil Magistrate has power to force
Men in things Religious, to do contrary to their Conscience? and if they will
not, to punish them in their Goods, Liberties or Lives? This we hold in the
Negative. But Secondly, as we would have the Magistrate avoiding this Extreme
of Incroaching upon Men's Consciences, so on the other Hand we are far from
joining with, or strengthening such Libertines, as would stretch the Liberty of
their Consciences to the Prejudice of their Neighbors, or to the Ruin of Human
Society. We understand therefore by Matters of Conscience, such as immediately
relate betwixt God and Man, or Men and Men, that are under the same Persuasion:
As, To meet together, and worship God in that way, which they judge is most
acceptable unto him, and not to incroach upon, or seek to force their
Neighbors otherwise than by Reason, or such other Means, as Christ and his
Apostles used, viz. preaching and instructing such as will hear and receive it;
but not at all for Men, under the Notion of Conscience, to do any thing
contrary to the moral and perpetual Statutes generally acknowledged by all
Christians. In which Case the Magistrate may very lawfully use his Authority,
as on those, who under a Pretext of Conscience make it a Principle to kill and
destroy all the Wicked, id est, all that differ from them; that they, to wit,
the Saints may rule, and that therefore seek to make all things Common, and
would force their Neighbors to share their Estates with them; and many such
wild Notions, as is Reported of the Anabaptists of Munster, which evidently
appears to proceed from Pride and Covetousness, and not from Purity or
Conscience: And therefore I have sufficiently guarded against that in the
latter part of the Proposition. But the Liberty we lay claim to, is such, as
the Primitive Church justly sought under the Heathen-Emperors, to wit, for Men
of Sobriety, Honesty, and a peaceable Conversation to enjoy the Liberty and
Exercise of their Conscience toward God and among themselves, and to admit
among them such, as by their Persuasion and Influence come to be convinced of
the same Truth with them, without being therefore molested by the Civil
Magistrate. Thirdly, though we would not have Men hurt in their Temporals, nor
robbed of their Privileges, as Men and Members of the Commonwealth, because
of their Inward Persuasion; yet we are far from judging, that in the Church of
God there should not be Censures exercised against such as fall into Error, as
well as such as commit open Evils. And therefore we believe, it may be very
lawful for a Christian Church, if she find any of her Members fall into any
Error, after due Admonitions and Instructions, according to Gospel Order, if
she find them pertinacious, to cut them off from her Fellowship by the Sword of
the Spirit, and denude them of these Privileges, which they had as
Fellow Members; but not to cut them off from the World by the Temporal Sword,
or rob them of their common Privileges, as Men, seeing they enjoy not these as
Christians, or under such a Fellowship, but as Men, and Members of the
Creation. Hence Chrysostom says well, (de Anath.) We must condemn and reprove
the evil Doctrines, that proceed from Heretics; but spare the Men, and pray
for their Salvation.

. II. But that no Man, by virtue of any Power or Principality he has in the
Government of this World, has Power over the Consciences of Men, is apparent,
Conscience the Throne of God.
because The Conscience of Man is the Seat and Throne of God in him; Of which
God is the alone proper and Infallible Judge, who by his Power and Spirit can
alone rectify the Mistakes of Conscience, and therefore has reserved to
himself the Power of punishing the Errors thereof, as he sees meet. Now for
the Magistrate to assume this, is to take upon him to meddle with things not
within the Compass of his Jurisdiction; for, if this were within the Compass of
his Jurisdiction, he should be the proper Judge in these things; and also it
were needful to him, as an Essential Qualification of his being a Magistrate,
to be capable to judge in them. But that the Magistrate, as a Magistrate, is
neither proper Judge in these Cases, nor yet that the Capacity so to be, is
requisite in him, as a Magistrate, our Adversaries cannot deny; or else they
must say, That all the Heathen-Magistrates were either no lawful Magistrates,
as wanting something Essential to Magistracy (and this were contrary to the
express Doctrine of the Apostles, Romans 13.) or else (which is more absurd) that
those Heathen-Magistrates were proper Judges in Matters of Conscience amongst
Christians. As for that Evasion, That the Magistrate ought to punish according
to the Church Censure and Determination, which is indeed no less, than to make
the Magistrate the Church's Hangman; we shall have occasion to speak of it
hereafter. But if the Chief Members of the Church, though ordained to inform,
instruct and reprove, are not to have Dominion over the Faith nor Consciences
of the Faithful, as the Apostle expressly affirms, 2 Cor. 1.24. then far less
ought they to usurp this Dominion, or stir up the Magistrate to persecute and
murder those, who cannot yield to them therein.

Secondly; This pretended Power of the Magistrate is both contrary unto, and
inconsistent with the Nature of the Gospel, which is a thing altogether
extrinsick from the Rule and Government of Political States, as Christ expressly
signified, saying; His Kingdom was not of this World: And if the propagating of
the Gospel had had any necessary Relation thereunto, then Christ had not said
so. But he abundantly has shown by his Example, whom we are chiefly to imitate
in Matters of that nature, that its by Persuasion and the Power of God; not by
Whips, Imprisonments, Banishments and Murderings, that the Gospel is to be
propagated; and that those, that are the Propagators of it, are often to suffer
by the Wicked, but never to cause the Wicked to suffer. When he sends forth his
Disciples, he tells them, he sends them forth as Lambs among Wolves, to be
willing to be devoured, not to devour; he tells them of their being whipped,
Matt. 10.16.
imprisoned and killed for their Conscience, but never that they shall either
whip, imprison or kill; and indeed, if Christians must be as Lambs, it is not
the Nature of Lambs to destroy or devour any. It serves nothing to allege,
That in Christ and his Apostles Times the Magistrates were Heathens, and
therefore Christ and his Apostles, (nor yet any of the Believers) being no
Magistrate, they could not exercise the Power: Because it cannot be denied, but
Christ being the Son of God, had a true Right to all Kingdoms, Matt. 28.18.
and was Righteous Heir of the Earth. Next, as to his Power, it cannot be
denied, but he could, if he had seen meet, have called for Legions of Angels to
defend him, and have forced the Princes and Potentates of the Earth to be
subject unto him, Matthew. 26.53. so that it was only, because it was contrary to
the Nature of Christ's Gospel and Ministry, to use any Force or Violence in the
gathering of Souls to him. This he abundantly expressed in his Reproof to the
Sons of Zebedee, who would have been calling for Fire from Heaven to burn
those, that refused to receive Christ: It is not to be doubted, but this was as
great a Crime, as now to be in an Error concerning the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ. That there was not Power wanting to have punished those Refusers of
Christ, cannot be doubted; for they, that could do other Miracles, might have
done this also; and moreover, they wanted not the Precedent of a Holy Man under
the Law, to wit, Elias: Yet we see, what Christ says to them; Ye know not,
what spirit ye are of, Luke 9.55. for the Son of Man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them. Here Christ shows, That such kind of Zeal was no
ways approved of him; and such as think to make way for Christ or his Gospel by
this means, do not understand, what Spirit they are of. But if it was not
lawful to call for Fire from Heaven to destroy such, as refused to receive
Christ; it is far less lawful to kindle Fire upon Earth to destroy those, that
believe in Christ, because they will not believe, nor can believe as the
Magistrates do, for Conscience Sake. And if it was not lawful for the Apostles,
who had so large a Measure of the Spirit, and were so little liable to mistake,
to force others to their Judgment; it can be far less lawful now for Men, that,
as Experience declares, and many of themselves confess, are fallible, and
often mistaken, to kill and destroy all such, as cannot (because otherwise
persuaded in their Minds) judge and believe in Matters of Conscience, just as
they do. And if it was not according to the Wisdom of Christ, who was and is
King of Kings, by outward Force to constrain others to believe him, or receive
him, as being a thing inconsistent with the Nature of his Ministry and
Spiritual Government; do not they grossly offend him, that will needs be wiser
than he, and think to force Men against their Persuasion to conform to their
Doctrine and Worship? The Word of the Lord says, Not by power and by might,
but by the Spirit of the Lord, Zach. 4.6. But these say, Not by the Spirit of
the Lord, but by Might and carnal Power. 2 Cor. 10.4.
The Apostle says plainly, We wrestle not with flesh and blood; and The
Weapons of our warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual: But these Men will needs
wrestle with flesh and blood, when they cannot prevail with the Spirit and the
Understanding; and not having Spiritual weapons, go about with Carnal weapons
to establish Christ's Kingdom, which they can never do: and therefore, when the
matter is well sifted, it is found to be more out of love to Self, and from a
principle of Pride in Man, to have all others to bow to him, than from the love
of God. Christ indeed takes another method, for he says, He will make his
People a willing People in the day of his Power: Psalm. 110.3.
but these Men labor against Men's Wills and Consciences, not by Christ's
Power; but by the outward Sword to make Men the People of Christ, which they
can never do, as shall hereafter be shown.

But Thirdly; Christ fully and plainly declares to us his sense in this matter
in the Parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13. of which we have himself the
Interpreter, ver. 38, 39, 40, 41. where he expounds them to be the Children of
the wicked one; and yet he will not have the Servants to meddle with them, lest
they pull up the Wheat therewith. Now it cannot be denied, but Heretics are
here included; but these Servants saw the Tares, and had a certain discerning
of them; yet Christ would not they should meddle, lest they should hurt the
Wheat: Thereby intimating, that that capacity in Man, to be mistaken, ought to
be a bridle upon him, to make him wary in such matters; and therefore, to
prevent this hurt, he gives a positive prohibition; But he said, Nay, ver. 29.
So that they, that will notwithstanding be pulling up that, which they judge is
Tares, do openly declare, that they make no bones to break the Commands of
Christ. Miserable is that evasion, which some of our Adversaries use here, in
alleging, these Tares is meant of Hypocrites, and not of Heretics. But how to
evince that, seeing Heretics, as well as Hypocrites are Children of the wicked
one, they have not any thing, but their own bare Affirmation, which is
therefore justly rejected.

If they say, because Hypocrites can not be discerned, Object^
but so may Heretics.

This is both false, and a begging of the question. For those, Hypocrites and
Heretics; and those that want it, cannot certainly discern either: Seeing the
question will arise, Whether that is a Heresy, which the Magistrate says is
so? And seeing it is both possible, and confessed by all, to have often fallen
out, that some Magistrates have judged that Heresy, which was not, punishing
Men accordingly for Truth instead of Error: There can no argument be drawn
from the obviousness or evidence of Heresy, unless we should conclude, Heresy
could never be mistaken for Truth, nor Truth for Heresy, whereof Experience
shows daily the contrary even among Christians. But neither is this shift
applicable to this place; for the Servants did discern the Tares, and yet were
liable to hurt the Wheat, if they had offered to pull them up.

III. But they Object against this Liberty of Conscience, Deuteronomy. 13.5. where
false Prophets are appointed to be put to death; and accordingly they give
example thereof. Object.


Commands to the Jews, and Practices following upon them, are not a Rule for
Christians; else we might by the same Rule say, It were lawful for us to borrow
from our Neighbors their Goods, and so carry them away, because the Jews did
so by God's Command; or that it is lawful for Christians to invade their
Neighbors Kingdoms and cut them all off without Mercy, because the Jews did so
to the Canaanites by the Command of God.

If they urge, That these Commands ought to stand, except they be repealed in
the Gospel. Object.


I say, these Precepts and Practices of Christ and his Apostles mentioned,
Repeal: for if we should plead, that every Command given to the Jews is binding
upon us, except there be a particular Repeal, then would it follow, that
because it was lawful for the Jews, if any Man killed one, for the nearest of
Kindred presently to kill the Murderer without any order of Law; it were lawful
for us to do so also. And does not this Command of Deuteronomy. 13.9. openly order
him, who is enticed by another to forsake the Lord, though he were his Brother,
his Son, his Daughter or his Wife, presently to kill him or her? Thou shall
surely kill him, thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death. If this
Command were to be followed, there needed neither Inquisition, nor Magistrate
to do the business; and yet there is no reason, why they should shuffle by this
part, and not the other; yea to argue this way from the Practice among the
Jews, were to overturn the very Gospel, and to set up again the carnal
ordinances among the Jews, to pull down the Spiritual ones of the Gospel.
Indeed, we can far better argue from the Analogy betwixt the figurative and
carnal state of the Jews, and the Real and Spiritual one under the Gospel;
That, as Moses delivered the Jews out of outward Egypt by an outward force, and
established them in an outward Kingdom, by destroying their outward Enemies for
them; so Christ, not by overcoming outwardly and killing others, but by
suffering and being killed, does deliver his chosen Ones, the inward Jews, out
of mystical Egypt, destroying their Spiritual Enemies before them, and
establishing among them his Spiritual Kingdom, which is not of this World: And
as such, as departed from the Fellowship of outward Israel, were to be cut off
by the outward Sword; so those, that depart from the inward Israel, are to be
cut off by the Sword of the Spirit: For it answers very well, that, As the Jews
were to cut off their Enemies outwardly, to establish their Kingdom and outward
worship, so they were to uphold it the same way: But as the Kingdom and Gospel
of Christ was not to be established nor propagated by cutting off or destroying
the Gentiles, but by persuading them, so neither is it to be upheld otherwise.

But Secondly, they urge Romans 13. where the Magistrate is said not to bear the
Sword in vain, Object.
because he is the Minister of God, to execute Wrath upon such as do evil. But
Heresy, say they, is evil. Ergo.

But so is Hypocrisy also, yet they confess, he ought not to punish that.
Therefore this must be understood of Moral Evils, relative of affairs betwixt
Man and Man, not of matters of Judgment or Worship; or else what great
absurdities would follow, considering, that Paul wrote here to the Church of
Rome, who was under the Government of Nero, an impious Heathen and Persecutor
of the Church? Now, if a power to punish in point of Heresy be here included,
it will necessarily follow, that Nero had this Power, yea and that he had it of
God; for because the Power was of God, therefore the Apostle urges their
Obedience. But can there be any thing more absurd, than to say, that Nero had
Power to judge in such cases? Surely, if Christian Magistrates be not to punish
for Hypocrisy, because they cannot outwardly discern it, far less could Nero
punish any body for Heresy, which he was incapable to discern. And if Nero had
not power to judge nor punish in point of Heresy, then nothing can be urged
from this place: Since all, that is said here, is spoken as applicable to Nero,
with a particular Relation to whom it was written. And if Nero had such a
power, surely, he was to exercise it according to his Judgment and Conscience;
and in doing thereof, he was not to be blamed; which is enough to justify him
in his persecuting of the Apostles, and murdering the Christians.

Thirdly, They object that saying of the Apostle to the Gal. 5.12. I would they
were even cut off, which trouble you. Object.


But how this imports any more, than a cutting off from the Church, is not, nor
can be shown. Beza upon the place says, We cannot understand that otherwise,
than of Excommunication: Such as was that of the incestuous Corinthian. And
indeed, it is madness to suppose it otherwise; for Paul would not have these
cut off otherwise, than he did Hymenaeus and Philetus, who were Blasphemers;
which was by giving them over to Satan; not by cutting off their heads.

The same way may be answered that other Argument drawn from Rev. 2.20. where
the Church of Thyatira is reproved for suffering the Woman Jezebel. Which can
be no other ways understood, than that they did not Excommunicate her, or cut
her off by a Church-censure: For as to corporal punishment, it is known, that
at that time the Christians had not power to punish Heretics so, if they had
had a mind to it.

Fourthly, They allege, Object.
that Heresies are numbered among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. Ergo, etc.

That Magistrates have power to punish all the works of the flesh, Evil is a
work of the flesh, but every Evil comes not under the Magistrate's cognizance.
Is not Hypocrisy a work of the flesh, which our Adversaries confess, the
Magistrates ought not to punish? Yea, is not Hatred and Envy there mentioned,
as the works of the flesh? And yet the Magistrate cannot punish them, as they
are in themselves, until they exert themselves in other acts, which come under
his power. But, so long as Heresy does not exert it self in any act destructive
to human Society, or such like things, but is kept within the Sphere of those
duties of Doctrine or Worship, which stand betwixt a Man and God, they no ways
come under the Magistrate's power.

IV. But Secondly, this forcing of Men's Consciences is contrary to sound
Reason, and to the very law of Nature. For Man's understanding cannot be forced
by all the bodily sufferings another Man can inflict upon him, especially in
matters Spiritual and Supernatural: It Is Arguments and evident Demonstrations
of Reason, together with the power of God reaching the heart, that can change a
Man's mind from one opinion to another, and not knocks and blows, and such like
things; which may well destroy the Body, but can never inform the Soul, which
is a free Agent, and must either accept or reject matters of Opinion, as they
are born in upon it by something proportional to its own nature. To seek to
force minds in any other manner, is to deal with Men, as if they were brutes,
void of understanding, and at last is but to loose ones labor, and, as the
Proverb is, to seek to wash the Black-More white. By that course indeed Men may
be made Hypocrites, but can never be made Christians, and surely, the products
of such Compulsion (even where the end is obtained, to wit, an outward Assent
or Conformity whether in doctrine or worship) can be no ways acceptable to God,
who desires not any sacrifice, except that, which comes thoroughly from the
heart, and will have no constrained ones: So that Men so constrained are so far
from being members of the Church, that they are made ten-times more the
Servants of Satan, than before; in that to their errors is added Hypocrisy,
the worst of evils in matters of Religion, and that which above all things the
Lord's Soul most abhors.

Object.
But if it be said, Their Error notwithstanding is thereby suppressed, and the
scandal removed.

Hypocrites, but greatly corrupted and endangered; for open Heresies Men may be
aware of, and shun such as profess them, when they are separated from the
Church by her Censures; but secret Hypocrites may putrify the body, and leaven
it, ere Men be aware. And if the Dissenters prove Resolute, and suffer boldly
for the Opinions they esteem right, experience shows, that such sufferings
often tend to the commendation of the sufferers, but never of the Persecutors:
For such suffering ordinarily breeds compassion, and begets a curiosity in
others, to enquire the more diligently into the things, for which they see Men
suffer so great losses so boldly; and is also able to beget an opinion, that it
is for some good, they do so suffer, it being no ways probable, that Men will
venture all, merely to acquire fame; which may as well be urged to detract from
the Reputation of all the Martyrs, unless some better Arguments be brought
against it, than a Halter or a Faggot. But supposing this principle, that the
Magistrate has power to force the Consciences of his Subjects, and to punish
them, if they will not comply: Very great inconveniences and absurdities will
follow, and even such, as are inconsistent with the nature of the Christian
Religion.

For First, it will naturally follow, that the Magistrate ought to do it, and
sins by Omission of his duty, if he do it not. Will it not then hence be
inferred, that Christ was defective to his Church, who having power to force
men, and to call for legions of Angels so to do, did notwithstanding not exert
that power, but left his Church to the mercy of the wicked without so necessary
a bulwark?

Secondly; Seeing every Magistrate is to exercise his power according to the
best understanding he has, being obliged so to do, for the promoting of what
he in Conscience is persuaded to be Truth; Will not this justify all the
Heathen-Emperors in their Persecutions against Christians? Will not this
justify the Spanish Inquisition, which yet is odious not only to Protestants,
but to many moderate Papists? How can Protestants in reason condemn the Papists
for persecuting them, seeing they do but exercise a lawful Power, according to
their Conscience and best understanding, and do no more to them, than the
Sufferers profess they would do to them, if they were in the like capacity?
Which takes away all ground of Commiseration from the Sufferers, whereas that
was the ground, that gained of old, reputation to the Christians, that they,
being Innocent, suffered, who neither had, nor by principle could hurt any. But
there is little reason to pity one, that is but dealt by, according as he would
deal with others. For to say; They have not reason to persecute us, because
they are in the wrong, and we in the right, is but miserably to beg the
question. Does not this doctrine strengthen the hands of Persecutors every
where, and that rationally, from a principle of self-preservation? For who can
blame me for destroying him, that I know waits but for an occasion to destroy
me, if he could? Yea, this makes all suffering for Religion, which of old was
the glory of Christians, to be but of pure necessity; whereby they are not led
as Lambs to the slaughter, as was the Captain of their Salvation; but rather as
Wolves catched in the snare, who only bite not again, because they are not
able; but, could they get force, would be as ready to lead those the same way,
that led them. Where is here the faith and patience of the Saints? For indeed
it is but a small glory to make a virtue of Necessity, and suffer, because I
cannot help it. Every Thief and Murderer is a Martyr at that rate; experience
has abundantly proved this in these last Centuries. For, however each Party
talk of passively obeying the Magistrate in such cases, and that the power
resides in him; yet it is apparent, that from this principle it naturally
follows, that any Party, supposing themselves right, should so soon as they are
able, endeavor at any rate to get uppermost, that they might bring under those
of another opinion, and force the Magistrate to uphold their way to the ruin of
all others. What engine the Pope of Rome used to make of his pretended power in
this thing, upon any pretense of dislike to any Prince or State, even for very
small Heresies in their own account, to depose Princes, and set up their
Subjects against them, and give their dominions to other Princes to serve his
interest, they cannot be ignorant, that have read the life of Hildebrand; and
how Protestants have vindicated the Liberty of their Consciences after this
same manner, is apparent. They suffered much in France, to the great Increase
and Advantage of their Party; but how soon they found themselves considerable,
and had gotten some Princes upon their side, they began to let the King know,
that they must either have the Liberty of their Consciences, or else they would
purchase it, not by Suffering, but by Fighting. And the Experience of other
Protestant States shows, that, if Henry the Fourth, to please the Papists, had
not quitted his Religion to get the Crown the more peaceably, and so the
Protestants had prevailed with the Sword, they would as well have taught the
Papists with the Faggot, and led them to the Stake: So that this Principle of
Persecution, on all hands, is the Ground of all those Miseries and Contentions:
For so long as any Party is persuaded, that it is both lawful for them and
their Duty, if in Power, to destroy those that differ from them; it naturally
follows, they ought to use all Means possible to get that Power, whereby they
may secure themselves in the Ruin of their Adversaries. And that neither
Papists nor Protestants judge it unlawful to compel the Magistrate, if they be
strong enough to do it, to effect this, Experience shows it to be a known
Popish Principle, That the Pope may depose an Heretic Prince, and absolve the
People from the Oath of Fidelity: And the Pope, as is abovesaid, has done so
to diverse Princes; and this Doctrine is defended by Bellarmin against Barclay.
The French refused Henry the fourth, till he quitted his Religion. And as for
Protestants, many of them scruple not to affirm, That wicked Kings and
Magistrates may be deposed and killed; yea our Scotch Presbyters are as
positive in it as any Jesuits, who would not admit this present Charles the
Second, though otherwise a Protestant Prince, unless he would swear to renounce
Episcopacy, a Matter of no great Difference, though contrary to his Conscience.
Now how little Proportion these things bear with the Primitive Christians, and
the Religion propagated by Christ and his Apostles, needs no great
Demonstration; and it is observable, That notwithstanding many other
Superstitions crept into the Church very early, yet this of Persecution was so
inconsistent with the Nature of the Gospel, and Liberty of Conscience, as we
have asserted it, such an innate and natural part of the Christian Religion,
that almost all the Christian Writers for the first three hundred Years
earnestly contend for it, condemning the contrary Opinion.

Athan. in epist. ad solit. vit. ag. ibid.
. V. Thus Athanasius; It is the Property of Piety, not to force, but to
persuade, in imitation of our Lord, who forced no body, but left it to the Will
of every one to follow him, etc. But the Devil, because he has nothing of
Truth, uses Knocks and Axes to break up the Doors of such as receive him. But
our Savior is meek, teaching the Truth; Whosoever will come after me, and
whosoever will be my Disciple, etc. but constraining none, coming to us, and
knocking rather and saying, My Sister, my Spouse, open to me, etc. and enters
when he is opened to, and retires if they delay, and will not open unto him,
because it is not with Swords, nor Darts, nor Soldiers, nor Armor, that Truth
is to be declared, but with Persuasion and Counsel. And it is observable, that
it was the Impious Arrians, who first of all brought in this Doctrine to
persecute others among Christians, whose Successors both Papists and
Protestants are in this Matter, whom Athanasius thus reproves further: Where
(says he) have they learned to persecute? Certainly they cannot say, Athan.
Apol. 1. de fuga sua, tom. 1.
they have learned it from the Saints; but this has been given them, and taught
them of the Devil. The Lord commanded indeed sometimes to flee, and the Saints
sometimes fled, but to persecute is the Invention and Argument of the Devil,
which he seeks against all. And after he says, In so far as the Arrians banish
those that will not subscribe their Decrees, they show, that they are contrary
to Christians, and Friends of the Devil.

But now, O lamentable! Hill. contra Aux.
(says Hilarious) it is the Suffrages of the Earth, that recommend the Religion
of God, and Christ is found naked of his Virtue, while Ambition must give
credit to his Name. The Church reproves and fights by Banishments and Prisons,
and forces her self to be believed, which once was believed, because of the
Imprisonments and Banishments her self suffered. She that once was consecrated
by the Terror of her Persecutors, depends now upon the Dignity of those, that
are in her Communion. She, that once was propagated by her banished Priests,
now banisheth the Priests. And she boasts now, that she is loved of the World,
who could not have been Christ's, if she had not been hated of the World.

The Church (says Hierom) was founded by shedding of Blood, Hieron. Ep. 62. ad
The.
and by Suffering, and not in doing of Hurt. The Church increased by
Persecutions, and was crowned by Martyrdoms.

Ambrose speaking of Auxentius, says thus; Ambr. Ep. 32. tom. 3.
Whom he (viz. Auxentius) could not deceive by Discourse, he thinks ought to be
killed by the Sword, making bloody Laws with his Mouth, writing them with his
Hands, and imagining, that an Edict can command Faith.

And the same Ambrose says, That going into France, Ambr. epist. 27.
he would not communicate with those Bishops, that required, That Heretics
should be put to Death.

The Emperor Marcio, who assembled the Council of Chalcedon, Marc. Ep. ad
Archimand, etc. Mon. Eg. in acta council. Chalced. tom. 2. conc. genesis
protests, That he would not force nor constrain any one to subscribe the
Council of Chalcedon against his Will.

Hosi. epist. ad -- Constit. apud Ath. in epist. ad solit. vit. tom. 1.
Hosius, Bishop of Corduba, testifies; That the Emperor Constans would not
constrain any to be Orthodox.

Hill. l. 1. ad Constable.
Hilarious says further, That God teaches rather, than exacteth the Knowledge
of himself, and authorizing his Commandments by the Miracles of his Heavenly
Works, he wills not, that any should confess him with a forced Will, etc. He is
the God of the whole Universe, he needs not a forced Obedience, nor requires a
constrained Confession.

Ambr. comm. in Luc. l. 7.
Christ (says Ambrose) sent his Apostles to sow Faith, not to constrain, but
to teach; not to exercise coercive Power, but to extol the Doctrine of
Humility.

Cypr. epist. 62.
Hence Cyprian comparing the Old Covenant with the New, says, Then were they
put to Death with the outward Sword; but now the Proud and Contumacious are cut
off with the Spiritual Sword, by being cast out of the Church: And this answers
very well that Objection before observed, taken from the Practice of the Jews
under the Law.

See (says Tertullian to the Heathens) if it be not to contribute to the
renown of Irreligion, to seek to take away the Liberty of Religion, Tertull.
Apol. c. 24.
and to hinder Men their Choice of God, that I may not be admitted to adore
whom I will, but must be constrained to serve him, whom I will not. There is
none, nay not a Man, that desires to be adored by any against their Will. Id.
Apol. cap. 28.
And again; It Is a thing, that easily appears to be unjust, to constrain and
force Men to sacrifice against their Wills; seeing, to do the Service of God,
there is required a willing Heart. And again, It is an Human Right and Natural
Power, that every one worship what he esteems; Idem ad Scapul. c. 2.
and one Man's Religion, does not profit nor hurt another. Neither is it any
piece of Religion to enforce Religion, which must be undertaken by Consent, and
not by Violence, seeing that the Sacrifices themselves are not required, but
from a willing Mind.

Now, how either Papists or Protestants (that boast of Antiquity) can get by
these plain Testimonies, let any rational Man judge. And indeed I much
question, if in any one Point owned by them, and denied by us, they can find
all the old Fathers and Writers so exactly unanimous. Which shows, how contrary
all of them judged this to be to the Nature of Christianity, and that in the
Point of Persecution lay no small part of the Apostasy, which, from little to
more, came to that, that the Pope, upon every small Discontent would
Excommunicate Princes, absolve their Subjects from obeying them, and turn them
in and out at his Pleasure. Now, if Protestants do justly abhor these things
among Papists, is it not sad, that they should do the like themselves? A thing,
that at their first Appearance, Luth. lib. de Captivitate. Babylon.
when they were in their Primitive Innocence, they did not think on, as appears
by that Saying of Luther; Neither Pope, nor Bishop, nor any other Man has
Power to oblige a Christian to one Syllable, except it be by his own Consent.
And again; I call boldly to Christians, that neither Man, nor Angel can impose
any Law upon them, but so far as they will; for we are free of all. And when he
appeared at the Diet of Spiers before the Emperor, in a particular Conference
he had before the Archbishop of Triers, and Joachim Elector of Brandenburgh,
History of the Council of Trent.
when there seemed no possibility of agreeing him with his Opposers, they
asking him, What Remedy seemed to him most fit? He answered, The Counsel, that
Gamaliel proposed to the Jews, to wit, That, if this Design was of God, it
would stand; if not, it would evanish; which, he said, ought to content the
Pope: He did not say, because he was in the Right, he ought to be spared. For
this Counsel supposes, That those, that are tolerated, may be wrong; and yet
how soon did the same Luther, ere he was well secure himself, press the Elector
of Saxony to banish poor Carolostadius, because he could not in all things
submit to his Judgment? And certainly it is not without ground reported, That
it smote Luther to the Heart (so that he needed to be comforted) when he was
informed, That Carolostadius in his Letter to his Congregation styled himself,
A Man banished for Conscience by the Procurement of Martin Luther. And since
both the Lutherans and Calvinists not admitting one another to Worship in those
respective Dominions, shows how little better they are, than either Papists
or Arrians in this particular. And yet Calvin says; That the Conscience is
free from the Power of all Men. If so, why then did he cause Castellio to be
banished, because he could not for Conscience Sake believe as he did, Calvin.
Inst. c. 19. sect. 14.
That God had ordained Men to be damned? And Servetus to be burned, for denying
the Divinity of Christ, if Calvin's Report of him be to be credited? Which
Opinion, though it was indeed to be abominated, yet no less was Calvin's
Practice in causing him to be burned, and afterward defending, that it was
lawful to burn Heretics; by which he encouraged the Papists to lead his
Followers the more confidently to the Stake, as having for their Warrant the
Doctrine of their own Sect-master: which they omitted not frequently to twit
them with; and indeed it was to them unanswerable. Hence upon this occasion the
judicious Author of the History of the Council of Trent (in his fifth Book,
where giving an account of several Protestants, that were burned for their
Religion) well and wisely observes it, as a Matter of Astonishment, that those
of the new Reformation did offer to punish in the case of Religion: And
afterward, taking notice, That Calvin justifies the punishing of Heretics, he
adds; But since the Name of Heresy may be more or less restricted, yea or
diversely taken, this Doctrine may be likewise taken in diverse Senses, and may
at one time hurt those, whom at another Time it may have benefited.

So that this Doctrine of Persecution cannot be mentioned by Protestants
without strengthening the Hands of Popish Inquisitors; Protestant Persecution
strengthens the Popish Inquisition.
and indeed in the end lands in direct Popery. Seeing, if I may not profess and
preach that Religion, which I am persuaded of in my Conscience is true, it is
to no purpose to search the Scriptures, or to seek to choose my own Faith by
Convictions thence derived, since whatever I there observe, or am persuaded of,
I must either subject to the Judgment of the Magistrate and Church of that
Place I am in, or else resolve to remove, or dye. Yea, does not this Heretical
and Antichristian Doctrine both of Papists and Protestants at last resolve
into that cursed Policy of Mahomet, Who prohibited all Reason or Discourse
about Religion, as occasioning Factions and Divisions? And indeed, those that
press Persecution, and deny Liberty of Conscience, do thereby show themselves
more the Disciples of Mahomet, than of Christ, and that they are no ways
followers of the Apostle's Doctrine, who desired the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. To prove all things, and hold fast that which is good: And also says,
Unto such as are otherwise minded, God shall Reveal it, Phil. 3.15. not that by
Beatings and Banishments it must be knocked into them.

. VI. Now the Ground of Persecution, as has above been shown, is an
unwillingness to suffer; for no Man, that will persecute another for his
Conscience, would suffer for his own, if he could avoid it, seeing his
Principle obliges him, if he had Power, by Force to establish that, which he
judges is the Truth, and so to force others to it. Therefore I judge it meet,
for the Information of the Nations, briefly to add something in this Place
concerning the Nature of true Christian Sufferings; whereunto a very faithful
Testimony has been born by God's Witnesses, which he has raised up in this
Age, beyond what has been generally known or practiced for these many
Generations, yea since the Apostasy took place. Yet it is not my Design here in
any wise to derogate from the Sufferings of the Protestant Martyrs, whom I
believe to have walked in Faithfulness toward God, according to the
Dispensation of Light in that Day appearing, and of which many were utter
Enemies to Persecution, as by their Testimonies against it might be made appear.

But the true, faithful and Christian Suffering is, For Men to profess, what
they are persuaded is right, and so practice and perform their Worship toward
God, as being their true Right so to do; and neither to do more in that,
because of outward Encouragement from Men, nor any whit less, because of the
Fear of their Laws and Acts against it. Thus for a Christian Man to vindicate
his just Liberty with so much boldness, and yet Innocence, will in due time,
though through Blood, purchase Peace, as this Age has in some Measure
experienced, and many are Witnesses of it; which yet shall be more apparent to
the World, as Truth takes Place in the Earth. But they greatly sin against this
excellent Rule, that in Time of Persecution do not profess their own Way, so
much as they would, if it were other ways; and yet when they can get the
Magistrate upon their Side, not only stretch their own Liberty to the utmost,
but seek to establish the same by denying it to others.

The Innocent Sufferings of the People called Quakers.
But of this excellent Patience and Sufferings the Witnesses of God, in scorn
called Quakers, have given a manifest Proof; for so soon as God revealed his
Truth among them, without regard to all Opposition, or what they might meet
with, they went up and down, as they were moved of the Lord, preaching and
propagating the Truth in Marketplaces, Highways, Streets and public Temples,
though daily beaten, whipped, bruised, haled and imprisoned therefore. And when
there was any where a Church or Assembly gathered, they taught them to keep
their Meetings openly, and not to shut the door, nor do it by Stealth; that all
might know it, and who would might enter. And as hereby all just occasion of
Fear of plotting against the Government was fully removed, so this their
Courage and Faithfulness, in not giving over their Meeting together (but more
especially the Presence and Glory of God manifested in the Meeting, being
terrible to the Consciences of the Persecutors) did so weary out the Malice of
their Adversaries, that oftentimes they were forced to leave their Work
undone. For when they came to break up a Meeting, they were forced to take
every individual out by Force, they not being free to give up their Liberty, by
dissolving at their Command: And when they were haled out, unless they were
kept forth by Violence, they presently returned peaceably to their Place. Yea,
when sometimes the Magistrates have pulled down their Meeting Houses, they have
met the next Day openly upon the Rubbish, and so by Innocence kept their
Possession and Ground, being properly their own, and their Right to Meet and
Worship God being not forfeited to any. So that, when armed Men have come to
dissolve them, it was impossible for them to do it, unless they had killed
every one; for they stood so close together, that no Force could move any one
to stir, until violently pulled down: So that when the Malice of their Opposers
stirred them to take shovels, and throw the Rubbish upon them, there they stood
unmoved, being willing, if the Lord should so permit, to have been there buried
alive, witnessing for him. As this Patient, but yet courageous way of Suffering
made the Persecutors Work very heavy and wearisom unto them, so the Courage and
Patience of the Sufferers using no Resistance, nor bringing any Weapons to
defend themselves, nor seeking any ways Revenge upon such Occasions, did
secretly smite the Hearts of the Persecutors, and make their Chariot wheels go
on heavily. Thus after much and many kind of Sufferings thus patiently born,
which to rehearse would make a Volumn of it self, which may in due time be
published to the Nations (for we have them upon Record) a kind of Negative
Liberty has been obtained, so that at present for the most part we Meet
together without Disturbance from the Magistrate. But on the contrary most
Protestants, when they have not the Allowance and Tolerance of the Magistrate,
meet only in secret, and hide their Testimony; and if they be discovered, if
there be any probability of making their Escape by Force, though it were by
cutting off those, that seek them out, they will do it: Whereby they lose the
Glory of their Sufferings by not appearing as the Innocent Followers of Christ,
nor having a Testimony of their harmlessness in the Hearts of their Pursuers;
their Fury by such Resistance is the more kindled against them. As to this last
part of Resisting such as persecute them, they can lay claim to no Precept from
Christ, nor any Example of him or his Apostles approved.

But as to the first Part for fleeing, and meeting secretly, Object.
and not openly testifying for the Truth, they usually object that Saying of
Christ, Matthew. 10.23. When they persecute you in this city, flee ye into
another: And Act. 9.4. That the Disciples met secretly for fear of the Jews.
And Act 9 25. That Paul was let out of Damascus in a basket down by the W^ll.

To all which I answer, First, as to that Saying of Christ, it is a Question,
particular Message, with which he sent them to the Jews; yea, the latter end of
the Words seem expressly to hold forth so much; for ye shall not have gone over
the cities of Judah, till the Son of Man be come. Now a particular Practice or
Command for a particular Time will not serve for a Precedent to any at this
Day, to shun the Cross of Christ. But supposing this Precept to reach further,
it must be so understood, to be made use of only according as the Spirit gives
Liberty; else no Man that could flee, might suffer Persecution. How then did
not the Apostles John and Peter flee, Fleeing in Time of Persecution not
allowed.
when they were the first time persecuted at Jerusalem? But on the contrary
went the next Day, after they were discharged by the Council, and preached
boldly to the People. But indeed, many are but too capable to stretch such
Sayings as these for self^preservation, and therefore have great ground to
fear, when they interpret them, that they shun to witness for Christ for fear
of Hurt to themselves, lest they mistake them. As for that private Meeting of
the Disciples, we have only an Account of the Matter of Fact; but that suffices
not to make of it a Precedent for us; and Men's aptness to imitate them in that
(which, for ought we know, might have been an Act of Weakness) and not in other
things of the contrary Nature, shows, that it is not a true Zeal to be like
those Disciples; but indeed a Desire to preserve themselves, which moves them
so to do. Lastly, As to that of Paul's being conveyed out of Damascus, The Case
was singular, and is not to be doubted, but it was done by a special Allowance
from God, who having designed him to be a principal Minister of his Gospel, saw
meet, in his Wisdom to disappoint the Wicked Counsel of the Jews. But our
Adversaries have no such pretext for fleeing, whose fleeing proceeds from
self-preservation, not from immediate Revelation. And that Paul made not this
the Method of his Procedure, appears, in that at another time, notwithstanding
the Persuasion of his Friends, and certain Prophecies of his Sufferings to
come, he would not be dissuaded to go up to Jerusalem, which, according to the
forementioned Rule, he should have done.

But lastly, to conclude this Matter, Glory to God and our Lord Jesus Christ,
that now these twenty five Years, since we were known to be a distinct and
separate People, has given us faithfully to suffer for his Name without
shrinking or fleeing the Cross; and what Liberty we now enjoy, it is by his
Mercy, and not by any outward Working or Procuring of our own, but it is he has
wrought upon the Hearts of our Opposers. Nor was it any Outward Interest has
procured it unto us; but the Testimony of our harmlessness in the Hearts of our
Superiors: For God has preserved us hitherto in the patient Suffering of
Jesus, that we have not given away our Cause by persecuting any, which few (if
any) Christians, that I know, can say. Now against our unparalleld, yet
Innocent and Christian Cause our malicious Enemies have nothing to say, but
that, if we had Power, we would do so likewise. This is a Piece of mere
Unreasonabe Malice, and a Privilege they take to judge of things to come,
which they have not by immediate Revelation; and surely it is the greatest
highth of harsh Judgment, to say, Men would do contrary to their professed
Principle, if they could, who have from their Practice hitherto given no ground
for it, and wherein they only judge others by themselves: Such Conjectures
cannot militate against us, so long as we are Innocent. And if ever we prove
guilty of Persecution, by forcing other Men by Corporal Punishment to our Way,
then let us be judged the greatest of Hypocrites, and let not any spare to
persecute us. Amen, says my Soul.

PROPOSITION XV. Concerning Salutations and Recreations, etc.
Seeing the Chief End of all Religion is to redeem Men from the Spirit and vain
Conversation of this World, and to lead into inward Communion with God, before
whom, if we fear always, we are accounted happy; Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Pet. 1.14. Joh.
5.44. Jer. 10.3. Acts 10.26. Matt. 15.13 Col. 2.8.
therefore all the vain Customs and Habits thereof both in Word and Deed, are
to be rejected and forsaken by those, who come to this Fear; such as the taking
off the HAT to a Man, the Bowings and Cringings of the Body, and such other
Salutations of that kind, with all the Foolish and Superstitious Formalities
attending them; all which Man has invented, in his Degenerate State, to feed
his Pride in the vain Pomp and Glory of this World: As also the unprofitable
Plays, frivolous Recreations, Sportings and Gamings, which are invented to pass
away the precious Time, and divert the Mind from the Witness of God in the
Heart, and from the living Sense of his Fear, and from that Evangelical Spirit,
wherewith Christians ought to be levened, and which leads into Sobriety,
Gravity and Godly Fear; in which as we abide, the Blessing of the Lord is felt
to attend us in those Actions, which we are necessarily engaged, in order to
the taking Care for the Sustenance of the outward Man.

. I. HAving hitherto treated of the Principles of Religion, both relating to
Doctrine and Worship; I am now to speak of some Practices, which have been the
Product of this Principle in those Witnesses, whom God has raised up in this
Day, to testify for his Truth. It will not a little commend them, (I suppose
in the Judgment of Sober and Judicious Men, that taking them generally (even by
the Confession of their Adversaries) they are found to be free of those
Abominations, which abound among other Professors, such as are Swearing,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Riotousness, etc. and that generally the very coming
among this People does naturally work such a Change, so that many Vicious and
Profane Persons have been known, by coming to this Truth, to become Sober and
Virtuous; and many Light, Vain and Wanton ones, to become Grave and Serious; as
our Adversaries dare not deny: Yet, that they may not want something to detract
us for, cease not to accuse us for those things, which, when ^ound among
themselves, After this manner the Papists used to disapprove the Sobriety of
the Waldenses, of whom Reinerius a Popish Author so writes; But this Sect of
the Leonists has a great show of Truth, for that they live Righteously before
Men, and believe all things well of God, and all the Articles, which are
contained in the Creed; only they blaspheme and hate the Church of Rome.
they highly commend; thus our Gravity they call Sullenness; our Seriousness,
Melancholy; our Silence, Sottishness. Such as have been Vicious and Profane
among them, but by coming to us have left off those Evils, lest they should
commend the Truth of our Profession, they say; That whereas they were profane
before, they are now become worse, in being Hypocritical and Spiritually proud.
If any, before dissolute and Profane among them, by coming to the Truth with us
become frugal and diligent, then they will charge them with Covetousness: And
if any Eminent among them for Seriousness, Piety and Discoveries of God, come
unto us, then they will say; They were always subject to Melancholy and to
Enthusiasm, Though before, when among them, it was esteemed neither Melancholy
nor Enthusiasm in an evil Sense, but Christian Gravity and Divine Revelation.
Our Boldness and Christian Suffering they call Obstinacy and Pertinacy; though
half as much, if among themselves, they would account Christian Courage and
Nobility. And though thus by their Envy they strive to read all relating to us,
backwards, counting these things Vices in us, which in themselves they would
extol as Virtues; yet has the Strength of Truth extorted this Confession often
from them, That we are generally a pure and clean People, as to the outward
Conversation.

But this, they say, is but in policy to commend our Heresy.

But such Policy it is, say I, as Christ and his Apostles made use of, and all
good Christians ought to do; yea so far has Truth prevailed by the Purity of
its Followers, that if one that is called a Quaker, do but that which is common
among them, as to laugh and be wanton, speak at large, and keep not his Word
punctually, or be overtaken with Hastiness or Anger, they presently say; O!
this is against your Profession! As if indeed so to do were very consistent
with theirs: Wherein though they speak the Truth, yet they give away their
Cause. But if they can find any under our Name in any of those Evils common
among themselves (as who can imagine, but among so many thousands there will be
some Chaff, since of twelve Apostles one was found to be a Devil) O! how will
they insult, and make more Noise of the Escape of one Quaker, than of an
hundred among themselves!

. II. But there are some singular things, which most of all our Adversaries
plead for the lawfulness of, and allow themselves in, as no ways inconsistent
with the Christian Religion, which we have found to be no ways lawful unto us,
and have been commanded of the Lord to lay them aside; though the doing thereof
has occasioned no small Sufferings and Buffetings, and has procured us much
hatred and Malice from the World. And because the Nature of these things is
such, that they do upon the very Sight distinguish us and make us known, so
that we cannot hide our selves from any, without proving unfaithful to our
Testimony; our Trials and Exercises have here through proved the more numerous
and difficult, as will after appear. These I have labored briefly to
comprehend in this Proposition; but they may more largely be exhibited in those
six following Propositions.

1. That it is not lawful to give to Men such flattering Titles, as, Flattering
Titles.
Your Holiness, Your Majesty, Your Eminency, Your Excellency, Your Grace, Your
Lordship, Your Honor, etc. nor use those flattering Words, commonly called
[COMPLEMENTS.] 2. That it is not lawful for Christians to kneel or prostrate
themselves to any Man, or to bow the Body, or to uncover the Head to them. Hat
and Knee.
3. That it is not lawful for a Christian to use superfluities in Apparel, as
are of no use, save for ornament and vanity. Apparel.
4. That it is not lawful to use Games, Sports, Plays, Gaming.
nor among other things Comedies among Christians under the notion of
Recreations, which do not agree with Christian silence, gravity and sobriety:
For Laughing, Sporting, Gaming, Mocking, Jesting, Talking, c. is not Christian
Liberty, nor harmless Mirth. 5. That it is not lawful for Christians to Swear
at all under the Gospel, not only not vainly, and in their common discourse,
Swearing.
which was also forbidden under the Mosaical Law, but even not in Judgment
before the Magistrate. 6. That it is not lawful for Christians to Resist Evil,
or to war or fight in any case. Fighting.

Before I enter upon a particular Disquisition of these things, Degrees of
Dignity and Precedence allowed.
I shall first premise some general Considerations to prevent all mistakes; and
next add some general Considerations, which equally respect all of them. I
would not have any judge, that hereby we intend to destroy the mutual Relation,
that either is betwixt Prince and People, Master and Servant, Parents and
Children; nay not at all: We shall evidence, that our Principle in these things
has no such tendency, and that these natural Relations are rather better
established, than any ways hurt by it. Next, Let not any judge, that from our
opinion in these things any necessity of Levelling will follow, or that all men
must have things in Common: Our Principle leaves every man to enjoy that
peaceably, which either his own Industry, or Parents have purchased to him;
only he is thereby instructed to use it aright, both for his own good, and that
of his Brethren, and all to the Glory of God: In which also his acts are to be
voluntary, and no ways constrained. And further; We say not hereby, that no man
may use the Creation more or less than another: For we know, that, as it has
pleased God to dispense it diversely, giving to some more, and to some less, so
they may use it accordingly. The several Conditions, Education differs
accordingly.
under which men are diversely stated, together with their Edcuations answering
thereunto, do sufficiently show this: The Servant is not the same way educated
as the Master; nor the Tenant as the Landlord; nor the Rich as the Poor; nor
the Prince as the Peasant. Now, though it be not lawful for any, however great
Abundance they may have, or whatever their Education may be, to use that which
is merely superfluous; yet seeing, their Education has accustomed them
thereunto, and their Capacity enables them so to do, without being profuse or
extravagant, they may use things better in their kind, than such, whose
Education has neither accustomed them to such things, nor their Capacity will
reach to compass them. The lawful or unlawful Use of the Creation.
For it is beyond question, that what ever thing the Creation affords, is for
the use of man, and the moderate use of them is lawful; yet per accidens they
may be unlawful to some, and not to others. As for instance; who by reason of
his Estate and Education has been used to eat Flesh and drink Wine, to be
clothed with the finest Wool, if his Estate bear it, and he use it neither in
superfluity, nor immoderately, he may do it; and perhaps, if he should apply
himself to feed or be clothed, as are the Peasants, it might prejudice the
health of his Body, and nothing advance his Soul. But if a man, whose Estate
and Education had accustomed to both courser Food and Raiment, should stretch
himself beyond what he had or were used to, to the manifest prejudice of his
Family and Children, no doubt it would be unlawful to him, even so to Eat or be
Clothed as another, in whom it is lawful; for that that other may as much
mortified, and have denied himself as much in coming down to that, which this
aspires to, as he in willing to be like him, aspires beyond what he either is
able or has accustomed to do. The safe place then is for such as have fullness,
to watch over themselves, that they use it moderately, and rescind all
superfluities; being willing, so far as they can, to help the need of those, to
whom Providence has allotted a smaller Allowance. The Rich to help the Needy.
Let the Brother of high degree rejoice, in that he is abased, and such as God
calls in a low degree, to be content with their Condition, not envying those
Brethren, who have greater abundance, knowing they have received abundance, as
to the inward Man; which is chiefly to be regarded. And therefore beware of
such a Temptation, as to use their Calling as an Engine to be richer, knowing,
they have this Advantage beyond the Rich and Noble that are called, that the
Truth does not any ways abase them, nay not in the Esteem of the World, as it
does the other; but that they are rather exalted thereby, in that as to the
Inward and Spiritual Fellowship of the Saints, they become the Brethren and
Companions of the Greatest and Richest: and in this respect let him of low
degree rejoice, that he is exalted.

These things premised, I would seriously propose unto all such, as mind in
reality to be Christians indeed, and that in Nature and not in Name only;
Whether it were not desirable, and would not greatly contribute to the
Commendation of Christianity, and to the increase of the Life and Virtue of
Christ, If all superfluous Titles of Honor, Profuseness and Prodigality in
Meat and Apparel, Excess of Gaming, Sporting and Playing were laid aside and
forborne? And whether such as lay them aside, in so doing walk not more like the
Disciples of Christ and his Apostles, and are therein nearer their Example,
than such as use them? Whether the laying them aside, would hinder any from
being good Christians? Or if Christians might not be better without them, than
with them? Certainly, the Sober and Serious among all Sorts will say; Yea. Then
surely such as lay them aside, as reckoning them unsuitable for Christians, are
not to be blamed; but rather commended for so doing: Because that both in
Principle and Practice they effectually advance that, which others acknowledge
were desirable; but can never make effectual, so long as they allow the Use of
them as lawful. And God has made it manifest in this Age, that by discovering
the Evil of such things, and leading his Witnesses out of them, and to testify
against them, he has produced effectually in many that Mortification and
Abstraction from the Love and Cares of this World, who daily are conversing in
the World (but inwardly redeemed out of it) both in Wedlock, and in their
lawful Imploiments, which was judged could only be obtained by such, as were
shut up in Cloisters and Monasteries. Thus much in general.

. III. As to the first, we affirm positively; That it is not lawful for
Christians either to give or receive these Titles of Honor, as, Your Holiness,
Your Majesty, your Excellency, your Eminency, etc.

First, Because these Titles are no part of that Obedience, Titles*
which is due to Magistrates or Superiors; neither does the giving them add to,
nor diminish from that Subjection we ow to them, which consists in obeying
their just and lawful Commands, not in Titles and Designations.

Secondly, We find not, that in the Scripture any such Titles are used either
under the Law or the Gospel: under the Law and Gospel.
but that in the speaking to Kings, Princes or Nobles, they use only a simple
Compellation, as 0 King, and that without any further Designation, save perhaps
the Name of the Person, as, O King Agrippa, etc.

Thirdly, Lying Titles.
It lays a Necessity upon Christians most frequently to Lie; because the
Persons obtaining these Titles either by Election, or Hereditarily, may
frequently be found to have nothing really in them, deserving them, or
answering to them: as some, to whom it is said Your Excellency, having nothing
of Excellency in them: And who is called Your Grace, appears to be an Enemy to
Grace: And he who is called Your Honor, is known to be Base and Ignoble. I
wonder what Law of Man, or what Patent ought to oblige me to make a Lie, in
calling Good Evil, and Evil Good? Patents do not oblige to a Lie.
I wonder, what Law of Man can secure me in so doing, from the just Judgment of
God, that will make me count for every idle Word? and to Lie is something more.
Surely, Christians should be ashamed, that such Laws manifestly crossing the
Law of God should be among them.

If it be said, We ought in Charity to suppose, Object.
that they have these Virtues, because the King has bestowed those Titles upon
them, or that they are descended of such as deserved them.

I answer, Charity destroys not Knowledge: I am not obliged by Charity, either
to believe or speak a Lie. Now it is apparent, Titles they bear, neither will
they allow to speak so to such, in whom these Virtues are, unless they be so
dignified by outward Princes. So that such as are truly Virtuous, must not be
styled by their Virtues, because not privileged by the Princes of this World;
and such as have them not, must be so called, because they have obtained a
Patent so to be: and all this is done by those, who pretend to be his
Followers, that commanded his Disciples, Not to call any Man Master, and told
them, such could not believe, as received Honor one from another, and sought
not the Honor, which comes from God only. This is so plain to such as will
indeed be Christians, that it needs no Consequence.

Your Holiness, Your Grace, etc.
Fourthly; As to those Titles of Holiness, Eminency and Excellency, used among
the Papists to the Pope and Cardinals, etc. and Grace, Lordship and Worship
used to the Clergy among the Protestants, it is a most blasphemous Usurpation.
For, if they use Holiness and Grace, because these things ought to be in a Pope
or in a Bishop, how come they to usurp that peculiarly to themselves? Ought not
Holiness and Grace to be in every Christian? And so every Christian should say
Your Holiness, and Your Grace one to another. Next, how can they in Reason
claim any more Titles, than were practiced and received by the Apostles and
Primitive Christians, whose Successors they pretend they are, and as whose
Successors (and no otherwise) themselves, I judge, will confess any Honor they
seek is due to them? Now, if they neither sought, received nor admitted such
Honor nor Titles, how came these by them? If they say, They did; let them
prove it if they can: We find no such thing in the Scripture. The Christians
speak to the Apostles without any such Denominations, neither saying, If it
please Your Grace, Hypocrites want Titles.
Your Holiness, Your Lordship, nor Your Worship; they are neither called My
Lord Peter, nor My Lord Paul; nor yet Master Peter, nor Master Paul; nor Doctor
Peter, nor Doctor Paul; but singly Peter and Paul, and that not only in the
Scripture, but for some hundreds of Years after: So that this appears to be a
manifest Fruit of the Apostasy. For if these Titles arise either from the
Office or Worth of the Persons, it will not be denied, but the Apostles
deserved them better than any now, that call for them: But the Case is plain,
the Apostles had the Holiness, the Excellency, the Grace; and because they were
Holy, Excellent and Gracious, they neither used nor admitted of such Titles:
But these having neither Holiness, Excellency nor Grace, will needs be so
called, to satisfy their Ambitious and Ostentive Minds, which is a manifest
Token of their Hypocrisy.

Fifthly, as to that Title of Majesty, usually ascribed to Princes, we do not
find it given to any such in the Holy Scripture; but that it is specially and
peculiarly ascribed unto God, as 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Job 37.22. Psalm.
21.5.29.4.43.3.63.1.96.6. Isa. 2.10.24.14.26.10. Heb. 1.3. 2 Pet. 1.16. and
many more Places. Hence says Jude, ver. 25. To the only wise God, our Savior,
be Glory and Majesty, etc. not to Men: We find in Scripture the proud King
Nebuchadnezar assuming this Title to himself, Dan. 4.30. who at that Time
received a sufficient Reproof by a sudden Judgment, which came upon him.
Therefore in all the Compellations used to Princes in the Old Testament it is
not to be found, nor yet in the New. Paul was very civil to Agrippa; yet he
gives him no such Title: Neither was this Title used among Christians in the
Primitive Times Hence the Ecclesiastical History of the Reformation of France
relating the Speech of the Lord Rochefort, at the Assembly of the Estate of
France held under Charles the Ninth, in the Year 1560, says, That this
Harangue was well remarked, in that he used not the Word [Majesty,] invented by
Flatterers of late Years. And yet this Author minded not, how his Master Calvin
used this flattering Title to Francis the First, King of France; Eccles. hist.
lib. 4. p. 445.

Your Majesty not used; How taken notice of in 1560.


and not only so, but calls him Most-Christian King, in the Epistle to his
Institutions, though by his daily persecuting of the Reformers it was apparent,
he was far from being such, even in Calvin's own Esteem. Surely, the complying
with such vain Titles imposed and introduced by Antichrist, greatly tended to
stain the Reformation, and to render it defective in many things.

Lastly, All these Titles and Styles of Honor are to be rejected by
Christians; because they are to seek the Honor, that comes from above, and not
the Honor that is from below: But these Honors are not that Honor, that
comes from above, but are from below. The Proud Mind loves Titles.
For we know well enough, what Industry, and what Pains Men are at to get these
Things, and what part it is that seeks after them, to wit, the Proud, Insolent,
Haughty, Aspiring Mind. For judge, Is it the Meek and Innocent Spirit of
Christ, that covets that Honor? Is it that Spirit, that must be of no
Reputation in this World, that has its Conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.
that comes to have Fellowship with the Sons of God? Is it that Spirit, I say,
that loves that Honor, that seeks after that Honor, that pleads for the
upholding of that Honor, that frets, and rages and fumes, when it is denied
that Honor? Or is it not rather the Lordly, insulting Spirit of Lucifer,
Lucifer's Spirit.
the Prince of this World, he that of old affected and sought after this
Honor, and loved not to abide in the Submissive, Low Place? And so all his
Children are possessed with the same ambitious, proud Mind, seeking and
coveting Titles of Honor, which indeed belong not to them. For let us examine,
Who are they, 1 Samuel 2.30.
that are Honorable indeed? Is it not the Righteous Man? Is it not the Holy
Man? Is it not the humble-hearted Man? the meek spirited Man? And are not such
those, that ought to be honored among Christians? Now, of these may there not
be Poor Men? Laborers? silly Fishermen? And* if so, how comes it, that the
Titles of Honor are not bestowed upon such? But who are they, that generally
receive and look for this Honor? Are they not the Rich ones? such as have
abundance of the Earth? as be like the Rich Glutton? such as are proud and
ambitious? such as are Oppressors of the Poor? such as swell with Lust and
Vanity? and all superfluity of Naughtiness? Who are the very Abomination and
Plague of the Nations; are not these they, that are accounted the Honorable?
that require and receive the Titles of Honor, proud Hamans? Now whether is
this the Honor, that comes from God, or the Honor from below? Does God honor
such as daily dishonor him and disobey him? And if this be not the Honor,
that comes from God, but the Honor of this World, which the Children of this
World give, and receive one from another; How can the Children of God, such as
are Christians indeed, give or receive that Honor among themselves, Hieron. in
his Epistle to Celant. admonishes her, That she was to be preferred to none
for her Nobibity, for the Christian Religion admits not of respect of Persons;
neither are Men to be esteemed, because of their outward condition, but
according to the Disposition of the Mind, to be esteemed either Noble or ^ase;
he that obeys not sin, is free, who is strong in Virtue is Noble. Let the
Epistle of James be read
without coming under the Reproof of Christ, who says, That such as do so,
cannot believe? But further, if we respect the Cause, that most frequently
procures to Men these Titles of Honor, there is not one of a thousand, that
shall be found to be, because of any Christian Virtue; but rather for things to
be discommended among Christians: As by the Favor of Princes procured by
Flattering, and often by worse Means. Yea, the most frequent, and accounted
among Men most-Honourable, is Fighting, or some great Martial Exploit; which
can add nothing to a Christian's Worth: Since, sure it is, it were desirable,
there were no Fightings among Christians at all, and in so far as there are, it
shows, they are not right Christians. And James tells us, That All fighting
proceeds from the lusts; so that it were fitter for Christians, by the Sword of
God's Spirit to fight against their Lusts, than by the Prevalency of their
Lusts to destroy one another. Whatever Honor any might have attained of old
under the Law this way, we find under the Gospel Christians commended for
Suffering, not for Fighting, neither did any of Christ's Disciples, save one,
offer outward Violence by the Sword, in cutting off Malchus's Ear; for which he
received no Title of Honor, but a just Reproof. Finally, if we look either to
the Nature of this Honor, the Cause of it, the Way it is conveyed, the Terms in
which it is delivered, it cannot be used by such, as mind to be Christians in
good earnest.

. IV. Now besides these general Titles of Honor, what gross Abuses are crept
in among such, as are called Christians, in the use of Complements, wherein not
Servants to Masters or others, with respect to any such kind of Relations, do
say and write to one another at every turn, Your humble Servant, Your most
obedient Servant, Lying accounted Civility.
etc. Such wicked Customs have, to the great Prejudice of Souls, accustomed
Christians to Lie; and to use Lying, is now come to be accounted Civility. O
horrid Apostasy! For it is notoriously known, that the Use of these Complements
imports not any Design of Service, neither are any such Fools as to think so;
for if we should put them to it, that say so, they would not doubt to think, we
abused them, and would let us know, they gave us Word^ in Course, and no more.
It is strange, that such, as pretend to Scripture as their Rule, should not be
ashamed to use such things; since Elihu, that had not the Scriptures, would by
the Light within him (which these Men think insufficient) say ( Job 32.21, 22.)
Let me not accept any man's person, neither let me give flattering Titles unto
man. For I know not to give flattering Titles; In so doing my Maker would soon
take me away. This History is reported by Casaubonus, in his Book of Manners
and Customs, page 169. In this last Age he is esteemed an uncivil Man, who will
not, either to his Inferior or Equal, subscribe himself Servant. But Sulpitius
Severus was heretofore sharply reproved by Paulinus Bishop of Nola, because, in
his Epistle he had subscribed himself his Servant, saying, Beware thou,
subscribe not thy self his Servant, who is thy Brother, for Flattery is sinful,
not a Testimony of Humility, to give their Honors to Men, which are only due
to the One Lord, Master and GOD.
A certain ancient devout Man, in the Primitive Time subscribed himself to a
Bishop, Your humble Servant; wherein, I doubt not, but he was more real, than
our usual Complementers; and yet he was sharply reproved for it.

But they usually Object, to defend themselves, That Luke says; Most excellent
Theophilus; and Paul, Most noble Festus.

I Answer; Since Luke wrote that by the Dictates of the infallible Spirit of
God, I think it will not be doubted, but Theophilus did deserve it, as being
really endued with that Virtue: Concerning the Title Paul gave to Festus.
In which Case we shall not condemn those, that do it by the same Rule. But it
is not proved, that Luke gave Theophilus this Title, as that which was inherent
to him either by his Father, or by any Patent Theophilus had obtained from any
of the Princes of the Earth, or that he would have given it him, in case he had
not been truly Excellent: And without this be proved (which never can) there
can nothing hence be deduced against us. The like may be said of that of Paul
to Festus, whom he would not have called such, if he had not been truly Noble;
as indeed he was, in that he suffered him to be heard in his own Cause, and
would not give way to the Fury of the Jews against him; it was not, because of
any outward Title bestowed upon Festus, that he so called him, else he would
have given the same Compellation to his Predecessor Felix, who had the same
Office; but being a covetous Man, we find, he gives him no such Style.

. V. It will not be unfit in this Place, The Singular Number to one Person used
in the Latin.
to say something concerning the using of the singular Number to one Person; of
this there is no Controversy in the Latin. For when we speak to one, we always
use the Pronoun [TU,] and he that would do otherwise, would break the Rules of
Grammar: For what Boy, learning his Rudiments, is ignorant, that it is
incongruous to say [ vos amas, vos legis,] that is [ you love, you read,]
speaking to one? But the Pride of Man, that has corrupted many things, refuses
also to use this simplicity of speaking in the Vulgar Languages. For, being
puffed up with a vain Opinion of themselves, as if the Singular Number were not
sufficient to them, they will have others to speak to them in the Plural. Hence
Luther in his Plays reproves and mocks this manner of speaking, saying,
Magister, vos es iratus: Which Corruption Erasmus sufficiently refutes in his
Colloquies. Concerning which likewise James Howel, in his Epistle to the
Nobility of England, before the French and English Dictionary takes notice,
That both in France and in other Nations the Word [THOU] was used in speaking
to one, but by success of Time, when the Roman Commonwealth grew into an
Empire, the Courtiers began to magnify the Emperor, ( as being furnished with
Power to confer Dignities and Offices) using the Word [You, How the Word You
came to be used to a Single Person.
] yea and Deifying him with more remarkable Titles; concerning which matter we
read in the Epistles of Symmachus to the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinianus, where he uses these Forms of speaking, Vestra Aeternitas, Your
Eternity; Vestrum Numen, Your Godhead; Vestra Serenitas, Your Serenity; Vestra
Clementia, Your Clemency. So that the Word [You] in the Plural Number, together
with the other Titles and Compellations of Honor seem to have taken their rise
from Monarchical Government; which afterward by degrees came to be derived to
Private Persons.

The same is witnessed by John Maresius of the French Academy, in the Preface
of his Clovis: Let none wonder (says he) that the Word [Thou] is used in this
Work to Princes and Princesses; for we use the same to God: And of old the same
was used to Alexanders, Caesar's, Queens and Empresses. The Use of the Word
[You] when one Person is spoken to, was only introduced by these base
Flatteries of Men of latter Ages, to whom it seemed good to use the Plural
Number to one Person, that he may imagine himself alone to be equal to many
others in Dignity and Worth; from whence at last it came to Persons of lower
Quality.

To the same Purpose speaks also M. Godeau, in his Preface to the New
Testament Translation: I had rather (says he) faithfully keep to the express
Words of Paul, than exactly follow the polished Style of our Tongue; therefore
I always use that Form of calling God in the Singular Number, not in the
Plural; and therefore I say rather [Thou] than [You]. I confess indeed, that
the Civility and Custom of this World require him to be honored after that
manner; but it is likewise on the contrary true, That the Original Tongue of
the New Testament has nothing common with such Manners and Civility; so that
not one of these many old Versions we have, does observe it. Let not Men
believe, that we give not Respect enough to God, in that we call him by the
Word [Thou] which is nevertheless far otherwise; The Word Thou a greater Honor
to one than You.
for I seem to my self (may be by the Effect of Custom) more to honor his
Divine Majesty, in calling him after this Manner, than if I should call him
after the Manners of Men, who are so delicate in their Forms of Speech.

See how clearly and evidently these Men witness, that this Form of Speaking,
and these profane Titles derive their Origin from the base Flattery of these
last Ages, and from the delicate Haughtiness of Worldly Men, who have invented
these Novelties, that thereby they might honor one another, under (I know not
what) Pretense of Civility and Respect. From whence many of the present
Christians (so accounted) are become so perverse, in commending most-wicked Men
and wicked Customs, that the Simplicity of the Gospel is wholly lost; so that
the giving of Men and Things their own Names, is not only worn out of Custom,
but the doing thereof is accounted absurd and rude by such kind of delicate
Parasites, who desire to ascribe to this Flattery and abuse the Name of
Civility. Moreover, that this way of speaking proceeds from a High and Proud
Mind, hence appears; because that Men usually use the Singular Number to
Beggars, and to their Servants, yea and in their Prayers to God: Thus the
Superior will speak to his Inferior, who yet will not bear, that the Inferior
so speak to him, as judging it a kind of Reproach unto him. So has the Pride
of Men placed God and the Beggar in the same Category! I think, I need not use
Arguments to prove to such, as know congruous Language, that we ought to use
the Singular Number speaking to one; which is the common Dialect of the whole
Scripture, as also the most Interpreters do translate it. Seeing therefore it
is manifest to us, that this form of speaking to Men in the plural number, does
proceed from Pride, as well as that it is in it self a lie, we found a
necessity upon us, to testify against this corruption, by using the singular
equally unto all. And albeit no reason can be given, why we should be
persecuted upon this account, especially by Christians, who profess to Follow
the Rule of Scripture, whose Dialect this is; yet it would perhaps seem
incredible, if I should relate, how much we have suffered for this thing, and
how these proud ones fume, Scripture 's Dialect the plain Language.
fret and gnash their Teeth, frequently beating and striking us, when we speak
to them thus in the singular number: Whereby we are the more confirmed in our
judgment, as seeing, that this Testimony of Truth, which God has given us to
bear in all things, does so vex the serpentine nature in the Children of
darkness.

VI. Secondly. Next unto this of Titles, the other part of Honor used among
Christians, is the Kneeling, Bowing to Men, etc.
Bowing and Uncovering of the Head to one another. I know nothing our
Adversaries have to plead for them in this matter, save some few instances of
the Old Testament, and the Custom of the Country.

The first are, such as Abraham 's bowing himself to the Children of Heth, and
Lot to the two Angels, etc.

But the practice of these Patriarchs, related as matter of Fact, are not to be
a Rule to Christians now: Neither are we to imitate them in every Practice,
which has not a particular Reproof added to it. For we find not Abraham
reproved for taking Hagar, etc. and indeed to say, All things were lawful for
us, The Custom of the Nations no Rule to Christians.
which they practiced, would produce inconveniences obvious enough to all. And
as to the Customs of the Nations, it is a very ill argument for a Christian's
practice. We should have a better Rule to walk by, than the custom of the
Gentiles; the Apostle desires us Not to be conformed to this World, etc. We
see, Romans 12. ver. 2.
how little they have to say for themselves in this matter. Let it be observed
then, whether our Reasons for laying aside these things be not considerable,
and weighty enough to uphold us in so doing.

First, We say; That God, who is the Creator of man, and he, to whom he owes
the dedication both of Soul and Body, is over all to be worshipped and adored,
and that not only by the Spirit, but also with the prostration of Body. Now
Kneeling, Bowing and uncovering of the Head is the alone outward signification
of our Adoration toward God, and therefore it is not lawful to give it unto
man. Bowing is Adoring, and is only Gods'.
He that kneeleth or prostrates himself to man, what does he more to God? He
that boweth and uncovereth his Head to the Creature, what has he reserved to
the Creator? Now the Apostle shows us, that the uncovering of the Head is that,
which God requires of us in our worshipping of him, 1 Cor. 11. But if we make
our Address to men in the same manner, where lies the difference? Not in the
outward signification, but merely in the intention, which opens a door for the
Popish veneration of Images, which hereby is necessarily excluded.

Secondly; Men being alike by Creation, (though their being stated under their
several Relations, requires from them mutual Services, according to those
respective Relations) owe not worship to one another; but all equally are to
return it to God: because it is to him and his Name alone, that every knee must
bow, and before whose Throne the four and twenty Elders prostrate themselves.
Therefore for men to take this one from another, is to rob God of his Glory:
Since all the duties of Relations may be performed one to another, without
these kinds of Bowings, which therefore are no essential part of our duty to
man, but to God: All men, by an inward instinct, in all Nations have been led
to prostrate and bow themselves to God. And it is plain, that this bowing to
men took place from a slavish fear possessing some, which led them to set up
others as Gods, when also an ambitious, proud spirit got up in those others, to
usurp the place of God over their Brethren.

Thirdly, We see that Peter refused it from Cornelius, saying, he was a man.
Are then the Popes more, or more excellent than Peter, who suffer men daily to
fall down at their feet, and kiss them? Peter and the Angel refused Bowing.
This Reproof of Peter to Cornelius does abundantly show, that such Manners
were not to be admitted among Christians. Yea, we see, that the Angel twice
refused this kind of bowing from John, Rev. 19.10.22.9. for this reason,
because I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren; abundantly intimating,
that it is not lawful for Fellow Servants thus to prostrate themselves one to
another: And in this respect all men are Fellow Servants.

Object.
If it be said, John intended here a Religious Worship, and not a Civil.

I answer; that is to say, not to prove: Neither can we suppose John at that
time of the day so ill instructed, unlawful to worship Angels; only it should
seem, because of these great and mysterious things revealed to him by that
Angel, he was willing to signify some more than ordinary Testimony of Respect;
for which he was Reproved. These things being thus considered, it is remitted
to the judgment of such, as are desirous to be found Christians indeed, whether
we be found worthy of blame for waving it to men? To forbear Bowing to man is
no Uncivility, nor Pride, nor Rudeness.
Let those then, that will blame us, consider, whether they might not as well
accuse Mordecai of Vncivility, who was no less singular, than we in this
matter? And forasmuch as they accuse us herein of Rudeness and Pride, though
the testimony of our Consciences in the sight of God be a sufficient guard
against such calumnys, yet there are of us, known to be Men of such Education,
as forbear not these things for want of that they call good Breeding; and we
should be very void of reason, to purchase that Pride at so dear a rate, as
many have done the exercise of their Conscience in this matter; many of us
having been sorely beaten and buffeted, yea and several months imprisoned, for
no other reason, but because we could not so satisfy the proud, unreasonable
humors of proud Men, as to uncover our Heads, and bow our Bodies. Nor does our
innocent practice in standing still (though upright, not putting off our Hats
any more than our Shoos, the one being the covering of our Heads, as well as
the other of our Feet) show so much rudeness, as their beating or knocking us,
etc. because we cannot bow to them, contrary to our Consciences: Which
certainly shows less meekness and humility upon their part, than it does of
rudeness or pride upon ours. Now suppose it were our weakness, and we really
under a mistake in this thing; since it is not alleged to be the breach of any
Christian precept, are we not to be Indulged, as the Apostle commanded should
be done to such, as scrupled to eat flesh? And does not persecuting us and
reviling us upon this account, show them to be more like unto proud Haman, than
the Disciples or followers of the meek, self-denying Jesus? And this I can say
boldly, in the sight of God, from my own experience, and that of many thousands
more, that however small or foolish this may seem, yet we behoved to choose
death rather than do it, and that for Conscience sake: And that, in its being
so contrary to our natural Spirits, there are many of us, to whom the forsaking
of these Bowings and Ceremonies was as death it self: Which we could never have
left, if we could have enjoyed our peace with God in the use of them. Though it
be far from us to judge all those, to whom God has not shown the evil of them,
under the like hazard; yet nevertheless we doubt not, but to such, as will
prove faithful Witnesses to Christ's Divine Light in their Consciences, God
will also show the evil of these things.

. VII. The Third thing to be treated of, APPAREL in its Vanity and
Superfluities dissallowed.
is the Vanity and Superfluity of Apparel. In which first two things are to be
considered; the Condition of the Person, and the Country, he lives in. We shall
not say, that all Persons are to be clothed alike; because it will perhaps
neither suit their Bodies, nor their Estates. And if a man be clothed soberly
and without superfluity, though they may be finer, than that, which his servant
is clothed with; we shall not blame him for it: The abstaining from
superfluities, which his condition and education has accustomed him to, may be
in him a greater act of Mortification, than the abstaining from finer Clothes
in the servant, who never was accustomed to them. As to the Country; what it
naturally produces, may be no Vanity to the Inhabitants to use, or what is
commonly imparted to them by way of Exchange; seeing it is without doubt, that
the Creation is for the use of man. So where Silk abounds, it may be worn, as
well as Wool; and were we in those Countries, or near unto them, where Gold or
Silver were as common as Iron or Brass, the one might be used as well as the
other. The iniquity lies then here; First, When from a lust of vanity, and
desire to adorn themselves, men and women not content with what their condition
can bear, or their Country easily affords, do stretch to have things, that from
their rarity, and the price that is put upon them, seem to be precious; and so
feed their lust the more: And this all sober men of all sorts will readily
grant to be Evil.

Secondly, When men are not content to make a true use of the Creation, whether
the things be fine or course, and do not satisfy themselves with what need and
convenience calls for; but add thereunto things merely superfluous; such as is
the use of Ribbands and Lace, and much more of that kind of stuff, as painting
the Face, plaiting the Hair, which are the Fruits of the fallen, lustful and
corrupt nature, and not of the new Creation, as all will acknowledge. And
though sober men among all sorts will say; That it were better, these things
were not; yet will they not reckon them unlawful, and therefore do admit the
use of them among their Church Members: But we do account them altogether
unlawful and unsuitable to Christians, and that for these Reasons.

First; The use of Clothes came originally from the fall. If man had not
fallen, it appears he would not have needed them. But this miserable state made
them necessary in two Respects: The proper use of Clothes.
1. To Cover his Nakedness; and 2. To keep him from the Cold: Which is both the
proper and principal use of them. Now, for man to delight himself in that,
which is the fruit of his Iniquity, and is the consequence of Sin, can be no
ways lawful for him* So, to extend things beyond their real use, or to superadd
things wholly superfluous, is a manifest abuse of the Creation, and therefore
not lawful to Christians.

Secondly; Those, that will needs so adorn themselves in the use of their
Clothes, as to beset them with things having no real use nor necessity, but
merely for Ornament's sake, do openly declare, that the end of it is either to
please their lust, (for which end these things are chiefly invented and
contrived) or otherwise to gratify a vain, Not to please their Lusts.
proud ostentative mind; and it is obvious, these are their general ends in so
doing. Yea, we see, how easily men are puffed up with their Garments, and how
proud and vain they are, when adorned to their mind. Now, how far these things
are below a true Christian, and how unsuitable, it needs not great probation.
Hereby those, that love to be gaudy and superfluous in their Clothes, show,
they concern themselves little with Mortification and Self-denial; and that
they mind to beautify their Bodies more than their Souls; which proves, they
mind little upon mortality, and so certainly, are more nominal than real
Christians.

Thirdly, The Scripture severely reproves such Practices, both commending and
commanding the contrary; as Isa 3. how severely does the Prophet reprove the
Daughters of Israel for their Tinkling Ornaments, Contrary to Scripture.
their Cauls, and their round Tiars, their Chains and Bracelets, etc. and yet
is it not strange, to see Christians allow themselves in these things, from
whom a more strict and exemplary Conversation is required? Christ desires us
not to be anxious about our Clothing, Matthew. 6.25. and to show the Vanity of
such, as Glory in the Splendor of their Clothing, tells them, That even
Solomon in all his glory was not to be compared to the Lily of the field, which
to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven. But surely, they make small
reckoning of Christ's Words and Doctrine, that are curious in their Clothing,
and so industrious to deck themselves, and so earnest to justify it, and so mad
when they are reproved for it: The Apostle Paul is very positive in this
Respect, 1 Timothy 2.8, 9, 10. I will therefore in like manner also, that women
adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety, not with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly Array: But which becomes women
professing godliness, with good works. To the same purpose says Peter, 1 Pet.
3.3, 4. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: But let it be the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit, etc. Here both the Apostles do very positively and
expressly assert two things; First, That the adorning of Christian Women (of
whom it is particularly spoken, I judge, because that Sex is most naturally
inclined to that Vanity, and that it seems, Plaiting the Hair, etc.
that Christian Men in those Days deserved not in this Respect so much to be
reproved) ought not to be outward, nor to consist in the Apparel. Secondly,
That they ought not to use the plaiting of the Hair or Ornaments, etc. which
was at that Time the Custom of the Nations. But is it not strange, That such
as make the Scripture their Rule, and pretend they are guided by it, should not
only be so frequently and ordinarily in the use of these things, which the
Scripture so plainly condemns; but also should allow themselves in so doing?
For the Apostles not only commend the Forbearance of these things, as an
Attainment Commendable in Christians; but condemn the use of them as unlawful;
and yet may it not seem more strange, that (in contradiction to the Apostles
Doctrine, as if they had resolved to slight their Testimony) they should
condemn those, that out of Conscience apply themselves seriously to follow it,
as if in so doing they were singular, proud or superstitious? This certainly
betokens a sad Apostasy in those, that will be accounted Christians, that they
are so offended with those, that love to follow Christ and his Apostles, in
denying of, and departing from the lying Vanities of this perishing World, and
so does much evidence their Affinity with such, as hate to be reproved, and
neither will enter themselves, nor suffer those that would.

. VIII. Fourthly: Let us consider the use of Games, Sports, Comedies and other
such things, Sports, etc. inconsistent with the Gospel.
commonly and indifferently used by all the several Sorts of Christians, under
the Notion of Divertisement and Recreation, and see, whether these things can
consist with the Seriousness, Gravity and Godly Fear, which the Gospel calls
for. Let us but view and look over the Notions of them, that call themselves
Christians, whether Popish or Protestant, and see if generally there be any
Difference, save in mere Name and Profession, from the Heathen? Does not the
same Folly, the same Vanity, the same Abuse of precious and irrevocable Time
abound? The same Gaming, Sporting, Playing, and from thence Quarrelling,
Fighting, Swearing, Ranting, Revelling? Now, how can these things be remedied,
so long as the Preachers and Professors, and those who are the Leaders of the
People, do allow these things, and account them not inconsistent with the
Profession of Christianity? And it is strange to see, that these things are
tolerated every where the Inquisition lays no hold on them neither at Rome, nor
in Spain, where, in their Mascarades all manner of Obscenity, Folly, yea and
Atheism is generally practiced in the Face of the World, to the great Scandal
of the Christian Name: But if any Man reprove them in these things, and forsake
their Superstitions, and come seriously to serve God, and worship him in the
Spirit, he is made a Prey, and presently made liable to cruel Sufferings. Does
this bear any proportion to Christianity? Do these things look any thing like
the Churches of the Primitive Christians? Surely not at all. I shall first cite
some few Scripture Testimonies, being very positive Precepts to Christians, and
then see, whether such as obey them, can admit of these forementioned things.
The Apostle commands us, That whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, we do
it all to the glory of God. But I judge none will be so impudent, as to affirm,
That in the Use of these Sports and Games God is glorified: If any should so
say, they would declare, They neither knew God nor his Glory. By Sports and
Games God is not glorified.
And Experience abundantly proves, That in the Practice of these things Men
mind nothing less, than the Glory of God, and nothing more than the
Satisfaction of their own Carnal Lusts, Wills and Appetites. The Apostle
desires us (1 Cor. 7.29, 31.) Because the time is short, that they that buy,
should be, as though they possessed not: And they that use this world, as not
abusing it, etc. But how can they be found in the Obedience of this Precept,
that plead for the Use of these Games and Sports? who, it seems, think the Time
so long, that they cannot find occasion enough to employ it, neither in taking
Care for their Souls, nor yet in the necessary Care for their Bodies, but
invent these Games and Sports to pass it away, as if they wanted other Work to
serve God, or be useful to the Creation in. The Apostle Peter desires us, To
pass the time of our sojourning here in Fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. But will any say,
That such as use Dancing and Comedies, Carding and Dicing, do so much as mind
this Precept in the Use of these things? where there is nothing to be seen but
Lightness and Vanity, Wantonness and Obscenity, contrived to hinder Men from
Fear, or being Serious; and therefore, no doubt, calculated for the Service of
the Devil. There is no Duty more frequently commanded, nor more incumbent upon
Christians, than the Fear of the Lord, to stand in awe before him, to walk as
in his presence; but if such as use these Games and Sports, will speak from
their Consciences, they can (I doubt not) experimentally declare, That this
Fear is forgotton in their Gaming: And if God by his Light secretly touch them,
or mind them of the Vanity of their Way, they strive to shut it out, and use
their Gaming, as an Engine to put away from them that troublesome Guest; and
thus make merry over the Just One* whom they have slain and crucified in
themselves. But further, if Christ's Reasoning be to be heeded, who says,
Matthew. 12.35, 36. That the good man out of the good treasure of the heart
brings forth good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure brings
forth evil things; And that of every idle word we shall give an account in the
day of Judgment; It may be easily gathered, from what Treasure these Inventions
come: And it may be easily proved, that it is from the Evil, and not the Good.
How many idle Words do they necessarily produce? Comedies a studied complex of
idle Lying Words.
Yea, what are Comedies, but a studied complex of idle and lying Words? Let Men
that believe their Souls are immortal, and that there will be a Day of
Judgment, in which these Words of Christ will be accomplished, answer me, how
all these will make account in that great and terrible Day, of all these idle
Words, that are necessarily made use of about Dancing, Gaming, Carding and
Comedies acting? And yet how is it, that by Christians not condemning these
things, but allowing of them, many that are accounted Christians, take up their
whole Time in them; yea, make it their Trade and Employment: such as the
Dancing-Masters and Comedians, etc. whose hellish Conversations do sufficiently
declare, what Master they serve, and to what End these things contribute. And
it cannot be denied, as being obviously manifest by Experience, That such as
are Masters of these Trades, and are most delighted in them, (if they be not
open Atheists and Prostigates) are such at best, as make Religion, or the Care
of their Souls their least Business. Now if these things were discountenanced
by Christians, as inconsistent with their Profession, it would remove these
things; for these Wretches would be necessitated then to betake themselves to
some more honest Livelihood, if they were not fed and upholden by these. And as
hereby a great Scandal and Stumbling Block would be removed from off the
Christian Name; so also would that in part be taken out of the Way, which
provokes the Lord to withhold his Blessing, and by occasion of which things the
Minds of many remain chained in Darkness, and drowned in Lust, Sensuality and
Worldly Pleasures, without any Sense of God's Fear, or their own Souls
Salvation. Many of those called Fathers of the Church, and other serious
Persons have signified their Regret for these things, and their Desires they
might be remedied; of whom many Citations might be alleged, which for
brevity's sake I have omitted.

. IX. But they object, That Men's Spirits could not subsist, Object.
if they were always intent upon Serious and Spiritual Matters; and that
therefore there is need of some Divertisement to recreate the Mind a little,
whereby it being refreshed, is able with greater Vigor to apply it self to
these things.

I answer, though all this were granted, Intentiveness of Mind, we do not
plead; knowing, how impossible it is, so long as we are clothed with this
Tabernacle of Clay. But this will not allow us at any Time so to recede from
the Memory of God, and of our Souls chief Concern, The Fear of God the best
Recreation in all things.
as not still to retain a certain Sense of his Fear; which cannot be so much as
rationally supposed to be in the use of these things, which we condemn. Now the
necessary Occasions, which all are involved into, in order to the Care and
Sustentation of the outward Man, are a Relaxation of the Mind from the more
Serious Duties; and those are performed in the Blessing: as the Mind is so
leavened with the Love of God and Sense of his Presence, that even in doing
these things, the Soul carries with it that Divine Influence and Spiritual
Habit, whereby, though these Acts as of Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Working be
upon the Matter one, with what the wicked do; Yet they are done in another
Spirit, and in doing of them, we please the Lord, serve him, and answer our End
in the Creation, and so feel and are sensible of his Blessing: Whereas the
Wicked and Profane, being not come to this Place, are, in whatsoever they do,
cursed, and their Ploughing as well as Praying is sin. Now if any will plead,
that for Relaxation of Mind there may be a Liberty allowed beyond these things,
which are of absolute need to the Sustenance of the outward Man, I shall not
much contend against it; provided, these things be not such, as are wholly
superfluous or in their proper Nature and Tendency lead the Mind into Lust,
Vanity and Wantonness, as being chiefly contrived and framed for that End, or
generally experienced to produce these Effects, or being the common Engines of
such, as are so minded, to feed one another therein, and to propagate their
Wickedness to the impoysoning of others: seeing there are other Innocent
Divertisements, which may sufficiently serve for Relaxation to the Mind; Such
as for Friends to visit one another; Lawful Divertisements.
to hear or read History; to speak soberly of the present or past Transactions;
to follow after Gardnering; to use Geometrical and Mathematical Experiments:
and such other things of this Nature. In all which things we are not so to
forget God, (in whom we both live and are moved, Acts 10.26.) as not to have
always some secret Reserve to him, and Sense of his Fear and Presence; which
also frequently exerts it self in the midst of these things, by some short
Aspiration and Breathings. And that this may neither seem strange nor
Troublesome, I shall clear it by one manifest Instance, answerable to the
Experience of all Men. It will not be denied, but that Men ought to be more in
the Love of God, than of any other thing; for we ought to love God above all
things. Now, it is plain, That Men that are taken with Love, whether it be of a
Woman, or any other thing, if it has taken deep Place in the Heart, and
possessed the Mind, it will be hard for the Man, so in Love, to drive out of his
Mind the Person or thing so loved; yea, in his Eating, Drinking and Sleeping
his Mind will always have a Tendency that way; and in Business or Recreation,
however intent he be in it, there will but a very short Time be permitted to
pass, but the Mind will let some Ejaculation forth toward its beloved. The
Love toward its beloved shuns its Offense.
And albeit such a one must be conversant in those things, that the Care of
this Body, and such like things call for; yet will he avoid, as death it self,
to do those things, that may offend the Party so beloved, or cross his Design
in obtaining the thing so earnestly desired: Though there may be some small use
in them; the great Design, which is chiefly in his Eye, will so balance him,
that he will easily look over and dispense with such petty Necessities, rather
than endanger the Loss of the Greater by them. Now that Men ought to be thus in
Love with God, and the Life to come, none will deny, and the thing is apparent
from these Scriptures, Matthew. 6.20. But lay up for your selves treasures in
Heaven. Col. 3.2. Set your affection on things above, etc. And that this has
been the Experience and Attainment of some, the Scripture also declares, Psalm.
63.1.84. 2 Cor. 5.14.

Sports, Plays, draw Men from the Fear of God.
And again; That these Games, Sports, Plays, Dancing, Comedies, etc. do
naturally tend to draw Men from God's Fear, to make them forget Heaven, Death
and Judgment, to foster Lust, Vanity and Wantonness, and therefore are most
loved, as well as used by such kind of Persons, Experience abundantly shows,
and the most-Serious and Conscientious among all will scarcely deny: Which if
it be so, the Application is easy.

. X. Fifthly, The use of Swearing is to be considered, which is so frequently
practiced almost among all Christians, not only profane Oaths among the
profane, in their common discourses, whereby the most^HOLY NAME of GOD is in a
horrible manner daily blasphemed; but also solemn Oaths with those, that have
some show of piety, whereof the most part do defend Swearing before the
Magistrate with so great zeal, that not only they are ready themselves to do it
upon every occasion, but also stir up the Magistrates to persecute those, who,
out of obedience to Christ, their Lord and Master, judge it unlawful to Swear:
Upon which account not a few have suffered Imprisonment, and the spoiling of
their Goods.

But considering these clear words of our Savior, All Swearing is forbidden.
--
Matthew. 5.33, 34. Again ye have heard, that it has been said by them of old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths: But I say unto you, SWEAR NOT AT ALL, neither by Heaven, etc. But let
your Communication be Yea, Yea: Nay, Nay: For whatsoever is more than these,
comes of evil. As also the words of the Apostle James 5.12. But above all
things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth,
neither by any other Oath: But let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; lest you
fall into Condemnation. I say, considering these clear words, it is admirable,
how any one, that professes the Name of Christ, can pronounce any Oath with a
quiet Conscience; far less to persecute other Christians, that dare not swear,
because of their Master Christ's Authority? For did any one purpose seriously,
and in the most rigid manner to forbid any thing, comprehended under any
General, can they use a more full and general prohibition, and that without any
Exception? I think not. For Christ, First proposes it to us negatively, Swear
not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by the Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy
Head, etc. And again, Swear not by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath.
Secondly, he presses it affirmatively, But let your Communication be Yea, Yea:
and Nay, Nay: For whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil. And says
James, lest ye fall into Condemnation.

Which words both all and every one of them do make such a full prohibition,
and so free of all Exception, that it is strange, Without Exception.
how men, that boast the Scripture is the Rule of their Faith and Life, can
counterfeit any Exception! Certainly, Reason ought to teach every one, that it
is not lawful to make void a general prohibition coming from God, by such
opposition, unless the Exception be as clearly and evidently expressed, as the
prohibition; neither is it enough, to endeavor to confirm it by Consequences
and Probabilities, which are obscure and uncertain, and not sufficient to bring
quiet to the Conscience. For if they say, that there is therefore an Exception
and limitation in the words, because there are found Exceptions in the other
general prohibition of this fifth Chapter, as in the forbidding of Divorcement,
where Christ says, It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, let
him give her a Writing of Divorcement: But I say unto you, That whosoever shall
put away his Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, causes her to commit
Adultery; If (I say) they say this, they not only labor in vain, but also
fight against themselves, because they can produce no Exception of this general
Command of not Swearing, expressed by God to any under the New Covenant, after
Christ gave this prohibition, so clear, as that which is made in the
prohibition it self. Moreover, if Christ would have excepted Oaths made before
Magistrates, Also Oaths before a Magistrate.
certainly he had then expressed, adding, Except in judgment before the
Magistrate, or the like; as he did in that of divorcement, by these words,
saving for the cause of Fornication: Which being so, it is not lawful for us to
except or distinguish, or (which is all one) make void this general prohibition
of Christ; it would be far less agreeable to Christian Holiness, to bring upon
our heads the crimes of so many Oaths, which by reason of this corruption and
exception are so frequent among Christians.

Neither is it to be omitted, that, without doubt, the most learned Doctors of
each Sect know, that these forementioned words were understood by the ancient
Fathers of the first three hundred years after Christ, The concurrence of the
Ancient Fathers therein.
to be a prohibition of All sorts of Oaths: It is not then without reason, that
we wonder, that the Popish Doctors and Priests bind themselves by an Oath, to
interpret the Holy Scriptures according to the universal Exposition of the holy
Fathers; who notwithstanding understood those controverted Texts quite
contrary, to what these modern Doctors do. And from thence also does clearly
appear the vanity and foolish certainty (so to speak) of Popish Traditions; for
if by the Writings of the Fathers, so called, the Faith of the Church of these
Ages may be demonstrated, it is clear, they have departed from the Faith of the
Church of the first three Ages in the point of Swearing. Moreover, because not
only Papists, but also Lutherans and Calvinists, and some others do restrict
the words of Christ and James, I think it needful, to make manifest the vain
Foundation, upon which their presumption in this matter is built.

Object.
. XI. First, They object, That Christ only forbids these Oaths, that are made
by Creatures, and things Created; and they prove it thence, because he numbers
some of these things.

Secondly* All rash and vain Oaths in familiar discourses; because he says,
Let your Communication be Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay.

First, That the Law did forbid all Oaths made by the Creatures, as also all
vain and rash Oaths in our common discourses, commanding, that men should only
swear by the Name of God, and that neither falsely, nor rashly, for that is to
take his Name in vain.

Secondly; It is most evident, that Christ forbids somewhat that was permitted
under the Law, to wit, To swear by the Name of God; To swear by God himself,
forbidden by Christ.
because it was not lawful for any man to Swear, but by God himself. And
because he says, Neither by Heaven, because it is the Throne of God; therefore
he excludes all other Oaths, even those, which are made by God: for he says,
chap. 23. ver. 22. He that shall Swear by Heaven, Swears by the Throne of
God, and by him, that sits thereon: Which is also to be understood of the
rest.

Lastly, that he might put the matter beyond all controversy, Neither by any
other Oath: Therefore seeing, to Swear before the Magistrate by God, is an
Oath; it is here without doubt forbidden.

Secondly, they object, Object.
That by these words Oaths by God 's Name cannot be forbidden, because the
heavenly Father has commanded them; for the Father and the Son are One, which
could not be, if the Son did forbid that, which the Father commanded.

I answer; They are indeed One, Father gave many things to the Jews for a time,
because of their Infirmity under the Old Covenant, which had only a shadow of
good things to come; not the very Substance of things, until Christ should
come, Oaths under the Old Covenant.
who was the Substance, and by whose coming all these things evanished, to wit,
Sabbaths, Circumcision, the Paschal Lamb: men used then Sacrifices, who lived
in controversy with God, and one with another, which all are abrogated in the
coming of the Son, who is the Substance, Eternal Word, and essential Oath and
Amen, in whom the promises of God are Yea and Amen: Who came, that men might be
redeemed out of strife, and might make an end of Controversy.

Thirdly, they object, But all Oaths are not Ceremonies, Object.
nor any part of the Ceremonial Law.

I answer; Except it be shown to be an eternal, immutable and moral precept, it
withstands not; neither are they of so old an Origin as Tithes, and the
Offering of the first fruits of the ground, Tithes, etc. unlawful now.
which by Abel and Cain were offered long before the ceremonial Law, or the use
of Oaths: which whatever may be alleged against it, were no doubt Ceremonies,
and therefore no doubt, unlawful now to be practiced.

Fourthly, they object; That to Swear by the Name of God, Object.
is a moral Precept of continual duration; because it is marked with his
essential and moral Worship, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10, 20. Thou shall fear the Lord
thy God, and serve him alone: Thou shall cleave to him, and swear by his Name.

I answer; This proves not, moral and eternal Precept; for Moses adds that to
all the Precepts and Ceremonies in several places: As Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. saying,
And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul: To keep the commandments of
the Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day? And chap 14. ver.
23. the Fear of the Lord is mentioned together with the Tithes. And so also
Lev. 19.2, 3, 6. the Sabbaths and regard to Parents are mentioned with swearing.

Fifthly, they object; That solemn Oaths, which God commanded, Object.
cannot be here forbidden by Christ, for he says, that they come from evil:
But these did not come from evil; for God never commanded any thing, that was
evil, or came from evil.

I answer; There are things, which are good, because commanded; and evil,
because forbidden: Other things are commanded, because good, and forbidden,
because evil. As Circumcision and Oaths, good, when and because they were
commanded, and in no other respect; Oaths are evils because forbidden.
and again, when and because prohibited under the Gospel, they are evil.

And in all these Jewish Constitutions, however Ceremonial, there was something
of good, to wit, in their season, as prefiguring some good: As by Circumcision,
the Purifications and other things, the Holiness of God was typified, and that
the Isralites ought to be Holy, as their God was Holy. In the like manner Oaths
under the Shadows and Ceremonies signified the Verity of God, his faithfulness
and certainty; and therefore that we ought in all things to speak and witness
the Truth. Truth was before all Oaths.
But the Witness of Truth was before all Oaths, and remains, when all Oaths are
abolished; and this is the morality of all Oaths, and so long as men abide
therein, there is no necessity of, nor place for Oaths, as Polybius witnessed,
who said; The use of Oaths in Judgment was Rare among the Ancients, but by the
growing of perfidiousness, so grew also the use of Oaths. To which agrees
Grotius, saying; An Oath is only to be used, as a Medicine, in case of
necessity: A solemn Oath is not used, Oaths supply presupposed Defects of Men's
inconstancy.
but to supply defect. The lightness of men and their inconstancy begot
diffidence, for which swearing was sought out as a remedy. Basil the Great
says; That Swearing is the effect of sin. And Ambrose; That Oaths are only a
condescendency for defect. Chrysostom says, That an Oath entered, when evil
grew, when men exercised their frauds, when all foundations were overturned:
That Oaths took their beginning from the want of Truth* These and the like are
witnessed by many others with the forementioned Authors. But what need of
Testimonies, where the Evidence of things speaks it self? For who will force
another to Swear, of whom he is certainly persuaded, that he abhors to Lie in
his words? And again, as Chrysostom and others say; For what end will thou
force him to swear, whom thou believe not, that he will speak the Truth?

. XII. That then, which was not from the beginning, which was of no use in the
beginning, which had not its beginning first from the Will of God, but from the
work of the Devil, occasioned from evil, to wit, from Unfaithfulness, Lying,
Deceit, and which was at first only evindent by man, as a mutual Remedy of this
evil, in which they called upon the names of their Idols; yea that, which (as
Hierom, Chrysostom and others testify) was given to the Israelites by God, as
unto Children, that they might abstain from the Idolatrous Oaths of the
Heathens; Jer. 12.16. Whatsoever is so, is far from being a moral and eternal
Precept And lastly, Whatsoever by its profanation and abuse is polluted with
sin, such as are abundantly the Oaths of these times, by so often swearing and
forswearing, far differs from any necessary and perpetual Duty of a Christian:
But Oaths are so: Therefore, etc.

Sixthly, They object, That God swore, Therefore to swear is good.

I answer with Athan. in pass. and cruc. Domin.
Athanasius, Seeing it is certain, it is proper in swearing to swear by
another; thence it appears, that God, Object.
to speak properly, did never swear, but only improperly: Whence speaking to
men he is said to swear; because these things, which he speaks, because of the
certainty and immutability of his Will, are to be esteemed for Oaths. Compare
Psalm. 110.4. where it is said, The Lord did swear, and it did not repent him,
etc. And I swore (says he) by my self: And this is not an Oath. For he did not
swear by another, which is the property of an Oath, but by himself. Therefore
God swears not according to the manner of men, God swears not by another, but
by himself.
neither can we be induced from thence to swear; but let us so do and say, and
show our selves such by speaking and acting, that we need not with our Hearers
an Oath, and let our words of themselves have the testimony of Truth: For so we
shall plainly imitate God.

Seventhly, They object, ^ Christ did swear, Object.
and we ought to imitate him.

I answer, that Christ did not swear; and albeit he had sworn, Law, this would
no ways oblige us under the Gospel; as neither Circumcision, or the celebration
of the Paschal Lamb. Concerning which Hierom says: Hier. lib. Ep. part. 3.
tract. 1. Ep. 2.
All things agree not to us, who are Servants, that agreed to our Lord, etc.
The Lord swore, as Lord, whom no man did forbid to swear: but unto us, that are
Servants, it is not lawful to swear, because we are forbidden by the Law of our
Lord. Yet, lest we should not suffer scandal by his Example, he has not sworn,
since he commanded us not to swear.

Eighthly, they object; That Paul swore, and that often, Object.
Romans 1.9. Phil. 1.8. saying, For God is my Witness. 2 Cor. 11.10. As the Truth
of Christ in me. 2 Cor. 1.23, I call God for a Record upon my Soul. I speak the
Truth in Christ, I lie not, Romans 9.1. Behold, before God, I lie not, Gal. 1.20.
And so requires Oaths of others. I Obtest you (says he) before God and our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27, I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle
be read to all the Brethren. But Paul would not have done so, if all manner of
Oaths had been forbidden by Christ, whose Apostle he was.

To all which I answer, First; Oaths, nor so esteemed by our Adversaries. For
when upon occasion in matters of great moment we have said, We speak the Truth
in the fear of God, and before him, who is our Witness, and the searcher of our
hearts, The Ceremonies of an Oath.
adding such kind of serious Attestations, which we never refused in matters of
Consequence; nevertheless an Oath has moreover been required of us, with the
ceremony of putting our Hand upon the Book, the kissing of it, the lifting up
of the Hand or Fingers, together with this common form of Imprecation, So help
me God, or, So truly let the Lord God Almighty help me. Secondly, This
contradicts the opinion of our Adversaries; because that Paul was neither
before a Magistrate, that was requiring an Oath of him; nor did he himself
administer the office of a Magistrate, as offering an Oath to any other.
Thirdly, The question is not, what Paul or Peter did, but what their and our
Master taught to be done; and if Paul did swear, (which we believe not) he had
sinned against the Command of Christ, even according to their opinion; because
he swore not before a Magistrate, but in an Epistle to his Brethren.

Object.
Ninthly, they object, Isa. 65.16. where speaking of the Evangelical times, he
says; That he, who blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless himself in the
God of Truth; and he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the God of
Truth: because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from
mine eyes. For behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: Therefore in
these times we ought to swear by the Name of the Lord.

Mosaical terms, as appears among others from Jer. 31.38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36.25.
and 40. and Isa. 45.23. I have sworn by my self, that unto me every Knee shall
bow, every Tongue shall swear. Where the Righteousness of the New Jerusalem,
the purity of the Gospel with its Spiritual worship, and the profession of the
Name of Christ, are expressed under forms of speaking used to Old Jerusalem,
under the washings of the Law, under the names of Ceremonies, the Temple,
Services, Swearing is expressed by Confessing under the Gospel.
Sacrifices, Oaths, etc. Yea, that which the Prophet speaks here of Swearing,
the Apostle Paul interprets it expressly of Confession, saying, Romans 14.11. For
it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me, and every
Tongue shall Confess to God. Which being rightly considered, none can be
ignorant, but these words, which the Prophet writes under the Law, when the
Ceremonial Oaths were in use, to wit, Every Tongue shall swear, were by the
Apostle, being under the Gospel, when those Oaths became abolished, expressed
by, Every Tongue shall Confess.

Object.
Tenthly, they object; But the Apostle Paul approves Oaths used among men, when
he writes, Heb. 6.16. For men verily swear by the Greater, and an Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. But there are as many contests,
fallacies and diffidences at this time, as there were ever: Therefore the
necessity of Oaths does yet remain.

men at that time did, who lived in Controversies and Incredulity; not what
they ought to have done, nor what the Saints did, who were redeemed from Strife
and Incredulity, and had come to Christ, Strife ceasing, Oaths cease.
the Truth and Amen of God. Moreover, he only alludes to a certain Custom usual
among men, that he might express the firmity of the Divine Promise, that he
might excite in the Saints so much the more Confidence in God, promising to
them, not that he might instigate them to Swear against the Law of God, or
confirm them in that, no not at all; for neither does 1 Cor. 9.24. teach
Christians the vain Races, whereby men often times, even to the destruction of
their Bodies, are wearied to obtain a corruptible prize; So neither does Christ
who is the Prince of Peace, teach his Disciples to fight, albeit he takes
notice, Luke 14.31. what it behooves such Kings to do, who are accustomed to
fight, as prudent Warriors therein. Secondly, as to what pertains to Contests,
Perfidies and Diffidences among men, which our Adversaries affirm to have grown
to such an hight, that Swearing is at present as necessary, as ever. Deceit
among the False, not the True Christians.
That we deny not at all; for we see, and daily experience teaches us, that
all manner of deceit and malice does increase among worldly men and False
Christians, but not among True Christians. But because Men cannot trust one
another, and therefore require Oaths one of another, it will not therefore
follow, that True Christians ought to do so, whom Christ has brought to true
Faithfulness and Honesty, as well toward God, as one toward another, and
therefore has delivered them from Contests, Perfidies and consequently from
Oaths.

Eleventhly, They object; We grant, Object.
That among true Christians there is not need of Oaths; but by what Means shall
we infallibly know them? It will follow then, That Oaths are at present
Needful, and that it is Lawful for Christians to Swear, to wit, that such may
be satisfied, who will not acknowledge this and the other Man to be a Christian.

I answer; It is no ways lawful for a Christian to Swear, whom Christ has
called to his essential Truth, Oaths, forbidding him to swear, and on the
contrary commanding him to speak the Truth in all things, to the Honor of
Christ, who called him; that it may appear, Truth was before Oaths.
That the Words of his Disciples may be as truly believed, as the Oaths of all
other worldly Men. Neither is it lawful for them to be Unfaithful in this, that
they may please others, for that they may avoid their Hurt: For thus the
Primitive Christians for some Ages remained faithful, who being required to
swear, did unanimously answer; I am a Christian, I swear not. What shall I say
of the Heathens, some of whom arrived to that Degree? For Diodorus Siculus
relates, lib. 16. That the giving of the Right Hand was among the Persians a
sign of speaking the Truth: And the Scythians, as Qu. Curtius relates, said in
their Conferences with Alexander the Great; Think not that the Scythians
confirm their Friendship by Swearing, they swear by keeping their Promises.
Stobaeus in his third Sermon tells, That Solomon said; A good Man ought to be
in that Estimation, that he need not an Oath, because it is to be reputed a
lessening of his Honor, if he be forced to Swear. Pythagoras in his Oration
among other things has this Maxim, Heathen-Testimonies against Oaths.
as that which concerns the Administration of the Commonwealth: Let no Man call
God to witness by an Oath, no, not in Judgment; but let every Man so accustom
himself to speak, that he may become worthy to be trusted, even without an
Oath. Basil the Great commends Clinias an Heathen, That he had rather pay three
Talents (which are about three thousand Pound) than swear. Socrates, as
Stobaeus relates, Sermon. 14. had this Sentence; The Duty of Good Men requires,
that they show to the World, that their Manners and Actions are more firm than
Oaths: The same was the Judgment of Isocrates. Plato also stood against Oaths
in his Judgments de Leg. 12. Quintilianus takes notice, That it was of old a
kind of Infamy, if any was desired to swear; but to require an Oath of a
Nobleman, was like an examining him by the Hangman. Marcus Aurelius Antonius,
the Emperor of Rome, says in his Description of a Good Man; Such is his
Integrity, that he needs not Oaths. So also some Jews did witness (as Grotius
relates out of Maimonides) It is best for a Man to abstain from all Oaths. The
Esseans (as Philo Judaeus relates) did esteem their Words more firm than Oaths;
and Oaths were esteemed among them, as needless Things. And Philo himself,
speaking of the Third Commandment, explains his Mind thus, viz. It were better,
altogether not to Swear, but to be accustomed always to Speak the Truth, that
naked Words might have the Strength of an Oath. And elsewhere he says; It is
more agreeable to Natural Reason, altogether to abstain from Swearing:
persuading, that whatsoever a good Man says, may be equivalent with an Oath.

Oaths abrogated by Christ.
Who then needs further to doubt, but that, since Christ would have his
Disciples attain the highest Pitch of Perfection, he abrogated Oaths, as a
Rudiment of Infirmity, and in place thereof established the Use of Truth? Who
can now any more think, that the Holy Martyrs and ancient Fathers of the first
three hundred Years, and many others since that Time, have so opposed
themselves to Oaths, that they might only rebuke vain and rash Oaths by the
Creatures or Heathen-Idols, which were also prohibited under the Mosaical-Law;
and not also Swearing by the True God, in Truth and Righteousness, which was
there commanded? As Polycarpus, Justin Martyr, The Testimonies of the Fathers
against Oaths and Swearing.
Apolog. 2. and many Martyrs, as Eusebius relates. Tertullian. in his Apolog.
cap. 32. ad Scap. cap. 1. of Idolatry, c. 11. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. lib.
7. Origin. in Matthew. tract. 25. Cyprianus, lib. 3. Athanas. in pass. and cruc.
Domini Christi. Hilarious in Matthew. 5.34. Basilius Magn. in Psalm. 14. Greg.
Nyssenus in Cant. Orat. 13. Greg. Nazianzenus in dialog. contra juramenta.
Epiphanius adversus haeres. lib. 1. Ambros. de Virg. lib. 3. Idem in Matthew. 5.
Chrysostom in Genes. homil. 15. Idem homil. in Act. Apost. cap. 3. Hieronymus
Epistol. lib. part 3. Ep. 2. Idem in Zach. lib. 2. cap. 8. Idem in Matthew. lib.
1. cap. 5. Augustinus de sermon. Dom. sermon. 28. Cyrillus in Jerem. 4. Theodoretus
in Deuteronomy. 6. Isidorus Pelusiota Ep. lib. 1. Epist. 155. Chromatius in Matthew. 5.
Johannes Damascenus l. 3. c. 16. Cassiodorus in Psalm. 94. Isidorus Hispalensis
cap. 31. Antiochus in Pandect. script. hom. 62. Beda in Jac. 5. Haimo in Apoc.
Ambrosius Ansbertus in Apoc. Theophylactus in Matthew. 5. Pascasius Ratbertus in
Matthew. 5. Otho Brunsfelsius in Matthew. 5. Druthmarus in Matthew. 5. Euthymius
Eugubinus Bibliotheca vet. patr. in Matthew. 5. OEcumenius in Jac. c. 5. v. 12.
Anselmus in Matthew. 5. Waldenses, V^clevus, Erasmus in Matthew. 5. and in Jac. 5.
Who can read these Places, and doubt longer of their Sense in this Matter? And
who, believing that they were against all Oaths, can bring so great an
indignity to the Name of Christ, as to seek to subject again his Fo^lowers to
so great an Indignity? Is it not rather Time, that all Good Men labor to
remove this Abuse and Infamy from Christians?

Lastly, they object, This will bring in Fraud and Confusion, for Impostors
will counterfeit Probity, and under the Benefit of this Dispensation will be
without Fear of Punishment.

I answer, There are two things only, Truth: First, Either the Fear of God in
his Heart and Love of Truth; for where this is, there is no need of Oaths to
speak the Truth. Or Secondly, the Fear of Punishment from the Judge. Therefore
let there be the same, The punishment of Liars.
or rather greater Punishment appointed to those, who pretend so great Truth in
Words, and so great simplicity in Heart, that they cannot Lie, and so great
Reverence toward the Law of Christ, that for Conscience^sake they deny to
Swear in any wise, if they fail; and so there shall be the same good Order, yea
greater Security against Deceivers, as if Oaths were continued; and also by
that more severe Punishment, to which these false Dissemblers shall be liable.
Hence Wicked Men shall be more terrified, and Good Men delivered from all
Oppression, both in their Liberty and Goods: For which Cause, for their tender
Consciences God has often a Regard to Magistrates and their State, as a thing
most acceptable to him. But if any can further doubt of this Thing, to wit, The
United Netherlands instanced.
If without Confusion it can be practiced in the Commonwealth? let him consider
the State of the United Netherlands, and he shall see the Good Effect of it.
For there, because of the great Number of Merchants, more than in any other
place, there is most frequent Occasion for this thing; and though the Number of
those, that are of this Mind, be considerable, to whom the States these hundred
Years have Condescended, and yet daily Condescend; yet nevertheless there has
nothing of Prejudice followed thereupon to the Commonwealth, Government, or
good Order; but rather great Advantage to Trade, and so to the Commonwealth.

. XIII. Sixthly, The last thing, to be considered, is Revenge and War, an Evil
as opposite and contrary to the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ, as Light to
Darkness. For as is manifest, Revenge and War contrary to Christ.
by what is said, through Contempt of Christ's Law the whole World is filled
with various Oaths, Cursings, Blasphemous Profanations and Horrid Perjuries; so
likewise through Contempt of the same Law the World is filled with Violence,
Oppression, Murders, Ravishing of Women and Virgins, Spoilings, Depredations,
Burnings, Vastations and all manner of Lasciviousness and Cruelty: So that it
is strange, that Men made after the Image of God, should have so much
degenerated, that they rather bear the Image and Nature of Roaring Lions,
Tearing Tigres, Devouring Wolves and Raging Boars, than of Rational Creatures
endued with Reason. And is it not yet much more admirable, that this Horrid
Monster should find Place, and be fomented among those Men, that profess
themselves Disciples of our peaceable Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who by
Excellency is called the Prince of Peace, and has expressly prohibited his
Children all Violence; and on the contrary commanded them, that according to
his Example they should follow Patience, Charity, Forbearance and other Virtues
worthy of a Christian.

Hear then what this great Prophet says, whom every Soul is commanded to hear
under the Pain of being Cut off, Matthew. 5. from verse 38. to the End of the
Chapter. For thus he says: Ye have heard, Revenge Forbidden by Christ.
that it has been said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: But I say
unto you, That ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right
cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and
take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also: And whosoever shall compel
thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Give to him that asks thee; and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. Ye have heard, that it has
been said; Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine enemy: But I say unto
you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you: That ye
may be the children of your Father which is in heaven. For he makes his sun to
rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the
unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even
the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more
than others? Do not even the Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father, which is in heaven, is perfect.

The Law of Christ more perfect than of that Moses.
These Words with a Respect to Revenge, as the former in the Case of Swearing,
do forbid some things, which were formerly lawful to the Jews, considering
their Condition and Dispensation; and Command unto such, as will be the
Disciples of Christ, a more perfect, eminent, and full Signification of
Charity, as also Patience and Suffering, than was required of them in that
Time, State and Dispensation by the Law of Moses. This is not only the Judgment
of most (if not all) the Ancient Fathers, so called, the first three hundred
Years after Christ; but also of many others, and in general of all those, who
have rightly understood and propagated the Law of Christ concerning Swearing;
Testimonies of the Fathers against Fighting.
as appears from Justin Mart. in Dialog. cum Tryph. ejusdemque Apolog. 2. Item
ad Zenam. Tertull. de Corona Militis. It. Apolog. cap. 21. and 37. It. lib. de
Idolol. c. 17, 18, 19. It. ad Scapulam cap. 1. It. adversus Jud. cap. 7, and 9.
It. adv. Gnost. 13. It. adv. Marc. c. 4. It. lib. de patient. c. 6.10. Orig.
cont. Celsum, lib. 3, 5, 8. It. in Josuam, hom. 12. cap. 9. It. in Mat. cap.
26. Tract. 36. Cypr. Epist. 56. It. ad Cornel. Lactan. de just. lib. 5. c. 18.
lib. 6. c. 20. Ambr. in Luc. 22. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 5. hom. 18. It. in Matthew.
26. hom. 85. It. lib. 2. de sacerdotio. It. 1 Cor. 13. Chromat. in Matthew. 5.
Hieron. ad Ocean. It. lib. Epist. p. 3. Tom. 1. Ep. 2. Athan. de Inc. Verb.
Dei. Cyrill. Alex. lib. 11. in Johan. cap. 25, 26. Yea Augustine, although he
vary much in this matter, notwithstanding in these places he did condemn
Fighting. Epist. 158, 159, 160. It. ad Judices, Epist. 263. It. ad Darium, and
lib. 21. It. ad Faustum, cap. 76. lib. 22. de Civit. ad Marc. cap. 6. as
Sylburgius relates. Euthym. in Matthew. 26. and among others of this last Age
Erasmus in Luc. cap. 3, and 22. Ludov. Vives in Introd. ad Sap. J. Ferus, lib.
4. Comment. in Math. 7. and Luc. 22.

From hence it appears, that there is so great a Connection betwixt these two
Precepts of Christ, that, as they were uttered and commanded by him at one and
the same Time, so the same way they were received by Men of all Ages; not only
in the First Promulgation by the little number of the Disciples, but also after
the Christians increased in the first three hundred Years. Even so also in the
Apostasy the one was not left and rejected without the other; and now again in
the Restitution and renewed Preaching of the Eternal Gospel, they are
acknowledged as Eternal and Unchangeable Laws, properly belonging to the
Evangelical State and Perfection thereof: from which if any withdraw, he falls
short of the Perfection of a Christian Man.

And truly, the Words are so clear in themselves, The Laws of Christ in the New
Testament are irreconcilable to Persecution, Wars and Fighting.
that (in my Judgment) they need no Illustration to explain their Sense: For it
is more easy to reconcile the greatest Contradictions, as these Laws of our
Lord Jesus Christ with the wicked Practice of Wars; for they are plainly
inconsistent. Whoever can reconcile this, Resist not Evil, with, Resist
Violence by Force; again, Give also thy other Cheek, with, strike again; also,
Love thine Enemies, with, spoil them, make a Prey of them, pursue them with
Fire and Sword; or, pray for those that persecute you, and those that
calumniate you, which persecute them by Fines, Imprisonments and Death it self;
and not only such, as do not persecute you, but who heartily seek and desire
your Eternal and Temporal Welfare: Whoever, I say, can find a means to
reconcile these things, may be supposed also to have found a way to reconcile
God with the Devil, Christ with Antichrist, Light with Darkness, and Good with
Evil. But if this be impossible, as indeed it is impossible, so will also the
other be impossible; and Men do but deceive both themselves and others, while
they boldly adventure to establish such Absurd and Impossible things.

. XIV. Nevertheless, because some, perhaps through Inadvertency, and by the
Force of Custom and Tradition, do transgress this Command of Christ, I shall
briefly show, how much War does contradict this Precept, and how much they are
inconsistent with one another; and consequently, That War is no ways lawful to
such, as will be the Disciples of Christ. For

First, Christ commands, That we should Love our Enemies: But War on the
contrary teaches us to Hate and destroy them. Matthew. 5.43.


Secondly, The Apostle says, That we war not after the flesh, and that we
fight not with flesh and blood: Ephesians. 6.12.
But outward War is according to the Flesh, and against Flesh and Blood, for
the shedding of the one, and destroying of the other.

Thirdly, The Apostle says, That the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal,
but Spiritual: 2 Cor. 10.4.
But the Weapons of outward Warfare are Carnal, such as Cannon, Muskets,
Spears, Swords, etc. of which there is no mention in the Armor described by
Paul.

Fourthly, because James testifies, That wars and strifes come from the lusts,
which war in the members of carnal men: But Christians, that is, Ja. 4.1.
Galat. 5.24.
those that are truly Saints, have crucified the flesh with its affections and
lusts: Therefore they cannot indulge them by waging War.

Fifthly, because the Prophets Isaiah and Micah have expressly prophesied, That
in the Mountain of the house of the Lord, Christ shall judge the Nations, and
then they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, etc. And the Ancient
Fathers of the first three hundred Years after Christ did affirm, Is. 2.4.
Primitive Christians most averse from War.
these Prophecies to be fulfilled in the Christians of their Times, who were
most averse from War; concerning which Justin Martyr, Tertullian and others may
be seen: Which need not seem strange to any, Mich. 4.3.
since Philo Judaeus abundantly testifies of the Esseans, That there was none
found among them, that would make Instruments of War. But how much more did
Jesus come, That he might keep his followers from fighting, and might bring
them to Patience and Charity?

Sixthly, Because the Prophet foretold, That there should none hurt nor kill in
all the Holy Mountain of the Lord: Is. 65.25.
But outward War is appointed for Killing and Destroying.

Joh. 18.36.
Seventhly, Because Christ said, That his Kingdom is not of this World, and
therefore that his Servants shall not Fight: Therefore those that fight, are
not his Disciples nor Servants.

Eighthly, Because he reproved Peter for the Use of the Sword, saying, Mat.
26.52.
Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they, that take the sword,
shall perish with the sword. Concerning which Tertullian speaks well (lib. de
Idol.) How shall he fight in Peace without a Sword, which the Lord did take
away? For although Soldiers came to John, and received a Form of Observation;
if also the Centurion believed afterward; he disarmed every Soldier in
disarming of Peter. Idem de Coron. Mil. asks, Shall it be lawful to use the
Sword, the Lord saying, that he, that uses the Sword, shall perish by the
Sword?

Ninthly, Because the Apostle admonishes Christians, That they defend not
themselves, Romans 12.19.
neither revenge by rendering evil for evil; but give place unto wrath, because
Vengeance is the Lord's. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.
If thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink: But War
throughout teaches and injoineth the quite contrary.

Tenthly, Because Christ calls his Children to bear his Cross, not to crucify
or kill others: Mark 8.34.
To Patience, not to Revenge: To Truth and Simplicity, not to fraudulent
Stratagems of War, or to play the Sycophant; which John himself forbids: To
flee the Glory of this World; not to acquire it by Warlike Endeavors:
Therefore War is altogether contrary unto the Law and Spirit of Christ.

Object.
. XV. But they object, That it is lawful to War, because Abraham did War before
the giving of the Law, and the Israelites after the giving of the Law,

Abraham offered Sacrifices at that time, and Circumcised the Males: Which
nevertheless are not lawful for us under the Gospel.

2. That neither defensive nor offensive War was lawful to the Israelites,
Israelites going to War enquired the Oracle of God.
of their own Will, or by their own Counsel or Conduct; but they were obliged
at all times, if they would be successful, first to enquire the Oracle of God.

3. That their Wars against the wicked Nations were a figure of the inward War
of the true Christians against their Spiritual Enemies, in which we overcome
the Devil, the World and the Flesh.

4. Something is expressly forbidden by Christ, Matthew. 5.26. which was granted
to the Jews in their time, because of their hardness; and on the contrary we
are commanded that singular Patience and Exercise of love, which Moses
commanded not to his Disciples. From whence Tertullian says well against Marc.
Some things permitted in the Old Testament, because of hardness of heart.
Christ truly teaches a new Patience, even forbidding the revenging of an
Injury, which was permitted by the Creator. And lib. de patien. The Law finds
more, than it lost, by Christ saying; Love your Enemies. And in the time of
Clem. Alex. Christians were so far from Wars, that he testified, that they had
no marks or signs of violence among them, saying; Neither are the Faces of
Idols to be painted, to which so much as to regard is forbidden: Neither Sword
nor Bow to them that follow Peace, nor Cups to them, who are moderate and
temperate; as Sylvius Disc. de Rev. Belg.

Secondly, They object; That Defense is of natural Right, Object.
and that Religion destroys not nature.

I answer, Be it so; but to obey God, destroy nature, but to exalt and perfect
it; to wit, to elevate it from the natural to the supernatural life by Christ
living therein, and comforting it, that it may do all things, and be rendered
more than Conqueror.

Thirdly, they object; Object.
That John did not abrogate or condemn War, when Soldiers came unto him.

I answer, What then? John's doctrine, but Christ's, whose Disciples we are,
not John's: For Christ, and not John is that Prophet, whom we ought all to
hear; and albeit that Christ said, Luke 7.28.
That a greater than John the Baptist was not among men born of women; yet he
adds, That the least in the Kingdom of God is greater, than he. But what was
John's answer, that we may see, if it can justify the Soldiers of this time?
For if it be narrowly minded, it will appear, that what he proposes to
Soldiers, does manifestly forbid them that Employment; for he commands them,
Not to do violence to any man, not to defraud any man; but that they be content
with their Wages. Luke 3:14.
Consider then, what he discharges to Soldiers, viz. Not to use Violence or
Deceit against any; which being removed, let any tell, how Soldiers can War?
For are not Craft, Violence and Injustice three properties of War, and the
natural consequences of Battles?

Fourthly, they object; That Cornelius, and that Centurion, Object.
of whom there is mention made Matthew. 8.5. were Soldiers; and there is no
mention, that they laid down their Military Employments.

I answer; Neither read we, that they continued in them. continued in the
doctrine of Christ (and we read not any where of their falling from the Faith)
that they did not continue in them; especially if we consider, that two or
three Ages afterward Christians altogether rejected War, or at least a long
while after their time; if the Emperor Marc. Aurel. Anton. be to be credited,
who writes thus: -- I prayed to my-Country Gods; but when I was neglected by
them, and observed my self pressed by the Enemy; considering the fewness of my
Forces, I called to one, and entreated those, who with us are called
Christians, and I found a great number of them: And I forced them with Threats,
Christians instanced, that did not War.
which ought not to have been; because afterward I knew their Strength and
Force. Therefore they betook themselves neither to the use of Darts nor
Trumpets, for they use not to do so for the cause and Name of their God, which
they bear in their Consciences. And this was done about an hundred and sixty
years after Christ. To this add those words, which in Justin Martyr the
Christians Answer, (...), that is, We fight not with our Enemies. And moreover
the answer of Martin to Julian the Apostate, related by Sulpitius Severus: I am
a Soldier of Christ, therefore I cannot fight; which was three hundred years
after Christ. It is not therefore probable, that they continued in Warlike
Employments. How then is Vincentius, Lyrinensis and the Papists consistent with
their Maxim, That which always, everywhere, and by all was received? etc. And
what becomes of the Priests with their Oath, That they neither ought, nor will
Interpret the Scripture, but according to the universal Consent of the Fathers,
so called? For it is as easy to obscure the Sun at Mid day as to deny, that
the Primitive Christians renounced all Revenge and War.

And albeit this thing be so much known to all; yet it is as well known, that
all the Modern Sects live in the neglect and contempt of this Law of Christ,
and likewise oppress others, who in this agree not with them for Conscience
sake toward God: Persecution for not bearing Arms, and not fasting and praying
for Victory.
Even as we have suffered much in our Country, because We neither could our
selves bear Arms, nor send others in our place, nor give our money for the
buying of Drums, Standards and other military Attire: And lastly, because we
could not hold our Doors, Windows, and Shops close for Conscience sake, upon
such Days as Fasts and Prayers were appointed, for to desire a blessing upon,
and success for the Arms of that Kingdom or Common Wealth, under which we live;
neither give thanks for the Victories acquired by the effusion of much blood.
By which forcing of the Conscience, they would have constrained our Brethren
living in diverse Kingdoms at War together, to have implored our God for
contrary and contradictory things, and consequently impossible; for it is
impossible, that two Parties fighting together, should both obtain the Victory.
And because we cannot concur with them in this Confusion, therefore are we
subject to Persecution. Yea and others, who with us do witness, that the use of
Arms is unlawful to Christians, do look a-squint upon us: But which of us two
do most faithfully observe this testimony against Arms? Either they, who at
certain times at the Magistrates order do close up their Shops and Houses, and
meet in their Assembly, praying for the prosperity of their Arms, or giving
thanks for some Victory or other, whereby they make themselves like to those,
that approve Wars and Fighting? Or we, which cannot do these things, for the
same cause of Conscience, lest we should destroy by our Works, what we
establish in Words? We shall leave to the judgment of all prudent men.

Fifthly, They object; Object.
That Christ Luke 22.36. speaking to his Disciples, commands them, that he that
then had not a Sword, should sell his Coat, and buy a Sword: Therefore (say
they) Arms are lawful.

I answer; Some indeed understand this of the Outward Sword; Christians are
prohibited Wars under the Gospel. Among which is Ambrose, who upon this place
speaks thus: 0 Lord! Why command thou me to buy a Sword, who forbid'st me to
smite with it? Why command thou me to have it, whom thou prohibitest to draw
it? Unless perhaps a Defense be prepared, not a necessary Revenge, and that I
may seem to have been able to Revenge, but that I would not. For the Law
forbids me to smite again: Peter offered Two Swords.
And therefore perhaps he said to Peter, offering two Swords [It is enough] as
if it had been lawful, until the Gospel time, that in the Law there might be a
Learning of Equity, but in the Gospel a perfection of goodness. Others judge,
Christ to have spoken here Mystically, and not according to the Letter, as
Origin upon Matthew. 19. saying; If any looking to the Letter, and not
understanding the Will of the Words, shall sell his bodily Garment, and buy a
Sword, taking the words of Christ contrary to his will, he shall Perish: But
concerning which Sword he speaks, is not proper here to mention. And truly,
when we consider the answer of the Disciples, Master, behold, here are two
Swords; understanding it of outward Swords; and again Christ's answer, It is
enough; it seems, that Christ would not, that the rest, who had not Swords (for
they had only two Swords) should sell their Coats, and buy an outward Sword.
Who can think, that matters standing thus, he should have said, Two was enough?
But however it is sufficient, that the use of Arms is unlawful under the Gospel.

Sixthly, they object, Object.
That the Scriptures and old Fathers (so called) did only prohibit private
Revenge, not the use of Arms for the defense of our Country, Body, Wives,
Children and Goods, when the Magistrate commands it; seeing the Magistrates
ought to be obeyed: Therefore albeit it be not lawful for private men to do it
of themselves, nevertheless they are bound to do it by the Command of the
Magistrate.

I answer; If the Magistrate be truly a Christian, Obey the Command of his
Master, saying, Love your Enemies, etc. and then he could not Command us to
kill them: But if he be not a true Christian, Christian Magistrates to obey the
Command of their Master Christ.
then ought we to obey our Lord and King Jesus Christ, to whom he ought also to
obey: For in the Kingdom of Christ all ought to submit to his Laws, from the
highest to the lowest, that is, from the King to the Beggar, and from Caesar to
the Clown. But (alas!) where shall we find such an Obedience? O deplorable
Fall! Concerning which Ludov. Viv. writes well ( lib. de con. vit. Christ. sub
Turc. by relation of Fredericus Sylvius. Disc. de Revol. Belg. p. 85.) The
Prince entered into the Church, not as a true and plain Christian, which had
indeed been most happy and desirable, but he brought in with him his Nobility,
Lud. Vives against Arms.
his Honors, his ARMS, his Ensigns, his Triumphs, his Haughtiness, his Pride,
his Superciliousness, that is, He came into the house of Christ accompanied
with the Devil; and which could no ways be done, he would have joined two
Houses and two Cities together, God's and the Devil's, which could not more be
done, than Rome and Constantinople, which are distant by so long a Tract both
of Sea and Land. (What Communion, says Paul, is there betwixt Christ and
Belial?) Their Zeal cooled by degrees, their Faith decreased, their whole Piety
degenerated; instead whereof we make now use of Shadows and Images, and (as he
says) I would, we could but retain these! Thus far Vives. But lastly, as to
what relates to this thing, since nothing seems more contrary to man's nature,
and seeing, of all things the defense of ones Self seems most tolerable, as it
is most hard to men, so it is the most perfect part of the Christian Religion,
as that, wherein the Denial of Self and Entire Confidence in God does most
appear; and therefore Christ and his Apostles left us hereof a most perfect
Example. As to what relates to the present Magistrates of the Christian World,
Concerning the present Magistrates of the Christian World.
albeit we deny them not altogether the name of Christians, because of the
public Profession they make of Christ's Name; yet we may boldly affirm, that
they are far from the perfection of the Christian Religion: Because in the
state, in which they are, (as in many places before I have largely observed)
they have not come to the pure Dispensation of the Gospel: And therefore, while
they are in that condition, we shall not say, that War undertaken upon a just
Occasion, is altogether unlawful to them. For even as Circumcision and the
other Ceremonies were for a season permitted to the Jews, not because they were
either necessary, or of themselves, or lawful at that time after the
Resurrection of Christ; but because that Spirit was not yet raised up in them,
whereby they could be delivered from such Rudiments: So the present Confessors
of the Christian name, who are yet in the mixture, and not in the patient,
suffering Spirit, are not yet fitted for this form of Christianity, and
therefore cannot be undefending themselves, until they attain that Perfection.
But for such, whom Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful to defend
themselves by Arms, but they ought over all to trust to the Lord.

The Conclusion.
. XVI. But lastly, to Conclude, If to give and receive flattering Titles, which
are not used, because of the Virtues inherent in the Persons, but are for most
part bestowed by wicked men upon such as themselves; If to Bow, Scrape and
Cringe to one another; If at every time to call one another Humble Servant, and
that most frequently, without any design of Real Service; if this be the
Honor, that comes from God, and not the Honor that is from below; then indeed
our Adversaries may be said to be Believers, and we condemned as proud and
stubborn in denying all these things. But if with Mordecai to refuse to bow to
proud Haman, and with Elihu not to give flattering Titles to men, lest we
should be reproved of our Maker; and if according to Peter's Example and the
Angel's Advice, to bow only to God, and not to our Fellow Servants; and if to
call no man Lord, nor Master, except under particular Relations, according to
Christ's Command; I say, Ephesians. 3.5 Job 32.21, 22.
if these things be not to be Reproved, then are we not blameworthy in so
doing. If to be Vain and Gaudy in Apparel, if to paint the Face, and plait the
Hair; if to be clothed with Gold and Silver and precious Stones; and if to be
filled with Ribbands and Lace, be to be clothed in modest Apparel; and if
these be the Ornaments of Christians; and if that be to be Humble, Meek and
Mortified, Then are our Adversaries good Christians indeed, and we proud,
singular and conceited in contenting our selves, with what need and convenience
calls for, and condemning, what is more as superfluous: but not otherwise. If
to use Games, Sports, Plays; if to Card, Dice and Dance; if to Sing, Fidle and
Pipe; if to use Stage Plays and Comedies, and to Lie, Counterfeit and
Dissemble, be to Fear always; and if that be to do all things to the Glory of
God; and if that be to pass our sojourning here in Fear; and if that be to use
this World, as if we did not use it; and if that be not to fashion our selves
according to our former Lusts; to be not conformable to the Spirit and vain
Conversation of this World; Then are our Adversaries, notwithstanding they use
these things, and plead for them, very Good, Sober, Mortified and Self-denied
Christians, and we justly to be blamed for judging them; but not otherwise. If
the Profanation of the Holy Name of God, if to exact Oaths one from another
upon every light occasion; if to call God to Witness in things of such a
nature, in which no earthly King would think himself lawfully and honorably to
be a Witness; be the duties of a Christian man; I shall confess, that our
Adversaries are excellent good Christians, and we wanting in our duty: But if
the contrary be true, of necessity our Obedience to God in this thing must be
acceptable. If to Revenge our selves, or to render Injury, Evil for Evil, Wound
for Wound, to take Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth; If to fight for outward and
perishing things, to go a Warring one against another, whom we never saw, nor
with whom we never had any contest, nor any thing to do, being more-over
altogether ignorant of the Cause of the War, but only, that the Magistrates of
the Nations foment quarrels one against another, the Causes whereof are for the
most part unknown to the Soldiers, that fight, as well as upon whose side the
right or wrong is; and yet to be so furious, and rage one against another, to
destroy and spoil all, that this or the other Worship may be received or
abolished; If to do this, and much more of this kind, be to fulfill the Law of
Christ, Then are our Adversaries indeed true Christians, and we miserable
Heretics, that suffer our selves to be Spoiled, Taken, Imprisoned, Banished,
Beaten, and evilly entreated, without any resistance, placing our trust only in
GOD, that he may defend us, and lead us by this way of the Cross unto his
Kingdom. But if it be other ways, we shall certainly receive the Reward, which
the Lord has promised to those, that cleave to him, and in denying themselves,
Confide in him.

And, to sum up all, If to use all these things, and many more, that might be
instanced, be to walk in the strait Way, that leads to Life, be to take up the
Cross of Christ; be to die with him to the Lusts and perishing Vanities of this
World, and to arise with him in newness of Life, and sit down with him in the
heavenly places; Then our Adversaries may be accounted such, and they need not
fear, they are in the broad way, that leads to destruction: And we are greatly
mistaken, that have laid aside all these things for Christ's sake, to the
crucifying of our own Lusts, and to the procuring to our selves Shame,
Reproach, Hatred and Illwill from the men of this world: Not as if by so doing
we judged to merit Heaven; but as knowing, they are contrary to the Will of
him, who redeems his Children from the love of this World and its Lusts, and
leads them in the ways of Truth and Holiness, in which they take delight to
walk.

THE CONCLUSION.
IF in God's Fear, Candid Reader, thou applyest thy self to Consider this
Systeme of Religion here delivered, with its Consistency and Harmony as well in
it self, as with the Scriptures of Truth, I doubt not, but thou will say with
me and many more, That this is the Spiritual Day of Christ's Appearance,
wherein he is again revealing the ancient Paths of Truth and Righteousness. For
thou may observe here the Christian Religion, in all its parts truly
established and vindicated, as it is a living, inward, spiritual, pure and
substantial thing, and not a mere form, show, shadow, notion and opinion, as
too many have hitherto held it, whose Fruits declare, they wanted that, which
they bear the name of: and yet many of those are so in love with their Empty
Forms and Shadows, that they cease not to calumniate us, for commending, and
calling them to the Substance, as if we therefore denied or neglected the true
Form and outward Part of Christianity, which indeed is (as God the Searcher of
Hearts knows) a very great Slander. Thus, because we have desired people
earnestly to feel after God near and in themselves, telling them, That their
Notions of God, as he is beyond the Clouds, will little avail them, if they do
not feel him near: Hence they have sought maliciously to infer, that we deny
any God, except that, which is within us; because we tell People, That it is
the Light and the Law within, and not the Letter without, that can truly tell
them their Condition, and lead them out of all Evil: hence they say, We vilify
the Scriptures, and set up our own Imaginations above them. Because we tell
them, That it is not their Talking, or believing of Christ's outward Life,
Sufferings, Death and Resurrection, no more, than the Jews crying, the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that will serve their Turn, or justify
them in the Sight of God; but that they must know Christ in them, whom they
have crucified, to be raised, and to justify them, and redeem them from their
Iniquities: Hence they say, we deny the Life, Death and Sufferings of Christ,
Justification by his Blood, and Remission of Sins through him. Because we tell
them, while they are talking and determining about the Resurrection, That they
have more need to know the Just one, whom they have slain, Raised in
themselves, and to be sure they are partakers of the first Resurrection, and
that, if this be, they will be the more capable to judge of the Second; hence
they say that, we deny the Resurrection of the Body. Because when we hear them
talk foolishly of Heaven and Hell, and the last Judgment, we exhort them to
come out of that Hellish Condition they are in, and come down to the Judgment
of Christ in their own Hearts, and believe in the Light, and follow it, that so
they may come to sit in the Heavenly places, that are in Christ Jesus; hence
they maliciously say, That we deny any Heaven or Hell, but that which is within
us; and that we deny any General Judgment; Which Slanders, the Lord knows, are
foully cast upon us, whom God has raised for this End, and gathered us, that
by us he might confound the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to naught the
Understanding of the Prudent, and might in and by his own Spirit and Power in a
despised People, (that no Flesh might glory in his Presence) pull down that
dead, dark, corrupt Image, and mere Shadow and Shell of Christianity, wherewith
Antichrist has deceived the Nations: For which end he has called us to be a
First Fruits of those that serve him, and Worship him no more in the Oldness of
the Letter, but in the Newness of the Spirit. And though we be few in number in
respect of others, and weak as to outward strength, which we also altogether
reject; and foolish, if compared with the wise ones of this World: Yet as God
has prospered us, notwithstanding much Opposition, so will he yet do, that
neither the Art, Wisdom nor Violence of Men or Devils shall be able to quench
that little Spark, that has appeared; but it shall grow to the Consuming of
whatsoever shall stand up to Oppose it. The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it!
Yea, he, that has arisen in a small Remnant, shall arise, and go on by the
same Arm of Power in his Spiritual Manifestation, until he has Conquered all
his Enemies, until all the Kingdoms of the Earth become the Kingdom of Christ
Jesus.

Unto Him, that has begun this Work, not among the Rich or Great Ones, but
among the Poor and Small, and has Revealed it not to the Wise and Learned, but
unto the Poor, unto Babes and Sucklings, even to him, the Only-Wise and
Omnipotent GOD be Honor, Glory, Thanksgiving and Renown from henceforth and
for ever. Amen. Hallelujah! A True and Faithful Account of the Most Material
Passages OF A DISPUTE Betwixt some Students of Divinity (so called) of the
University of ABERDEEN, AND THE PEOPLE called QUAKERS; Held in Aberdeen in
Scotland, in Alexander Harper his Close (or Yard) before some hundreds of
Witnesses, upon the fourteenth Day of the Second Month called April, 1675.
There being

Opponents John Lesly, Mast. of Art. Alexander Shirreff, Mast. of Art. Paul
Gellie. Mast. of Art.


And Defendants upon the Quakers Part, Robert Barclay and George Keith.

Praeses for Moderating the Meeting chosen by them, Andrew Thomson, Advocate:

And by the Quakers, Alexander Skein, sometime a Magistrate of the City.

Published for preventing Mis-reports, by Alexander Skein, John Skein,
Alexander Harper, Thomas Merser and John Cowie.

To which is added, Robert Barclay's Offer to the Preachers of Aberdeen,
Renewed and Reinforced.

Acts 4.27. For of a truth, against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have
Anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of
Israel were gathered together.

London, Printed for Tho. Northcott. 1691.

The Epistle.
Friendly Readers,
FOrasmuch as our Opposers threatened, they would Print an Account of the
Debate, and boasted of a Victory; we thought it our concernment for the Truth's
sake, and to undeceive those that may be abused by such Reports, to give this
True and Faithful Account of what past; Which we are confident, all the
Impartial and Attentive Auditors will affirm to be a True Account: neither is
there any one Argument omitted, that we can remember of, or any thing added.
There were many things spoken extrinsick from the matter; and sometimes
confusedly, Two or Three of our Opposers speaking often at once, and also some
others, that were not concerned; as particularly, one Brown, the Bishop's
Chaplain, who though he refused to Subscribe the Articles, and so was excluded
from speaking, did often most impertinently interrupt and intrude himself: But
these being only transient, and no Arguments insisted on, we have not inserted
them; studying to keep to the Matter. And we do faithfully declare, that we
have herein dealt impartially, according to our Memory; as we hope, such
serious Auditors, as may read this, will acknowledge. So leaving you to the
Perusal hereof, we rest

Your Souls Well-Wishers, Alexander Skein, John Skein, Thomas Mercer, John
Cowie.


An Account of a DISPUTE at ABERDEEN.
In the first Place, the Articles were read, which are as follows.
I. IT is hereby declared, That this is to be a Private Conference betwixt the
Students of Divinity (so called) of the Colleges of Aberdeen, and the People
called Quakers, as a fulfilling of any Challenge, wherein these Students may be
included within the Theses set forth by Robert Barclay (or may have received
from any of that People) but abstract from the Public Challenge given to the
Preachers in general in the end of the English Theses; because it is offered
with particular Condition, of having the Public Places to dispute in, before
the Auditories, before whom they conceive they have been misrepresented.

II. It is provided, That when any of either Party is speaking, if any of their
Company offer to speak, he that is speaking, is to be silent; but if two of a
Party speak at once, he that is seen to obtrude himself, shall be judged
Impertinent, and excluded thereby from farther Access.

III. That each Speaker on any of the Sides have full Liberty and Time to
speak, without interruption of the contrary Party; and that he that interrupts,
shall be debarred from farther Speaking.

IV. That each Side abstain from School-Terms and Distinctions ( as much as
possible) but if any use them, that they may be opened to the People in plain
English; so that any of ordinary Capacity (that are not educated in Colleges)
may understand them.

V. As for Retortions, they must not be impertinent, and from the purpose; and
none shall be so insisted on, as to divert us from the Point, or turn the
Opponent into the Respondent.

VI. The Day appointed for the Conference, is the fourteenth of April, in the
Year, One thousand six hundred seventy five, ( being the Day called Wednesday)
the Place is to be at Alexander Harper 's House or Close (in case the
Gray-Fryers Church (so called) cannot be obtained) and that the Conference is
to continue from two to five a Clock in the Afternoon,

VII. Both Parties shall endeavor to procure a Praeses to Moderate, but not to
have any Decisive Judgment; yet if such a one cannot be procured, the
Conference is not to be broken up.

VIII. And it is hereby declared, That both Parties intend this for Mutual
Edification; and therefore intend to abstain from any thing, that may obstruct
so good an Event.

IX. It is likewise agreed, that none shall have Liberty to speak, but those
that have, or shall subscribe, before the Dispute begin, these aforesaid
Articles.

HEre Alex. Skein, one of our Friends chosen Praeses for Us (because we could
not at that time procure another) standing up with the other Praeses --

Student. It was condescended, That no Quaker should be a Praeses.


Quaker. We are wronged; for we never condescended to any such thing: And
seeing ye have chosen one of Your Way, how can we be hindered to choose one of
Ours?


Andr. Thomson (their Praeses) There needs no debate in this matter; for we are
chosen not to have any Decisive Judgment, but only for the Moral Part, to take
notice, if the Rules be observed; or whether ye keep to the Purpose. Then John
Leslie had a long and tedious Discourse, concerning what was fit to be done,
and how we ought to Dispute.


G. K. Praeses, I suppose we came not to this Place to hear from this Young Man
a long Logic Discourse.


R. B. I desire to be heard; We being a People so generally misrepresented, as
Heretical and Erroneous, did conceive our selves obliged to give a True and
Faithful Account of our Principles, which I did in a certain Paper now under
debate. And, that our Innocence therein might appear, there was a Challenge
added to the end of it, offering to defend these our Principles, if we might be
allowed so to do, in these Public Places, where we have been so much
misrepresented, and against those Persons, who had there so often traduced us.
To which having received no Answer, some of the Students of Divinity came to
us, and signified, that they looked upon themselves as concerned; because
mention is made of such in the beginning of that Paper. To whom we answered,
That they were not the Persons Challenged by Us; as not being the Public
Preachers, that had misrepresented Us: But seeing, they were desirous to
debate the matter, we were not unwilling to render to any a Reason of the Hope
that is in us; and therefore should not decline it. And forasmuch as some did
object, that we were at a loss, as engaging with them; because there would be
little Advantage, in case we had any Victory; and a greater Reflection, should
we appear to be at any loss. To such we had, and have this to say; That as we
are not afraid to meet with the Greatest and Ablest of the Preachers
themselves; so the Truth leads us not to Despise any. As R. B. was going on, he
was interrupted.


Alex. Shirreff: If it were pertinent, I could easily disprove much of what is
said; but to be short, R. B. having given Theses, provoking all the Scholars of
Europe and Great Britain, (though R. B. pretends in his Preface to be against
School Divinity; yet his Theses are full of it: and there are many other
Contradictions, which I will not now take notice of) The Preachers and
Ministers of the Word not finding themselves concerned; we Young Men, and but
Students, have offered to Dispute. In the Articles the Quakers have been very
unreasonable; and particularly G. K. did refuse, any Article should be put in
against Railing; because he said, That might be Railing in me, which was not in
him; because he (to wit G. K.) was immediately led by the Spirit. We have
concluded, that being Young Men, in case the Quakers should have any Advantage,
it will not be of great Consequence, and if we have Advantage, we hope it may
be useful: because these are the great Prophets and Preachers of the Quakers.


G.K. I could take notice of many things not true in that Young-Man's long
Discourse; And it may here be observed, that afterward J. L. speaking
reflectingly against the Quakers, said, It was no Railing, to speak the Truth;
which was all he pleaded for.
as particularly, that R. B. has provoked all Europe; but I pass them by,
because I am here exceedingly abused; and therefore desire to be heard. For I
declare in God's Fear, and in singleness of my Heart, I never said any such
thing, as is by that Young Man alleged upon me; as I can Appeal to the
Auditors, who were there present. But what I said was this; I cannot bind my
self not to Rail, because I Am bound already, that I should not Rail, by the
Righteous Law of God in my Conscience; and may perhaps speak that, as believing
it to be true, which ye may call Railing.


A. Shir. I being chiefly concerned, and having mostly occasioned this Debate,
am Employed by the rest to speak first; and therefore I will Impugn the Second
Thesis. Which R. B. read; and is as follows: Seeing no Man knows the Father,
but the Son, and he to whom the Son Reveals him, Second Thesis.
Matt. 11.27. And seeing, the Revelation of the Son is in and by the Spirit;
therefore the Testimony of the Spirit is that alone, by which the true
Knowledge of God has been, is, and can be only Revealed: who, as by the moving
of his own Spirit, converted the Chaos of this World into that wonderful Order,
wherein it was in the beginning, and created Man a living Soul to rule and
govern it; so by the Revelation of the same Spirit he has made manifest
himself all-a-long unto the Sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles: which Revelations of God by the Spirit, whether by outward Voices and
Appearances, Dreams, or inward objective Manifestations in the Heart, was of
old the formal Object of their Faith, and remains yet so to be, since the
Object of the Saints Faith is the same in all Ages, though set forth under
diverse Administrations. Moreover these Divine inward Revelations, which we make
absolutely necessary for the building up true Faith, neither do, nor can ever
Contradict the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or right and sound Reason;
yet from hence it will not follow, that the Divine Revelations are to be
subjected to the Examination either of the outward Testimony of the Scriptures,
or of the Natural Reason of Man, as to a more noble, or certain Rule and
Touchstone. For this Divine Revelation and inward Illumination is that, which
is evident and clear of it self; forcing by its own Evidence and Clearness the
well-disposed Understanding to Assent, irresistibly moving the same thereunto,
even as the Common Principles of Natural Truths move and incline the Mind to a
Natural Assent.





R. B People, this is that which we Affirm, and which these Young Men are about
to Dispute against, as false. Notwithstanding that A. Shir. had thus offered
himself first to dispute, yet I. L. Intruding himself, put him to Silence,
beginning as follows:


I. L. That which is not to be believed, as the Rule of Faith, is not to be the
Rule of Faith: But The Spirit is not to be believed, as the Rule of Faith;
Therefore

The Spirit is not to be the Rule of Faith.




R. B. Having (Repeated the Argument) I deny the Minor, or second Proposition.


I. L. I prove it; That which has not a sufficient Evidence, to evidence it
self to be a Rule, is not to be a Rule: But

The Spirit in the Quakers has not a sufficient Evidence, whereby to evidence
it self to be a Rule; Therefore

The Spirit in the Quakers is not to be our Rule.




R. B. (Having Repeated the Argument) I distinguish that Second Proposition, If
thou meanest any Spirit in the Quakers, which they peculiarly assume to
themselves, as Quakers, or say, they have as a^part of themselves, or of Man's
Nature; we Concede, that such have no Evidence; neither do we say, that any
such Spirit is to be our Rule. But if thou meanest that Universal Spirit of
God, a Manifestation whereof is given to every one to profit withal; we affirm,
it has a sufficient Evidence in us, and in all Men.


I. L. I urge that Distinction; If the Spirit has a sufficient Evidence,
either this Evidence is from your own Declaration, or some other. But

It is neither from your own Declaration, nor from some other; Therefore

It has not a sufficient Evidence.




R. B. It is from both.


J. L. What is it then?


R. B. That it teaches us to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World: This is an Evidence to
all Men.


J. L. I prove, that is not a sufficient Evidence; thus; That is not a
sufficient Evidence, which Heretics may pretend unto, as a sufficient ground
for their Heresy; But

Heretics may pretend this as a sufficient ground for their Heresy; Therefore

It is not a sufficient Evidence.




R. B. I Answer this first by a Retortion; this is the same Argument upon the
matter, which the Jesuit Dempster used against your Master, viz. John Menzies:
For the Jesuit pressing him to assign a ground for the Protestant Religion,
which Heretics could not pretend unto; J. M. named the Scripture: and the
Jesuit further urged, that Heretics could, and did pretend unto the
Scriptures. Now, what Evidence can ye give from the Scriptures, which we cannot
give? Yea, and greater from the Spirit, that Heretics cannot justly lay claim
to.


Stud. (With one voice) We will not have Retortions.


R. B. Praeses, Read the Articles, which contain a particular provision for
Retortions, as being lawful, if not insisted too much on.


So the fifth Article abovementioned was read. G. K. I offer to Answer
directly to his Argument without Retortion, though I pass not from the
Retortion; for it stands over your heads, which ye will never get over. Then I
say, we have a twofold Evidence, which no Heretic can justly lay claim to.
The one is, the inward Evidence of the Spirit of God, by its own immediate
Testimony in our hearts: The other is, the Testimony of the Scriptures, which I
affirm in the Name of the People called Quakers, is the best external and
outward Evidence and Rule, that can be given. And my Reason, why we have the
Testimony of the Scriptures, as an Evidence, that we have the Inspiration of
the Spirit is this;

All Men have a measure of the Inspiration of the Spirit of God according to
the Scriptures Testimony, That Christ the true Light inlightneth every Man,
that comes into the World; and that a Manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every Man to profit withal: But this universal Illumination or Manifestation is
Inspired; and if all Men be in measure Inspired, then consequently we, who are
Men, are Inspired*


J. L. I prove, ye have not the Testimony of the Scriptures for a sufficient
Evidence: That which is fallacious, is not a sufficient Evidence. But

The Scriptures Testimony according to the Quakers, without the indwelling of
the Spirit is fallacious: Therefore

The Scriptures Testimony is not a sufficient Evidence.




R. B. (Having Repeated the Argument) I deny the 2 d Proposition.


G. K. The Argument is wrong in its Structure, and vicious, as consisting of
four Terms, which no right Syllogism should have.


Stud. I appeal to all Lo^icians, if when any thing is Subsumed in a Syllogism,
which is neither in the first Proposition, nor in the Conclusion, whether that
Syllogism has not four Terms?
Is it not in Forma? For it has not four Terms.


G. K. It has four Terms; and this I offer to prove before either your
Masters, or any other judicious Logicians in any University of this Nation. I
say, it has four Terms, because it subsumes that in the second Proposition,
which was not in the first Proposition.


At this the Students fell a laughing, and so provoked the People to lightness.
Al. Skein (one of the Praeses's) I am sorry to see those, who profess to study
Divinity, behave themselves so lightly, and so far from Seriousness in such
weighty matters, as concern the Truths of God.


G. K. I am ready still to prove, that the Syllogism has four Terms: But this
being not so proper here for this Auditory, proceed ye to prove the second
Proposition, which R. B. has denied.


J. L. I prove the Second Proposition; That which may beguile a Man, is
fallacious: But

According to the Quakers, the Scriptures may beguile a Man, without the
indwelling of the Spirit: Therefore

According to the Quakers, the Scriptures are fallacious.




G. K. This Argument is also wrong in the Structure, having four Terms.


R. B. But waving that, I deny thy second Proposition: For the Scripture cannot
beguile any Man, although Men may or have beguiled themselves by a wrong use of
it.


A. Shir. Take notice People, The Quakers say, The Scriptures cannot beguile
you.


R. B. Speak louder yet; for we do and have constantly Affirmed it: And we
hope, it will help to clear us of those Mis-representations, as if we despised
or spoke evil of the Scriptures.


G. K. I would, my words could reach from the one end of the World to the
other, when I say, The Scriptures cannot beguile any Man: for the Scripture is
innocent, and a true Testimony in it self; but Men do beguile themselves often,
by making perverse Glosses upon the Scriptures: The Scripture cannot be
fallacious, because according to you, it is your Principal Rule of Faith; and
if we can prove from your own Principal Rule, that we are Inspired, then the
Scriptures Testimony is not Fallacious, else your Principal Rule would be
Fallacious.


Stud. But that is not according to your Principle.


G. K. But it is an Argument ad Hominem, which ye know, is lawful: And besides,
though we do not acknowledge them to be the Principal Rule of our Faith; yet we
Affirm, that they are a true Testimony, and the best outward Testimony and Rule
in the World. And besides, there is a Manifestation of the Spirit in many,
where there is not an in-dwelling of the Spirit, and by this Manifestation of
the Spirit all men may understand the Scriptures, as they do improve it.


Stud. We will go to another Argument.


R. B. People take notice, this Argument is left upon this Point, that
according to the Quakers Principle these Young Men say, The Scriptures may
beguile People; which we utterly deny, as proved, or that can be proved.


Al. Shirreffe: I argue against the latter part of the second Thesis, where ye
affirm; That Inward Immediate Revelations are necessary to the building up of
true Faith. We confess, that Subjective Revelation is necessary; but we deny,
that Objective Revelation is necessary, which ye Affirm.


G. K. Explain, what ye mean by Subjective and Objective Revelation, that the
People may understand according to the Articles.


A. Sh. I explain it from this Scripture, Luke 24.17. And beginning at Moses
and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself. Here is the Objective Revelation, to wit, the Scriptures,
so that they needed not any new Objective Revelation, but only that which was
before; but needed a Subjective Revelation, or Divine Illumination, to make
them understand the Objective Revelation, to wit, the Scriptures.


G. K. That is not a sufficient Explanation of Objective and Subjective
Revelation; therefore I desire to be heard, that I may open it more
sufficiently, according as is provided in the Articles of Agreement.

Objective Revelation, or the Object of our Faith is twofold, to wit, first,
the Material Object; secondly, the Formal Object.


Stud. Do the People understand this?


G. K. I shall explain it to them, for it is necessary to the matter in hand.
The Material Object is that, which is to be believed; the Formal Object is
that, for which principally we are to believe, or the principal Motive of
Credibility. Now to apply, I say; The Scriptures are the Material Object, or a
part of the Material Object of our Faith; but not the Formal Object of our
Faith.


Al. Shir. I prosecute my Argument against such Objective Revelations, as being
necessary to Faith.


G. K. We confess, the Scriptures are sufficient to move us to an Historical
Faith, and that to a more excellent degree of Historical Faith, than any other
Histories in the World; because it has more excellent outward Motives of
Credibility, as the Consent of all Ages, since they were written, and of all
Christians, however differing among themselves, etc. but they are not
sufficient to beget in us a Saving Faith, without Inward Objective Revelation.


Al. Shir. I prove, such Inward Objective Revelations are not necessary to
beget Saving Faith, by this Argument: If there be no such Seed in Men, as the
Quakers maintain, then there are no such Revelations, as the Quakers maintain.

But there is no such Seed in Men, as the Quakers maintain:

Therefore there are no such Revelations, etc.




R. B. (After he had repeated the Argument) I deny that second Proposition.


Al. Shir. I prove it.

If there be no such Seed in Men, as a substantial, living Principle, distinct
from the Soul, that can be heard, seen, savoured, tasted and felt, then there
is no such Seed in Men, as the Quakers maintain:

But the first is true; Therefore the last.

And then the said Alexander Shirreffe read a passage at length out of G. K.
his Book of Immediate Revelation, page 6, 7. That the Seed was such a living,
substantial Principle, and that in the Seed these Revelations were only
received.


R. B. This is a Digression from the Matter, and a passing from the Theses
(which should have been the Subject of this Day's Debate) to G. K. his Book of
Immediate Revelation.


G. K. I must now appear to defend my Book, and Apologize to R. B. because I am
necessitated to put my Hand in another's Harvest: Therefore I distinguish upon
the Word Such, in the first Proposition. If by Such, thou meanest a Substantial
Principle, etc. I say, that is altogether Extrinsick to the Subject of the
Debate; and besides it will engage us into the greatest Nicities and
Obscurities of Philosophy and School Divinity, that is not proper for this
Auditory: But if by Such thou meanest, an Universal Principle of God's Saving
Grace in Men, whereby they are capacitated both to know and do the Will of God;
I Affirm and am ready to maintain, there is such a Principle in all Men.


Al. Shir. But I prove, That that Seed in Men is not of a Substance, or
Substantial Principle.


G. K. I am ready to defend, That it is a Substantial Principle: But that
belonging to the Second Proposition, we ought not to come to it, before the
Distinction of the First Proposition be discussed. Here the Students made a
great Noise; and G. K. appealed to the Praeses And. Thomson: Who answered
discreetly, That G. K. did not refuse to defend, That the Seed of God was a
Substantial Principle; but this was not its proper Place, until the Distinction
of the former Proposition be discussed.


Al. Shir. I shall wave the Word Substantial, etc. and I offer to prove, That
there is not a Seed of God in Men, as the Quakers Affirm: If there be such a
Seed, it is either Created or Uncreated.

But it is neither Created, nor Uncreated; Choose you whether.




G. K. (After he had repeated the Argument:) I distinguish the Word Seed, as
being either a Concrete Term, or an Abstract Term.


J. L. Does the People understand this Distinction?


G. K. I hope ye understand it; and I shall explain it to them, who understand
it not. A Concrete Term comprehends two things; the one in Recto (as they
say) the other in Obliquo, that is to say, the one has the other belonging to
it. As Merciful is a Concrete Term, which is as much as to say, One that has
Mercifulness in him; and so Mercifulness is the Abstract, which signifies that
one thing belonging to the Concrete. Now to Apply: If we understand Seed as the
Concrete, it is both Uncreated and Created; for it is God himself discovering
himself to the Creatures Capacity in his Work of Manifestation, which Work is
Created: but he, who does manifest himself in that Manifestation, is Uncreated.
And because he manifests himself at first in a low and small degree unto the
Soul; therefore he in that Manifestation is compared unto a Seed; even as
Clemens Alexandrinus says, That Christ compared himself to a Grain of
Mustard Seed in his inward Appearance in Men's Hearts.


Alex. Shir. The Seed is not a Substantial Principle, because it is the
Manifestation of God; But the Manifestation of God is not a Substantial
Principle, but Accidental.


G. K. That may be Substantial or a Substance, which in another Respect is
Accidental; as Gold is a Substance, so Silver, Houses, Lands are Substances;
but they are Accidental to me, because I may want them.


Al. Shir. He says, his Seed is a Substance or Substantial Principle.


G. K. This is an Abuse: I speak not of my Seed, or the Seed of Man; but of the
Seed of God in Men.


A. Shir. I prove, that Manifestation is not a Substance.


R. B. That brings us again into a Philosophical Debate, which is here to be
avoided.


J. L. I prove, that Manifestation is not Created.

Whatsoever is of God is God: But

This Manifestation is of God,

Therefore it is God.


G. K. Take notice of this Young-Man's Blasphemy; for if whatsoever is of God,
be God, then all the Creatures are God, as Stones, Horses, etc. for the
Scripture says; Of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Here the
Students made a Noise, and fell a laughing to cover this: Some of them speaking
irreverently of God.


G. K. I beseech you, yea, I charge you all in God's Fear, that when you speak
of that Holy and Dreadful Being, ye do it with Fear and Reverence.


A Shir. Ye say then, This Seed is God in a Manifestation: I prove, it is not.

That is not God, which can be measured in Measures, and can grow from a lesser
Measure to a greater, can be formed and grow up in Men.

But God cannot be measured in Measures, nor grow, etc.

Therefore this Seed is not God in a Manifestation.


G. K. (After he had repeated the Argument) I answer; God as in himself, or as
in his own Being, cannot be measured or grow up, it is true; but as in respect
of his Manifestation, quoad nos (or as to us) that is to say, as he comes forth
as to us, discovering himself, He or his Spirit may be said to have Measures.
And this I show from Scripture: As where it is said in John concerning Christ;
God gave not the Spirit by Measure unto him; implying, he gave it forth in
Measures unto others: And where Elisha said unto Elijah, Let a double Portion
of thy Spirit be upon me.


J. L. He says, God comes forth into the Creatures: I prove, he cannot come
forth into the Creatures, because he is in himself.


G. K. He does come forth into the Creatures, and yet is still In himself; for
he is not limited, as Creatures are, who go from one Place to another: but he
is In all Creatures, and In himself also. But this Young Man, as I perceived by
him the other Day, is a Nullibist in his Opinion, as they term them: so that
according to his Principle, the Soul of John Lesly is as much in France, even
now, as in his Body, or in this Place; that is to say, neither here, nor there.
But herein I speak according to Scripture-Words, which says; God boweth the
Heavens, and comes down: Yet not that he leaves his own Being; but it is
spoken after the Manner of Men, who is every where in all his Creatures; but
manifests himself in several Measures unto them.


Al. Shir. There is nothing in the Seed, but God; therefore God in his own
Being is measured forth according to the Quakers Doctrine; for the Seed is
nothing, but God and his Manifestation.


G. K. The Manifestation is in it self, and not out of it self. Can Al. Shir.
be out of himself? or can any thing be out of it self?


R. B. If some of them be not without themselves, it is like they are beside
themselves.


G. K. In a moral way of Speaking, when a Man is as a Madman, or beside his
Purpose, he is beside himself. Upon this the Students fell to debate among
themselves, Whether they should prosecute the Argument, or not, some being for
it, and some against it: And those who were for it, boasting of their Advantage?


G. K. I see no Strength in your Reasoning to Glory in, it has not the
Strength of a Cobweb; but if you think it has, produce it: and if any more
Water remain in your Bottle, bring it out.


A. Shir. Yea, we have Water enough yet in our Bottle to quench your Spirit.


R. B. Come on with it then.

We will go from this to the Eleventh Thesis, which R. B. read cut, and is as
follows.

All true and acceptable Worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate
Moving and Drawing of his own Spirit, which is neither limited to Places,
Times, or Persons. For, though we be to Worship him always, in that we are to
fear before him; yet as to the outward Signification thereof in Prayer, Praises
or Preachings, we ought not to do it, where and when we will, but where and
when we are moved thereunto by the secret Inspirations of his Spirit in our
Hearts, which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move us
thereunto, when need is; of which he himself is the alone proper Judge. All
other Worship then, both Praises, Prayers and Preachings, which Man sets about
in his own Will, and at his own Appointment, which he can both begin and end at
his Pleasure, do or leave undone, as himself sees meet, whether they be a
Prescribed Form, as a Lyturgy, or Prayers conceived ex tempore, by the Natural
Strength and Faculty of the Mind, they are all but Superstition, Will Worship,
and abominable Idolatry in the sight of God, which are to be denied, rejected
and separated from in this Day of his Spiritual Arising. However it might have
pleased him, who winked at the Times of Ignorance, with a respect to the
Simplicity and Integrity of some, and his own Innocent Seed, (which lay, as it
were, buried in the Hearts of Men under that Mass of Superstition) to blow upon
the dead and dry Bones, and to raise some Breathings, and answer them; and that
until the Day should more clearly dawn and break forth.



Al. Sh. By this Thesis ye affirm, That no Man ought to go about any Duty
without a particular Impulse of the Spirit.


R. B. Impulse is not a Word used by me, but an obscure Word; therefore say,
Inspiration or Influence.


Al. Sh. Either this Inspiration ye have it in all things, or in some things:
Choose you whether.


R. B. We have it in these things relating to our Duties of Worship toward God.


A. Sh. This contradicts G. K. who in his Book of Immediate Revelation says,
That in all things whatsoever, we ought to have an Inspiration of the Spirit
for the doing of the same; otherwise we cannot do in Faith.


R. B. This is another Digression and going from the purpose: for the Question
is not, How far I contradict another; but what in Reason ye can say, against
what I have here affirmed? for when I showed you before, how ye Contradicted
your Master, viz. John Menzies in another Matter, ye would not admit it as
Relevant, though the Case be alike; alleging, it was a Retorsion. Ye undertook
to Dispute against the Theses; but it seems you find not room enough there, but
ye must run to G. K's Book for further matter.


G. K. I see it is more against G. K. than R. B. his Theses, that you set your
selves: And therefore G. K. must defend G. K. But I say, in this there is no
Contradiction between R. B. and me; for there is a twofold sort of
Inspirations or Influences, Note, diverse of the Auditors were displeased with
their going from the Theses.
the one General, other Special. The General Influences are given in general or
common, for the doing of all common or ordinary Actions; and by the Special
Influences of the Spirit we are enabled to go about those Special Duties, as of
Prayer, Thanksgiving, etc. Now of these special Inspirations or Influences R.
B. in his Theses is to be understood; and thus there is no Contradiction
betwixt him and me.


R. B. To which I have this to add; there is a Difference betwixt the
Influences of the Spirit, as we are particularly acted by them in singular and
particular Acts of Worship; and as we are generally Influenced by the Spirit,
in so far as we come habitually to live and walk in the Spirit: For in that
respect we may be said to do every thing in the Spirit, as we grow up into that
State; though there be more particular Influences requisite in Matters of
Worship.


G. K. I say further; particular Influences or Inspirations of the Spirit are
of several sorts, which are Analogous or proportional to the several Sorts of
Duties: As Preaching and Praying are several sorts of Duties: now the
Particular Influence to Pray, is not to Preach, and so on the contrary. Also
the Influences, which serve to Duties only Inward, as to Wait, fear and love
God, do not serve without a superadded Influence to the performance of outward
Duties. Therefore every Influence is to respect the Duty, that it is given unto.


A. Shir. I prove, that such particular Influences are not needful to Acts of
Worship, Thus: If such particular Influences of the Spirit were needful unto
outward Acts of Worship, then they were also needful unto inward Duties, as to
waiting, desiring, loving and feeling God: But

The last is absurd; Therefore the first.




R. B. (Having repeated the Argument) I deny, that the last is Absurd.


G. K. Come (...) with that Argument: I confess, it has some Acumen or
Sharpness in it; but ex tua pharetra nunquam venit illa sagitta, this Arrow
has not come out of thy Quiver, but out of thy Master's, who has formerly
used this Argument against us.


Alex. Shir. I prove the last is absurd: If the Inspirations of the Spirit be
necessary to Inward Duties, as to Wait, desire, etc. then we must not Wait
without them;

But this is Absurd; Therefore is the other.




G. K. (Having repeated the Argument) I deny, that this is Absurd: For we
cannot suppose, that ever at any Time an Influence or Inspiration can be
wanting to Wait upon God, to Desire, and Fear and love him, and the Particular
Influences to particular Duties, such as Praying, Preaching, Thanksgiving, is
not wanting, whenever the Season comes to go about them.


Al. Shir. If ye have these particular Influences, why do ye not make use of
them? Why do ye not say the Grace?


R. B. It will not follow, That we do not pray, nor make use of those
particular Influences, because at sometimes we do not take off our Hats, or
speak Words, which are not Essential to true Prayer.


J. L. I prove, That that Distinction concerning general and particular
Influences is not sufficient.

That which may be a Ground for a Heretic to forbear Prayer for a whole Year,
is not a sufficient Distinction; But

This may be a Ground for a Heretic to forbear Prayer for a whole Year;
Therefore

It is not a sufficient Distinction.


G. K. (Having repeated the Argument) I deny the Second Proposition.


J. L. I prove it; for a Heretic may pretend, He has not those particular
Influences for a whole Year.


G. K. Though an Heretic may pretend, yet he has no Ground from our Principle
to pretend to any such thing, because these particular Influences cannot be
wanting, neither for one Year, nor for any Time, that the particular Duties
ought to be gone about; and if any did pretend the want of particular
Influences, to pray, etc. they are to be judged as Guilty and Deceitful, as
giving that for an Excuse, which is not sufficient, although all have not the
Utterance of Prayer, so as to Pray in Words; nor can any pray truly in Words,
but by a particular Influence.


A. Sh. This Influence or Inspiration is either commanding or forbidding; so G.
K. understood it; but because of the great Confusion or Noise, he cannot
certainly say: And upon this Understanding G. K. answered, It is not a
sufficient Enumeration; for there is a Midst.


Praeses, A. T. Master Keith, ye know we say, Non datur medium.


Students. There is no Midst betwixt Contradictory Propositions.


G. K. But these Propositions are not Contradictory; for there is a Midst
betwixt Commanding and Forbidding.


A. Shir. Either he does Command, or not Command; there is no Midst here, choose
you whether.


G. K. He does not Command us in all things, in which we are Inspired; for some
Inspirations are Mandatory and Commanding, some Permissory or Permitting; and
some forbidding; so betwixt commanding and forbidding, the midst is Permitting.


J. L. But a Permission cannot be an Inspiration, otherwise ye might say, A
Stone does Inspire you as much as God, because a Stone does permit or not
hinder you.


G. K. I deny the Consequence; for I offer to show from Scripture, That Paul,
when he did a thing by Permission, was Inspired: As when he said; I speak this
by Permission, and not by Commandment: Here he was writing Scripture by
Inspiration in the very Time. See 1 Cor. 7.6. and compared with 40. verse.

See Acts 16.7.


And again, where he said; I assayed to go to such a Place, but the Spirit
permitted not.


A. Shir. This was not a Permission, but a hindering, or not a permitting him.


G. K. But I gather out of these Words by the Rules of Contraries, That if the
Spirit did not permit Paul at sometimes, it did permit him at other Times; and
this Permission was by Inspiration: And I hope, it is lawful for me to make
this Observation or Note upon this Scripture, seeing, your Masters will make
half a dozen not so much to the purpose. But for the further opening of this
Matter, I distinguish of Permission thus: There is a Negative Permission, and a
Positive Permission. A Negative Permission is a simple Forbearance, or not
meddling in any Case; and such a Negative Permission is no sufficient Warrant to
us to do any thing. The Positive Permission is, when God by some Inward
Evidence or Signification of his Spirit by Words or otherwise, makes us know,
That he Allows us to do such a thing, although he Command it not. As for
Example; if a Scholar should go forth, out of the School, without getting of
his Master's Leave, this is a Negative Permission, and is not a sufficient
Ground for the Scholar to go forth: But when the Scholar comes, and says; Let
me go forth; and the Master answers, Thou may go: this is a Positive
Permission, and not a Command.


Praeses And. Th. Examples are not Demonstrations.


G. K. But they may be used to Illustrate.


Praeses A. Th. But the Master says to the Scholar, Exi, go forth, which is in
the Imperative, and that signifies to Command.


G. K. That is but a Grammaticism: for the Imperative Mood does not always
signify to Command; but sometimes to Command, and sometimes to Permit: which I
refer to the Judgment of Schoolmasters, who teach the Grammar.


A.T. Praeses. As in the third Person in the Imperative, Exeat Let him go, is
Permissive.
This is rather like a Debate about Grammatications of Imperative Moods, than
about the Matter intended; therefore come to the Purpose.


A. Shir. In the Prosecution of this Argument against this Thesis alleged on
G. K. He will not pay his Debt, because he may pretend, he wants an Inspiration
to do it.


G. K. I hope, none can blame me for refusing to Pay my Debt; and I pay my
Debt, as well as any of you; nor can any be supposed, that Men can want an
Inspiration to do any such thing. And we refer our selves to the Judgment of
Discretion in all sober Persons here present.


Paul Gelly. I have an Argument to propose for Water Baptism.


R. B. Then let me read the Thesis; which was read, and is as follows: As
there is one Lord, and one Faith, so there is one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. which is
not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a Good
Conscience before God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. and
this Baptism is a Holy and Spiritual Thing (to wit) the Baptism of the Spirit
and Fire, by which we are buried with him, Col. 2.12. that being washed and
purged from our Sins, we may walk in newness of Life, Romans 6.4. of which the
Baptism of John was a Figure, which was commanded for a Time, and not to
continue for ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a mere Human Tradition,
for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in all the Scripture.





R. B. What have thou against this Thesis, is it not the express Words of
Scripture?


P. G. It is true, and therein we agree; but I oppose your Meaning of it.


R. B. We make no Meaning in the Case, Note, That while this Young Man was
prosecuting his Argument, J. L. did insolently intrude himself, and interrupted
him, and they spoke of them three at some times.
for the Scripture declares our Meaning.


G. K. Ye have a large Field to dispute in, in the last part of the Thesis, if
you please, where he positively affirms, That Sprinkling of Infants is a mere
Human Tradition.


Students. We will not meddle with that at this Time.


P. G. Either you mean by this Thesis, That Water Baptism is ceased, or not
ceased.


R. B. Come on, we mean, It is ceased.


P. G. I prove it is not Ceased, thus: If the Presence of Christ is to continue
with his Church for ever, then Water Baptism is to continue for ever:

But the first is true: Therefore the second.




G. K. People take Notice, he says, Water Baptism is to continue for ever; if
so, then we must be baptized in Heaven after this Life with Water Baptism.


Stud. He means by for ever, to the end of the World.


R. B. (Having repeated the Argument) I deny the sequel of the first
Proposition.


P. G. I prove it from Matthew. 28. Go Teach and Baptize all Nations, etc. Here
Christ commanding them to Baptize, shows, he will be with them to the end of
the World; therefore as long as he was to be with them, that Baptism was to
Continue.


R. B. I grant the whole: But the Question is, If that Baptism be by Water?
which I deny.


P. G. I prove, it was by Water.

If the Apostles baptized with Water, then they were commanded to baptize with
Water.

But the Apostles baptized with Water;

Therefore they were commanded to Baptize with Water.


R. B. (Having repeated the Argument) I deny the Consequence of the Proposition.


P. G. I prove it thus: Either the Apostles did Baptize with Water by
theCommand of Christ, Matthew. 28. Or they were ignorant of the Meaning of that
Command: Choose you whether.


G. K. It is not a Sufficient Enumeration; for they might have known the
Meaning of the Command, and yet Baptized with Water, not for that Command, but
in Condescension to the Weaknesses of the Jews.


P.G. If they Condescended to Baptize with Water for the Weakness of the Jews,
though without a Command, then ye ought to Baptize now with Water to Condescend
to Peoples Weakness now; seeing ye confess, that there are, who are weak both
among us and your selves.


G. K. That will not follow, more than in the Case of Circumcision: for the
Apostle Paul did Circumcise without a Command in Condescension to the Jews; yet
it follows not, that any now should Circumcise to Condescend to the people,
who should require it.


Stud. The parity is not alike, because Baptism with water was Commanded to the
Apostles, so not Circumcision; for John Baptist was sent to Baptize with Water.


R. B. John Baptist was not an Apostle, and so not concerned in that
Commission, Matthew. 28. And his Baptism was to decrease, that the Baptism of
Christ by the Holy Ghost might increase.


Al. Shir. It must be Water Baptism, because the Baptizing of the Holy Ghost is
ceased now.


G. K. People, take notice, he says; The Baptism of the Holy Ghost is ceased
now.


A. Shir. It is ceased to be given by Men; for do ye give the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of Hands?


G. K. The Holy Ghost may be given without the laying on of Hands; and Holy Men
now are Instruments in conveying the Gifts of the Holy Ghost to others.


R. B. Did not Paul say, Romans 1.11. That he longed to see them to communicate
some Spiritual Gift? And besides, as to the Matter of Condescendence,
Abstaining from Blood and things strangled though particularly Commanded by the
Apostles, yet is not now to be practiced by any Condescension, as your selves
confess.


G. K. Hear what Augustine says in the Case of Circumcision, observing of
Meals, Drinks, Washing, Sacrifices, etc. They are to be considered in a
threefold respect, viz. First, as Living, under the Law; Secondly, as dead,
after the Death of Christ; Thirdly, as deadly, as being once buried; and being
once buried, they are not to be again raised up out of their Grave, out of
Condescension to any. So I say the same, as of Water Baptism, it being once
Dead and Buried, is not again to be raised up now, after the Apostasy.


P. G. I prove, That Water Baptism was thought needful even to those, that were
Baptized with the Holy Ghost: Can any Man forbid Water, etc. as Paul said Acts
10.


G. K. Say Peter, not Paul.


P. G. Peter, I say, not Paul.


R. B. That proves not all, that it was done by Necessity; but to Condescend to
their Weakness.

About this Time the Praeses, And. Th. going forth, said, It was now five a
Clock, the Time appointed for the Continuance of the Dispute; and so went away:
Nor was there any Argument farther urged.


G. K. Praeses Al. Skein; I see, there is like to be no more here, but
Confusion, seeing the other Praeses is gone. I shall only propose this Just and
Reasonable Desire to these Students, that since we have given them a fair
Opportunity to Impugn and Oppose our Principles, they also will promise us
another Day, to Impugn and Oppose theirs.


Stud. When we set out Theses, then ye shall have an Opportunity to Impugn them.


G. K. Your Theses are set out already, for your Confession of Faith is your
Theses, which I offer to Impugn


Stud. Our Faith is Established by the Law of God, and of the Nation, and
therefore ought not to be called in Question.


R. B. That it is Established by the Law of God, is the thing under Debate; and
as for the Law of the Nation, so is the Popish Faith in Italy and Spain, and
Mahometanism in the Turks Dominions; will it therefore follow, that Popery and
Mahometanism are not to be called in Question or Oppugned?


Stud. We will come to your Meetings, and Debate further with you.


R. B. Our Meetings are not for Debate, but to Wait upon God and Worship Him;
but if ye please to meet us here again to Morrow, we are satisfied.


Stud. We will not.


R. B. It seems, ye need a longer Time to prepare you; for your present
Strength is all Exhausted.


Stud. We will come to your Meeting, and wait, till it be done; and then Oppose
you.


R. B. I have told you before, That is not proper; but on this Condition I will
admit it, that when I see meet, I may have the like Opportunity to come to your
Meetings; and when your Preachers have done, that I be allowed to Oppose and
Impugn your Principles.


Stud. No, no.

The Confusion and Tumult increasing through the removing of the Praeses, A.
Th. and diverse of the Soberest People: And the Students vainly boasting of
their Victory, Laughing, Clamouring and making a Noise, and telling, they would
cause to be published in Print their (imaginary) Victory, occasioned such
Lightness and Rudeness in a Rabble of the grossest Sort, that were without the
Bar, that laying hold on a Heap of Turffs, they threw many of them against us,
without offering the least Violence to our Opposers on the other Side. So that
having beat diverse with hard Turffs, Peates, and also with Stones, R. B. with
diverse other Friends, received several Knocks in his Head, and was wounded in
his Hand with a Stone; while as the Students (the Masters of Art) and their
Companions, who had been Disputing in Matters of Religion, instead of
interposing themselves to prevent, stood diverse of them laughing, hollowing and
clamouring thereat; and so the Meeting broke up. G. K. said to others more
sober, that were present; These are your Church Members.

This True and Impartial Account (which was offered to be read to their
Praeses, Andrew Thomson, but he declined it; alleging, The Matters treated of
were so Extrinsick from his Emploiment, and these things that took up his Head;
and he so apt to forget such Things, that though the Matter might be True, he
could not Attest it, neither for us nor our Opposers. It was also read in
Writing to some judicious and unprejudicate Persons, that were present, and are
not of our Way; and acknowledged by them to be according to their best Memory,
a Full and Ingenuous Account: as may be further proved, in case it be called in
Question) will, we hope, serve to appease these Empty Clamours, which the
Students vain Ostentation, and the Ignorance and Prejudice of others might have
raised; some of whom did so little, or at least will needs appear so little to
understand the Matter, as to affirm, The Quakers were all Routed; for they
could prove nothing: whereas we were by Mutual Agreement to be mere Defendants;
and not to be admitted at all to Prove, but only to Answer. And whether we
Answered not all was urged, will by this Account appear; where none of the
Arguments are omitted, nor any whit of the Strength of them concealed.

As for what was or may be accounted Reflections, we have not put them in the
Body of the Dispute; because we remember not particularly, at what Time they
were spoken: But that we may not seem designedly to Conceal any, as tending to
our Disadvantage; so far as we remember, they were as follows.

That G. K. said to J. L. He spoke more with his Fingers, than his Tongue;
after, What need he make such a Work with his Finger, and affect a Canting
Tone, like his Master J. M.? That his Head was too full of Mercury, and his
Heart in his Tongue; whereas a Wise Man's Tongue is in his Heart.

Now whether J. L's extravagant Behavior did not deserve such Checks (while he
oftentimes would be speaking, when his Companions were; and put them by with
both his Elbows, that he alone might be heard: To which add his Forwardness in
his Blasphemous Assertion above observed) let the discreet and judicious
Hearers judge.


A. Shir. said; He would overturn Quakerism, and he hoped in so doing to have
his End.


J. L. That he might not miss to hit, as he thought, G. K. said, It seemed, he
was an Aberdeen 's Man, and would take his Word again, (which was noted by G.
K. as being a Reflection upon the City, where J. L. himself was born, which G.
K. was not). Also,


A. Shir. Laughing, and raising Lightness, called upon G. K. (speaking some
Words) If there was a Notar, that he might take Instrument?

To which R. B. answered: That he desired the Notar might take Instrument, how
Divinity-Students and Masters of Arts, that were preparing themselves for the
Ministry, were so Light and Vnserious in Religious Matters, etc.

But however, if they have gotten such a Victory, as they boast of, how is that
Consistent, with what we are Informed of, and is noised up and down in the
City, That Jo. Menzies, their Master, went within a Day or two, to desire the
Bishop to Complain to the Primate and King's Council, and procure us to be
punished for holding the Dispute, And an Order, That none such further be
admitted? And indeed, if the Scholars have proved so good Disputants, we think,
the Masters cannot in reason reason refuse this following OFFER.


R. B. His Offer to Jo. Menzies, Professor of Divinity (so called) George
Meldrum, Minister at Aberdeen, and William Mitchel Catechist, at Foot of Dee.
AS in this late Rencountre it was specially provided, Challenge.
that it shall be Abstract from the Challenge made to you, and so no fulfilling
of it; so now this being past (of which you have here presented to you a good
and Faithful Account, which we hope, being seriously weighed by your more
Mature Judgments, may allay any hasty Joy, that might have proceeded from the
Windy Triumphs, the Students might have possessed you with a Belief they had
obtained; who at every turn, to the nauseating of the more Serious and
Impartial Auditors, were proclaiming themselves Victors) We think you more
concerned: And indeed, we are the more desirous to Meet and Debate it with your
selves. For either this is All ye have to say, which ye have put in their
Mouths; or ye have more to say: If this be all, then indeed it may be your
Wisdom, not to accept this Offer; but if ye have more, we shall be willing to
hear it, and endeavor to Answer it. And as your Appearing yourselves would be
more Satisfactory to the People, and is most desired by them, as well as us; so
diverse Inconveniences, that have in this, or may fall in the like, would be
avoided.

For First; It being in your Public Houses, Reasons.
there would be less Occasion of Tumult; because the House is capable to hold
diverse Thousands. Secondly, as it is probable, ye would not so readily be put
to a Stand as they: If it should happen, ye were; we are hopeful, ye would not
by raising a Laughter and Clamor amongst the People, and crying out three or
four at once, seek to cover it, or boast of Victory, and cry out, Your Argument
is pungent, before we have Time allowed us to Answer it. Thirdly; You engaging,
we are hopeful to procure Discreet, Learned, and Persons every way Considerable
to be Judges Consultative upon our part (though not professing our Way) to help
to Moderate and keep Good Order. Fourthly; It is probable, That by the
Solemnity of of such an Action and the Influence of your Presence, as well as
other Persons of Condition being there, might secure us from the Hazard of
Clods and Stones: for I do truly assure you, I conceive my self more able to
Answer the most pungent of your Arguments, than defending my self from the
Stones and Blows of your Unreasonable and Brutish Church Members. That it is
below you, to engage with us: But as this is altogether unsuitable to Christian
Ministers, whose Master disdained not daily to Debate, and Answer the Questions
of such, as Opposed themselves unto him, and taught his Disciples to leave the
ninety and nine, and go seek after the Odd one. Next, It is most Unreasonable;
for since ye take Liberty to speak against us in your Pulpits, and particularly
to design us, yea and sometimes to speak Untruths of us, I desire then to know;
Whether it be agreeable to the Rules of Christianity, or even of Common
Honesty, to take Liberty to speak ill of Men behind their Backs, abuse their
Principles and Reputations, and yet say; It is below them to prove these
Charges to the Men's own Faces? Secondly; It is Objected, That it is against the
Laws, to call the Faith established by Law into Question. But may not the same
be said against Protestants in those Nations, where Popery and Mahometism are
Established by Law? Yea, is not this the very Pretense and put-off, which the
Papists both in Germany and France gave the Primitive Protestants, when they
desired Public Conferences with them? And was not both the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, and his Brother Ferdinando sorely checked by diverse Bishops of Rome,
for granting these Conferences? and the Queen Mother of France openly reproved
and cried out against by Cardinal Turnon and other Clergymen, for giving way
to that of Poysy, as suffering the Universal Faith of the Church to be called
in Question; which had been established by many Laws, and for a far longer
Time, than the Profession we oppose. It seems, ye Defend your selves chiefly by
Popish Weapons; as will anon further appear: In order whereunto I shall speak a
Word or two to John Menzies, and so make an end.

The greatest and frequentest Argument, that both thy Scholars and others make
against us, Scholars chief Argument against us.
is; That we have no certain Evidence, by which we can make known, That we are
led by the Spirit, that Heretics and others cannot pretend to. Now if this may
be admitted as Relevant or Strong against us; I desire, thou would be pleased
to show me, How thou can extricate thy self out of the same Difficulty, when
urged by the Jesuit Dempster; That the Scripture, which thou assignedst as the
Ground of the Protestant Religion, is an Evidence for you, seeing all Heretics
also pretend to it? Let me see, what Difficulties occur in our Case, as to the
Spirit, which likewise occur not in the same very Way in Yours, as to the
Scripture? For (besides that we have as good Ground to lay Claim to the
Scriptures, as your selves, and are ready, and I hope able to prove our
Principles from them, as well as your selves) If ye say, Men may be deceived by
a Seducing Spirit; What then? will it therefore follow, That the Spirit of God
will deceive any? Or that Men ought not to be guided by it? more than because
many Men have been and are deceived by a Misunderstanding and wrong Use of the
Scripture; that therefore the Scripture does deceive People, or ought not to be
the Rule? If it be said; Diverse Men pretending to the Spirit, Contradict one
another: Does not the same recur as to the Scriptures? What greater
Contradictions can there be, than there is betwixt certain Churches, both
acknowledging the Scriptures to be the Rule? Have thou forgotten (John) how
thou and thy Elder Brother Andr. Cant, who both Affirmed the Scripture to be
the only Certain Rule, and yet oftentimes before the same Auditory, in the same
Pulpit, did from the very same Verse of Scripture, Psalm. 93 5. Holiness
becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever, draw different and Contradictory
Doctrines, Uses and Applications? If that then will not infer according to you,
the Scriptures to be an Uncertain Rule; neither will the other, as to the
Spirit. If it be said: That the fame Man pretending to be guided by the Spirit,
has been of different Judgments; does not the same also recur as to the
Scriptures?

Or need we go further, John, than thy self, to prove this, who have all-along
acknowledged the Scripture to be the Rule; and yet sometime judged the
Congregational Way to be preferrable to the Presbyterian? And then the
Presbyterian better than the Independent? And now the Episcopal preferrable to
both? Or tell me, John, honestly, did the Scripture deceive thee, when thou
preachedst upon that Text, Why mournest thou for Saul? If thou say, Thou only
here mis-understood the Place, and mis-applyedst it; yet is the Scripture for
all that True and Certain: May not the same be said, if one pretending the
Spirit to be the Rule, should fall in the like Error, that the Spirit were not
to be blamed, or thence termed uncertain? But the Man that mistook the Voice
thereof, or took his own Imaginations instead of it, as thou did thy
Mis-apprehensions for the Sense of that Scripture? If thou can extricate thy
self out of these Difficulties, so as to satisfy me, or any other Rational and
Indifferent Person, I may seriously say to thee, according to the Proved, Eris
mihi magnus Apollo; and really, thou may not be without Hopes of making a
Proselyte. But if it appear to all Judicious and Unprejudicate Persons, That
John Menzies's Arguments against the Quakers are no other, than the Jesuit's
against him; and whatever way he can defend himself against the Jesuit's, so
the Quakers can do against him, and impugn and straiten him the same way: so
that his Argument is like the Viper's-Brood, that destroys him that brings it
forth; I say, if this appear, what may Candid Persons judge of John Menzies's
Honesty, that has asserted in Print, That Quakerism is Popery under a Disguise;
and the Papists and Quakers are one?

The State of the Controversy in the first Place then both upon our Part and
Yours is in Thesi, and not in Hypothesi; That is, Not, Whether or not we be
truly ruled by the Spirit, or can give an Evidence of it, more than Whether ye
be truly led by the Scriptures, or can give any Evidence that ye are? but,
Whether we do well in saying, The Spirit is the Principal Rule of Faith? For
though diverse Sects now, to wit, Lutherans, Calvinists, Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians, etc. do all
quarrel one another, each laying Claim to be led by the Scripture, and denying
it of the other; yet do they all agree in this, That the Scripture is the only
Rule: Will it therefore follow, That the Scripture is not the Rule or Certain,
because none of these can give a Certain Evidence convincing their respective
Opposers, that they are led by it? So on the other Hand, though such as affirm
the Spirit to be the Principal Rule, cannot give any Evidence to convince their
Opposers, that they are led by it; it will not follow, that it is not the Rule,
or that they err, in Affirming it so to be.

A POSTSCRIPT.
AS the Apostle Paul said concerning the Spirit of God, That there are
diversities of Operations, but one Spirit, and one Body of Christ, which is his
Church; so I may say concerning Antichrist, and his Spirit and Body. The Body
of Antichrist is but one, having many Members; and the Spirit of Antichrist is
but one in the Root, though in different Operations and Appearances. And what
is this Body of Antichrist, but all these (whether Papists or others, though
pretending to Reformation, under whatsoever Designation, as Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, or any else) who oppose the Spirit of
Christ in his Spiritual Appearances and Operations in the Body of Christ, which
is his Church? A manifest Instance of the Truth of this, I my self of late have
been an Ear and Eye witness of. For not many Months ago I had occasion at
London, both to see with my Eyes, and hear with my Ears, how the People called
Anabaptists, some of their Chief Teachers opposed, denied, slighted and (by all
Means their Earthly and Devilish Wisdom could invent) labored to make of none
effect the Inward Evidence of the Spirit of God in his People; alleging openly
in the Faces of Thousands, That whoever could not give an Evidence to their
Adversaries, that they were Inspired with the Spirit of God, such as no
Heretics could pretend to, were no Christians, but deceivers: So these
Anabaptists lately argued against us at London in an open Assembly. And so now
since in my own Native Country within these few Days, I have seen the same
Spirit to appear in Men, professedly very much differing from Anabaptists, and
slighting them as a sort of Heretics, yet one with them in the Ground; and in
this particular Work and Service also, to carry on the great Design of
Antichrist. These are some Masters of Arts, Students of Divinity, (as they call
themselves) in the University of Aberdeen, who openly in the hearing of diverse
Hundreds of People, (some whereof were Sober and Judicious) did oppose the
inward Evidence of the Spirit of God in his People, as not being a sufficient
Evidence unto them, unless they could give an Evidence of it unto others, even
their very Adversaries, that they were Inspired; and so if we the People called
Quakers could not give an Evidence of this unto these our Opposers, we were but
Deceivers. After it had been shown them, That Papists and Jesuits used the same
Argument against all the Protestants, that indeed did more militate against
them out of the Papists Quiver, than out of these our Adversaries Quiver
against us; I produced the Testimony of the Scripture, as the best and most
Convincing outward Evidence that could be given, as a Witness to the Doctrine
and Principle of Immediate Revelation, and Inspiration of the Spirit of God,
owned by us, as being in all Men in some Measure, and consequently in us. This
is, I say, not the best and most principal Evidence, nor the greatest, that we
have unto our selves, or unto one another, who are gathered into the same
Faith, Spirit and Power (for that is the Immediate Evidence of the Spirit in
our Hearts, which witnesses both to our selves, and to one another, that we
are the Children of God) but it is (I mean the Scripture) the Greatest, Outward
and Visible Evidence, that can be given unto our Adversaries, who in Words own
the Scriptures, as their only Rule, and chiefest Evidences. And in doing so, I
followed the Example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who while he
reasoned against the Jews, who professed to own the Scriptures, but denied him,
he brought a Testimony for himself out of the Scriptures, which they in Words
owned as their Rule; Search (said he, or, Ye search) the Scriptures, for in
them ye think, ye have Eternal Life, and these are they, which testify of me.
Now though Christ his own immediate Testimony should have been received, as
greater than any of his Servants, such as Moses and the Prophets were; yet he
used this, as an Argument against them, as bringing them to their own Rule:
And, said he, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for Moses wrote
of me. And he said again, I have a greater Testimony, than that of John; and
yet John was the greatest of all the Prophets: So in like manner we say; We
have a greater Testimony to Christ Jesus by his Spirit and Power Revealed in
us, than the Testimony of Moses and the Prophets, even than John, who was the
greatest. But when we produce the Testimony of Moses, and the Prophets and
Apostles, as an Evidence to the Truth, of what we affirm, I say, it should be
received by our Adversaries, who own the Scriptures as their Chief and Only
Rule. For either they should Receive it, or not Receive it; if they should
Receive it, then they are faulty, who in the late Dispute at Aberdeen did
refuse to Receive the Evidence of the Scriptures, as from us, only because we
say, We have a greater, to wit, that of the Spirit within us; although we own
the Scripture, as the greatest Visible and outward Evidence, that we can give
to our Adversaries. If they should not Receive the Scripture-Evidence and
Testimony as from us, because we say, we have a Greater, to wit, that of Christ
himself immediately in us by his Spirit; then they must needs also say for the
same Reason, That the Jews ought not to receive the Testimony of the
Scriptures, as an Evidence for Christ, because he said, He had a Greater: And
certainly, he had a greater, though they would not receive it; nor could not,
as they stood in their Prejudice and Malice, wherewith they were filled against
him, who did not receive him.

Now, this I say with Freedom and Boldness of Spirit to all those, whether
Papists, Anabaptists, Prelatical or Presbyterian Professors, who with one Mouth
require of us an Evidence, that we are Inspired, or have a Measure of the
Inspiration of the Spirit of God and Christ in us; I offer unto all of you the
Scriptures for an Evidence of this Truth, viz. That the Quakers (so called)
have a Measure of the Inspiration of the Spirit of God and Christ in them. For
according to the Scriptures-Testimony, Christ the true Light enlighteneth every
Man, that comes into the World; and his Illumination is his Inspiration. I
profess sincerely in God's Fear, That the Scriptures-Testimony is to me as full
and plain, and Convincing to prove this Truth, viz. That an Illumination,
Manifestation and Inspiration of the Spirit of God is given to every Man, is in
every Man; as to prove this Truth, That Christ, who according to the Flesh was
born of the Virgin Mary, was the promised Messiah. Now, if we can prove from
Scripture, That all Men have in them a Measure of this Divine Illumination and
Inspiration by the Spirit of Christ, we have gained our Point, which is; That
we have also a Measure of the same in us: for ALL MEN does comprehend Us called
Quakers, as well as other Men: I see not, what our Adversaries can with any
Color Object against this Evidence from Scripture, but this, That they will
deny, that the Scripture bears Testimony to this Universal Illumination or
Inspiration of the Spirit of God in Men. But this brings the Matter of the
Debate from being Personal to be Doctrinal, and so puts us upon equal Terms at
least, with all our Adversaries, especially Prelatical, Anabaptist and
Presbyterian, and Independent Opposers whatsoever, who say; The Scriptures are
their chief and only Rule. And though our Adversaries say; The Scripture does
not testify to that Universal Inspiration of the Spirit of Christ in Men; that
moves us not more, than when the Jews denied, That the Scriptures bore
Testimony to him, that was born of the Virgin Mary, to be the Christ. We are
able, by the help of God, to prove from Scripture the Truth of this Doctrine of
Divine Illumination and Inspiration in all Men, and consequently in the
Quakers, as much as they, or any professing Christianity upon Earth, can prove
any Principle or Doctrine of their Faith. Secondly; We are able, and do offer,
by the Grace of God, against all our Opposers whatsoever, to prove from the
Scriptures-Testimony, That this Universal Inspiration and Illumination of
Christ by his Spirit in Men is a sufficient Evidence of Truth, and Rule of
Faith and Life in all Men, and consequently in us called Quakers. Thirdly; that
this Divine Inspiration and Illumination, where it is not wilfully resisted and
rejected, but regarded and attended, is a Greater Evidence, than the Scripture
is, and witnessed by the Scriptures. Fourthly, and yet the Scripture is the
Greatest Visible and Outward Evidence, that either we or they can give of their
Rule.

I shall conclude with a reasonable Demand to these Young Men, Masters of Arts,
their Masters and Teachers, which is this; Whether they own these Assertions,
Affirmations and Arguments of their Scholars in the late Dispute, as follows,
viz. That whatever is of God, is God? That the Scriptures according to the
Quakers are Fallacious, and can beguile us? That the Baptism with the Holy
Ghost is ceased? And the rest of their Discourse inserted in this foregoing
Treatise? If Yea; Let them declare so much to the People, who are greatly
stumbled at these their Expressions, even diverse of their own Church. If Nay;
then let them publicly Reprove and Disown those Words: otherwise not only we,
but many others will say; Ye have both taught and allowed them so to Affirm.

G. K.

Quakerism Confirmed: OR, A VINDICATION Of the Chief DOCTRINES and PRINCIPLES
Of the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, FROM THE Arguments and Objections of the Students
of Divinity (so called) of Aberdeen, in their Book entitled, QVAKERISM
CANVASED.

BY ROBERT BARCLAY AND GEORGE KEITH.


2 Timothy 3.9. But they shall proceed no further: for their Folly shall be
manifest to all Men, etc.

London, Printed for Tho. Northcott. 1691.

Friendly Reader, 1676.

HAD we not more Regarded the Interest of the Truth, for whose sake we can shun
no Abasement, than the Significancy of those, with whom we have this
Rencountre, we should have rather chused to be silent, than Answer them; they
being of so small Reputation among their own, that neither Teachers nor People
will hold themselves Accomptable for any of their Positions, and seem zealous
to have it believed, they would not bestow Time to Read it, nor yet hold
themselves obliged to Approve it. However, since we certainly know, That in the
Second Part of their Book (to which this Reply is) they have scraped together
most of the Chief Arguments used against us, and borrowed not a little from G.
M's Manuscripts (with whose Work (that yet appears not) we have been these
seven Years menaced*) Which, like the Materials of a Building managed by
Unskilful Workmen, though they be by them very confusedly put together; yet
being the chief Things can be said against us, we have thoroughly handled for
the Reader's Satisfaction; which may be Serviceable to the Truth, without
Respect to the Insignificancy of those, against whom it is written. As for the
first Part of their Book, we have also Answered it, but distinct from this; it
consisting of many Particularities of Matters of Fact, which perhaps might have
proved tedious to many Readers, that may by This be Edified; and think it of no
great Consequence, that the Students are proved Liars, which even many of their
own Party think, is not any Spot in their Religion: so little are they looked
upon among their own: Yet those that are Curious, may also have that first
Part. As for this second Part, wherein our Principles are handled, we judge, we
deal with the Clergy in General; however they seek to shift it, and hide
themselves, since their Book is Licensed by the Bishop of Edinburgh; and he
being challenged, said, He did it not without a Recommendation from Aberdeen.
So that no Man of Reason can deny, but they are accountable for the Errors and
Impertinencies, which we have herein observed; which we leave, Reader, to thy
serious Examination, remaining

Thy Friends R. B. G. K.


THE CONTENTS.
SECTION I. COncerning Immediate Revelation. SECT II. The Students Argument
against the Spirit's being the Rule, proved one with the Jesuit Dempster's.
SECT. III. Concerning the Supper, Perfection and Women's Speaking. SECT. IV.
Concerning the Necessity of Immediate Revelations to the Building up of True
Faith. SECT. V. Concerning Worship. SECT. VI. Concerning Baptism. SECT. VII.
Concerning the Ministry. SECT. VIII. Concerning Liberty of Conscience. The
CONCLUSION. Wherein their Observations upon R. B. his Offer, and their last
Section of the Q. Revilings (as they term them) are Examined.
Quakerism Confirmed.
SECTION I.
Concerning Immediate Revelation, Wherein the Second Part of the Students Book
from page 44. to page 66. is Answered.

IN their first Section they allege: We do wickedly put many Indignities upon
the Holy Scriptures; and that we monopolize the Spirit to our selves: Which are
gross Lies: But that they are against the Spirit, is no malicious Accusation,
but a Truth, as will appear to any true Discerner. Their comparing us, when we
plead for the Spirit, to them who cried, The Temple, The Temple; is Unequal and
Profane: They that cried, The Temple, The Temple, rejected the Spirit of God,
and relied too much on the Temple and outward Privileges; but dare they blame
any, for relying too much on the Spirit of God? Again, in their first
Sub-section they commit a gross Deceit, in which they follow G. M. their Master
(who uses the same in his Manuscript to us) in alleging; They are more for
the Spirit, than we, because they affirm, That the Efficacy of the Spirit is
Insuperable. For we do affirm, Operations of the Spirit may be Resisted.
That the Efficacy of the Spirit is in a true Sense Insuperable, as namely,
where the Mind is well disposed: See R. B. his Thesis, where he uses the Word
Insuperably. But that the Spirit does Insuperably move, or irresistibly force
the ill-disposed Minds of all, in whom it operates, is False and contrary to
Scripture, which says; That Some Resist the Spirit; yea, and is contrary to
the Experience of all, who are acquainted with the Spirit's Workings; that
know, that the Spirit many Times works so gently, that his Operation may be
resisted: Therefore said the Apostle, Quench not the Spirit. Now that Doctrine,
which is contrary both to Scripture and Experience, is not for the Spirit, but
against it. Again, how are they more for the Spirit than we, seeing they
affirm, The Spirit's Influence is but only Effective, as having no Evidence in
it self sufficiently to demonstrate, that it is of God: We say, it has; as
being both Effective and Objective. 2. They say; The Influence of the Spirit is
only given to some; We say, To all. 3. They say; It is so weak, that it can
bring none to a perfect Freedom from Sin in this Life, though never so much
improved: We say; it can, Yea. 4. They say commonly; The Influence of the
Spirit cannot keep the best Saint one Moment from Sin: We say; It can keep them
for whole Days; yea, always, if they improve it, as well as they can. 5. They
say; A Man may and ought to pray without the Spirit: Which we deny. And so we
leave it to the Judicious, if here they do not commit a gross Deceit. Lastly,
in their stating the Question, they accuse us falsely; As if we did hold, that
all Men ought to judge and examine all the material Objects of Faith, and
Articles of Religion by Inward Revelations; As if all Men were bound to an
Impossibility. All Men have not all the Material Objects of Faith propounded
unto them; Accidental Objects of Faith.
for some of the Material Objects of Faith are merely Accidental unto all Men's
Salvation: As to believe, that Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac Jacob, etc.
Others although not Accidental, yet are but Integral Parts, and not Essential
of Christian Religion; such as the Outward History of Christ, etc. and so by
this Distinction diverse of thief Arguments are answered, without more ado;
especially the first two, where they spend much Paper fighting with their own
Shadow, telling us; That the Heathens have no Revelations showing the Birth,
Passion, Resurrection, etc. of Jesus Christ; Which we do grant: For the Belief
of such Things is only necessary to them, to whom they are propounded; and the
Scriptures alleged by them, at most prove no more. It were a needless Labor,
and not worth the Pains to answer particularly to all their Impertinencies,
Follies and Blasphemies, which they obtrude upon us as Arguments; and in the
Issue, their last Probations resolve into mere Assertions, as much denied by
us, as the things they undertake to Refute. Therefore upon each Section or
Sub-section we shall but take notice, what their Arguments resolve into at
last; and as there is occasion, set down some Propositions, that may serve as a
Key, to open the Reader's way through all these Heaps of Confusion and
Blasphemy, wherewith they fill their Pages. As for the Scriptures brought by
them Arg. 1. as Isa. 9.2. Matthew. 4.16. Psalm. 147.19, 20. These prove not, that
they had no Light, for the Light shines in Darkness Joh. 1. And Prove. 29.18.
does not import, That People have wanted Vision from the beginning; but that
for some Time they may want it, to wit, when their Day of Visitation is over;
which we deny not. And whereas they tell us, That the Greek Particle (...) is
often to be translated among, and therefore so to be Col. 1.26. and other
Places alleged by us; we deny this Consequence. And that they say, The Apostle
is speaking of the outward Preaching of Christ, Col. 1.26. is their bare
Assertion without any Proof. Also in their first Argument they allege a gross
Untruth upon G. K. as if he did hold in his Book of Immediate Revelation, page
11. That the Jews generally under the Law had no Immediate Revelation in the
Seed: Let the Place be read, and it will clear G. K. where he distinguishes a
Twofold sort of Revelation in the Seed, according to a Twofold Condition of
the Seed. The first sort of Revelation is more hid and obscure, Revelation
universal and particular.
the Seed not being completely formed; but as under Ground: The second is more
manifest and clear, so as with open Face to behold the Glory of God. The first
sort of Revelation is given universally unto all, both Jews and Gentiles; but
the second is only given to the Saints, in whom the Seed is completely formed
and brought forth. As to their Queries, we answer; That Conscience and Reason
are distinguished from the Saving Light of Christ in all Men, and the
Revelation thereof, as a Natural and Supernatural Principle are distinguished;
and it was the Natural, which Pelagius did exalt too much: as our Adversaries
also do, who affirm, That Men may be Lawful Preachers, without being renewed by
the Supernatural Principle of God's saving Light and Grace.

In the Prosecution of their Second Argument 1. They deny the Inward Blood and
Sufferings of Christ, referring us to their Proof afterward; which we shall in
its Place examine. 2. They allege, That we hold an Heavenly and Spiritual
Nature in Christ, which is distinct from the Godhead on the one hand, and from
the Manhood on the other, which they call a Third Nature in Christ. But this
their Alledgance is false; The Inward Hearing of the Word Asserted.
for that Heavenly and Spiritual Nature is not a Third Thing distinct from both
the Godhead and Manhood of Christ, as shall be afterward shown. 3. They
allege, That the Apostle does not speak of any inward Hearing or Word, but of
the outward: The Contrary is manifest from the Apostles own Words in the same
Chapter; The Word is nigh thee, in thy Mouth and in thy Heart. Nor is their
Reason valid to prove it; for the Words verse 14, 15. are not Arguments made by
Paul, but Objections adduced by him; which he afterward answers: And this is
usual with Paul in this Epistle. As to their Question; Wherein consists the
Nature and Essence of Faith? We say, It is a Receiving of Christ, laying hold
upon him, according to whatsoever Revelation he makes of himself in Men's
Hearts; which is in some greater, in others less, but in all is in some degree.

In their Third Argument they undertake to prove, That according to us the
Scriptures are not necessary secundum quid, or profitable: But all in vain. As
for their Example, as they know, Examples prove not; so is it vain and
impertinent: for we never Compared the Scriptures to a mutilated and dim Copy;
they are a clear and perfect Copy, The Scriptures a perfect Copy, but not the
Original.
as to all Essentials and Necessaries of Christian Religion: But they are not
the Original. And seeing we have answered them so many Questions; let them
Answer us this one: Are not all these Divinity-Books and Commentaries on the
Scripture made by Men not divinely Inspired, as a mutilated and dim Copy in
comparison of the Scripture, and whether is the Scripture or these Books more
perfect? If they say, the Scripture is more perfect; then what need they the
mutilated and dim Copy of these Divinity-Books? Or what Profit can they have by
them, which they cannot have rather by the Scripture? Again, here they confound
the Material and Formal Object of Faith; as if we did hold, That Inward
Revelation without Scripture did propound unto us the Material Objects of
Faith; which is False: For there are many of the Material Objects, which are
only propounded by the Scripture, to wit, such as the Historical Part of the
Scripture; and in this Respect we do not plead, That Inward Revelation is the
Material Object, but the Formal.

In their Fourth Argument they are so blind, as not to take notice how we can
give the same Answer, that they give, concerning the Law, That we, who are
under Grace and Obedience to the inward Law, are dead as to the Condemning
Power; but not as to the Commanding Power thereof. But that it is not the
Letter, or any outward Testimony of the Law, Not the Letter, nor the outward
Law, but the Spirit convinces the Conscience.
that does so powerfully Convince a Man's Conscience, as of other Sins, so of
Covetousness, as the Spirit of God does in his inward Convictions and Smitings
upon the Conscience, is clear from the Experience of all those, who have known
and passed through the State, which the Apostle spoke of, when he said; I was
alive without the Law; but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died.
Yea, what Law is that of the Mind, whereof he makes mention Romans 8. but an
Inward Law, by which the Knowledge of Sin comes, and through which both the
Knowledge and Remembrance of Sin sticks more closely to the Soul, than through
any Outward Law it can? And did not Christ say, That the Spirit should Convince
the World of Sin? Yea how many of those called Heathens, The Heathens instanced.
who had not any Outward Law, have declared, That Inward Concupiscence was a
Sin? As for their malicious Accusation against us, of our Lust and
Covetousness, we reject, as not worth the noticing; seeing they assert it
without any color of Proof: but it seems, they have learned that Wicked and
Devilish Maxim, Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit, i. e. Calumniate
boldly, that something may stick.

Their Fifth Argument is Answered in the First, as being a Branch thereof.

Their Sixth Argument is built upon a false Supposition, that according to our
Principle, All would be Prophets, and that no Difference could be assigned
betwixt Prophets, and Pastors and Teachers; seeing Prophets and Teachers teach
both from the Spirit. Prophets and Teachers distinguished.
The First is Answered at large in the End of G. K's Book of Immediate
Revelation. To the Second we Answer; that by Prophets in the strictest Sense
are meant those, who Prophesy of things to come, as Agabus was; by Teachers,
they who Instruct the People in Doctrine: And this is a manifest Difference;
although in the large and common Sense Prophesying and Preaching are one thing.

Their Seventh Argument, they pretend to build on that Scripture Jud. 19. but
it is easily Answered: That Men in one Sense may be said not to have the
Spirit; and in another to have it. Even as a Rich Man, who improveth not his
Money, both Has, and Has it Not, in diverse Senses: According to which Christ
said; From him that has not, shall be taken away that which he has. And
whereas R. B. does grant, That they, whose Day of Visitation is come to an End,
The Reproofs of the Spirit internal.
have not the Spirit, so much as to invite and call them unto God; Here they
insult, as if all were granted they seek: But they are greatly deceived. For
though he grant, That some have not the Spirit to call and invite them; yet he
grants not, That they have not the Spirit to reprove them: For even the
Devils and Damned Souls of Men and Women sin against the Spirit of God,
witnessing against them in their Hearts, which is in them a Law of
Condemnation: as David said; If I go down into hell, thou art there. Yea, do we
not read nor only, God spoke unto Cain, a most wicked Man, but also unto Satan,
Job 1. which speaking of God to Satan, we suppose, the Students will not say,
was by an outward Voice, and consequently it was Internal. But we ask them, If
all wicked Professors of Christianity should burn the Bible, and destroy all
outward Rules and Means of Knowledge, Should they by this Means cease to Sin,
because they should have no Rule? Or should they be excused from Gospel-Duties,
because they have no Rule, by this Supposition (according to the Students) to
require them?

In their Second Subsection they spend both their Strength and Paper, in
laboring to prove some things, which we no wise deny; as the Sequel of their
Major,. 14. But in the Proof of their Minor, where the whole Stress lies, they
utterly fail in both its Branches, as we shall briefly show. As to the first,
they Argue thus; They know no such Inward Objective Evidence of Inward
Revelations of the Spirit in themselves; therefore they have none such. We deny
the Consequence; they see it not, nor know it, because they will not: Their
Prejudice against the Truth does blind them, and indispose their Understanding.
Yea, might not the unbelieving Jews have reasoned the same way against Christ,
when he was outwardly present with them: We do not know him to be Christ;
Therefore he is not Christ? Again, whereas they query in a scoffing way, Can a
thing, that is self-evident, he hid from the whole World, except a few
Illuminado's? We answer, If it were hid from the whole World, except a few in
comparison of others, it is no more than what the Scripture says; That the
whole World lies in Wickedness: And their Wickedness blinds them, that they
do not see the Light that is in them. Yet we could Instance many, The
Self-Evidence of Inspiration.
who are not Quakers (so called) both Christians and Gentiles, who have
acknowleded the Evidence and Certainty of Divine Inspiration in all Men, as the
surest Ground of Knowledge: But we need not digress into this here; we have
enough besides to stop their Mouths. For do not they say, That the Scriptures
have a Self-Evidence? and yet, are not the Scriptures and the Truths declared
in them hid from the greatest part of the World? The Mahometans reject both Old
and New Testament, and the Jews the New; although they read them: And yet
according to our Adversaries, they have Self-Evidence. So that it is Evident,
the same Argument is as much against the Scripture, as the Light within in
Point of Self-Evidence; and indeed much more, seeing many, who deny the
Self-Evidence of the Scriptures, even Heathens, have a Knowledge of the
Self-Evidence of Divine Inspiration, as Socrates, Plato, Plotinus, Phocylides,
Seneca and many others. And here in the close, being sensible of their
Weakness, after they have labored to prove the Negative, they tell us; That
seeing the Negative is theirs, they are not bound to prove it: And so would
roll it over on us to prove the Affirmative against their own Law; which would
have us to be mere Defendents. As to the Maxim, Affirmanti incumbit probatio,
it does not help them; for they have Affirmed a Negative* and have been at
great Pains to prove it: But all in vain. And why may we not put them to prove
their Minor, Negative, as well as their Master J. M. put the Jesuit Dempster to
prove his Minor; which John Meinzies affirmed to be Negative?

In their Prosecution of the Second Branch, they Affirm, That the Q. cannot
give any sufficient Evidence of their Revelations. This we deny, and put them
to prove it: But how shamefully they fail here, is apparent. For instead of
proving of what they Affirm, they put us to prove the Contradictory; and so
contrary to their own Law, would urge us to be Impugners and Defenders at one
time: a silly Trick, they learned from the Baptists in their Dispute at London;
The Spirit's Real and Convincing Evidence.
as indeed the Students Argument about an Evidence is the same upon the Matter
with that, which the Baptists used against us at London long before them, and
which the Jesuit used against J. M. long before them both. So that we may see,
what Sort of Patrons the Students here follow. But it is well to be observed,
That when they seek an Evidence from us, they tell us, page 57. They mean not
an Evidence, which will actually and de facto Convince a pertinacious
Adversary; but an Objective Evidence or Clearness in the thing it self, which
is apta nata, fit of its own Nature to Convince, and will really Convince the
well-disposed. Very well! this their plain Concession destroys their whole
Building. For seeing, they press upon us by way of Dilemma, Either we have the
Spirit of God, or we have it not; (which is J. L. his Argument) We may very
lawfully by his own Example press him and his Fellow-Students with the like
Argument; Either they have a well-disposed Mind, or they have not. If they say,
they have not, then they confess, they are a Pertinacious Adversary, and so not
capable to be Convinced of our Evidence: and surely, it were great Folly in us,
to seek to Convince them of the Truth of a thing, who are not in a Capacity to
be Convinced. If they say, They have a well-disposed Mind; then let them prove
it to us, or give us an Evidence of it: Seeing by their own Rule, Affirmanti
incumbit probatio. Who is so weak, that does not see, that they are entangled
in the same Difficulty, they would urge upon us? Yea, into a far greater: For
they cannot so much as pretend to any Objective Evidence, whereby to Convince
us, that they are well-disposed; seeing they altogether deny such a thing. If
they Answer; That they are not bound to say either the Affirmative or Negative;
but require of us to prove the Negative; who sees not, that we have the same
to Reply unto them, when they urge us, Either the Q. have the Spirit, or they
have not; that we are not bound to say either the Affirmative or Negative? For
although to have, and not to have, are Contradictory; yet to say, that we have
the Spirit, and that we have not the Spirit, are not Contradictory, being both
Affirmative. And indeed, when we assert Things only in Thesi, we do not say,
either that we have, or have not the Spirit; but this we say, and we are able
to prove from Scripture, that all good Christians have the Spirit of God
immediately to Teach and Guide them into all Truth; and all Men have it so far,
as either to justify or condemn them. By this we stand, and are able to defend
it through the help of God, as consisting both with Scripture, and sound
Reason, Thesis to the Hypothesis; they must know, the same will bring them down
to it also. For seeing it is a Truth acknowledged both by them and us, The
Spiri^'s working in us, as an efficient Cause.
That all true Christians and Children of God have the Spirit of God, working
in them at least as an Efficient Cause; from this we urge them thus: Either
they have the Spirit of God working in them as an Efficient Cause, or they have
not; If they say, they have not they confess, They are not true Christians, or
Children of God, which we suppose they will be loath to say. If they say, They
have the Spirit of God, as an Efficient Cause of Faith working in them, and
subjectively inlightening them; let them prove it, or give us an Evidence of
it. Who does not see, that, Poor Men! they are taken in their own Snare? We
know, all Rational and Sober Men will acknowledge, that we are not bound tb
receive their Affirmations without Proof, more than they are bound to receive
ours; nor indeed so much: we being, as the Case stands, but Defendents.

As touching their Answer to R. B. his Retortions about an Evidence, it shall
be examined in the Next Section.

In page 60. they tell; That we assign them at last some Shadows of Evidence,
namely 1. our own Declaration. 2. The Scriptures. 3. The immediate Testimony of
the Spirit. But that these are not Shadows, will appear to the Judicious and
well-disposed, if they consider these two things. 1. That by our Declaration we
mean not a bare verbal Declaration, having no Virtue or Manifestation of Life
in it; for we confess, such might be as good a Ground for an Heretic in way of
Evidence: A Declaration proceeding from the Spirit, no Heretic has it.
but by our Declaration we mean such a Declaration as does really proceed from
the Spirit of God in us; and is therefore a living Declaration, having a
Manifestation of Life in it, and with it, and which is not only in Words of
Life, or Living Words uttered through us from the Spirit of Life, but also in
Works of Life or Living Works, which are the Fruits of the Spirit, as said
Christ: By their fruits shall ye know them. Now such a Declaration can no
Heretic have, however he may pretend to it. If our Adversaries say, That we
only pretend to such a thing; We answer them with their own Rule: Affirmanti
incumbit probatio, i. e. The Affirmer ought to prove: Let them prove us only to
be Pretenders; which yet they have not done, nor can do. And indeed, such a
Declaration from the Spirit of God in the Apostles, as when John said, We are
of God, etc. was an Evidence, That no Heretic could justly pretend to. 2. It
is a most Unjust and Unreasonable thing, to require of us any other Evidence of
our having the Spirit, than that, which every true Christian may and ought to
give; seeing we pretend to no other Spirit, but that which every true Christian
has; nor to any Revelations, but these, which are the Privileges of all true
Christians; nor to any Doctrines, which are not conform to the Scriptures of
Truth: As we are ready to prove, and as G. K. has already showed in his Book
of Immediate Revelation; which neither the Students, nor their Masters have
given us any Refutation of. Now, have not all Good Christians these three
Evidences for them? The Scripture is the best outward Evidence, that can be
given; We mean it not, as a particular Evidence; but as a general, Common to
all good Christians. The Scripture an Evidence.
For we grant, That the Scripture cannot prove, that any particular Man has
the Spirit of God in such a way, as true Christians have it; but it proves in
general, that all true Christians have it, yea, and all Men, to Convince them
at least.

In page 61, 62. They reject the Scriptures-Testimony, as an Evidence to us,
Because, according to us, the Scriptures Testimony has no Evidence without the
Spirit. In answer to which we say: But it has an Evidence with the Spirit, his
Inward Evidence going along with it; which Inward Evidence, we say, does go
along with it, sufficiently to Convince every well-disposed Intellect: And this
we can prove from the Scriptures-Testimony. Nor is this to commit an Unlawful
Circle, as they foolishly allege; which is but an old, threadbare alledgance
of Papists against the Protestants; as Turnbull alleged on Paraeus, That he
proved the Spirit by the Scripture, and the Scripture by the Spirit. Some
Protestants in our Days do miserably seek to extricate themselves of that
Circle, that they know the Spirit by the Scriptures Objectively, and they know
the Scriptures by the Spirit Effectively; and so indeed they get free of the
Circle, as not being in eodem genere, i. e. in the same kind. But they affirm a
gross Untruth, That the Spirit's Influence is only Effective, and ex part
subjecti, whereas we know, it is Objective, and can prove both from Scripture
and Primitive Protestants: see G. K. his Book of Immediate Revelation, and
Quakerism no Popery; where the same is at length proved. But we have a most
clear way to extricate our selves of that Circle, imposed on us by Papists and
these Students, The Scriptures Testimony known by the Spirit, etc.
to wit, That we know the Scriptures Testimony by the Spirit, tanquam a priori,
as we know the Effect by the Cause; and we know the Spirit's Testimony by the
Scriptures, tanquam a posteriori, as we know the Cause by the Effect: and so
both are Objective, and yet in a diverse kind; because the Objective Evidence of
the Spirit is a self-Evidence and primary; the Objective Evidence of the
Scripture is but derived and secondary.

In their answer to G. K. his Retortion from the Practice of Christ, who though
his own immediate Testimony was to be received, referred them unto the
Testimony of the Scriptures, They most miserably betake themselves to their Old
Trade of Affirming Things without any Proof; and yet on the Proof of these
Things the whole Stress of their Answer lies. As 1. they say, The Jews
rejected only the outward immediate Testimony of Christ: However dare they say,
but that the Outward, Immediate Testimony of Christ was to be believed? and yet
he referred them unto the Testimony of the Scriptures. 2. They say, They have
no such Testimony themselves, as the Inward, Objective Testimony of the Spirit.
3. They say, According to Christ the Scriptures were the Rule, meaning the
Primary Rule; and so, they set the Scripture above Christ his own immediate
outward Testimony; a most gross Disorder! That G. K. acted the Part of a
cunning Sophist, when he spoke these Words repeated by them page 4. Is no less
without any real Proof: For it is a Truth, That no Scripture-Truth can be
savingly believed, but by the Illumination of the Spirit, which is Objective.

In Paragraph 28. they think to evade G. K. his Argument, That we have
Inspiration, because all Men have it; that then Papists, Mahumetans, Pagans and
Men bodily possessed have Inspiration; which we do affirm, viz. That these have
it so far, as to Convince them, and is sufficient to be a Law of Condemnation,
and render them without Excuse for their Sin: and this all Men have not only
within their Day, but after their Day of Visitation is expired. But as to their
imposed Glosses and Senses, which they say, their Divines have already
vindicated on these Scriptures cited by G. K. for Universal Grace and
Inspiration; as they refer us to their Divines, so we refer them to our
Friends, and our Books, where their silly and weak Reasons are answered against
this Gospel Truth. As for the Word EVERY, we acknowledge, it is not taken
always Universally; but seeing it is taken so most frequently, it lies on them
to prove, that it is otherwise taken in the Places cited.

Before we close the Answer to this Subsection, Revelations self-evident.
we propose further unto the Reader these Two Considerations. 1. That when we
say, Inward Divine Revelations in the Seed are self-evident, we do not mean it
always in respect of the Material Objects, of things Revealed; but in respect
of the Formal Object, or Revelation it self. 2. Although we affirm, That the
Illumination and Influence of the Spirit in Men's Hearts, is both Effective and
Objective; yet we do not affirm, That they are two distinct Things, but one and
the same thing under different Respects: so that we do not plead for another
Influence, than that which in Words they seem to grant. But we say, it is a
more Excellent Thing, than they acknowledge it to be, as being in it self
perceptible, and having a self-Evidence; whereas they will have it only a
Medium incognitum, a thing altogether undiscernible and in-evident of it self,
so as to convince or satisfy the Understanding, that it is of God. And thus
according to our Adversaries Sense, and upon their Principle, this Inward
Illumination of the Spirit may be said to be Fallacious, for want of Evidence;
seeing, according to their own Argument, That which has not a sufficient
Evidence, is fallacious.

But whereas the Students in their Account grant in Words, That the Soul has
Spiritual Sensations, and that the Work of Grace may be felt; This Confession
destroys their whole Superstructure. For if the Work of Grace can be felt, or
is perceptible, then it is Objective; for whatever is perceptible, is
objective: And seeing they grant, That the Soul has Spiritual Sensations; we
ask them, What are the Objects of the Sensations? Are they only Words and
Letters? or Things, such as God himself, in his heavenly Refreshings, Waterings
and Bedewings? If the first, it is most unreasonable; for it would make the
Spiritual Senses to fall short of the Natural, seeing the Natural Senses reach
beyond Words to Natural Things themselves. If the Second, they must needs with
us acknowledge inward objective Revelations; for by them we understand no other
thing, but as God, and the things of His Kingdom are felt in us by way of
Object.

SECTION II.
Where the Students Chief Argument against the Spirit's being the Rule, is
proved to be one upon the Matter, with that the Jesuit Dempster used against
their Master J. M. and the same way answered, and their Weak Endeavors to
evite it, Examined and Refuted.

THere has enough been said heretofore to demonstrate the Fallacies in the
Form of their Arguments, in which also it resembled the Jesuits; which to avoid
Repetition, we shall now omit. Their Medium against us is, That we cannot give
an Evidence of our being led by the Spirit; but that which may be as good an
Evidence for Heretics: Heretics Pretenses to the Spirit.
For thus they word it in their Account, alleging, We wronged them in saying,
They used the Words, which Heretics may pretend to: yet abstracting from this
false Charge, we shall take it, as they now express it, being indeed
Equivalent. To prove, that it may be as good an Evidence for Heretics, they
make J. L. argue thus; Other Heretics declare and say, they have the Spirit of
God, teaching them as well as you: Therefore if your saying, you were so
taught, were a sufficient Evidence, etc. Then their declaring, etc. Now let the
Reader judge, whether this Argument amounts to any thing more, then that; That
is not a sufficient Evidence to the Quakers, which other Heretics may pretend
to? Thus the Students dispute against the Quakers; let us hear, how the Jesuit
disputes against J. M. their Master. Pap. Lucifug. page 3. after the Jesuit
has repeated his Argument, he adds, May it please the Answerer of this
Syllogism to remember, That the Ground or Principle, which he shall produce to
prove the Truth of his Religion, must have this Property, that it cannot serve,
nor be assumed to prove a false Religion; as the Grounds and Principles, that
one produces, to prove that he is an Honest Man, must have this Property, that
it cannot serve nor be assumed to prove a Knave to be an honest Man, etc. Let
the judicious Reader consider, whether there be any material difference betwixt
these two Argumentations? But to proceed, and show, that their Arguments are no
better, than the Jesuits against their Master, and our Answers no worse, than
their Master's against the Jesuit; we shall place them together.

J. M. Answers the Jesuit thus, page 5. of his Pap. Lucifugus.
The true Religion has sufficient grounds in it self, to manifest it self to
be the true Religion, if it meet with a well disposed Intellect. For (to use
your own Similitude) an honest Man may have ground enough to show a distinction
betwixt him and a Knave, albeit a Fool cannot discern it; so the true Religion
may have ground enough to prove it self True (which the false Religion has
not) though an Infidel or Heretic, whose foolish mind is darkened, Romans 1.21.
cannot take it up.

Our Answer to the Students, as themselves acknowledge it page 59. is, J. M 's
Answer to the Jesuit compared with ours.

That the Evidence of the Spirit cannot be assigned, but to the well-disposed
Understanding: this they call a pitiful Subterfuge; alleging, that then this
Evidence can only be assigned to such, as are of the Quaker's mind, but not to
others; and that any Heretic in the World may deny Evidences upon the same
account. Now let the judicious Reader determine, whether, if this Answer be a
pitiful Subterfuge, the Students with the same Breath do not declare their
Master's to the Jesuit to be the same.

And when they write next, let them show the difference; which they have not
yet done.

In answer to this Retortion they allege page 67. That R. B. said, their
Master, Jo. M. would not assign the Jesuit a ground, to prove the Truth of the
Protestant Religion; and therefore, say they, R. B 's. Practices agree exactly
with the Jesuit's Morals, and give an egregious Specimen of his Jesuitical
Honesty, which makes us suspect him to be a Jesuited Emissary. This is a false
Calumny disproved by their own Account, where page 8. upon this occasion they
Confess, R. B. said only, that their Master desired the Jesuit to prove, that
the Protestant Religion had no ground for it. Will they deny this? Let them
read the very first four Lines of their Master's first Answer to the Jesuit's
Paper, page 3. and they will find, he put the Jesuit to prove his Minor, which
was; That the Protestant Religion had no such ground. As it does not therefore
follow, that I. M. assigned not afterward a Ground; so neither will R. B. his
repeating this, infer, that he said, he did not assign such a Ground. Yea, in
Contradiction to themselves, page 60. They acknowledge he told; their Master
named the Scripture as a Ground, etc. So it is manifest, they have given here a
Specimen of their Iesuitical Honesty. And because they could not Answer, they
forged lies to fill up the Paper, and things not to the purpose, as page 57.
where offering to Reply to this Retortion, they say: But for Answer, it is well
known, R. B. was brought up in a Popish College; and it is thought by many,
that he is a Iesuited Emissary, etc. Is not this a pungent Answer, Reader? R.
B. was educated in a Popish College; The Objection about R. B's. Education
Answered.
Ergo, say the Students, Our Answer is not that, which the Jesuit used against
our Master. It seems, the Students are offended, that R. B. has forsaken
Popery; or otherwise their charging him with his Education must be very
impertinent: as indeed it is no less Foolish, than if we should upbraid Luther,
Calvin, and all the first Reformers as Papists, for being so Educated. And
though it is no wonder, their Folly and Malice led them into this Impertinency,
yet it might have been expected, that their gratitude to the Bishop of
Edinburgh, who was pleased to permit their Book to be Printed, might have
hindered them from this Folly, seeing he was Educated in the same Popish
College R. B. was, and ows some of his Philosophy to it; whereas R. B* learned
only there a little Grammar, and came thence in his 15 Year: but the Bishop was
there professing Popery in his more mature Age. So if this reflect any thing
upon R. B. it will much more against the Bishop; which they will do well to
clear: and be sure not to omit, when they write next, or else acknowledge their
Impertinency herein. It seems, they wanted strength of Reason to evite the
Retortion, which makes them thus rove; offering also to prove, That their
Master did assign a ground: which was never denied, and that he was Defendent;
so was R. B. also: What is that to the purpose, unless to make the Retortion
the stronger, and show, they cannot get by it? But page 60. they say, That
whereas the Jesuit pressed their Master, that Heretics did say, their Religion
was conform to the Scripture, as well as he; and so the Scripture was no
peculiar ground for him, more than for Heretics: They say, their Master
answered, That it was not a pretended, but real Conformity unto the Scripture,
that demonstrates a true Religion, etc. and upon this they inquire, what
follows? Alleging, They argued from being as good, and not pretending; and so
fall a railing, saying: That the light of our Consciences is ecclipsed by a
newfound Light, and that we mis-represent them maliciously. This Railing is
for want of better Reasoning; but seeing they are so blind, as not to see,
whether they will see it or not, we shall tell them, and we hope, let the
Reader see, what follows here from Jo. Menzies, the Students Master, who says
to the Jesuit; It is not enough, that Heretics say, the Scripture is a ground
for their Religion, unless it really be so; and that other Heretics saying so,
does not infer, that it is as little a ground for his own (to wit J. M's.)
Religion. Very well! The Quakers tell the Students, That it is not enough, that
Heretics declare, they have the Spirit, unless it be really so; and their
saying, they have it, while they have it not, does not infer, that our saying,
we have it, is as little a ground for us. Who but such as are as Childish, as
the Students, will affirm, there is here any difference? But further, they
confound most ignorantly the Internal Testimony of the Spirit with the
Declaration of having the Spirit; which are two different things. It was
incumbent upon them to have proved, The Internal Testimony of the Spirit is
above the pretense of Heretics unto it.
that the Internal Testimony of the Spirit is as good an Evidence for
Heretics, as for us; which they have not offered to do. Next, they have not
proved, that the Declaration of Heretics is as good as ours, neither can they,
unless they can prove ours to be false; which they neither have nor can do. But
they have egregiously fallen in that Inconveniency, they would fix upon us,
page 58.59. where in answering R. B's. Retortion, showing them, That if Men's
being deceived, contradicting themselves, or one another, who say, the Spirit
is the Rule, did infer, the Spirit not to be a certain Rule; then Men's being
deceived, contradicting themselves and one another, who say, the Scripture is
the Rule, would the same way infer, that the Scripture is not the Rule. Here
they are miserably put to it, and therefore not ashamed to deny, that they
plead not against the Spirit's being a Rule, for these Causes: The contrary for
which is known to all, that are acquainted with these Controversies. And for
Example let them read their so much applauded W. Mitchell his Dialogue and his
Sober Answer (so called) where he makes this the chief Cause, yea, themselves
for the same reason within two (pages to wit, page 60. and 61.) plead against
the Teaching of the Spirit, affirming, that But besides, will not their
Master's Answer above mentioned meet well with them here, that since these
Sects and Saints did (as both they and the Quakers confess) but pretend to the
Spirit, that because they did but pretend, therefore the Quakers do but pretend
also; no more than because some Heretics do pretend, their Religion is conform
to the Scripture, therefore I. M. does so too?
Because the Georgians, Familists, and pretended Saints, as Francis and Loyola,
etc. pretended the Inward Teaching of the Spirit, and had an outward show of
Godliness, therefore the Spirit's teaching to deny Ungodliness, is as good an
Evidence for them, as for the Quakers. Who but the Students would run
themselves into such miserable Contradictions? But to give the Reader an
evident Demonstration of the Students gift of Contradicting themselves, take
one here in their own Words; The Students contradicting themselves about the
Rule of Faith.
They say, this abovementioned Retortion does not meet their Argument, why,?
Do we conclude, that the Spirit is not the Rule of Faith, because they cannot
give an Evidence, which will actually Convince, that they are led by the
Spirit? No such thing: Compare this with J. L's. Medium of his second Argument,
where he undertaketh to prove, That the Spirit is not the Rule of Faith, (as it
is expressed by themselves) because there can be no Evidence given of it in the
World. But if they think to creep out here, that there may be Evidences given,
though not such, as do actually Convince, because of the want of a subjective
Evidence, or disposition of the mind (as they afterward add) and that we can
give no Evidence of this last sort: It remains then for them to prove, that
their minds are well disposed, seeing they are the Opponents, and we the mere
Defendents; and that the Evidences assigned by us, or such as are not manifest
even to the well-disposed, and (yet to go round) page 59. Paragraph 19. They
account this of the well-disposed mind ridiculous, though it was the best
Answer their Master could give the Jesuit in the like case, as above is shown.
But thou may perhaps judge, Reader, that these, that are so nice and
scrupulous in receiving Evidences from others, would give some very solid ones
for their own Rule, when pressed the same way to give us an Evidence, that they
have the Scripture to be their Rule from God, and that they have the true sense
of it. Take then notice of them here, Reader, and see, how satisfactory their
Answer is. Now (say the Students page 59.) The Solution is easy; for they, who
make the Scripture their principal Rule, are either our own Churches, or they
are Sects dissenting from us. If the first; have not our Divines frequently
proved both from the intrinsic Characters of Divinity, that appear in the
Scriptures themselves, and also from the outward Motives of Credibility, that
we have these Scriptural Revelations from God? And have they not often assigned
sufficient, objective Evidences and Proofs of the senses of the Scriptures
taught by our Churches, as to every point controverted by us, and all Sects
whatsoever? So that Dissenters remain Vnconvinced for want of subjective
Evidence, and disposition of mind; and really ought to believe us teaching such
senses of Scripture, etc. Is not this rarely well solved? Do the Students give
any better Evidence for all this, than their own declaration? And is not this
(according to themselves) as good for other Heretics as for them? Is it not
strange, with what confidence they should print such stuff? Besides as to the
first part of it, it is manifestly false; for Calvin the Chiefest of their
Divines, has in plain words asserted -- viz.

That all the Objective Evidences and Motives of Credibility are not sufficient
to establish the Conscience in the belief of the Scriptures certainly, Calvin's
Testimony for the Spirit.
and that thereunto is necessary the secret and inward Testimony of the Spirit;
yea, that the same Spirit, that was in the Prophets and Apostles, enter into
the heart, etc. So say all the public Confessions of the Protestants abroad:
and seeing of this, according to the Students, there can be no Objective
Evidences in the World given; then neither can there of the Scripture, which
they confess is their Rule. So the Reader may see, that their Work is like the
Viper's Brood, that destroys it self; and tends to overturn the Certainty of
all Christian Religion, landing in Skepticism. Which because they cannot shun,
they end their Section in vain Boasting and Railing, saying, page 77. They
provoke all the Papists and Quakers of the World to argue against them so, if
they can. Here are high Words indeed; but seeing, they are so busy in
Boasting, we accept the Challenge, and offer to prove before as public an
Auditory, as the last Dispute was, that their Arguments against the Quakers are
no better, than the Iesuit's against their Master. And here to conclude, they
add; Let the Reader therefore judge, whether Railing Robin shows forth more of
an Ass 's, than of a Viper 's nature; where he brands our Argument with the
black mark of Popery. Well! we leave to the Reader's judgment, who also may
judge, if this be not Railing? And it the Students, who talk at this rate, be
to be trusted in their Preface, saying, That they have abstained from all
personal Criminations, and have not rendered evil for evil. And what may be
thought of Men, that are not ashamed thus to belie themselves?

SECTION III.
Wherein the Students Arguments concerning the Supper, and against Perfection
and Women's Speaking are Considered and Answered; contained in their
Sub-section 3. from page 66. of their Book to page 78.

FIrst, They say, They might argue, that the Quakers have not Revelations from
the Spirit, because of their mad and impious Practices: And then they turn this
Assertion into a Question, asking; Have not the Quakers committed such
Practices, saying, Lying Books writ against the Quakers.
they were commanded by the Spirit? And for this they refer the Reader to
several Books writ against the Quakers by their declared Adversaries: Which
signify nothing, unless they will prove, that these Men spoke Truth; which
they neither have, nor can do: and so are no more valued by us, then Cochleus's
Lies against Luther. But to Confirm this, They place at large a Citation out of
H. More, whom they say, The Quakers have reported to be a Quaker: This is a
false Calumny, which they are dared to prove. That H. More has in a Letter to
G. K. owned some of the Quakers Principles, is true; as particularly that of
Immediate Objective Revelation, called by them The Head of the Monster; and
that the Seed is a Substance; which they count one of the Quakers grand Errors.
As for that Citation of H. More, he wrote it upon Trust, and was not an
Eyewitness of these things; and it recurs upon him and them to prove the
things true. The Story there mentioned of J. N. seeing it was at that very time
disowned by the Quakers, and since Condemned by himself, militates nothing
against us; no more than other horrid things, yea, that which (in the Students
own esteem) is downright Treason, being done by some of the Chief of their
Ministry, as Commanded by the Scripture, does against them. In Conclusion they
give a Proverb used by Will. Dundas in a Book of his, as a further Instance,
which they call a Bundle of Ridiculous and Non-sensical Expressions: But will
they deny, but the Presbyterian General Assembly, of which W. Dundas so writes,
was a Minglemangle of Omni gatherums? particularly that Assembly, that
Excommunicated and gave to the Devil B. Spotwood, and these other called
Reverend Prelates of the Church the Students own? Or let the Students tell us,
whether in their esteem they deserve a better Designation? Now that to use
Proverbs in things written even from the Spirit of Truth, is no Inconsistency,
let them read Tit. 1.12. To use Proverbs is not Inconsistent with Truth.
Evil beasts, slow bellies, 2 Pet. 2.22. The dog is returned, etc. and the sow
to the puddle. But to proceed, they offer to prove, the Spirit in the Quakers
not to be the Spirit of God, because it teaches Doctrines contrary to the
Scriptures. The first Instance of this is, The Quakers denying the necessity of
the Continuance of the use of Bread and Wine, as an Ordinance in the Church;
which they allege page 67. is Commanded Matthew. 26.26. Mark 14.21. Luke 22.19.
But the Students may look over these places, and find (if they can) any thing
in the first two of Matthew. and Mark like a Command; The Use of Bread and Wine
discontinued.
but only a mere Narrative of the Matter of Fact. In that of Luke these Words
are added, Do this in remembrance of me. They proceed to prove, that this is
not Ceased of its own nature; carping at these Words of R. B. (in his first
Answer to W. M. page 54, 55. where he says; The very Institution intimates the
Abolishing thereof at Christ's Coming) Insinuating, as if he had mistaken
himself: for his Words (say they) allude to Paul 's, 1 Cor. 11. and not to
Christ's. But while they take a Liberty to judge of his Thoughts, they do but
show their own forwardness to Mistake. For either these Words of Christ's in
Luke abovementioned, do import, They should do that in Remembrance of him,
until he came; or they do not: If they do not; the Students give away their own
Cause; If they do, then he might allude to that, as being there included,
though not expressed.

As often, etc. implies no Continuance.
They urge; The Coming of Christ mentioned, must be his Coming to Judgment;
because these, to whom Christ was come in Spirit, do use it: But this proves
not, That they then practiced it by way of Necesary Duty, more than their
practicing other things, which our Adversaries themselves do acknowledge, do
not Continue, nor are not Binding. But they proceed page 69. to prove it
Commanded since, from the Apostle's words 1 Cor. 11. And to prove, that this
was not a mere Narrative of a Matter of Fact (as we truly affirm) but a
Command, they Affirm first; That he often gives the Title of the Lord's Supper
to it, even as received by those Corinthians. For Answer; the Students must
needs be like themselves; and as they often belied us, so they use the Apostle
the same way: For not only in this Chapter or Epistle, but in all Paul's
Epistles these Words ( the Lord's Supper) are only once mentioned; so not
often. Secondly, verse 20. where he uses these Words thus; When ye come
together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper; It is
so far from making for them, that it makes clearly against them. And the
Syriack Copy has not in that 20. ver. nor elsewhere, these Words The Lord's
Supper at all, but in lieu of it, when then ye meet together, not as ye ought
to do in the day of the Lord.
For the Apostle clearly here asserts, that the Corinthians in their using of
Bread and Wine did not eat the Lord's Supper: He says not, they did not eat it,
as they ought. Secondly, they urge, That the Apostle received of the Lord a
Command to take, eat, do this. This is strongly alleged, but we deny it; and
let them prove it: For Proof, they give none, unless we may take an Example for
a Proof, in which they beg the Question. For unless that alleged Minion of the
King should tell these Citizens, he came to, that he had received Order to
Command them to obey the Decree, repeated by him, the Example says nothing: But
that the Apostle has signified any such thing to us, we deny; and it remains
for them to prove.

Thirdly, They allege, That since the Apostle reproves them for Abuses in the
use of this, and to rectify those, brings them back to the Institution, the
duty of Receiving it may be much more concluded from the same Institution.
Answer, this is their bare Affirmation: The Abuses committed in practicing a
Ceremony, may be regulated by telling the proper Rise, Use and End of it; and
yet the using it may not be an Absolute Duty. The Apostle says, how those that
observe Days, ought to do it to the Lord; it will not therefore follow, that
the Observation of Days is a Duty Incumbent upon all: Yea, the Apostle in that
Place expressly asserts the Contrary. Their fourth Reason is yet more
Ridiculous; The Apostle insinuates, that it is a Duty, because of the first
Word, FOR that which I have, etc. Who but the Students would Argue at this
rate? such kind of Reasons serve to show their Folly, not to confirm their
Opinions: As do these that follow, with their old Example of the King's Minion.
In all which they miserably beg the Question, taking for granted, That it is a
standing Statute: Which is the thing remains to them yet to prove. In the end
of this page they desire to join the Word OFTEN; which say they, evidenceth, it
was a practice to be Continued in. And here they insult, because that R. B. in
answer to W. M. arguing thus from this Word Often, did Reply, That thence it
would not follow, That As often as a man sins, he offends God, did import, we
should sin often: Here they say R. B. egregiously shows his Folly and Impiety,
because they never did argue from the Word OFTEN precisely: But their Brother
W. M. to whom he then Answered, did precisely Argue from it; whose express
Words in his pretended Sober Answer are page 92. It may be observed, That the
Corinthians were to be often in the use of it, because it is said, as often as
ye eat, etc. So since he argued from the Word Often, his answer was proper; nor
have they brought any thing to weaken it. And whereas they add; Who will say,
that ever sin was instituted by God? R. B. never said so; but yet that weakens
not his Retortion, nor strengthens their Argument from the Word Often: As may
appear in a thing truly Instituted by God, and yet unlawful; else as Often as a
Man Marries, he is bound to his Wife, might be said to Import, that it were a
Duty Incumbent upon Men to Marry often, or unlawful to forbear. Their Fifth
Reason is, A Regulating Prescription is no Commanding Injunction.
because the Apostle prescribes the right Method of using it. For they allege;
If it had been indifferent, he would have rather forbidden it, as useless, etc.
This is no Argument, but their bare Conjecture, in which they would be wiser
than the Apostle: and we have answered it before, showing, the Apostle gives
Rules to rectify the Observation of Days; which yet imports not a Duty to
observe them. Their last and chiefest Reason is, as they say; The Apostle's
Express Command for it: Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, The
Students affirm (and do but affirm) that to say, This is only a Permission, is
a desperate Shift. Let us hear, how they prove it: Let a man examine himself,
this is without doubt a Command; therefore Let him eat, must be a Command also.
We deny this Consequence; and it remains for them to prove it. And though this
were enough in strictness, yet we shall give a Reason of our denial; because
their Proposition (whatever it may do in some Cases) holds not universally
true. As to instance from an Example or two: Let a man marry in the Lord, and
so let him marry: The first is a Command here, but not the second. Let a man
speak in Religious things, as the Oracle of God, and so let him speak: The
first is a Command, but not the Second. Many more might be named, which import
only a Conditional Command; not that there is a Necessity upon all to Marry, or
upon all to Preach: But if a Man Marry, let him do it in the Lord; and if a Man
preach, let him do it, as the Oracle of God. Also see a most plain Example of
this, Rev. 22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is
just, let him be just still: They are both in the Imperative Mood, yet the one
is a Duty, the other but a Permission, not Moral and Positive, but Physical and
Negative. So if a Man partake of the Ceremony of Bread and Wine; let him
examine himself. Seeing then, their Proposition holds not universaliy true, it
remains for them to prove, That in this particular Place it is so.

They bestow their 34. Paragraph page 70, 71. to no purpose, in missing the
Controversy. For whatever we understand by the Substance, which whosoever enjoys,
needs not the Shadow; We do not deny, but these that had the Substance, made
use of the Shadow at times: Paul purifying himself according to the Law of
Moses.
For Paul purified himself according to the Law of Moses, after he had been
long an Apostle. But the Question is; Whether that oblige us now? This the
Students have forgot to prove, and will do well to advert to it, when they
publish their next Volume, omitting needless Homilies not to the purpose. And
thus we hope, the Reader may see, that the things we bring to prove this
Ceremony is ceased, are not Shadows; but rather, that what they bring to
Confirm it, is nothing but Shadows.

Page 71. They go about to answer an Argument used by R. B. against this
Ceremony, drawn from the Apostle's Words 1 Cor. 16.16. in his first Answer to
W. M. p. 54. where he shows, that since the Bread is but one, which must needs
be the Inward; the Outward must be ceased. And to this they Answer, saying; The
true and genuine Sense of the Place is, etc. So go on, as they were Dictating,
and not Disputing, without adding any Probation. But secondly they proceed,
saying; That seeing the one Bread is the Saints, though the Apostles were truly
this one Bread; yet Christ instituted his Supper without any Contradiction, or
making them not one Bread. For answer; were that Practice of Christ of the
Nature they would have it, then should they say something; but while they
suppose it so, and Argue from it, they do but beg the thing in Controversy. For
the Apostles both then and after that time used many Legal and Typical
Observations; and yet they would Argue ill, that would infer from thence,
because they did so, and that without Contradiction to their being
Christians,and under the Gospel Dispensation, we ought to do so too. As for
that Bread spoken by the Apostles in the 16 and 17 Verses, The One Bread.
We acknowledge it to be the Spiritual Bread, to wit, the Spiritual Body of
Christ, of which the Saints feed, which makes them One, and is One with them,
as the Apostle himself wordeth it, ver. 17. Now what signifies all this to
prove, That the Outward Bread is the One Bread? Hear, how the Students Evince
it. But thirdly, we say, That the one Bread spoken of ver. 17. is both the
outward and the inward Bread, yet but one Sacramentally: And is not this rarely
well argued, We the Students say so? As to the Reason afterward insinuated, as
Christ says of the Bread, that it is his Body; they should have shown, how it
follows. Christ, as Protestants well argue against Papists, calls himself a
Door, a Rock, etc. what then? is Christ and a Rock one? Christ and a Door one
Door? Let them show us, if they can, in all the N. T. so much as one Word of
this Figment of a Sacramental or Symbolical Union. And whereas upon this
occasion R. B. argued in his Truth cleared of Calumnies, page 54. See above p.
34, 35.
That if the outward Bread were to be called the one Bread, as signifying it,
the Sacrifices of the Law might be called one with the one Offering of Christ
mentioned Hebr. 10.14 and so continued. This, they say, signifies nothing,
because these are abrogated: Then until they prove, this Continues by virtue of
a Gospel Command (which they have not as ye done) the same Reason will hold
against it.

To another Reason given of the Discontinuance of this Ceremony, Meats and
Drinks used in Religious Acts.
from Gal. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meats, or drinks, They say first, That
then it had not been lawful for the Apostle, to have Reprehended the
Corinthians for the Abuses in this matter. This is a poor Shift indeed: though
they should not have been Reprehended for laying it aside altogether; yet
seeing, they used it as a Religious Duty, they might well be Reprehended, if
they did it not Religiously. Secondly, they say, That then Gluttony, etc. ought
not to be reproved: and that the Quakers, ere they miss to pull down Christ's
Ordinance, will make way for Gluttony and Drunkenness. Answer, Here is but a
silly, malicious Reflection in stead of a Reason: The Apostle is speaking here
(as the Students themselves afterward acknowledge) of Meats and drinks used in
Religious Acts; and if the Proposition hold true in this Respect, it will
answer the End, and not of Natural Eating, etc. Thirdly, They say; It must only
be understood of the Legal Ceremonies, because of the 14. verse, asking, If the
Lord's Supper was contrary unto us, or was nailed to the Cross? What then? The
Students are overhasty, and should have looked to the 21 and 22 verses; Touch
not, taste not, handle not; which all are to perish with the using: And do not
Bread and Wine? which perish in the using, and are therefore here included. As
for the Absurdity insinuated by them, How could that be Nailed to the Cross,
that was but Instituted two Days before? Will they say, That abstaining from
things strangled, and from Blood, was Nailed to the Cross, which was Commanded
long after Christ was Crucified? And yet some of their Divines (as they call
them) use this Scripture for a Repeal of it.

Their second Charge against the Quakers, and to prove, they are not led by the
Spirit, is, A Legal Righteousness distinguished from the Gospel Righteousness.
because They assert a possibility of not sinning upon Earth: Which they say,
is expressly contrary to the Scripture. As first to Isaiah 64.6. We are all an
unclean thing: All our Righteousness are as filthy Rags. But they should have
proved, that the Prophet speaks here not only of the Legal Righteousness of the
Jews; but even of the Righteousness wrought by Christ in the Regenerate under
the Gospel; which they have not so much as attempted to do; and therefore prove
nothing. Yea, the Chiefest of their Divines (as Calvin, Musculus, Corretus)
deny this Place to be understood of the Righteousness of the Saints under the
Gospel; Freedom from Sin demonstrated by Scripture-Testimonies.
but only of the Legal Righteousness of the Jews: whom we leave them to Refute
or Reconcile themselves to. And proceed to their Second Argument from the Words
of the Prayer, Forgive us our sins: But Men may pray for Forgiveness of Sins
past, though they sin not daily; and this is the thing in Question. Likewise
this Argument drawn from these Words, does militate no less against Perfect
Justification, than it does against Perfect Sanctification; as G. K. has at
more length in his Quakerism no Popery in Answer to their Master J. M. page 41.
They argue from the Words of the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.18, 20. etc. To will is
present with me, etc. but they should have proved, That the Apostle wrote of
his own Present Condition, and not as personating the Condition of others. For
the Apostle in the same 7 Chap. ver. 14. says of himself; But I am Carnal,
sold under Sin: But who will say, That the Apostle, as to his own Present
Condition, was then Carnal? or if he was, was there no Spiritual Men then? or
was he none of them? But fourthly, they urge 1 John 1.8. If we say, we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, etc. and here they are offended R. B. should say,
This is Conditional, like the 6 Verse, which they Confess is so: For (say they)
at the same rate he might allege, all the rest of the Verses of the Epistle to
be Conditional. But if it refer or allude particularly to the 6 Ver. the Reason
will hold as to it, though not of the rest, that both they and the rest of the
Verses of this Chapter do allude to the fifth. The Supposition [If] so often
repeated, does show, they are angry, that R. B. should allege, WE here does
not include John more, than the Apostle James 3.9. With the Tongue Curse we
Men, does include James: For first the Students will have James here included;
alleging it is spoken of Excommunication. And here they take occasion to
upbraid R. B. with Ignorance in Ecclesiastical Discipline; but surely, they
have been either Dreaming or Doting, when they so wrote. For had they read the
following verse, they might have observed the Apostle Condemning this Cursing,
saying; These things ought not so to be: And we suppose, they judge not their
Ecclesiastical Discipline to be Unlawful. But being (it seems) ashamed of this
Shift, they give another Interpretation, which destroys their own Cause,
alleging; James might have understood it of himself, before his Conversion,
The Tongue, etc. therewith Curse we Men; how interpreted by the Students.
while perhaps he was a Curser. Very well; then let them give us a Reason, why
the Apostle John might not also have understood, If we say, etc. of himself
also before his Conversion? But are not these, think thou Reader, Learned
Divines, who to evite the Strength of a Scripture, give it within the Compass
of one page two Contradictory Expositions, affirming them both; and yet if the
one be true, the other must be false: And then can shake them both off,
alleging, They may render the Word by way of Interrogation, And do we
therefore Curse men? Are not these rare Interpreters? because the Apostle uses
an Interrogation elsewhere in this Chapter, therefore this may be so done also?
But what then becomes of their Church Discipline, and other Interpretation?
These must be shut out of Doors. Are not these like to be stable Preachers, who
give three different Interpretations to one Text? if any one of which be true,
the other two cannot be admitted. It seems, these Young Men think to make a
quick Trade of the Bible, Cauponari verbum Dei, who can thus play fast and
loose with it at pleasure. But to proceed, they allege, Ecclesiast. 7.20.
There is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not: Their Plea
for sin, from an Error in the Translation of the Text.
This Argument is built upon an Error of the Translation; it should be
translated, Who may not sin, qui non peccet: so Junius and Tremellius,
Vatablus, the Vulgar Latin, and almost all the Interpreters have it; and our
English Translation Psalm. 119. ver 11. translateth the same Hebrew Word so,
being in the same Tense, which is the Second Future: I have hid thy word in my
heart, that I may not sin against thee. A second Place, Ja. 3.2. In many things
we offend all: What then? it follows not thence, that we offend at all Times,
or we can never but offend; which is the thing under Debate. But to Conclude,
they Confess, we have other Exceptions, which themselves, it seems, take no
notice of; because they are solidly refuted by their Divines: and therefore
(say the Students) the Quakers herein teach a doctrine contrary to the
Revelations of God's Spirit in the Scriptures. Answ. A quick way to dispatch
Controversies indeed, if it could hold; but at present it may serve to show the
Students Folly, not to Refute our Principles: If their Divines have already
done the Business so solidly, might not they have spared their Labor? which
some of their own think had been their Wisdom.

Their Third Instance against the Quakers is page 74. their allowing of Women
to Preach, alleging, It is directly contrary to 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Let your
Women keep Silence, etc. and 1 Timothy 2.I2. Let the Woman learn in silence, etc.
Here to begin like themselves, they say, G. K. is too much addicted to Women;
but they are dared, if they can, to produce any real Ground for this malicious
Insinuation. G. K. Vindicated from their Insinuations.
G. K. besides the Testimony of a good Conscience has the Testimony of
Hundreds, who have known his manner of Life and Conversation from his Childhood
to this Day, that it has been Honest and of Good Report; so that he fears
not, that the Lying Reports, which the Malice of his Adversaries may raise, can
hurt him. Yet these are Men, that solemnly profess, they have abstained from
Personal Criminations; but seeing they have belied the Apostle Paul, as is
above observed, G. K. may take it patiently to be treated at this Rate by Men
of such Circumstances. But if they think to infer it, because G. K. does plead
for the Liberty and Privilege of Women, they might as well plead, That G. K.
is too much addicted to a Perfect Holiness, because he does plead for it; or
that the Students are too much addicted to sin, since they plead for the
Continuance of it for Term of Life. They are little less than enraged, that G.
K. should have alleged the Testimony of Augustine and Bernard, interpreting
this Place of the Flesh; and therefore they labor, like Men in a Sweat, for a
whole Page against this to no purpose; the only Reason of G. K's citing them
being, because some of their Preachers cried out against this Allegory, as a
horrid, abusive thing in some Quakers; to show them, it is none of the Quakers
Coining, but already used by Men by themselves applauded and commended. Upon
this they ask: Have not some of our Antagonists been observed to make a
Welchman's hose of the first Chapter of Genesis? If they mean us, let them
prove, we have so done; as we have already proved, they have again they ask;
Have not some Quakers been bold to aver, that there was never any such real
Tree, as the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil? If they have, let them
instance and prove, by whom it was spoken and writ? and then they shall have an
Answer. As they proceed, they give an egregious Specimen of their Folly,
alleging; That if it did hold, Women's Speaking in the Church, Lawful.
(as G. K. affirms) that Women are not allowed to speak by Permission; then a
fortiori, it is unlawful for them to speak by Commandment. Who but the Students
would talk at this rate? As if a Commandment might not authorize a Man to do
that, which a bare Permission will not? G. K's Arguments drawn from their own
allowing Whores to speak, and Women to sing, they call Quibbles, because they
cannot answer; which they Reply to only by Questions, Do they allow Whores
Authoritative Preaching, affirming, Women may sing? Very well, whether it be
Authoritative, or not, whatsoever way they speak, they keep not Silence: and so
the Apostle's Words are not taken strictly and literally; which gains us the
Cause, and shows, our Doctrine is no more directly against the Apostle's Words,
than their own. Besides, from this it follows by the Students Confession,
that Women may as lawfully speak in the Church, as the Licentiate Students,
whom the Presbytery permits to speak in the Church, before they are Ordained.
They pass our chief Objection very overly drawn from 1 Cor. 11.5. where the
Apostle gives direct Rules, how Women should behave themselves in their public
Praying and Preaching, alleging; There are Rules given in Scripture concerning
things, that were never lawful, but only permitted, etc. as of Polygamy under
the Law: But they should have remembered, that these are Rules given by the
Apostle to the Christian Church of Corinth. And seeing, the Students suppose,
That the Apostle gave directions to the Church of Corinth, not only of things
that belong not to them now, but which are not lawful for them (a Doctrine, we
question if their Masters will approve of, or of the Consequence of which
themselves are aware) it remains for them to prove, That these Two Rules
forbidding Women's Speaking belong to us, or is not of the number of these
useless Rules, more than that other concerning the manner of their Preaching.
So we hope, this Solution it Impugned; and desire, they may be sure not to
forget to bring us this Reason, when they write next.

SECTION IV.
Concerning the Necessity of Immediate Revelations to the Building up of True
Faith, containing an Answer to the Students second Section from page 78. to
page 92.

IN their stating the Controversy, they say; These Inward Revelations are not
subjective Revelations, or Divine Illuminations. This is false: for as we have
above showed, one and the same Illumination, that is Effective or Subjective,
is also Objective; and the Objective is Effective. Again they say; The Question
is not, if Immediate, Objective Revelations be possible, or be sometimes made
to some de facto: This Concession will overthrow much of all their own Work.
For if they admit, that any Person in our Time has Immediate, Objective
Revelations, admit Peter or John; their former Argument will as much militate
against this Real, Immediate, Immediate, Objective Revelation asserted.
Objective Revelation granted by them, as against those, which they do not
grant. Seeing page 7. at the Letter A, they say; Suppose, that the Spirit
Reveal the Objects of Faith immediately, none will deny, that he is a Rule, (or
rather Ruler) to them who have him so: A good Concession; but which quite
undoes their own Cause. For now let us apply their former Argument against this
Real, Objective Revelation granted by them, as thus; We ought to believe, That
as the Rule of Faith, of which there can be no Evidence given: But,

There can be no Evidence in the World given of the Spirit, that is in Peter
and John; Therefore, etc.



Again; if Peter and John say, they can give an Evidence of the Spirit of God
in them, to wit, their own Declaration in Life and Power, as also the Immediate
Testimony of the Spirit, or the Scriptures-Testimony; let us Apply in the last
place their Argument used against us, and see, if it will not be as good
against Peter and John, whom they grant de facto (according to their
Hypothesis) to have Immediate, Objective Revelation. The Argument is this: That
which as really agrees to Enthusiast Heretics, as to them, can be no Evidence.
But,

That Evidence, to wit, their own Declaration and Saying, that both they and
their Adversaries have the Immediate Testimony of the Spirit witnessing to the
Truth of it, would as really agree to Enthusiast Heretics; Therefore, etc.

Yea, not only might they thus Argue against any Men's having Immediate,
Objective Revelation in our days, but against the Prophets and Apostles having
it; seeing, the Argument might every way be as strong against their having it,
as against our having it; especially at such times, as they wrought no outward
Miracles in the sight of the People, to whom they were sent, as often they did
not. When the Lord sent Jonas to preach to the Ninivites, he wrought no Miracle
in their sight. Now let us put the Students in the Ninivites place, and we
shall find, they could Argue as stoutly and hardily against Jonas, as now they
do against any Quaker: They could tell him; He could give no Evidence of the
Spirit of God in him, giving any such Message: as for his Declaration, it would
not suffice, because his saying, he had the Spirit, would be as good a ground
for any other Enthusiast Heretic. Outward Miracles discussed.
But further, these stout and hardy Warriors could have used these same
Arguments against the Prophets, when they wrought Miracles: for they could have
alleged; The Miracles were not true Miracles, but false; and such as may be
done by the power of the Devil. And so, if any could produce Miracles now (as
there have been) they would no more be believed, than the unbelieving Jews
believed the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles: For they still looked
upon them to be Deceivers. It is clear from Scripture, that Antichrist shall be
permitted to work false Miracles; but that they shall so Counterfeit the true,
that it will be hard to discern the one from the other, without God's Immediate
Direction and Teaching. And therefore the preaching of sound Doctrine,
accompanied with a holy Life, is a better Evidence of a true Prophet, than all
outward Miracles whatsoever: The Fruits prove the Doctrine.
as Christ said, By their Fruits ye shall know them; he does not say, by their
Miracles, but by their Fruits. Now we are most willing to be tried by this
Rule, if both our Doctrine, and Life, and manner of Conversation be not
answerable to that of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, then let them say,
we have not that Spirit, which was in them: But if they cannot make out this,
they but fight, as Men beating the Air.

Page 80. They Argue; That there is no Substantial, living Principle in Man,
that is the good Seed, because then the evil Seed or Principle should also be
Substantial.

But this is absurd; Therefore That this is Absurd, they argue; For then it
should be Created by God, and so God should be the Author of Evil and Sin; or
it should be Uncreated, and consequently God.

To this we answer: The same Argument militates as much and rather more against
their own Principle; for seeing, they hold Sin to be somewhat, (whether a
Substance, or an Accident, is all one as to the Argument) we Argue by a
Retortion against themselves; Either it is Created, or Uncreated: and so the
same Inconvenience would follow. But to answer directly, we say; Sin considered
in its formal Reason, is rather a Privation, than any real being; as Blindness
or Lameness in a Man's body, or Corruption in Wine, or any other Liquor. But if
they enquire about the Subject of this Privation, whether it be a Substance? We
answer; It is: Sin a privation in the Subject.
And it is clear from the Scriptures Testimony, that as Christ rules in the
Saints, so the Devil rules in the wicked, and is in them; and as God has his
Seed and Birth in the Saints, so the Devil has his seed and birth in the
Wicked, which is of the Devil's nature. But if it be asked further, whether it
is a Substance? We answer first, with inquiring at them another Question, and
Retorting the Argument upon them; Whether the Devil is a Substance, yea or nay?
If yea, either he is Created, or Uncreated; if Created, then God is the Author
of the Devil: If Uncreated, then he should be God; their own Consequence: which
is Blasphemy. But 2. the true Answer to both is, that he, who is now the Devil,
was Created of God a good Angel; but by his own voluntary Fall he has reduced
himself to be a Devil, not by any real Creation, but by a Degeneration: and as
is the Devil himself, so is his Seed, a corrupted, degenerated Principle, from
what it was originally, before Sin was. But if we take the Seed of the Devil
distinctly, The Seed of Sin.
as distinct from himself, we do not say, it is any percipient Principle, that
sees or knows, etc. for it is rather of the nature of a Body, than of a
percipient intelligent Spirit; and the Scripture calls it a Body, to wit, the
Body of Death. But whether the Seed of Sin be a Substance, or not, the Students
Argument is altogether impertinent to argue that; because the good Seed is a
substantial, living Principle, etc. then the evil Principle or Seed should also
be substantial, living, etc. for the same Reasons. We deny this Consequence:
for there are greater Reasons, whereby to prove the one, than the other. If
they think to argue from the Rule of Contraries, they think foolishly; for it
would as much follow, that because a Man is a Substance, who sees and hears,
etc. that therefore a Man's blindness, and deafness and lameness are also
Substances, and that blindness sees, deafness hears, lameness walks: Do
they not know the Maxim in Logic, that tells them; Substantia substantiae
proprie non contrariatur. i. e. One Substance properly is not contrary to
another. But last of all we may more justly retort this blasphemous Consequence
upon many of their own Church, who hold, That God stirs up the Devil and all
wicked Men unto all their wicked Actions, by an irresistible Motion or Quality,
which he infuseth into them, commonly called, Praedeterminatio Physica. Is not
this to make God the Author of Sin? Original Sin so called.
As also many of them teach, that Original sin is a positive quality, infused
into the Souls of Men at their Creation: Concerning which positive quality we
thus argue; Either it is Created, or Uncreated, etc. and so the Inconveniences
of their Argument will fall much more upon their own heads: for they cannot
allege, that this positive Quality at its first Creation was first good, and
afterward became changed into evil, because no Quality can admit any such
Transmutation. As for Example: Whiteness can never become Blackness; nor
Sweetness, Bitterness; nor Streightness, Crookedness: although a Substance that
is White, may lose its Whiteness, and may become Black; and that which is
Sweet, may become Bitter; and that which is Straight, become Crooked.

In the prosecution of their second Argument they bring their matter to this
Issue; That G. K. holds the Seed it self to be contradistinct from the
Manifestation, because the Manifestation is in the Seed; but we deny the
Consequence. Their Arguments about Manifestation of the Will of God Answered.
Do not they say, that the Manifestation of God's Will is in the Scripture? And
also that the Scripture it self is the Manifestation of God's Will? That G. K.
calls the Seed both a Substance, and a Manifestation, is as reasonable, as to
say; There are outward Manifestations of God's goodness, power and wisdom in
the Heavens and Earth; and yet the Heavens and Earth are the very outward
Manifestations themselves. Are not our Meat, and Drink and Clothing natural
and outward Manifestations of the goodness of God to us? And are not these
things Substances? And does not God manifest his Goodness also in them? What
blind Reasons are these, which those poor, blind Men bring forth against the
Truth? Again they Argue; That this Manifestation (which we say is a Substance)
depends not a solo Deo, cannot exist without a Subject; nay, not without the
Understanding, to which it is made: All which they barely assert, but do not
offer to prove. Again they say, It is but a mere Action, and applicatio agentis
ad passum: But how do they prove it? Here they are as dumb, as Stones. Perhaps
they think to prove it, because Manifestation is a Nomen Verbale, which
commonly being derived from the Active Verb signifies an Action; but this is
merely to play in words, and not to Dispute; for they may as well say, because
the whole World is called the Creation (for Creation is an active verbale)
therefore the whole World is a mere Action, or Applicatio agentis ad passum. We
deny not, but the Action or Motion, which proceeds from the Spirit of God, may
also be called a Manifestation; but we say, the Seed it self is also a
Manifestation, and those inward, heavenly Refreshments, which God ministers
unto the Souls of his Saints, are as real, substantial, spiritual
Manifestations of his goodness, as the outward, earthly Refreshments, to wit,
Meat and Drink, are real, substantial, natural Manifestations. Lastly, they
query, If the Manifestation be a Substance, whether is it One Manifestation, or
all the Manifestations? To this we Answer; They that please to call the Action
or Motion (which proceeds from the Spirit of God, as an Efficient Cause) a
Manifestation, may easily distinguish Manifestation, as it is a Principle, or
quid permanens, or as it is an Action, or quid transiens. Now to Apply, we say;
The substantial Manifestations of God inwardly to our souls are many, as they
are quid permanens, and per modum principii: for as God nourishes our outward
Man, not with Bread and Drink once only, but often (and many are our outward
refreshments, all which are Substances, agreeing in this, that they are
Manifestations and pledges of Gods bounty unto us) so does he nourish our
inward Man with spiritual Bread and Drink not once only, but often, giving us
daily the Super-substantial Bread; as the words in the Prayer may be
translated, and have been by some Learned Men. And thus we have answered their
last Argument in their. 5. without recurring to any Idea Platonica; a Term they
vainly bring in to their Argument, to move People to laugh at their Folly. And
thus we hope it is apparent, that we have no need to retract our Answers given
in the Dispute, as they vainly imagine.

It would be more labor, and expense of Time and Paper, than the thing is
worth, to answer them in all their pitiful, ridiculous Reasonings in these
matters, in every particular: Therefore not to weary the Reader, nor mispend
Time, we shall set down some few, clear, distinct Propositions, which shall
clearly Answer any seeming Difficulties alleged by them in this whole Section,
as in relation to Christ.

1. Proposition. The Word, or Son of God has the whole entire nature of Man,
Spirit, Soul and Body united to him in the Heavens, and he is the same in
Substance, what he was upon Earth, both in Spirit, Soul and Body.

2. Christ in us, or the Seed, is not a third spiritual Nature, distinct Christ
Jesus, that was crucified according to the Flesh at Jerusalem: For the same
that is in us, was and is in him; and as it is in him, its the fullness or
Spring of the same in us, as the Stream; nor is there any difference, but such
as is betwixt the Spring, and the Stream, which are one in their nature and
substance.

3. We say, that the same Seed and Life is in us, which was in Water is in the
Spring; and in us as the Stream: and this Seed and spiritual Nature, which is
both in him and us, does belong to him, as he is the second Adam, or Man
Christ. Therefore this Seed being in us, the Man Christ is in us; not according
to his whole Manhood, but according unto that, which is proper unto it: and yet
without all division. As the natural Life is in all the Members, but more
principally in the Head and Heart without any Division; so this Spiritual Life
and nature is both in Christ our Head, and in us, by which he dwells in us,
as the Spirit of Man does in the Body; and we eat and partake of his Flesh.

4. But if they argue, that at least Christ has three Natures in Principle
will Conclude that, as much as ours. For the Godhead is One Nature; the Nature
of the Soul is a Second, and the Nature of the Body is the Third: and our
Adversaries themselves teach, that as God is Three Persons in One Nature, so
Christ is Three Natures in One Person,

5. Although the Word or (...) should assume into Union with Two Natures, but
Three, it should not make either Two, or Three Christ's, but One. For they
grant, that the Word has assumed two, to wit, the Soul and Body of the Man
Christ; and yet he is not two Christ's, but One: even as the King is but One
King, although he possess Three Kingdoms; for Ad multiplicationem Obliquorum
non multiplicantur Concreta: As your Logic teaches.

6. The Seed and Spiritual Body of Christ both in him, and in us, belonging to
Christ, as he is the Second Adam, is as really and immediately Word, as his
outward Body was: for the whole Manhood of Christ was united to the Logos, and
the Logos to it, and in it; therefore the Sufferings of this Seed, and
Spiritual Body of Christ in us, are as really his Sufferings, as these He
accomplished at Jerusalem.

Seed is not our Souls; but is a Medium betwixt God and us: and our Union with
God is but Mediate through this; whereas the Union of God with this is
Immediate. Therefore none of us are either Christ, or God; but God and Christ
are in us.

Seed and Spiritual Nature of Christ is one and the same, both in him, and in
us, it is most unreasonable to argue, that there are as many Christ's, as Men;
as it is unreasonable to argue, that because the Soul of Man is in all his
Members, that therefore, as many Members, as many Souls. The Element of the Air
is but one only Element, although it fill the whole Universe, betwixt the Stars
and the Earth. And the Element of Water is but one, although it fill many
Channels.

outwardly dyed but once, but inwardly he dies in a Spiritual and Mystical
Sense as often, as any Crucify him to themselves by their Unfaithfulness and
Disobedience, as the Scriptures declare.

Satisfaction of Christ without us, we own it against the Socinians, and that
it was Full and Complete in its kind; yet not so, as to exclude the real Worth
of the Work and Sufferings of Christ in us, nor his present Intercession. For
if Christ his Intercession without us in Heaven, does not derogate from his
Satisfaction, but does fulfill it; no more does his Intercession and Sufferings
in us.

Sufferings of Christ in Men are Voluntary, and yet without sin; as his
Sufferings at Jerusalem were Voluntary and without sin: for as he joined not
with them, who outwardly Crucified him, in any Active way to concur with them
or countenance them; so nor does he inwardly join with Men to countenance or
concur with them, when they Crucify him by their Sins.

Jews should have Crucified Christ outwardly, so as purposely to sin, that
Christ might suffer for Sin outwardly; (although the Prophecies of Christ's
Sufferings and God's Foreknowledge were certain) so there is no need, that Men
should now Sin to crucify Christ inwardly: for if there be any Difficulty in
the one, it recurs in the other much more. Now, either Men sin, or sin not; If
they sin, Christ suffers by it; If they sin not, he does not suffer: (nor is it
needful, that he suffer, when Men sin not) But all Men have sinned; and Christ
has suffered for and by the sins of all, both without and within.

Outward Sufferings at Jerusalem were necessary unto Men's Salvation,
notwithstanding his Inward Sufferings, that he might be a Complete Savior in
all respects. For it behoved Christ not only to Suffer in the Members of his
Body; but also in the Head; so that it is a most foolish and unreasonable
Consequence to argue, that because Christ suffers in the Members, therefore
he needed not to suffer in the Head: Whereas the Sufferings of Christ in the
Members are but a small Part, of what he Suffered in the Head, by being Offered
up once for all: Yet a part they are, as serving to make up the Integral of his
Sufferings.

14. The Doctrines of the Incarnation, Sufferings, Death and Resurrection of
Christ, etc. are necessary every where to be preached, Integral Parts of
Christianity, and Christian Religion. Even as the Arms and Legs are Integral
Parts of a Man, without which (though it is possible, that a Man may be, and
live; yet) he is not a Complete Man as to all his parts: even so, though one
may be a Christian, and partaker in part of Christianity, and in that State be
accepted of God (as is clear in the Case of Cornelius) without the express
Knowledge of the outward Birth, Sufferings, etc. of Christ; yet without the
same he is not a Complete Christian, as wanting the Knowledge of that, which
serves to the Perfection and Accomplishment thereof.

Before we close this particular, The Students gross Lies and Perversions.
we cannot omit to take notice of two most horrible Perversions, committed by
the Students, Sect. 2. The one is page 83. where they allege out of G. K. his
Book of Immed. Revel. page 7. That G. K. holds, that when Christ suffers by
Man's Sin, that he joins with man: Which is a most abominable Lie and
Perversion. The Second Perversion of the Students, which is no less abominable,
is in page 79. of their Book, where to cover their other Perversion, they cite
most falsely and perfidiously a Place in G. K's Book, where they bring him in,
saying, [ Though it may be hurt and stain, by joining with the Contrary Seed,
before it come to its perfect Formation] And thus they would prove, That
according to G. K. Christ joins with Man, when Man sins. Now we beseech the
Reader to look to page 7. in G. K. his Book of Immed. Revel. and he will find,
that the Words of G. K. are thus, [ Though till it come to its perfect
Formation, it can suffer hurt, so far as to be slain through Man his joining
unto the Contrary Seed and Birth] Mark Reader, G. K. says, Through Man his
joining; but the Students purposely to deceive the Reader, have left out the
Word, Man, that the Reader may understand it of Christ his joining; a thing
never entered into G. K. his Heart to think, far less to write. This Abominable
Perversion of the Students is enough to make all sober Men abhor them, as
Wilful and Impudent Liars; for such a manifest and visible thing could not be
done in Ignorance. But are not these Students rare Disputants, who thus argue
against the Quakers, page 83. l. 5, 6. Either he (to wit, Christ) suffers
within willingly, and so he sins, it being by the sins of Man, that he suffers,
and is crucified within. For by this Argument it will follow not only, that all
the Martyrs, -- Who think it a Sin, to suffer willingly
when they suffered willingly, did sin; but also that Christ himself, when he
suffered willingly by the Sins and wicked Hands of the Jews, that Crucified him
outwardly, did sin: Which is the highest Blasphemy, and naturally follows by
the Students Argument. But it seems, these Students have no mind to suffer
willingly for Righteousness sake, seeing they are Men of such Principles, that
think, when any does suffer willingly, he Sins. We leave the Reader to judge,
whether such Stuff and Work of the Students be Quakerism Canvased, and a
Confutation of the Quakers Errors? or rather, whether it be not a Manifest
Betraying of the Truth, and declaring themselves Guilty of highest Blasphemy,
Lying and Confusion? And whether these Men, who are guilty of such Confusion
themselves, are fit to accuse others, as not writing perspicuously and clearly,
as they do G. K. for his Book of Immediate Revelat. page last of their Preface?
But G. K. doubts not, but that his Book will be acknowledged to be Clear and
Perspicuous, where it meets with Men of a Clear Understanding; such as the
Students (to be sure) are not.

J. N's Repentance.
As for those Stories about J. N. they have been long ago Answered by our
Friends, who judged both him, and them that joined with him in that particular:
As he also judged and Condemned himself, and was by the Mercy of God reduced to
a sober Mind. As for that Passage in Christopher Atkinson's Book, we can say
nothing to it, unless we saw the Book, which is in G. M. his Custody: (which
shows, That the Students have plowed with his Heifer) who refused to let us
have the use of it, to see, whether the place was perverted? And we did not
know, where to have it any where else. But it is Incumbent on them to prove,
whether C. A. or his Book was owned really by the Quakers? for we can prove, he
was denied by them: And if he denied, that Christ is Man; we deny him and his
Book both: For we truly believe, that Christ is both God and Man.

The Heathens Book of Nature.
In the Prosecution of their Second Argument, Sect. 2. They take great pains to
prove, That Heathens have the Law and Book of Nature; and from exercising their
Reason and Understanding naturally, they may know many things: Which we do not
deny; and so they might have spared that Labor. But whereas they Allege, That
there is nothing needful to be known and believed by the Heathens, but what the
Book of Nature, and their Natural Understanding, and Reason as Men can teach
them, according to the Quakers Principle; and consequently the Heathens need
not these Supernatural Revelations; This they affirm without any Proof: We
shall give manifest Instances to the Contrary. For the Quakers say, All Men
need both to have and to know a Supernatural Influence and Work of the Spirit
of God, in order to their Salvation: And this also our Adversaries grant.
Heathens need a Divine Revelation.
Now the Heathens need a Divine Revelation to make this known to them: For the
Book of Nature, or the mere Natures of things being considered, cannot teach
Men, what is Supernatural; and so it cannot teach Men, that in all their
Actings they are to have a Supernatural End: Nor can it teach them, that they
are to Love, Fear, Serve and Worship God from a Supernatural Principle of God's
Grace; which are the greatest Duties required of Man: and if it cannot teach
Men, and convince them of their greatest Duties, it follows, that it cannot
convince them of the great sins, that are contrary unto those Duties. Also
Nature cannot teach Men the Mystery of Regeneration; which yet is needful to be
known: For Men, who are but too much addicted to Natural Reason, and Searchings
into the Book of Nature (and despise the Divine and Supernatural Illumination
of Christ in them) think Regeneration a Fiction, or unnecessary thing. Other
Instances could be given; but lest they should call them the Quakers Errors, we
shall forbear; contenting our selves with such, as our Adversaries acknowledge
to be true. But 2. if it were granted, that the Book of Nature could in some
sort discover all things necessary to Salvation (without Supernatural Light)
which yet we deny; it does not follow, That therefore Divine, Supernatural, The
Book of Nature is short of Divine things.
Objective Revelation is not necessary: Because the Discovery, that the Book of
Nature and Natural Reason gives to Men of Divine Things (as of the Power,
Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, Love and Mercy of God) is but Dim, Weak, Faint and
Barren; and is no more a proportionate Object to the Spiritual Sensations of
the Soul, than a Report of Meat and Drink, and Clothing are a suitable or
proportionate Object to the Taste and Feeling of the outward Man. The Souls of
men need not only to be Convinced, That there is a God, who is Good, Loving,
Merciful, Powerful and Just; but they need also in order to their Salvation to
have a Feeling of his Divine Power, to see and taste that he is Good, to handle
that Word of Life; to know Christ in themselves; to have the Love of God shed
abroad in them by the Holy Spirit: Which Love is a sensible and perceptible
Object, and so is Objective. For if the Scriptures be not a sufficient
Objective Revelation of God, and the things of his Kingdom, much less the Book
of Nature, etc. But the first is true; therefore the Second is true also. Now
that the Scriptures are not a sufficient Objective Revelation of God, etc. G.
K. has proved at large in his Book of Immediate. Revelat. and we need not
produce any new Arguments here, until the Students or their Masters Refute
those already set down in that Book. Only this we say in short, Nature and
Scripture tell us, That there is a God; but they can neither give us a Sense,
Sight or Tasting of him, or of his Love, or of his Spiritual Judgments, as
these things are inwardly experienced, where God Reveals them. Nature cannot
Refresh or Comfort the Soul, nor pour in Wine and Oil into it, when it is
wounded with Sin: and although it could tell, that God can do this; what
Comfort could that be to the Soul, unless God himself do it, and make the Soul
sensible of his Hand reaching unto it the Spiritual Things themselves, that
Nature cannot afford? Also Nature cannot discover the Spiritual Judgments of
God in the Soul, whereby he cleanses it from Sin, as by Water and Fire. Now as
to the Second Branch of their Argument, That the Scriptures are a sufficient
objective Revelation of all things necessary to Salvation; this we altogether
deny, as is said. For although the Scripture is a full-enough Declaration of
all Doctrines and Principles both essential and integral of Christian Religion;
yet the Scripture does propose Divine Things and Objects, but as a Card or Map
does a Land, The Scripture, a Map.
and the Fruits of it to the outward Eye. Now as this is not a sufficient
Objective Proposal, because we need to see the Land it self, and to taste, and
eat and drink of the Fruit of it; so our Souls need a more near and Immediate
Discovery of God, than the Scripture, which is but a Report of him, that he may
Feed and Nourish us by his Divine Manifestations. And here in the Prosecution
of this Argument, they are at great Pains to prove, That the Scriptures are
given from God; which we deny not, although same of their Proofs be weak: But
whatever Reasons can be brought to prove, That the Scriptures are given from
God, if the Inward Testimony of the Spirit of God be not believed and received,
these Reasons cannot beget any Divine, Saving Faith, (whereof only we speak)
but a mere Human and Natural Faith or Conviction.

As to that Place of Scripture 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel, etc. that is, If
our Gospel be hid, etc.
say they, the Outward Gospel. But does Paul say so? Nay; Look the Greek Text,
and you will find the contrary; that the Gospel he spoke of, was hid in them
that are lost, so the Greek (...).
: Therefore it was Inward. And this Scripture they bring to prove, That the
Scriptures have Objective Evident and Perspicuity in themselves; whereas Paul
does not say of the Scripture, but of the Gospel, which is the Power of God.
And whereas they query; If a person may have Immediate Objective Revelations,
who has not his Mind well disposed? and if so, what Advantage would he have by
them, which he might not have without them by the Scriptures? We answer; Much
every way: Because the Scripture is not able to Dispose his Mind, as our
Adversaries grant; but these Immediate Objective Revelations are also really
Effective, and have sufficient Power and Ability in them to Dispose his Mind,
if he do not resist them. Again, whereas they query; May a Person be well
disposed, who has not such Revelations? We answer; No: Yet he may want some,
and have other some; but if he may, yet there is need of such Revelations. Even
as if a Man's Eye or Taste were never so well disposed, he needs the Objects
themselves: And as painted Bread, or a Discourse of Bread cannot satisfy the
Natural Taste and Appetite; A Discourse of Bread satisfies not the Hungry.
no more can the Scripture-Words satisfy the Taste and Appetite of the Soul.
They cite 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. to prove, That the Scriptures of Old and New
Testmament are the Principal, Complete and Infallible Rule of Faith and
Manners: But this place does not say, that they are so. The Scripture we grant;
but deny their Consequence: Which is merely begged without a Proof. They
Confess, page 90. That the Scriptures are not sufficient every way, so as to
exclude the Inward Efficiency of the Spirit, and the Concurrence of other
Causes. Very well: Enough to overthrow their whole Argument. Inward Revelation
both Effective and Objective.
For among other Causes Divine Inspiration is a Main: For indeed, the inward
Efficiency of the Spirit, is that Objective Revelation, which we plead for;
only they deny it to be Objective, whereas we say, it is both Effective and
Objective. As if a Man should grant, that the Light and Heat of the Fire does
both enlighten us, and warm us; but deny, that either that Light or Heat of the
Fire is Objective to our discerning, or perceptible by themselves; which were
ridiculous: And as Ridiculous is their Conceit of an Influence of the Spirit,
that is merely Effective, and not Objective. That the Books of the Old and New
Testament are called the Scripture by way of Eminency, we deny not (although
the Name is given at Times to other Writings;) nor does this refute G. K. his
Translation of that Scripture 2 Timothy 3.16. which is confirmed by the Syriack,
which has it thus; In Scriptura enim, quae per Spiritum scripta est, utilitas
est ad doctrinam, etc. i. e. For in the Scripture which is written by the
Spirit, there is profit. All Scripture given by Inspiration, etc. Controverted.
But their Reason from the Conjunction [ and] is both Foolish and Blasphemous.
For if the Words be rendered thus [ All Scripture given by Inspiration is and
profitable] is no more Nonsense, than diverse other Places in the Scripture,
where the Conjunction [ and] seems to be Redundant. As in that Place Joh.
8.25. where the Greek has it thus, (...) i. e. The beginning (or from the
beginning) the same which and Or also.
I speak unto you. Now if the Conjunction [ and] render not this Place
Nonsense; no more does it render that in Timothy: But the Students Ignorance
renders them rather Blasphemers, and their Arguments Blasphemous against the
Words of Christ. Moreover the Conjunction (...) may signify a strong
Affirmation, (as to say, even, truly, indeed,) as both our English Translation
has it, Joh. 8.25. and Schrevelius in his Greek Lexicon does render it: And
thus the Words have good Sense, All Scripture (or Writing) given by
Inspiration, is even (or indeed) profitable. And whereas they say; None but a
Quaker or Jesuit would so interpret the Place; They declare their Malice and
Ignorance. For William Tindall, that famous Protestant Martyr, in his
Translation of the Bible (for which the Papists burnt him) did Translate it, as
G. K. does; whom we think, the Students dare not Accuse, as a Jesuit: That he
was a Quaker, in so far, as he held diverse of our Principles Condemned by the
Students, we shall not deny. As for us, we bless the Lord, Unprofitable
Nicities of the Letter-Mongers reprehended.
our Faith stands not on such a small Nicity, as the want of an [ is,] or the
redundancy of an [ and] let them look to that, whose Faith knows no other
Foundation, but the Letter: It does nothing hurt our Faith, nor lessen the due
Esteem of the Scripture to us, if peradventure an [ is] has been lost, or an [
and] has crept into the Text, since the Original Copies were lost. This we
know, and can prove, That the Scripture cannot profit any Man to Salvation
without the Illumination or Inspiration of the Spirit: which is both Effective
and Objective, and which our Adversaries grant at least to be Effective. And if
they make one Exception; why may not we make another? Or if they say, the
Spirit is necessary one Way; why may not we say, It is necessary another Way?
But then the Scriptures, say they, would not be profitable at all in any Manner
or Kind; We deny the Consequence: For it is profitable, yea, The Scripture is
profitable.
and necessary in genere objecti materialis, i. e, as the material Object in
Relation to all Historical Truths; and diverse other Dogmatical and Doctrinal
Points, which perhaps we would not have known without the Scripture, although
we had had the Spirit in as large a Measure, as Men now have it. Again, The
Scripture is profitable in genere Objecti remoti and secundarii, i. e. by way
of a Remote and Secondary Object and Rule: even as in relation to Testimonies
of Life and Experience, which may be known without the Scripture; yet the
Scripture is a Secondary Confirmation and Help; even in that Case, as a Card or
Map of a Land is unto a Traveller, that travels through the Land it self, and
sees the High Ways: who will not throw away his Card, The Map compared with
the Land in Possession.
because he sees the Land it self; but will both delight and profit himself to
Compare them both together. Other great and weighty Uses we could give; but
these suffice, to serve as Instances against their Weak and Sorry Argumentation.

Their last Argument is from Joh. 12.48. The Word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day. But how prove they, That this is the Letter of
the Scripture, much of which was not then writ? And although this Word were not
Christ himself; yet it may be an Inward Testimony spoken by Christ in Men's
Hearts: Here they merely beg, and prove not. But 2. Suppose it were the
Scripture or Written Law, as that cited by them Romans 2.12. it will only follow,
That the Scripture is a Secondary Law or Rule: which we willingly grant, and
that by it Men, who have the Scriptures, shall be judged; but not by them only.
For if the Gentiles, who have not the written Law, shall be judged by the Law
in the Conscience; so shall these also, (who have both Inward and Outward) be
judged by both, and consequently their Damnation shall be greater.

SECTION V.
Of Worship; being an Answer unto their Third Section concerning Inspirations
to Duty.

IN their stating the Controversy in this particular, they grossly prevaricate
in diverse things. As where they say, N. 2. The Question is not only about Duty
on the Matter, videlicet, The Act of Prayers, Prayer without the Spirit not
acceptable.
etc. as separated from the right manner, viz. Sincerity and Truth; whereas
indeed the Question betwixt them and us is about Prayer, as separated from the
Right Manner, viz. Sincerity and Truth. For they say; God requires Men to pray
without any Inspiration, or gracious Influence of the Spirit: So that such a
Prayer is an answering of the Obligation to the Duty upon the Matter, although
it be separated from the Right Manner. And accordingly they do both require and
allow Men to Pray, when they have no gracious Influence or Motion thereunto;
telling them, That even such Prayers are required; and that they do better to
give such Prayers, as want Sincerity unto God, than not to pray at all; seeing,
such lifeless and spiritless Prayers have the Matter of True Prayer, although
they want the Right Manner. Whereas we on the contrary affirm, that Lifeless
Prayers have neither the Right Matter and Substance, nor yet the Right Manner
of Prayer; and therefore are not at all required in Scripture. Yet we deny not,
but many Times, when Men want an Influence of Life to Pray, they are still
under the Obligation; and at such Times it is their Sin, not to Pray, because
they ought to have suitable Influences to Prayer: which would not be wanting,
if they were faithful unto God. But when through unfaithfulness they want them,
it does not excuse them from being under the Obligation; yet still when they
want the Help of the Spirit, they ought to pray by the Spirit, because they
ought to have it. Even as when one Man owes unto another Man a just Debt in
Money, the Debtor ought to pay the Money, although he have no Money to pay it
with; for his Want of the Money does not excuse him from the Obligation to pay
it; yet he ought to pay the Debt only with Money, or the Equivalent of it. But
if he should offer to pay it with any thing, that is not Money, nor Mony's
Worth, as suppose with a few Counters; this is no answering the Obligation
either in the Right Matter or Manner: And so it is in the Case in Hand. Again,
N. 8. They fall into the like Prevarication, in alleging; The Question is not
about a New Heart, and Spiritual Principle of Obedience; for they own that as
Indispensably necessary for acceptable Performance. But do not they say, That
when Men pray without a New Heart, they do in part answer the Obligation? And
do not they encourage them to pray, even the most Wicked? This is denied by the
People called Quakers, and is a great part of the Question. We say indeed, Is.
1, 10 -- 18. c. 55, 7. c. 59, 2 Ezekiel. 8, 18. Prove. 15, 8, 29. c. 21, 27. Joh.
9, 31. c. 4, 23.
Wicked Men ought to Pray, but not remaining Wicked; but that they ought to
forsake their Wickedness, and have a new Heart, and therewith to pray.
Moreover, whereas they say; The Question is not about every Performance, but
about acceptable Performance: Herein they most palpably contradict themselves
N. 9. where they grant, That no Act of Worship can be acceptably performed
without these Influences; and they well know, that the Quakers say the same.
The Question then is not about Acceptable Performance, seeing both they and we
grant, that no Duty can be acceptably performed without the Spirit: So that if
the Students had understood their Matter, they would have said; The Question is
not about acceptable Performance, but about simple Performance, whether there
be any Obligation to perform Duty, that is not acceptable; which they affirm,
and we deny. For indeed, Unacceptable Performance, Unacceptable performance, no
performance.
is as good as no Performance, but rather worse: As if under the Law the Jews
had offered up a Dog's Neck in place of a Sacrifice, it had been a greater sin,
than not to offer at all; as it is a greater Offense for a Man to offer to pay
his Debt with Counters or Pennies made of Slait-Stone, than not to pay at all.
Another gross Error they commit, in alleging; The Question is about
preparatory Motions, previous in Time.

This is a Lie: We challenge them to show us any such thing in our Books.
Motions of the Spirit previous in order of Nature.
We do not require Motions or Influences of the Spirit previous in Time,
(although they are often given;) it suffices, that they are Previous in Order of
Nature, as the Cause is previous unto the Effect, which is not always in Time,
but in Nature. But the Question is indeed about the Necessity of Motions to,
and in the Performance of Duty, so as the Performance is to be in, by, through
and with the Spirit; which may well be without a previousness in Time, as to
inward Duty at least. And if the outward can be simultaneous with the Inward,
it may also be as to the outward: but if it cannot be so soon as the Inward in
some Cases, the Reason is not for want of the Motion; but because the bodily
Organs cannot so hastily answer the Motion, as the mind it self can: And it
sufficiently answers the Motion, that the Mind answer it first; and then the
bodily Organs, as soon as their Nature can permit. There is yet another great
Error they commit, in alleging Such a lively and Spiritual Disposition, as
being necessary in our Sense; whereas we do not lay it upon such a lively, etc.
as if we required such a Degree of Life: for the least Measure of Life, that is
but able to carry forth the Soul in any living Measure of Performance, is
sufficient; where the Soul keeps to the Measure, and does not exceed, or go
beyond it.

In the Prosecution of their Arguments they are no less unhappy in the stating
of the Question; as will shortly appear. Page 95, 67. they bring in R. B. and
A. Sk. denying their Sequel; which they labor to prove: (but how
unsuccessfully, we shall se anon) because as Angels and Brutes agree, in that
they are both Substances; so Spiritual Duties, and other Duties agree, in that
they are both to be performed in the Spirit. Duties Natural and Spiritual
differ.
But what then? Yet the Difference is still great betwixt those Duties, that as
to their Matter are Natural and Civil; and those, which as to their very Matter
are Spiritual. As for Example, To eat, to plow, to pay a Debt, are not
Spiritual, as to their Matter; but only as to their Manner and End, when
acceptably performed: And therefore the Matter of those Duties, and whole
Substance of them may be without any gracious Motion of the Spirit. And in that
Case the Performances themselves are really profitable in the Creation among
them; and consequently do answer the Obligation in part: But Prayer and
Thanksgiving, etc. are Duties wholly Spiritual, both as to Matter or Substance,
and as to Manner and End; so that whosoever essayeth to do any of them without the
gracious Motions of the Spirit, he leaves not only the right Manner, but the
very Matter and Substance of the Duty behind him, and brings the mere
Accidents along with him: Which have no Profit nor use to Men, nor are any wise
in the least part an Answer to the Obligation. And as to that Scripture cited
by them; The Plowing of the Wicked is Sin.
The plowing of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. they do not prove, that it is
meant of outward Plowing: The Margin of our English has it, The light of the
wicked; and Arius Montanus rendereth it on the Margin, Cogitatio, the Thought.
That the Plowing of the Wicked is Sin, in respect of the Manner and last End,
we grant; but that the Action materially considered is Sin, we altogether deny,
even in a Wicked Man. For the outward, Mechanic and Bodily Act is good in its
Nature, and profitable; as also in so far as it may be for the Maintenance of
his Family, it is good. So that in respect of the Matter, and subordinate End,
there is no Difference betwixt the Plowing of a Good Man, and a Wicked; whereas
the Prayer of a Good Man by the Spirit, and the Prayer of a Wicked Man without
the Spirit, differ materially in their very Nature and Substance: The Good
Man's Prayer by the Spirit is true and real Prayer; but the Wicked Man's
Prayer, The true Worshipper distinguished from the False.
is no true Prayer at all, but a dead Image of it. Nor is the Wicked Man a true
Worshipper: for he only is True Worshipper according unto the express Doctrine
of Christ, Who worships the Father in Spirit and in Truth; whereas a Wicked
Man's Plowing is as Real and true, and good as to the Matter and Nature of the
Outward Action, as that of the Good. It does not therefore follow, That
(according to the Quakers Principle) because a Man is not to pray without the
Spirit, that therefore he is not to Plow without the Spirit in respect of the
Matter; although in respect of the Defect in the Manner and last End, which
should be the Glory of God, he sins, when he Plows, as when he Prays; but yet
not so much in the one, as in the other; for in the one both Matter and Manner
are wrong; in the other not the Matter, but Manner. But if a Man be faithful to
God, he may as certainly expect the Divine Assistance of the Spirit to help him
to Plow, as to Pray; although that Assistance to pray is greater, and of
another manner, than that to Plow: As is obvious to any, that has Spiritual
Experience. And whereas A. Sk. infers upon them, Their going about the
Spiritual Duties in a Carnal Manner, etc. This they call an Impudent Calumny:
But in this the Impudent Calumny is their own, not his. For dare they deny, but
they are for going about Prayer and Praise (which are Spiritual Duties) without
the Motion of the Spirit? which is as much as to say, in a Carnal manner; for
what is not done by the Spirit, is done but in a Carnal manner. And whereas
they call his Second Answer, A Clear Confession, etc. yet they tell us nothing
of it page 96. They are no less disingenuous, in alleging, That G. K.
dissenteth from R. B. and A. Sk. (whom in their airy and frothy Minds they call
his pretended Infallible Brethren: for as G. K. requires Inspirations to the
Acceptable Performance of other Actions; so does A. Sk. and R. B. Yet we all
say, Wicked Men may very lawfully go about Natural and Civil Performances, as
to Plow, to Eat, to pay Debts, as they are materially considered, without
Inspiration; and in so doing (although they fall short of Acceptable
Performance for Defect of the right manner, and the End) they sin less; than to
omit those Actions, and indeed sin not at all, as to the Nature and Substance
of them; as they do, who pray without Inspiration.

As for G. K. his Distinction of Mandatory and Permissory Inspirations, it
holds good, notwithstanding all their Idle, Inspirations mandatory and
permissory.
Foolish and Impertinent Cavilling at it. From the Words of Paul, that he
essayed to go to Bithynia, but the Spirit permitted him not; G. K. inferred by
the Rule of Contraries, That the Spirit sometimes permitted him: To evade this,
they are sorely pinched. In their Account of the Dispute, page 30. they grant
his Consequence, That Paul at sometimes had a Permission; but they deny it to
be an Inspiration. But here in this new Assault they deny, That any Permission
follows by the Rule of Contraries from Paul 's Words; alleging, That he
permitted him, and he permitted him not, are not Contraries. But G. K. did not
allege these to be Contraries; for they are flat Contradictory: Propositions
Contrary and Contradictory distinguished.
But these we say are Contraries, The Spirit permitted not Paul to go to
Bithynia; therefore he permitted him to go sometimes to some Places: This is a
plain Inference from the Rule of Contraries by Contraries. We mean not
Contraries in the strict Logical Sense, as when the Contrariety is betwixt two
Vniversals; but Opposites, which in the common way of Speech are called
Contraries, and in the Logical Sense may be called Sub-Contraries: Which do
infer one another not to be true always simul and semel, at one Time and Place;
but at diverse Times and Places, etc. As for Example; If there be a South, there
must be a North; if a Time to come, there is a Time to be past: If some things
be Hot, and not Cold; other things must be Cold, and not Hot. And to use a more
near Example to the Matter in Hand: If when a River is not permitted to Run by
reason of an excessive Freezing, that binds it up at one Time; it follows,
That it is permitted to Run at another Time, when there comes a Thaw: Or yet
to come nearer; If the Wind do not permit a Ship to sail Southward at one Time,
it does permit her at another Time to sail Southward. We would not have
insisted on such Rudiments, had not the great Ignorance of the Students
occasioned it.

Page 97. They close their. 9. most pitifully. After having failed to refute G.
K's Distinction of Permissory and Mandatory Inspirations, they say; They leave
it to be proved by G. K. That the simple permitting of him (meaning Permission
not joined with a Command) has been by Inspiration. The Students Evasions and
preposterous Demands.
Here they shamefully desert their Undertaking, which was, to Refute permissive
Inspirations; but when they fail to do this, they put G. K. to prove them:
Whereas they ought to remember, that G. K. is not bound by the Law of Dispute
to prove any thing, being a mere Defendent; yea, when he offered ex abundanti
to prove something in the Dispute, they blamed him for so doing; being but a
Defendent: And now they would have him leave Defendent, and become Opponent.
This is a pitiful Confutation of the Quakers Principles, that when they fall
short in their Proofs against us, put us to prove our own Principles. But
seeing, they are so beggarly, as to beg from G. K. a Proof of this, he shall
give it unto them; and it is this. Admit then, that according to the Students
Supposition Paul was permitted to go unto a certain Place without any Command
of God, and that Paul did this acceptably, or without sin, as to the thing it
self, which they must needs acknowledge he might; it follows then by their own
Argument, that he walked this Journey in the Spirit: Seeing, they themselves
plead, That Men ought to walk in the Spirit, (meaning outward Walking.) And
seeing they grant, That whatever Act a man does acceptably, he must do it to
the Glory of God; and that a Man can do nothing to the Glory of God, but as he
does it from a Good Principle, (yea, the Glory of God being a supernatural End,
must have a supernatural Principle, which is the Spirit of God;) it manifestly
follows, that Paul his Journeying by a Permission was by Inspiration. For
whatever is done in the Spirit, is done by Inspiration; Inspiration both in the
common Sense, and here particularly signifying any gracious Motion, Influence
and Assistance of the Spirit. In their Answer to that other Scripture 1 Cor.
7.6. compared with ver. 40. they fall into their old way of Asserting barely
without any Proof. They tell us; That the Permission falls upon the thing
spoken, and not upon the speaking it self: But how prove they it? Here they are
quite dumb, and say nothing for Proof. And indeed, it is as manifest, as a
thing can be, that the Permission does no less fall upon the speaking, than
upon the thing spoken; and they do most presumptuously Contradict the Apostle,
when they say, Paul was commanded to speak this; Whereas Paul said expressly, he
spoke by Permission, and not of Commandment.

In the Prosecution of their second Argument they bring in G. K. distinguishing
betwixt Privative and Positive Permission; Permission Positive and Negative.
where they give the Lie to their own Account, which says page 30. That G. K.
distinguished Permission into Positive and Negative, as indeed he did. Now
Privative and Negative differ widely: For the want of sight in a Stone is not
Privative (as in a Man;) but Negative: And surely there is so little Wit, or
acumen in this Argument of the Students, and their Prosecution of it, that it
proves them to be liker Stones, than Men of Reason and Solidity. And here they
tell us, that G. K. (whom in their vain Minds they call this Great, Inspired
Rabbi) was very unfortunate in explaining this Distinction, and assigning its
Ground; as may be seen in their Account. But, Alas for them, Poor Men! they
have egregiously baffled themselves in that very Matter in their Account: as is
showed in our Answer thereunto. But behold, what dull and heavy Disputers these
Men are! If Positive Permission were Inspiration, say they, then, a man might
Inspire us, for he might positively Permit us. This Consequence is as dull and
heavy as a Stone; although the weight of it falls not upon us, but upon
themselves to prove them altogether Impertinent. For their Argument proceeds
upon a wrong Supposition, that according to G. K. all positive Permissions are
Inspirations; a thing G. K. never dreamed of: But only that some positive
Permissions (to wit, those of God) are Inspirations, as he by his Spirit does
permit Men, or allow them to do or use some things. As when God said to Adam in
the Garden; Of every tree in the garden thou may freely eat, save one; This
was a positive Permission, and also (if God spoke this to him inwardly, as is
most probable, and as Augustine supposes) an Inspiration: Also when the Lord
said unto Ezekiel, cap. 4.15. Lo, I have given thee Cows dung for man's dung;
This was a Condescendence, and positive Permission, and also an Inspiration,

But the Students proceed still more and more to baffle themselves (in stead of
baffling the Quakers) and show their Ignorance and Sottishness. For thus they
argue, page 99. in prosecuting their Third Argument: Every Inspiration (say
they) puts us out necessarily to the doing of the thing Inspired; and so
Commands us virtually: And upon this bare Alledgance the whole superstructure
of this Argument stands; which yet is a manifest Untruth, and suffers many
undeniable Exceptions. For many times things Inspired are not at all of the
Nature of Things to be done; but are simply things to be believed. Things
inspired are either to be done, or simply to be believed.
As when God Inspired the Prophets with the Knowledge of things to come; which
neither could nor ought to be done by them: And as when Daniel was Inspired to
know Things; which he was so far from being commanded to Write, that he was
forbidden, Dan. 12.4. Again some Inspirations are mere inward Consolations, and
Spiritual Refreshments and Renewings of Strength only to enable us in general
to serve God (as Meat and Drink is unto the Body) and that sometimes without
Words, and sometimes with Words by way of Promise. As when he spoke to Noah,
Genesis cap. 9. from ver. 8. to ver. 18. where the^e is not any Command given to
Noah, but only Promises; and yet Noah was Inspired by the Lord, Which are
either of Command, or of Promise.
as all the true Prophets were. And whereas they allege, That Inspiration
includes in its Notion an Insuperable putting and prompting out to the things
Inspired in all Authors, both Sacred and Profane; is merely precarious. For
sometimes indeed it signifies to Command; as where the Inspiration is
Mandatory: But at other Times it signifies to Comfort, Refresh, Quicken,
Influence and Assist us, without any particular Command to any particular
Action. Yet we acknowledge, the Nature of all Divine Inspirations in the
Children of God is to Incline, Lead, Move, Draw and Guide them up more and more
into Unity with God, and so unto a further Degree of Holiness; but not to
determine them unto all particular Actions. And thus also their fourth Instance
is disproved, where they allege, That all Inspirations of God determine us to
one Extreme: Which is false; if they mean an Extreme in the particular Act: If
they mean an Extreme in the general, as to do all in Charity, and to the Glory
of God; we grant it: But this does not militate against, what we affirm. Their
other two Instances are but the former upon the Matter, repeated in a
Tautological way for want of new Matter; and are sufficiently Answered above.
And thus their Silly and Faint Reasonings in this Argument are answered without
any necessity of G. K. his returning to his Bag for new Distinctions; as they
scornfully, but foolishly insinuate.

Page 99.. 15. The Students tell us, That G. K. finding himself beset with
these inextricable Difficulties, as it seems, misplaces this distinction in
their Account, and gives in another distinction of Particular and General
Inspirations. This is but their mere Alledgance: The Distinction was right
enough placed; as any may see by the Nature and Coherence of the Account: Nor
did G. K. see any Difficulty in their Argument at all; as indeed there is none
in it. But let us see, how they Refute this Distinction of General and
Particular Inspirations or Influences. First they say; He shall never be able
to produce a Ground for this Distinction out of Scripture. A learned Refutation
indeed! and like unto their old way, of putting us to prove, what they cannot
disprove. May it not as well suffice us to say, They shall never be able to
produce a Ground out of Scripture against it? Inspirations General or
Particular.
and the rather, since we are Defendents. Secondly: That which is called a
general Inspiration, could not put us out to any particular thing, say they.
Answer; If by putting us out, they mean, determine us insuperably or
irresistibly thereunto, we grant; but this is no Absurdity. Thirdly, They would
always leave us undetermined. Answer: Nor is this Absurd. For in things that
are permissive, and left to our Freedom in the Lord to do them, or not to do
them, we need not any thing to determine us, as to the partiticular Act; but
may determine our selves, being free Agents: although as to the Nature and Kind
of the Act in General, that it be in true Love to God and to his Glory, we are
determined by the Lord.

Page 100. They are no less unsuccessful in managing their other Argument, in
Comparing Inward Duties with outward. For, whereas they allege for a Proof of
their Minor, That if we were not to go about Inward Duties without a previous
sensible Inspiration, there would be a progressus in Infinitum. This has been
sufficiently ananswered above in the Dispute; that as to that Inward Duty of
Waiting we cannot suppose, that ever at any time an Influence or Inspiration
can be wanting: And this we say still; we mean to true Christians, who are
faithful unto God, and do faithfully improve his Influences. As for others,
Unfaithfulness wants Influences to Duties.
if they want Influences either to Inward or outward Duties, the Cause is their
Unfaithfulness: And so the Way to have them upon all Occasions, is to be
Faithful to answer God's Call, who does often invite and call upon them, who are
Unfaithful. But if they mean All Inward Duties, as Meditation in many Cases
upon particular Subjects; we deny, that even true Christians have always
particular Inspirations thereunto: Nor is there any necessity to assert them.

Now let us take notice, how they refute the Distinction of General and
Particular Inspirations. First, say they: There are no General Inspirations, as
we have showed already. But that they have showed no such thing, is already
made apparent. Secondly: Supposing them; yet they being but General, would not
be a sufficient Ground for the particular Inward Duties of waiting, desiring.
But how Prove they this? No wise, but merely Affirm it; only they confound
Waiting, Desiring and Meditating together; whereas Meditating is of a larger
extent, and sometimes, yea, oft-times requires a Special Inspiration. Thirdly,
say they: The Scriptures produced by the Quakers prove alike, as to outward and
inward Duties: To this we answer; That as to some outward Duties, it is true;
as to others, false. As for Example: To be clear in all outward Conversation,
is a Continual Duty; and therefore we can never want an Influence thereunto, if
we be faithful: Preaching and Praying audibly is from a particular Influence.
But to Preach and Pray in the Church or Assembly with audible Words, is not a
continual Duty, nor yet a General to all Christians; and therefore it has not
always an Influence to assist thereunto. And here let the Reader note, That by
a General Influence or Inspiration we mean only such an Influence, as serves
in general for all Ordinary Actions, that are to be generally performed in an
acceptable Manner: As the same Spiritual Influence, that suffices me to Eat in
Faith, Fear and Love, suffices me also to Plow, or do any other Mechanical
Work: But the same does not suffice me to preach, or expound Scripture;
otherwise any ordinary Christian might do so at any Time: Which our Adversaries
will not acknowledge. Now that Preaching and Praying in particular require a
Super-added, Spiritual Influence and Inspiration, we prove thus: If Men may
have an Influence or Inspiration of the Spirit to wait, fear and love God, and
yet want an Influence or Inspiration to Preach or Pray Vocally; Then the
Influence and Inspiration to Preach and Pray vocally, is a distinct superadded
Influence, etc.

But the first is true; Therefore the Second.



The Consequence of the first Proposition is clear from that Maxim, Quorum
unum potest esse absque alio, etc. When of two things the one can be without
the other, the two are really distinguished. The Second Proposition is proved,
1. Because all true Christians have an Influence and Inspiration to Wait, Fear
and Love God; but all true Christians have not an Influence and Inspiration to
Preach and Pray Vocally in the Church: This our Adversaries cannot deny. 2.
Even a true Gospel-Minister may at times want a Door of Utterance, when in the
Time of this Want he has an Influence or Inspiration to Wait, Fear and Love
God: Therefore these Two are distinct. The Antecedent is clear in the Case of
Ezekiel (Chap. 3.15, Ezekiel sat seven Days with the Elders in silence,
16.) who sat seven Days with the Elders, having nothing to speak unto them
from the Lord, until at the end of the seven Days the Word of the Lord came,
unto him. And Ezra sat silent, till the Evening-Sacrifice; And Ezra sat
silent, etc.
and then he kneeled down and prayed, Ezra 9.5. Also Paul desired the
Colossians to pray for him, that Utterance might be given him: Which clearly
imports, That he had it not at all Times; although at all Times he had an
Influence or Inspiration to Wait, Fear and Love God. And David prayed, That God
would open his Mouth, and his Lips should show forth his Praise: Isaiah said,
That God had given him the Tongue of the Learned, etc. Christ promised, That he
would give his Apostles a Mouth and Wisdom, which all their Adversaries should
not be able to Resist: All this signifies an Influence of the Spirit to speak;
which was not general to all, nor permanent or perpetual with them, who had it.
As is clear in the Case of David, who declared; That he was silent, and held
his Tongue even from good, until the Fire kindled in him; and then he spoke
with his Tongue, Psalm. 39.3. Yea, what signifies the Coal, wherewith Isaiah
his Mouth was touched, but an Inspiration or Influence of Life, superadded unto
that General Influence, which he had before? Now if our Adversaries say, This
was given unto those Men in an extra-ordinary way, as being Prophets and
Apostles; but is now ceased, since the Apostles Days. To this we Answer 1. This
is a plain Acknowledgment, That general Influences common to all Christians are
one thing, and particular Influences given to holy Men to Preach and Pray
Vocally, Inspirations to Preach and Pray vocally, not ceased.
are another. But 2. That all Influences and Inspirations or Motions of the
Spirit to enable Ministers to Preach and Pray Vocally, are not Ceased since the
Apostles Days, is clear from Rev. 11.3. And I will give Power unto my two
Witnesses, and they shall Prophesy: And it is said, That if any Man will hurt
them, fire proceeds out of their mouth: which must needs signify a Special
Influence of the Spirit given them to prophesy or preach; which is not common
to all Christians. Also what are these Gifts given unto Ministers for the
perfecting of the Saints? but such special Influences to enable them to Preach,
which are not given to all. Yea, do not the National Preachers desire in their
public Prayers some special Assistance and Help of the Spirit, to carry them
forth in their Ministry, which they, have not before? For if they had it
before, why do they seek it? From all which it is manifest, that as there are
general Influences given to all, and at all times; so there are particular and
special given only to some, and but at some times. Moreover that there is a
greater Influence of Life required to Vocal Prayer, when it is acceptable,
Mental Prayer the Cause and Spring of Vocal Prayer.
than unto some mere Mental Prayer (a thing expressly denied by the Students,
page 100.. 16.) is clear; because all true and acceptable Vocal Prayer, has
Mental Prayer going along with it, as its Cause and Spring: And so when any Man
prays Vocally, (if his Prayer be True and Acceptable) he prays also mentally;
and so he does two things together: Whereas when he prays but mentally, he
does but one thing. Now common Reason teaches us, that more Strength is
required to do two things together, than to do but one of them: And seeing, the
Vocal Prayer has not any Life or Virtue in it to reach unto God's Throne, or
yet unto the Hearts of his People, to quicken and refresh them, but as it
receives that Life from the Life, that is in the Mental Prayer; it is clear,
that a greater Measure is required to both, than simply to the one. Now
although Mental Prayer (as to the Disposition and Frame of the Soul at least)
be always in and with Good Christians, and has always some Measure of Life in
it; yet that Measure is sometimes so Weak and Low, that it cannot go forth into
the Words without Hurt or Prejudice: And at other times although it be able and
strong, yet it will not answer the Motion of Man's Will, so as to be drawn
forth thereby; but it only abides or goes forth into the Vocal Prayer
according to the Will of God, as he pleases to move it: Therefore the Free
Motion of the Life it self, as it pleases God to bring it forth, is to be
attended in all Outward, Spiritual Performances. But here let the Reader note,
That we have said, Vocal Prayer requires more Life, than some Mental Prayer; we
do not say, than all: For some Mental Prayer may be stronger, than that which
is a Complex of Mental and Vocal, as gathering the whole Strength of the
Complex into that which is solely and entirely Mental: According unto that
common saying abundantly confirmed by Experience, Vis unita fortior; united
Strength is the stronger. As when the Beams of the Sun are united into a small
Point, they have more Force, than when they are diffused; and for this Cause it
is, that we are so much for Mental Prayer, as knowing the great Good of it in
our Experience. And from what is above said, it is clear, that we need another
Influence, wherewith to pray vocally, than to Eat, Plow, Walk, etc. because
these natural Actions may be done sufficiently in a Spiritual Manner, by the
help of that General Influence, which does always attend Good Men to Fear and
Love God. For the Principle of Divine Life, which is the Living and Powerful
Word of God in Men's Hearts, is never idle, The Principle of Divine Life is
never Idle.
but is always Operative and at Work; especially more abundantly in them who
join with it; being as a most Rich and Living Spring, that is continually
flowing, and sending forth its Streams, according to Joh. 4.14. But to pray
Vocally, requires an Influence of Life to flow forth into the Words, that it
may in a Living and Powerful way reach the Hearers; but that Plowing, Eating,
Walking, etc. need no such Emanating Influence, is certain; and will be
acknowledged by our Adversaries. But perhaps also they will deny, that any Life
or Virtue does flow forth into Mental Praying and Preaching, even when these
Duties are acceptably performed; but this is contrary both to the certain
Experience of many Thousands, and also to the Scriptures-Testimony in many
Places.

Experience of many Thousands, who can declare, (whereof we are some) that the
Declarations, Testimonies and Words of the Servants of God in Preaching and
Praying have a real Life and Living Virtue in them, The Life in the Words of
the Servants of God, witnessed by Experience*
whereby their Souls are exceedingly Refreshed, Quickened and Stengthened;
which Life and Living Virtue is a thing as distinct from the bare outward
Words, which the natural Ear can hear, as Wine is distinct from the Vessel,
that carries it: Therefore if another Man, that has not this Spiritual
Ability, should pronounce the same Words, they have not any Life or Virtue at
all. And that God had given this Spiritual Discerning to many, before the
People called Quakers were raised up, is manifest from diverse in our own
Nation, who cared not to hear Men, who could speak never so good Words, if they
wanted Life; and in that day they could and did distinguish betwixt dead and
living Preachers, as also betwixt a Living Testimony and Preaching, and a Dry
Discourse: See for this the Book called, The fulfilling of the Scriptures. And
this was the express Testimony of that Philosopher, who was Converted by the
means of a few Words spoke by a certain Old Man (who was a Christian) at the
Council of Nice; Out of the Mouth of that old Man (said he) there went forth a
Virtue, which I could not Resist: These were his very Words; as Lucas Osiander
relates them in his Epitome of the Church History. Cent. 4. lin. 2. cap. 5.

II. It is Contrary to the Scriptures-Testimony in many Places: The Prove.
10.11. This must be understood in respect of the Influence of Life, that comes
out of his Mouth, And testified unto by Scripture.
as Water does out of a Well; and not barely in respect of the good Words,
which a Wicked Man may speak. According to this Christ said to his Disciples;
The Words that I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life: and as it was then, so it
is now; for at this day he speaks in his Servants, and will to the end of the
World; and it is He only, who has the Words of Eternal Life, which he speaks
in his Servants. And as in the Days of his Flesh he was said to speak with
Authority or Power, and not as the Scribes; and the People wondered at the
gracious words, which proceeded out of his mouth (all which import a living
Influence and Virtue in the Words of Christ, which the Words of the Scribes and
Pharisees had not) so it is at this Day: For Christ does as really speak by his
Spirit in his Servants, as he did in his Body of Flesh: So that Paul said, he
spoke in him; and therefore his Preaching was in demonstration of the Spirit
and Power. And for this cause true Preachers and Prophets are called good
Trees, of which Men gather good Fruit; whereas bad Men or evil Trees have no
good Fruit, True Prophets and Preachers distinguished from the false.
although they have the Prophets and Apostles Words. Also they are compared (to
wit, the False Prophets) to Clouds without Rain, and Wells without Water;
although they have good Words, yet they have no Rain, nor Water: Their whole
Ministry is dry, and empty of Life and Virtue. But the True Prophets Ministry
is as a Shower of Rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2. And sometimes it is compared unto Fire; as
it is said in the Psalm, He makes his Angels (or Messengers) Spirits and his
Ministers a Flame of Fire: And Fire was said to go out of the Mouths of the two
Witnesses. Also the Influences of Life, that go forth through the true Prophets
in their Ministry, are compared to Golden Oil, and the Men are compared unto
Golden Pipes, Zech. 4.12. And therefore the Apostle Peter exhorted the
Ministers in his Day, To minister of the ability, which God gives, as good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of God; so they ministered not only Words, but
Grace. Many other Testimonies might be cited to prove this Truth.

Another Instance brought by the Students, is, That an Heretic forbearing
Prayer a Year or two, or his whole Lifetime, may justify himself by this
Doctrine. To this it was answered: That though he may pretend; yet he has no
just Ground from our Principle: All Men are bound to pray often.
For we believe, That all Men are bound to pray often unto God, yea daily; and
that God does inwardly call and move all Men often unto Prayer during the Day
of their Visitation: And when that is Expired, or when at any other Time they
want that Inward Call or Influence through Unfaithfulness, they are still
bound: And if they pray not, they sin; because they ought to have an Influence.
But that our Account says, All have not Utterance to pray in Words, Utterance
of Words in Prayer.
is no Excuse for Heretics: For they must needs acknowledge, as well as we,
that all have not Utterance, who may be good Christians; seeing some that are
naturally dumb, may be good Christians, and yet they must confess, these have
not Utterance. Also many good Christians, who have no Natural Impediment, do
want Utterance in a Spiritual Way, to speak or pray vocally in the hearing of
others at some times; although we believe, it is given at times to all that are
faithful (who have no Natural Defect) that they may pray vocally, or in the
Hearing of others: But how often, it is more than we can determine; seeing it is
not Revealed: But if any fail of this Utterance through Unfaithfulness, their
sin is nothing the less, if they omit Prayer. And thus their last two Instances
are also Answered. For we do affirm with great Freedom, That all who are
faithful to the Lord, never want sufficient Inspiration or Influence to wait
upon God, fear him, love him, desire his Grace, and diverse other Inward Duties.
We say not All: For some Inward Duties, such as Meditation on a particular
Subject or Place of Scripture are not always required, more than it is always
required to speak; but if they be unfaithful, we deny not, but they may and
will want them: and in that case although they want Inspirations and
Influences, they are bound to pray, yet not without them, but with them. As a
Man, that wants both Money and Goods to pay his Debt, yet is bound to pay his
Debt; yet he must not, nor ought to pay it without Money or Goods: The Example
is clear, and the Application is easy. As for that Story they bring in
concerning T. M. which (that their Deceit may be the more hid) they do not
positively affirm; but only propose by way of Question: Have not Quakers
declared to People, etc. To which we Answer: That we know not, that any Quaker
ever declared any such thing; and we believe, diverse things in the Story are
utterly false. The Story about T. M. Answered for not praying in the Family, as
pretended.
If T. M. or any other of our Profession, having none in the Family, that can
join with them in the true Spirit of Prayer, but are professed Opposers of the
Quakers Way, be not so frequently heard pray by them, is excusable by your own
Way; who will not readily pray in our Hearing, when they have none to join with
them. And indeed, the want of that true Unity on the part of those, who are not
of our Faith, does often hinder our Freedom to pray in their Hearing; (unless we
have some of our Faith present to join with us:) We may pray for them, as it
pleases God to move us in their hearing; but we cannot so properly pray with
them, as not being in Unity with them. Where two or three (said Christ) agree
together to seek any thing in my name: But let our Adversaries, if they can,
show us, where in the Scripture it is commanded for any Man to pray in the
Hearing of others, where all present have no Agreement with him? Yet we deny
not, but that God upon some solemn Occasion may move to such a thing,
especially when a public Testimony is required: as in the Case of Stephen, who
prayed audibly in the Hearing of others; all which were so far from having any
Agreement with him, that they were at that time stoning him to Death, Acts 7.
Moreover we could easily upon a more just Ground Retort the Question upon your
own Church Members. How many of your own Church Members were not only for a
Twelve month, but for many twelve months never heard pray, and yet they pass
among you for good Christians? It is well known, that although ye hold
Family Prayer Morning and Evening to be a Duty, and the want of it a great sin;
that yet many thousand Families in the Nation, who belong to your Church, want
it: and many whole Families are so grossly Ignorant, that none in the Family can
go about it, even in that Natural Way, which ye plead for. As for us, it does
suffice unto us, God hears Prayer in secret.
that God hears us in secret; although Men do not so frequently hear us. Yet
we own with all our Hearts public Expressive Prayer, as it is performed in
Spirit and in Truth; and all of us have our Share and Testimony therein, as God
moves thereunto: Even those who are outwardly silent, as these who speak; when
as both agree together in one Spirit, and with one Heart and Soul join together
in the same.

SECTION VI. Of BAPTISM.
Wherein their Fourth Section concerning Water Baptism is Answered.

IN their stating the Question, they say; The Question is not, Whether Infants
ought to be Baptized? Or who have the Power of Administering Baptism? Whereas
indeed these Two are a great part of the Question betwixt our Adversary and us.
For as touching Infant Baptism, R. B. his Thesis does expressly say, It is a
mere Human Tradition; Infant Baptism an human Tradition.
and it is well known that all the Quakers (so called) are of the same Mind:
and do not the Students undertake to Confute the Quakers Principles? How is it
then, that they leave out so considerable a part of Quakerism, as they call it?
Is this Quakerism Canvased, to pick and choose at some, and pass by others? Yea,
Infants-Sprinkling with Water on the Forehead, is so considerable a part of the
Question betwixt them and us, that if that be disproved, or if they cannot
prove that to be a Gospel-Institution, they fall short exceedingly; seeing,
that is the only Baptism in use among them of the National Church. Again, it is
so great a part of the Question, Who have the power of Administering Baptism?
that by this the Controversy stands or falls; None have Power now to Administer
Water Baptism
For one of our main Arguments against Water Baptism, as remaining a Duty upon
all Christians is, That none are to be found, that have the Power to administer
it: And the Administration cannot be without a lawful Administrator. The
Question then really is, Whether these, who have no Immediate Call to
administer Water Baptism, (as John had) have Power to administer it? Again,
Whether those, who have no other mediate Call to Baptize, but what they have by
the Church of Rome, which is no true Church (as the best Protestants affirm)
have power to Administer Baptism? And this Question is the more proper in this
Place, seeing J. M. the Students Master confesses, his and his Brethrens Call
and Ordination to be by the Church of Rome, and that they have no other, but
what is conveyed down to them from the Apostles Times by that Apostate Church.
But let us now Examine their Arguments for Water Baptism in general. The First
is, Baptism with Water is to continue in the Church, The Students Argument for
its Continuance.
as long as Christ's Presence is to continue with his Apostles, and them, who
teach the Doctrine, that they taught: But,

Christ's Presence is to continue with his Apostles, and them, who teach the
Doctrine, that they taught, to the End of the World;

Therefore, etc.



Where it is to be observed, That they think, all is Safe as to the Minor; and
therefore they altogether pass it by. Now although it is sufficient to
invalidate the Argument, if the Major be false; yet we have somewhat of great
moment to say to the Minor, that is enough to overturn any Baptism, that they
have. For we put them to explain, who these are, That all along since the
Apostles have taught the Doctrine, which the Apostles taught? For the Words are
liable to diverse Senses. If they mean the Church of Rome, and her Bishops and
Teachers, we altogether deny, that they have taught the same Doctrine, which
the Apostles taught: And we suppose, the Students, if they follow their Master
J. M. will not affirm it. And indeed, for the same Reason the best primitive
Protestants denied, that the Church of Rome in their Day had any lawful
Ordination at all; seeing she continued not in the Apostles Doctrine and Faith:
As that famous Protestant Sadeel does argue at great length, lib. de legit.
voc. min. where he affirms, Sadeel's Testimony concerning a Succession of
Faith from the Apostles.
That the Succession of Faith is as the Soul, which gives Life to the
Succession of the Bishops, as unto a Body; but that Succession without this
Faith is a dead thing, and unprofitable Carcass. Now the same Reason does
militate as strongly against Water Baptism, and that also called the Supper,
upon our present Adversaries Principle, That none have Power to administer the
one or the other, but those who have a mediate outward Call conveyed down from
the Apostles by a visible Succession of ordained Bishops and Presbyters. For we
say, There has been no such Visible Succession, nor visibly Ordained Bishops
and Presbyters, who all a long have had the true Faith, and taught the true
Doctrine of the Apostles; therefore their Ordination and Power to administer
the Sacraments, is void and null. And this is further confirmed by the
Authority of Cyprian, Cyprian of Baptism.
who taught with great Earnestness, That the Baptism of all Heretics was void,
and no Baptism: But so it is, by our Adversaries Confession, That the Church
and Bishops, and Teachers of Rome have been Heretics for many hundred Years
before the Reformation; Therefore, and. We say then, the Argument is fallacious
as to the Minor, supposing, what is not to be supposed in their Sense, viz.
That either the Teachers of the Church of Rome, or any other claiming a Visible
and Mediate Call from the Apostles Times conveyed through a Visible Church unto
them, have taught the Doctrine, which the Apostles taught; a thing we
altogether deny: And it lies on them to prove. But that Christ has had some
all along, who have both believed and taught the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
that his Presence has been with them, we acknowledge; but we deny, that these
have been all a long a Visible Church and Teachers, having a Mediate Call and
Ordination: and in this we agree with the best Protestants. For indeed, the
True Church has been hid, even as a few Grains of Corn among an exceeding
great Quantity of Chaff and Stubble; The True Church has been hid.
and she who has called herself the Church by reason of her outward
Succession, was not the True Church, though some of the True Church lay hidden
in her, as Corn is hid in a great Quantity of Chaff. And that the Church is
properly to be placed in the alone Grains of Corn, and not in the Chaff, Sadeel
does also show out of Augustine Ep. 48. Another Fault we find in the Students
Argument, that supposing Water Baptism had been commanded to the Apostles by
Christ, Matthew. 28. (which yet we altogether deny) it insinuates, That it was
as long to Continue, as Christ's Presence with his Church. For if Teaching had
Continued, though Baptism with Water had Discontinued (as our Adversaries
grant, That Anointing with Oil, and miraculous Curing the Sick is discontinued)
yet the Promise was ground enough to encourage them: And if all be still
binding, that Christ Commanded to his Apostles, why go they not forth, The
Partiality of the National Teachers concerning Water Baptism.
(we mean the National Teachers) into all the World, and teach the Nations, who
do not so much as believe the Gospel historically? If they say, This was a
Command to the Apostles, and not to them; Why are they so partial, as to take
one part to them, and reject another? But we shall now come to a more
particular Examination of their Major. We have told them, That the Apostles
baptized some with Water out of a Condescendency (as Paul circumcised Timothy)
and not from that Command, Matthew. 28. which says nothing of Water Baptism.

Their First Reason against this is, They should have Baptized with Water of
their own Will, and without any sufficient Authority. But we deny this
Consequence, and they themselves have furnished us with a sufficient Answer,
where they say, Paul Circumcised Timothy, but not without a Command; for the
Law of Charity, and other General Precepts obliged Paul so to do, though it was
a thing indifferent of itself. The same we say as to their Baptizing with
Water: The Jews having so great an Esteem of Water Baptism, and thinking it
necessary, the Apostles used it (although it was a thing indifferent of it self
after Christ's Ascension, and giving of the Holy Ghost) the Law of Charity, and
other general Precepts obliging them: But this proves not, That the Apostles
had any Command from Matthew. 28. or any such Command any where else, that made
Water Baptism of it self to be a Necessary Duty to the End of the World.

And whereas they Query, Will G. K. grant, that it was once lively? We answer,
Yes, under John: Yet it follows not, that it was to Continue; because John
had no Commssion to the Nations, but only to the Jews. And that the Apostles
Baptized whole Families and Thousands (if they so did) will not prove, that it
was Necessary of it self, more than that Circumcision was; and yet even then
many Thousands of believing Jews were Zealous for Circumcision, see Act. 21.20,
21. Yea, many Bishops of Jerusalem were Circumcised after this, as Eusebius
relates. A Condescension in the Apostles by Water Baptism.
The Reason therefore was, That People were Zealous of Water Baptism, because
of John, and therefore the Apostles Condescended to it out of the Law of
Charity.

Another Question they make, Where is Water Baptism buried? We answer; where
the other Shadows are Buried: For it was but a Shadow, and Carnal Ordinance,
Heb. 9.10. the Greek Word is (...). Again the true Water Baptism has been out
of use all the Time of the Apostasy; for the Apostate Church has had no true
Baptism; and so in that respect it has been Buried: And being but a Shadow, is
not to be raised up again. And it is observable, That in the Revelation, where
it is prophesied of the Return and Restoration of the Church, there is not any
thing mentioned of the Restoring either Water Baptism, or the use of Bread and
Wine; as Signs, etc. And so their Second Reason is answered, That Water Baptism
is no more to be used out of Condescendency to the Weak, than Circumcision,
because both are long ago buried: And what is buried, is deadly to be raised up
again, as Augustine taught.

Their Third Reason is built on a Mistake, That the Godhead of Christ, or Names
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were a stumbling block to the believing Jews;
For of these only we are to be understood. Also, That the Apostles used the
Words Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, when they baptized, cannot be proved; far
less used they the Word Trinity, which was not invented long after the Apostles
Days. Their Second Argument, That the Baptism Commanded in Matthew. 28.16. is
with Water, resolves at last into this, That it is God only, and not Man, who
baptizes with the Holy Ghost; because he is only the proper, immediate,
efficient Cause of Baptism with the Holy Ghost: But we deny the Consequence, as
Weak and False. For there is nothing more usual, The Effect ascribed unto the
Instrumental Cause, which is the Principal.
than to ascribe the Effect unto the Instrumental Cause, as truly as unto the
Principal: Paul was sent to turn or convert the Gentiles from Darkness to
Light, and to open their Eyes; and yet God only was the Proper and Immediate
Efficient Cause of this. Many more Examples could be given, yea the same Reason
of the Students would militate against Teaching: For even outward Teaching,
which is by the Motion of the Holy Ghost, has a Power and Virtue in it;
whereof the Men who Teach, are but the Instrumental Conveyers, that is only
from God, as the Immediate Efficient Cause.

Another Reason they give to make all sure, as they say is, That it is only
Christ, as he is God, and mightier than John, who baptized with the holy Ghost,
Matthew. 3.11. where Baptism with the Holy Ghost is peculiarly attributed to
Christ. But this makes their Matter nothing more sure; for although that
Baptism with the Holy Ghost be peculiarly attributed to Christ, as the
principal Cause; yet it hinders not, that Men are the Instrumental: Even as
Christ said, It is not ye, that speak; and yet they also spoke, as Instruments.
It is true, that John did not Baptize with the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles did
(or rather Christ through them) because John had not so powerful a Ministry
given him, as the Apostles; of whom Christ said, that they should not only do
as great Works as he, but greater, to wit, by his Power. Again they Argue, That
giving and not granting, that Baptism with the Holy Ghost could be administered
by Men, yet it is not Commanded here; for the Words then would be full of
needless Tautologies. To this we Answer; That this does not follow. For
suppose, That by Teaching and Baptizing were meant one thing; how usual is it
in Scripture to express one thing under diverse Names without any Tautology?
However we believe, That by Teaching and Baptizing are meant two several
Things, both which require the special Operation of the Holy Spirit. For a Man
through Teaching by the Concurrence of the Holy Ghost is first of all Convinced
of the Truth, and has a ground laid in him to believe; and then he is Baptized
with the Holy Ghost, upon his believing and obeying, in what he is Convinced
of. Nor is this to confound the Command with the Promise, for the Sense of it
is this; Go ye, and Baptize with the Holy Ghost (Instrumentally) and I shall be
with you, as the Principal Cause to concur and assist you: and thus there is no
Tautology; the Command and the Promise being in diverso genere, id est, in a
different kind.

Their next Argument to prove, John's Baptism ceased, the Reason why?
That Water Baptism is to continue to the End of the World, is, That God sent
John to baptize with Water; and Christ caused John to baptize him, and
commanded or caus^ed his Apostles to Baptize with Water; and these Commands
were never formally Repealed, nor ceased of their own Nature: Therefore, etc.
But to this the Answer is easy. For John's Baptism was no part of the
Gospel Dispensation, as serving only to prepare the way to Christ; and he was
sent only to Baptize the Jews, that Christ might be manifest to Israel, Joh.
1.31. And it is called John's Baptism, in distinction from that of Christ; for
some were baptized with it, who had not Received the Holy Ghost. And that
Christ was baptized with Water, proves not its Continuance; no more than that
he was Circumcised, proves the Continuance of Circumcision. That Christ
Commanded his Disciples to Baptize with Water, we find not; and though it were,
it is but as at that time, being under John's Dispensation: but unless they can
prove, that Christ Commanded to Baptize all Nations with Water, and that to the
End of the World, they gain nothing. For what was Commanded only as toward the
Jews, does not reach us Gentiles; and so we need seek no Repeal, there not
having been any such Command.

In their answering our Retortion, as touching Washing the Feet, Washing of
Feet and Anointing with Oil, etc. abolished*
Anointing the Sick with Oil, and Abstaining from Blood, and things strangled,
They say, 1. This Retortion has a damnable tendency; for Enthusiasts may arise
and plead the same way against the most necessary Truths, etc. We answer; they
have no Ground from our Retortion so to do; because these things above
mentioned are but Figures, and such as have no Inward, or Intrinsecal Goodness
or Righteousness in them, as the other things have, which are most necessary.
2. Whereas they say, If these things had been Commanded, and never Repealed, it
were better to admit and observe them, than to reject Baptism, etc. We answer,
if by Repeal they mean a formal Repeal, we deny, that it were better; for all
being but figurative things, and such as the inward Law of God writ in our
Hearts (which is the New Covenant-Dispensation) does not require of us, they
Cease of their own Nature, and carry a virtual Repeal in their Bosom; although
it be not formally expressed in the Scripture, as to every particular. The
outward Law being changed.
For all the things of the Ceremonial Law are not one by one particularly
Repealed in the New Testament; but together in one Body: for the Law it self
being changed, the things required by it (if they have no other Law to require
them) do Cease. 3. They say, That Christ in washing his Disciples Feet, did two
things. 1. To seal up to his Disciples their part in him. 2. He intended to
leave them one Example of Humility; and it is only this second thing, which he
commanded to his Disciples, to wit, that they should perform Acts of Humility
one to another. But we miss their Proof there altogether, that he only
Commanded this, and not the Washing one another Feet in particular: yea, this
Gloss expressly gives the lie to Christ his own Words, Joh. 13.14. Ye also
ought to wash one another Feet; where not only an Act of Humility is
signified, A Spiritual washing of Feet pointed at by Christ.
but an Act of Love: And also by the outward Washing of the outward Feet is
signified, how we ought to contribute to Wash one another Feet in a spiritual
sense, that is to say, by seasonable Reproofs and Exhortations to help on one
another unto the Sanctification of the most-Inferiour Affections, that are, as
it were the Feet. And that Christ points at such a Mystery, is clear from
ver. 10. He that is washed, needs not, save to wash his Feet. Again, they
allege, That this Act is put Synecdochically for all other Acts of Humility:
But admit, that it be so; this proves nor, that this particular Act was not
Commanded, when Christ Instituted the Breaking of Bread at Supper: Among other
Ends it had this also, to signify the Unity of Christians, and how they ought
to love one another; shall we therefore say, it is Synecdochically put for all
Acts of Love, but is not particularly Commanded? And indeed, as Washing of Feet
was in use in these hot Countries, before that Christ did Wash his Disciples
Feet, and Commanded it to them; so was that in use, the Chief in the Family to
take Bread and break it, and give to every one, saying, Take, Eat: This was in
use among the Jews before Christ did so; as diverse Historians relate,
particularly Paulus Ricius de Coelesti Agricultura. Again, whereas they say, If
he had commanded so, some would have observed it.

To this we Answer; some, yea many did observe it, as they grant Ambrose and
the Church of Millain did: for if they used to do so in the Eastern Countries,
where there was need for it, because the People ordinarily did go barefoot; the
Christians in that Country would use it the rather, that Christ Commanded it.
Yea it does appear, that it was a most ordinary thing in the Primitive Times,
from Paul's Words 1 Timothy 5.10. where it is numbered among other Commanded
Duties; Washing of Feet observed by Christians in the Primitive times.
If she has washed the Saints feet. If it be said, That they used it, but not
as a Sacrament: We Answer; we read not of the Word Sacrament in the Scripture:
It is enough, that they used it; and were Commanded so to do by Christ: And it
had a Spiritual Signification, as well as those things they call Sacraments. It
is needless for us to insist more on this particular, so as to refute Arguments
of their own making, which are none of ours; wherein they fight with their own
Shadow: where we leave them; and proceed to the other Particulars. They tell
us, That the Command to Anoint the Sick with Oil carries a Repeal in its
Bosom; so, we say, does John's Baptism with Water, as preparing the Way to
Christ; who is now come. And so we may return them their Axiom, Cessante fine
legis, cessat and obligatio. But that Anointing with Oil was only in order to
Miraculous Cures, they say it, without giving any Proof, Ja. 5.14. For although
it were confessed, that it were in order to outward Healing or Curing; yet it
is clear from the Text, that it was not Exclusive of all other things; for it
is not only promised, That he shall be saved; but if he have Committed sins,
they shall be forgiven him. And this saving seems rather to be Spiritual, than
the restoring the Body to Natural Health; otherwise it being absolutely
promised, Anointing with Oil was rather a Spiritual Saving than a Restoring the
Body.
all Sick Persons in the Church should have been always restored to Natural
Health, and so none should have died. And we find Anointing with Oil joined
with Prayer, yea, We are bidden, pray one for another, that we may be healed.
Nor is this Ceased; but that by the Prayers of the Godly for one that is sick,
and bodily diseased, it pleases God at times so to answer them, that they are
Restored to Health by the Lord: and we dare our Adversaries, if they will deny
this altogether; and this is in a true sense Miraculous. Yea, Instances of this
kind have been even among the People called Quakers: and if it were altogether
Ceased, according to the Students Argument; Prayer (at least, so as to pray to
God to heal any Sick Person) should Cease also: It is better therefore to say,
That Anointing with Oil is ceased, as being but a Figure. Abstaining from
Blood, and things strangled, the Ceremonial Law, ceased.
Their Repeal of the Command to abstain from Blood and things strangled, is not
sufficiently proved from 1 Cor. 10.25. For let any read the whole Chapter, and
he shall find nothing said in it of Blood, or things strangled: That was not
the Subject, he was upon; but things offered to Idols, which we read not, that
they used to strangle. The Sense is plain, Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles
(whether offered to Idols, or not) that eat; asking no Question, if it be
offered to an Idol, or not. Beside it is not usual to sell Flesh of Beasts
strangled, in the Shambles; for they kill them otherwise, than by strangling,
which is hurtful to the Meat: and if selling of strangled Flesh had been
usual, it would have been no Transgressing the Apostle's Rule, if they had any
Doubt, to have asked, If it was strangled: For many will not eat Flesh that is
strangled, because it is not so good Nourishment; although they have no Scruple
of Conscience. Yea, the Primitive Christians even in Tertullian's time, (as he
shows in his Apology) Abstained from Blood and things strangled; Wherein
there was a great Providence of God to clear them of that horrid Falsehood, as
if they did drink the Blood of Children. By which it is clear, they did not
understand Paul's Words 1 Cor. 10.25. to be any Repeal: It is therefore more
safe to say, that it being a part of the Ceremonial Law, it is Repealed with
the other Figures.

The Words of John, He must increase, but I must decrease, The Decrease of
John's and Increase of Christ's Baptism.
Joh. 3.30. they will not have to be understood of John's Baptism; wherein they
are not only contrary to many of their own Church, (as could be shown) but also
to the Scripture it self. For it is most clear, That John spoke this with a
particular Relation to his Baptism: When they came to him, and told him, That
Christ Baptized, etc. On this he said, That Christ was to Increase, meaning
Christ's Baptism, not with Water, but with the Holy Ghost (for Christ baptized
none with Water himself) and he, that is, his Baptism must Decrease, not his
true Honor and Virtue: And the Disciples he gathered, was unto Christ. But
that John's Baptism was much practiced, proves it no more a standing Command,
than other things of the Law.

In the last Place they allege, That Peter commanded Cornelius and others with
him to be baptized, Peter's Commanding Cornelius (and them) to be Baptized,
answered.
out of a necessity arising from a Divine Precept: But their Proofs are weak.
For 1. We ought to do all things in the Name of the Lord, when we eat, or
drink, or journey: but yet all things are not Commanded; but some left to our
Freedom. 2. Peter in his Sermon told Cornelius nothing of Water Baptism; and
when after he spoke of it, he did not tell him, That he ought to do it out of a
necessity arising from a Divine Precept: let them prove it, if they can. 3.
Whereas they allege, That Peter was accused by the Disciples for administering
Water Baptism to Cornelius, from Acts 11. It is a manifest Untruth: for there
is no such thing either in their Accusation, or his Answer; as may be seen, if
any will read the Chapter: They accused him for going in to them, and eating
with them; and this was all the Accusation: And though they had, the Students
Consequence does not follow; for if the Law of Charity obliged him to Baptize
them, his Refusal would have been a withstanding of God.

SECTION VII. Of the MINISTRY.
Being an Answer to their Fifth Section, Concerning the MINISTRY.

IN the first part of their Section they plead, That a Man, who is an Hypocrite
and graceless, may be a true and lawful Pastor; yet they grant, That none ought
to be admitted into the Ministry, but such as ex judicio charitatis, id est,
out of the Judgment of Charity is to be esteemed truly pious: By which
Acknowledgment they destroy with their own Hands any seeming Strength, that
lies in their own Arguments; as will appear by a particular Examination of
them. Their First Reason is taken from Many Jewish Priests and Highpriests,
and many Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's time, who were Ministers of God's
Word; and yet who will say, they were endued with sanctifying Grace? To which
we answer: That they were Ministers of God's Word, Ministers of the Gospel, and
of the Law and Shadows differ.
or of the Gospel, is denied; for they were but Ministers of the Law, and legal
Performances, Types, Figures and Shadows: and as that Legal Dispensation was
but Imperfect in Respect of the Gospel, so the Priesthood and Ministry of it;
therefore both were to pass away. So that to argue from the Law to the Gospel,
is not Equal, more than to Argue, that because the Ministers of the Law were
Ministers of the Figures and Types, that therefore the Ministers of the Gospel
should be the same; yea, we may draw an Argument from the outward and Legal
Qualifications of the Priests, that none but truly Holy should, or ought to be
Ministers under the Gospel. For as under the Law none were to be Priests, but
those, who came of Levi, a Figure of Christ; Levi a Figure of Christ.
so under the Gospel none are to be Ministers, but who by a Spiritural Birth
and Nativity are of Christ. And as under the Law, none that were Lame, and
blind Corporally, were to be Legal Ministers; The Lame and Blind no Legal
Ministers.
so under the Gospel none that are Lame and Blind Spiritually, are to be
Gospel Ministers: But all, that want true Holiness, are Lame and Blind
Spiritually; Therefore, etc. Again, many of these Jewish Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees were openly and manifestly Impious, especially in the time of Christ
his being in the Flesh, and could not be esteemed truly Pious in the Judgment
of Charity; and so if the Argument hold, it proves, that Men may be admitted
and owned to be Ministers of the Gospel, that are not Pious in the Judgment of
Charity. The Students plead for a Graceless Ministry.
The like may be said of Judas, whom they take in their Second Argument to
patronize a Graceless Ministry. For if Judas was a Devil from the beginning,
certainly, Christ did know him to be so; and therefore could not in the
Judgment of Charity esteem him to be truly Pious: how could he then Admit him?
But as for Judas, they allege indeed, That he was a Devil from the Beginning;
but they have not proved it: It is said expressly of him, That he fell from his
Ministry by Transgression; we read not, that he was Degraded his Office any
other way, but simply by his Transgression, which was his betraying Christ.
Again, it is written of him, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man
dwell therein; and his Bishopric let another take, Psalm. 109. But they, who
plead for a Graceless Minister, would put another in Judas Habitation; and so
would hold up a Ministry of Covetous Men, as he was, who to satisfy their
Covetousness, will betray Christ. For suppose, that a Man have all other
Qualifications requisite, Holiness requisite in a Preacher.
and yet be openly and notoriously a Wicked Man; he may plead his Right to be
Admitted; and if Admitted, to be Continued to be a Minister: What Ground have
his Brethren out of Scripture to depose him, according to the Students Argument
(which is indeed the General Argument of the Clergy (as they are called) seeing
he has all the Essentials of a Minister? If they say, Paul requires, That a
Bishop or Deacon be found Blameless, not covetous, but vigilant, sober, etc.
then it will follow as much, that he, that is not really Pious, ought not to be
Admitted; as he, that is not seemingly Pious: For the Apostle does not say, he
must be seemingly so; but simply, that he must be so. And indeed, to expound
all these Qualifications of a seeming, and no real Holiness, is to mock the
Scripture: For they might as well say, that seeming Holiness only, and not real
is required indispensably of us in Order to Salvation; for the Scripture as
positively requires Holiness unto the Function of a Bishop, as it does require
it unto Salvation. There is yet another thing, which they have to prove
concerning Judas, viz. that Christ sent him to preach the Gospel. He sent him
indeed to work Miracles, heal the Sick, and to say, The Kingdom of God is at
hand, that is to say, the Gospel Dispensation is approaching; but that Judas
was a Minister of the Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation, we
require them to prove: For it was after his Removal, that Christ sent the
Apostles to preach the Gospel.

Their third Reason is, That the Efficay of the words depends not upon the
worthiness of the Preachers, The Efficacy of the Word preached.
1 Cor. 3.7. We grant the Antecedent, but deny the Consequence. For although it
depend not upon the Worthiness of the Preacher, yet it may and does require
Holiness, as a Qualification indispensably necessary in him: even as they grant
themselves, that none are Justified without Faith; yet they deny, that the
Efficacy of Justification depends upon the Worthiness of him, that believes.
And the Efficacy of good Wine depends not upon the Worthiness of the Vessel,
that bears it; yet none will put good Wine in a leaky Vessel, or unfit: And
indeed, as Unfit as a leaky, Unclean Vessel is to receive good Wine; a
Graceless Man is as Unfit to receive the Dispensation of the Gospel, which is
compared to New Wine in the Scripture. And, said Christ, No Man puts new
Wine into old Bottles: for indeed, the Ministration of the Gospel is a
Ministration of Life and Grace, and none can Minister that, which they have not.

Their Fourth Argument depends upon a Proposition, which they lay down, and
offer to prove; but fall short in, viz. That they cannot know, who have true
Grace: This we deny. For if they would believe in the Light, wherewith Christ
has enlightened them, they should receive the Anointing; and by it their Eyes
should be opened to know, who are Gracious, and who not.

But let us see, how they prove it; 1. Say they, We cannot know it Immediately;
That is granted. 2. Nor can we know it by their Outward Works, unless it be out
of the judgment of Charity, which may deceive us; for all the works, which a
Godly Man can do, may likewise be performed as to the outward, The Fruits of
the Spirit are a Savor of Life, which Hypocrites have not.
by Hypocrites. To this we Answer; If by Outward Works they mean such, as come
under the outward Observation of the mere outward and bodily Senses, we grant;
but there are Works, which are the Fruits of the Spirit, which, although they
remain in the Souls of Holy men, yet send forth a savor of that Life and
Spirit, or Spiritual Principle, that is the Root of them, through the outward
Works and Conversation, which can and do reach unto the Spiritual Senses of
others, where they are. And this Savor and Manifestation of Life can no
Hypocrite have; but it is an Infallible Evidence of Sanctification in measure,
where it is: and where the Sanctification is greatest, the Savor or
Manifestation of Life is there greatest also. According unto this Paul said, 2
Cor. 2, 15, 16. c. 3.3.
We are a good Savor, etc. and Paul said of the Corinthians, That they were
the Epistle of Christ: John said of the Saints, That the Name of God, and of
the Lamb shall be in their Foreheads. Many other Testimonies could be brought
to prove this; we shall only add that of Christ, He that believes in me, out
of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water. So here is an Evidence, that no
Hypocrite can have. Now what are these Rivers, but the Influences of the
Spirit? And seeing, they are said to flow out, they may be discerned by others.
It is true, the Natural Senses cannot discern them; but the Spiritual Senses
can: and seeing, Natural and Spiritual Senses discerning their proper Objects.
the Students grant Spiritual Senses, if they grant them to be True and Real,
they must grant also Spiritual Sensible Objects; which may be as certainly
apprehended and discerned by our Spiritual Senses, although the Objects
themselves be without us, as natural Objects without us may be apprehended by
the Natural Senses.

3. Nor can we know it, say they, by Revelation. But how prove they it? They
only suppose they have proved already, that there is no such thing; but how
VVeak and Impertinent their Proofs are, is above showed. But here note, that by
Revelation is sufficiently understood the Revelation or Discovery, which the
Fruits of the Spirit, or Spiritual Life give forth in Holy men one to another:
for as the Savor of some Sweet Ointment is a sufficient Revelation of it to
the Sense of the natural Smell; so the Spiritual Savor of the Spiritual
Ointment is such to the Spiritual Smell.

Lastly, Whereas they say, The Gift of discerning Spirits was never Common to
all. This we deny; nor does that Scripture cited by them prove it, 1 Cor.
12.10. Otherwise they might as well say, The Discerning of Spirits is Common to
all true Christians.
That Faith was not Common to all true Christians, because it is said, To
another, Faith. But as by [ Faith] here must be understood some Extraordinary
Degree of Faith, or the Faith of Miracles; so the Discerning must be some
Extraordinary Degree, or as in Relation to Miracles: seeing, there were Spirits
of Devils, that wrought false Miracles. And such a Discerning as to that, we do
not plead for, as Common to all; but that a Discerning of Spirits, so far as to
discern betwixt them, who were Godly and Wicked, and who were Ministers of the
Spirit, and who not, was Common to all, we prove. Because it is promised as a
General Privilege, Mal. 3.18. Then shall ye return, and Discern between the
righteous and the wicked, etc. again, all are commanded To Try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1. Therefore all have a measure of Discerning, whereby to try them;
otherwise they were required to do an Impossible thing, which is Absurd. If it
be said, He gives a Rule, whereby to try them, viz. Every Spirit, that
confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God, ver. 2. To this
we answer. The Rule is one thing, the Discerning is another; and differ, as the
Object, and the Eye. Now, the Eye is as much required to see, as the Object;
Therefore all need a Spiritual Eye, to apply the Rule in a suitable manner, The
Spiritual Eye sees and discerns the true Confessor from the false.
so as to know, who do truly confess Christ come in the Flesh. For John cannot
mean a bare Verbal Confession, because Antichrist himself may have that;
therefore he means a True living Confession in Life and Power, which no
Hypocrite can have.

Having thus answered all their Arguments, we shall conclude this Particular
with one Argument against them; one part of which is their own Confession.

They who can be certainly known and discerned to be Impious and Unholy, ought
not to be admitted into the Ministry. But

Impious and Unholy men can be certainly known to be Impious and Unholy;

Therefore they ought not, etc.

The first Proposition is proved, and sufficiently confirmed from their own
Confession, That None ought to be Admitted, but who in the judgment of Charity
are to be esteemed truly Pious; Therefore they, who cannot be so Esteemed,
ought not to be Admitted. But if they be certainly known to be Impious, they
cannot be so Esteemed; therefore, etc. The Assumption is proved above, partly
by Arguments, and partly by the Refutation of what they have said against it.

Divine Inspiration.
In the Second Part they Dispute Against an Immediate, Enthusiastic Call (as
they call it) by way of Inspiration, being necessary, and for the necessity of
a Mediate and Outward Call. And because we plead for the blessed Inspiration of
the Spirit of God, they call us Enthusiastical Impostors; and if the Apostles
themselves and Primitive Christians were now living, they would give them the
same Name: For we plead for no other Inspiration, but that which was given unto
those Holy men. But seeing, they use the word Enthusiasm so much in a way of
Reproach; it is fit, that it be opened. Let them tell us then, if they mean any
other thing by it, than true Divine Inspiration? If they mean another, it
concerns us not; ( Enthusiasm, its proper Signification.)
for we plead for no other. But if they mean that (as the word properly
signifies, being derived from a word, that signifies, God within, as the best
Greek Dictionaries show) they should not Reproach us with that, which was the
Glory of the Primitive Christians, and by which the Scriptures were writ, to
wit, Divine Inspiration. And here they tell us of an Inward Call, which
consists in the Disposition of the Soul; but they will not have it to be an
Inspiration: But if by this Disposition they mean any spiritual or supernatural
Gift, they must needs acknowledge, that it is an Inspiration; at least in the
general sense. For how can it be Spiritual, unless it be Inspired? Is not every
good thing, that is spiritually good, from the Spirit? Surely, the National
Confession of Faith published in Knox's time, does expressly say, That Faith is
the Inspiration of God. But if they say, they deny not Subjective, but
Objective Inspiration; we put them to prove this unnatural Division and
Separation: As if there were Inspiration in Men's Souls, that is not Objective;
which we altogether deny. But as to this Inward Call, The Call of Ministers.
we ask them, If it has not in it the Nature of a Command, so that he, who
has it, is bound to obey it? If they say, Not; Then a man may lawfully Disobey
it, and Resist it, although it be of God: If they say, It is a Command; then it
is Objective: for it is the nature of all real and true Commands to be
Objective. Again; If by Disposition they mean the mere Qualification, that
enables a Man to be a Preacher, how can that be a Call? Seeing a Man may be fit
or able for an Office, that has not a Call thereunto, being already in another
Office, that he is fit for also. So that they bewray gross Ignorance, in
confounding the Ability, and the Gall, which are distinct things. And here they
require of us to prove our Immediate Call by Miracles, or any extraordinary
thing, which can only be from God; and so cannot agree to false Teachers. And
it having been told them by R. B. that the Papists made the same Objection
against the first Reformers, they call this an Impertinent Prattling; but for
all the disparity they show, the Impertinent Prattling falls upon themselves.
They confess, The first Reformers had an extraordinary Call in respect of their
Heroic Gifts; First Reformer's Call.
yet they also had a mediate Call: They owned the holy Scriptures for their
principal Rule, and Preached no other Gospel, etc. To this we answer, that all
of them had a mediate Call, is a mere Alledgance without any proof; yea, the
History of the Reformation shows the Contrary. Again, it is abundantly
Evident out of their own Writings, that the most Eminent of them did lay no
weight upon that Outward Call, which some of them had from the Popish Church;
but did plead, that seeing the Visible Succession of the Church and Ministry
was interrupted by the Apostasy, that they needed no Outward Call, but did
betake themselves to the Extraordinary: Sadeel de Voc. Min.
See for this Sadeel de Legit. Vocatione Ministrorum; and when they used any
Argument of a Mediate Call, it was but by way of Arg. ad Hominem: As now, if
any of us called Quakers had ever had the Mediate Call from the National
Churches; as some in England indeed had, namely S. F. who was a Parish Priest.
Nor will it prove, that the first Reformers had an Extraordinary Call, because
they owned the Scriptures as their principal Rule, and preached no other
Gospel; otherwise all the National Preachers now would have an Extraordinary
Call, because they pretend to own the Scriptures, as their principal Rule, and
to preach no other Gospel. Yea, The Scriptures an External Rule.
we own the Scriptures as much, as the first Reformers did; and we do
acknowledge them, that they are the Principal External Rule, and to be
preferred to all other outward Writings and Testimonies: but we cannot prefer
them to the Inward Testimony and Word of God in our hearts, as neither did the
most Eminent of these, called Reformers; but indeed preferred the Inward
Testimony and Word to the Outward: as is proved in the Book called Quakerism no
Popery. Now, whatever Proof or Evidence the first Reformers could give of
their Extraordinary Call, the Quakers can give the same: That which they mainly
insisted on, was the Soundness of their Doctrine, accompanied with the Holiness
of their Life, and good Effect of their Ministry, whereby Souls were Converted
unto God, as Sadeel in the Treatise abovementioned de Legit. Voc. Min. shows
at length. And let our Adversaries disprove this Evidence, if they can; which
we say is as good an Evidence to us, as it was to them: and though false
Teachers may pretend unto the same; yet it can be proved, that it does not
justly belong unto them. As for Popery and Mahometanism, it can be proved,
Popery and Mahometanism not ours.
that they are Contrary to Scripture; but our Adversaries have not proved, nor
can, that our Doctrine is so: and we are most willing to bring the matter to
this Issue; we doubt not, but to give better and stronger Evidences from
Scripture and Reason to Convince Gainsayers in a Rational Way, than our
Adversaries can. But that we make the Efficacy of our Doctrine (taken precisely
by it self, and without being accompanied with the Soundness of it, etc. an
Evidence of our Call, is a mere Calumny of the Students.

Now let us see, what they have to say for Their Outward and Mediate Call. The
Students derive their Mediate Call and Ordination from Rome.
They cite diverse Scriptures to prove, that the Apostles Ordained Elders; but
does this prove, that their Ordination, which they derive from the Apostate
Church of Rome, is a true Ordination, and necessary? Yea, it is clear, and
confessed by the most judicious Protestants, that true and lawful Ordination
and Succession has not continued in the Church, since the Apostles days; but
has suffered an Interruption by the general Apostasy, that as a Flood
overflowed the Earth: and that although God still preserved a Church, yet she
had not a Visible Outward Succession; because she was not Visible all along her
self: and before our Adversaries can make the half of their Argument good, they
must prove, that not only a True Church has continued ever since the Apostles
days; but that she has been Visible, having a true Visible Succession of
Visible Teachers, who were good and faithful Men all along to Convey it down to
this day. But to infer, that Ordination has Continued, because of the Command
(if the Command has been Universal) does not follow; seeing many things
Commanded may be Unpracticed through Unfaithfulness to the Command. Now it is
certain, that generally the Visibly Ordained Bishops have not been faithful Men
for many hundred years, and so kept not to the Substance of that True
Ordination, that was in the Apostles times; but lost it through Unfaithfulness,
and set up a Shadow in its Room: the like may be said of other things. And the
Ordination being once lost, it cannot be recovered again from a mere
Scripture-Command; otherwise all may pretend to a power to Ordain: For the
Scripture does not Command one more than another. Ordination and laying on of
Hands.
Yea, we find no general Command in Scripture for Ordination, only that it was
practiced, which we deny not; and with it there was a spiritual Gift of the
holy Ghost conveyed: Which was the main and only thing, that made the
Ordination and laying on of Hands Effectual; and without which it is but a
Shadow. As may be seen at this day in the National Church: for who among them
dare say, that they either Give or Receive that Spiritual Gift of the Holy
Ghost, which was then Given and Received therewith? 1 Timothy 4.14.

Their second Argument is from Heb. 6.1, 2. whereby they would infer, that
laying on of Hands is a part of the Foundation of Christianity; but that
Scripture says no such thing. For the Doctrine of Baptisms, and laying on of
Hands relates to the third ver. as a thing that the Apostle intended to open;
and this (said he) will we do, if God permit; whereas he had laid the
Foundation already: Therefore the Doctrine of the Laying on of Hands belongs
not to the Foundation; but to the Superstructure. But however it does not
follow, that Laying on of Hands it self is a thing to continue: For he speaks
of it but as of a Doctrine, as that of Baptisms, which we confess does
Continue; as the Doctrine of the Figures, Types, Ceremonies and Sacrifices does
Continue to this Day: and the Apostle opened them largly in that Epistle; yet
the Figures themselves were not to Continue. Besides, how do they prove, that
this laying on of Hands is Ordination, and not that used in Confirmation? Here
they miserably stick; only they allege, it is Ceased among many, and is not so
necessary: But how prove they, that it is not as Necessary? Show us, where it
is Repealed more than the other; seeing, it was as generally practiced, yea,
and more; for many received it, that were not Preachers nor Elders?

In the last place they plead, That Preachers should have a Maintenance; which
we deny not if they need it: The Preachers Maintenance,
But may not Men be Preachers, who need no Supply from others? But many have,
wherewith to be Hospitable unto others, without taking, far less forcing others
to give them. The Maintenance then, that we are against, is 1. A Superfluous
and Unnecessary Maintenance; 2. A Forced Maintenance; 3. Such a Maintenance, as
Preachers-Agree with, and Contract for; 4. A Taking it from them, who are not
worthy; 5. A Taking it from them, who do not acknowledge them to be true
Preachers. Now, none of all the Scriptures or Reasons brought by them prove any
such Maintenance; nor do we read, that ever the Apostles Received it: Or that
they Received any Tithes; which was the Maintenance of the Law, and not of the
Gospel. And that the People ought to Contract with Preachers, will not follow,
because they are bound in Charity to supply their Wants. For we are bound in
Charity to supply the Wants of the Poor, according to our Ability; yet it does
not follow, that we are to Contract with them, or that they can Force it from
us. As for the Words of Christ, Freely Give: As they Import, Freely Give.
that they were not to make Sale of the Gospel; so also, that they were not to
Force or Compel Men to Give them any thing, as a Recompense for Preaching the
same: For how can we Give freely that, which we Force others to Recompense us
for? And here they cry out upon the Quakers, as a Sacrilegious Crew, for
denying such Unlawful Maintenance, as the Priests generally have. It seems, the
Young Men are greatly concerned; they love so well the Wages of
Unrighteousness; for against no other thing do we Contend. Again they allege,
That we belly them, in saying, They think, Priests sell the Gospel.
that the Preaching of the Gospel can be sold for any earthly Wages: The Reason
they give is weak. For although there is a vast Disproportion and Inequality in
Worth betwixt the same; yet a thing may be sold for less than the Worth of it;
yea, when the Worth is infinitely Greater. For did not Judas sell Christ for
thirty Pieces of Silver? Judas-like.
And do not they plead, That Greedy and Covetous Men ought to be Received and
Paid, until Divested? And are not such guilty of Simony, and selling of
Preaching? Which they confess themselves: Therefore the Quakers in this do not
Belie them. Yea, do they not well know, that it is a most Ordinary thing in
Young Men, (and it is well, if some of these be not Guilty of the same) to go
unto Patrons, and offer them Money for Presentations unto Parish Churches? than
which we know no greater Simony used in the Church of Rome? And as for the
Hospitality of Preachers, Guilty of Simony.
it is also required in Deacons, and all good Christians; will it therefore
follow, that all good Christians must have set Stipends? or if Christians are
to work with their Hands, Stipends.
that they may have, wherewith to be Hospitable; why may not Preachers also?
They cite Paul, telling, That he had Power to forbear Working: But they know,
That Paul was an Apostle, and claimed that Power not as an ordinary Preacher,
but as an Apostle, like unto the other Apostles: Mark these Words. For as
touching the Apostles, they had that Power, because of a more Universal Charge
incumbent upon them, than ordinary Pastors; so that they could not so attend to
Work with their Hands, as others could: Paul wrought with his Hands.
And yet even Paul wrought with his Hands; which is more, than any of the
National Teachers will do, to spare the Receiving from them, who are not Able.
And it is to be observed, how the National Teachers plead stoutly for their
forbearing of Working, from the Power of the Apostles; but when we tell them,
That the Apostles traveled from one Nation to another, and took great Pains to
plant the Gospel in many Places, and hazzarded their Lives to preach it among
the Heathens; they Answer, That is not required of them. So they would take the
Apostles to patronise them in forbearing Working, and taking Maintenance; but
not in being at such Pains and Jeopardies for the Gospel's sake, as the
Apostles, which is not equal. Also when we tell them, The Apostles preached by
Inspiration, and had an Immediate Call from Heaven; they tell us, that is
ceased now: But why tell they not, that the Power to forbear Working is ceased
also? Surely, the continuing of Inspirations, and Immediate Calls to the
Ministry seems a more needful thing, than their Stipends.

SECTION VIII. Of LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE.
Wherein the Students Sixth Section concerning the Civil Magistrate his Power
in punishing of Heretics, and also what they say in their Eighth Section
concerning the Tendency of Quakerism to Anarchy and Treason, and Denying the
Necessity of Christianity, is Considered and Answered.

AFter that the Studens have Labored what they can, to Overturn the Quakers,
Persecution, the Students last Refuge.
they betake them to PERSECVTION, as their Last Refuge; thinking, if they can
but prevail here, and get the Magistrates to Cut off the Quakers, as
Blasphemers and Traitors (for such they have designed them in their Title Page)
they will be eased of the Troublesome Task of Disputing any more with them. And
here, not to be unlike themselves, they begin with a Lie, saying, [ They had a
Dispute concerning this with the Quakers, the first of June 1675.] Whereas One
of them ( to wit J. L.) was not present; and the other Two proposed not one
Argument in that Matter: But what was spoken, was by Another; who being
earnestly desired by them to Concur in the Account of it with them, utterly
Refused; as judging, neither he, nor they could give a True Account of it; and
absolutely discharging to meddle with that in their Book. Which yet they are
not ashamed falsely to Ascribe to themselves, The Students declared Liars in
their Account of the Dispute.
which that Young Man upon sight of their Book from one of us, declared to be a
Lie; Asserting, what is above-written in this Matter, before several Witnesses
of their own Profession; particularly P. D. one of the Students Attestators.
And therefore since he judges himself (as he declared) Abused in this Affair
by them, as well as we; we shall not take notice of what passed at that time
betwixt him and us, (it being also his Desire*) but betake our selves to this
Theme, as it is now proposed and urged by the Students: wherein how miserably
they are pained, the very Stating of the Controversy shows; in which they have
given away their Cause.

1. They say, They speak only of Real Heresies* and not what others call so.

2. They say, They speak not of inward Acts and mere Exercises of the Mind,
because it belongs neither to Church, nor Magistrate, To Judge of hidden things.

To which we Answer. That since, the Students acknowledge, Their Church and
Magistrate cannot Infallibly discern Heresy, (they say) then ought not to judge
it.
that both their Church and Magistrate are liable to Error, yea, and that
neither of them is to be supposed Infallible, and therefore cannot certainly
and infallibly discern, what is Heresy; neither ought they to take upon them to
punish for Heresy. And that de facto Protestant Churches have thus Erred, their
Master, John Menzies and many of his Brethren can bear witness; who have cried
out against that for Error, Antichristianity and Heresy, (causing Men to be
grievously persecuted for it) which now they allow, as Christian and Orthodox.
But we shall improve this more hereafter; and now proceed to their Arguments.

1. They argue from Deuteronomy. 13.5. Exodus 22.20. Lev. 22. but the Question is,
Whether these Commands, given particularly to the Jews, belong to us? (for that
of Lev. 22. is only concerning the Priests and Levites touching the Holy
Things, with their Uncleanness upon them; and is wholly Impertinent to this
Purpose. Particular Commands given to the Jews whether now Obligatory upon us.
) For if these be Obligatory upon us; so will also many other: As that a Man
may immediately with his own Hand kill him, that has killed his Kinsman, unless
he get to the City of Refuge; seeing there is no particular Repeal of that,
more than of the former. Yea, and that of Deuteronomy. 5.9. says expressly, That the
brother, husband or father of him, that consents to serve other Gods, shall
kill him with his own Hand; which our Adversaries will not deny to be Murder.
And let them show us, where the one Part of this Command is Repealed, more than
the other? or how the one Part is Lawful for us, and the other Unlawful, seeing
both were Commanded and Lawful to the Jews? For their mere Assertions as to
this ( page 126.) are not to be regarded. They are offended, that Matthew. 5.29.
should be given for a Repeal of this; alleging, That belongs only to private
Persons, and not to Magistrates; else it should be unlawful for Magistrates to
punish Transgressors, etc. Answ. The Consequence will not hold. For we are not
speaking of things Civil, but of things Religious; though it may be lawful for
them To Resist Evil in the one, yet not in the other. But that Christian
Magistrates are here included, is easily proved. If this belong to all
Christians, then it belongs to all Magistrates, if they be Christians: for to
say, that a Christian, by becoming a Magistrate, is dispensed of these
Obligations he is particularly tied to, as a Christian: A Suffering for
Righteousness in Magistrates.
is most Absurd: Yea, if Christian Magistrates be bound to suffer for
Righteousness sake, then they are not to Resist Evil in Matters of Religion:
But the first is True; for how could they enjoy the Blessing of those, that
suffer for Righteousness-sake ( Matthew. 5.10, 11.) if they still Resisted? At
this rate none should suffer for Christ, who could by any means shun it by
killing those that make them suffer; and who would then be those that Suffer
Willingly? And it seems, according to the Students, if a Man be a Magistrate,
he ought not any more to suffer for Christ; which is as much as to say. That so
soon as a Man becomes a Magistrate, he ceases to be a Christian.

The great Noise they make of the Two Dispensations of the Gospel, Two
Dispensations of the Gospel.
mentioned by G. K. does but manifest their own Weakness and Folly. For
themselves will not deny, but that Wherever Faith in Jesus Christ is
professed, and he owned as the Savior, and Son of God, there is a Dispensation
of the Gospel; as in the Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian, yea (and in their Account)
in the Romish Church also: Yet will they not deny, but that Dispensation is
more Legal and Obscure, than that themselves are under; as having many
Ceremonies and Shadows not Necessary. And so here is a Twofold Dispensation
acknowledged by themselves; Seeing, they will not affirm, that the use of all
these Ceremonies is absolutely sinful in these Churches, who are not as yet
Convinced of it, though it should be unlawful for them to use them; And seeing,
the purest and most Excellent Dispensation of the Gospel is to be like unto
Christ, who Resisted not Evil, though he was powerful to do it; and that we are
bound to be like him; Then there is a Dispensation of the Gospel, in which Evil
is not to be Resisted. But further, if there be such a Dispensation of the
Gospel, as Men shall beat their Swords into Plough shears, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks, and not learn War any more; then there is a Dispensation,
in which Evil shall not be Resisted. The Consequence cannot be denied; the
Antecedent is the express Words of the Prophet Isaiah 2.4. Besides, this
Twofold Dispensation is proved out of Bishop Forbes of Aberdeen his Exposition
upon the Revelations, where he Affirms, That the two last Chapters of the
Revelation are understood of a Church upon Earth; in which Church it cannot be
supposed, that Evil should be Resisted by an Outward Sword.

Page 121. Magistrates are not to bear the Sword in vain.
They Argue from Romans 13. where the Magistrate is not to bear the Sword in
vain; Hence they conclude, They ought to Resist Evil: But this says nothing as
to Matters of Religion. They show as well their Malice, as Disingenuity here,
insinuating, we denied that Place to belong to Magistrates now* which we never
did, nor do: Only G. K. said, He would be glad to hear, how they could prove,
that it did belong to Magistrates now? And indeed, were we not otherwise
persuaded of it, their Arguments could not in Reason Convince us, which is;
That the Scripture is written for our Cause; and these Epistles are to be
received and obeyed by us: But they have overturned all these themselves (as is
above observed) where in their Answer to the Apostle's Rules about Women's
Praying and Prophesying with their Head covered, they suppose Rules given by
the Apostle in his Epistles of things, that not only are not pertaining to us,
but even Unlawful. And so unless they make us a Clear Distinction of these
Rules, and that by some Evident Demonstration; to Argue from our Duty to obey
these Commands, signifies nothing. But while they take up the Paper to prove
that, which they cannot say we ever denied, they most shamelesly omit our Chief
Answer to this; which could they have Replied unto, they would not have dropped
thus. And therefore we shall Return it upon them, that they may not forget it,
when they write next. That of the 13 Romans cannot be understood of the
Magistrates punishing Men for Matters of Conscience, because it being written
to the Church of Rome, to show them their Duty toward their present
Magistrate, which was Nero, Not to punish Men for Religious Matters; like Nero
that persecuting Emperor*
that Cruel and Persecuting Emperor: And then it would follow, That Nero had
had a lawful Power and Authority to punish even Christians for Errors in
Matters of Religion, though himself was a professed Infidel. And seeing, the
Magistrate is to Exert his Power according to his Knowledge; it would follow,
that Nero exercised a Lawful Power in causing to kill the Apostles, and
persecute the Christians: which will make that horrid Crime very slender, seeing
it was no more according to the Students, but the Exercising that Lawful
Authority, he had received from God, according to his Knowledge.

Page 122. They build an Airy Triumph upon their own Mistake, alleging; That
since their Magistrates are not under that pure Dispensation, it is lawful for
them to Resist Evil: And so that of Matthew. is not a Repeal to them. But they
have here either wilfully, But for Evil in Civil Matters.
or ignorantly forgotten the other Branch of the Distinction: For granting,
their Magistrates may (as we deny not) and that lawfully Resist Evil in Civil
Matters; yet not in Matters of Conscience: And this is that, which was
incumbent upon them to have proved. But it may be worth the Reader's Pains
specially to notice their Reasonings in this 122. p. in Answer to that
Objection given in by us from the Parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13. where the
Servants are expressly forbidden to pluck them up: Tares what they are.
Here they play fast and loose to purpose; and to facilitate their own Work,
make no difficulty to fasten Contradictions upon Christ himself. 1. They say,
It is clearly Repealed; because Murderers, Witches, Traitors are Tares, as
well as Heretics; and if the one were to be eximed Exempt, or Excepted.
, so would the other. Is not this the way to Argue against Christ, and to
charge Contradictions upon him, not upon us? Wherein they fasten an Absurdity
upon him, who gave this Command: or else they must acknowledge, that by these
Tares are to be understood some sort of Evildoers, with whom the Magistrates
are not to meddle. But since the Students say, This is Repealed; they must
Confess, it sometimes stood in Vigor, it being once Commanded; we would
willingly be informed then of them, (and they may remember it, when they write
next) How long this Command stood, and to whom it belonged, since it had its
Rise from Christ, and was none of the Old Covenant-Precepts? Or if it be one of
those useless Gospel-Commands they dream of, which it is unlawful for us to
Obey? But to go on, they say, That by the Tares is to be understood bemasked
Hypocrites; who being scarce discernable from the Wheat, are therefore not to
be meddled with. No Discerning, no Judging.
Very well then, where the Magistrate cannot discern Heresies, according to
themselves he is not to punish: And then what comes of that Authority, was
acknowledged Nero had, from Romans 13. who was as incapable to Discern Heretics,
as Hypocrites? And then seeing, as before is said, They are not to Judge of
hidden things; Experience has abundantly shown, how much the True Discerning
of Heresy is both Uncertain, and Difficult even to Protestant Magistrates, who
have called that Wheat to day, which they have called Tares to morrow: And
therefore ought (according to this Rule) to forbear meddling in such Matters.

Sundry Religions may live in Peace together.
Their Second Argument page 123. drawn from Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2.14. (which is
parallel with it) is before Answered. Afterward they go about to play the
Politicians, showing both here, and in the following page, How the Public
Peace is disturbed by suffering of sundry Religions: And this they reckon so
Certain, that they conclude, It is known by all, that are but indifferently
versed in Histories, etc. Now if this Conclusion hold True, it is Impossible
either for France, Germany, Holland or Zwitserland to be in Peace, without
either the Papists rise up, and Cut the Protestants Throats, or the Protestants
theirs: And who but such as the Students can be Ignorant, that after much
Bloodshed and Contention (who should Oppress and Destroy each other) they have
learned by sad Experience, That it is safest, and most conducible to the Peace,
and contributes most to the Public Benefit, Not to meddle with each others
Consciences; Notwithstanding that these pitiful Statesmen can prattle to the
Contrary: Who have shown themselves in this to be very indifferently versed in
History.

Civil Offenses require a Civil Censure; and Religious Offenses an
Ecclesiastic Censure.
But they proceed Affirming; That since the Magistrate is Keeper of both Tables,
to whom is entrusted not only the Care of Men's Bodies, but Souls; he ought to
punish not only for Evil, but also for Religious Offenses. If all this were
confessed, would it follow, that he were to punish Religious, as Civil Offenses
by a Civil Censure? Surely nay, no more than he must punish Civil Offenses by
an Ecclesiastic Censure. Now it remains for them to prove, That Offenses in
things purely Conscientious should among Christians be punished by the External
Sword? Which they have not as yet done. And let it be here Observed, that
notwithstanding all their Clamours for the Magistrates Privilege, and that the
Quakers detract from him; All the Power, Dignity and Honor they put upon him,
is, To be the Clergy's Burrow: For as they allow him not Authority to judge,
who are Heretics, and who not; So he must only serve to be their Executioner,
and persecute such, as they find prejudicial to their Interest. For though they
will have it to be lawful for Preachers (such as their Bishops) to be
Magistrates, as Chancellor, Councellor, Judge, etc. yet no Magistrate, nay the
King himself must take upon him to be a Preacher; though we could never see any
thing in all the New Testament making this Unlawful: yea, and David and Solomon
in the Old, who were not of the Tribe of Levi, were both Prophets and
Preachers, and Penmen of the Scripture. This Trick even the Protestant Clergy
have learned from their Father the Pope, Priests shut out the Magistrate from
meddling with their Function.
who showed the Clergy long ago the way to make themselves Princes and Judges,
but to be sure to shut out the Magistrate from meddling with their Function. So
it may be easily seen here, whether the Quakers or the Students be the greatest
Friends to the Magistrate. Lastly, They Conclude, that since those that broach
Heresy, do Evil, and that the Magistrate is the Executor of God's Wrath upon
him that does or acts outwardly Evil without any Restriction, etc. it is not
lawful for us to add a Restriction, where the Spirit of God has put none.

Who can but Admire the Impudency of these Students, which do that, which in
the following line they Affirm is unlawful, by adding [ Outwardly] which is a
Restriction! For the words in the Text are not [ Outwardly Evil] but Evil;
which being taken without any Restriction, Comprehends Inward as well as
Outward Acts of Evil. Seeing then, they put a Restriction, (though to their own
Self-Condemnation they Confess it to be Unlawful) which they are forced to do,
else Hypocrites would be Comprehended, whom they Confess to be Tares, that are
not to be meddled with; Tares.
We that judge it no wise Unlawful (because without other clear Texts be
Contradicted, there must be here a Restriction) may Restrict it to things Civil
and Moral, excluding matters of Worship and Difference in Opinion, for the
Reasons often beforementioned. Their third Argument wholly misses the matter,
which is, The Practice of many Princes even approved of God, in Coercing
Idolatries, etc. For since all the Examples they give, are of the Kings of
Judah and Israel under the Law, it no wise meets the present Controversy, which
is concerning the power of Christian Magistrates under the Gospel.

Lastly, they Argue, That the Prophets of the Old Testament have prophesied,
The Death of false Prophets.
that it should be the Office of Christian Magistrates to Coerce false
Prophets; for which they allege Deuteronomy. 18.20. He that shall speak in the name
of other Gods, shall die. Very well; he says not, shall be put to death in a
Judicial Way: It is said, The Soul that sins, shall die; it will not
therefore follow, that Every Soul that sins, shall be killed by the
Magistrate. But though it be understood of putting to death, it reaches not
the Case, we being under the Gospel, not under the Law; where also it was not
lawful so to do for different Opinions and Interpretations of the Law, but only
for Rejecting the true God and his Law, and introducing new and strange Gods.
Their other proof is from Zech. 13.1, 2, etc. where it is said, That the
Fathers and the Mothers of the false Prophets shall say unto them, Thou shall
not live, and thrust them through, when they prophesy: This is so far from
being taken literally, that the Students dare not take it so themselves; else
the Father and the Mother might do the business without troubling the
Magistrate. And afterward the Text speaks of those, Who were not to live, of
their having Wounds in their hands, and being alive; which shows, the
Understanding here is to be Spiritual. And seeing, the Students do not
understand it literally of the Persons, to whom the Text ascribes this
Coercing, and that there is not the least word of a Magistrate in the place;
for them to affirm, that it is not to be understood of the Magistrate, is but
miserably to Beg the Question. They begin their 8th. Sect. page 126. Affirming,
That Quakerism tends to Anarchy and Confusion, Quakers are not against
Magistracy.
and Treason, alleging, We would pull down the Magistrate, if we could; and
set up our own spiritual Magistrates: as John of Leyden, etc. For this
Malicious Insinuation they give no Reason, but such an one, as destroys it, to
wit, Our giving in [ Resist not evil; pluck not up the Tares] as Repeals of
some Laws in the Old Test. Now let Men of Reason judge, whether Treason be the
Tendency of these Men's Principles, that Affirm, Evil is not to be resisted? Or
how these can do Violence to the Magistrate without Contradicting their
Principles? And then it cannot be the Tendency of them. And whereas they
Conclude, saying, That Quakerism, as they Conceive, beyond all doubt tends to
Anarchy, Confusion of State and Treason; Their Conceptions are very false in
this matter: The Fraternity of the Students, Trumpeters of Wars and Confusions.
and we may upon far better Grounds Retort this upon the Students
Confraternity, the Clergy, who through their Ambition and Turbulency did from
the Pulpits blow the Trumpet of all the late Confusion and Treason in the Civil
Wars, and show themselves Exact Disciples of John of Leyden, acting his Pranks
upon the Stage of Great Britain; a Charge, they have not to lay to the Quakers.

Their next Effort is to prove, We deny the necessity of Professing
Christianity, because we believe those not bound to believe the History of
Christ, from whom God has necessarily withheld the knowledge of it: For they
Confess, That we believe those obliged to believe them, to whom they are
Revealed. But they must here also Act like themselves, in making that a
horrible Crime in us, which their own Chief Doctors Affirm; who being pressed
by the Arminians with this Argument, [That which every Man is bound to believe,
is true. But every Man is bound to believe, that Christ died for them;
Therefore it is true.] They deny the Minor, plainly Affirming, that those, that
have not heard of Christ, are not bound to believe, he died for them: so
according to the Students, themselves are guilty of denying the Necessity of
professing Christianity, as well as we. But further they say, We are guilty of
this, because we set up a new Christ in every Man, that is born, and grows up
unto a perfect, substantial Birth. Christ within is no new Christ.
As their first Charge in this matter hits at their own Doctors; so this second
is common with us to the Apostle Paul, (for the Students Dispute, like blind
Men striking at Random, that heed not, what they hit) seeing the Apostle calls
Christ within, of which we speak, the Hope of Glory, which is neither a New
Christ, nor yet another, than He, that died at Jerusalem; who did travel, that
he might be brought forth in the Galatians, and calls him, the New Man, born
in, and put on by others. So if in this the Apostle did not deny the outward
Sufferings of Christ, neither do we; unless the Students can show, how our
Doctrine differs from his, or Contradicts it: which they have not yet attempted
to do. As for that Question of J. Penington, How can outward Blood Cleanse? We
refer them to his own Book in Defense of that Expression, as quarrelled by J.
Hicks, called The Flesh and Blood of Christ: Of which there were diverse printed
Copies at Aberdeen, before the Students Book was put to the Press.

The CONCLUSION.
Wherein their Observations upon R. B. his Offer, and their last Section of the
Quakers Revilings (as they term them) are Examined.

IN the End of the Account of our Dispute I renewed an Offer to the Preachers
of Aberdeen, as being the Persons, we were principally concerned withal; giving
the Reasons therefore, and showing the good Effects, that might proceed
therefrom: as in the same Offer may be seen. At this the Students seem to have
gone Mad, and Fret and Fume, like Persons possessed, alleging, I betake my
self to Railing, as my last Refuge: But whether there be any Railing in that
Offer, is left to the Judicious Reader to Examine. The Students,
notwithstanding their Clamours, give not one Instance of it; but whether they
have any better Reason to Answer it withal, than Railing, let the Reader judge.
For upon this occasion page 127, 128. they call me Vain and Arrogant, The
Students Railing Expressions and Lies.
like a very Thraso; Ignorant and Foolish; one whose Weakness and Ignorance is
renowned; a bold Barker, but a soft Biter. These are the Modest Young men, that
profess to be against Railing; that say in their Preface, They have abstained
from personal Criminations, and have not rendered evil for evil. And with this
their unreasonable Railing they mix in a Company of Lies; as that Insinuation,
As if the Theses had been written by G. K. which is a false Calumny they are
dared to prove. Like unto which is what follows: That I provoked all Europe;
sought Dispute in diverse places from any, who would, without distinction; Upon
the Account of this Printed Provocation boasted and gloried, that I had got no
Dispute: which contain as many Lies almost as Words; for which they offer not
the least Proof. Afterward, as an Instance of my Cowardliness and vain
Boasting, they say; I with G. K. fled, and deserted a Dispute appointed betwixt
us and R. G. my Uncle, at the Cross of Elgin: Which is utterly false; neither
G. K. nor I ever spoke with R. G. about such a matter, nor made any Appointment
with him: Yea R. G. has under his Hand declared, that being by a Friend of his
desired, he refused to Debate with us in relation to these Theses; nor was
there any such Appointment ever made known to us. So the Reader may see,
whether these Credible Witnesses, that Attested their Account, be any better
here, than those Credible Informers, from whom they had this great Untruth. As
they proceed, they give themselves the Lie; for after many needless Words (of
which it is hard to make sense) they Conclude, That this late Engagement
(meaning the Dispute with themselves) is a fulfilling of the Offer in the End
of the English Theses: Notwithstanding they subscribed the Articles, whereof
the first expressly bears, That it is Abstract from it.

But first they say, The Ministers are not concerned to meet with the Quakers;
because the Report of the Victory is already gone upon their side, who are but
Young Men, and cannot do so well as their Ministers, who are more Learned, and
Grave: And yet a little after (that they may not omit here to give themselves
the Lie) they say, That such a Dispute would be a means to stumble the Weak,
harden the Fallen, and dishonor God, rather than the contrary. What Confusion
is here! They are but Young Men, and their Masters more Learned, Grave and
Able, their Dispute (if they be to be believed) has done good, Established many
Inclining to Quakerism: And yet their Ministers Disputing would be a mean to
stumble the Weak? etc. They conclude, that we are not to be sought after,
because we are Goats and Wolves, and not strayed Sheep: We could produce enough
under their Masters hands to Contradict this, if it were worth the pains. They
fill up the rest of the Sect with alleging, That public Disputes are against
the Law; upbraiding me as a Rebel, for offering one; alleging, that it is not
lawful for Protestants neither in the Turkish nor Popish Dominions to offer to
dispute against the public Religion authorized by the Magistrate; though they
may privately call it in question, and dissuade from it: Whereby they openly
condemn as Rebels the Apostles and Primitive Christians, The Students
Condemning the Apostles, etc.
yea, and the Primitive Protestants; as by many Instances both at home and
abroad could be shown. And whereas they say, We profess to oppose their
Religion, and not Papists: It is another Falsehood: for some of us of late years
have lost their Lives, and other^ deeply Suffered for opposing Popery at Rome
it self; a Task, the Students so long as they can sit at ease, and buy a
Benefice at home, will as unwillingly undertake, as another Dispute with the
Quakers.

They begin their last Section most Impudently, alleging; That they have past
by, as much as they could, personal Criminations: How great a Lie this is, the
Reader, by what is above said, will Observe. They are Angry, we should allege,
That their Masters had put Arguments into their Mouths; Though we can show them
of the Closest of them in Manuscripts sent by them to us. And to disprove this,
they say; They faithfully declare it to be Lies: But what Men of Faith they
are, is above shown: Let it be left to the Reader to judge, whether they be
more to be Trusted in saying, The Arguments they brought, were their own; than
when they say, They had a Dispute with the Quakers the 1. of June 1675. Though
one of them was altogether Absent; and the other two were but mere Hearers.
What Reason is there, they should be believed in saying, The Arguments they
used, were their own; though perhaps they only Repeated them? as when they
positively affirmed, That they disputed with us; though they were mere
Auditors? And to this they add another great Lie, saying; That the Quakers
affirmed in their Contra-Remonstrance, that this is G. M 's Work under their
Cover: Whereas the Words are; It is strange, that they (to wit the Students)
should Undertake so hastily, what he has been so long Advising; unless this be
his Work under their Cover! but a Supposition is not a positive Assertion: It
is not said, This is his Work, as the Students have perverted it; who are so
accustomed to Lie, that such kind of Perversions pass with them but for small
Escapes. They are offended W. M. should be called a Catechist; though the
Bishop their Ordinary is not pleased, he should have a higher Designation: and
themselves cannot deny it. And whereas they say, This is done exceeding
maliciously; for he officiated at the foresaid Place for a short Space, and
long before the publishing of their Pamphlet: They would do well to show,
wherein the Malice of this lies; and to examine, Whether he did not exercise
that Office longer, than he has done any since? But it is their Custom to speak
at Random.

They cry out against our saying, We were informed, Their Master complains to
the Bishop against the Quakers, etc.
that their Master had gone to the B. to desire him to Complain to the Council,
etc. Alleging, That though we say, we are Informed; yet they Insinuate, it is
a Lie of our making: Because it is usual for us, that are damnable Heretics,
to spread a false Report our selves, and then say; We heard it. Let them
Instance any Report (if they can) Raised up by us, for which we cannot give
them Authors of their own Religion; whereas the most part of their Reports
against us have no Authors, but our Enemies. But for Answer let them know, that
the same was told to R. B. by G. M. and J. S. two Chief Citizens of their own
Profession; the last of which Constrained him to stand upon the Street, until
he should Tell it him. And whereas they add, That if they would follow our
Footsteps, they could cast many horrid things in our Teeth. Answ. It is one
thing, To receive Information against a People, and report things as true,
spoken or written by their professed Enemies, as the Students do in their
Citations out of Clerk's Examples, Hicks and Faldo; and another, To Report
things spoken by Members of their own Church: who if they have belied them, let
them reckon that among themselves. Lastly, They accuse me, As having Impudently
Aspersed their Professor J. M. with Scurrilous Revilings, and Malicious
Calumnies; Of which, they are so Impudent, as not to give one Instance: and are
thereto dared, when they write next, to Name them; or Instance one Calumny or
Scurrilous Reviling, wherewith I asperse him; or else be accounted Impudent
Liars. Whereas they say, These Calumnies we borrowed from the spiteful Jesuits,
and like Vipers spouted them out: again they declare their Folly. The Jesuit
accused him of Treason, as the Students following his Example, do us; but so
not I, who only minded him, that seeing he, who says, The Scripture is his
Rule, has been deceived, in pretending the Scripture said that, which now he
confesses to be an Error: If the Spirit were to be rejected from being the
Rule, because Men pretending to it have been deceived; so should the Scripture
also. In which Instances if he or they dare say, I have Calumniated him; Let
them name Wherein? and I shall prove all I have Asserted in that Affair, and
that without Recurring to the Jesuit's Testimony; having my Information from
better Hands. And to Augment their Lies, they say; It tends to his Advantage to
be calumniated by such as the Quakers: They have not proved, that we have
Calumniated him. And we may justly Retort, That he may rather be Troubled and
Shamed, to find himself so fawningly Flattered and Commended by such as the
Students; like the Philosopher of Old, that was troubled, when spoken well of
by a Profligate Person.

Lastly, They go about to Apologize for the Long Time their Book has been a
coming out, because of their Difficulties at the Press: Which Difficulties were
not such as We meet with, to have their Papers surprised and stopped, as they
sought to do ours; but because they could not persuade a Printer to be so
foolish, as to print them without due Payment. But it is like, the Contriving
and Patching it together has been as great a Cause of Let; since when it was
out, and came from Edinburgh to Aberdeen, and after we had bought one Entire
Book at Edinburgh, they kept it up at Aberdeen several Weeks, Advising and
Consulting about it: And upon notice of some Gross Contradictions in it (which
we had Observed to some of their own Way) They caused the Printer there to
patch two Pages to it, to help them: By which they have but rendered their
Weakness more Obvious. For whereas to solve that gross Contradiction before
observed by us, of their making us speak in their Account one after another,
and yet saying; The Auditors can testify, That we are Liars, and never spoke
so, They say; Their meaning is not, that we did not speak one after another.
What means the Word never then? This Apology amounts to no more, but that the
Students intended not to Contradict themselves; and instead of Bettering
themselves by this Addition, they have given away their Cause. For whereas they
before make a great Clamor against G. K. for Asserting Permissive
Inspirations, as if it had been some great Absurdity; themselves here Affirm
the same thing, saying, The Apostle by these Words, [it is good for a man not
to touch a Woman] does not Command, but only Permit, ( he himself nevertheless
being Inspired by the Spirit of God so to do.) Is not this then a Permissive
Inspiration? So that these things will but make their Folly manifest, as also
their further Frivolous Apologies in that Additional Advertisement; which to
the truly Judicious does not Cover, but rather Discover their Weakness.

Seeing it may fall out, that this Tract may arrive at the Hands of many, who
perhaps may not see those Sheets, in which we have Disproved the Students
Calumnies and Lies in Matter of fact, as in Relation to the Dispute we had with
them; we thought fit here also to Insert the Certificate of four Students
present at the Dispute, and since come among us: Three of which were at that
time actual Students of Philosophy in the University; and the other had been in
the Class with one of the Disputants.

R. B.

WE Vnder-Subscribers, late Students of Philosophy in the University of
Aberdeen, being present at the Dispute, do faithfully declare, That the
Students have grossly belied the Quakers in their Account, making them speak
that which they spoke not; and also forging Arguments and Answers not mentioned
upon the Place. And though we had no Intention at that time to own the People
called Quakers; yet we dare not but declare, That their Answer and Behavior
had no small Influence upon us, to make us in love with their Way, and to
search after it more diligently: As also the Students Arguments and Lightness
did not a little tend to make us disgust them and their Principles. And albeit
that inward Peace and Satisfaction of Mind, which we enjoy in the Truth we now
profess with that Despised and Injured People, does make us bless the Day, in
which it pleased God to bring us among them; yet we are not a little Confirmed
in the Belief of this Reproached Testimony and Witnesses, that we find, the
strongest Arguments their Adversaries have against them, are Lies and
Calumnies. And this we Testify for the Truth, whom the Truth has taught not to
Lie.

R. S. I. A.


And I also declare, who (being a Student at that Time in the Old-Town-Colledg)
was present at the Dispute, and heard the same with Attention, that the
Students have grossly belied the Quakers in many things in their Account: And
although that since it has pleased God to join me unto that People, yet at
that Time I had no Mind to be of their Way: However, when I saw their Account,
I did approve it, as Ingenuous, as now also I do; and disapprove the Students,
as false in many things.

Alexander Seaton.

And I likewise (being a Student in the New-Town College) at that Time was
present at the Dispute, and do declare, that the Students Folly and Lightness
had no small Influence upon me, to search more narrowly into the Way of that
People: Which it pleased the Lord to bless unto me, so that the Eyes of my
Understanding came to be opened, and I came fully to be Convinced of the Truth
of their Principles and Way, to which now by the Mercy and Goodness of the Lord
I am joined; and do find, by comparing the two Accounts together, that the
Students have wronged the People called Quakers in diverse things, as the
Students Self-Contradictions do sufficiently show.

Alexander Paterson.

Universal Love CONSIDERED, And established upon its RIGHT FOUNDATION: Being a
Serious Enquiry how far CHARITY May and ought to be Extended toward Persons of
Different Judgments IN MATTERS of RELIGION: AND Whose Principles among the
several Sects of Christians do most Naturally lead to that due Moderation
Required.

Writ in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, for the removing of Stumbling Blocks
out of the Way of the Simple; By a Lover of the Souls of all Men,

ROBERT BARCLAY.

1 John iv.16. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God.

1 Jo. v.2. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments.

London, Printed for Tho. Northcott. 1691.

Universal Love, etc.
SECT. I. The INTRODUCTION.
Giving an Account of the Author's Experience in this Matter; with the Reasons
Moving him to Treat thereof.

ALbeit it were very desirable, Godliness from a tender Age, is the Happiness
of few.
that Man could from his very Tender Age upwards receive so Living an
Impression not only of the truest and surest Principles of the Doctrines of
Christ, but also of the Life and Power of Godliness, to leven the whole Mind
and Affections unto the pure and holy Nature of Jesus; yet seeing, that this
Happiness befalls to few (most of Men being by the prejudice of Education
either pre-possessed, or defiled with wrong Notions) or else those who come to
receive even at first a Right Impression in their Understandings, as to Opinion
or Principle, do either by the power of inward Corruption working upon their
Natural Complexions, or by other Temptations from without, oftentimes fall
exceeding short of this pure Life; the best way to Redeem the Time, and to
Repair that Loss is from the Experience we have had of the Evil, and the Memory
we retain of how far we have been wrong, to Confirm and Strengthen our selves
in the Good now Revealed and Embraced: which by the powerful working of God's
Infinite Goodness turning all to the Advantage of those, that love and follow
Him, makes the Ministry of such the more Effectual; as in the Example of Paul
and others was manifest.

It being then so, that the Condition of my Life hitherto (albeit I as yet am
but a Young Man) gives me Experience more, than perhaps to many others, to
Treat of this Subject; Therefore, finding a true Freedom and Liberty in my
Spirit, I have willingly undertaken (for the sake of some) to Write something
briefly, and yet I hope clearly thereof: that my Experience herein (if the Lord
will) by His Blessing may be made Useful to others.

My first Education from my Infancy up fell amongst the strictest Sort of
Calvinists, those of our Country being generally acknowledged to be the
Severest of that Sect, in the heat of Zeal surpassing not only Geneva (from
whence they derive their Pedigree) but all other the Reformed Churches abroad
(so called: The Author's Education and Experience.
) So that some of the French Protestants being upbraided with the Fruits of
this Zeal, as it appeared in Jo. Knox, Buchanan and others, do (besides what is
peculiar to their Principles of this kind) allege, the Super-abundance thereof
to proceed a fervido Scotorum Ingenio, i. e. from the violent Complexion of our
Countrymen. I had scarce got out of my Childhood, when I was by the
permission of Divine Providence Cast among the Company of Papists, and my
tender Years, and Immature Capacity not being able to Withstand and Resist the
Insinuations, that were used to Proselite me to that way, I became quickly
defiled with the Pollutions thereof; and Continued therein for a time, until it
pleased God through his rich Love and Mercy to Deliver me out of those Snares,
and to give me a clear Understanding of the Evil of that Way. In both these
Sects the Reader may easily Conceive, that I had abundant Occasion to receive
Impressions contrary to this Principle of Love herein Treated of; seeing the
Straitness of several of their Doctrines, as well as their Practice of
Persecution do abundantly declare, how Opposite they are to Universal Love: as
shall hereafter more at large be shown. And albeit the time it pleased God to
deliver me out of these Snares, I was so Young, that it may be presumed, my
Observations could be but Weak, and consequently my Experience Inconsiderable;
yet for as much as from my very Childhood I was very Ambitious of Knowledge,
and by a certain Felicity of Understanding (I think, I may say without Vanity)
successful beyond many of my Equals in Age (though my Observations at that time
were but Weak) yet since I have with more Leisure and Circumspection gathered
thence so much Experience, as I am Confident, will serve for a sufficient
Foundation to any Superstructure I shall build upon it in this Treatise.

The Time that Intervened betwixt my forsaking of the Church of Rome, and
Joining with those, with whom I stand now Engaged, I kept my self Free from
Joining with any Sort of People; though I took liberty to Hear several: His
Hearing several Sects.
And my Converse was most with those, that Inveigh much against Judging, and
such kind of Severity; seeming to Complain greatly for want of this Christian
Charity among all Sects. Which Latitude may perhaps be esteemed the other
Extreme opposite to the Preciseness of these other Sects; whereby I also
received an opportunity to know, what usually is pretended on that side
likewise; and thence can say somewhat Experimentally on that part also.

As for those I am now Joined to, and whom I justly esteem to be the true
Followers and Servants of Jesus Christ, People's Various Judgments of the
Quakers.
the World speaks diversely of them, as to this matter; some highly accusing
them of the Want of Charity, and quarrelling with them as such, who
peremptorily Condemn all but themselves: Others have a Contrary Conceit of
them; each according as they are Prejudicated and Informed: What may be truly
said in the Case, shall after appear. I my self have been diversely Censured in
this matter, being engaged in Controversy; which as they can be scarcely
handled without something of sharpness, so are seldom managed by any so
successfully, as not to bear the Censure of some or other in this respect.
Having then upon the whole matter observed, that this Want of Charity is that,
for the Want of which each Sect accuses the other, and yet are most averse to
see this Defect in themselves; and that some do accuse All Sects, as guilty of
this Crime; I have judged it meet to commit my Sense hereof to Writing,
according to the purpose signified in the Title aforementioned.

SECT. II.
The Nature of Christian Love and Charity demonstrated; the Consistency of True
Zeal therewith: It Is distinction from false Zeal.

THE Nature of Christian Love and Charity is fully and abundantly described in
the Holy Scriptures, The Nature of Christian Love and Charity.
where it is preferred before all other Virtues and Properties whatsoever; as
that which Comprehends in it all other Perfections, and is the Root and
Spring of them. For there can be no true Virtue, but that which proceeds from
Love; hence God himself is called Love, 1 Jo. 4.7. as being that, under which
all his Innumerable and Unutterable Perfections are Included. By this Love we
are Redeemed from the Corruption of our Nature, and have received the benefit
of a Mediator; Joh. 16. This is the Banner, wherewith God covers his
Children, Cant. 2.4. This is that, which Constrained our Lord Jesus Christ to
lay down his Life for us, Joh. 15.13. The Exercise of this is given by Christ,
as the principal Token of his Disciples, Joh. 13.35. It is numbered as the
first Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. It is called the fulfilling of the Law,
as that, wherein all Consists, Romans 13 10. For to love God above all things,
and our Neighbor as our selves, is the sum not only of the Law, but of the
Gospel also, 1 Cor. 13.13. Therefore the Apostle Paul gives to this Love or
Charity the Precedence before either Faith or Hope; The Excellency of Love and
Charity, and Necessity of pressing after it.
in which Chapter he does briefly, but very Emphatically describe it. For
having first shown, that the speaking with Tongues of Men and Angels, that the
gifts of Prophesying, Understanding and Knowledge, that the Faith, that even
could Remove Mountains, and the Giving of all to the Poor, yea, and the Body to
be burnt, is nothing without it; He proceeds to the Description of it thus:
Charity suffers long, is kind; Charity envieth not, Vaunteth not it self, is
not puffed up, dos not behave it self unseemly, seeking not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoiceth not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in
the Truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things, never fails; albeit other Gifts have: 1 Cor. 13. from
the first Verse. As by this the Excellency of Love is shown; so the Necessity
of pressing after it, and living in it will be readily acknowledged by all: but
seeing, the Sum of this Love, as well as the Perfection thereof consists in
Loving God above all; so whatever diverteth in any thing there from, is not to
be accounted Love, though the same Word be used to Express it, and that in the
Scripture it self; Self-Love.
such as the Love of Self, the Love of the World, the Love of any Creature.
Hence for the Attaining of the true and excellent Love, the Love of all these
other things is not only to be laid aside, and the Love of God preferred to
them; but they are to be hated, as Christ himself Phraseth it: He that hates
his Life, Jo. 12.25. Yea, he uses it so, as to speaking of hating Father and
Mother, Luke 14.26. Though when the Love to such is truly Subordinate to the
other, it is both Commended and Commanded.

The Testimony of the Love of God is to keep his Commandments.
The Testimony, which is required of our Really being in the Love of God, Christ
himself signifies to us: If you Love me, keep my Commandments: And as the
Beloved Disciple John said in the Case of Knowledge, showing us the Falsehood of
such, as pretend to know God, and yet do not so; saying: He that says, he knows
God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him; 1
Jo. 2.4. So may be also said: He that says, he loves God, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him; according as the same
Apostle says, 1 Jo. 5.3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his
Commandments. Hence it is apparent, that Love without Purity is but a False
Pretense; and that whatsoever hinders from the Practice of this Love of God, or
withdraws from the Obedience of the least of his Commands, is to be denied, and
no ways to be Entertained; as being either the Love of the Devil, the Love of
the World, or the Love of Self, and not the Love of the Father. And as from the
True Love of God (having taken Place both upon the Understanding and Will)
there arises a great Fervency and Desire of Mind, that it may be wholly United
with the Lord, and made Conformable unto his Will in all things; So from hence
arises also a certain Aversion from, Indignation of, and even Hatred, to
whatsoever is Contrary thereunto, or has a Tendency to lead from it, which is
commonly called Zeal. Which Zeal having a right Bottom and Foundation, The True
Zeal proceeds from the love of God.
and proceeding purely from the Love of God, is a great Virtue, greatly to be
commended and pressed after; and the Defect thereof is justly reproveable in a
Christian. That Zeal then, thus considered, is a thing Excellent, Pure and Holy
of it self, appears, in that it is ascribed to God himself, 2 Kings 19.13.
Where the Performance of the Blessed Evangelical Promises is to be performed by
the Zeal of the Lord (Isa. 19.17.) He is said to be Clothed with Zeal, as with
a Cloak; and 63.15. His Zeal is numbered with his Bowels and Mercies. Next David
Recommends himself to God, for that the Zeal of his house had eaten him up,
Psalm. 69.9. and 119.139. And Paul commends the Corinthians for their Zeal, 2
Cor. 7.11. 1 Cor. 14.12. And for this End has the Grace of God appeared unto
all, that there might be a People gathered Zealous of good Works, Tit. 2.14.
And as this is commended and recommended on the one hand; so is the contrary
thereof (to wit, Indifferency and Luke-warmness) reproved and rebuked, as a
thing displeasing to the Lord. Of many Instances whereof, that might be given,
that unto the Church of Laodicea may serve at present, Rev. 13.15, 16. Because
for a Remedy against this Evil she is Exhorted, verse. 19. To be Zealous and
Repent.

But as there is a True Zeal, so is there a False one; The False Zeal, its
Kinds and Degrees.
and it is not more needful to have the one, than it is to avoid the other. Now
as the True Zeal proceeds only from the pure Love of God, and single Regard
to his Honor and Glory; so the False Zeal proceeds from the Love of
something else, and the Regard to other things. And of this False Zeal there
are several Kinds, as well as Degrees: all of which, though they ought to be
shunned; yet some are far more hurtful and pernicious than others. The Worst
and Highest of these is, when as Men through the height of Pride, Lust,
Ambition or Envy show themselves Furious and Zealous to satisfy and fulfill
their Desires and Affections; 1. A Furious Cain 's Zeal.
This is the highest Zeal for Self: From this Zeal did Cain slay Abel; Ishmael
mocked Isaac, and Esau hated Jacob; Pharaoh Persecuted the Children of Israel;
Saul, David; and Jezabel the True Prophets of the Lord.

A Second Kind is, when as Men, that are not True and Faithful even to those
Principles of Religion they profess themselves to acknowledge as True, as being
Conscious to themselves, 2. A Wicked Persecutors Zeal.
and also publicly known to be such, as are Vicious and Profligate; yet do
violently Persecute and Oppress others, that differ from them; though they be
not only Equal to them, but even by their own Acknowledgment exceed them in
Temperance and Virtue: having nothing to charge them with, but that they Agree
not with them in Judgment and Practice in Matters of Religion. This apparently
is a False Zeal, and not of God; for if it proceeded from the true Love of God,
it would first Operate in themselves to the removing of all those Things, which
they acknowledge to be Contrary to this Love of God, before it exerted it self
toward others; seeing, as the Proverb is, Charity begins at home. And like
unto this was the Zeal of the Scribes and Pharisees, Scribes and Pharisees
Instanced.
who Persecuted Christ for a Breaker of the Law, which themselves did not
fulfill: As is also the Zeal both of the Papists and Protestants in their
Persecutions at this Day.

A Third Sort is of such, 3. A Blind Religious Zeal.
who do indeed walk strictly and closely to their own Principles, making
Conscience of their Way; but yet being Blinded in their Understanding, do
Persecute Truth, supposing it to be Error. Of this Number was Paul before his
Conversion, Being as to the Law Blameless, and Persecuting the Saints out of
Zeal, Act. 22.3. Gal. 1.14. And therefore in this Class he numbers his
Countrymen, saying, They have a Zeal for God, but not according to knowledge,
Romans 10.2. And perhaps among these such may be numbered, of whom Christ
speaks, saying to his Disciples; And when they kill you, they shall think to
do God good Service.

4. A Rash Self-willed Zeal.
A Fourth or Last Sort is, when as Men being truly enlightened in their
Understanding, but their Will, Heart and Affections not being thoroughly
leavened with the Love of God, do Condemn things justly Reproveable, but not
out of the pure Drawings of Divine Love; but even from a Mixture of Self in the
Forwardness of their own Will, as not suffering any to be Contrary unto them.

This is the most Innocent kind of Wrong Zeal; yet not so, but that it ought to
be watched against: And of these few that are guilty of it, it were fit, they
Waited to be Redeemed from it. But the pure, undefiled Zeal, that is acceptable
to God, is that, which proceeds not only from a pure and clear Understanding,
The Pure and Undefiled Zeal.
but also from a Renewed and Sanctified Will, which moves not of nor from Self,
but from and for the Lord.

SECT. III.
The Controversy Stated with Respect to the different Sorts of Christians; how
it is to be fetched from the Nature of their Principles, and not from the
Practice of Particular Persons.

True Christian Love the most excellent Virtue.
THe sum of what is said, is, That true Christian Love and Charity is the most
Excellent of Virtues, most needful to be sought after and attained; that it is
never joined, but with Purity, which it naturally leads to; and therefrom does
consequentially arise an Indignation and Zeal against Unrighteousness: which
True Zeal is justly Commendable, and really distinguishable from all false and
Ignorant Zeal.

For the more clear Stating of the Controversy in proceeding in this Matter,
these following Assertions relating thereto may be Proposed and Affirmed.

Assertions taken for granted by all sorts of Christians.
I. That whatsoever Love is Consistent with the pure Love of God, may be safely
exercised toward all sorts as well of Men, as Christians.

II. That whatsoever Love or Charity really conduces to the Salvation of their
Souls, and so far as they are capable thereof, may and ought to be showed
toward them.

III. That therefore the Good in all ought to be Commended, Encouraged and
Loved; and no true Good either denied, rejected or despised, because of any
Errors peculiar to respective Sects.

IV. That the Evil either in Opinion or Practice ought neither to be spared,
encouraged nor fomented under any Pretense of Love whatsoever.

These I shall not enlarge, nor yet offer to prove (studying to avoid
Prolixity) because I presume, they will be readily Granted and Assented to by
all: That then, which principally comes under Consideration, is to Consider and
Examine, Which of all the several sorts of Christians at this Day, do most
truly observe these Rules, and show forth most of the true Love and Zeal of God
in their Way and Principles, avoiding that; which is Contrary thereunto?

Wherein that I may proceed clearly, there are some things previous to be
warily and seriously weighed. As --

First; I. Unsettled Men Judging others, are more reprovable than those others*
When I speak of the Charity of the several sorts of Christians, I speak of
such as are settled in their respective Principles, as persuading themselves
certainly in the Truths and Soundness of them: so that their Love and Charity
is really to such, as they judge and believe are wrong. Seeming to have Charity
to all, and be afraid to judge them from an Vnsettledness in ones self, as not
knowing which is right, or which is wrong, is a Virtue of Necessity, and not of
Choice; and proceeds no ways from the Love of God, neither has any
Resemblance thereunto: For God loves and Compassionates Sinners, and such as
are out of the way, not as being Ignorant or Doubting, whether they be such;
but as really knowing them. It were indeed the Height of Madness and Folly for
these Unsettled, uncertain and straggling Souls to take the Liberty to Judge
others for being Wrong, while they profess, they know not yet, who is Right,
and who is Wrong; being only sure of this, that themselves are not come to
Rights: for they could not in so doing but be Self-condemned. Not but I
believe, that the Condition of such, if they be truly forbearing, and ready to
embrace the good, when seen by them, is both more Tolerable to others, and Safe
for themselves, than those, that are hardily Confident in a wrong Belief, from
thence forwardly Judging others. But this I mention for the sake of certain Men
of loose and uncertain Principles, who being really Conscious to themselves of
their own Vnsettledness, finding themselves at a Loss as concerning many of the
Controverted Principles of the Christian Religion, which is right, and which
wrong; and not finding a ready way to come to any certain Determination
therein, and being perhaps unwilling to undergo the Trouble and Difficulty of
such a Serious Search and Enquiry, as well as desirous to avoid these
troublesome Circumstances, or other Inconveniences, which may seem to them
necessarily to accompany their Imbodying themselves with any particular People
or Fellowship, and therefore find it more easy to satisfy and please
themselves with some general Notions of practical Truths commonly acknowledged
by all, and therefore Cover themselves by Condemning that Heat, Asperity and
severe Censuring, that is among the several sorts of Christians one toward
another, as not consistent with, nor suitable to that Love, which ought to be
in all Christians: Whereas poor Men! they mind not, how much they fall in this
Crime, and that in a degree far more Reprovable, than those they thus Accuse.
For --

First: Are not they found Guilty of the Want of this Christian Love and
Charity, 1. Different Opinions in Religion Censuring and Judging each other for
that they are found Guilty of themselves.
that do Judge and Condemn all those several sorts of Christians, as Defective
in this so principal and necessary a Christian Virtue; whereby they do
indirectly shut them out from being Christians or Disciples of Jesus? For if
they judged it an Error Inconsistent with Christian Love and Charity, to
Condemn or Accuse one another for difference in Opinion; why are they found
themselves so guilty of it? For since this Censuring and Condemning of one
another among the several sorts of Christians is practiced by them as their
Duty, and a necessary Consequence of their Doctrine, why should these Judge
them for it? If they say, They Condemn them for it, because they believe it to
be a wrong Principle; shall not others be allowed the like Liberty to Condemn
Principles they likewise believe to be Wrong? One of two then must of necessity
hold, Either that wrong Doctrines or Opinions may be justly Reproved, Confuted
and Condemned without Breach of Christian Love and Charity, and therefore the
so doing amongst the several sorts of Christians (upon their own respective
Principles in it self simply considered) not Evil or Reproveable, and therefore
these Men wrong in Judging it so; Or it is an Evil, and inconsistent with
Christian Love and Charity to Condemn any sort of Christians for their
Doctrines and Opinions: And if so, these Men fall foully in this Crime, that do
Accuse all others for this Judging of Principles* and yet themselves Judge them
for their Principles herein. And --

2. Unstable Judgments and Conscious to themselves.
Secondly: Their Envy in this is of an higher Degree by their own Sentence,
than those others thus Judged by them: because the others proceed upon a
certain Belief and firm Persuasion, that they are in the Right, and those they
Condemn, Wrong; and so proceed rationally Consequential to their own
Principles: But these Men, albeit they be Conscious to themselves, that they
are not come to a Determination of what is Right, and what Wrong, and remain
yet in doubt for want of a clear Understanding, what to Approve, and what to
Condemn; do nevertheless most irrationally (and inconsequentially to their own
Affirmations) Reprove, Censure and Condemn all others, as destitute of, or at
least defective in a Virtue and Quality so Necessary and Essential to all
Christian Societies. To whom therefore may be fitly applied the Saying of the
Patriarch Jacob to his Firstborn Ruben: Unstable as Water, thou shall not
Excel, Genesis 49.4. And that of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, Romans 2.11. As
also that other Saying of the same Apostle to the Galatians; For if I Build
again the things that I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor, Gal. 2.18.

II. A Religious Society is judged from its Principles, not from particular
persons Practices.
Secondly, To make a Judgment of the several Sorts of Christians, we must fetch
it not from the Practices of Particular Persons; but from their respective
Principles, by enquiring, how far they naturally lead to, or draw from this
Universal Love? Because that it cannot be denied, but that among all and every
sort of the several Sects of Christians, there are Men of diverse and sundry
Humors and Complexions, some more hot, violent and froward, who prosecute what
they judge Right, with great Zeal, Have and Fury; others of more Calm, Meek,
and Loving Dispositions, who though they be not less desirous to Advance their
Way, yet do it in a more Complacent, Affable and Deliberate Manner: Some there
are, that are naturally of a Careless, Indifferent Galli^- like Temper in such
things, and therefore behave more forbearingly and civilly toward such as
Dissent from them; not because of any Virtue, but because such things do not
much trouble or touch them. Neither then of these Virtues, as they are incident
to particular Persons, are so justly Chargable upon a Sect or People, as from
thence to make a positive Judgment of their Universal Charity or not, seeing,
these are not the Consequences of their Principles, or that which necessarily
comes from them, as relating to this or that Society; but the mere product of
their Natural and private Humors. How far any particular or singular Persons
among the several Sects have attained to the Performance of that true Love and
Zeal formerly described, I shall not determine; neither dos it necessarily
belong to this Question: For if any should be found to do any thing, which were
so far from being the Consequence of their Principles, as to be quite Contrary,
their Brethren would not suffer their Principles from thence to be
Dis-approved; so neither can the Excellency of any singular Persons, while not
proceeding upon their Principles, approve them as Justifiable in this respect.
As for Instance; where it is the Universal Principle and general Practice of a
Sect, to Persecute even to the utmost those that differ from them (as in the
Church of Rome) should there be found one or two, or a very few of a more
moderate Spirit, that should profess an Aversion from such sort of Severity,
and also practice it in their Station according to their Capacity, who would
ascribe this Moderation and Charity to the Church of Rome, would take his
Measure but badly. And on the other hand, where it is the Universal Principle
and general Practices of a People, not at all to Persecute for the Matter of
Conscience, should any private Persons of that Society be carried by their Fury
and Heat to the Practice of any such thing, though directly Contrary to their
Principles; who would charge this upon the whole People, and thence measure
them, would make also a bad Consequence. Nevertheless I shall not deny, but
some Principles are so pernicious, and so strait and narrow, that they seem by
a certain Malignity generally to Influence all their Followers, as shall after
be observed: But I shall now proceed to the forementioned Examination.

SECT. IV.
An Examination of the Principles of several sorts of the so called Christians
Compared with this Universal Love, and found Defective: As 1. Of Papists: 2. Of
Protestants in general: 3. Of Socinians.

Universal Love consists in --
AS there are two Ways Chiefly, whereby a People or Society do signify their
Charity or Love toward others, that differ from them; so by these two also is
signified their Contrary Principles and Practice.

1. A Charitable Judgment.
The first is by a favorable and Charitable Judgment of the Condition of Men's
Souls, albeit of different and contrary Principles from them, in supposing, or
at least not absolutely denying, but that they may even upon their own
Principles, if faithful thereto, obtain Peace with God, and Life Eternal.

2. A Friendly Deportment.
The Second is by a Friendly and Neighbourly Deportment toward Men's Persons, in
not seeking to ruin and destroy them, whether in Life, Liberty or Estate;
albeit their Judgment concerning God, and things Spiritual in the Nature and
Manner of the Exercise of their Worship be both contrary and different; where
the Defect of any of these two is, there of necessity must be wanting Universal
Love and Charity.

1. Uncharitable Judgment.
For thou, that have bound up and tied the Means of Salvation to thy Principles
and Doctrines, so as to exclude from Salvation all that differ from thee, or
contradict thee, have certainly declared, thy Charity exceeds not the limits of
thy own Form; and that the best Opinion and highest Esteem thou have of any
that differ from thee, for any Virtues or Excellencies that may appear to be in
them, resolves at last in no better than this Conclusion; For all this they
must be damned. Neither will it serve to prove the Universal Charity of any
People in this respect, that some of them may Problematically Affirm, That
Salvation may be possible to some such Dissenters living in remote parts, who
are excluded from the benefit of all means of knowing their Principles, making
this Possibility only as an Effect of God's Omnipotency, and so purely
Miraculous; alleging, They will not deny, but God in a miraculous and
extraordinary way may bring some to Heaven: For this shows no Charity at all
either in the Principle or People; but is only a mere seeming Acknowledgment of
God's Omnipotency from a sight of the gross Absurdity, that would follow from
affirming otherwise. Those only can be esteemed Charitable in point of
Doctrine, and truly to Commend the Love of God, whose Principle is of that
Extent, as naturally to take in within the compass of it both such, as have not
arrived to their Discoveries, and who are also Different in Judgment from them,
and that without any extraordinary and miraculous Conveyance; as being the
Common Means and Order of Salvation appointed by God for all, and truly
reaching all.

Moreover in the second place, far less can thou pretend to have Charity for
me, that wilt rob me of my Life, Goods or Liberty, because I cannot jump with
thee in my Judgment in Religious Matters: To say, Thou do it for good, and
out of the Love thou bear to my Soul, Is an Argument too Ridiculous to be
answered; unless that the so doing did Infallibly produce always a Change in
Judgment: The very Contrary whereof Experience has abundantly shown, and to
this day does show; seeing such Severities do oftener Confirm men in their
Principles, than drive them from them. And then by thy own Confession thou do
not only Destroy my Body, but my Soul also; and can not avoid thinking upon
thy own Principle, but I must be Damned, If I persist in my Judgment: 2.
Uncharitable Deportment: To destroy Men for Conscience, an Act of Malice.
Which for thee to be the very Immediate Occasion and Author of, is certainly
the greatest Act of Malice and Envy, that can be imagined; seeing thou do
what in thee lies, through the heat of thy Zeal and Fury to cut me off from
obtaining that place of Repentance; which for ought thou know, it might
please God to afford me, were not my days thus shortened by thee. Magistrates
putting to death Malefactors for their Crimes, is no Example for them to kill
good Men for matters of Conscience.
To allege the Example of Putting to Death Murderers and other such Profligate
Malefactors (which is allowably done by the general Judgment of almost all
Christians) from thence urging, That as this is not accounted a Breach of
Christian Charity, so neither the other; will no way serve the purpose; nor yet
be a sufficient Cover for this kind of Unchristian Cruelty; because the Crimes,
for which these are thus punished, are such, as are not Justified as matters of
Conscience, or Conscientiously practiced; which are unanimously Condemned not
only by the Consent of all Christians, but of all Men, as being Destructive to
the very Nature of Mankind, and to all Humane Society: And it is Confessed even
by all such Malefactors themselves, I know not if one of a Hundred Thousand can
be Excepted; and the punishment of such is Justifiable, as all generally
acknowledge. But to kill Sober, Honest good Men merely for their Conscience, is
quite Contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; as has been elsewhere upon other
Occasions largly demonstrated.

This being premised, I shall briefly Apply the same to the several Sorts of
Christians, that thence may be observed, whose Principles do most exactly agree
with, and lead to that Universal Love and Charity, so much in words commended
by all; and for the want of which every sort take so much liberty to Judge and
Condemn each other. There are many other particulars, by which the several
Sects may be Tried in this respect; but these Two forementioned being the
principal, I shall chiefly insist upon them in this present Application.

To begin then with the Papists, there is nothing more commonly acknowledged
and assented to among them, The Papists Maxim; Without the Church is no
Sal^ation.
than that Maxim, Extra Ecclesiam nulla Salus, without the Church there is no
Salvation; which Maxim in a sense, I confess to be True: (as shall hereafter
appear) but according as it is understood among them, it does utterly destroy
this Universal Love and Charity. For by this Church, without which there is no
Salvation, they precisely understand the Church of Rome; reckoning, that
whosoever are not of her Fellowship, are not Saved. And this must needs
necessarily follow upon their Principles, seeing, they make the Ceremonial
Imbodying in this Church so necessary to Salvation, that they Exclude from it
the very Children begotten and brought forth by their own Members, Their
Children not Excluded from their Rigor.
unless formally received by the Sprinkling or Baptism of Water. And albeit
they have a Certain place more tolerable than Hell for these Unbaptized
Infants; yet hence is manifest, how small their Charity is? And how much it is
Confined to their particular Ceremonies and Forms? Since if they think Children
born among them for want of this Circumstance are excluded from Heaven, albeit
never guilty of Actual Transgression; they must needs judge, that such as both
want it, and also are guilty of many Sins (as they believe all Men are, who are
come to Age, especially such, as are not in the Church) go without Remedy to
Hell.

Secondly: All Dissenters and Separatists from the Church, Infidels, Turks and
Heretics, The Pope's Yearly Curse and Excommunication of all without them.
which (in short) are all that profess not Fellowship and Communion with the
Church of Rome, and own her not as their Mother, are in a most solemn manner
Yearly Excommunicated by the Pope: And it were a most gross Inconsistency to
suppose, that such, as are so Cursed and Excommunicated, and given over to the
Devil by the Father and Chief Bishop of the Church, can in the Judgment of the
Members be Saved; especially while they think, he is Approved of God, and Led
by an Infallible Spirit in his so Excommunicating them.

And lastly: To suppose any such Universal Love or Charity, as extending to
Persons either without the Compass of their own Society, The Foundation of the
Romish Church, the Superiority of Peter.
or Dissenting and Separating from them, so as to reckon them in a capacity or
possibility of Salvation, were to destroy and overturn the very Basis and
Foundation of the Roman Church; which stands in acknowledging the Superiority
and Precedence of Peter and his Successors, and in believing, that
Infallibility is annexed thereunto.

Now, such as are not of the Roman Society, cannot do this; and those that do
not thus, are such, to whom the Church of Rome can have no Charity; but must
look upon them as without the Church, and consequently as Incapable of
Salvation, while there abiding.

Object.
If it be Objected that the Church of Rome professes Charity to the Greek,
Armenian and Ethiopian Churches, albeit vastly differing in many things from
them.

Charity the Church of Rome either does, or ever has professed to any of
these, shall be found to be always upon a supposed Acknowledgment made by them
to the Sea of Rome, The Church of Rome professing Charity to some.
as the Mother Church and Apostolic Seat, from thence seeking the Confirmation
and Authority of their Patriarchs, at least, as the Romanists have sought to
make the World believe (how true, is not my present Business to Inquire:
Differences of Ceremonies, that are betwixt them, are only Approved by the
Romanists, as such which are Indulged to them by the Pope, who pretends out of
a Fatherly Care and Compassion to Yield these things unto them: Which, if it be
true, is done by him rather to uphold the Show of his Authority and because
Distance of Place and other Incommodities hinder him from pressing more upon
them; since in Places nearer Hand, and where fitter Opportunities have been
presented, he has shown himself very Zealous and Violent to bring all to a
ready Obedience to the least of his Commands: As by many Examples could be
largely proved. Yet some are of the Mind, that all these Stories, and pretended
Acknowledgments of Patriarchs to the Romish See, are but the mere Effects of
the Policy of that Court to uphold their Grandeur; and nothing better but
pretty Comedies to amuse the Vulgar and Credulous, and augment their Reverence
toward the Pope and his Clergy: But whatever be in this, it is abundantly
manifest, That there can be nothing more Contrary to this Universal Love and
Charity, than Romish Principles, and that no Man of that Religion, without
deserting his Principles, can pretend to it.

As to the other Principle of Persecution, Persecution practiced and Wars
fomented in the Church of Rome.
how much it is Preached and Practiced in the Church of Rome, will need no
great Probation: Those that are acquainted with, or have heard of the Spanish
Inquisition; of the many Inhuman Butcheries and Massacrees committed both in
France and the Netherlands upon Men, merely for the matter of their
Consciences; the many Plots, Consultations, Combinings and Wars contrived,
fomented and carried on by the Bishops of Rome themselves, and the Chief of
their Clergy yielding large and voluntary Contributions thereto for to Ruin and
Root out the Dissenters from the Romish Society, after Luther appeared; Cannot
but see, how Natural and Consequential it is to Romish Principles so to do? and
thence also observe, how Contrary and Opposite these things are to Universal
Love and Charity? and how much they act the Hypocrite, when they pretend
Christian Charity to any, that differ from them?

And this manifestly appears in these Two, which none of them that has
Understanding to know, or Honesty to Confess their Principles, can deny. I
might also add a Third, which albeit by some Popish Doctors in some Nations it
be Denied; yet is no less firmly Believed and Contended for by other Eminent
Persons among them, especially Bellarmine, and approved by the Pope himself, to
wit; The Popes Power to Depose Princes in case of Heresy, and give their
Kingdoms to others: allowing them upon that account to Fight against them, and
accounting their so purchasing of them lawful. Small Offenses heretofore would
have provoked to this Sentence, as appeared in the Example of Hildebrand and
others; but of late he is more sparing and deliberate in his Denuntiations,
finding his Authority less Regarded, The Pope's (Abbreviated) Power of Deposing
Princes in Case of Heresy.
and his Power to bring to Obedience much Abbreviated. But surely, this
Principle cannot Consist with Universal Love, when that, which by all is
acknowledged to be an Ordinance of God, does not secure the lawful
Administrators thereof from the Bitterness of it: King to be a King, albeit his
Right and Title so to be is every way as good, as such among your selves,
unless he be of your mind; certainly, there is but small hopes of your Charity
to other Persons? There might be much more said and enlarged as well upon this
as other things, which sufficiently evidenceth, The Church of Rome can have no
just claim to this Universal Love; which I purposely, to avoid all manner of
prolixity, do omit.

Protestants Principles.
The great variety or Doctrines among Protestants (so called) will make it
somewhat harder to decipher them particularly in this matter; yet to take first
notice of those, who by their most public Confessions, as well as by their
Possession of whole Nations are most Commonly and Universally understood to
bear that name, (to wit) the Lutherans and Calvinists, 1. Lutherans and
Calvinists.
seems most Regular.

And because of their Unity, as well as of several others in that Doctrine and
Practice of Persecution, Persecution, their Doctrine and Practice.
I shall make my first Observation from thence; which being not only held by
them, but also by several others Dissenting from both of them, may be termed,
(the more the pity) A general Doctrine of Protestants: How far this contradicts
Universal Love, is beforementioned. But as to them, it has this Additional
Aggravation (which is very Considerable) That they do, and that upon their
owned Principles, so rigorously persecute one another, not permitting one
another the free Exercise of their Conscience in their respective Dominions;
albeit they acknowledge, that they Agree in Fundamentals, and that they have
both upon the same design of Reformation departed from Antichrist. How then can
these Men pretend to any thing of Universal Love or Charity, who upon so small
Difference, by themselves not esteemed Fundamental, do deny one another the
very Common and Natural Benefits of the Creation? And of this the Island of
Great Britain can give good Evidence. England instanced at Variance.
For albeit the Protestants there be in a sense all Calvinists, or at least not
at Variance in that, which was and is the great Controversy among the Lutherans
and Calvinists abroad; and that their Difference lies only in the matter of the
Government of the Church, and some other Ceremonies; many of which Calvin
himself confesses not to be of that Consequence, for which the Godly should be
at Variance; Yet how little Charity they have to one another, and how great and
Irreconcilable Prejudice and Malice, is openly known to the World! So that upon
this account the Prelatick Party has Persecuted the Presbyterian, and the
Presbyterian them, as they respectively found themselves in a Capacity to do
it; not only to the Ejection of the Clergy for this difference out of their
Function, and the Excommunication and publicly Cursing one of another;
Excommunicating one another.
but also to the Turning in and out of State-Officers, to the Imprisoning,
Forfeiting, Banishing, yea, and Judicial Execution both of private and public
Persons. Not to mention the horrible Devastations and public Wars, whereby
this Island became as a bloody Tragedy to the ruin of thousands of Families;
Wars and Bloodshed.
which took its rise from their Differences, and was carried and fomented from
the very Pulpits under this Notion: Also those common and usual Denominations,
wherewith they used (and yet do design on) one another, are not unknown; as,
Self-seeking and self-separating Hypocrites, seditious Incendiaries,
presumptuous Rebels: and on the other hand; Proud and Bloody Prelates, Ignorant
and Ungodly Curates, Wicked and Hateful Malignants, Idolatrous and
Superstitious.

I could also (were it not both tedious and troublesome to repeat such stuff)
give Instance of not much less Severity and Reproaches very near of the same
Quality, Severity and Reproaches betwixt Remonstrants, etc. and Presbyterians
and Independents.
that have passed betwixt other subdivided Species of Calvinists; as betwixt
the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants in Holland, upon the difference of
their Principles, albeit they agree in the matter of Government; And the
English Presbyterians and Independents, who quarrel not much (at least the
generality of them, as themselves are willing the World should believe) about
Principles but only in a small Circumstance of Government. All which does well
witness, how Void those Men are of true Charity! and how far from that true
Universal, Christian Love so much commended and pretended to by them!
Especially considering, that these are not only some personal Infirmities or
Escapes of private Persons among them; but the Universal, Necessary and
Consequential Effects of their respective Principles, which proceed from them
as Men so Circumstantiated and Related to such and such Fellowships and
Societies.

There is another Principle not only Common both to Lutherans and Calvinists,
The Evil of National Churches, Parishes and Preachers, etc. set up and
Established.
but even to those subdivided Calvinists (I mean the Episcopalians and
Presbyterians) which cannot but obstruct and necessarily hinder this Universal
Love; To wit, The pressing after, and seeking to establish a National Church;
whereby upon the Magistrates, or great part embracing any Religion, they
distribute the whole Kingdom into several Parishes or Congregations, and
appoint Preachers of that Way to them all: So that a Man cannot be a Member of
the State, without he be a Member of the Church also; and he is robbed of the
very Privileges, which he ought to enjoy as a Man, unless he will Agree
(albeit against his Conscience) to every Circumstance of that Church, which is
established in the Country he lives. For the making of which the more
Effectual, the Law in our Country provides, that when a Man is Excommunicated
or cast out of the Church, Excommunication, the Evil thereof.
he is also cast out of the State: So that a Man upon the Churches Censure for
a matter merely Conscientious, incurs the same hazard of the loss of his
Estate and Liberty, as if he had been guilty of some heinous Crime toward the
State. But how can those pretend to Universal Love, that have thus Confined
all, both Spiritual and Temporal Blessings to their Sect, that they think not
Men worthy to live as Men, or breath the common Air, unless they will subscribe
to all their Sentiments? Surely, this is far from the Nature of God's Love,
that causes his Sun to rise both upon the Just and Unjust! Thus far as to
Persecution, and what depends upon it.

I observed before, that the general Defect of this Universal Love did proceed
from wrong Notions concerning the Love of God; for such as Confined God's Love,
did consequentially Confine their own. Now the Chief way, whereby Men by their
own narrow Opinions seek to limit and confine the Universal Love of God, is by
proposing the necessary means of Salvation appointed by God, as not reaching to
all; for such, to whom they reach not, we cannot suppose to have any Real Love
extended to them: In this the generality of Protestants are deficient; albeit
some exceed others in in a particular respect, as shall be hereafter observed.

Lutherans etc. hold, No Salvation without the Knowledge of Christ and the
Scriptures.
That wherein they are generally Wanting, is by affirming, That there can be no
Salvation without the explicit Knowledge of Christ, and Benefit of the
Scriptures. This is held both by Lutherans, Calvinists and Arminians, I mean,
by these Churches; whatever may be the private Sentiments of particular Persons
among them.

Now whereas all these do acknowledge, That many Thousands, yea, whole Nations
have been and are Excluded from the Benefit of this Knowledge; they must
necessarily Conclude Salvation Impossible to them, and so they can have no
Charity for them, so as to suppose a possibility of Salvation to them. And this
goes directly against, and destroys the Nature of Universal Love; which cannot
be entertained toward any, but upon the Supposition, that they are under a
Possibility of being Saved; or that those Circumstances they are under, not
being in themselves (simply considered) sinful (as being such, as are not in
them to help) do not absolutely Exclude them from it. I Confess, that I cannot
have Charity to a wicked Man, that he can be Saved, so long as he continues
Wicked; and if thence any should seek to Infer, That so likewise --

Object.
We cannot have Charity to those Men, that want the Scriptures and the outward
Knowledge of Christ, that they can be Saved, so long as they want that:
Therefore as the one is not contrary to Universal Love, neither is the other.

Comparison holds not at all: because the Ground of my not having Charity to
him, is his Continuing in a thing, which himself knows to be displeasing to God
by the Law of God, which he has Revealed to him, and acknowledges to be good;
and therefore the ground of my Hopes of him, that he may be Saved, if he
Repents, is, because he knows the means how to Repent, The Ground of our
Universal Love.
and be Converted. So my Universal Love reaches to him not only in that I
believe, it is possible for God to bring him out of his Wickedness; but in that
I acknowledge, that God in order thereto has actually made manifest to him the
Way, how he may be Converted: and so I exclude him not from the Universal Love
of God, which I suppose in that Manifestation of his Will to have already
really touched and reached him. But the other Case has no Parity with this. The
Defect of the Scriptures and outward Knowledge of Christ in the Indians is
Providential.
For first, that Defect of the Scriptures and outward Knowledge of Christ in an
Indian or American, etc. is no wilful, malicious Act of them against any Law
known to them; but is the mere Providence of God by them inevitable: neither is
it unto them any Moral Evil, that they are born or brought up in these parts,
or come not to those places, where they may learn and find that Knowledge. If I
then judge, that God's Love reaches not any such, whom by this Providence he
has permitted to be thus Born and Educated in order to Save them, my Universal
Love can no ways reach to them, so as to suppose Salvation possible to them,
not because they Refuse or Resist the Means of Knowledge and Salvation
appointed to them of God; but because they want it by the Will of God, who
thought not meet to give it to them. I look not upon it as my work in this
Treatise, to Refute this Doctrine, and show its Contrariety to Truth and
Scripture, having done that largely elsewhere, (as in my Apology Expl. of the
5 th. and 6 th. Proposition;) it is enough here, that I show, that such as hold
this Opinion cannot justly pretend to Universal Love: as does evidently appear
by what is said, and needs no further Question.

Perhaps the Socinians may step in here, or others of more general Principles,
who will Affirm, They do not believe, that the want of this Explicit Knowledge
does necessarily Exclude Men from Salvation. It is true, there are some of that
mind; but it were hard to rank them under any particular Denomination: It being
rather a Notion of those Men, of whom I made mention before, that are Uncertain
in their Principles, and join with no People absolutely; than acknowledged by a
People or any public Confession of any United or Gathered Church and People.

The Socinians generally lay very great stress upon the outward Knowledge of
Christ, and do believe, Socinians belief of the outward Knowledge of Christ,
and Resurrection, as necessary to Salvation.
the outward Knowledge of Christ, or of the Resurrection at least, to be
absolutely Needful, holding the Sufficiency of that alone upon Romans 10.9. But
passing that, and taking it for granted, that the Generality of Socinians, and
several others with them (who being all taken in Cumulo) may pass; for as much
as a whole Body of People do believe and affirm Salvation even possible to
such, as are by an Inevitable Fate Excluded from the benefit of that External
Knowledge, in that they say,

That such, as will Improve that light of Nature, Object.
which all Men have given them of God, and Exercise that Common Principle of
Reason, may from the Works of Creation and Providence certainly Conclude, That
there is a God, forsake many Evils, and do much Good; and that such, as do thus
Improve this Natural and Common Light, do obtain of God to send them
miraculously either some Man or Angel to signify to them the outward Knowledge
or Resurrection of Christ, that they may believe it, and be saved.

I Answer: This does not reach the full Extent of Universal Love; because it
still limiteth it to this External Knowledge, Means of Salvation without it.
And next, because it supposes somewhat Miraculous; which as has been before
observed, is a Limitation not to be admitted in this Case. But if any would
Affirm, that the Improving of this Natural Light proved to them a Means of
Salvation, without supposing any Necessity of having the outward Knowledge of
Christ at all; albeit it would seem by the Extent of their Charity, that their
Love were very Universal; yet they do not establish true Universal Love, more
than the other. Because nothing is true Universal Love, but that which
naturally proceeds from the true Love of God, and is founded upon good and
sound Principles deduced there from, and which has not its rise from the Love
of Self, or from a Selfish Principle: Which though it may have a show of
Universal Love, is not really such; else he that would Affirm, He believed,
that all Men as well the Wicked as the Godly, the Unbelieving as the Believing
should be saved, and that no Wickedness can hinder a Man from being Saved --
Might be said to be a truer Preacher of Universal Love, than any, and most
Charitable of all Men; and yet how would this be justly Condemned by all
Christians? There can then be no true Universal Love, but that which is built
upon the Love of God, and is pure, and of the nature of it. So then, those that
Affirm, That Men may be saved even without the outward Knowledge of Christ, and
of the Scriptures, if they Improve the Light of Nature; Whether it be that they
judge, The Light of Nature in order to Salvation, an Exalting of Corrupt
Reason, not true Operation.
that the Light of Nature can carry them through to the End, and accomplish the
Work; or that they suppose, the Improving of it will procure any such
Miraculous Revelation; do not truly Preach or Establish Universal Love, because
the same is not founded upon the true Love of God, but is an Exalting of the
Nature and Reason of Man, which is really defiled, and proceeds from Self.
Since these Men for the most part do look upon Grace, or the Operation of the
Spirit in the Saints, as but a mere Fancy; so I say, these Men do not commend
the true Love of God, which is contrary to Self; but only their own Corrupt
Nature and Reason: and do therefore really Oppose and Slight the Universal Love
of God, in that they suppose Man capable of himself to save himself without
Christ the alone Mediator; in and by whom the Universal Love of God to all is
only Extended. For whom-ever God loves, he loves them in Christ, and no other
ways; and this Love of God in Christ cannot be truly received and entertained
to the Salvation of the Soul, but as the Old Man, the first Man with his Deeds
(which are altogether Corrupted, and can claim no share in Man's Salvation) is
put off and done away; and as the New Man, that proceeds from a Divine
Spiritual Seed, which is not of nor from Man's Nature, comes to be born and
brought forth in the Soul.

The Principle of Absolute Reprobation is contrary to God's, Universal Love,
and Invitation.
But much more do they Contradict and Declare themselves void of and Strangers
to the Universal Love, who hold the precise Decree of Reprobation, with the
other Principles depending thereupon, in believing, That the far greater number
not only of Man kind, but even of those that profess the Name of Christ, are
necessarily damned, and that by Virtue of God's Absolute Decree, who from all
Eternity ordained to Create them for that very end, and appointed them to walk
in such Wickedness, for which he might Condemn them, and punish them Eternally:
So that not only such, as are ignorant of the History of Christ, and of the
Scriptures, are certainly Damned; but even most of those who have the benefit
of this Knowledge, are notwithstanding Damned also, for not right using and
applying the same, which miserable Crime they necessarily fall in, because that
God, albeit He publicly and by his Revealed Will does invite them all to
Salvation, yet by a secret Will unknown to Men, He does withold from them all
Power and Grace so to do. Now I say, whoever are of this mind (as all
Calvinists generally are) cannot justly pretend to Universal Love; for seeing,
they limit the Love of God to a small Number, making all the rest only Objects
of his Wrath and Indignation, they must by Consequence so limit their own Love
also: For God being the Fountain and Author of Love, no Man can extend true
Christian Love beyond his; yea, the greatest and highest Love of any Man falls
infinitely short of the Love of God, even as far as a little Drop of Water
falls short of the Great Ocean. Now, none of these Men, without manifestly
contradicting their own Principles, can pretend to have Love to any of those,
that are thus predestined to Death: For what sottishness were it, and
Inconsistency to pretend Charity to such, so as to suppose a possibility of
Salvation for those, whom God has Appointed to be Damned, and to be Sons of
Perdition? For to say, We ought to have Charity to all, because we know not,
who is appointed to Life, or may be called to it; says nothing to solve this
Difficulty.

Because even to such, as may be supposed to be Elected, I am not to have
Charity, so long as I see them in Wickedness, and in any Unconverted State; for
that were to walk against all true Judgment, and a putting Light for Darkness,
and Darkness for Light; a calling Good, Evil; and Evil, Good; which is expressly
forbidden.

Next, This were to make true Christian Love as blind, as the Heathens supposed
their God of their Lustful Love to be: For I ought to love Men for some Real
Good I see in them, as feeling them to partake of, and grow in the Love of God;
and not upon a mere perhaps God may do them good, perhaps they may be called;
unless I believed, there were something of God in all given them in order to
Call them.

Thirdly: Seeing these Men do Believe and Affirm, That as God End, so he does
the Means also; They are not only obliged upon their Principle, without all
Charity to conclude as Damned, and appointed to Damnation all such, as have not
the Benefit of these Means they think needful; but even all such among
themselves enjoying these Means, in whom appear not (according to their Notion
of it) True and Convincing Tokens of Conversion. And as this Doctrine naturally
leads from any thing like Universal Love; so (as I observed before) it so
leaveneth and defiles with an Vnlovely Humor such, as strictly and precisely
hold it, that for most part they are observed to be Men of peevish and
persecuting Spirits.

For these two Principles, to wit, That of there being no Salvation without the
Church among Papists (as precisely understanding it of the Church of Rome) and
this of Absolute Reprobation among Protestants, The Root of that Bloody and
Antichristian Principle of Persecution.
are the very Root and Spring, from whence flows that Bloody and Antichristian
Tenet of Persecution for the Case of Conscience; and therefore both it and they
are directly Contrary and diametrically Opposite to the true Catholic,
Christian Love of God.

SECT. V.
Some Principles of Christianity proposed, as they are held by a great Body of
People, and whole gathered Churches in Britain and Ireland; which do very well
agree with True Universal Love.

SUch as most commonly Complain for the Want of Universal Love, do Alledg this
Defect to proceed from the Nature of a Sect, unto which they think this Want of
Charity so peculiar, that from thence they Conclude, that it is Impossible
either for any Sect Universally to have this Universal Love, or for any Member
of a Sect, so long as he stands to his Principles, or is strictly bound up and
tied to a Sect, to have this Universal Love: And indeed, this in a great
Measure is too True, if the Nature of a Sect be rightly understood; and
therefore to avoid Mistakes, it will be fit to Inquire somewhat in this Matter.

A Sect is commonly and universally taken in the worst Part, and always so
understood, where it is mentioned in the Scripture; as being either really
understood of such as are Justly so termed, Act. 5.17. chapter 5.5. chapter 26.5. or
Reproachfully cast upon such, as ought not to have been so denominated, Act.
24.5. chapter 28.22. For a Sect is a Company of People following the Opinions and
Inventions of a particular Man or Men, A Sect justly so called.
to which they adhere more, and for which they are more Zealous, than for the
Simple, Plain and Necessary Doctrine of Christ. But such as are not a Sect, nor
of a Sect, are those, The Followers of Christ are of no Sect.
That follow the Faith and Doctrines of Christ, and receive and believe the
same, as purely Preached and held forth by him unto them; and not as by the
Recommendation of Man, as Clouded and Encumbered with their Interpretations and
Additions: and so are mere Christians, and yet true and faithful Ones too; yea,
the most True and Faithful.

Now, which of the several Sorts of Christians are to be accounted Sects, and
which not, is a great Question; and would take a larger Discourse, than is
proper to be inserted in this Place, truly to Inquire into it: And therefore it
shall suffice me at this Time to have Asserted this in General, which, I judge,
will be generally accorded to by All; and leave the Application to each
understanding Reader: For the Clearing which there may several weighty
Observations fall in hereafter. Societies contradicting Universal Love are
truly termed Sects.
Probably, this will be almost granted by All; and I am sure, may be truly
Affirmed, That Whatsoever People hold forth and preach Doctrines, which in the
Nature of them Contradict and are inconsistent with true Universal Love, such
may truly be termed a Sect; Which may be easily applied to those
heretofore-mentioned: And so Consequently, Whoever hold forth Principles and
Doctrines consistent and agreeable thereunto, are and may truly be esteemed
mere Christians, and no Sect. Next, the Nature of a People's Society, and the
Causes drawing them together, with the Method of their being gathered, does
much contribute to Evidence, whether they are to be Esteemed a Sect or not?
First, 1. Mark of a Sect.
whose Fellowship stands merely in Judgment, and in that which reaches the
Understanding, and so are joined together in and for one Opinion, are only to
be esteemed a Sect, however true their Notions may be supposed to be. For the
true Principles and Doctrines of Christ albeit they do truly reach the
Understanding, True Principles are of an Operative Nature to Conversion; the
false not so.
and require its Assent; yet they are of an Operative Nature: However they may
be held by one or two Members of the Church, without working upon their Hearts;
yet cannot be held, nor never was by any Entire Society, without purifying
their Souls, and reaching to and working upon their Hearts to a True and Real
Conversion, I mean, upon the greatest, and most considerable part: but False
Doctrines may be firmly believed by a whole Society without having any
Operation. For the Gathering of the Apostles and Primitive Christians was an
Uniting of Hearts, and not of Heads only; Those Three thousand Converts were
pricked in their Hearts, and not in their Heads only: Yea, where there may be a
Dissent in some things in point of Judgment, if there be this Unity of Heart
through the prevailing of the same Life of Righteousness, yet the true
Fellowship is not broken: As appeared in the Example of the Apostles
themselves. Now these People, who hold forth the Principles and Doctrines
hereafter to be mentioned, were not gathered together by an Unity of Opinion,
or by a tedious and particular Disquisition of Notions and Opinions requiring
an Assent to them, and binding themselves by Leagues and Covenants thereto; but
the manner of their Gathering was by a secret Want, The Gathering of the True
Church its Rise and Foundation.
which many truly tender and serious Souls in diverse and sundry Sects found in
themselves: which put each Sect upon the Search of something beyond all
Opinion, which might satisfy their weary Souls, even the Revelation of God's
righteous Judgment in their Heart to burn up the unrighteous Root and Fruits
thereof; that the same being destroyed and done away, the inward Peace and Joy
of the Holy Spirit in the Soul might be felt to abound, and thence Power and
Life to follow him in all his Commandments. And so many came to be joined and
united together in Heart and Spirit in this one Life of Righteousness, who had
long been wandering in the several Sects; and by the inward Unity came to be
gathered in one Body: From whence by degrees they came to find themselves
Agreed in the plain and simple Doctrines of Christ. Which External Agreement as
well in Doctrines as in the Practices necessarily following thereupon, became
as one External Bond and Tie of their outward and visible Fellowship obvious to
the World, whereby they are distinguished even to the Observation of Man from
the several Sects professing the Name of Christ; as the true Christians of Old
were by their Adherence to the Orthodox Principles from other Heretics, that
laid claim likewise to be Christians.
And as this inward Power they longed for, and felt to give them Victory over
Sin, and bring the Peace that follows thereon, was that, whereby they were
brought unto that Unity and Community together; so they came first thence to
Accord in the Universal Preaching of this Power to all, and directing all unto
it: which is their First and Chiefest Principle, and most agreeable to this
Universal Love, as I shall hereafter show. And it is very Observable, that as
those, whose Gathering and Fellowship arises from this mere Unity of Notions
and Opinions, do usually derive their Name and Designation from the First
Authors, Inventors and Fomentors of those Opinions (as of old the Arians,
Nestorians, Manichaeans, etc. and of late the Lutherans, Calvinists, Armenians,
Socinians, Mennonites, etc.) so those People, whose Unity and Fellowship did
arise from their Mutual Sense of this Power working in and upon their Souls,
that Society derives not their Name from any particular Man; and therefore are
providentially delivered from that great Mark of a Sect. But as the Ungodly
will be always throwing some Name or Reproach upon the Children and Servants of
God; it being observed, that through the deep and inward Operation of this
Power in them a Dread took hold on them, not only to the begetting of God's
Fear in their Hearts, but even to the reaching and instructing of their outward
Man; hence the Name of Quakers or Tremblers has been Cast upon them: which
serves to distinguish them from others, though not Assumed by them. Yet as the
Christians of Old, albeit the Name of Christian was cast upon them by way of
Reproach, gloried in it, as desiring above all things to be accounted the
Followers of Christ; so they also are glad, that the World Reproacheth them as
such, who Tremble before the Lord, and who work out their Salvation in Fear and
Trembling. And truly, the Lord seems by his Prophets of old to have foretold,
that his Children should be so Reproached; as Isa. 66.5. Hear the Word of the
Lord, ye that Tremble at his Word; your Brethren that hated you, that cast you
out for my Name's sake, said, Let the Lord be Glorified, and He shall Appear to
your Joy, and they shall be ashamed: where a Joyful Appearance of God is
promised to these Hated and Reproached Tremblers or Quakers. And Jer. 33.9.
does more clearly Prophesy, how this Reproachful Name, when cast upon his
Children, shall be Owned and Countenanced by the Lord in these very plain and
Comfortable Words: And it shall be to me a Name of Joy, The Honor wherewith
the Lord will Honor his despised People.
a Praise and an Honor before all the Nations of the Earth, which shall hear
all the Good, that I do unto them, and they shall Fear and Tremble (or Quake)
for all the Goodness and for all the Prosperity, that I procure unto Alias,
Them.
it.

2. Mark of a Sect.
As the Nature of a Sect arises from the Love of Self and its Production, so in
the last place there can be no more signal or certain Mark of a Sect, than When
a People seek to advance and propagate their Way in the strength of their own
Spirits, A Sect arises from the Love of Self;.
reckoning the Preaching and Publishing thereof by their own Natural, or
Acquired Parts, without the Necessity of the Inward Motion of the Holy Spirit,
both lawful and commendable; and not only so, but the advancing and
establishing of the same by Outward Force and Violence. For here is Man working
without God or the Guidance of his Spirit in his own mere Strength and Will, to
set up his own Images and Inventions under a Pretense of Truths and pure
Christianity: But those that dare not seek to Advance even that, But the Truth
from the Denial of Self.
which they are persuaded is Truth, in their own Will and Spirit (far less by
outward Force and Violence) but in and by God's Spirit, as he leads and moves
to it by his Life and Power, show, that such are not a Sect, nor Followers of
Man's Inventions, but of Christ alone, waiting to follow Him, as He acts and
moves them by his own Spirit and Power: and therefore are no Sectarians, but
mere Christians.

The Chief and First Principle then held by those Christians, I. That there is
somewhat of God, his Life and Light in all Men able to bring them to Salvation.
which (as I observed before) naturally arises (and was assented to by them)
from their Inward Sense, that Tied them together, is, That there is somewhat of
God, some Light, some Grace, some Power, some Measure of the Spirit, some
Divine, Spiritual, Heavenly, Substantial Life and Virtue in all Men, which is a
Faithful Witness against all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness in the Heart of
Man, and leads, draws, moves and inclines the Mind of Man to Righteousness, and
seeks to leaven him, as he gives way thereunto, into the Nature of it self;
whereby an inward, through and real Redemption may be wrought in the Hearts of
all Men, of whatsoever Nation, Country or Kindred they be, notwithstanding
whatsoever outward Knowledge or Benefit they be by the Providence of God
necessarily deprived of: Because whatsoever they want of that, yet such a
Measure of this Light, Seed, Life and Word is communicated to all, as is
sufficient truly to Convert them from the Evil of their Ways, purify and
cleanse them, and consequently bring them to Salvation. And in the Affirming of
this, they do not at all Exalt Self or Nature (as do the Socinians;) in that
they freely acknowledge, that Man's Nature is defiled and corrupted, and unable
to help him, or further him one step in order to Salvation; judging nothing
more needful, than the full and perfect Denying and Mortification of Self in
order thereunto. Nor do they believe, this Seed, Light and Grace to be any part
of Man's Nature, or any thing, that Properly and Essentially is of Man; but
that it is a Free Grace and Gift of God freely given to all Men, in order to
bring them out of the Fall, and lead them to Life Eternal. Neither do they
suppose, this Seed, Word and Grace, which is sufficient to lead to Salvation,
to be given to Men without Christ; for they believe it to be the Purchase and
Benefit of Christ's Death, who tasted Death for every Man: So that they Confess
all to be derived to them in and by Christ, the Mediator, to whom they Ascribe
all. Yea, they believe this Light, Grace and Seed to be no other, but a measure
of that Life and Spirit, that was in Christ Jesus; which being in Him, who is
the Head, in the Fullness of it, is from Him (in whom it Resideth) as He is
Ascended up unto, and Glorified in the Heavens, Extended to all Men, in order
to Redeem them from sin, and Convert them to God.

Thus according to this Principle, without Attributing any thing to Self, or to
the Nature of Man, or Claiming any thing without Christ, The Universal Love of
God to all Men is Exhibited: whereby the means of Salvation by Christ, and
Reconciliation unto God is so Asserted, that no Man is altogether Excluded from
it; but each so Reached, as puts him in a Capacity to be Saved. Such then, as
Believe and Preach this Doctrine, must of necessity be Esteemed great Advancers
and Assertors of Universal Love, as those that truly Establish it not through
any Uncertainty or Doubtfulness in themselves, but upon their own firm and
acknowledged Principle; since that does necessarily Extend their Charity to the
not only Supposing, Salvation possible to Heathens in the most Barbarous and
Unciviliz'd places of the World.
but even Concluding Salvation possible not only to the several sorts of
Christians, but even to such, who by the Disadvantage of Education, and the
Remoteness of their Habitation are Ignorant of the Name of Christ. Providing,
that this Seed, Grace, Word and Light, which is in them all, and the Free Gift
of God to them all, Receive place in their Hearts, so as to work out the Fruits
and Nature of Unrighteousness; and to beget them unto Righteousness, Purity and
Holiness: which according to this Principle is believed to be very possible,
where the External Knowledge is thus unavoidably wanting. For albeit those, who
hold this Principle, do believe, that the outward Knowledge of Christ, and
those other Advantages, which from the Use of the Scriptures are enjoyed among
Christians, are very Comfortable, and conducing to facilitate Salvation; yet
they reckon them not absolutely Needful, holding them only to be Integral, and
no Essential parts of Christianity: For they place the Essence or Being of
Christianity only in the True and Real Conversion of the Heart, by virtue of
the Operation of this Light Seed and Grace there.

Let not the Reader thinkstrange, that I Assert this Principle, and enter not
upon the probation of it (having done that largely elsewhere, as in my
Apology) it not being my business here so to do; but only to show, how such and
such Principles do not agree with Universal Love: As on the other hand, when I
make mention of other Principles, I do not offer to Refute them; it being
enough here to demonstrate, that they are Contrary to Universal Love.
Even as the Essence and Being of a Man Consists in the Unity of Soul and Body,
which is enough to Denominate one a Man, albeit he should want a Leg or an Arm,
an Eye or an Ear, or have some other Defect, or even should be destitute of
some of the Faculties of the mind, as of the Memory, etc. that other Men have;
yet such a one would still, and that truly be called a Man, albeit not a
Complete and Entire Man. Yea, those that live in the most Barbarous and
Vnciviliz'd places of the World, where they are destitute and ignorant of all
the Liberal Arts and Sciences used among us, and of all those Conveniences,
which so much Conduce to the facilitating of Humane Society, and accommodating
of Mankind in their Living together; I say, those are still truly accounted
Men, as having that which is truly Essential or Constitutive of a Man, as such.
In like manner, this Principle supposes the possibility of Salvation both to
those commonly called Heathens, and to many among the Dark and Erroneous Sects
of Christianity, in that this Essential Part of Christianity is Extended to
them, albeit they want those other Integrals and Comfortable parts, which may
in and with respect to the Spiritual Man be fitly Compared to these Defects,
that those Barbarous Nations want, which we Enjoy, as to the Natural Man. As
none can deny, but this Principle is most agreeing to Universal Love; so the
Practice of all, even of those that deny it, does evidence and show, how
agreeable it is as well to the Love of God, as to Right Reason: where, when
ever any of the Sects come to deal with a Heathen or any such, against whom
they cannot urge any thing from Scripture or Tradition, as being Principles not
acknowledged by them; then they are always forced to recur to an Inward, Innate
Light in the Soul, to which they labor to make manifest their Principles:
albeit they differ about the Nature and Sufficiency of it; yet they are forced
to Concede, that this is God's Love to Mankind, and that in this the Universal
Love of God is extended to all. So that to every one, to whom they come to
Preach, they may find something, by which they may urge or commend their
Doctrine: of which I shall give one singular Example out of the words of
Franciscus Xaverius, a Jesuit, whom that Tribe for the high Esteem they have of
him, term the Apostle of the Indies; as it is Recorded in Bernhardus Varenus
his Descriptio Regni Japoniae, p. 195. Cap. 8. where he puts down the words of
Francis Xaviers Letter thus; ( p. 247.) The Amargurians, before they received
Baptism, Franc. Xavier his Letter of the Conversion of the Japonians.
were straightened with an odious and troublesome Scruple, to wit; That God seemed
not unto them Merciful and Benign, who had Condemned all the Japonians before
our Coming to Eternal Punishment; especially, who ever did not Worship God,
according as we Preached: And therefore they said, that He ( to wit, God) had
wholly neglected the Salvation of all their Predecessors, in permitting, that
these Miserable Souls should altogether be destitute (to their utter Ruin) of
the Knowledge of Saving Truth. This most odious Thought did much draw them back
from the Worship of the True God; but by the help of God this Error and Scruple
was taken from them. For we first did demonstrate unto them, that the Divine
Law was the Oldest of all; yea, before any Law was made by the Ancients. Taught
by Nature not to Kill, etc.
The Japans knew by the Teaching of Nature, that it was unlawful to Kill,
Steal, Forswear and other things contained in the Ten Divine Laws; as was
evident in that, when any of them Committed these Crimes, they were tormented
by the Pricks of their Consciences: That hence Reason it self does teach to
flee the Evil, and follow the Good; and therefore was Implanted in the minds of
all Men by Nature: So that all have the Knowledge of the Divine Law from
Nature, and of God the Author of Nature, before Discipline be added. Of which,
were it doubted, Trial might be made in some body altogether Void of
Discipline, who has been Educated in some Mountain or Wilderness without any
Knowledge of the Laws of his Country: For if such an one, thus altogether
Ignorant and Unacquainted with Humane Discipline, were asked, Whether to Kill a
Man, to Steal, and these other things, which the Law of God forbids, were
Sinful or not? Or if it were not right, to forbear these things? Truly, I say,
such an one utterly Ignorant of Humane Discipline, would so answer, that it
would easily appear, that he were not Void of the Law of God. From whence then
shall we judge, he has drawn his Notion, unless from God himself, the Author of
Nature? If then this be manifest in Barbarous Men; how much more in Men
Civilized and well-Educated? Which being so, it necessarily follows, that the
Divine Law was Implanted in Man's Heart, before all Laws made by Man. This
Reason was so manifest to them, that they were fully satisfied; and so being
delivered from these Snares, did easily subject themselves to the sweet Yoke of
Christ. Thus far Xaverius.

Thus it may seem, that to satisfy these Japonians, that their Forefathers
were not all necessarily Damned; and to show, that the Universal Love of God
reached unto them to put them in a Capacity of Salvation; This Cunning Jesuit
could not find another way, than by Asserting this Principle: Albeit it be no
ways Congruous to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. For these Ancient
Japonians could not be esteemed Members of the Church of Rome; and as not being
such, according to the Romish Principle (who say, There is no Salvation without
the Church, that is, without the Church of Rome) must needs have been Damned.

II. That by virtue of that Light Men may be Converted, and become Members of
the Church, without which is no Salvation.
Secondly: That Notion and Definition of a Church, which naturally arises from
this Principle (and is accordingly believed by the Assertors of it) does also
both very well Agree to and Establish this Doctrine of Universal Love. For by
virtue of this Seed and Light Extended by Christ unto the Hearts of all, it
being supposed, That Men may thereby be truly Converted, and consequentially
United to Christ, it naturally follows, That such may become Members of the
Church: Else none of Old, but the Families of the Patriarchs and of the Jews
could have been judged to be Saved; nor yet any, during all the Time of the
Apostasy: Which as it is false in it self, will be hardly affirmed by any. And
therefore since such might be Saved, they must be esteemed Members of the
Church; without which (in this large Sense) there can be no Salvation, as
including the whole Body of Christ: Of which Body who are not, are certainly
Excluded. And therefore it is, that the Church Catholic or Universal is not so
confined to any Sect, Form or External Profession, as that those, that are not
Initiated in those Forms, are Excluded absolutely from being Members of the
Church; unless it be upon Refusal or Resistance of the Will of God really
manifest to them, as drawing them to the Practice of particular Things. For it
has pleased God at several Times to Require several things both of particular
Churches and Persons, which he has not of others: As to the Jewish Converts, To
Abstain from things Strangled and Blood; and to the Churches of the Gentiles,
Not to Circumcise; (which was permitted to the Christian Jews for a Time): And
from particular Persons many particular things have been Required: Which,
albeit they were not general Obligations upon all Christians; yet in so far as
Manifested to, and Required of them, were sufficiently Obligatory: And their
Disobedience to them should have been in them a Breach of their General
Obligation of Obedience (which we owe to God in all things He Requires) and
consequently pernicious; however others, to whom they have never been Revealed
nor Required, might have been Saved without them.

III. That God by his Spirit Reveals his Will Immediately in the hearts of all
true Christians.
Thirdly: As the Asserting of Principles, which commend the Love of God, and
show the Great Extent of it to Mankind, do most agree with Universal Love; so
this People in another Chief Principle of theirs do greatly show it. For as by
the Preaching of this Universal Principle of the Light, they show the Extension
of God's Love to all; so by Preaching, that God both does, and is willing to
Reveal his Will Immediately by his own Spirit in the Hearts of all those, that
Receive his Light, that so they may be guided, acted and led thereby, and know
the Mind of God thus Inwardly Immediately in themselves; they hold forth the
Intension of God's Love to all those, that follow and obey him: so that they
neither bind up this being led by the Spirit of God only to themselves, nor
stint it to singular and Extraordinary Occasions; but hold it forth as a Common
and Universal Privilege to all true Christians and Members of the Church. Now
this Doctrine greatly Commends the Love of God, and Establishes the Principle
of Universal Love, in that it shows, how Universally God has offered this
Blessed Privilege to all, in that He has given his Light unto all; upon the
receiving of which this Immediate Guidance of the Spirit follows, as a
necessary Concomitant: For such as deny this Immediate Revelation of God's Will
by his Spirit in the Hearts of his Children, to be a Common and Universal
Privilege to all true Christians and Members of the Church, must needs suppose
the Knowledge of his Will Necessary for them, to be Communicated to them by
some other External Means, as by outward Writings and Precepts; insomuch, that
all such, as are robbed of this Benefit, are necessarily Excluded from
partaking of the Universal Love of God, in order to the Salvation of their
Souls.

Fourthly: IV. That the Work of the Ministry is not Limited to Outward
Ordination and Literature.
As the Confining of the Gifts and Graces of God to certain External Forms and
Ceremonies, are directly Opposite and Contrary to Universal Love, such as the
Limiting of the Work of the Ministry to outward Ordination, and to a particular
Tribe of Persons; the making Human Parts and Arts more necessary thereto, than
the Grace of God, so that the Grace of God is not judged sufficient to make a
Man a Minister, or to privilege him to Preach without those other Artificial
and Ceremonial Things; so I say on the other hand, those People to the
Commending of the Universal Love of God to all, but especially in the Visible
Church, do Affirm, That as this Light and Grace of God is given to all in order
to Save them; so whoever finds himself truly Called in his Heart thereby, and
fitted to Minister to others, may lawfully Preach and Declare to others the
good Things that God has done for his Soul, and Direct and Instruct them, as by
the same Grace he is enabled, how they may come to the Experience and
Attainment of the same things; albeit he have no outward Ordination or Call
from Men; be not Initiated in their Ceremonies and Orders, nor yet furnished
with their Learning and School-Education. This greatly Commends and holds forth
the Love of God, because it does not Confine the Ministry unto such a narrow
Compass, as by the several Sects it is done; but supposes, that among those
that had not the Scriptures and outward Knowledge, there might have been
Ministers or Preachers of Righteousness: as it was said of Noah, Job, Socrates,
Pythagoras, several Arabians, Indians, Ethiopians, Lovers of Righteousness.
Noah, that he was one, who was, ere the Scriptures were writ; and Job was
another: Besides Socrates amongst the Greeks, Pythagoras amongst the Latins,
and several others that might be named among the Arabians, Indians and
Ethiopians. And this Doctrine does very much hold forth the Universal Love of
God in the Visible Church, in that it excludes none from Ministering his Gift,
as he has it, albeit a poor Tradesman, or Mechanic Men; as is done among the
far greater parts of the Sects of Christendom by the presumptuous Usurpation of
them.

V. That Washing or Sprinkling, and Bread and Wine, are not the Seals of God's
Covenant with Man.
Fifthly: This People do greatly Commend and hold forth the Universal Love of
God to all, In Denying the use of outward, Carnal things, which perish in the
using, such as Washing or Sprinkling with Water, or Eating of Bread and Wine,
to be the Seals of God's Covenant with Man, or to be the Means or Channels, by
which Grace and Spiritual Refreshment is ministered to the Soul. For thereby
they Confine not God's Love in the Communicating of his Gifts and Graces to the
Application, or not using of Elementary things, which may be as truly (as to
the matter of them) performed by the most wicked and greatest Hypocrite of the
World, as by the most Godly and Sincere; as do the greatest part of the Sects
among Christians, who make such a noise of the Sacraments and Ordinances, and
do so quarrel and jangle about their matter and manner of performance: but do
affirm and believe, that Increase of Grace, and Refreshment in and by the Life
of Christ is Conveyed unto the Souls of all those, that are Faithful, as this
Seed receives a place, and grows up in their hearts, without these outward
Ceremonies. This cannot be performed, but by such as are Sincere and Godly
indeed; for such can only be truly Faithful, and wait in that place, where
Grace and Refreshment, Strength and Power, Wisdom and Courage, Patience and all
other good Gifts are received.

VI. That Persecution for Conscience is Unlawful.
Sixthly: These People do much Establish Universal Love, in that they affirm,
Persecution of Men for the matter of their Consciences to be Unchristian and
Unlawful; believing, that as God can only Inform and Enlighten the Conscience,
so it is contrary to the Universal Love of God, for Men to seek to Force and
Restrain it: as has hitherto been sufficiently shown.

VII. That Wars and Fightings for Christians are Unlawful.
Lastly: They do very truly and observably Establish Universal Love, in that
they Preach Love to Enemies, and the necessity of bearing and suffering
Injuries without Revenge; holding it Unlawful for Christians to Fight or use
Carnal Weapons, even to Resist such as Oppose them, and wrongfully prejudice
them. As this is most agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ, so is
it to the Universal Love of God, whose long-suffering- Patience even toward
the Wicked, Stiff-necked and Rebellions after many Provocations, does above all
declare his Love; in which they cannot pretend to be Followers of him, who
believe it Lawful for them to Revenge every Injury, to give Blow for Blow, and
Knock for Knock (and so know not, what it is patiently to receive and suffer
such an Injury) if they have any opportunity of Revenging themselves: and so
consequently cannot have Universal Love, which necessarily supposes and
includes Love to Enemies. And he that will Beat, Kill, and every way he can,
destroy his Enemy; does but foolishly Contradict himself, if he pretend to Love
him: And those that do not Preach and Practice Love to Enemies, but that which
is quite Contrary, cannot justly pretend either to the Doctrine or Practice of
Universal Love. Wherefore I desire, the Reader may make Application hereof, as
to the several Sects of Christians, and Examine, Whose Principles and Practices
do most Agree herewith? And seriously Consider, Whether there be any Entire,
United Body of Christians, except these here mentioned, who do Unanimously hold
forth so many Doctrines, so directly Establishing and Agreeing to True
Universal Love?

Written in Aberdeen- Prison, the first Month, 1677.
The CONTENTS.
SECT. I. THE Introduction, giving an Account of the Author's Experience in
this matter, with the Reasons moving him to Treat thereof. page 977. SECT. II.
The Nature of Christian Love and Charity demonstrated, the Consistency of true
Zeal therewith; its distinction from false Zeal. 679. SECT. III. The
Controversy Stated, with Respect to the different Sorts of Christians; how it
is to be fetched from the Nature of their Principles, and not from the Practice
of Particular Persons. 682. SECT. IV. An Examination of the Principles of
several sorts of those called Christians, Compared with this Universal Love,
and found defective; As 1. Of Papists. 2. Of Protestants in general. 3. Of
Socinians. 686. SECT. V. Some Principles of Christianity Proposed, as they are
held by a great Body of People, and whole gathered Churches in Great Britain
and Ireland, which do very well Agree with true Universal Love. 696.
Ambassadors of the several Princes of Europe, Met at Nimeguen to Consult the
Peace of Christendom, so far as they are concerned.

Wherein the true Cause of the present War is discovered, and the Right Remedy
and Means for a firm and settled Peace is Proposed.

By R. Barclay, a Lover and Travailer for the Peace of Christendom.

Which was delivered to them in Latin the 23 d. and 24 th. days of the Month
called February, 1677/8. and now published in English for the satisfaction of
such, as understand not the Language.

Psalm. 2.10. Be wise therefore ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth;
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with Trembling.

Kiss the Son, least he be Angry, and ye perish from the Way, when his Wrath is
kindled but a little; blessed are all they, that put their Trust in him.

To the Ambassadors and Deputies of the Christian Princes and States met at
Nimeguen, to Consult the Peace of Christendom, R. B. a Servant of Jesus Christ,
and hearty Wel-wisher to the Christian World, Wishes Increase of Grace and
Peace, and the Spirit of sound Judgment, with hearts Inclined and willing to
Receive and Obey the Counsel of God,
LET it not seem Strange unto you, who are Men Chosen and Authorized by the
Great Monarchs and States of Europe to find out a Speedy Remedy for the present
Great Trouble (under which many of her Inhabitants do groan) as such, whose
Wisdom and Prudence, and Abilities have so Recommended them to the World, as to
be Judged fit for so Great and Difficult a Work, To be Addressed unto by one,
who by the World may be esteemed Weak and Foolish; whose Advice is not Ushered
unto you by the Commission of any of the Princes of this World, nor Seconded by
the Recommendation of any Earthly State: For since your Work is that, which
concerns all Christians; why may not every Christian, who feels himself stirred
up of the Lord thereunto, Contribute therein? And if they have place to be
heard in this Affair, who come in the name of Kings and Princes; let it not
seem heavy unto you to hear him, that comes in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, who in the truest sense is the Head and Governor, and Chief Bishop of
the Church, the Most-truly-Christian and Catholic King: Many of whose Subjects
are Concerned in this matter, and the Blood of many in Hazard, for whom he
has shed his precious Blood. And yet who shall not seek to Obtrude upon you
the Belief of the Truth or Certainty of his Commission because of his own
Testimony; but leave it, as well as the things he therein delivers, to the
holy and pure Witness of God in all your Consciences, to be Received or
Rejected by you, as it shall there be Approved, or not Approved.

Know then, My Friends, that many and often times my Soul has been deeply bowed
down under the weighty Sense of the present State of Christendom; and in secret
before the Lord I have mourned, and bitterly lamented because thereof. And as I
was Crossing the Sea, and being the last Summer in Holland, The Burden that
was upon the Author in this Matter.
and some parts of Germany, the Burden thereof fell often upon me, and it
several times came before me to Write unto you, what I then saw and felt from
God of these things, while I was in those parts. But I Waited, and was not
willing to be Hasty; and now being Returned to my own Country, and at my own
Home, I cheerfully accept the fit Season, which the Lord has put in my hand,
and called me to therein, to signify unto you those things, which in his Name
and Authority I am Commanded to do.

And for this End the Lord has shown me, what the Causes are of all this
Mischief and Confusion, and Desolation; which are necessary to be made known
unto you, and deeply and seriously to be Considered by you: Else ye can never
be able to Apply the Right Remedies. I speak of the Primary and Original Cause,
The Primary Cause of Mischief first to be Removed.
as it proceeds from him, and is hatched by him, who is the Author of all
Mischief, and the great Enemy to, as well as Envyer of the true Peace and
Prosperity of all good Christians; and who sows in Men's hearts that Evil Seed,
and fomenteth that bad Ground, from which all Evil Rises. For unless this be
seen, discovered and removed in the Ground, although the secondary and more
immediate Causes be seen, (to wit) the Projects, Designs and Councils of Men,
and in part be answered and removed by giving way to some, and taking from
others, according as they are more or less formidable and considerable,
measuring these things by the Rules of Humane Wisdom, and Carnal Prudence and
Policy; yet that is not sufficient: That may Allay the Heat for a Time, but
will not Remove the Evil; and You in so doing, will prove but like those
Physicians, that do Mitigate the pain and violence of a Disease for a Time, but
do not take away the Ground and Cause of it: so that it shortly again Returns,
and in the End Destroys him that is Afflicted with it.

The Chief Ground, Cause and Root then of all this Misery among all those
called Christians, is, because they are only such in Name, Christians in Name,
and not in Nature.
and not in Nature, having only a form and profession of Christianity in show
and words, but are still Strangers, yea, and Enemies to the life and virtue of
it; owning God and Christ in words, but denying them in works; and therefore
the Lord Jesus Christ will not own them as his Children, nor Disciples. For
while they say, they are his Followers; while they Preach and Exalt his
Precepts; while they Extol his Life, Patience and Meekness, his Self denying,
perfect Resignation and Obedience to the Will of his Father; yet themselves are
out of it: and so bring Shame and Reproach to that Honorable Name, which they
Assume to themselves in the face of the Nations, and give an occasion for
Infidels (Turks, Jews and Atheists) to profane and blaspheme the holy Name of
Jesus. Is it not so? While so much Ambition, Pride, Vanity, Wantonness and
Malice, Murder, Cruelty and Oppression, Abominations abounding in the Courts of
Christian Princes.
yea, and all manner of Abominations abounds and is openly practiced; yea,
while those, that should be Patterns and Examples of Justice, Virtue and
Sobriety to others, do for the most part Exceed most in those things. So that
the Courts of Christian Princes (who while in words seem more to Glory in being
Professors and Protectors of Christianity, than in their outward Crowns) which
should be Colleges of Virtue and Piety, are mostly Scenes of greatest
Wickedness, and Nests and Receptacles of all the Baffoons, Stage Players, and
other vilest Vermin not fit to be mentioned. I say, Is it not so? While upon
every slender Praetext, such as Their own small Discontents, or That they
judge, the present Peace they have with their Neighbor, cannot suit with their
Grandeur and Worldly Glory, War's Calamities.
They sheath their Swords in one another's Bowels; Ruin, waste and destroy
whole Countries; Expose to the greatest misery many Thousand Families; Make
Thousands of Widows, and ten Thousands of Orphans; Cause the Banks to overflow
with the Blood of those, for whom the Lord Jesus Christ shed his precious
Blood; and Spend and Destroy many of the good Creatures of God. And all this
while they pretend to be Followers of the Lamb like Jesus; who came not to
destroy Men's lives, but to save them: The Song of whose Appearance to the World
was, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, and Good Will and Peace to all Men: Not to Kill,
Murder and Destroy Men; not to hire and force poor Men to Run upon and Murder
one another, merely to satisfy the Lust and Ambition of Great Men; they being
oftentimes Ignorant of the Ground of the Quarrel, The Warriors are forced to
Kill, of their fellow Christians, whom they never had Evil Will against.
and not having the least Occasion of Evil Will or Prejudice against those
their Fellow Christians, whom they thus Kill; amongst whom not one of a
Thousand perhaps ever saw one another before. Yea, is it not so, that there is
only a Name, and nothing of the true Nature of Christians especially manifest
in the Clergy, who pretend not only to be Professors, but Preachers, Promoters
and Exhorters of others to Christianity, who for the most part are the greatest
Promoters and Advancers of those Wars; and by whom upon all such Occasions the
Name of God and Jesus Christ is most horribly abused, profaned and blasphemed,
While they dare Pray to God, Preachers the War's Promoters.
and Thank him for the Destruction of their Brethren Christians, and that for
and against, according to the Changeable Wills of their several Princes: Yea
so, that some will Join in their Prayers with and for the Prosperity of such,
The Priests Confusion and Instability in their Prayers.
as their Profession obliges them to believe to be Heretical and Antichristian;
and for the Destruction of those, whom the same Profession acknowledges to be
good and Orthodox Christians. Thus the French, both Papists and Protestants
Join in their Prayers, and Rejoice for the Destruction of the Spanish Papists
and Dutch Protestants: The like may be said of the Danish, Swedish and German
Protestants, as respectively concerned in this matter. Yea, which is yet more
strange, if either Constraint or Interest do engage any Prince or State to
Change his Party, while the same War and Cause remains; then will the Clergy
presently accommodate their Prayers to the Case, in praying for Prosperity to
those, to whom instantly before they wished Ruin; and so on the Contrary: As in
this present War, in the Case of the Bishop of Munster is manifest. Was there
ever, or can there be any more horrible Profanation of the holy and pure Name
of God, especially to be done by those, who pretend to be Worshipers of the
true God, and Disciples of Jesus Christ? Worse than Heathens.
This not only Equals, but far Exceeds the Wickedness of the Heathens: for they
only prayed such Gods to their Assistance, as they fancied allow their
Ambition, and accounted their Warring a Virtue; whom they judged Changeable
like themselves, and subject to such Quarrels among themselves, as they that
are their Worshippers: But for those to be found in these things, who believe,
there is but One only God, and have, or at least profess to have such Notions
of his Justice, Equity and Mercy, and of the Certainty of his punishing the
Transgressors of his Law, is so horrible and abominable, as cannot sufficiently
be neither said, nor written.

The Ground then of all this is the Want of True Christianity, because the
Nature of it is not begotten, The Ground of War.
nor brought forth in those called Christians; and therefore they bear not the
Image, nor bring not forth the Fruits of it. For albeit they have the Name; yet
the Nature they are Strangers to: The Lamb's Nature is not in them, but the
Doggish Nature, the Wolfish Nature, that will still be quarrelling and
destroying; the Cunning, Serpentine, Subtle Nature, and the proud, ambitious,
Luciferian Nature, that sets Princes and States a work to contrive and foment
Wars, and engages People to Fight together, some for Ambition and vain Glory;
and some for Covetousness and Hope of Gain: And the same Cause does move the
Clergy to Concur with their share in making their Prayers Turn and Twine; The
Clergy's Prayers turn and twine.
and so all are here out from the State of True Christianity. And as they keep
the Name of being Christians; so also upon the same Pretext each will pretend
to be for Peace, while their Fruits manifestly declare the Contrary. And how
has and does Experience daily discover this Deceit! For how is Peace brought
about? Is it not, when the Weaker is forced to give way to the Stronger,
without respect to the Equity of the Cause? Is it not Just so, as among the
wild and devouring Beasts? who when they Fight together, the Weaker is forced
to give way to the Stronger, and so Desist, until another Occasion offer? So
who are found Weakest, who are least Capable to hold out, they must bear the
Inconveniency; and he gets the most Advantage, however frivolous, yea, unjust
his pretense be, who is most Able to vindicate his claim, and preserve it not
by Equity, but force of Arms: So that the Peace-Contrivers Rule is not the
Equity of the Cause, but the Power of the Parties. Is not this known and
manifest in many, if not most of the Pacifications, that have been made in
Christendom?

It is therefore in my heart, in the Name and behalf of the Lord Jesus Christ,
to Warn you to Consider of those things: And therefore be not unwilling to hear
one, that appears among you for the Interest of Christ his King and Master. Not
as it thereby he denied the Just Authority of Sovereign Princes; or refused to
acknowledge the Subjection himself owes to his lawful Prince and Superior;
Which Calumny some have been apt to throw upon us, by reason of some in those
Countries, that have so Affirmed.
or were any ways inclined to favor the Dreams of such, as under the pretense
of Crying up King Jesus, and the Kingdom of Christ, either deny, or seek to
overturn all Civil Government; Nay, not at all: But I am one, who do Reverence
and Honor Magistracy, and acknowledge Subjection due unto them by their
respective People in all things Just and Lawful; knowing, that Magistracy is an
Ordinance of God, Romans 13.1.4.
and that Magistrates are his Ministers, who bear not the Sword in vain. Yet
nevertheless I judge it no prejudice to Magistracy, nor Injury to any, for one
that is Called of the Lord Jesus, to appear for him in this Affair; for he is
not a little concerned, as by all their Confession, so by right are his
Subjects (unless they wilfully render themselves to another, even to the
Adversary) for he is Heir of all, and therefore it is fit, that they, who speak
in his Name, be Heard; for his Honor and Glory is concerned: His Authority has
been Contemned; his Laws broken; his Life Oppressed; his Standard of Peace
pulled down and rent; his Government incroached upon: What shall I say! his
precious Blood shed, and himself afresh Crucified, and put to open Shame by the
Murders and Cruelties, that have attended those Wars. If then ye come not under
a deep and weighty Sense of those things, so as to Apply your selves to seek
after some Effectual Way to Remedy these Evils; however you may seek to please
Princes and States by patching up a Reconciliation, and troubling your selves
to satisfy their Covetous and Ambitious Wills, who make such a noise and stir
in the World about their Glory, and do not mind the Glory and Honor of the
Lord Jesus Christ, so as to give him the Right, that is due unto him in the
first place (not in a bare Sound of Words; he will not accept of such a
Complement, while the Evil Works remain;) I Testify in his Name, and Power and
Authority, Your Work will be Imperfect, and not Prosperous.

For although those Kings and Princes, that are now at Variance, may be by your
means brought to lay down Arms, and appear to be good Friends, and Dear Allies;
yet unless the Lord Jesus Christ can be Restored to his Kingdom in their
Hearts, and that Evil Ground of Ambition, of Pride, and Lust, and Vain Glory be
Removed, that so they may Rule in the Wisdom and Power of God, and not
according to their Lusts; that Evil Ground and devouring Nature being still
alive and predominant in them, will quickly stir some of them up again, so soon
as Opportunity offers fit for their Advantage: They will kindle the Flame
again, and all your Articles will not bind them; but they will break them like
Straws: The World's Peace is soon at an end.
and their Counselors, who flatter them, and seek to please them, will quickly
find out a Pretext for a Breach, such as have taught them these Hellish Maxims,
Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare, i. e. That such, as make Conscience to
Lie (or serve the Devil) but to obey Christ, are not fit to Rule; and that
Kings must not be Slaves to their Words. And perhaps, if they find it difficult
to hit upon any probable Ground or Pretense; if they judge themselves strong
enough, they will neither trouble themselves, nor the World to give a Reason,
but tell, That to be at Peace, is no longer Consistent with their Glory: And
when they have brought about, what they have determined; they will let the
World know the Reason of it. Has not manifold Experience proved those things
to be True? And seeing it is so, there is, nor can no settled, firm,
established Peace be brought to Christendom, until the Devil's Kingdom be
Rooted out of Men's Hearts, from which Wars come, Jam. 4.1, 7.
as the Apostle James testifies; and the Kingdom of Jesus come to be
established in the Hearts of Kings, and Princes, and People, whose Kingdom is a
Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Spirit: Until he come
to Rule in and among them, and his Enemies, viz. every Evil Lust be thrown out
from him, so that his Heavenly Wisdom may take Place, which is pure, and
peaceable, Jam. 3.17.
and easy to be Entreated. And therefore to bring this about, is the one and
Great Thing Needful to be minded and considered of, and effectually to be
pressed after, as that, by the accomplishing whereof the present Evils can
alone be Cured and Removed.

Therefore be not Mistaken, neither deceive your selves to think, Ye can
Accomplish this Work by your Worldly and Humane Wisdom; the Wisdom of the Flesh
will not do it, neither that of the First Birth, which must Die and be
Crucified, e're the Heavenly Wisdom, the beginning whereof is the Fear of the
Lord, be Revealed, Prove. 1.7.
by which alone this Work can both be truly begun and finished. For the Worldly
and Carnal Wisdom is the Cause of the War: It is by it, that Men have been, and
are stirred up to it, even the Wisdom of the first Fleshly Birth, which leads
men not to be Content with their own, but to Covet their Neighbors, and to
Quarrel and Fight in hopes of Advantage: Therefore that Wisdom, which is the
Cause of the Mischief, will, nor can never Cure it. Try and Examine your selves
therefore seriously in the Sight of God, whether you be Led, Acted and
Influenced in your present Negotiation by the Wisdom of this World, the Wisdom
of the First Birth, which is Sensual, Devilish and from below; or by the
Heavenly and Pure Wisdom of God, which is from above, and is the Fruit of the
second Birth, Jam^ 3.17.
the new Birth by Christ Jesus formed and brought forth in the Soul, and the
Light of Jesus Christ in you, which shows you all your Thoughts, and has
Reproved every one of you for your Unrighteousness, even from your Childhood
up: That will manifest unto you (if you mind it, and heed it) which Wisdom you
are acted by; and discover to you, whether it be your Thoughts and Purposes to
Glorify God over all, The Glory of God, and Ease of the Oppressed to be minded.
and to Remove, so so far as in you lies, what is Contrary to his Holy and Pure
Will; and whether you be more concerned for the particular Interest and
Interests of your several Princes, to satisfy or obviate their Designs, or to
bring about that, by which God's Holy Witness in every Conscience may be
answered, and the pure Life of Jesus: that by these Doings the Oppressed may be
eased, and suffered to Arise. For if this be little in your Minds, as a thing
not much regarded, but neglected by you, I must Intimate to you in the Name of
the Lord, that your Work will not be blessed by him; neither will it Prosper:
For although you may make Peace for a Time; yet (as I have before said) it will
not be firm, nor of any long Continuance: but the Old Root still remaining,
will send forth its Evil Fruit again, and all your Labor will quickly be
Undone.

Let me Exhort you then seriously to Examine your selves by the Light of Jesus
Christ in you, that can alone discover unto you your own Hearts, and will not
flatter you (as Men may) whether you be fit for this Work you are set about? In
the peaceable Wisdom of God a Lasting Peace is Established.
Which you cannot be, until you have seriously Applied your selves to the
killing and crucifying of that Nature in your selves, from which all this Evil
flows: If the Warring Part be Removed out of you, and the Corrupted Wisdom done
away, and the Peaceable Wisdom brought up, then are you fit to Consult, and
bring about the Peace of Christendom. But this cannot be accomplished in you,
until you have first believed in the Light of Jesus Christ, wherewithal you, as
well as all Men are Enlightened; and which is given you as a sufficient Guide
and Leader, to lead out of Darkness, to lead out Strife, to lead out of the
Lusts, Jam. 4.1.
from which the Wars come, unto the Ways of Righteousness and Peace; which
leads not to destroy, but to Love, and forgive Enemies: It is the minding of
this, and being led and guided by it, that only can fit you for so great and
good a Work; for this is the Fruit of the Father's Love to Mankind, and the
Gift of God, Isa. 49.6. Luc. 2.32.
even Christ Jesus, who was given for a Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and
for his Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth. So it is by turning to this, and
following it, and obeying it (in which is sufficiency, and which gives Power to
the Receivers of it to become the Sons of God) that the true Nature of
Christianity can be brought forth and Restored; and by which Kings and Princes,
Rulers and People may be brought out of Lust, Envy, Warring and Strife, to true
Peace with God, and one with another.

And therefore the Cause of all the Mischief, that is in Christendom, is,
because this Light has not been minded, nor regarded in the Heart; but has been
hated and overlooked, as a low and insufficient thing: and therefore the Seed
of the Kingdom, this Gift of the Father's Love, this little Leaven, this Pearl
of great Prize, and this Talent being hid in the Ground, Condemned and
Despised, and the World and Worldly Mind being set over it, notwithstanding all
the Preaching and Praying, and Professing of Christ in Words (that has been
only one outward Show and Appearance, by which Men might the more easily be
deceived, and live more securely in their Wickedness) the Innocent Life of
Christ has not been known, and all Christendom has brought forth bitter and
sower Grapes under all their Talk and Forms of Worship; and not the sweet and
peaceable Fruits of Righteousness: Which can never be brought, until all come
to him, to the Light of Christ in their Consciences, to follow and obey it, and
acknowledge it, The Light of Christ leads to Life, and to Truth and Peace.
as that which is given them of God, and sufficient to lead them to Life and
Salvation. For as this is thus received and entertained, the true Nature of
Christ will be begotten and brought forth in People; and then the Contrary
Nature, in which the Enmity and Strife is, will die and pass away: And so Truth
and Peace will come to be settled and firmly established. And for this End the
Lord God Almighty is arisen, and arising in his own Power and Glory, who out of
his Infinite Compassion, having regard to the present distracted and desolate
Condition of Christendom (as seeing them Strangers to his Life and Power, and
led and guided at Will to the utter Ruin and Destruction both of Body and Soul
by the Adversary of Mankind's true Happiness) that he might Reveal the Light of
his Truth even of True Christianity to those, who have the Name only, has
turned many, who are Strangers and Enemies thereunto in their Minds by wicked
Works, to this precious Light, by which Judgment has been laid to the Line,
Esa. 28.17. Mat. 12.20.
and Righteousness to the Plummet in them, and the evil Works and Nature in
them have been Judged and Condemned; and they have willingly abode under it,
until it has been brought forth to Victory in them. And many of them, who have
been Wise according to the Wisdom of the World, have learned to lay it down at
the Feet of Jesus, that they might receive from him of his Pure and Heavenly
Wisdom; being contented in the Enjoyment of that by the World to be accounted
Fools: And also many of them, who were Fighters, and even Renowned for their
Skill and Valor in Warring, have come by the Influence of this Pure Light to
Beat their Swords in Plough-shares, Esa. 2.4.
and their Spears in pruning hooks, and not learn Carnal War any more, being
Redeemed from the Lusts, from which the Fighting comes. And there are
Thousands, whom God has brought here already; who see to the End of all
Contention and Strife, and that for which the World Contends: And albeit the
Devil be Angry at them, The Rage of the Devil against the Lord's Chosen.
and Rage against them in the mere Nominal and Literal Christians, because he
knows, they strike at the very Root and Foundation of his Kingdom in Men's
Hearts; and therefore he prevails in his Followers, to wit, in these Literal,
Nominal Christians, to Persecute, Kill, Beat, Banish and Imprison, and many
ways vex them: Yet because the Lord has Chosen them to be a First Fruit of that
Glorious Work, which he is bringing about in the Nations; therefore they
hitherto have, notwithstanding of all that Opposition, and yet shall Prosper:
By a Patient Enduring in the Spirit of Jesus they do and shall OVERCOME

And therefore there is nothing can so much tend to the Good and Universal
Peace of Christendom, than for all and every one to mind this Gift of God in
themselves; and not only to suffer, but to rejoice at the Preaching and
Promulgating of the Universality of this glorious Light, whereunto God is now
calling many: For as the Resisting and Slaying of this in themselves, as well
as in those, who come in the Name of God to declare it, is the Cause of all the
Mischief, that Christendom labors under; so also its being received and taking
Place, would remove and do it away.

Be not therefore easily Engaged by the Enemy to slight and reject those
things, as foolish and weak, and too low for you to Consider, or give Place
unto; for thereby the Enemy always labored to vail and darken the Counsel of
God, and hindered it from being received by Men. 1 King. 2.8. Luc. 21.2. Mat.
27.20. Job. 18.40.
Thus the King of Israel despised the Counsel of Micah at the Instigation of
his Mocking Prophets; but Remember, that you profess to be Followers of Jesus,
who was laden with many Reproaches, accounted a Disturber, and to whom
Barrabas a Murderer was preferred by the Counsel and Advice of the wise Rabbis
and great Professors among the Jews; and Remember, that you profess your selves
to be Owners of that Gospel, whose First and Chief Ministers and Preachers were
accounted Foolish and Illiterate Men, Act. 2, 7. chapter 4, 13. chapter 17, 18, 19, 20.
chapter 21, 28. chapter 24, 5, 6. chapter 25, 7.
Movers of Sedition, Idle Bablers and Turners of the World upside Down: And
therefore be not easily frighted by these and such like Reports and Reproaches
from hearing those, whom God has Called and Chosen, that in and amongst them
he may be glorified, and by them may Restore that in reality in the (so called)
Christian World, which for several Generations they have only had the Shadow
of, but have not enjoyed in the Substance.

And because many are the Calumnies, that such are Reproached withal, as
holding forth Strange and Pernicious Doctrines; therefore I have herewith sent
you a large Apology for the true Christian Divinity, held forth and preached by
them; That therein you may see, how the truly Christian Principles, which have
been lost in the Apostasy, while the Life of Christianity was not to be found,
is Restored by their Testimony: Desiring you seriously to Read and Consider the
same, as well as Transmit it to the several Princes you are Employed by; that
both you and they may see, That the Day of the Lord is dawned; and may Learn to
walk in the Light of it; which would bring Peace and Quietness, and felicity to
all, both outward and inward: And thereby all may be stirred up to receive with
Gladness such, as the Lord will move to Preach and Declare this Day, as it is
dawned and made manifest in them; following the Apostle's Rules In receiving
Strangers willingly; Heb. 13.2.
for that some in so doing have entertained Angels unawares. And that none of
you may be like the Pharisees, who Cried, Crucify him: Nor like those, who
entreated him to depart out of their Coasts; and like those who would have none
of him to Rule over them; lest with them ye receive the like Condemnation.
However, I shall be clear of all your Blood, in so far as I have faithfully
Answered, what God Required of me toward you, and Discharged my Conscience in
Love to your Immortal Souls; as well as to the Common Peace and Good of
Christendom. Whereof, and of all those, that profess the Name of Christ, I am

A True Friend and Hearty Well-wisher, Robert Barclay.
This Came upon me from the Lord to Write unto You at Ury, in my Native Country
of Scotland, the Second of the Month called November, 1677.
COpies of the foresaid Epistle in Latin, were upon the 23 d and 24 th Days of
the Month called February 1678. delivered at Nemeguen to the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, of the Kings of Great Britain, Spain and France, Sweden and Denmark,
of the Prince Elector Palatine; as also of the States General, and of the Duke
of Lorain, Holstain, Lunenburg, Osnabrug, Hannover, and the Pope's Nuncio, to
wit, one to each Ambassador, and one to each of their Principals: together with
so many Copies of the Book, whereof the Author makes mention in the Letter, the
Title whereof is, Roberti Barclaii Theologiae verae Christianae Apologia,
Carolo secundo, Magnae Britanniae, etc. Regi oblata. Robert Barclay his Apology
for True Christian Divinity, offered to Charles the Second, King of Great
Britain. Typis Excusa 1676. pro Jacob Claus, Bibliopola habitante Amstelodami.
Printed 1676. for Jacob Claus, Bookseller at Amsterdam.

R. B.'s APOLOGY FOR THE True Christian Divinity VINDICATED FROM JOHN BROWN's
Examination and pretended Confutation thereof, in his Book called, Quakerism
the Pathway to Paganism: In which VINDICATION JOHN BROWN his many Gross
Perversions and Abuses are Discovered, and his Furious and Violent Railings and
Revilings soberly Rebuked.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

Whereunto is Added A Christian and Friendly Expostulation with ROBERT
MACQVARE, touching his Postscript to the said Book of J. B. written to him by
LILLIAS SKEIN, Wife of ALEXANDER SKEIN, and delivered some Months since at his
House in Roterdam.

Isaiah 51.7. Hearken unto me, ye that know Righteousness, the People, in whose
heart is my Law, fear ye not the Reproach of Men, neither be ye Afraid of
their Revilings.

Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye, when men shall Revile you, and persecute you, and
speak all manner of Evil falsely against you for my Name's sake.

London, Printed for Tho. Northcott. 1691.

THE Preface to the Reader.
Serious READER,
I Shall not need to trouble thee here with a Long Preface, most of what is
commonly Inserted in such Epistles being proposed to thee in the First Section;
only I will take occasion here Ingenuously and Solemnly to profess, That no
Delight in Controversy has Induced me to undertake this Treatise, but pure
Necessity to Vindicate the Truth professed by me, from the many gross
Perversions, wherewith this Author has Abused it. For as for his Personal
Reflections at me, which are very frequent, and whereby he labors to Represent
me to his Reader, as the Veriest Fool, Ignorant, Senseless, Non sensical, and
yet Proud, Presumptuous and Blasphemous Miscreant (for such are his
Expressions) that can be imagined; I should not have troubled my self nor the
World with a Vindication: being persuaded, none, who truly knows me, will
believe him; and that none of Solidity and Judgment, who knows me not, will so
easily Agree to this Censure. As for such Credulous Creatures, if his Book find
any such (for I have heard of several of the same Faith with him, who much
Condemn his Railing Style) who will judge of me upon so small and suspicious
Evidence, I must be Contented (as many better Men have been before me) to abide
the Rash Judgment of those Inconsiderate Souls. As for the Book, from which he
Assumes and Pronounces this Character of me, thou will find it here Vindicated;
and see that hideous Mask, wherewith he labored to Vail it, that he might Rail
the more securely, Taken off. I could easily show the Lightness of his
Judgment, by filling the other Scale with a pressed-down Measure of the
Testimonies both by Word and Writ of several Persons at Home and Abroad, who
are not Quakers; and yet such, to whom without Disparagement he must give the
Precedence both for Parts, Piety and Learning: but I desire not to Raise my
Reputation that way, it is his Work, that needs a Postscript of that Nature.
And truly, he has saved me this Pains, while at other times he manifestly
Implies a Contradiction to this Character, while he persuades the Reader of the
Necessity he was under to write so great a Volumn; as if the whole Christian
Commonwealth had been in Danger to be Overturned, and many Souls in Hazard to
be hurt by the Quakers (among whom both he and his Brother R. M. C. give me and
my Writings a Chief Place, as their Goliath, Patron, Sharpest and Neatest Pen)
if not seasonably supplied by this his Antidote. For sure, had it been so
Inconsistent and Contradictory a piece of Work, as he sometimes Represents it
to be, as being written by so silly and pitiful an Ignoramus (as he is
sometimes pleased to term me) there could not have been so great Cause of Fear,
nor such need of a great Volumn, especially to such, as could not understand
mine; being not yet Extant in a Language they skilled, to whom he principally
directs his: and though they had, could have no great Hurt; if he speak true,
when he represents me frequently to write things Unintelligible: And yet he is
so Wise as to Apprehend, he has Refuted, what he Confesses he does not
Understand. But the Reason of his thus Contradicting himself is, that albeit
his Malice to the Truth and my self was such, that he could not say enough to
Render both it and me despicable; yet forgetting himself at other times, he was
forced to Acknowledge, what I say, Considerable, that he might render his own
Work of some Value, and himself a Champion: Which he could never have done,
albeit he might be supposed to have Rebuked and Refuted a piece of pitiful
Nonsense. Thus the Man, while he stretches to Exalt Himself, and Abase me,
overturns on the one part, what he affirms on the other. But if he can have so
far pity upon himself, as to think in time of Repenting, I do with my whole
Heart freely forgive him; and whether he do, or not, I can Assure him, as I
should never have Valued my self upon his Commendation, so I am nothing moved
by his Abuses, save only to Pity and Commiserate him. I must Entreat this of
the Reader, that, if he desire to be fully Informed in this Controversy, he
will be pleased first to Read my Apology; which for his Benefit will, I hope,
be Extant in our own Language, ere this comes to his Hands: and then perhaps he
will little need an Antidote against the pretended Confutation: But if any
Scruple there Remain, it will easily be Removed by seriously perusing this
Vindication. And because before his Book he places a great List of that he
accounts the Blasphemous Assertions of the Quakers, that so he may prepossess
his Reader with Prejudice at the very Entry; to Remove them, thou will find
Inserted at the End a List of so many of them, as are utterly false: Besides
many of them are Perversions, and not owned in the Terms he Asserts them: And
yet a great part of them he pretends not so much as to Deduce from any Words
written by me; but has sished for them in the Writings of others of our
Adversaries: which piece of Injustice is in the last Section Demonstrated. Not
desiring to Detain thee any longer, I shall only Wish The God of all Grace to
Minister to thee such a Measure thereof, and give thee such Light and
Understanding by the Holy Influence of his Divine Spirit, that thou may for
his Glory and thy Soul's Salvation make a Right Judgment of the present
Controversy, and come truly to Discern, which Doctrine it is, and Who, that
speaks most Consonantly to the Holy Scriptures.

So Wishes he, who is a Real Friend to all Men, R. B.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is hoped, That the more Moderate, Sober and Serious among the Presbyterian
Preachers, and who have a true Regard as well to the Peace of their own
Consciences, as to the Christian Reputation of their Cause and Interest among
Sober and Honest Christians, will show their Readiness to do Justice to
themselves, as well as Right to the Injured Author of this Treatise, not only
in respect to the Appeal added to the End of the last Section; but also to the
many other gross Abuses, Falsehoods and Railings detected herein, to be most
Impudently Asserted by John Brown; since he comes forth under no less
Character, than a Presbyterian David, and that given him by so Eminent a Man,
as Robert Macquare is Reputed among them. Which Justice is also the more hoped
for, since the more Moderate Presbyterians have themselves felt the Fruit of J.
B. his Violent, Furious and Unchristian Temper in his fomenting Divisions among
them, and encouraging Cameron by his Letter; whom they repute an Heady,
Turbulent Incendiary, and the Effects of whose Work strengthened by J. B. have
produced no small Mischief both to the Cause in general, and to many poor
People, who have been thereby Ruined; if the Occasion some of themselves
Represent of the late Rising in Scotland, be true.

R. B.'s

R. B's. APOLOGY FOR THE True Christian Divinity VINDICATED FROM J. B's.
Examination and pretended Confutation thereof in his Book,
SECT. I.
Containing the Introduction, and the Method, the Author proposes to himself
in this Treatise; with the Reasons, Wherefore? Together with some general
Considerations Relating to J. B's. whole Book; and Remarks on his Epistle to
the Reader.

1. AMONG the many Evils, that abound amongst those, that bear the Name of
Christians, this is a great One, that in the Unhappy difference they have among
themselves, there appears so much Malice, Bitterness, and Envy, and so little
of that Candor and Sincerity, True and Unmixed Zeal, and of the Meekness,
Peceableness and Gentleness of Jesus: so that there is oftentimes observed an
Eager Willingness to Represent their Opposits other ways, than they are. But
among all sorts of such, as profess Christianity, I know none have more Reason
to Complain of this Abuse, than we: who, albeit we have not a little labored
to make known to all the plain Truth held by us; yet our words have been most
miserably perverted upon many occasions, and we most horribly Misrepresented.
As is abundantly manifest to many, who are acquainted with the Books Writ
against us, and our Answers; wherein many, if not most of the Arguments used
against us, are not levelled at those things we truly hold, Our sad Sufferings
by our Adversaries mis-representing us and perverting our Principles and
Doctrine.
but at the monstrous and horrid Conceptions, which our Adversaries have framed
to themselves, and them would needs fasten upon us, as our Principles and
Doctrines. Many of us have been thus exercised in the Controversys, wherein we
have been Concerned; and I my self, in some small Rencountres, that have
heretofore fallen to my share, have had my part; but I Confess, Inferior to many
of my Brethren: But now that J. B's. Work appears, I think (considering the
Bulk and Nature of it, hereafter more particularly to be viewed) I may come up
with most. For I scarce think, that ever a Man's words were so horridly and
constantly throughout perverted, or that ever a Book of Controversy of its
Bulk, to wit, (as I take it) betwixt 70 and 80 Sheets of Paper, was so stuffed
with a Continual Strain of Railing, from the very first Page unto the last:
Yet, when we consider the Man's Design, which appears from the Nature of his
Work, perhaps there will be less Occasion of Wonder.

For either he, or some Brother of his abroad, having without any Provocation
from us, the People called Quakers, fallen into the most gross and vilest Sort
of Railing against us in a Postcript to S. R' s. Letters, The Advantage J. B.
has upon his Implicit Believers.
and that without the least Offer of Probation; it seems, they judged
themselves concerned to give the People some Reason for their so doing. And
there could not be a finer Knack to Beguil the Credulous and Implicit
Multitude, than to Answer a Book writ in Latin, and not Extant in their
Mother Tongue; for there a Man, as to them (who cannot Read, Understand and
Compare it with that, to which it relates) may pervert Words as he will, draw
Consequences at pleasure, and make to himself what Monsters best please his
Fancy, or like his Humor best to batter: And yet he cannot find in it (by all
his Perverting) enough to make us so black, as he would have us; so that he is
often times Constrained to Fish for this, by citing the Writings of some, that
have writ against us, and brings us up some of their Old, Thread bare Calumnys,
long ago answered by us: In which his Injustice shall be afterward observed.
And so he, being thus furnished, can the more easily Abuse, especially while he
is almost secure, that the generality of those he writes to, are such, as will
not Call in Question, as to the Truth of it, what is said by one Esteemed by
them A precious and gracious Minister, and Sufferer for the good Cause to boot.
But blessed be God! the Number of such Implicit Believers grows daily less,
and many, that had wont to do other-wise, begin to love to see with their own
Eyes, and not to pin their Faith so much upon the Clergy's Sleeve, as they had
used formerly to do. For this cause, had I had to do only with the more
Judicious and Learned, who could have well understood the Latin Edition, I
should have thought my self the less Concerned to have said any thing to this
Answer: But knowing, that his may come to the hands of many, and may be Read by
them, who do not understand Latin; and that not a few, who do understand it,
love rather to Read and Consider things in their own Language; this made me
hasten an English Edition, (not one Sheet whereof was Committed to the Press
several weeks after J. B's. Book came out.) And now it being abroad, as to
those, who are diligent and judicious, and willing seriously to Compare as to
the Argumentative part, I should not to be much concerned to Answer him;
judging the English Edition with all such a sufficient Reply to this pretended
Examination. However, J. B's. singing a Triumph before the Conquest.
he often times sings a Triumph to himself, saying in many places, What will
our Quaker say now? Contrary to the Rules of Sobriety, and to what the
Scripture teaches him, saying; Let not him boast, that puts on his Armor; but
he that takes it off: besides what his Brother in a most fawning, flattering
manner adds in his Postscript; (To which something may be said hereafter.) But
because too many out of Malice, Prejudice and Ignorance may be too apt to
Credit him, I resolve here to take notice of his gross Perversions and Abuses
upon every Thesis, and of his most Unreasonable and Brutish Railing: Which
being subjected to the Reader's View, will give him a great In-sight in the
matter, and let him see, what kind of Man this is, and what kind of Work it is
that comes from him? And likewise in respect he Insults very much; I may labor
to Allay it, in taking notice of his Chiefest Arguments, that are any ways to
the purpose. This, I know, will satisfy the Moderate and Judicious, who bring
not along with them an Understanding already Prepossessed; but are willing
patiently to hear both Parties, and then make a Judgment accordingly. And as
for others, who are wholly prepossessed with Malice and Prejudice, and have no
Ears to hear, but (according to the Author of the Postscript his Advice) Avoid
the least of that kind, as Poison; I say, as for such, I wish the Lord open
their Eyes, and give them a Heart more Just and Equal: I shall not be much
concerned, if my Writing have no great Influence upon them at present.

3. But if any Strange, that so small a Treatise, as this may seem to be,
should Answer so great a Bulk; the considering of these particulars following
will easily remove that Wonder.

1. If we Consider, how much is taken up in mere Railing, The Railing
Expressions of J. B's. a great part of his Book.
of which few Pages are found free; and sometimes takes up near the whole Page;
besides that almost every Paragraph ends with a Dish of this Desert, saying; O
what Hell-hatched Heresies these abominable Quakers maintain! And the like:
Besides many little Sentences, such as, This is an Answer fit for a Quaker:
This is like the Quakers Nonsense: I see the Quakers can dream waking, and
such like Stuff. I need not set down Pages to prove this; for as thou will find
a Specimen of it in the first half side to the Reader, so indeed thou wilt scarce
open the Book, but thou will meet with it: So that I may safely say (to speak
within bounds) there are 20 Sheets (if it were all put together) that are mere
Railing either by way of Admiration, Detestation or Execration; which have
nothing of Argumentation neither from Scripture, nor Reason, but the mere
strong Affirmo of the Assertor. All which (albeit I may Remark it, as I go on)
I think not my self concerned to Answer; nor do I Conceive, will any sober Man
judge, I am: and my Answer thereto, as now to the Bulk of it, so may perhaps
prove not much more all along, than, The Lord Rebuke that Railing Spirit in
thee J. B. and, if it may stand with his Will, Redeem thee from it; that thou
may learn Sobriety of that Grace of God, thou so much Fightest against! It is
a Trade I love not, nor do I skill or think to learn it; I will readily grant
him both the Preference and Victory in this Art of Billings-gate Rhetoric, or
(to speak yet more plain to all our Scots Capacities) of Rail-Wives Oratory: So
I say, Let all this Railing in his Book be laid aside. And whereas he would
Insinuate in several places, as if there were much Railing in my Apology,
saying, I Rage, and such like Expressions: How great an Abuse this is, I leave
to the Judgment of the Intelligent Reader.

2. If all his Excursions be laid aside, wherein he runs out often times
into long Homilies by way of Explanation of their Judgment, J. B. 's Excursions
and tedious Preachments.
descanting upon the several Opinions of their Divines (as he calls them) in
which he oftentimes not only bestows several Pages, but sometimes diverse
Sheets, as in its place may be observed: In all which Tedious Preachments (some
whereof are may be Shives of Old Rusty Sermons, that have been lying by him) I
think my self no more concerned, than if the Man had writ a great Volumn of
their Divinity; which I should not perhaps have bestowed the pains to Read, far
less looked upon it as my business to Answer it.

3. If all his Citations out of Hicks, Faldo and others, that have written
against us (all which are long ago Answered, His other Helps and Irrational
Proofs.
though not heeded by him) were laid aside, which is not only most Impertinent,
but likewise Unjust; (as shall be after more particularly observed:) and
likewise his long Citations out of the Westminster Confession of Faith, and
larger Catechism (a good part whereof he has Transcribed, and Inserted in his
Book: albeit it had been a great deal Easier, to have cited the Chapters, and
Referred to them, the Book being so Common; but it seems, it pleases the Man's
Humor to see a great Bulk go under his Name, however it be filled up.) And --

4. Lastly, If his many Perversions be considered, wherein he either wilfully
or ignorantly mistakes my Meaning, and sets up to himself a Man of Straw, and
then batters at it; I say, this being laid aside, which takes up no small part
of his work, will make a Considerable Abatement. Now all these things
considered, and all this superfluous and chaffy Stuff being laid aside, which
is little or nothing to the purpose, the Reader will find, that what remains,
will go into a pretty Narrow Compass, and bear no great Disproportion, if any
at all, with these my Observations.

J. B.'s Introduction with Malicious Railings.
4. But ere I make an End of this Section, I judge it needful to take some
notice of his Epistle, where the manner of his Introduction is very odd. Men
use to be sober and moderate, that write Controversies, in the beginning at
least, and not seek to prepossess the Reader with Prejudice against their
Adversaries, until by the Strength of their Reasons they have proved them to
deserve it; but this Man is so full fraughted with Malice, and so in love with
Railing, that he cannot forbear the first Page, where we have him calling us
Locusts, of whose Ministry the Devil makes use, only Masculine in Malice
against Christ, etc. -- Breathing forth nothing, but that Putrid Poison, that
innate, Serpentine Venom, etc. And of this Strain is the whole of his Epistle,
where we are termed Apostate-Quakers, Renegado-Quakers, etc. Page 2. and 3.
But methinks, it should have been more Rational to have forborne this, until he
had proved us such; and not to have begun thus to Rail without the least
Probation: But however this may take with Malicious or Credulous Persons, it
will give the Judicious a sufficient Taste of the Nature of his Work; and we are
not afraid of great Prejudice by this kind of Arguing. But as he goes on, he
gives us a clear Specimen of, what Spirit he is of; and abundantly shows, that
if either he had Power, or were Able to Influence the Magistrate thereunto, he
would have saved himself the Labor of all this Confutation, by making short in
Cutting us all off. His Persecuting Spirit.
For since he Represents us not only as the worst and vilest of Heretics, but
as the sworn and most-desperate Enemies of Jesus Christ in all his Offices; we
need not doubt, considering his Judgment expressed in the Case of Liberty of
Conscience, what he would have done with us. And albeit it might have been
judged, that in Prudence he should have let it alone, until that place; where
it seemed to be most proper, and only might be Inferred by way of Consequence:
yet in this, as in most other things, his Malice out does his Prudentials; and
therefore he cannot let three Pages pass, and that in the Epistle, till he
discover his Temper in this. For there he tells us a Story of a Turk, who
caused punish a Jew for blaspheming of Christ, to the shame of Christians, who
have not so much Zeal, etc. -- and a Redress of this (says he) is called for
at the Hands of one and other, according to their Place and Station. The
Language of this is sufficiently understood, and bears no small Reflection
upon Magistrates, as not being so forward to Persecute, as J. B. would have
them. And if we consider that Flood of Railing, that follows, the Application
is easy; and then, as he goes on, he takes a very convenient way, that he may
Rail securely and Calumniate without fear of being discovered. For he would
Fright People from so much as Coming near us; yea, he will have all fleeing
from us more hastily, than from Persons having the black Botch (such is his
Comely Expression) yea, and under the dreadful hazard of Incurring Anathema
Maranatha, so much as to enter into a Friendly Communing with us, give us the
least token of Kindness and Affection by word or deed! (What! not Feed us, if
ready to Starve? or Cloth us, if Naked? Prove. 25. ver. 21. Matthew. 5.44. Romans
12.20. Romans 7.2. Ephesians. 5. v. 25.
Which Christ commands all his Disciples to do to their greatest Enemies.) But
how would this Man have a Husband behaving toward his Wife, or a Wife toward
her Husband? If turning Quaker they must show one another no Token of Kindness
and Affection either in word or deed; when the Apostle encourages Christian
Husbands and Wives to live with one another respectively, if they be willing,
albeit professed Heathens and open Idolaters? But with him they must not so
much as show a Token so much as by one Cast of the Eye, far less by more Homely
Discoursings. And after the same manner a little after he would have all
forbear so much as looking into our Writings; to which, according to his
ordinary Style, he gives such Epithets as his Railing Genius affords him: a
very ready way for him to Belly and Calumniate us at pleasure. But upon this
occasion I would ask him this Question, If he judges it reasonable, that he,
that reads his Examination, should look into the Apology, to which it
relates, or unto that which is said by way of Reply to it, or if he would have
them taking all upon trust from him? Were not this a brave way of Examining
Controversies? And does not this fairly lead to the blind Ignorance and
Implicitness of the Church of Rome, and to the Custom of the Turks and Mahomet
's Rule? (whom he has so often in his Mouth.) I would willingly know, if the
Man would avow himself so Irrational, as to require or desire this of any body
in their wits? And yet he must be so Irrational, or otherwise allow the
breaking of the Rules he so earnestly presses.

5. After he has proceeded at the same rate of Railing, accusing us of Devilry,
and what not, (as for the Number of the poisonous Assertions, which he says he
has gathered together, it shall be spoken of hereafter, and his gross Abuse
therein detected) he comes at last to apprehend, That some will think, he is
too large; but he has a quick way of solving that Difficulty, J. B's. Reason
for his Prolixity.
by answering himself with a Contrary Apprehension, That more will blame him
for not being larger: And so this Objection is easily dispatched. As for the
Reason he gives of his Prolixity, to wit; because of the temper of the Quakers,
who would have been ready to Vaunt and Triumph, if he had omitted any thing:
But for all this Boast it shall be shown, that several times (as large as he
is) he has Omitted whole, Considerable Paragraphs, where he found, he would be
pinched, and that the matter was too hot for his Fingers, that he durst not
meddle with it. His Proofs from Westminster Confession and Catechism,
preferring them before Scriptures.
At last he comes to an Honest and Ingenuous Confession, That in most of the
Heads he has adduced for Confirmation only their Confession of Faith and
Catechism: A very plain Acknowledgment of the Nature of his Work; for he is
very good at begging the Question, and proceeding upon Principles denied by him
he has to do with. But the Judicious Reader may Judge, whether his Proofs be
very Valid and Binding, which are only Confirmed by that, which is Denied by
me; and which needs to be Confirmed no less, than the Arguments deduced from
it; since I account it no Confession of the True Faith: This is just, as if a
Papist, Arguing against a Protestant, should tell him; He uses only for
Confirmation the Decrees of the Council of Trent: how Ridiculous this is, any
Judicious Man may Judge. But since he has so great a Veneration of the
Confession of Faith, and also such an Itch of Scribbling, methinks, he should
not suffer it to lie so long under the Censure of that Examen, which was
written several years ago; and lies yet (for ought ever I could learn)
Unanswered: all the Notions of which albeit I will not Espouse; yet I think,
all J. B's. Clergy and Reason will not solidly Reply to it: and I am well
Assured, it has disgusted Hundreds of that Confession, who are not Quakers;
and also how weakly the Confession is Confirmed, and how grossly the Scriptures
are perverted to make them serve it, I have given a Taste in the last Chapter of
my Book, Entitled, A Catechism and Confession of Faith: which is not only
Extant in English, but he will find it also printed in Low Dutch; and should in
Reason have been removed by him, ere he had used it only for Confirmation in
Controversy against me. But there is something more in this Expression: for
when the Confession of Faith and Catechism is only adduced for Confirmation,
what becomes of the Scriptures, that in words are so highly Exalted? It seems,
notwithstanding all these Verbal Commendations he has no more use for them,
than for an Old Almanac: the Confession of Faith and Catechism is that, which
is to be minded. It seems, what he brings of them in this Controversy, is only
pro forma, for the Confession of Faith is only adduced for Confirmation; it is
the good Antidote against the many Errors of the Times: And whereas he speaks
of Apposite passages of Scripture, those that will Compare them with the things
they are pointed to prove, will find in most not the least Correspondence: of
which I have given some Proof in that place beforementioned.

6. But indeed, he has spoken out the Truth of the matter. For all their great
Talk of the Scripture it is manifest to such, as will narrowly look into it,
that not the Scripture, but the Confession of Faith and Catechism is their Rule
of Faith and Manners: For the Scriptures must serve the Confession of Faith,
not the Confession of Faith answer the Scriptures; which must be turned, twined
and wrested to suit to the Confession of Faith. Hence if a Man believe the
Scriptures ever so firmly, and square his Faith accordingly, unless he agree to
every point of the Confession of Faith, all is to no purpose, he must pass for
an Heretic.

At last to Conclude, he having, it seems, said all he has to say, makes
Provision not to be put upon the Necessity to Vindicate his gross Perversions
and Calumnies. As for his Comparison of Rats and Mice their dealing with Books,
he must know, I Intend not to square these Observations to gratify his Humor;
it will be enough for me to satisfy the Candid and Judicious Reader. He doubts
not to make a Judgment of things not yet in being, J. B. presumes to be Judge
in his own Cause.
and therefore Expects no Answer, that shall savor of Reason, Religion, Candor
and Plainness: We have seen that of him, which gives us ground to believe, he
has had enough Thoughts of us: But however, he must not expect to be Judge in
his own Cause. And whereas he says, He will not be troubled at our Railings
and Barkings; one may wonder, the Man has the Confidence to Accuse others, of
what himself is so highly guilty of: but he shall not need fear to be troubled
with such Stuff; and whether he gives or gets most of that, is Referred to the
Judicious Readers, to whose Judgment and Censure, whether he will or not, as
his Writings will be liable, so to them, and to their Christian Consideration I
freely Submit, what is written in these Observations.

SECT. II.
Wherein his Two First Chapters, containing Remarks upon my Preface, and the
First These Of the true Ground of Knowledge, are Considered.

1. UPon the Preface of my Theses, which is but about half a Dozen of Lines, he
bestows no less than twelve pages; all which being either bare Assertions, or
Railing (as cannot escape the diligent Reader's Observation) will therefore
Require the shorter Reply. He has not got the length of a Dozen of Lines, when
with a piece of Confidence he will seem so Modest, J. B.'s vain Pretense to
Modesty.
as Not to Pre-occupy the Reader 's Judgment, by calling the Theses, Ethnical
or Diabolical; but methinks, if he has not forgotten his Epistle, which we will
in Reason suppose the Reader to have first Viewed, in which (as is above
observed) there is enough of that sort said to Pre-occupy his Judgment: So that
he must needs put out his Eyes, that does not see, that his pretended Modesty
and Forbearance is not Real.

2. Next, because these Theses are directed by me to Clergymen of all sorts in
the Christian World, he will needs have it, that I acknowledge a Christian
World, to which my self, and those I patronize, do not belong; but how he makes
this Consequence appear, he leaves us to Divine: For there is no Proof brought
for it, but his own Assertion. He needs not Wonder, that I acknowledge a
Christian World, The Christian World so called from its outward Profession of
Christ.
unless he had known me somewhere to deny it; for in respect of Profession
(which Distinction himself elsewhere uses) all these may be accounted of it,
who make an outward Profession of Christ: Besides that I have sufficienly
acknowledged my belief, that in severals of them the Inward Life of
Christianity is to be found. As for what follows, he needs not doubt, but I am
as much against the Distinction of Laity and Clergy, The Word Clergy used by
the Author for Distinction's sake.
as himself can be: But since I writ to such, many whereof Own it, my Using it
to them for Distinction's sake, will not infer my Approving of it. With his
Usual Candor he will have this Direction to import no less than a Chartal, to
provoke all those it is directed to, to a Dispute; as if a man for removing of
Mistakes and Mis-representations could not give an Account of his Faith,
without it be Esteemed a Provocation to Dispute: If he really believes I
intended so, I must tell him, he is greatly Mistaken; and I Apprehend, I should
know my own Intentions large as well, as he. He is offended, that our Doctrines
should be thought as different from Papists, as Protestants; but with how
little ground, will after appear: And he also refers it to a fitter Probation.
Then, after he has knocked as hard as he can upon me, for my Confidence, he
tells me, That there is little said by me, but what was Refuted, ere I was
Born, by the Orthodox Writing against Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians,
Enthusiasts, Anabaptists and Papists: But methinks, then there was the less
need of troubling the World with his Volume: Yet he has for that a ready Salvo,
He must Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
Conceit. Some other Reasons he adds for Engaging in this his Work; which the
Reader may judge of, whether they be of any Weight.

3. As he goes on, he is greatly Offended, I should Style my self a Servant of
the Lord; and will have it to be upon no better ground, than Thomas Muncer and
the Annabaptists of Munster: But because all this is founded upon the
Supposition of my being a false Prophet, and Preaching another Gospel than the
true, we must leave it to the Reader's Judgment, after he has taken time to
Consider of the Whole Debate. But because he speaks here of the producing
Credentials, Which are the Priest's Credentials for his Ministry pretended.
I would willingly have him producing his Credentials for being a Minister of
the Gospel; and it may be then seen, if I cannot produce as valid, for any
thing I Style my self: only he must remember, That as his must have something
more than his own Affirmation, or those of his party; so he must overturn mine
with some stronger Arguments, than mere Railing.

4. He needs not Apprehend (as he would Insinuate) That the Omission of any
words in the Theses perfixed to the Apology, proceeds from my being Ashamed of
the name QVAKER; since himself bears witness in the very same page, that I
fully Acknowledge it in the Explanation of the Eleventh Thesis. Here he has a
Descant upon Trembling, and seems to strange, that any Quaker should bring the
Example of Moses and Habbakkuk, to show, that such a thing was not so much to
be wondered at in the Saints; but why this should be Esteemed Impertinent by
him, he does not tell us. As for the foaming at the mouth he talks of both here
and elsewhere, it is Returned upon him as a Calumny, and he is desired to prove
it; but it must be by some more Credible and Impartial Testimony, than his Mr.
Stalham: for Parties use not to be Admitted as Witnesses. For his denominating
us by that Name of Distinction, I shall not quarrel: But as for his Insinuation
in the beginning of page 5. where he says, It is like, J. B.'s malicious
Insinuation against our owning the H. Scriptures and Schools of Learning.
we would gladly have them casting away their Bibles, as no more to be
regarded, than the Turks Alcoran; it bespeaketh the Height of Malice: as to
which I shall only say, The Lord forgive him for so gross a Calumny, which he,
that is the Searcher of Hearts, knows to be a most horrible Lie! He goes on
after his usual manner, saying; I inveigh against all Humane Learning, that
has been any ways made use of in Theology; but where he finds this Asserted by
me, I know not: Whether the Words he would deduce it from, to wit, (That Man
has rendered the plain and naked Truth obscure and mysterious by his Wisdom)
will bear such a Consequence, is left to the Reader's Judgment. But he thinks,
he has found out our Secret Design of being against Learning and Schools of
Learning (which is neither our Affirmation, nor Principle, but his own false
Supposition) We would (says he) have all those Banished, that we might the
more easily prevail with our Errors: But methinks, the Man should be more wary
in venting his own false Imaginations, unless he could bring some ground for
them: For his Assertion is so far Untrue, that if he had been rightly Informed,
he might have known, that we have set up Schools of Learning for Teaching of
the Languages and other needful Arts and Sciences, and that we never denied its
Usefulness: Only we denied it to be a Qualification absolutely necessary for a
Minister; in which Case alone we have Opposed its Necessity.

5. He Confesses, I speak not amiss, in saying; The World is overburthened
with Books: but thinks, that my Apology of Fifty Sheets adds some Considerable
Weight. But methinks, he of all Men should have here been Silent, who has
troubled the World with an Examination of it a great deal Larger; albeit he
Confesses, All that is in it, has been Refuted by the Orthodox long ago: And
not only so, but since that he has Written a Book near Twice as Large upon one
Point, to prove the First Day of the Week to be the Christian Sabbath; and yet
is but the First Time, and seems but to be the Porch, of what he intends upon
that Subject. With his Usual Candor he says, I am against Disputes and
Debates, or Books written of that Nature: Solid Controversy for clearing the
Truth, useful.
But to infer simply, That I am against all such, because I Reprove the vain
Jangling, that has been and is among the Schoolmen, is an ill Consequence: He
shall not find me any where speaking against useful and solid Controversies for
clearing and maintaining of Truth. He seems not to disapprove, what I speak
against School Divinity, Confessing the Abuse of it; albeit he thinks, it has
been of Use: And as for this Imagination of my being Acquainted with it, we
will place it among his other Mistakes. He proceeds page 8. to say, I am
against the Labors of those, that have writ Commentaries; but his Conclusion
here is like others of this Nature: When I mention Commentaries, it is with
Relation to what goes before: He will not deny, but Many Books are written
under the Notion of Commentaries on the Scripture, by which the Truth has been
more Darkened, than Cleared; will it therefore follow, that he Condemns
Commentaries indefinitly? As for such Writings tending to the Opening of the
Scripture, in which the Authors are Acted and Influenced by the same Spirit,
from which the Scriptures came, and which alone can give the True Meaning of
them, I am so far from Condemning them, that I highly Approve them, as very
Beneficial to the Church of Christ. As for his Talk here of our Disrespect to
the Scriptures, I shall have occasion to take Notice of it, where they are
particularly treated of: But he is Apt to think, that the real ground of my
Prejudice against such Books is, because so much is to be found in them against
my Old Errors; for I cannot but know (says he) that whoever reads these, must
see my Nakedness and Folly without much Study: As for this Imagination we must
take it with much more, upon Trust; but this helps to prove the Needlesness of*
his large Examination.

6. At his usual rate of Perverting he goes on to say, That the Account I make
of all the Learned Men of the World, is, that they are Scribes and Disputers of
the World, etc. But for proof of this we have nothing: He Confesses, the Words
to be those of the Apostle; and how he proves, that I have a different Meaning
from the Apostle, I know not. After he has Commended his Learned Men, and
loaded the Quakers with Reproaches, he concludes this Paragraph, page 8. with
another Falsehood; and yet he will have it Remarked, to wit, That according to
my Judgment, the Pure and Naked Truth of God was never unfolded nor Declared,
until the Generation of the Quakers arose: But where he finds me saying so, he
tells not, and indeed cannot; since such a thing was never Asserted by me. For
Answer to my saying, That God has laid aside the Wise and Learned, and made use
of Illiterate Men, as to Letter-Learning, after he says, It is Affirmed
without Proof, (not considering, how Improper it was, not to Expect any formal
Probation upon the Occasion and manner it was delivered) he gives us diverse
Citations out of the Apostle Paul, warning against Seducers: All which I
acknowledge to be True; but the Question lies in the right Application: And
yet since, (albeit he believes, they very Appositly agree to us) he thinks it
not his present Business to Demonstrate it; it will need no Reply. After he has
proceeded in his Tenth page, according to his usual sort of Railing, affirming
the great Difference betwixt our Doctrine, and that of the Apostles, he brings
forth a mighty Charge, That I usurp the Throne of God, and Judge of Men's
Hearts and Intentions: (but how Guilty himself is of that Crime, has been in
part already shown, and will hereafter more appear.) But why do I so? because I
say, The Clergy have Clouded the Truth, The Clergy Clouding the Truth, that the
People might Admire and Maintain them.
that the Common People might Maintain and Admire them: But have not
Protestants, and that truly Asserted this of the Popish Clergy? and is not the
Thesis directed to such? Will it not then hold True (according to his own
Judgment) of a great, yea the greatest Part of those, to whom it is directed?
what then will become of his Clamours? Yea, if it were needful, I could give
Instances of very Mean Thoughts he and his Party have of many of the Protestant
Clergy; yea, and Reflections not much (if any thing) inferior to this, to
verify, with how little Ground he quarrelleth me here. As for his Malicious
Aspersion, That there are shrewd Presumptions, our Stock lies at Rome; he
should have produced some of them, if he could: We could never yet Obtain for
this Old Calumny from our Adversaries the least Probation; and it will be found
as hard for him to prove it, as he may think it for such, who strongly Affirm,
Their great IDOL, the COVENANT, was Contrived at Rome, and came from thence. As
for his Reflections upon our Church, as being All Eyes and Ears; it will be
proper to speak of it in its own Place. Next, to prove the Positions of the
Quakers to be such, as overturn and destroy the Gospel, he brings ( page 11.)
diverse Citations out of Mr. Norton and Mr. Stalham (as he terms them) adding;
More may be had out of Mr. Hicks: J. B.'s False witnesses, contributing to his
bulky Book.
But such Witnesses will have small Credit with Impartial Readers: If he
himself had dealt Impartially, he should have first read our Answers to them,
ere he had given them such Authority. It were Easy for me, by way of Reply to
Transcribe, what our Friends have written particularly by way of Answer to
them; did I as much Affect to have my Writings bulky, as it seems he does. He
closes up this with a Fit of Railing: and after he has quarrelled me page 12.
for having an high Conceit (as he imagines) of my Theses, he falls fresh to
that Work again, telling; They have Weight to sink into the bottomless Pit the
poor Soul, that embraces them: I never sought, any should Receive Doctrines as
Truth, upon my Bare Testimony; and therefore he needs not Vpbraid me with so
doing. And whereas on the Contrary, (as himself immediately Observes) I leave,
what I say, to the LIGHT in every Man's Conscience; it shows, with how little
Reason he made his former Alledgance. After he has pleased himself with making
an Impertinent Conjecture of the Import of these Words, that so he might, if he
could, render them Ridiculous; he comes at last to the True Understanding of
them: And truly, he needed not fear at my being offended, that he should make a
Judgment, of what I writ, according to his Conscience; but he went the wrong
way to Work, when his Labor is to pervert and wrest, and make them speak, what
they do not. This apparently proceeds from Malice and Prejudice; and the Light
of his Conscience, if he had minded it, would never have prompted him so to do.
Thus I am come to the End of the First Chapter.

7. In the Second Chapter, Entitled, Of the true Ground of Knowledge, I find,
he cannot Contradict, what is Asserted by me; only because he must be Carping,
he makes a Noise, that Joh. 17.3. cited by me, So much of the Sentence was not
set down in the First, as Second Edition. What a pitiful Cavil this is, the
Reader may easily judge: since the Place was noted, it was enough, though never
a Word had been set down; but this with him is a bad Omen: Let the Judicious
judge of this Man's Judgment in the Matter. But because he cannot Quarrel, at
what is said, he will quarrel, That so much is not said, as he judged meet: But
he may be pleased to understand, that I judged my self under no Necessity to
Advise with him, what was Needful for me to Write. But (says he) since I take
upon me to Teach the whole World, (it is strange, it should be so Natural for
this Man to write Untruths; since I direct my Theses only to the Christian
World: But if it may render me odious, such Peccadillo's pass with him, it
seems, but for Piae Frauds:) I intended never to write of those things,
concerning which we do not differ from others. But let us see, wherein he
accounts me Defective. I have Written nothing (says he) of the Nature and
Attributes of God: I write not to Atheists, but Christians, who already
acknowledge; and I judge it not my Work to write Books to persuade Men of that,
they already profess to believe. But I write not Expressly and Distinctly of the
Trinity; Trinity (so called,) spoken of by the Author.
yet himself after acknowledges ( page 24.) That it would seem, I am Orthodox
herein; that he finds not any Clear Ground to the Contrary: I writ as Expressly
and Distinctly of that, as is Expressed in Scripture; which I hope, J. B. will
not say is defective in sufficiently Expressing this Article of Faith.

8. The Third Challenge is, I speak nothing of God's Decrees, by which some are
praedestinated to Life, others Foreordained to Death; (for the Man without
Ceremony takes the Doctrine for granted:) But if I have spoken nothing of this,
(though perhaps not in the Method he would) how Extravagant must he be, that
writes a whole Chapter upon Reprobation, as pretending to Refute, what I have
said concerning it. With the like Confidence (not to say Impudence) he accuses
me of Silence in relation to the Covenants; to the Redemption purchased by
Christ; his taking Flesh upon him; to the Work of Grace and Sanctification; to
Obedience to the Law of God: Which Gross Abuse any one that reads my Book, will
easily see; considering, how much, and how particularly these things are spoken
to in the Explanation of the 5, 6, 7, and 8. Theses. Last of all he accuses me
for giving no Account of the Resurrection of the Body: Resurrection of the Body
owned by us.
But do I not expressly in my Conclusion Affirm, that those, that accuse us of
denying of it, belie us? and does not that clearly import an Owning? But as to
that Matter (because I love not Repetitions, as he does, who will be upon one
Matter often, and out of its proper place) I will Refer, what further I have to
say, until I come to his last Chapter. At last, after he has Confessed in part,
to what I Affirm, he Craves Liberty, because some may put a wrong Foundation
for the right, to Examine, what by me is placed for it; which Liberty is freely
granted him: (for I am a great Enemy to Implicit Faith, as well the Popish, as
Presbyterian, who in that are much^what alike) and I will take also Liberty to
Re-examin his Examination, that I may free my self of those many Abuses,
wherewith he has Injured me.

SECT. III.
Wherein his Third Chapter of Inward and ^mmediate Revelation is Considered.

1. THat I may not trouble the Reader with a long and taedious Pursuit of J. B.
in all his Extravagant Rambles and Unreasonable Railings (wherein he accuses me
as an Ignoramus, writing Nonsense and Confusion. page 39. (more of that kind
in page 31.) while yet to his own Confusion (page 40 and 41. The Priest's
professed Ignorance.
) he says, He knows not, what I mean, nor what I would prove; nor what my
Arguments must Conclude: Wherein if he speak true, he declares himself
Incapable to Judge of, and far less to Answer my Arguments) a large
Disquisition of his Impertinency in which things I willingly Omit; and will
Consider this his Chapter as well where he misses, as where he truly in any
measure urges the Matter. And first to dispatch what is Superfluous, all that
is said by him against False Revelations and Delusions of the Devil (against
which he speaks sometimes more largely, sometimes more overly in page 21, 22,
34, 35, 36, 47.) no Judicious Reader will think, is any thing to the purpose;
False Revelations and Delusions disowned by the Quakers.
since I never did plead for False Revelations, but for the Necessity of the
True Revelation of the Spirit to all real Christians. And though it could be
proved, that either I, or any other Quaker, (so called) were deluded by a false
Revelation; yet it will not thence follow, That our Asserting the Necessity of
True Revelation to the building up of True Faith, is Erroneous, more than in J.
B.'s own sense the Arminians or Socinians Asserting False Doctrines, pretending
to have for them the Authority of Scripture, will make him Judge, that their
Asserting the Scripture to be the Only and Adequate Rule of Faith, is False in
his Judgment, since he therein Agrees with them. And therefore his
Disingenuity, as well as Weakness does notably appear page 46, 47 and 48. where
coming to take notice, of what I have said, in showing, how the same may be
returned upon such, as own the Scripture, Reason and Tradition to be the Rule
of their Faith, he gives it no Answer; and most Effrontedly comes up with his
often- Reiterated Story of John a Leyden and Munster, (with which we are less
concerned, than himself.) Notwithstanding that I show, that even men pretending
to the Scripture, and to be led by it, and in particular his own Brethren, had
done no less vile Actions, than those of Munster; and yet he would not think it
well Argued to Infer thence, that it were Dangerous to follow the Scripture, as
the Rule. To all this he returns no Answer, which takes up six pages in my
Apology (Lat. Ed. page 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.) unless it be a sufficient
Answer to say, He needs not take notice of my Trifling Answers, and that it is
a mere Rapsody. But the Truth is (to use his own Expression) It was too hot for
his Fingers; and therefore he judged best to shuffle it by so easily. But his
Vnfairness in this is so much the more Considerable, (where the pinch of the
Question lay, J. B. finds it too hot to Touch with Truth.
and his own and his Brethrens Reputation was so highly Concerned, as being
charged as Guilty of no less Abominations, than the Monsters of Munster) in
that he boasts in his Epistle to the Reader, That he has Examined every thing
Asserted by me, particularly; which he gives as the Reason of troubling him
with so Prolixe a Treatise.

2. Now albeit I might in reason pass his new-Inforced Objection, till he have
satisfied to this so shameful an Omission; yet lest he should fancy any
Strength in it, and to show him the Silliness of it, I will here Consider and
Remove it. It runs thus, page 46.

If, since the Apostles and other Extraordinary Officers fell asleep, and after
the Canon of the Scriptures was Completed, J. B. 's Argument.
All that have pretended to Immediate Revelation, have been led by a Spirit of
Error, Then that is not the Way of Christ.

But the former is true:

Therefore so is the other.

Such an Objection is not like to signify much, both Propositions the Question
is most miserably begged, and the thing in debate taken for granted. J. B.
Argues without Proof.
For albeit the Connection of the Major should be granted; yet the Question is
there in a great part of it begged, to wit, that such Officers in the Church,
as were the Apostles, are not now, neither as to the Nature of their Office,
nor Manner of their being led by the Spirit. Next, That the Canon of the
Scriptures is Completed: That is to say, No Writings are ever hereafter to be
expected or believed to be written by the Spirit; both which I deny, and he has
not so much as offered to prove: and therefore his Argument, if I should go no
further, can Conclude nothing. Next, his Minor, to wit, That all pretending to
Immediate Revelation, have been led by a Spirit of Error, is not at all proved
by him: For albeit it might be said of all those Old Sects named by him, and of
the German Enthusiasts; yet that is not sufficient Proof, unless he can make it
appear, that there was never any other, but were so also: which yet remains for
him to Prove, and will trouble him to Effect. For to Affirm, there were never
any, because he has never heard nor read of them, were an Argument a great deal
more Ridiculous, than Rational. And for his Challenging me to show them,
(albeit the Instance of the Quakers be enough to spoil all his Argument, as
will after appear) yet by his good Leave, I am not bound; Affirmanti incumbit
probatio. And that this Answer is sufficient, I have the Testimony of his
Learned Brother John Menzies, Professor of Divinity at Aberdeen, in his Book
Entitled, Papismus Lucifugus, where he Answers the Jesuit's Minor the same
way, and proves it to be Sufficient. And surely, he has not taken notice, that
by this he has Condemned, as led by a Spirit of Error, all the Primitive,
Protestant-Martyrs, that Prophesied at any time; such as John Huss, and George
Wishart our Countryman, and many others, by reason of whose Prophesying J. B.
and his Brethren have valued their Cause: J. B's. condemning the Primitive
Martyrs as led by a Spirit of Error.
since these Prophecies were said by them to proceed from Inward and Immediate
Revelation, and so they pretended to it; albeit not as the ground of their
Faith and Obedience in all matters of Doctrine and Worship, yet as the ground
of that Faith, by which they believed these Revelations to proceed from God,
and not from the Devil; and of that Obedience, by which they published and
declared these things. Moreover he Overturns all by the last Instance, which he
gives to prove it, to wit, That the Quakers, who pretend to Immediate
Revelations, are led by a Spirit of Error: For Proof of which we have only his
bare Affirmation; and yet till this be proved, his Objection is naught. For
indeed, this is a rare way of debating with an Adversary, to make use of an
Argument, by which he must be Concluded already as Erroneous, in order to
Convince him, that he is such: If this be not, as they say, To put the Plough
before the Oxen, I know not, what can be said to be so. For J. B's. Argument,
to make it plain, amounts to this; J. B's. Argument against Immediate
Revelation.
If the Quakers be led by a Spirit of Error, Then the Quakers Err in affirming,
Inward and Immediate Revelation to be the Ground and Foundation of true Faith;

But The Quakers are led by a Spirit of Error:

Therefore, etc.

Which is just, as if I should Argue, thus: If J. B. be a Knave, a manifest
Liar and Calumniator, Then he is not a true Minister of Christ, nor fit to
write in Religious matters:

But J. B. is such:

Therefore, etc.



Is not this a notable way of Arguing, and a quick Way to dispatch
Controversies? What says Robert Macquair? Does not this well become his
singularly Acute, solidly Learned, and truly gracious Author? (Postscript page
559.)

The next thing to be considered, is, His Stating the Controversy; Where,
according to his Custom, he all along beggs the Question. For having writ down
his Opinion, and taken it for granted, without offering to prove it, he goes on
and builds thereon without more difficulty, as if it were not to be further
questioned. This appears in page 20.28.29.30.34.35.36.37.40.43.44. in which
places he states his Opinion of the Immediate Revelation of the Spirit, What J.
B. will have Revelation by the Spirit to be?
as not being such, as presents any Truths to be believed objectively; but only
in removing the Vail of the Eye of the Understanding, and spiritually
Illuminating the Mind, and Working effectually upon the Heart, to embrace and
receive the Truth already Revealed and Proposed in the Scriptures. Now for not
using this Distinction and holding Revelation in this his sense, he greatly
blames me, as jumbling things together, and darkning and pre-judging the
Reader; and bestows upon me ever and anon many Railing Words: with the
Repetition of which I will not trouble the Reader. And yet notwithstanding this
Accusation, in Contradiction of himself he cites me page 42. and 28. taking
notice of this very Distinction, as used by some, and also Refuting it: Surely,
the Man must have miserably forgot himself; and will verify the Proverb: Liars
should have good Memories. Next: Since he judges I Err, in not holding this
manner of Revelation? and that he builds all his Superstructure upon it, as the
Truth; he should have offered to prove it to be such: For since he says, They
willingly grant to these Scriptures noted by me, As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, etc. Romans 8.9, 14. together with 1 John 2.27. Joh. 6.45. Joh.
14.16, 17. By which Scriptures he cannot deny, but the manner of the Apostles
being led, as well as of all Christians, is Included; since some of them were
directed to the Apostles particularly: In all which there is no ground for his
Distinction and Assertion. It is not said, The Comforter, that I will send,
shall lead you, the Apostles, immediately, by proposing Truth to be believed
objectively to you, and this shall be accounted Extraordinary; but after you it
shall only lead other Christians by Illuminating their Understandings, and that
shall be the Ordinary Leading. And since then it is a Rule granted by all, that
we must hold to the plain Words of Scripture, unless an Urgent Necessity force
us to the Contrary; he should show us, where this Necessity lies? and prove,
his Assertion to be the true and genuine Meaning of the Words; and that we
ought not to take them, as we do, according to their plain and naked
Signification and Import. For I would willingly hear any ground from Scripture
of this Nature of Extraordinary and Ordinary Revelations, as pertinent to this
Debate: For albeit Things Extraordinary may be Revealed to some, and not to
others, that only respects the Things Revealed, not the manner of Revelation.
For a Man telling me Extraordinary things, and Ordinary, albeit the things may
differ in their Nature, yet neither my manner of Hearing, nor his of Speaking
do thence necessarilly differ.

But perhaps the Man does Apprehend, that what he says, page
20.30.31.40.44.45. is some Proof of his Assertion; (which if he do, the Reader
may easily observe his Mistake) where he would Insinuate: As if the manner of
Immediate Revelation by the Spirit (asserted by me) rendered all other Means,
Mediate Instruction not Inconsistent with Immediate, Revelation.
even those of Teaching and Exhorting ( which are appointed by God) useless,
and took away all Obligations of Obeying the Commands of God conveyed by
others. And yet he takes notice, page 23. that I acknowledge Other Means of
Knowledge as profitable; neither has he ever heard me deny: But Men are obliged
to obey the Commands of God through one another, as well as in themselves; as
the Children of Israel were those of Moses and the Prophets, and the Christians
those of Christ and his Apostles. But I suppose, he will Affirm with me, That
no Man's Obedience to any Command will avail him any thing, unless upon Inward
Belief and Conviction, that the thing Commanded is of God; since whatsoever is
not of Faith, is sin. If he say, That albeit I do not deny such an obligation;
yet it necessarily follows from my Principle: That this is untruly Alleged,
will easily appear; since I suppose, he will deny, but the Rest of the
Apostles, who were alive, when Paul's Epistles were written, were obliged to
receive them, and obey them, as the Dictates of the Spirit, yea, and were
benefitted by them; and so the Apostle Paul by others: Albeit on both sides he
will acknowledge them to have had such Revelations, as he accounts Immediate
and Extra-ordinary. And so we see, that to have such Revelations, and yet to be
Mediately Instructed, are not Inconsistent; nor do they render one another
Useless: And indeed, to affirm they do so, is rather a presumptuous Accusing of
God, who has Appointed both in their Order for the Edification of his Church,
than a Refuting of such as Assert them. Such are his Reasonings, page 45.
Besides that, this Objection may be easily Refuted: for since J. B. affirms,
(as particularly page 42.) That the Scripture is a Complete Rule in all things
concerning Faith and Manners in reference to Salvation; might it not be said,
that this takes away the Use of all Commentaries and Expositions, Then J. b's.
etc. Exposition and Commentaries are of no use.
and other Books, especially, since he and his Brethren do withal Affirm, that
it is Clear and Intelligible to all, in things Essential to Salvation? Let him
show, how this is weaker as to him, than the other, as to me. With the like
presumption he blasphemously Asserteth, That even these Revelations (which he
himself calls and acknowledges to be Inward, Immediate and Extraordinary)
are Uncertain for this Reason, because many Men have been deluded by the Devil:
On which he also Insists in the following page. And page 34. and 48. where he
sums up his matter in this Question, How comes it, that others pretending to
Revelation as much as I, have been deceived? But as I said before, How comes,
that others pretending to be led by the Scripture, as the Rule, as much as J.
B. have been deceived, since the Scripture declares nothing but Truth? But how
silly this is, I have above shown; and more largely in my Apology in those
Paragraphs, which I observed, he most foully Omitted. And indeed, this is a
fine Argument he has provided for Atheists and Scepticks; for it renders all
Faith, even that of the Patriarchs, Uncertain. For since the Ground and Warrant
of their Writing the Scriptures was (in his own account) Inward, Immediate and
Extraordinary Revelations, and if such be, as he affirms, Uncertain, J. B.
Asserts Revelation to be Uncertain.
then the Truth of the Scriptures, which depends upon such, must necessarily be
Uncertain; since the Stream cannot be more pure, than the Fountain, nor the
Superstructure more sure than the Foundation. And therefore most weak is his
Reasoning, page 46. where he pleads, That such Revelations cannot be more
sure than the Scriptures, which are the Objective Revelations of the Apostles
written down; since the Certainty of these Writings depends upon the Certain^y
of these Revelations, by which they were Written. And Certainly, if in any Case
that Maxim of the Schools do hold, it must in this; Propter quod unumquodque
est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale.

5. It will not be amiss here in the Third place to take notice of his most
Uncharitable and Unchristian Insinuations, contrary to all Christian and Fair
Rules of Debate, As first, page 24. where he will needs Infer our Denying of
the Trinity: albeit he cannot deny, but he finds it owned by me; groundlesly
coupling us with the Socinians. And to help him in this, he brings in the
Testimony of one Mr. Stalham (as he terms him) an open Opposer of ours; which
Witness to receive against us, is most Unjust. But I desire here in the Entry,
that it be observed, that I intend to take little or no notice of his many
Citations, to prove what we Hold, out of the Writings of our open Opposers; and
shall give such a sufficient Reason for my so doing, ere I make an end, as I am
hopeful, shall satisfy all Judicious Readers as well of our Innocence, as his
Injustice therein. But by this the Man's Temper may be seen, and that his
Design is not so much to Refute, what we truly hold; as to make the world
believe, that we hold what we do not, to render us the more Odious. J. B's
Enforcing false Beliefs and Doctrines upon the Quakers from the lying Books of
their Opposers.
And thus he proceeds also basely to Insinuate, That I deny Jesus of Nazareth
to be the Son of God; albeit he does not so much as pretend to any Color for it
from my Words: Only he finds, Some Quakers give an Indistinct Answer in this
matter; but who they are, or what their Answer is, he tells not. In pursuance
of this in the following page he Insinuates, As if I mean'd not the first, but
the second Creation; and so joined with Socinus: Which is a gross Calumny, like
the former: As also is, what he says page 31. number. 18. where he raileth
against me, as Writing things contrary to the Scriptures, and as one, whose
Revelations are not from God, but from Satan. For all this the only proof is, [
I B. says so:] which I must plainly tell him, is with me of no Weight at all.
Of the same nature is, what is Asserted by him page 33. number. 20. wherein he
insinuates, That we Contemn the Scriptures; telling a lying Story from his
Author Mr. Hicks of one Nicolas Lucas: which I desire him to prove the next
time not by Hicks (for he is Accuser) but by some more Indifferent Witness;
else to be justly held as a Calumniator. And whereas he says, We should not
obtrude any thing upon them without Scriptures: This is another lying
Insinuation. For where do we obtrude any Doctrines without offering to Confirm
them by Scripture, as much as he and his Brethren? For if he say, That our
Confirmations are not Valid; that is not to the purpose: we can easily say so
of his, and do as truly believe it. But the Question is, Whether we obtrude any
Doctrines upon any to be believed, telling them, they ought to believe it;
albeit we either will not or can not Confirm them by the Scripture? Now he
knows in his Conscience this to be a lie; since I Affirm of the Scriptures,
Apol. Lat. Ed. p. 47. and n. 60. That they are the most fit, Outward Judge of
Controversies; of which himself also takes notice in that place. And lastly,
of the Nature of these malicious Insinuations is, what he says page 48. and
49, and last Paragraph of this Chapter; where, after he has Repeated, what he
terms my Monitory Conclusion, he infers: That I mean, that a man should
believe, that Nature's dim Light is the Spirit of God and the Holy Ghost; and
that he may burn the Bible, J. B 's. Calumnious Meaning he puts upon the Author.
and with Confidence assert, he is led by the Holy Ghost; whatever Scripture or
Common Sense say to the Contrary. This is all Affirmed by him without the least
Proof; which as it is the Height of Injustice, so it is with respect not only
to my Words, but Belief and Intention, (God the Searcher of Hearts knows) a
most-horrid Falsehood and Calumny.

6. Now, albeit what is said, may seem sufficient for a Reply to this Chapter,
and is indeed enough to give any sober Man a Disgust of it; yet that he may not
have reason to Complain, that any thing, wherein he may judge there is Weight,
and is directly to the purpose, is Omitted; I will now in the last place
Consider and Answer, what he says against the Validity of my Arguments, to
which an Answer has not been Included, in what is already said. To begin then
like himself (which to be sure is with some Calumny or other) he says page 14.
I stigmatize with the black mark of being Carnal and Natural Christians, all
that Assent not, to what I say: But he takes no time to prove it, and indeed
cannot. For albeit I say, that It is like, many Natural and Carnal Christians
will Condemn, what I say; yet it will not follow, I account them all such, who
will not fully agree with me in this matter. Of the same kind is his Calumny,
p. 22. n. 5. where he alleges, The Citations of the Fathers (so called) prove
no more, than his sense of Revelation above expressed: But whether he speaks
true here or not, the Reader may Judge by seriously Reading over these
Citations; and then let him see, if they do not hold out An Inward and
Immediate Teaching of the Spirit of God in the Soul, as the firm ground of
Knowledge, without which all outward Teaching is in vain. But to Infer this, he
tells, They writ against such, as being Impostors and led by the spirit of the
Devil, pretended to Revelations. What then? Can not men write against false
Revelations, without they deny the Necessity of true Ones? That is an odd
Conclusion: If I. B. were well acquainted with the Writings of the Quakers (so
called) he would find them as much against false Pretenders, as any other. But
page 24. and 25. he finds fault with my Argument deduced from these words,
That there is no knowledge of the Father, but by the Son; because I take
notice, as a First Instance, of God's Creating all things by Jesus Christ;
adding, Was this so difficult a point to be proved, that I was constrained to
go back to the first Creation for an Argument? Answ. No: But I judged it not
Improper (however he may) to show first, as Preparatory, God's more general way
of working by his Son Jesus Christ, ere I come to that, which is more
particular; and this was the Reason as well of my putting these Propositions
into that Order as of my using of that Instance, by which that pretended
Abomination, which he pretends lurks under words, evanisheth. For the Man is
very good at drawing Inferences from other men's Words, which they, that spoke
and wrote them, never thought of; as I for one can very well witness, since the
least can be allowed me, is to know my own Thoughts and Purpose; which how he
should come to Assure himself, he knows better than I, is more than I can
fathom. For the same Reason above mentioned I used the Instance of God's moving
in his manifesting himself in his Creatures, and of the Spirit of the Lord's
moving upon the face of the waters; which page 26. he flouts at, but does not
Answer. And it is strange, that he of all men should be offended with such
Preparatory Considerations, where the Matter is in a few pages after closely
come to; who has used so many Remote Arguments and several not pages only, but
sheets, yea quires of paper in order to prove the First Day of the Week to be
the Christian Sabbath. He objects page 26. against my affirming, That God's
Communion with man was by Immediate Manifestation of the Spirit, Immediate
Revelation under the Law, not Ceased under the Gospel.
from Adam to Moses, because so few are mentioned; and he supposes, the Rest
not-mentioned: had it only by their Instruction: But since these few, that are
mentioned, are said to have had Immediate Revelation, and that the Rest had no
written Rule, as I. B. will Confess, it seems, there was more of God's
Immediate Revelation in those dark Times (even by his Confession) than now
under the Gospel, where the Chief Pastors of the Church, according to him, are
to Expect no such thing. Neither is it proved, that others not mentioned, had
no Immediate Revelations; albeit they might have been Instructed by these
Patriarchs: which I have shown before to be very Consistent. And thus may be
easily Answered (setting aside his Railings) what he says page 27. against my
Urging the Frequent Revelations, that men had during all the time of the Law,
betwixt Moses and Malachy, (by which himself confesses, the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament to have been written) that that does not prove, that
every one had such Revelations: What then? I lay not the stress of the Proof of
Every one's having Immediate Revelations upon this; but this is clearly proved
from it: That since Immediate, Inward and Objective Revelations were so
frequent during all the time of the Law, which was the less-glorious
Administration, and that of the Letter; it is grossly absurd to say, as I. B.
and his Brethren do, that they are now Ceased under the Gospel, which is said
to be more-Glorious, and the pouring forth of the Spirit more abundant and
Universal; and that not only for a little time, to wit, to the Apostles, with
Restriction to them and their Times, (for which he never produced the least
proof from Scripture) but to the End of the World. And if so, that Immediate
Revelation be not Ceased, there is a great deal of the point gained; albeit I.
B. confidently Affirms, J. B. believes, God spoke his last Words to his Church
at the End of the Revelations.
that there can be proved nothing by these Reasonings, but what no body will
deny; since the Divines of Westminster have denied, and I. B. no doubt, with
them will deny, That Immediate Revelation now is; since they positively say,
That it is Ceased: and James Durham, whom I. B. applauds as a Reverend Brother
and Pastor of the Church, has most absurdly affirmed in his Treatise upon the
Revelation; That when John finished that Book, God spoke his last words to his
Church.

7. When he comes page 28. to my Proposition, Asserting, That these
Revelations were of old the Formal Object of Faith, he begins to Inquire and
Conjecture, what I mean by the Formal Object? and upon that he bestows the
following page. For answering then his Scruples in that matter, I say, In a
Divine Revelation two things are to be considered, 1. The thing Revealed, and
2. The Revelation. The Thing Revealed is indeed the Material Object; The
Revelation is the Formal Object: In which may be considered not only The Manner
of the Revelation, The Material and Formal Object of Faith distinguished.
that is, the Voice or Speech of God unto the Soul, or his Imprinting in the
Soul by a Divine Manifestation the things Revealed; but also God himself so
Operating: both which, to wit, Deus loquens, id est, God speaking, is the
Formal Object of Faith; He himself, his Veracity is the Original Ground of our
Faith; His Voice, Holy Influence and Manifestation, by which he Expresses
himself, gives us the Certainty and Assurance, that it is He; and is very
distinguishable by those of a Spiritual Discerning, from the most subtle
Appearance and Transformations of the Devil: since Christ says, My Sheep hear
my Voice, and will not hear that of a Stranger. Even as the Voice and
Appearance of two Men of the most contrary and different Humors, Statures and
Complexions, are different and distinguishable by a Man of a sharp Sight, to
whom those Men are well known: But of this I wrote more largly in my Letter to
a certain Ambassador, printed the last Year at Roterdam, at the End of the
Letter written to the Ambassadors of Nimmegen; whereto I refer him for further
Satisfaction. But I wholly deny the Consequence deduced by him, that if God's
Veracity, (because it is God that speaks and commands) be the formal Object
of Faith, therefore it is all one, whether it be Mediate or Immediate: Since
albeit that be the Original Ground; yet the Immediate Revelation is necessary,
that we may certainly know, that it is he. For what avails it me to believe,
That all that God Commands, is True, and ought to be Obeyed; if I do not
certainly know the things I believe as Truth, do come from him? And the
Question is, Whether certain Knowledge can be had without Immediate Revelation?
And therefore to this his Question, in the following page 30. What was the
formal Object of the Faith of the People, to whom the Patriarchs and Prophets
said, [Thus says the LORD?] I answer; The Inward Testimony of the Spirit in
their Heart, assuring them, That the things spoken were from the Lord, and not
the Divinations of the Men's Brains, that spoke them; and therefore inclining
their Hearts to receive and acknowledge these things, as the Commands of God
unto them: Since, as J. B. Confesses, They were not to believe them, because
spoken by those Men, but because of the Authority of God; It must be, that
which wrought this Persuasion and Assurance in them, was the formal Object of
their Faith, as the things spoken were the Material: Even as the Light serves
by way of formal Object, to make us see, what is proposed unto us.

8. Page 31 and 32. he acknowledges, That Divine and Inward Revelations need
not be tried by the Scripture, as a more Noble Rule, by him who has such a
Revelation; but by those, to whom he delivers it: And then gives the Instance
of the Beraeans being Commended. To which I shall willingly Assent: judging, no
Man that delivers or declares a Revelation to another, ought to be offended,
that he Try it by the Scripture; which no true Revelation can Contradict. The
Spirit of God in the Heart to try Revelations by is a more noble Rule, than the
Scriptures.
But that such may not also Try it by the Testimony of the Spirit of God in
their Hearts, I cannot deny; and that it is the More Noble Rule, as being most-
Universal: Since some Divine Revelations, such as Prophecies of Contingent
Truths, or things to come, cannot be Tried by the Scriptures; as was that of
George Wishart concerning the Cardinal's Death: For had another taken upon him
at that time to Prophesy the quite Contrary, I would willingly be informed, by
what Scripture it could be deduced or known, that the one was false, or the
other true? yet who will be so absurd, as to deny, but that it could by the
Immediate Testimony of the Spirit? As for his Proof, That the Scripture is the
most certain Rule, taken from those Words 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. We have also a more
sure Word of Prophecy, etc. It is but a begging of the Question, in supposing,
that Peter by this understood the Scripture; and indeed is most Ridiculous to
Affirm. For since the Apostle reckons this Word more sure, than the Voice they
heard with their outward Ears, J. B. pleads the Scriptures to be the more sure
Word of Prophecy.
and the Vision they saw with their outward Eyes; it were absurd to affirm,
that the Description or Narration of a thing were more sure, than the Immediate
Seeing and Hearing it. Can any Description I may receive of J. B. however True,
give me so certain a Knowledge of him, as if I saw him and spoke with him? Yet
without any absurdity it may be said, That the Inward Word or Testimony of the
Spirit in the Heart is more sure in things Spiritual, than any thing that is
objected to, or conveyed by the outward Senses, as that Vision was, of which
the Apostle there speaks; since the Inward and Spiritual Senses are the most
proper and adequate Means of conveying Spiritual Things to the Soul, by which
the Saints, after they have laid down this Body, and have no more the Use of
the Outward Senses, which are seated in it, do most surely enjoy the Blessed
Vision of God, and Fellowship both with him and one another. As for that of
Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, etc. and that of Joh. 5.39. Search
the Scriptures, etc. mentioned here by him, I shall have occasion to speak of
them hereafter. It Is true, We are not to believe every Spirit; but it will not
thence follow, that the Scripture is a more sure Rule, than the Spirit for such
a Trial. Page 35. he thinks, My saying, That the Divine Revelation moves the
Understanding well disposed, Confirms what he says, and spoieth all my
Purpose; because then Every Revelation pretending to be Divine, is not to be
submitted to: But where did ever I say so? What he talks further of this
Well-disposed Intellect (page 36.) I spoke to in my Answer to Arnoldus, page
18, 19. to which I refer. For I believe, All Men in a Day have, by the gracious
Visitation of God's Love, an Understanding well disposed to some Divine
Revelations; which becomes Disposed for others, as these are Received: which
will after in its place be discussed. And some Divine Revelations, which are
Prophetic of things to come, may so far manifest themselves by their
Self-Evidence even to Men not Regenerate, as to force an Assent; as in the Case
of Balaam mentioned by him, did apper. What he says further, page 36 and 37.
inquiring, How and after what manner these Revelations were the Object of the
Saints Faith of Old? is easily answered, by applying it, to what is before
mentioned in Answer to his Queries and Conjectures of the Formal Object. For
those of Old, that had these Revelations Immediately, the Formal Object of
their Faith was God manifesting himself and his Will in them, to them by such
Revelations: And those, who received and obeyed the things delivered by the
Patriarchs and Prophets, those things so delivered (as he confesses) were not
the Formal, The Material and Formal Object of FAITH.
but Material Object of their Faith; but the Formal Object was GOD, by the
secret and inward Testimony of his Spirit, persuading them in their Hearts,
that these things declared to them were really his Command, and thence
inclining and bowing their Minds to an Assent and Obedience to them. And albeit
page 38. he terms this a Wild Assertion; yet he has but said, and not proved
it to be so: and till he prove, he needs no further Refutation. Neither is it
Nonsense, nor yet a destroying of the Cause, as with the like proofless
Confidence he affirms, p. 37. That, where Revelations are made by outward
Voices, or in a manner objected to the outward Senses, the Cause or Motive of
Credibility is not so much, because of what the outward Senses perceive, as
because of the Inward Testimony of the Spirit, assuring the Soul, that it is
GOD so manifesting himself. Which Testimony, to answer his Question, is
distinguishable from what is objected to the outward Senses; albeit it go
always along with it simul and semel, as they use to say: since he with me
accounts it a Serious Truth to say, The Devil may delude the External Senses;
and he can far more easily deceive them, than the True, Inward and Spiritual
Senses of the Soul, by Counterfeiting the Inward Testimony of the Spirit: Since
by that, the Apostle says, We know and partake of that, which neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear heard.

9. Page 39. He confesses with me, That the Formal Object of the Saints Faith
is always the same: But yet, that he may say something, he spends the
Paragraph in Railing, accusing me, As writing Nonsense, and being an
Ignoramus; because I bring Instances, which relate to the Material Object,
which himself Confesses also to be the same in Substance: But by his good
Leave, for all he is so positive in his Judgment, I must show the Reader his
Mistake. The Formal Object of Abraham's Faith.
For those Examples of Abraham and others, are adduced by me to show the
one-ness of the Formal Object; neither has he shown, that they are Impertinent
for that End: Since as the Formal Object of Abraham's Faith was God's speaking
to him by Divine Revelations, so is the same the Formal Object of the Saints
now; and therein stands the Unity or Oneness of our Faith with him, and not in
the Material Object, which often differs: For to offer up his Son was a part of
the Material Object of his Faith, which is none of ours now. And so for as much
as he desires to know of me, What was the Material Object of Adam 's Faith
before the Fall? (a Question not to the purpose) he must first tell me, why he
so Magisterially and positively denies Christ to have been the Object of his
Faith? And then he may have an Answer. And whereas he flouts at that Reason;
That Actions are specified from their objects, as Non-sensical; he should have
proved and shown, Wherein? And then I might have Answered him: He might have
Wit enough to know, that no man of Reason will be moved by his bare Railing
Assertions (page 40.) besides a deal of Railing, wherein he accuses me of
Confusion and Darkness. He accounts my Arguing for Immediate Revelation from
the Revelations the Patriarchs and Prophets had, Impertinent; to which I
Answered before: The sum of which is, that since these Immediate Revelations
were so frequent under the Law, Revelations frequent under the Law.
it must be very absurd to say, They are Ceased under the Gospel. He himself
proves, page 41. that under the New there is a more clear Discovery, according
to that of Paul, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, etc. which being brought by him, albeit against himself,
I leave him to Answer. In this page and the next 42, he alleges the sayings
of Christ and his Apostles brought by me, and my Arguments thence do prove no
more, than he Confesses: But whether they prove not all I plead for from
thence, is left to the Reader's Judgment. Here, according to his Custom, (tho I
Condemn the Socinians) he will be insinuating, that I Agree with them; to whose
Notions of the Spirit albeit I Assent not; yet I desire to know of him, That
the Spirit is a distinct Person of the Trinity, no Proof in Scripture for it.
in what Scripture he finds these words, That the Spirit is a distinct Person
of the Trinity? For I freely acknowledge, according to the Scripture, That the
Spirit of God proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is God. And by what
Authority he seeks to obtrude upon others Expressions of the Chief Articles of
Faith not to be found in Scripture, or to accuse such as will not Accept of
them, and Assent to them; or whether any has reason to think, he truly makes
the Scripture the Rule of his Faith (notwithstanding his pretense) when he
either will not or can not find words in it to Express the Chief Articles of
his Creed?

10. Page 43. By a strange Mistake he would have me prove, since I make use of
these promises of Christ relating to the Spirit, I would prove, that all have
Warrant to write Scripture: As if no man could have Immediate Revelation,
without he write Scripture? Whereas himself Confesses, that many of the
Patriarchr had it before Moses, who yet wrote no Scripture; yea, and Cain, whom
I suppose he judges to have been no Writer of Scripturs. And by the like
Mistake page 55. He Confesses all I plead for; J. B's. Self-Contradiction in
granting Revelation.
and Contradicts all he has been fighting for, in affirming: That Believers now
have free Access to Christ, the great Teacher of his People, always to get his
mind known and Written in their Hearts; but not to get Prophetic Revelations.
But where does he find me plead for Prophetic Revelations, as Common to all?
And whether the former words do not grant Immediate, Objective Revelation, in
the largest sense I plead for it, I leave the Reader to Judge. Here he accuses
me of speaking basely of the Scripture; but neither tells me Where? Nor What I
say? Which is indeed a base way of Reviling, though Familiar to him. To my last
Argument, page 49. 35. he Answers little, but Railing. The Minor [to wit, That
whereas Protestants call the Scriptures their Rule, yet if asked, why they
believe them? Do say, because in them is delivered the Will of God, which was
Revealed Objectively and Immediately to Holy Men] he says, destroys the
whole Argument: But why? I know not; since surely that proves, They at last
recurr to the Immediate Testimony of the Spirit, as the Certain and Infallible
ground of Faith: which is my Conclusion. That I thence infer, That Protestants
are for the Uncertainty of Immediate, Objective Revelation, is most falsely and
disingenuously Asserted by him: For I seek not to Infer any such thing from the
Medium of that Argument; but having shown thereby, how they are forced to recur
to this Revelation, as the primary ground of their Faith, I add, That it is
strange then, they should seek to Represent that as dangerous or uncertain,
which they are thus forced to Recur to. And whether he does not so, ever and
anon repeating the story of Delusions to Nauseating, through this Chapter, and
that reads it, may see, and easily perceive his Base Dis-singenuity in that
part: As also in the following Lines, where he says, Their Concession makes
nothing for the falsely pretended, Immediate and Objective Revelations, which
Quakers boast of; For where does he find me pleading for any such? Neither is
it the Question, Whether the Quakers do falsely pretend to Immediate
Revelation, yea or nay? But, Whether Quakers do well, and are sound in
believing, that Immediate, Divine, Inward Revelation is Necessary to every
Believer for the building up of true Faith? But it is usual with him, where he
cannot answer, to Turn-by the Question, and fill up the Paper with Railing and
Reviling!

SECT. IV.
Wherein his Fourth Chapter of the Scriptures is Considered.

1. WE may Judge of this Chapter of the Scriptures by the first Sentence, which
contains a Lie, saying: He finds the Third Thesis in somethings altered, and
more clearly set down in the Apology, than in the single Sheet; whereas there
is not one word of difference, but the misplacing of a word by the Printer: But
it is become so familiar with him to speak Untruth, that he cannot forbear it!
Indeed, this whole Chapter is a Complex of Railing, Calumnies and Malicious,
Groundless Insinuations: And indeed the Man is so troubled, that he cannot find
any thing in what I write, (which he ought according to his Title and
Undertaking only to Examine and Confute) that in stead of that he bestows
several pages out of Stalham and Hicks, J. B's. Authors for his Lies and
Calumnies, etc.
and his Considerations upon them; whose Lies and Calumnies are long ago
Answered, and Unreplyed to by them. So So that the Partys concerned having
already Vindicated themselves, it is not my place to meddle in it; and if J. B.
would do any thing in this to the purpose, he should take up this Debate, where
his Friend Mr. Stalham and his Brother Mr. Hicks the Anabaptist (whose
Authority he uses so often, and to whom he gives so much Credit) have given it
over, by a Reply to these Answers. Having solaced himself in the Repetitions of
these Men's Calumnies (for that appears to be his Delight) he digresseth to
prove The Scriptures to be the Word of God: But if they be granted to be the
Words of God (which no Quaker, The Scriptures are the Words of God* and Christ
the Word.
that ever I knew of, did or will deny (wherein are they derogated from, since
they are many Words, and not one? But if he will plead, They are the Word of
God (...), or per Eminentiam: To say so, seeing, the Word of God is ascribed to
Christ, must either Equal them with him, or speak Nonsense; seeing, that one
Epithet cannot be predicated of two things (...), without a gross
Contradiction. That the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets, and that what
they spoke, was the Words, that came from that Word, is granted; nor was it
ever denied by us, who are against all false Revelations and lying Fancies of
Men's Imaginations, as much as he, which he here in this Chapter Repeats over
and over again to nauseating: But it will not thence follow, that the Word
spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.19. is the Scripture; which he has not yet
proved, and I have shown the Contrary in the former Section.

2. At last page 54. n. 5. he comes to Treat of the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, and reckons it Confusion and Self-Contradiction in me to Assert, J.
B. Contradicting himself.
That the Authority of the Scriptures does not depend upon any Efficacy or
Virtue placed in these Writings; but is wholly to be ascribed to that Spirit,
from whence they came; and yet within half a dozen of Lines he confesses the
same, saying; We stoop unto the Authority of the Scriptures of Truth, because
delivered by the Inspiration of God: so the Confusion and Contradiction is his
own. Yea, the Examples he brings of the Acts and Statutes of Parliament, do
very well prove, what I say: for we do not submit to these Statutes, because of
the Matter in them, or things Commanded; but because of the Authority
Commanding. For when the Parliament by an Act appoints a Tax of so much Money
to be levied from the Subjects, it is not the Matter or Substance of this Act,
that makes us Obey it; but because of the Magistrates Authority. But he says,
They are Divine Revelations, and therefore must have the stamp of Divine
Authority. Answ. The Stamp of Divine Authority lies not in the things Revealed;
but in the manner of the Revelation, as being the Voice and Manifestation of
God: else great Absurdity would follow. As I shall briefly show, being to
pursue him in this point, as he has it lying up and down in his Rambling
Discourse: whose way is not to follow one matter to a Period; but to touch it
here and there, Intermixing other things: that so his nauseating Repetitions
and often- reiterated Railings may be the more Covered. And therefore I intend
not to Tie my self to follow him page after page immediately, lest I should
Embark my self in the like Disorder, and make such a Confused Hodg-Podg, as he
has done; but to follow every matter, as he has it scattered up and down: And
of this I thought fit to acquaint the Reader in this place once for all, The
Method the Author purposes to use.
as being the Method I purpose to use throughout this Treatise. So from this 55
page we have him not upon this matter, until page 61, where he takes notice of
my Citations out of several Protestant Confessions, and Calvin, and will not
have them to favor me; giving most disingenuously as one Reason, because they
Expressly say, That the work of the Spirit is by and with the Word, and not an
Inspiration distinct and separated from it: Thereby he would make his Reader
believe, as if this were said by all of them; whereas it is only said by the
Westminster-Divines, of whom I particularly observed, that they spoke not so
Clearly, as the other. The French Confession says; It is by the inward
persuasion of the Holy Spirit: and the Belgic, That it is by the Testimony of
the Spirit in our hearts: and Calvin says: The Spirit of God must inwardly
Teach us, that Moses and the Prophets spoke from God: But that Testimony of the
Spirit, which is in our hearts, and by which the Spirit teaches us there,
albeit it be not different from and contrary to the things it Teaches us of;
yet it is certainly distinct and separate; albeit all the things Taught were
the very same, which here is not. Else because a Man may be Taught that by a
Jesuit at Rome, which J. B. may Teach another Man in Holland; therefore that
Jesuit and J. B. are not distinct and separate: Are these good Reasonings? But
let us now see, whether these be any better, by which in the two following
pages (62. and 63.) he prosecutes the same matter; the Sum whereof amounts to
this: That there are such evident Characters of Divinity in the Scriptures,
which do as manifestly prove them to be of God, as the Sun does its shining to
a Man, whose Eyes are opened; What is the Spirit's taking off the Vail, but a
Revelation or Opening by the Spirit?
and that the Work of the Spirit is only, to take the Vail from off Men's Eyes,
that they may see these Characters of Divinity, and not, that the Spirit by any
Inward, Immediate Revelation does signify to the Soul by way of Object, that
these Books proceeded from the Dictates of the Spirit of God: In which he
places the Difference betwixt himself, and the Quakers. Now, whether these
aforesaid Testimonies of Calvin and the rest do not Confirm this last, rather
than the other, I leave the Reader to judge. But further, it is like the Man has
not been aware, into what Inextricable Difficulty he has run himself by his
Reasoning here. For if this Opening of the Eyes by the Spirit, be needful to
perceive these Divine Characters, as the opening of the Natural Eyes is
needful, to see the outward Sun; then the Characters cannot be seen, but by
those, whose Eyes are thus opened, that is to say, who have a Well-disposed
Intellect: And thus recur upon himself all the Difficulties and Absurdities he
would urge upon me in his former Chapter for saying, That Divine Revelations
are evident to a Well-disposed Intellect. For it may be query'd, Whether all
have this Well disposed Intellect, their Eyes thus opened? If yea, then all Men
have Subjective Revelation: yet at other times he accounts this a Privilege of
the Saints, and thence denies it, in Confessing ( page 63.) That some are
Blind, and see it not. And then again the Question recurs, How a Man knows, he
has it; so that he may not think, he sees it, Some Imagine they see, when they
are blind.
and has it, when he has it not? This cannot be decided by the Scriptures, for
they are the matter under Debate: and that were to run in a Circle. And since,
as he says, The Devil is God's Ape; and that there are so many Delusions of
the Devil, and false Imaginations of the Fancy, which Men are subject unto, as
he has told over and over again: How is he sure, that he is not thus deluded by
the Devil, and abused by his fancy, in imagining he sees, when indeed he is
blind? And to give him his own Argument and Query, since some, and even The
Examiners of the Westminster-Confession.
Protestants have affirmed, Books denied by him to be of the Canon, such as The
Wisdom of Solomon and Esdras, and to have these Divine Characters; and Some
Lutherans.
others deny some to be of the Canon, and to have these Characters, as the
Epistle of James, which he says, has it: How is he sure, that they are blind
and deceived, and not He? So that he must either Confess all his former
Reasonings (as also here page 83.86.) to be to no purpose; or else acknowledge,
that all he says here for the Scriptures, is of no force; and that he has no
better Certainty nor Ground for his Faith of the Scriptures Verity (to give him
back his own durty Example he throws at me, page 64.) than for the Turk's
Alcoran. And thus is dispatched also, J. B. brings his own Author in for
Devilish Doctrines.
what he says p. 66. n. 18. where he Confesses; Some Approved Books, which
others Rejected. And whereas he says ( p. 86. and 87.) That sad Experience has
taught the World, what Devilish Doctrines have been invented under the Notions
of New Revelations: Of which after he gives a List (since the same sad
Experience has taught the World, what Devilish Doctrines have been taught under
the notion of being Revealed in the Scripture) such, as (in his own Account)
those of the Socinians, Arminians, Antinomians and present English Anabaptists
(to wit, his Author Hicks, and his Brethren:) And yet what will more follow
from the One against the Spirit's Revelations now, than from the Other against
the Scriptures?

3. Like to this are his Reasonings page 87. concerning the CANON of the
Scriptures, that there are just so many Books, neither more nor less. For I
have proposed this to be proved by Scripture, it being an Article of their
Faith, since they judge, J. B's. Proofs for the CANON of the Scriptures
Examined.
all such should be proved by Scripture: To this instead of offering any
Scripture Proof, he says; They have the Characters of Divine Light: The
Weakness of which is above observed. And then he brings two Examples, one of
the Acts of Parliament; another of a Man's writing ten Letters to his Wife: But
Examples are poor Arguments, especially to prove Articles of Faith; when not
One Scripture can be brought to do it by such as say, The Scripture is the
Adequate and only Rule of their Faith. Neither will his Examples do: For if in
a Nation one Part should differ from the other, alleging Spurious Acts not
made by the Parliament, were by the Industry of some, Printed and Recorded with
the Right, as the case is now among the Professors of Christianity concerning
the Canon of Scripture; the Written Acts could never decide this Question; but
either these Legislators, if alive, or a New Parliament, having Equal Authority
and Legislative Power with those, that made the former. And if a Woman should
doubt, that Five of the Ten Letters subscribed with her Husband's Name, were
not his; she could not know the Certainty, but by her Husband's own Testimony:
and since he himself has said, That to Discern these Characters, a Subjective
Concurrence of the Spirit is necessary; Which since he says, some have not;
they can then not be sure of this Article of Faith. His Example of the Five
Fingers is yet more silly, than the former: And albeit he confidently Affirms,
he has above shown this; we shall by Examining it, show the Contrary. As p. 74.
and 75. answering to that of mine, The Prohibition of not Adding to Prophecy,
considered.
where I show, that in Prove. 30.5.6. there is the same Prohibition of Not
adding, that is Rev. 22. ver. 18. and therefore it would follow, That all
written after Solomon 's time, was against the mind of God: To this he gives a
rare Answer! What is spoken of that Book (I suppose he means the Revelations)
and elsewhere of the Commands of God, is consequently to be understood of all:
But this is to Repeat that, against which the Argument is formed, instead of
Answering it. Either that of Revelations must not be understood, as he does it;
or that of Proverbs makes the same Exclusion; since the words are the same, and
the Authority also. But the Prophecies of the Prophets (says he) were but
Explications of the Law of God: But such Explications go to make up the Canon;
and will he admit that yet? No. But the Lord did not (says he) bind up his own
hand; but has he bound up his hands now, that he cannot move any of his
Servants by his Spirit to write? I suppose he will not say, he has. He
Confesses, there were Prophets after John's days, who truly foretold Events,
but were not to write Scripture: But is not a part of that, which he accounts
the Canon, a foretelling of Events? And yet that excludes it not from the
Canon. Here, because he is pinched, he takes his usual Retreat by falling a
Railing, and Comparing us with Papists, who, he says, use this Argument: And
what then? I could tell him an hundred Arguments used by him, which the Papists
also use against us; will he say, it follows they are Invalid? But at last he
thinks he has found a Mysterious Riddle, that will do the business; and
therefore he leaves it with a Defiance: J. B's. query of a Complete Canon, and
Revelations ended.
Let him un-riddle this Mystery, if he can; to wit, When shall our Canon be
Completed? When will there be no more need of Revelations? But might not this
same Question have been proposed to the Christians, that lived, before John
wrote his Book of the Revelation? And as (I suppose) They would have Answered
(to many of whom perhaps it was not Revealed, that John should write such a
Book afterward) so shall I directly Answer his Question; When it shall please
God: in whose Power it is to Reveal himself, when, how and so long as he
pleases; and who (as he says) has not bound up his own Hand.

4. I come now to consider, what he says of the Perfection of the Scriptures:
And because he is very Clamorous in accusing me, as derogating therefrom; it
will be manifest, whether he has any reason so to do. P. 55. n. 6. he quarrels,
I forget the Narration of the first Creation; and that the Examples are
Instructive: But who will deny, or when did I, that the Remarkable Providence
of God toward his Children are Instructive? Do not I expressly show, how they
are Instructive (p. 46. See above p. 304, 305.
) which himself also noticeth? And was the first Creation no part of God's
Providence toward Man, who was to Rule over it? Is it not then there Included?
But I make no mention of the Promises and Threatenings: But are not they any
part of the Doctrines of Christ, nor included in any part of these precious
Declarations, which I say the Scripture Contains? Next, he Carps at my saying [
The Chief Doctrines of Christianity] asking, Where we may find the whole
Doctrines of the Christian Faith? I answer freely; In the Scriptures: And let
him prove, if he can, this to be any Contradiction; seeing, my saying [ The
Chief Doctrines of Christianity] is Indefinite, excluding none. And therefore
most base and abominable is that Lie he makes of me in the last part of this
Paragraph, where he says; I say, the Scripture only bears Testimony to some
of them, to wit, of the Chief Heads of Christianity; which I dare him to prove,
ever to have been said or written by me. And of the like nature are his lying
Conjectures, and his malicious Insinuations from my Words in the two following
Paragraphs; which I utterly Renounce, and Return upon him as his own false and
fictitious Apprehensions. The Authority of the Scriptures is from the Spirit.
For do not I declare the Authority of the Scripture, when I Testify, They are
from the Spirit, and that such Commands require Obedience, as has been above
shown? But what he urges of this further, p. 57. and 59. from the saying of
some Quakers, affirming; That is not a Command to them, which is given to
another: Albeit I might justly reject it, as Impertinent, till he prove it, for
the Reasons upon this occasion above declared; yet, because he mentions
Benjamin Furly in Roterdam having some knowledge of that matter, I answer:
Whether will he say, All the Commands in Scripture to every Person there
mentioned, are binding upon every Individual now? If he dare not say, they are,
as I know, he dare not; how must I then distinguish betwixt what binds me, and
binds me not? Must it not be by the Spirit (suppose it were only subjectively,
as he will Confess) Inlightning the Understanding? To make this Distinction
then, it seems it is the Operation of the Spirit, that makes them know their
Duty; and sure, they cannot Obey, before they Know. But if he say, That though
they should want that Operation of the Spirit, and did not know, nor
acknowledge them to be their Duty, yet they are binding upon them; Neither B.
F. nor any Quaker will deny, but even the Commands of God's Spirit, and the
Precepts of the Scripture, which now concern all, are binding upon all; so that
they shall be justly Condemned for not Obeying; albeit that by the perverseness
of their Hearts and Wills they either Refuse to Obey, or will not Acknowledge
them* So that his urging of that p. 60. and 61. n. 13. and his pleading for it,
is Unnecessary, and needs no Answer; yet who would say, they could Obey to any
Advantage of their Souls without this Operation of the Spirit, since Whatsoever
is not of Faith, is Sin? But as to these words said to be written by B. F. he
is here Challenged to prove, They are his, without adding or diminishing? (and
it is well known, the adding or diminishing of two or three words in a few Lines
will quite alter the Sense.) And before he has answered this Challenge, and
freed himself from the just Censure of a Calumniator; albeit he take the help
of his Author Hicks, he will find his Folly, in accusing Men at
second-hand-Proofs, and upon the Testimony of their Adversaries. What follows
in this Paragraph and p. 60. is mere Railing and Perversions, Comparing us with
Papists, as is before observed; and indeed, all of it is overturned by that one
Assertion of mine, that What Revelations are contrary to the Scripture, are to
be Rejected.

5. Page 57. n. 10. He says, I come nearer to the Core of my Design, which is,
to set up Enthusiasmes, in affirming; That the Scriptures are not the Fountain,
but a Declaration of the Fountain: And yet the Man within three or four Lines
Confesses it himself; ascribing it to my Folly to Dream, any Man thinks so:
(thus he goes backward and forward!) Which he illustrates by the Example of
Laws: But if it be so, are not they to be blamed, that account them the
Principal Original of all Truth and Knowledge? Whether the other branch of my
Deduction follow from this, That they are not to be accounted the primary Rule
of Faith and Manners, will appear, when the Arguments and Objections relating
to that, come particularly to be mentioned. And whereas he thinks, this is
Absurd, and not making for my Design, because God himself is the Fountain, and
yet not the Rule; he mistakes the matter, as urged by me: For I Argue, That the
Scriptures are not the Original Ground of Knowledge, The Scriptures are not the
Original Ground of Truth, but God.
but GOD (not simply Considered, but) as manifesting himself in Divine,
Immediate Revelations in the hearts of his Children; which being the New
Covenant's Dispensation (as in the last Section is proved) is the Primary and
Adequate Rule of Christians. For I was never so Absurd, as to call God simply
considered, or the Spirit of God in Abstracto (not as Imprinting Truths to be
believed and obeyed in Men's hearts, not contrary, but according to Scripture,
for he cannot Contradict himself) the Rule of Christians: And this may serve to
Answer all his Cavils upon this, Theme. And whereas he wondereth in the
following page 58. Why any Revelations even from the Spirit should be more
Primary, than the Scriptures, since they are Confessed to come from the
Inspiration of the Spirit, (for why he uses the Latin word Afflatus, and does
not Interpret it, I know not; unless to fright Ignorant Folk, that they may
think, it is a piece of the Witchcraft of the Quakers, whom he accuses) it is
strange, he should have so little sense, as to make it a matter of Admiration;
as if that were not more Primary to a Man, which comes Immediately from the
Spirit of God in his heart, than that which (albeit it come from the Spirit)
yet is through another, and so must needs be but Secondary: albeit it be
confessed, they writ them not for themselves, but for others; which I deny not.
Of the same Nature is, and the same way is answered, what he says p. 65. n.
19. to wit; That I Confound, the Principal Leader with the Original Rule,
because I say, The Spirit is the Prime and Principal Leader: But I deny his
Consequence; neither does his Example of the Wind and Compass prove it: The
Spirit is the Principal Leader, as Imprinting upon Man's Soul the Rules he
should walk by. But indeed he would prove a very Uncertain Pilot, that had no
Compass, but only a Description of it; and a Journal, how other Men had steered
that Course: and such Pilots is he and his Brethren according to their own
Confession. But he thinks, I drive at something more Intolerable, to wit; That
the Revelations the Quakers pretend to, or the Light within, is to be
preferred, as the more primary and principal Rule, to the Scriptures: If the
Quakers did affirm, any Revelations they speak of, as coming from that Light,
either were or could be Contrary to the Scriptures, he would say something;
otherwise it will amount to no more, but that Commands, as they are Imprinted
upon the Soul, that is, The Law written in the Heart by the Spirit, is more
primarily and principally the Rule, than the same things written and received
only from another. As to which I will only ask him, Whether those things, which
the Apostles received immediately from the Spirit, commanding them to go here
or there to preach the Gospel, or the like, were, as to these Ends, more
primarily and principally the Rule to them, than any thing, that was Recorded
in the Scripture, where they could not learn their Duty, as to those
particulars? And that I make not the Scriptures and the Spirit all one, I have
above shown; and therefore his Malicious Insinuations of Socinianism falls to
the Ground. But he thinks, he has found out a mighty Dilemma in the End of this
Paragraph, p. 66. Or will I say, The Light within, the Increated Spirit.
that the Light within me is really the Increated Spirit? This (says he) must
be Blasphemy with a Witness -- to be heard with Horror; and therefore needing
no other Confutation: Poor Man! how apt is he to make a Noise about nothing? If
there be any Blasphemy, it is his own. For what, if I Should say, Is not GOD a
LIGHT? and is not he in every Man? and is not this Light within, the Increated
Spirit? The Reader may judge, how easily these windy Boasts of his are blown
away. How the Spirit Rules us, and yet is not confounded with the Rule, I have
above shown; so that what he says to that in the rest of this Page, where he
Vapors and Rails, is but superfluous. Next, after he has a little played the
Pedant upon the Words magis Originaliter, he concludes his 22. Paragraph with
asking me; Why the Revelations I pretend to, should be accounted more One with
the Spirit himself, than these Revelations, by which the Scriptures were
dictated? But this is his Allegiance, none of my Affirmation. Next I never
said, that the Revelations, by which the Scriptures were dictated, were less
Primary, than any other whatsoever; albeit no Revelation, which is written and
transmitted to a Man only by the Report of another, can be so Primary and
Immediate to him, as that which he Receives in himself. He Confesses here with
me, p. 67. That the Spirit is the Prime and Principal Leader; whether that
makes for my Cause, as also what follows, will after in its Place be Examined.

6. But because he foundeth his Assertion of my detracting from the Perfection
of the Scriptures, J. B's Proofs for the Scriptures, to be the Primary Rule.
because I deny them to be the primary and original Rule, (for he
acknowledges, that I Confess them to be a secondary one) I will Examine the
Ground, by which he goes about to prove it; as also his Answers to my
Arguments, proving the Contrary. I. Moses and the Prophets to be heard,
Answered.
His first is from the Parable Luke 16.31. where it is said; They have Moses
and the Prophets, whom if they hear not, neither will they be persuaded, if one
be raised from the Dead: But this proves only, that one raised from the Dead is
not able to Convince those, that will not hear Moses and the Prophets; not that
the Scripture is a more Primary and Principal Rule, than what the Spirit
Immediately reveals in the Soul: For that Consequence will not, nor does
follow, nor is in the least proved by him, neither can be, unless he first
prove, that, albeit the Testimony of one from the Dead be less powerful to
persuade, than the Scriptures, yet it is more than the Immediate Testimony of
the Spirit in the Heart; which I deny, and rests for him to prove, before he
Conclude any thing from this Place. Next, this Parable was used by Christ to
the Jews, to show them their Hypocrisy, who, albeit they deceitfully pretended
so much to Reverence and follow Moses and the Prophets, (as many now adays do
the Scriptures;) yet they did not really hear them, else they would have
acknowledged him, of whom Moses and the Prophets did so clearly write: Since he
also did as Great and Convincing Miracles before them, as if they had the
Testimony of one raised from the Dead. And this leads me to take notice, of
what he says p. 68. n. 24. in answer to my Argument drawn from the difference
betwixt the Law that is written without, and the Gospel that is written within;
where he accuses me of Contradiction, because of my Argument drawn from the
Revelations, that were under the Law and the Sameness of the Object: But I have
answered this Cavil in the former Section. Yet since the Strength of this
resolves in his supposing I Affirm, There is no written Rule under the Gospel,
which he after Concludes; the whole falls to the Ground: For I never denied
the Scripture to be a secondary Rule, and that is some Rule; for to Say, I
Affirm, There is no written Rule, because the Written is not the Primary, is a
wild Conclusion. And therefore all the rest of his Talk to prove, That Christ
Inspired the Apostles to write things to be a Rule to Christians, is merely
superfluous; since that, that is a Rule, though not the Primary, was never
denied by me: And it may be here observed, that all his Arguments to prove the
Scripture to be a Rule, unless they prove them to be the primary and principal
One, Conclude nothing; and are against me to no purpose.

II. Their making Wise to Salvation* and Perfection, Answered.
7. His Second Argument is deduced from 2 Timothy 3.16. where he cites the Apostle
saying of the Scriptures, They are able to make wise unto Salvation, and to
make the Man of God perfect: Where is first to be observed his perverting of
the Apostle's Words by an Addition of his own (and therefore no wonder, that he
so frequently pervert mine.) For the Apostle says not, They are able to make
the Man of God perfect; but, all Scripture given by Inspiration is, that the
Man of God may be perfect; that is, Contributeth in its Kind and Order toward
the Perfection of the Saints: But it follows not thence, that they are the
Primary Rule; no more than though J. B. will affirm, that his Book is written,
That the Man of God may be perfect (that is, to help him to Perfection) that
thence it is to be Esteemed the Primary and Chief Rule. Thus is answered that
of John 20.31. But these are written, that ye may believe, etc. cited by him,
p. 74. for his Book is also written for that End; yet the Consequence will not
follow. That they are able to make wise unto Salvation, is not denied, in so
far as they declare of the Grace that brings Salvation, and direct to the
Light, which leads to it: But how he thence Infers, They are the Primary
Rule, he must inform us the next time, since he has forgotten to do it now. And
this may serve to Answer those Places, where he (according to his Custom)
Repeats it over and over again, as p. 74, 77 and 82. where he has again the
forementioned Perversion, and ennumerates the particular Uses applied to the
Scripture, he concludes its Perfection, as wanting nothing. Now I deny not,
Perfection of the Scriptures urged by J. B. to make them the Primary Rule or
Canno.
that every Book as well as Chapter and Verse of Scripture is Perfect, as to
its End, that is, so far to express the Mind of God, as he was pleased at that
time; and also with a Respect to its Author, as being written by the Dictates
of the Spirit; but that Place will not Conclude its Perfection, either as the
Primary, Only, or Adequate, that is, Entire Rule: Else all the other
Scriptures, which were written after that Epistle of Paul, (as he will not
deny, but there were some so written) must be denied being any part of the
Rule, and so to be any way necessary for that End. The like Absurdities follow
upon his using 2 Cor. 3.14. where the Apostle speaks of a Testament; since he
dare not deny, a great part of that Testament was written afterward. And thus
is also answered, what he urges from Psalm. 19.7. ( page 74 and 79.) The Law of
the Lord is perfect, etc. and from other Scriptures of like Import: For if he
understand Perfection in the first Sense, it is not denied; if in the Second
(which indeed is the Question) it concludes nothing, without rendering all the
Scripture written afterward, no part of the Rule or Canon (to use his own
Term.) As for that of Peter, which he insists upon in the End of his Paragraph,
(p. 70.) I deny it to be understood of the Scripture; and gave my Reasons
before: and yet the Man takes that for Granted, and thence Argues from it;
which is a most silly manner, albeit very Familiar to him to beg the Question.

8. Next, he comes to Consider my Answer to their Objections; but how he
Removes them, may be judged by the first he Observes p. 71. where, instead of
proving, That these Words of Isa 8.20. usually brought by them, To the Law and
to the Testiny, etc. are meant of the Scripture; which I desired, ere any thing
could be Inferred for it; He Answers: As if any, that ever read the Bible,
could be Ignorant, what is all along meaned by these Words. Is not this a
goodly Proof, Reader? I am one, that have read the Bible, and know, by the [
Law] is sometimes meant the Outward, sometimes the Inward; and Thousands more
are yet to be Convinced, J. B's. goodly Proof for what is meant by Law and
Testimony.
that that Place speaks only of the Outward: And will need some better
Argument, than this of his, ere we Change our Judgment. But to proceed: He
thinks, my saying, That the Law was in a more special manner given to the Jews,
and more principally than to us] to be a Railing and Roving, and a
Contradicting, what I said in the former These: But this Cavil, often repeated
before, I did Answer above. The like he Judges my Arguing therefrom, That as
they were to Try all things by the outward Law, so we are to Try all in the
First Place by the Word within: But here his base Disingenuity appears: For he
has left^out these Words [ In the first Place] that he might introduce the
better the difficulty he fancieth to himself to have brought me to afterward;
for by this Argument (says he) I prove more, than I ought, to wit, that the
Scriptures shall not be so much as a less principal Rule. Who will be so
foolish, as to Conclude, that the saying, Things ought [in the first Place] to
be tried by the Word within, The Scriptures a secondary and subordinate Rule.
excludes things [ in the second Place] to be Tried by the Scriptures? and is
not that still to own it as a Secondary and subordinate Rule? And so he may
see, my Feet here are easily Rid; and that he held them not so fast, as he
fancied. And as for the other part of his Alternative, the Consequence is of
the like Nature, That what was a Principal Rule then, is now only subordinate:
For albeit I said, it was more Principal to them, than now to us; yet I said
not, it was the most Principal to them, or then more Principal, than what came
immediately from the Spirit, which he Confesses to have been frequent under
the Law, yea more frequent, than now according to his Principle: and my saying
so could only Infer that Consequence. He Rejects, what I urge from the Version
of the Septuagint, as spurious; but for that we must take his Word, else want a
Proof. And then because he cannot come off better, according to his Custom he
Concludes with a gross Perversion and Falsehood, saying; It is my Opinion, that
the Law, id^est, the outward Law, was given the Jews for a Rule even above the
Spirit 's Revelations: Which if it be mine, (as I utterly Renounce it) I desire
to know, where I have Asserted it? he might have been at the Pains to mark it;
but he knew (it is like) it was not Convenient. Scriptures to be searched makes
them not the Primary Rule.
Next, he comes to prove, that these Words, Search the Scriptures, etc. Joh.
5.39. do Evince, The Scriptures to be the Primary and Adequate Rule; because if
Christ's Doctrines should be Tried by them, much more private Enthusiasms: But
who denies that? Yet he does not thence prove, that the Scriptures are the
Primary Rule, by which all things must be Tried in the first Place, which is
the thing in Question. Secondly; I would ask him, Whether the Words Christ
spoke to the Jews, which are Recorded in Scripture, were less a Rule to them,
or less binding and obliging upon them, than the Sayings of Moses and the
Prophets? If he say, They were less; then he overturns all his own tedious
Reasonings, by which he labors to prove the Obligation, of what Christ and the
Apostles delivered, ( p. 84. at the end) as well as what Moses and the
Prophets, without the need of a New Obligation: And likewise he must show us,
how these Sayings come to be as binding upon us now, as Moses and the Prophets?
or how they acquired greater Authority, after Christ spoke them, than they had
then? Or why they wanted then that Authority? If he say, They were binding and
obliging to the Jews, because spoken by Christ; then his Proof falls to the
Ground. He is Angry, that I say, The Words may be interpreted, Ye search the
Scriptures, as well as Search the Scriptures (albeit the Greek Word signify the
one as well as the other) and for Answer very Magisterially tells, (...) Ye
Search, and search ye.
It is quite Contrary to the very Words of Command, Search the Scriptures: But
the Question is, Whether that be the Words? and that was, what he should have
proved. But he makes no Bounds of begging the Question, telling; Tolet and
Maldonat (say, It is so taken by all the Fathers, except Cyrill. And what then?
Did I undertake to subscribe to all these Authors Writings? He must give me a
Reason, Why? ere I do it: And let him deny it, if he dare, that the Greek Word
signifies, Ye search the Scriptures, as well as, Search the Scriptures? and if
it do, before I conclude the one more than the other, I must have some better
Argument, than his bare Affirmation. But to finish this, he will conclude all
by the Words of the Apostle James, c. 1. v. 25. where he says: The Apostle
calls the Scriptures the perfect Law of Liberty; The Perfect Law of Liberty,
the Royal Law in the Heart.
But that does not prove them to be the Primary Rule. Suppose it were granted,
the Apostle meant the Scriptures, which remains yet by him to be proved; and is
not done, by what he cites Chap. 2.8. by his desiring them to Fulfill the Royal
Law, according to Scripture, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; which
proves it not at all: Yea, to understand it of the Scriptures, were to make the
Apostle's Words scarce good Sense; as if he had said, Fulfill the Scriptures
according to the Scriptures: whereas it suits the Place much better, that the
Apostle meaned, They should fulfill the Royal Law in their Hearts, which was one
with the Scriptures, that also command the same thing. That the Apostle means
the outward Law, and not that Written in the Heart, Chap. 4. 12. he has
Affirmed, but not Proved. Next, Beroeans commended for searching the Scriptures.
he comes to the Beroeans being commended for Searching the Scriptures, Acts
17.11. But this is the same way answered, as the former. For if the Beroeans
were obliged to believe and receive Paul's Testimony, because he preached the
Truth to them by Authority from God; then their Using, or his Commending them
for using the Scripture, will not prove the Scripture to be the Primary Rule;
yea, more a Rule, than the Doctrine, they Tried by it. In the the rest of what
he says in this n. 28. he but fights with his Shadow; for I never said, They
excluded the Law of Nature, in affirming, the Scripture to be the Rule; or did
I ever deny, but that the Scripture Reveals things, which Nature could never
have Discovered? But the Question is, Whether that Truth, that Man is the
Offspring of God, from which the Apostle argues with the Athenians, was
discovered to any by mere Nature, or by a Divine Principle? And this is that he
should have proved; and therefore yet remains for him to do: But to be like
himself, he concludes this also withh a gross Lie, saying, I affirm, the
Scripture to be no more our Rule, than the Heathen-Poets; which no ways follows
from my Words, neither has or can he ever prove it.

9. He thinks, The Scriptures not determining of many things, nor having any
Rule for them (which he seems to acknowledge) is no Argument against their
being the Primary and Adequate or Only Rule, for that (he apprehends) no
rational Man will think needful to a Complete Rule [Why?] because General Rules
are enough: And thence he thinks it would follow, That the Quakers must have a
new, particular Revelation for every Act and Word, such as Eating, Drinking,
Walking, etc. But I deny this Consequence. These Acts, as simply Considered,
are Natural; and it will not follow, because to Spiritual Acts, Spiritual Acts
and Motions distinguished from Natural.
relating to Faith and my Immediate Service toward God, I need a Spiritual
Motion and Influence of the Spirit; that therefore I need such a thing to
Natural Acts. If he say, These Natural Acts under some Circumstances may be Sin
or Duty: I Confess, then the Revelation of the Spirit is needful. For if I be
sitting, sleeping or eating in one Place, when it is the Mind of God, I should
be Preaching and Praying in another; I do sin: But how can the Scripture give
me a Rule here? All that he answers to this, p. 76 and 77. resolves into this:
That all such Doubts may be solved, applying the General Rules of Scripture by
Christian Wisdom, Prudence and Discretion, etc. But how shall I know, that I
truly make this Application? And (to give him his own often-repeated Argument
in the Case of Revelation) have not some Thought, they have made this
Application by Christian Prudence, when they did not? J. B's. Christian
Prudence (so called) doubtful and uncertain.
And not to go further, than J. B's own Brethren, the Presbyterians, yea, the
Chief and most-Eminent Teachers among them, did not some of them judge it
Christian Prudence according to the Scripture-Rule, to draw near and Adhere to
the Remonstrants, which others, called public Resolution-men, denied? Do not
some of them think it Christian Prudence, to go hear the Bishops Curates, which
others deny? Did not those Chief Men among them (as George Hutcheson and
others) think it Christian Prudence, to accept of the Indulgence Anno 1668. in
Entering, according to the Limitations proposed by the Council, to their Places,
which others, especially of the banished Brethren, and perhaps himself was
highly Offended at? whence these Men were termed Council-Curates: Other
Instances among them I could give. But how shall all this be Decided? What
Scripture-Rules can he Assign, that clearly do it? Let him answer this
distinctly, and not pass it over; lest he be suspected to Leap, where he cannot
Step. He confesses to my Alleging 1 Cor. 12. and Romans 12. and after a little
Railing he tells, p. 78. That he that is to Rule, is to do it with Diligence,
etc. but that the Scripture says not, that James or Peter should take-on this
or that Office: By which Confession he destroys all; since the Question is, How
James and Peter knew, they should take upon them to Rule? This he says he has
shown above; but how Insufficiently, my Reply will Evidence. He thinks no less
Impertinent (p. 78.) for me to Argue against their being a Rule as to all
things, because they do not tell a Man, that he has the marks of true Faith,
upon which knowledge the assurance of Salvation is founded: As if I must think,
the Laws of the Land must prove, that R. B. is a Quaker; or that if R. B. had
murdered a Man, it is a sufficient defense to say, The Law does not name R. B.
But such Examples are poor Arguments, and do miserably Halt: J. B.'s Halting
Examples to prove true Faith.
R. B. Confessing himself to be a Quaker, acknowledging every One of their
Doctrines, is enough to prove him one in the sense of the Law of the Land; and
the Judge to Condemn him a Murderer, if Convict by Witnesses, that he really
did the Deed. And both these relate to outward things, which can be proved by
outward Testimonies; for without the Certainty of the Evidence the Judge cannot
pronounce his Sentence. But is a Man's own Confessing or Affirming, he has the
true marks of Faith, enough to prove, he has them? And what are the Witnesses
(to Apply the Example of committing the Murder) by which a Man shall know, he
has these Marks? And who must Examine the Witnesses, and judge of the Certainty
or Clearness of their Evidences? Must it be the Man, that is Accused? Who uses
that Method? Does not the Man see, how miserably his pitiful Example
Claudicates?

10. To my Objection against the Scriptures being the Only and Adequat Rule,
the Example of Deaf Persons, Idiots, Infants, such as cannot Read, and are
ignorant of the Original Tongues, so called (all which in some measure, less or
more are deprived of the Benefit of the Scriptures, Deaf Persons etc. the Light
may Influence, which Writings, etc. cannot.
so as to Apply them to themselves immediately and effectually for a Rule) he
asks; Whether if any such Person in a Land should kill a Man, or do any thing
contrary to the Law, would it not punish them? (and this he Repeats n. 35. in
other words) Which urges nothing; but upon Supposition, that the Will of God
cannot be known otherwise, than by the Scripture: which Supposition is false;
and therefore his Argument Concludes nothing: Yea, himself Confesses, that
some things, and in particular, Murder, may be known by the Light of Nature;
and so overturns his own Argument. But he asks, What use can Children, or
Idiots, or Mad men make of the Light within? Answ. The Light within being
affirmed by us to be a Living Principle, that quickens the Soul, may Influence
such Persons; but so cannot any Writings. As for his learned Dr. Owen's Book,
which he Recommends; he may find it Answered long ago by Samuel Fisher a
Quaker: which because the Doctor found too hot to Reply to, J. B. that is so
busy a Body, may supply that Want. J. B. Confesses to a Rule obvious to many
Doubts.
But most Rare of all is his Answer (p. 80.) to my Conclusion; [ That Christ
would not leave his own to be led by a Rule obvious to so many Doubts] which
is; And yet we see, he has done it: If this be not to beg the Question in the
highest Degree, the Reader may judge. He Confesses, The Spirit is the chief
Leader; but to seem to come off with some Credit, he falls a Railing upon me
for not Distinguishing, but Confounding the Spirit's work and the Scriptures:
and then bestows many words to prove, they are Distinct; with a heap of
Citations in the next p. 81. All which he might have spared, until he had
proved first, that I denied, they were Distinct, or shown, where or when I
Confound them? What he writes ( n. 38. and 39. p. 82.) is mere Railing; as the
Reader by looking unto them may observe. He flouts there at my Affirming, [I
knew one, that could not Read, discover an, Error in the Version] saying; But
the good luck was, himself was Judge: What he would Infer hence, I see not;
unless that their Version is free of Errors: which if he will adventure to
Affirm, his Mistake may be shown by the Testimony of Learned Men among
themselves, and his own Correcting it diverse times; which will after be
Observed. He says; My speaking soberly of the Scriptures is only out of
Policy; because the Quakers could not effectuate their point, which was, to
have the Scriptures quite laid by, as an Old Almanac: But such malicious Lies
and Railings need no Answer. J. B.'s gross Calumnies, denying our using
Scripture-Testimonies.
To this he adds two other gross Calumnies to Conclude his Paragraph; That it
is the Quakers fixed Opinion, that the Scriptures are not to be made use of in
their Assemblies; it being below them to Expound any Portion of it there, or to
Adduce any Testimony therefrom for Confirmation of their Assertions: This can
be proved to be a Manifest Untruth by the Testimony of many, that are not
Quakers, who have been Witnesses of the Contrary. The other (which he calls
Their Constant Opinion) is, That when one comes to hearken to the Light
within, he has obtained the whole End of the Scriptures, so that they become
wholly useless to him: This is also a horrid Calumny.

10. In his Examining of what I Assert, to be the End and Usefulness of the
Scriptures (p. 83.84.) he cannot find fault, with what I Ascribe to them; but
that I give them not all; and whether I do wrong, denying that to them, which
he would seem to give, the former Debate will show. But that he may be here
like himself, he seeks to Infer from my words most gross and malicious
Consequences, which are utterly false; and till he prove them, they need no
other Answer, but to observe them, and deny them, which I utterly do: Such as;
That albeit Christ has ordained Pastors, J. B's false Insinuations against our
Asserting the Usefulness and Truth of the Scriptures.
and the Scriptures under the Gospel, to make the Man of God perfect; yet the
Quakers think, they may be both laid aside, as useless: That, according to me,
the Scriptures are not so much as a Subordinare Rule: That the Quakers would
have all others, save themselves, to look upon themselves as not concerned in
the Scriptures; that so they might be the sole Keepers of these Oracles: and
then (he says) they shall quickly know, what shall become of them. And that
the Quakers always suppose, that what the Spirit within them says, cannot
contradict the Scripture; and therefore what they say contrary to the Scripture
from the Spirit within, must be supposed to be seeming, and not real (This he
Repeats again according to his Custom in the next page.) If he mean the Spirit
of God, I hope, he will not deny it; and if he mean any other Spirit, we deny
it: But he would be fastening that upon us here, which may be justly said to
them of their Exalting their Confession of Faith above the Scriptures; as in
the first Section upon his Preface I observed. But he has an Objection, which
he urges p. 67. and by which he thinks to overturn all; asking: If I believe
the Testimony of the Scriptures to be True? Yes, I do believe them; because the
Testimony of the Spirit in my heart obliges me so to do: and therefore being
persuaded they are True, I make use of them, though, in respect to my self, not
in the first and primary place, but in a secondary, next to the Spirit: yet as
to him, I may urge them every way, because he accounts them so. And as to their
Testimony for the Spirit's being the Principal Leader, upon my using of which
he founds his Objection, (albeit, since he acknowledges it, he has the less
Reason to Carp at it) I believe it from the Scripture-Testimony; but not as the
primary Ground of my Faith, which I derive from the Spirit it self: yet as a
Ground, and that a Very weighty One. As for his other Question, Whether I be of
the fame mind with other Quakers, of whom Mr. Hicks Reports? I answer; That
what is there Reported by Hicks, is false; and I here dare J. B. and his Author
Hicks to prove it, to have been said by any Quaker: which till they can do by
good and sufficient Proof they are both to be held as Lying Calumniators.

SECT. V.
Wherein his Fifth and Sixth Chapters, Entitled by him, Of Man's Natural
State, and Of Original Sin, are Considered.

1. AFter he has Repeated some of my words, he Complains, I speak darkly; and
having given his usual, malicious Insinuations, that I do it of Design, and
have some Mysteries under it; He takes upon him to endeavor to guess at my
Meaning, and bestows many Pages to frame one Conjecture after another: and then
spends many words to Refute these Shadows, and Men of Straw of his own making.
And yet at the end of all he Confesses, He doubts, whether he has got or hit my
Meaning; J. B. Confesses himself in the Dark with Trying his uncertain
Conjectures.
And to be sure then, he must be as Uncertain, that he has Refuted it; and
therefore knows not, but all his Reasonings against his own Conjectures are
Impertinent. For after he has written one Conjecture, and bestows much labor
in Refuting it; his own words are ( p. 91. n 5.) If this be not his true
meaning, let us try another Conjecture: which shows, he knows not, whether what
he said before, was to the purpose. Thus he spends page 88, 89, 90, 91, 92,
93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98. in which last Page he is very Angry, that I should
Condemn the Socinians and Pelagians; but the Reason is manifest, because he
would so willingly have it believed, that I am one with them. And albeit I
could not in Reason be Obliged to say any thing more to these Pages; yet that
none of these fictitious and false Conjectures may catch any unwary Reader, I
do freely Affirm, that I believe, Man fell, and was degenerated both as to Soul
and Body: and I understand, the first Adam, (or Earthly Man) to Comprehend
both. But that there was something in Adam, which was no part of his Soul and
Body, nor yet Constitutive of his being a Man (in my Judgment) which could not
degenerate, The Fall of Man; and the Breath of lives (Spiraculum Vitarum)
remaining in Adam.
and which was in Adam by the Fall Reduced to a Seed, and could never have been
Raised in him again to his Comfort, but by a New Visitation of Life, which from
Christ by the Promise was Administered unto him, and is to all Men in a Day,
(for to say, the affirming such a Seed remained in Adam when he fell, does
Infer, his Understanding was not hurt; and, as he does p. 94. is a Consequence
I deny, and remains for him to prove) That to believe, there was such a thing
in Adam, which the Scripture calls Spiraculum vitarum, the Breath of Lives,
is no New-Coin'd Doctrine: as those may see, that will read Athanasius de
Definitionibus, and his Third Dialogue de Trinitate, and Fourth Oration against
the Arians; and Cyrillus Alexandrinus in his Treatise upon John, lib. 2. and 3.
and lib. 8.47. and in his Thesaurus lib. 4. and Others, that might be
mentioned. As for his arguing ( p. 96) that because I affirm, The Seed of God
is a Substance, therefore (according to me) the Seed of Sin must be a Substance
also; which Consequence I deny: and therefore what he builds against me upon
this Supposition, falls to the ground. What he says here and there scattered
in these Pages of the Light, will in its proper place come more fully to be
Considered.

2. Page 98. n. 17. after he has saluted me with the Titles of Effronted and
Impudent, he will have me one with Socinians and Pelagians, because I deny,
Outward Death to be a Consequence of the Fall; but where he proves I do so, I
see not. It Is true I say, The death threatened (Genesis 2.17.) was not outward
death; Adam did not die an outward Death, the day he did Eat.
for Adam did not so die the Day he did eat; and I do still believe so; neither
offers he me any thing to give me ground to alter my mind: but to Conclude
thence, I deny Outward Death to be a Consequence of the Fall, was too hastily
Inferred. But what! if I were Undetermined in this matter, and that it remained
a Mystery to me? (for I believe not the being positive therein, Essential to my
Salvation) which if I were, truly, what he says, seems not to me sufficient to
Proselite me to his Opinion. For albeit I willingly Confess with him, that
Sickness and all the other Miseries attending this Life, yea and Death it self,
considering the Anguishes wherewith it is now generally accompanied, are the
Consequence of the Fall, and of Sin; yet I see not, how it would thence follow,
that Adam should not have died; seeing Death to him, if he had not fallen,
would have been freed of all these Miseries, and rather a Pleasure, than a
Pain: which has been known to have befallen many Saints. As for his n. 19. he
Confesses; the matter of it is left to the next Chapter, where I may meet him.

3. Page 100. n. 20. He goes on at an high rate of Perverting. For after he has
said; Who would suspect, but I mean honestly? He applies to me the saying of
Solomon, He that hates, dissembleth with his Lips, we must not believe him;
for there are seven Abominations in his heart. But why am I with him guilty of
this great Charge? Because albeit I affirm, That Man is wholly degenerate, yet
I say, Whatever good Man does in his Nature, that does not proceed from him,
but from the Divine Seed in him, Answ. These words are none of mine, but a
Forgery of his own; so incident it is for the Man to lie and pervert: And
therefore all his vapouring and absurd Inferences drawn from this throughout
this Paragraph, fall to the ground. My words are, That the nature, by which the
Apostle says, the Gentiles did the things Contained in the Law, How the
Gentiles did the things of the Law?
cannot be understood of the proper, Corrupt Nature of Man, but of a Spiritual
Nature, which proceeds from the Seed of God, as he receives a New Visitation
of the Divine Love: Where it is very plain, I consider Man, as visited anew,
and that in the Strength of that Grace thereby received (not of his degenerate
Nature) he does that which is good. Nor do I any where say, as he falsely
insinuates, That this Spiritual Nature is in all Men; though I do say, That all
Men are visited by God, in order to beget this spiritual Nature in them; as
will after come in its place to be spoken of. Now all his battering of this my
Assertion in the three following pages depends upon this Supposition; That the
good Acts done by the Gentiles, are not done by virtue of any such Visitation,
but only by a Light of Corrupt Nature, which remained in them after the Fall:
So that it is but a mere begging of the Question, until that be first debated.
But he thinks, he has brought me under a great Dilemma, p. 103. urging, That
since I say, All their Imaginations are Evil, I must say, Every Heathen has
this Spiritual Nature in him, yea, and the Devils must be Partakers of it;
because they believe, there is a God, which is a good Thought. Answ. The
difference between Head-Knowledge and the partaking of the Divine Nature.
He is too hasty in his Reasonings: for that the knowledge a Man may receive
from the Divine Seed, makes him instantly to partake of the Divine Nature, is
not proved by him; and he knows, I believe all Men to be Visited by this Divine
Seed, which may give them an Head knowledge, which they may retain (as some Men
do the Truth) in Unrighteousness; and yet not receive it in the Love of it: So
though they have it from a Divine Seed, yet it will not follow they must
necessarily so receive it, as to become Partakers of the Divine Nature. And as
for the Devils, he will Confess that once they had this Knowledge from a
Spiritual Nature; and though they have fallen, yet they may retain the Memory
of it: for that their Fall and Man's is every way alike, he will not Affirm. He
says p. 102. That to believe good done by Heathens ( that is, by such as have
not the benefit of the outward Knowledge of Christ) is done in virtue of a
Divine Seed, overturns the Gospel; but he leaves the Confirmation of it to the
Sequel, where I shall attend him. N. 25. he tells me very fairly, The Apostle
does not Contradict himself; as if I had ever imagined he did: but the question
is, Whether the Meaning he gives the Apostle's words, implies not a
Contradiction? which indeed he can no ways Reconcile, but upon the Supposition
above denied: And the Reader may judge, whether he or I do most fully
acknowledge Man's fall, and most truly Exalt the Grace of God; he that
affirms, That Man, notwithstanding the Fall, yet retains some Relics of
the Image of God, yea so, that the Law of God, which is Holy, Just, Good and
Spiritual, is written in his Heart, page 105. and all this Considered as fallen
Man, without receiving any Grace and Benefit from Christ: or I, J. B's false
Assertions that Man retained some Relics of the Image of God in the Fall.
who affirm, That Man by the Fall was wholly degenerated, retaining nothing of
the Image of God; in whom albeit there remained a Seed of Righteousness, yet no
other ways, than as a Naked Seed in Barren Ground, in virtue of which he can do
nothing, until visited by a New Visitation, which he receives by virtue of
Christ, as Mediator. And yet while he ascribes all this to Unregenerate Men,
he says in a few Lines, That the Apostle and all Regenerate Men are in a
certain respect Carnal: So his Divinity will run thus; The Devil and all
Unregenerate Men are in a certain respect Spiritual, and the Apostle and all
Regenerate are in a certain respect Carnal.

4. But he thinks, in the following page 106. he has gotten me in a notable
Contradiction; so that he concludes, if I may have occasion to Contradict the
Truth, I care not, how often I Contradict my self; and that is, by asking me
this Question: Wherein appeared the Wisdom of the Wise Men among the Greeks, if
not in the knowledge of the Things of God? The Wisdom of the Greeks appeared in
their Worldly Affairs.
I Answer: In the Wise and Prudent Management of Worldly Affairs: For he has
not proved, that is necessarily united to a Knowledge of God and things
Spiritual; since it is said of some Beasts, that they have something of this,
such as Bees and Ants, etc. And whereas he asks, Wherein Men differ from Brutes
then? I say, In many things; as in the knowledge of Numbers, and Mathematical
and Mechanical Demonstrations: Is the Knowledge of such natural Truths (as 2
and 3 makes 5: and the whole is greater than the part, and all that is deduced
therefrom) the knowledge of the things of God? And yet is not this further,
than what Beasts know? And to show him his forwardness in this, let him show
me, if he admit not this, how the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God,
and the Wisdom of God Foolishness with Men? At last he comes p. 107. and to the
end of this Chapter, to prove, That there does remain in Man some Relics of
the Image of God, notwithstanding the Fall; which he builds upon that saying of
the Apostle, Romans 1.19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in
them; and the reason he urges, is, Because it was known not to a few only.
Answ. This is very true; but makes nothing for him: for here (as for the most
part elsewhere) he with an unparalled Confidence (not to say Impudence)
every where begs the Question. First, in that he (supposes that this (...), or
what is to be known of God, That which may be known of God, etc. are not J.
B.'s Relics.
is somewhat, that Man retained in the Fall, and no New Visitation of Light and
Grace; which he knows I deny. And Secondly,: That it must be so; because all
Men have it: where he supposes, that all Men receive not such a Visitation;
which he knows I also deny: and yet he Concludes, without offering to prove
either of them. Who but one Desperate, and that cares not, how Ridiculous and
Absurd he be, if he can but heap together a Company of Railing Words, would
urge his Adversary by Mediums, which he knows he denies; without first proving
them, or at least attempting so to do?

5. Next follows his Sixth Chapter, Entitled, Of Original Sin: in which
nothing of what he says, can touch me; but so far as he proves, That those,
who never actually sinned (such as Infants) are guilty of Adam 's sin: J. B. of
Original Sin.
Therefore what he says of others, who affirm, That Man sustained no hurt by
Adam, but by Imitation, Concerns me not; since I say no such thing: And yet he
thinks it a Paradox for me to say (albeit he cannot deny but it is true) that I
deny the Errors of such. And of this nature is, what he writes in the first
four Pages of this Chapter: in the last of which he goes (after his Custom) as
it were, to pump for the Meaning of my Words, that he may Insinuate to the
Reader, as if I wrote all in the Dark, and had great Mysteries under them;
whereas any one that reads them, may see, they are so plain, that they need no
Commentary. For who is so weak, as not to understand me saying, That the Seed
of Sin is not Imputed to Infants, That the Seed of Sin is not imputed to
Infants until they Actually join with it.
until they actually join with it? He comes, p. 114. n. 8. to Examine, what he
says, I say in defense of this Error: And first he will take notice, of what I
say of Augustine, whom he alleges I Abuse, because I say, that he was the
first among the Ancients. that opened the way to his Opinion in his declining
Age, out of Zeal: But will he deny, that Augustine wrote most Zealously against
Pelagius in his declining Age? Next he shows here his great Disingenuity: For
while he names many of the Ancients, as being of the same Mind, and whom
Augustine also cited against Pelagius, he gives none of their Words; that it
might have been seen, whether it was in this, that they Condemned him, to wit,
That Infants are not guilty of Adam 's Sin: For these Citations may relate to
that, which was accounted indeed Pelagianism, to wit, That Man by Nature
without the Grace of God could fulfill the Law, yea, that he needed not Grace to
perform the Will of God; which was the thing, for which Pelagius was Condemned
by the African Synod. As for the Citation he gives of Augustine, saying, He was
of the same Mind since the beginning of his Conversion; seeing, in this Place
Augustin's Words, which he says he has held, are no more than the Express
Words of the Apostle, Romans 5.12. which J. B. has not yet proved to Import, that
Infants are guilty of Adam 's Sin: So if he has no better way to prove
Augustin's positive Judgment in the Case, than this, he does but give a Token
of his own Effrontedness and shameless Boldness, not of Mine. But since he
seems so great an Admirer of Augustine, as an honored Instrument of the Lord,
and an Holy Father, (as he terms him) then I desire to know, Whether he will
agree to all that Augustine has written? which if he will not do, he does ill
to Accuse me for Condemning Augustine, as Erroneous in some things: And if he
will, I may then show him, That Augustine both Commended and Practiced things,
which he and his Brethren Cried-out against as Superstition, Will Worship and
Abominable Popery and Idolatry; and for far less, than which they have
Excommunicated their Fellow Preachers: Which shows in effect meaner Thoughts of
him, than I have yet Expressed. Children of Wrath are so for their evil Deeds.
My Argument drawn from Ephesians. 2.3. (where the Apostle Ascribes the Reason of
Mems being Children of Wrath to their Evil Deeds) he says, was the Fathers
against Pelagius. And what then? does that render it null? But his own Answer
to it is Rare, saying, He thinks, I put out my Eyes, that do not observe, how
the Apostle changes the second Person, saying; [Among whom also we all had our
Conversation in times past, -- and were by Nature the Children of Wrath] whence
the Man wisely infers, That Paul and the Jews were the Children of Wrath; which
is not denied: but they must have quick Eyes indeed, that see it from thence to
be Inferred, that they were such, ere they Committed any Actual Sin; since the
Apostle expressly mentions his and their having had their Conversation among the
World as a Reason of their having been in the same Condition. He says further,
1 Confess 1 Cor. 2. that (...) is to be understood of the Rational Soul: And
what then? Therefore so soon as they partake of the Rational Soul, they become
Children of Wrath; This is indeed a rare Consequence: But he must Excuse me for
not Admitting it, till better proved. It would seem much more Rational to say,
That so soon as they come to the Exercise of their Rational Soul, and then do
Evil, they become guilty; for he cannot deny, That the Gospel nor Condemns,
nor Threatens any Man, but him that has Actually Sinned: And whether this
destroys not his Cause, the Reader may judge. That, Except a Man be born again,
he cannot enter the Kingdom, I never denied. Albeit Children be capable of
Death, yet it will not follow, that they are Guilty of Sin, since Death is no
Punishment, but rather an Advantage to such; to whom it is a Transition to a
better Life. He thinks, p. 117. that my saying, Such as homologate their
Fathers Sins, God will visit the Iniquities of their Fathers upon them, is no
worth Noticing; but whether his Answer be worth Noticing, the Reader may judge,
which is: That Adam 's sin was not a personal Sin, as other Men's are, and his
own After-sins; but the Man forgot to prove this, and therefore may do it next.
But he thinks, the Children of Core, The Children of Core, etc. Instanced.
Dathan and Abiram, of Achan and the Sodomites, were judged guilty of their
Fathers Sins; for unless he proves that, he says nothing: But for what Reason,
I know not; unless that they were outwardly destroyed: But until he prove, that
infers Guilt, he must forbear making his Conclusion. He is highly offended
should say, Their Opinion is contrary to the Justice and Mercy of God;
alleging, It is without proof: But if to account one guilty for a Sin
committed by another Thousands of years, ere they had a Being, and to punish
for it, be not against Justice, and inconsistent with Mercy, I desire to know
of him, what is more Unjust and Unmerciful? To say, that this is an Accusing of
God, is but a silly begging of the Question, until he has first proved his
Opinion to be true: It Is no Accusing of God to Condemn Men's Opinions, when
contrary to his Nature. He will have it to be a Rapsody of Nonsense when I
say, This proceeds from Self-love founded on their Opinion, of Absolute
Reprobation; but whether it be, or not, the Reader may judge: Sure, his saying
it makes it not so. That this of Infants being guilty of Adam 's Sin, and
therefore many of them being damned, depends upon their Doctrine of
Reprobation, no Man of Sense, that knows their Doctrine, will deny; since they
say, some Infants are saved, because Elected: Are not the rest then (according
to them) Damned, because Reprobated? He gives me nothing here in answer, but
Railing; and so concludes this Paragraph with this notable Saying; Woe, Isay
(that is, Some Infants Elected, some Reprobated, J. B.'s Opinion.
J. Brown forsooth) and thrice Woe to such, as drink-in this Man's Doctrine, and
live and die accordingly (p. 118. n. 14.) He thinks, my saying, Papists are
more Charitable in allowing a Limbus to Children, shows my Affection to them;
but he has not heard me allow of their Notion of a Limbus, as he does (in the
Chapter of Justification, p. 310.) of the Opinion of a certain Popish Cardinal;
preferring it not only to what is said by William Forbes, a Protestant Bishop,
but even (as it would appear) to Richard Baxter, his ancient Presbyterian
Brother: And in pursuance of this he asks, How they come to Heaven (meaning
Children) who have nothing to do with Christ? But then what will he say of
those, he accounts Elect Children? go they to Heaven without Christ? If not,
the difficulty is the same way resolved. To prove Children are under a Law, and
subject to Transgression, he gives the Common Practices among Men, who forfeit
Children; yea such, as are unborn, with their Fathers for great Crimes: But in
what Country do they use to kill all the Children, when the Father is put to
Death for a Crime? and unless this were done, his Comparison infers not the
Point. His plain answer (he says) is, Adam his being a Public Person; of
which hereafter. To my Citation Ezech. 18.20. The Son shall not bear the
Father's Iniquity, how Explained by J. B?
The Son shall not bear the Father's Iniquity, he preaches at large upon the
Words, alleging, his Meaning is, that those Persons he wrote to, had so much
Sin of their own, that God might justly judge them; albeit he did not visit
them for their Fathers Iniquities: And this is the quick Dispatch he says this
Place receives: It is a quick Way to Dispatch indeed, if it were Valid, to make
the Meaning destroy the Text; But Men of Sense use not to be sudden in
receiving such Dispatches. The Words are plain and positive, The Son shall not
bear the Father's Iniquity; therefore, until he give Ground from plain
Scripture to take it away, it must stand to the overthrow of his Doctrine: for
the greater Sinners those Men were, the more justly and deservedly might their
Father's Iniquity be laid upon them.

6. Page 120. n. 17. He comes from my Confession, J. B. Infers Original Sin
from Adam's being a public Person.
That Adam was a public Person, to infer, That the guilt passes from him to
all: And first in this page he affirms, That this Sin of Adam 's, from whence
Original Sin proceeds, is the Sin of the whole Nature of Mankind, and not like
Adam 's After-sins, and the Sins of other Men; which he confesses, are not the
Sins of the whole Nature. And because upon this depends much, of what he
infers; he had done well to have proved this in the first Place by some
Scripture: Till which Time his Inference is not to be Received. For did Adam
Cease to be a public Person, after he had Committed that Sin? If he say, Yea,
let him prove it by plain Scripture; for I deny it: If not, then his other Sins
must be Imputed to all Men (which he denies) or else nothing can be urged from
his being a public Person. And while to urge it, he asks, Did ever any hear
one stated as a Public Person, whose Failings could have no Effect, until the
Persons represented did testify their Approbation of it? For here speaking of
Failings, he must either Conclude in Contradiction to himself, That Adam's Sins
are laid to the Charge of his Posterity; or his Instance is wholly Impertinent.
And yet (to go round again) he takes notice, p. 125. That the Apostle names One
Offense in the Singular Number, as if thence he would Infer, that One Sin is
only Transmitted: But how he proves his Consequence thence, he has not shown.
For albeit by that first Offense he gave Entrance for Sin, that being his
First; yet it will not follow, he then ceased to be a public Person: and if
not, nothing can be proved from granting him to be such, as is above observed.
As by the Offense of one, etc. Objected.
Next, the Words are, The Offense of one, and not, One Offense, as he would
Insinuate; which (though in the Singular Number) may include many, yea all his
Offenses. For whatever way he seek to urge this from this Place as to Adam, the
parallel will allow it to be Interpreted of Christ; where the Apostle speaking
of his Righteousness uses also the Singular Number: and thence according to
him we might say, that it is only the first Act of Christ's Righteousness, that
is Imputed unto us, and none of the rest; so that we have nothing to do with
his Death, Sufferings and Resurrection. What thinks he now of his own Divinity?
Let him loose his Knot the next time (to give him one of his own modestest
Proverbs.) The Absurdity he seeks to draw from denying this Consequence of his
being a public Person, That if Adam had stood, Infants should have no
Advantage by him, since they have no hurt by his Fall, Touches not me at all;
who no where say, That Infants have no Hurt by Adam's Fall. Adam by his Fall
became obnoxious to Temptations.
Adam by his Fall lost his Glory, his Strength, his Dominion, by which he could
have easily withstood the Devil; and came under great Weakness, whereby the
Enemy's Tentations had a ready Access to him, and he became very obnoxious to
fall under them: And so all his Posterity are come under the same Weakness and
Obnoxiousness to the Enemy's Tentations, who influenceth them by Entering into
them, and powerfully Inclining them to Sin; and this malignant Influence is
that Seed of Sin in all Men, whereunto they become obnoxious by reason of the
Fall: which though in it self really Sin, yet is it not Man's, but the Devil's,
until Man give Way to it. But I deny not, but the least yielding is Man's Sin;
among which I reckon Concupiscence to be one; and so differ from Papists. For
albeit the Tentation simply considered, or as presented by the Devil, be not
Man's Sin; yet if he have the least Love or Desire to it, albeit he join not
Actually, that shows, his Mind is already defiled and corrupted, and that he is
become a Partaker of it. Thus are answered his Reasonings and Questionings, How
this Seed of Sin can be, and yet not the Persons Sin? p. 121, 122, etc. as the
Reader by Comparing may observe. Only it is remarkable, p. 121. where he seems
to put a great Stress upon the Judgment of Augustine, and citing him, he brings
him in saying these Words (among others) concerning Infants; Shall they sin,
that are under no Command? Now since they, Infants are under no Law.
who are under no Command, are under no Law (for every Law imports a Command)
how will he reconcile this saying or his Holy Father, which he brings as a
matter of Authority, with his accounting it both foolish and strange in me p.
119. to prove, Children are under no Law? J. B. taken in his own Snare.
So that either the Authority of Augustine he brings, is not to be regarded; or
his Reasonings to prove Children under a Law, that is, a Command, must be
naught: let him choose which he will, and clear himself of Impertinency. His
Argument in this page, That as the Seed of Grace denominates a Man gracious,
even while not exercising works of Grace; so the Seed of Sin must denominate a
Man sinful, is but a begging of the Question: as in its place will appear, when
I come to treat of the Seed of Grace.

7. When he comes p. 123. n. 18. to Reply to my Answer to their Objection,
Romans 5.12. among his preliminary Observations the first is very proper, where
he says; It is observable, the Apostle makes Comparison betwixt Adam and
Christ. I answer; As Christ's Righteousness, so Adam's Unrighteousness is not
Imputed to Men, before actual Joining with either.
It is indeed so: for as the Righteousness of Christ is not imputed to Men for
Justification, until they actually Join with it, or apprehend it by Faith, (as
himself will acknowledge, for I suppose, by his accounting the Antinomians
Heretics, he will not with them affirm, that Men are Justified, before they
believe;) so neither is the Unrighteousness and Disobedience of Adam Imputed to
Men for Condemnation, until they actually Join with it: but this Comparison
spoils all his Doctrine. Then after he has begged the Question a while, by mere
Allegations, affirming; his Doctrine to be so clear from the Apostle's words,
that it cannot be Contradicted, without doing violence to the Text; he forms an
Argument thus: That Sin, which is so described to us by the Apostle, that he
says, it brought Death upon all Men; that Men sinned by it, and were made
Sinners, even they who could not as yet actually Sin; that thereby all became
guilty of Death and of Condemnation; that Sin by Imputation is the Sin of the
whole Nature, included in Adam, and renders the whole Nature obnoxious to
Death, and to Condemnation. But

The first Sin of Adam is described to us by the Apostle, etc. Ergo

That Sin is the Sin of Nature, etc.



This Argument may perhaps satisfy such, as are already Proselites of his
Theme: but will not Convince one, that either believes other ways, or doubts;
since the Major is a mere begging of the Question. And if any thing be a
foisting-in of words to the Text, this must be it: since he foists-in the thing
in Debate, and words not in the Text, such as [ Even they, J. B. foist 's in
words of his own to deceive his Reader.
who could not as yet actually Sin] and joineth them with the words of the Text
without distinction, and not as an Interpretation; that his unwary Reader may
Conclude them to be of the Text. And yet the Man has the Impudence in the same
page to Accuse me of Intolerable Boldness, as foisting words into the Text,
while I expressly show, it is but an Interpretation, by saying, That is, etc. so
much is he blinded with Self-Interest: but I am Content, there be neither
Addition, nor so much as Consequence made use of. Let him show me the plain
Scripture, that says, Infants are guilty of Adam 's Sin? If he say, It must be
necessarily Inferred from these words, [in whom all have sinned] I say, it as
necessarily follows, that it is only to be understood of all that could sin,
which Infants could not; as not being under any Law, as I have above proved,
and Augustine (whom he so much reverenceth) does affirm, if his Citation from
him be true. And therefore finding this to pinch him, he brings it up again p.
126. where bringing me in saying, Infants are under no Law, J. B.'s proofless
Assertion of Infants under a Law.
he answers; But the Apostle says the contrary: He would have done Charitably
to have told me Where? that I might have observed it. What he says in this, as
well as the former page in answer to my Affirmation, that (...) may relate to
Death, and that it is understood [ upon which occasion Man sinned^] urging
Absurdities by the like Application of Christ's Righteousness; is solved by a
serious observation of the Comparison, as stated by me betwixt Christ and Adam.
His Arguing from Childrens dying does not Conclude, until he prove Death simply
considered, necessarily to infer guilt in the Party dying, Whether Childrens
DEATH argues Guilt in them.
of which I have spoken before p. 126. n. 20. to my answer to Psalm. 51.5.
alleged by them, wherein I show, that David says not. My Mother conceived me
sinning; and therefore it proves not his Assertion. His Reply is (after he has
given a Scoff) It quite crosses David's design: But why so? because in that
Psalm he expresses his Sorrow and Humiliation for his Sins? and what then?
might not David lament upon that occasion, that he was not only a Sinner
himself, but also came of such, as were so? But when I urge this place further,
showing, their Interpretation would make Infants guilty of the Sin of their
Immediate Parents, since there is no mention here of Adam; His Answer to this
is a Repetition of his own Doctrine: A rare Method of Debate, very usual to
him! And then taking it for granted, he asks me; Whether this Originated Sin
(of which he supposed David spoke, for he never offers to prove it, though it
be the matter in Debate) came from another Original than Adam? What he affirmed
here of my Insinuating Marriage-Duties to be Sin, is but a false Conjecture:
but as to the Hurt and Loss, that Man got by Adam, which I ascribe to no other
Original (as being no Manichee) I spoke before. But he should first prove,
before he Obtrude such things upon others (and I desire yet to be Informed of
him) In what Scripture he reads of Original Sin? and whether, if the Scripture
be the only Rule, he cannot find words in it fit enough to express his Faith?
or must he shift for them elsewhere?

The Wages of Sin is Death, proved Eternal.
8. Page 127. n. 21. He urges Paul's saying, The Wages of Sin is Death; and to
my saying [This may be a Consequence of the Fall; but that thence it cannot at
all be Inferred, that Iniquity is in all those that are subject to Death] he
says; It is in plain terms (but my Modesty dare not speak it out) to say, the
Apostle speaks not Truth. Answ. Is not this to take upon him to judge of
another Man's heart, which else^where he accounts a great Presumption? and why
takes he no notice, or gives he no Answer to the Absurdity I show, followed
from thence, since the whole Creation received a Decay by Adam's Fall, and yet
we say not, Herbs and Trees are Sinners? And while he would make-out this great
Charge of my Contradicting the Apostle, he forgets the half of his business,
which is To prove, the Apostle meaned in that place Natural Death, and not
Eternal; since the Apostle opposes it there to Eternal Life: and Eternal Death
he will Confess, is the Wages of Sin, which the Apostle shows they shun by
Jesus Christ's obtaining Eternal Life; whereas Natural Death they do not avoid.
Likewise he should have proved, that all the Scriptures mentioned by him, p.
128. are meant of Natural Death; which he will not find very easy. As for his
citing Death, as mentioned by, the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. the Apostle's words, ver.
56. Confirm, what I say, That Death is only a punishment to the Wicked, not to
the Saints: for the words are, The Sting of Death is Sin; so where Sin is taken
away, there Death has no Sting; and that is the Saints Victory* Now he cannot
Apply this to Infants, without supposing, that they have Sin; which were to beg
the Question. And whereas he asks, Whether Death be NO Punishment for Sin? I
Answer, that I said not so; neither is that needful for me to affirm, seeing it
is sufficient, if it be not always a Punishment of Sin: which if it be not, it
cannot be Concluded, that because Infants die, therefore they must be guilty of
Sin. Since then the Absurdities he after urges, follow from his Supposition,
That Death is No Punishment for Sin (which I say not) they do not Touch me. He
judges, p. 128. n. 22. That I run wilder, than Papists, in saying, We will
rather admit the supposed Absurdity of saying, All Infants are Saved, to follow
from our Doctrine, than with them say, That Innumerable Infants perish
Eternally, not for their own, but only for Adam's Fault: This he reckons a
Contradicting of my Doctrine of Christ's dying for all, Infants saved without
Christ, J. B.'s horrible Lie.
saying, I here grant, That all Infants will be saved without Christ. What
horrible Lie is this? Where say I, That all Infants will be saved without
Christ? If he say, it is by Consequence, that I say so, (which he must needs
do, or else be an Impudent, Unparalleled Liar) then he Infers it either from my
saying, Christ died for all: Therefore if all Infants are saved, it must be
without Christ; or that, If all Infants be saved, Christ cannot have died for
all: for one of these two must be, If I Contradict my self. But such
Consequences are only fit for such an Author, as seems to have abandoned all
sense of Honesty and Christian Reputation, and resolves per fas aut nefas, and
without Rhyme or Reason (as the Proverb is) to bespatter his Adversary* As for
his adding, They that have no Sin, have no need of a Savior to save them from
Sin, He Overturns it all by asking me, (in which also lies the pinch of his
matter) Since I affirm, they have a Seed of Sin in them, which is called Death
and the Old Man, how can they put-off this, and sing the Song of the Redeemed,
which all that enter into Glory, must do? Infants are saved by Christ, who died
for them.
Does not this then show, I believe, they have need of Christ, as a Savior,
who died for them, to deliver them from this? And is not the Contradiction his
own in urging this Question? which I thus answer: How are those he accounts
Elect Infants, saved, whom he affirms to be really guilty of Adam's Sin, and so
in a worse Condition, than I affirm Infants to be? (for he will not say with
Papists and Lutherans, that the Administering of that they call the Sacrament of
Baptism, does it?) When he Answers this, he will solve his own Argument. To
insinuate, That some Infants are damned, he asks me; What I think of those of
Sodom, Jude v. 7. the words are these: Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
Cities about them in like manner giving themselves over to Fornication, and
going after strange Flesh, are set forth for an Example, Sodom's Children, etc.
not guilty of their Fathers Transgressions, nor of Adam's.
suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. But it is strange, the Man should be
so desperately Audacious, as to proclaim his own Sottishness to the World: Is
there a word here of Infants? Is not the very Reason of suffering the Vengeance
of Eternal Fire given, because of their giving themselves over to Fornication?
which Reason could not touch Infants. Page 129. he thinks, I wrong Zuinglius
upon the Credit of the Council of Trent; but if the Council of Trent wronged
Zuinglius, in Condemning him for that he was not guilty of, he and his Brethren
have the honor to have their Judgment Approved by that Council, while ours is
Condemned: and let him Remember how he uses to upbraid me with Affinity with
Papists; yea, in this very Chapter upon less ground. Page 130. he goes about to
prove his matter from several Scriptures; but how shallowly, the Reader may
easily observe. (1.) He cites Genesis 6.5. Man's thoughts are evil continually:
What then? Are Infants therefore guilty of Adam's Sin, that is the thing in
Question? But the Hebrew signifies a pueritiis, from their Infancy: What then?
how proves that the Case? I do not deny, but Children may become guilty of Sin
very early; but the question is, Whether they be guilty of Adam's Sin even in
their Mothers Womb? And hereby we may see, he thinks not their Version so
Exact, but J. B. must take upon him to Correct it, to help himself at a Dead
Lift, as they say. The same way is answered the other Scriptures, that follow,
Ezekiel. 16.4. Matthew. 15.19. Ephesians. 2.3. which are yet more Impertinent; as the
Reader by looking to them may see, and I might easily by Examining them
particularly show; Infants perishing in the Flood, proves not them guilty.
if it were not, that I study Brevity, and delight not to glory over the Man's
Impertinency. And though Infants perished in the Flood, and that was brought
upon the Men and Women that sinned, for their Iniquities; yet it will not
follow thence, that Infants are guilty of Sins, until he better prove, that
Natural Death is always, and to all the Wages of Sin: albeit I confess with the
Apostle, Eternal Death is. And indeed, if these Infants were punished at all,
it must have been for the Sins of their Immediate Parents; which he will not
affirm, since the Flood is not said to have come for Adam's Sin, but for their
own: so this Instance clearly overturns his Assertion. I leave to the Reader's
Judgment the Scriptures not mentioned at length, but set down by him, in this
to judge, whether they prove the thing in Debate, to wit, That Infants are
guilty of Adam's Sin? The Citations out of Augustine and Origin brought by him
in the next page 131. the Reader may also judge of, (in case they be truly
cited, which I cannot Examine at present) whether they have Weight enough to
Overturn, what has been here proved from Scripture. The words of Eliphaz (Job.
15.14.) speak of a Man, not of a Child; and therefore not to the purpose:
neither do I believe, though the Spirit of God gave a Relation, of what Eliphaz
said, that we ought to build our Faith upon his Affirmations. Next he urges
Genesis c. 5. v. 3. And Adam -- begat a Son in his own Likeness, after his Image;
but this would prove Adam's Sons as guilty of all Sins, as that first, which he
denied; or let him show a ground for such a Distinction. And thus is further
Answered, Circumcision argues not Infants guilty.
what he says next page, Genesis 17.14. where it is said, The Man-Child that is
Uncircumcised, shall be cut off; which he thinks so strong, that in a Vapor he
desires me to Chew my Cud upon it: For if this Cutting-off was a Punishment of
these Children for Sin, it must be for that of their Immediate Parents, who
neglected to Circumcise them; which Adam could not do, and therefore could not
Sin in omitting it: and since he will not say this, he can Urge nothing from
that place. He says, The Fathers used to make use of these words of Christ,
Joh. 3.5. Except a Man be born of Water, etc. But their Using it was upon their
Mistake, that Baptism took away Original Sin; and that therefore Infants
Unbaptized could not to be saved. Regeneration of Infants*
That Regeneration is needful to Infants, I deny not; and whereas he asks, how
they are Regenerate? I answered that before, asking him, How those he accounts
Elect Infants, whom he confesses to be guilty of Adam's Sin, are Regenerate? He
Confesses, The Fathers Argument, taken from sprinkling Infants with Water,
(which they and he falsely call Baptism,) will Conclude nothing against me. But
since he names here Initial Sacraments in the Plural Number, which the Fathers
made use of; it seems, they had some more, than Baptism: And since he and his
Brethren make use of no more as Initial, but Baptism, it seems he differs from
them, in what they judged needful here, as well as the Quakers. I have shown
above, how I Evite both Contradicting my self, as to Universal Redemption, and
Excluding Infants from the benefit of Christ's death. And as for his last
Question, Christ's Birth without Sin, and the Birth of other Infants differ:
Wherein did Christ Excel other Infants, if they be born without Sin? (he
should have said, not guilty of Sin;) I answer: In that he had no Seed of Sin
in him, as other Infants have; and that not only, but he had nothing of that
Weakness and Propensity to yield to the Evil Influence thereof, as other
Infants: but was in greater Strength, Glory and Dominion over it, than Adam,
even before he fell. This shows his Privilege above others, and in nothing
Contradicts, what I have said before.

SECT. VI.
Wherein his Seventh and Eighth Chapters of Reprobation and Universal
Redemption are Considered.

1. IN his seventh Chapter of Reprobation he Expspatiateth himself at great
length in large and tedious Homilies, which will make my Reply the shorter, who
look not upon it as my concern to answer them; because these Controversies are
largely handled by others, and what is said by him, is abundantly answered: Yet
if he will affirm, he has said something that is New upon this Theme, and point
to it, it is like, it may not want an Answer. And indeed, the Reader may
observe him much pained and strained to put a fair Face upon these Foul
Doctrines; and though what he says here, may be, and (it is most probable) is
to be understood of the Reason he gives in his Epistle, in being so Large,
because of the Opposition of others besides Quakers (and also, because I
touched these things but passingly, as being a Theme much debated, and Common
to us with others) I might pass it by, with a Reference to those Authors, who
largely Treat of them; yet I will take notice, of what he says in direct
Answer, to what by me is Affirmed. And first, as for his Accusation of me, as
not being positive and punctual enough, in setting down my Judgment of the
Decrees of Election and Reprobation, It is of no weight: All do at Times
Confess, That it is not Safe nor Proper, too curiously to Inquire into the
Decrees of God; though this Man dive into them, and be as positive in telling
the several Causes of them, as if he were upon the Secret Counsel of the
Almighty! I judge, I have said that which is needful and sufficient, God
calls every Man to Repentance and Salvation, who has not foreordained any to
be Damned.
to wit, that God calls Every Man Every where to Repent and be Saved through
Faith in Jesus Christ, who tasted Death for every Every Man, and is given for a
Light to inlighten the Gentiles, and to be God's Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth: And therefore that Every Man ought to Apply himself to Repent and
Believe, and Obey, without believing That God has foreordained him to be
Damned; and therefore has withheld from him Grace and Power to do, what he
finds himself Commanded and Obliged to do: Which if it were true, as he
supposes it to be of most Men, there can be no Reason, Why they ought not to
believe the Truth. If he say, they either ought or need not, because they know
it not; Let him remember, what Pains he has been at in the former Chapter to
prove, That Ignorance of a Truth does not take away the Obligation of believing
it: So he must either overturn all, or be Content, this Absurdity stick to his
Doctrine. As for his saying, That the Opposers of it do Arraign God, and give a
Sign of their Pride and Arrogance, because they cannot Comprehend it with their
Corrupt and Blinded Understandings; it is but a silly begging of the Question:
And supposing it to be true, thus every Impostor might Intrude upon Sober
Christians Wild, Absurd and Non-sensical Notions, contrary to God's Justice and
Mercy; and because they would not Accept of them, tell them, They Arraign God,
are proud and arrogant, and not receiving the Truth, because not Comprehended
by their Corrupt Understandings: Would not this, thinks he, be wisely Reasoned?
But page 135. n. 3. he thinks, I run so furiously against this Doctrine, that I
run my self blind: And why so? because I say, They Affirm, That God did
predestinate to Everlasting Damnation the most part of Men, without any respect
had to their Sin, only to demonstrate the Glory of his Justice: And upon this
he Rants, as a ridiculous and false Representation of their Meaning: But this
Storm is quickly blown away, for all his great Noise. For their Westminster
Confession of Faith says Chapter 3. expressly; Westminster Confession falsely says,
That some are Ordained by God for Wrath.
That GOD ordained such, as are not Elected, for Dishonor and Wrath, to the
Praise of his Glorious Justice: And the same Confession says in the same
Chapter; That nothing future, or what was to come, even as foreseen by God,
was the Cause of God's Decree: and this himself also affirms p. 137, 138, 139.
What then is become of all his Boast? But if he place it here, and say; Sin
became the Cause, so soon as, To demonstrate the Glory of his Justice, became
the End; and therefore (they say) It was for their Sin he so Decreed: This may
serve for a Rattle to please Fools and Children; but not such as are
spiritually Wise, and look more narrowly unto things: since they so manifestly
Contradict themselves, telling; Sin, nor any future thing is not the Cause of
God's Decree; and yet in a few Lines, That God Ordained or Decreed Men to Wrath
for their Sin, to manifest the Glory of his Justice: Which is as much as to
say, God Decreed Men to be Damned without respect to Sin; and yet he decreed
them to be damned for their Sin: How makes he this hang together by
Scripture-Proofs? Besides all will Confess, that the Cause of all God's Decrees
is his own Glory, which is exerted in his Divine Attributes, whereof Justice is
one, so that this must be a Cause, before Sin can have any Place to be a Cause;
since they deny, it has any. He tells me p. 136. n. 5. That the Orthodox have
written copiously on this Subject, and very far above my Reach; There was the
less need then for him to write so many pages upon it: which must be little,
but a Transcribing out of their Writings; unless he think, he has written more
accurately and copiously than any of them (which I judge he will hardly
affirm.) I might easily, If I would, trouble the Reader with a tedious
Discourse, also Transcribe an Answer out of those, who write Copiously against
these his supposed Orthodox (but truly Heterodox) men; but I rather choose to
pass it by, (not affecting to be Admired for the Bulk of my Writings) to come
to what he says directly in Answer to me, which is the Business properly in
hand.

2. After he has premised, what he thinks meet, he comes p. 143. n. 12. to take
notice of what I say; and first, wherein I misrepresent them, in which, he
says, he has found no less than twelve Untruths: But how Untrue this Assertion
is, shall shortly appear. The first is, that I say, God for perfecting of this
(that is, for bringing his Decree to pass) did appoint, that these miserable
Souls should necessarily sin; this he says is a Mistake: But if the
Testimonies of Calvin, Zanchius, Piscator and others cited by me (whose
Testimonies must have more Weight than his, to prove the Calvinists Principle
in this) do not prove this to be no Mistake, Calvinists Principle, That God
Predestinates Men to Sin, and to the Causes of it.
then I may Conclude, that 2 and 3 makes not 5. Calvin says, That God not only
predestined Men to Sin, but to the Causes of it, which is Sin: The Reader may
look the other Passage of it in my Apology. Several of his other Untruths (p.
144.) he builds upon supposing, that I Insinuate, That they believe, the Gospel
is once preached to every person; That every Reprobate had the Knowledge of
Christ, and that God had given to every one, that hears the Gospel,
sufficient Grace to embrace it: But truly, I was never so Mad, as to Insinuate,
they believed these things; for not believing of which I Condemn them. Neither
will his Pedantism upon the Word subtrahendo make it out; since to Withdraw or
With hold may be said of things, that Man never had, without any great
Impropriety: And yet, according to him, all Men had a Will and Power to obey
God's Law in Adam; so his Ordaining, Adam should fall, was even in that Sense a
Withdrawing, of what they once had in their Foederal Head, according to his
Phrase and Notion. Another of his alleged Mistakes is, that I say, They
Affirm, God did decree, Men should not obey; but whether these Passages I cited
out of their Authors, do not make out this, the Reader may judge; yea, his
Confession does Asscribe the Withholding of Mercy, which is the Means, to
Agree to the Decree of Reprobation; so that all the Fig-leaf-Coverings, whereby
this Man would fain shelter this Opinion contrary to their Public Confessions
of Faith, and positive Sentences of their Chief Doctors, are too short and
narrow to hide the Vgliness of it. He Confesses, the Ancients say little of
this before Augustine: I never so used their Testimony, as to build my Faith
upon it, or to reject their Doctrine merely for its Dissent from them, which he
Insinuates; and yet to his own Self-contradiction Confesses I say, I would not
much regard all that, if it had any Ground in Scripture. And he denies not his
Union with the Dominicans: J. B. rejecting the Chief and first Reformers.
And that he may show, how little he cares for good Company, he willingly
Rejects the Chief and First Reformers, to wit, the Lutherans; whom (according
to his Charity) he denies so much as the Name of Reformed Protestants.

3. Page 146. n. 16. He comes to prove, That this their Doctrine makes not
God the Author of Sin; but he labors here like a Man in a Sweat, and gives
so little of a direct Answer, as scarce deserves any Reply: Such as amounts to
this, being by way of Retortion, That if I acknowledge, God foresaw Sin,
permitted it, and might have hindered it; I will make God the Author of Sin too:
But I deny the parity; and he has forgotten to prove it. His other Answer is
from the Authority of Cicero and Plautus, who oppose Author to Dissuasor; and
then he asks, Whether they say, God persuades any Man to sin? Zanchy's
Erroneous Doctrine, That God moves the Thief to Killing.
But Zanchius, one of their Doctors, says, He moves the Thief to kill; and
that he sins, God putting him, yea, forcing him to it: And sure, that is more
than persuading. But the Poor Man must be at a low Ebb, when he is forced to go
to the Heathens (of whom he has expressed, he has so mean Thoughts) for a
Shelter to his Doctrine! At last, to come off with some seeming Credit, he
desires me to Confute the Apostle, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. because that he thinks,
from that, as much as from their Doctrine this Charge may be Inferred; but here
he does only only beg the Question. He and I do both Agree, That the Apostle
makes not God the Author of Sin; but it does not thence follow, That their
Doctrine does not Infer it; since from the positive Saying of their Doctors and
the Doctrine it self it is manifest: as is more largly shown in my Apology;
and this remains yet by him to be Removed. For his desiring me to Refute the
Apostle, is no more Answer, than if to all his Arguments in his Book I should
only say, Confute the Scripture, which contains our Doctrine; and therefore
dispute no more against us, until thou first do that: would he reckon this
sufficient? As for their Misapprehensions of Romans 9. he may find them Refuted
in many Authors, that have written upon that Subject; particularly in the
Examination of West. Confess. of Faith, Chap. 3. to which I Refer him. To the
Citations I give him of their Authors, making God the Author of Sin, he says;
If they give more Ground, than the very Expressions of Scripture, he will not
own them: And what then? the Consequence is but very small; whether he will or
not. It is enough for me, that I have shown the Absurdity of their Doctrine,
which even by the Testimony of their Chief Doctors makes God the Author of Sin;
unless he will reply, All this is nothing, because I, J. B. will not own them:
And if to say, He that forces another to do a thing, is the Cause and Author
of it; who, without Contradicting their own Reason, can deny, they make God the
Author of Sin? As for the many Testimonies of Scripture brought by him, I own
them; and both Agree, they make not God the Author of Sin: but that the Saying
of their Divines does it, what is above said does Evince. Page 149. He comes
(but as may be observed, Calvinists Distinction between the Revealed and Secret
Will of God.
unwillingly) to Vindicate the Twofold Will they ascribe to God, the one
Revealed, by which he commands Men to Repent; and the other Secret, and quite
Contrary: How he is pained here, the Reader may observe by his Ifs and Ands,
thinking to turn it by without any direct Answer. The Sum of what he says,
resolves in this, That the Purpose of God is not of the same Nature with his
Command: But what, if that should be granted? The Question is, Whether they be
quite Contrary, and that in respect to one and the same Subject? so that, when
a Man is Commanded by God to do a thing, by his secret Purpose he is forced to
do the quite Contrary? Page 150. n. 19. He comes to Answer my Saying, That
their affirming, Man sins willingly, will not avail; because, according to
them, his propensity of Inclination to sin is necessarily Imposed upon him by
God: To this instead of Answer he refers me to Romans 9. of which before; and for
want of Reason he falls a Railing, calls me a proud Quaker, saying, I Agent the
Devil's Cause: But whether that be to Remove my Objection, or Vindicate their
Doctrine, the Reader may judge, Page 151. n. 20. In Answer to my showing, their
Doctrine is Injurious to God, because it makes him delight in the Death of a
Sinner (Contrary to Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.3. 2 Pet. 3.9.) he says nothing
directly; but would be Retorting, That If I prove any thing from this, then I
must say, That God did absolutely Decree, J. B's. silly Shifts and Evasions
overturned.
that all Men should be Saved; but I deny this Consequence. Albeit it is
Injurious to God, to say, He decrees that, which he declares to take no
delight in; it will not follow, that it is Injurious to him, to say, He
permits, what he delights not in. For on all hands it is Confessed, he
permits Sin; and yet on no hand, that he delights in Sin: so that this
Injuriousness of their Doctrine to God is no ways Removed by him; albeit he
would fain be mincing and covering it, saying, They do not say, that God
purposes to punish any not for their Sins, but merely to satisfy his own
Pleasure: but such silly shifts must only satisfy blind Men. Do not they say,
God purposed to damn Many to Eternal Torment, and that Sin is no ways the Cause
of this Purpose? And will he say, to be Eternally Tormented is no Punishment?
And was not this a purpose to punish Men, and not for their Sin? His alleging
in this page, that this is not injurious to Christ's Mediation, is upon the
supposition, that Christ died not for all; which comes after to be Examined.

4. Page 152. n. 22. He comes to prove, Their Doctrine makes not the Gospel a
mere Mock; as I show it did, by proposing the Offer of Salvation to many, who
yet by an Irrevocable Decree are Excluded from receiving any Benefit by it: and
to this he gives the Instance of Moses being sent to Pharaoh, J. B.'s Instance
of Pharao's heart hardened, and Eyes shut, etc.
whose Heart was hardened; and Isaiah to the People of Israel, to make their
Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes, with others of like Import. But this is easily
answered, considering I grant, many Men Outlive the Day of God's Visitation to
their Soul, and are justly Hardened; and yet the Offers of Mercy and Peace is no
Illusion, because they were once in a Capacity to have by it Received it. But
he thinks here, he has gotten me in a Contradiction; because he supposes, that
I willingly grant, That the Light within may continue to Exhort such to Repent
and Turn, whose Day of Visitation is Expired: but it is no wonder, the Man's
Arguments are weak, that are built upon so groundless Suppositions. For I will
never grant, that the Operations of the Light are every way the same in Man
after, as they were before his Days of Visitation were Expired: For albeit
before they Judge, Reprove and Condemn for Sin, yet this is accompanied with a
gentle Drawing and Invitation to Life; but that he has this afterward, I
utterly deny: as is Clear by Christ's Weeping over Jerusalem. To prove p. 153.
that this their Doctrine is not Injurious to Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice,
by making it a great Judgment and Plague to many, he asks; Must not Christ be
for the fall of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. citing other Scriptures of the like
Import: Answ. All this urges nothing, but upon Suppositition, that all these
never had a Day of Visitation: so that he does but beg the Question. His
supposed Contradiction, which he Repeats again here, is before removed. Page
154. N. 25. To prove, Their Doctrine puts not Men in a worse Condition than
Devils, he says; Devils are under no Offer of Mercy now, and hear not the
Gospel: but is not this a pretty Solution? whereas he Confesses, this Offer of
Mercy and Hearing is no Advantage, nor was ever Intended to Advantage those who
are damned; and therefore foreseeing the Weakness of this, he brings-in my
words, Men put in a worse Condition than Devils by J. B.'s etc. Doctrine.
where the pinch of the matter lies, to wit; Devils had once a possibility of
standing, but so not Men, according to their Doctrine: To this he has no
Answer; but That all Mankind once stood in Adam. But did not God decree, that
Adam should fall? Let him answer me this directly: where then was their
Capacity of standing, or his either? If he say, not; let him take home his own
Reasonings, that something came to pass, which God decreed not, and
consequently, according to him, foresaw not. But suppose, this difficulty were
solved; let Men of Sense and Reason judge, whether Men be not put by their
Doctrine into a worse Condition, than Devils, while they affirm, That Devils
had once a standing, and fell by their own, personal disobedience and
presumption; but Men had only a standing in Adam, fell by his Act, and not by
any of their own, all of them, before they had a being, and many several
Thousand Years before. But to befool his Reader he says in the end of this
Paragraph, Their Doctrine is Consonant to that Rev. 22.17. -- and whosoever
will, let him take of the Waters of Life freely: and this he Repeats in the end
of the next Paragraph. But how deceitful he is in this, cannot be hid from the
understanding Reader; since that Invitation signifies nothing to those, that
are by an Absolute Decree Excluded from the Benefit of it; and is but to deal
with such Invited Ones, as the Poet feigned of Tantalus, The Example of the
Poet's Tantalus further urged.
who was up to the Chin in Water, but restrained from Drinking: which he takes
notice of, as Objected by me, p. 155. and labors to remove it, but in vain.
What he says to that end, Resolves in this Question; Have Heathens or
Reprobates as great a desire to Salvation, as Tantalus had of Drinking? And
what, if they had not? the Comparison is not Impertinent: for he, that has
resolved to starve a Man, whether he do it by hindering him to Eat, or by
destroying his Stomach, that he has no Appetite, and therefore does perish,
does equally Contribute to his Death. And the like does their false Doctrine
most Injuriously ascribe to God. As for the Scriptures here brought by him,
such as; All Men have not Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. and others of the like Import,
they are not to his purpose; for the question is not, The Question Stated.
Whether all Men have the Exercise of those Gifts, that lead to Salvation? but
Whether the Most of Men be by an Irrevocable Decree, before they had a Being,
yea, from all Eternity secluded from all Means of obtaining these Gifts, that
they may be Saved; and that because Ordained to be Damned; albeit by the
Gospel, as the Revealed Will and Command of G0D, Invited to Repent and be Saved?

5. Now I come to his 8 th Chapter of Universal Redemption; where I shall not
have much ado for many Pages. For after, according to his Custom, he has
Introduced himself with Railing and Reproaches, and that in the first 4 Pages
he has told the Various Opinions of those, that held Universal Redemption, and
at last his own, as conceived in the Westminster-Confession of Faith; he goes
about to prove, That there is No Universal Redemption, and that upon this
Medium: That there was a Covenant betwixt God and the Mediator, which would be
destroyed by such, as Assert this Universal Redemption; J. B.'s proof against
Universal Redemption.
because, according to them, it might have fallen out notwithstanding that
Eternal Transaction, that not one Person should be saved. Upon this he
enlarges, endeavoring to show the Absurdity of it both from Reason and
Scripture, unto page 194. All which touches me not at all, who do not say,
that Christ by his Death purchased a Mere Possibility (against which he
battereth through all these pages) since I have expressly affirmed, and he
himself observes it, that Christ's death purchased not only a sufficiency of
Grace for all; but also such a Prevalency for some, by which they were
necessarily brought to Salvation: and yet is so Unjust as to affirm, That I am
for this Mere Possibility, saying, p. 178. n. 28. I embrace this Opinion with
the Arminians, and p. 179. n. 30. he says -- Or as this Quaker says, who in
Effect says, that it may so fall out, that there shall be no Application:
Whether this be Malice, or Forgetfulness, himself best knows. But this is sad,
he seldom forgets to be Malicious; but often to be Just: yet as to the Bulk of
his Reasonings of that matter, perhaps he bestows them for the Confutation of
those others he speaks of, besides the Quakers, against whom he says he
writes; who, if they judge it their Concern, may Answer it. ^et in this prolixe
Disputation he has Cast-in some Arguments, which seem not only to urge against
this Mere Possibility, as he terms it; but also against Christ's dying for all
in any respect (such as from page 169. N. 19. to page 175. J. B.'s false
Doctrine, That Christ died to take away Peoples Sins with. out Repentance.
) But these are such, as his usually are, which only proceed upon the
Question's being begged. For whereas he says, That those, for whom Christ
died, he died to take away their Sins; It is not denied: provided, they resist
not the Grace purchased thereby, so that Faith and Repentance be wrought in
them. But he urges this in the following page (170.) That since this
Nonperformance of the Condition is a Sin, if he died for all Sins, he must
have died for this also; and if there be another Condition imagined, for that
too: and so in Infinitum. I Answer; This Reasoning would infer those to be
saved by the Death of Christ, who never Repent; especially with those who
judge, Men may sin, yea, must sin all their lifetime, and yet be saved:
Neither does the Absurdity reach those, who affirm Christ to have died for all,
as to obtain Remission of Sins that are past, and Graee sufficient to work
Faith and Repentance; yea, and Restore those that may Fall into sin after their
Conversion, if not Resisted: and this is sufficient to Infer, that Christ died
for all, neither can that Absurdity more reach them, than the Apostle, who
speaks of such, as Denied the Lord, that bought them. And since the Evangelist
places the Benefit upon the Reception, Why all are not benefitted by Christ's
Death?
saying, But unto as many as received him, he gave Power to become the Sons of
God; all these Scriptures afterward cited by him, signifying the Efficacy of
Christ's Blood, is not denied; they themselves Confess, it was Sufficient, and
of Value enough to have Redeemed every Man: but that does not hinder it from
proving Ineffectual to such, as will not Receive it; as is above shown. And
therefore his Question ( p. 172.) If Christ died for the Sins of all Persons,
how comes it, that they are not all actually pardoned? is easily answered;
Because of their Non-reception of the Grace, Christ dyed for all, yet all are
not saved; and why?
by which his Death should be made Effectual to them: And albeit this makes
Free Will Author of Condemnation, as himself will acknowledge; yet not of
Salvation: as shall after appear. His next Argument (p. 174.) is, That if
Christ had died for all Men, all Men should be saved, because he has purchased
Faith and Salvation for all, for whom he has died; and this he supposes he has
shown before: But his Confidence in his own Arguments does not Influence other
Men; I am yet to see, where he has proved any such thing. The Scriptures he
brings (such as Romans 8.32, 39. etc.) to prove this, speak of those, who had
really received the Grace, and in whom Regeneration was working by it; and do
indeed very well prove, that Christ died for them; yea, what if I should say,
has purchased them Grace prevalent to Salvation? Yet they will not prove, that
he has not died for others also, also that may miss of Salvation. Page 175. N.
25. he says; It is considerable, that no where in Scripture we find it
expressly affirmed, That Christ died for all Men: Why then is all trouble made?
But is it not expressly said Heb. 2.9. That we see Jesus, -- That he by the
Grace of God should taste Death for every Man? Let him tell us, what less that
Imports? yea, if it be not more Emphatick to say, Christ tasted Death for
every Man, than to say, Christ died for all Men? It is much, the Man would so
proclaim his Ignorance!

6. After more of his Tedious and Superfluous Reasonings against this Mere
Possibility (as he calls it) he comes ( p. 194. N. 48.) to Overturn my Grounds
for Universal Redemption; and first, in answer to the Angels Song Luke 2.10.
urged by me, wherein they hold forth the Coming of Christ, The Angel's good
Tidings were to all People as well in general as in particular.
as Tidings of great Joy to all People, This (he says) is to show, the Offer
was to be made now to all Kindreds, Nations, Tongues and Languages. And what
then? It is not said only so, excluding all Particulars of these, since the
Word ALL, in the Common Acceptance comprehends every Particular, as well as
all Sorts; and he should have given some Reason from Scripture, why he
Restricts it here: But in stead of that, he Contradicts himself in the very
following Words, saying; For he was to Reign over the House of Jacob, Luke 1.
v. 13. for this, if it Urge any thing, it will Exclude his former Concession;
if it be not Exclusive, he can prove nothing from it. Neither does he more
pertinently allege Matthew. 1.21. That he was to save his People from their
Sins; for that Scripture does not say, That he purchased not a Capacity for
some to be his People, who by their Resisting lost the Benefit offered them:
How often would I have gathered you, -- and ye would not? says Christ, Mat.
23.37. Luke 13.34. He says further, This would not have been glad Tidings, if
it had been a mere Possibility: But I affirm no such thing. To my urging
Christ's Commission, Mark 16.15. To preach the Gospel to every Creature; and
that of Paul, Col. 1.28. he says: It will no more prove, That Christ died for
all Men, than for Devils and Beasts; for they are Creatures: But how silly and
perverse this Answer is, is easily apparent. For is it lawful to preach the
Gospel to Beasts and Devils? or is it as unlawful to preach the Gospel to any
Men, J. B.'s Perversion Christ's Commission to preach the Gospel to every
Creature for Salvation.
as it is to do it to Beasts and Devils? But on the contrary: since he will not
deny, but it is a Duty to preach the Gospel to all Men Indefinitely, yea, in
this Place he acknowledges it, they being the proper Subjects of it; so that of
them must be understood [ every Creature] here mentioned. Page 196. N. 50. To
my arguing, The Gospel Inviteth all; and that it would be a mocking of Men, if
Christ died not for all, to Command them all to believe, that Christ died for
them: He says; This is built upon an Untruth, that the Gospel does not Command
all, to whom it is preached, to believe, that Christ died for them; but only to
flee to an All sufficient Savior. But what is the preaching of the Gospel
(especially in his Sense, even as a little before acknowledged by him) but a
Declaring and Offering of Salvation to all, to whom it is Preached, Mercy and
Good will through the Merits of Christ, who died for them? Next, the Argument
still holds good; If the Gospel Commands (as he says) to flee unto an
All-sufficient Savior: For unless it be possible for such, who are so
Commanded, to do it, the preaching of it to them is a mocking of them, and that
to purpose; if this Impossibility be Imposed upon them by him, by whose Command
the Gospel is thus preached. The Example of Moses to Pharaoh, and Esaias to the
Jews has been before answered. He ends this Paragraph begging the Question; As
if the Gospel could be said no where to be, but where there is an outward
Dispensation of it by the Ministry of Men.

7. Page 197. N. 51. He confesses, There is no Scripture, that says,
Salvation possible for all, because Commanded to pray for all.
Christ has not died for all Men; and there is, that says, He has tasted Death
for every Man: Which is rather more, and not a probation by Consequence only;
as I have already shown. Then he comes to consider my Argument from 1 Timothy
2.1, 3, 4-6. showing, That Salvation cannot be Impossible for all, since we are
Commanded to pray for all; and that since Christ gave himself a Price of
Redemption for all, it cannot be Impossible, that all should be saved: As is
more largely illustrated in my Apology. Now how he is pained in Answer to this,
and in his Nibblings about the particle [ all] even unto page 204. the Reader
may easily observe. First he distinguishes upon the Word Possible: It is meant
(says he) here of such a thing, as may be, abstracting from the Decree, yea,
in respect of the Decree, the Contrary whereof is not decreed by God; but not a
thing simply so. The Man it is like thinks, he has found-out a very subtle
Distinction; but it serves for little, save to show his own Confusion. For to
be possible, abstracting from the Decree, and with a respect to the Decree, is
for a thing to be Impossible, if God had not decreed the Contrary; and yet to
be possible, because God has not decreed the Contrary. But to leave this piece
of Confused Pedantry; J. B. denies praying for all Men.
he denies, That we may pray for every one, because John says, -- There is a
Sin unto Death, I do not say, ye should pray for it. But this is in plain Words
to say, The Apostle Paul was deceived; and therefore his Brother John reproved
him: For the Man labors more in this to make these Two Apostles Contradict one
another, than to Refute me. But for all this we see, they are no ways at
Variance: We may pray for all, because all may in a day be saved; though when
some have outlived that Day, it may not be fit to pray for them: but if
Salvation were by an absolute Decree made Impossible for most of Men, it were
Madness to pray for them. He thinks, it may as well be Inferred, and to give
Thanks for all Men.
That we should give Thanks for all Men: This I suppose he reckons Absurd; but
why so? May not Men give thanks to God for and in the behalf of all Men, for
his Grace that he has given to all Men, and also for his daily Care and good
Providence over all Men? That which he says afterward in many Words, amounts
to this: That Men have prayed allowably for that, which by reason of God's
Decree was Impossible; and therefore may pray in Faith for that, which is
Impossible. Of this he gives one great Instance from Christ's praying; Christ's
praying, Father save me from this Hour, etc.
Save me from this hour: Which is always with a Submission to God's Will. But
this may diverse ways be answered: for he has not proved, That Christ's praying
to save him from this Hour, was in him a real Desiring, however submissively,
that he might not undergo that, which he knew he came into the World to do.
Neither can this be affirmed without Importing, That Christ was unwilling to do
his Father's Will, and desirous to shun it; which to Affirm were Blasphemy, to
Accuse him, who in all things was found Willing and Obedient. So that his
Prayer was not a Desiring, the thing might not be; but that he might be saved
and preserved from being overwhelmed with the Difficulties and Distresses, that
in that Hour did and might Attend him: And in this his Prayer was Answered; for
albeit these Difficulties were not Removed, yet he Triumphed over them. That a
Man pray for the Life of his Father or Friend, who notwithstanding dies at
that Time, is not denied; but it will not thence follow, that it was
Impossible, that those Prayers could have been Answered. For to Conclude from
the Events, that things could not have been other ways, were to Conclude, all
things came to pass by a Stoical Fate: The Stoical Fate believes God an Agens
necessarium, and all things to come to pass necessarily, after an Inevitable
and Unchangeable manner.
So that God himself were Agens necessarium; and to savor of Spinosa: Then it
had been Impossible for J. B. to have Omitted (though at te earnest Desire of
his Friends) one Word as what he has written, or to have added one Word more;
and yet he says in some Places, He might have said more. But the Apostle's
desiring to pray here, is founded upon the positive Mind of God, who wills
all Men to be saved: This (he says) is most false in the Sense asserted by me;
else all Men should be saved: But I never took it in that Sense. The Question
is; Whether in any true Sense it could be said, that he will all Men to be
saved? and that given as a Reason, why we should pray for all, if God had made
it always simply Impossible for many to be saved? To show, that God's Will of
Precept (as his Phrase is) may be Impossible in respect of his Decree, he
says; God Commands all, perhaps Devils and Damned, to love him perfectly,
and yet this is not now possible. But this [ perhaps] spoils all this
Inference: For until he be Certain of it, he can Conclude nothing from it. He
bestows diverse pages upon the Universal particle ALL, to show, how it is
diversely taken; and by an Instance of several Scriptures to prove, it sometimes
is not taken for All and every One: But in this (had he not loved to be longsom
and tedious) he might have spared his pains; since that was never denied by me.
But the Question is, That since the proper, common and most universal
Signification of [ all] is to signify every one, whether in the places brought
by me, the most common Signification should not be made use of, according to
the general Rule of all Interpreters? And therefore if he had said any thing to
the purpose, he should have proved, that in these places there must be a
Restriction, and not have bestowed many words to prove [ all] sometimes to be
Restricted; which I never denied: and the pinch lies here, wherein I desired
to be satisfied; but find not as yet, he has given any Answer. J. B. etc. make
the word All express of two Numbers the least, to be Elected.
Where is [ all] made use of in Scripture, to express of two Numbers the least?
which yet, according to their Principle, they make it to do; since they usually
affirm, that the Number of the Elect is much less, than that of the Reprobates.
After the like manner, ere he make an end of this, he would turnby the word [
World] as being understood of a part, and not All; but he is mightily pinched
upon this occasion, where he comes p. 208. n. 64. to answer, what I urge from 1 John 2.1, 2. where Christ is said to be a Propitiation for the sins of the
whole World; and that he may do it the more easily, he omits a long time the
word [ whole] to show, that the word World is sometimes taken with a
Restriction. And at last he tells us fairly, that the Phrase, the Whole World,
cannot prove any thing; and that It is but rational to suppose, that the Whole
World here denotes no more, J. B. by the Whole World understands only the
Elect, falsely.
etc. and and for this he refers to Rev. 3.10. and 12.9. and 13.3. etc. But
these Scriptures are so far from hurting me, or making against what I say, that
they Confirm it: for I argued, that All and Every one was included by the
Apostle in these words, wherein he says, Christ was a Propitiation for the
sins of the Whole World, because he mentions the Saints before, -- not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the Whole World; and so it must be the Whole
World, as Contradistinguished from the Saints. Now these places of the
Revelations cited by him, do denote All and Every one, as Contradistinguish'd
from the Saints; which himself, I judge, will not deny: for will he say, That
the hour of Tentation (Rev. 3.10.) came upon Every one, as Contradistinguished
from the Saints? and that the Beast (12.9.) did in this sense deceive the
World, that is, All and Every One? and that (13.3.) All the World wondered after
him? The other places marked by him, have no relation to the Whole World, in
the sense I here urge it; which is, that the Whole World, when used in
Contradistinction from the Saints, expresses All and Every one: and the thing
he should have done, if he would have truly Refuted me (which he has not so
much as attempted) was to prove, That the Elect, or any part of them, at
expressed by the word [We] or [Us] by any of the Penmen of Scripture, are
Contradistinguished from the Elect, or any part of them, under the term of the
[Whole World?] Until he do which, he no ways overturns my Argument; and
therefore what he says besides this, is beside the purpose.

7. Page 204. N. 59. In answer to Joh. 3.16. compared with I Joh. 4.9. God so
loved the World, etc. and God sent his Only-begotten Son into the World, etc.
he tells; [ Whosoever] albeit Indefinite, is not Universal, unless it be in a
necessary matter; J. B's. frivolous and wicked Exceptions against God so loved
the World, etc.
which this is not. But he should have defined, what he means by a Necessary
Matter distinctly; and then proved this not to be such: till both which be
done, that is now omitted by him, his Answer is deficient. His next Quibble is;
That the [ World] in these two places is not the same; the one being understood
of the Habitable World, and the other of the Inhabitants. But the last may be
understood of the Inhabitants, as well as the first: Where is the Absurdity of
saying, God sent his Son into the World, that is, unto Men, or among Men? (3.)
He supposes, I will not say: God sent his Son into the World, that all
Inhabitants might live the life of Faith; For all Men have not Faith, and all
Men will not be saved, or God should be disappointed of his Intentions; and
therefore he adds, as his Commentary upon Rev. 3.3.4. What if some do not
believe? shall their Unbelief make the unchangeable Purposes of God of none
Effect? No. Answ. I perceive, as most of the Man's Reasonings are built upon
Suppositions, so most of his Suppositions are false* For God sent his Son into
the World, to put all Men into a Capacity to live the life of Grace; and
therefore who do not, the Fault is their own. Nor are God's unchangeable
Purposes of none Effect; since God has not unchangeably purposed to Damn any,
which he supposes, he did: And upon this mere and unproved Supposition,
according to his Method he builds his matter. He adds: Joh. 3.16. is directly
against the meaning of his Adversaries (I judge, he means all those, who Assert
Universal Redemption) who build much upon it; albeit I had not the Wit to
Improve it. But it seems, had I had a great deal more Wit, than I have, he
judges himself to have Wit enough to prove it all to no purpose: Why? because
according to the Greek it is; For God so loved the World, -- that all believing
(or all Believers, or every one that believes) in him, might not perish, etc.
And what then? We must prove, that either all are or shall be Believers, and
then he will easily grant without Dispute, that Christ died for them all. But
the Man has not here well heeded, what he says: There is no necessity of
proving, That all are, or shall be Believers; it is enough to prove, that, All
are put in a Capacity to Believe, and that Faith is not made by an Absolute
Decree Impossible to most: This in part is done already, and more of it will
appear hereafter. That Christ by this place intended to show, that his Death
should not be Restricted to the advantage of the Jews only, is not denied. In
answer to Heb. 2.9. that he Tasted death for every Man, he says; that the
Greek here, for every Man, imports, in their room and stead; shall we think,
that Christ died so for every Man, and yet many of these Men died for
themselves? But if any Absurdity be inferred here, it will redound upon himself
(no less than upon me) who will Confess (as his after-words make manifest) the
saying here, Christ tasted death for Every Man, Imports his dying here for the
Elect; and yet do not many of the Elect die for themselves if he mean a Natural
Death; but if not, I see no Reason of admitting his Figure: nor is there any
Strength in it to prove, that it imports his Dying in their room and stead, as
he would have it. Here again he says, This shows, the Benefit of his Death
is not restricted to the Jews; Which is granted: but that proves not that it
is not therefore Universal. Next, he takes notice of the Context, where it is
said, It became him in bringing many Sons unto Glory, etc. and therefore these
are the All, for whom he died: But this is strongly to affirm, not to prove.
Albeit Christ brought many Sons unto Glory, and called such Brethren, it does
not follow, he Tasted death only for such: The Apostle shows us first the
general Extent of Christ's Death, in saying, He tasted death for every Man; and
then shows us, how it became Effectual to many: And yet the Man is so
confident (albeit he has urged nothing, but only affirmed) that he adds; If
this Context do not sufficiently Confute this Conceit, J. B. etc. regard the
Scriptures no farther than it favors their Opinion and Confutes their
Adversaries.
we need Regard the Scriptures no more. But here he has spoken-out the Truth,
as it is: For this evidently shows, that for all their pretense to Exalt the
Scriptures, yet they regard it no more, than it favors their Opinion. This is
the Account, for which they Regard the Scriptures; if it favor their Opinion,
and Confute their Adversaries; but if it do not, They need no more regard it;
else surely he should have said, If the Scriptures do not Confute that, which
he esteems an Error, then he will not judge it so any more, but regard the
Scriptutes more than his own Judgment: but on the contrary he is Resolved, if
the Scripture do not Confute what he thinks a Conceit, that he need no more
Regard them. Likewise in the rest of this page he gives himself a notable
stroke: for to my saying, That their Doctrine would infer, that Christ came to
Condemn the World, contrary to his own words, Joh. 3.17.12.47. he answers,
That Prejudice has so blinded mine Eyes, that I cannot see the Beam in mine
Eye; for in my opinion, not one Man might have been saved, because Christ only
procured a mere possibility, and no certainty for any one Man, etc. But as I
have above observed, I assert, as my judgment, the express Contrary, that
Christ has so died for some, that they cannot miss of Salvation; and this
himself also noticeth afterward, p. 276. I would know then, and let all honest
Men judge, if there be any spark of honesty left in him, whether himself be not
the Man, whom prejudice has blinded. Almost at the same rate, p. 207. he asks
me, if my Argument from 2. Pet. 3.9. the Lord is -- long-suffering to usward,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto Repentance,
do hold; What will I do with those, that outlive the day of their Visitation?
is the Lord willing to give them Repentance? I answer, No: and yet no
overturning of my Argument: For in respect All had a Day of Visitation, wherein
they might have Repented, God may be said to be Long-suffering, and not to have
been Willing, any should have Perished, etc. But this cannot be said, if none
ever had such a Day or Season, as they affirm. He would Insinuate, as if This
made all to depend upon Free Will; but how frivolous this Calumny is, will
after appear. And whereas both in this and the following page he Rants at an
high rate, as if I did fight against God's Omnipotency, saying: God will be
God, whether I will or not; and that Christ must turn a, Petioner, and
supplicate Lord [Free-Will,] exclaiming, O cursed Religion! The Man does but
show his Malitiousness and Weakness. For if God's Omnipotency, because he does
whatsoever he Will, God's Omnipotency wills not Wicked Actions.
be Urged to prove, that Men cannot Resist his Will, and that therefore
whatsoever Men do, even the wickedest Actions are willed by God; then Violence
is offered to the Will of the Creatures, and the Liberty and Contingency of
second Causes are necessarily taken away: Which yet is expressly denied by the
Westminster-Confession Chap. 3. Nor will all his Distinctions, far less
Affirmations solve this, that Peter speaks only of the Elect, because he
mentions them elsewhere: unless he prove [ All] here to be Restricted, is but
a begging of the Question.

8. Page 210. n. 65. Testimonies of Antiquity slighted by J. B. as not being
for his Turn.
He quarreleth my bringing some Testimonies of Antiquity, Agreeing with what I
say; which he terms a Fouling of Fingers with humane Writings, saying;
Himself lays not so much Weight upon the Authority of Men in this matter: and
yet afterward he Cites some, as making for his purpose. He may know, I as
little build upon the Testimony of the Ancients, as he can, for the bottoming
of Faith: and yet to show their Agreement with us, and against them, is a good
Check to their shameless Objection of Novelty; considering, how the same is
Objected to them as strongly, and with no less Reason by their Mother, the
Church of Rome, whom, when pinched by us, they begin to Run to for the Ground
of their Church, Ministry and Maintenance. That ever I said, The Quakers (whom
he terms to be of Yesterday) have only found the Truth, is false; albeit I say,
they have a more Clear and Full Discovery of it: But one would think
(notwithstanding his pretending) he lays little Weight upon the Authority of
Antiquity in this matter, that it is not so; else why does he so often in this
matter Vpbraid us with the Heresy of Pelagius, as Contradicting the Sense of
the Ancient Church and their Doctors? Who are those, whose Testimony he calls
the Authority of Men in this matter?

SECT. VII.
Wherein his IX. Chapter Of Universal Salvation Possible* his X. Of Universal
Grace and Light: XI. Of the Necessity of this Light to Salvation, and his XII.
Of the Salvation of Heathens, without hearing the Gospel, are Considered.

1. HE begins his 9th Chapter Of Universal Salvation Possible, (according to
his Custom) with Railing, accusing me of Ignorance, Folly, Pride and Pedantry;
but he thinks it not worth his pains to spend words to discover it: yet he
gives a main Reason for all, to wit; I suppose, our Opinions were never known
in the World, before we were raised up to declare them: Which being a manifest
Untruth, and never said by me, the Reader may thence judge of the Grounds he
has for this his Railing. However he supposes, They are but Old Errors
clothed with New Notions; and which himself has sufficiently enough Enervated
in his former Chapter of Reprobation and Universal Redemption: Which being the
Basis of them, is by him (if he may be admitted Judge in his own Cause) already
overturned. And then he thinks, It was Impertinency to say, That Quakers can by
sensible Experience be Confirmed in their Doctrine; and so brings to an end his
first two Paragraphs. J. B's. Comment and false Insinution put upon our
Doctrine of Grace and Salvation.
His next work is to play the Commentator, and to tell his Reader my Meaning,
which to be sure is to pervert it; as he does in this Chapter throughout:
affirming, It to be my belief, that every Man has Power and Ability moral to
lay hold of Salvation, and that there is not Requisite thereunto any new Grant
of Grace and Divine help to quicken the Man; -- he has a stock from his
Mother's Womb, which is sufficient: This he calls the Proper and Native face of
my Doctrine; and this he puts down as my Opinion, and charges me with it, p.
214. And p. 218. he says it further, Without any Concurrence of Divine Grace,
page 220. he says, I Conclude, Man has power to believe and obey the Gospel
without the Spirit of God; as also the like p. 221. twice. And p. 222. he
says, I Conclude, That the Wicked have power of themselves, without the Spirit
of Regeneration and Grace, to do what is commanded in reference to Life
Eternal; and further p. 223, 224, and 226. he affirms the like of me; which
is utterly false, and was never Believed nor Asserted by me. And its
observable, that in all these places, where he thus Charges me, he does not so
much as once point to any one page in my Apology; and not only so, but not so
much as from the Words or Writings of any other Quaker, borrowed from some of
his usual Authors, which is his most frequent Refuge: And therefore the Reader
may judge, what he builds upon his False Supposition, or batters against it,
falls to the ground, without further Refutation. After he has branded this Brat
of his own begetting, p. 214. with Pelagianism, Jesuitism, Arminianism and
Socinianism, thence accusing the boldness and confidence of the Quakers, and of
my self in particular, in terming it a New Discovery of ours; he ends this
page with a Fit of Railing: and begins in his next to Wonder, how the
Heathens can be said to have a day of Visitation, The Heathens have a day of
Visitation.
since nothing can be called a day of Visitation in reference to Salvation, but
what is in and through the Preaching of the Gospel. But this Wonder is built
upon his Supposition, that the Preaching of the Gospel is no where, but where
there is an outward Administration of it; wherein his Mistake will come
hereafter to be manifested: into which Mistake he falls in the next page, and
elsewhere in this Chapter, where I shall pass it over, until I come to speak of
it in its proper place. To none God denies the Means of Salvation.
In this page 215. he thinks, that since I Affirm, their Doctrine makes God
unjust, as denying to some the means of Salvation; that which I affirm, may be
likewise so charged, because some may think, God is not just, in not granting
to all an equally long Day of Visitation. But the Question is not, what some
may think? but whether these Thoughts be built upon Justice and Reason? All Men
know, it is manifest Injustice to punish a Man, and torment him for
nonperformance of that, which he that Commands him to perform, has by an
invincible Necessity barred and hindered him from doing; and therefore to
suppose this of the most-just God, must be a great Error and Abuse: But it is
no Injustice to punish a Man for not performing that, which he had received
sufficient Power to do; albeit another had received more: to say so, is like
the Laborers, whom Christ Reproves in the Parable for murmuring, that those
that came-in after them, received equal Wages with them, Matthew. 20.12, 13, 14.
That the preaching of the Gospel is not a Mocking of those, whose Day of
Visitation is Expired, as it is to the Reprobates among them; I have in the
former Section shown: But he asks here, Obdurateness or hardness of Heart,
when begotten?
Whether such become obdured before, or after their Day of Visitation be
expired? What if I shall say both, though not in the same manner and degree? It
was before Removeable, but not after; since albeit simply considered the same,
and always pardonable, yet with a Respect to certain Persons and their
Circumstances, unpardonable, or not pardonable. That God permits Sin to be
in the World, I never denied; nor accused their Divines for so saying: But
whereas he says, It is a manifest untruth, that I would make the Reader
believe, they say, God does Impell Men to sin necessarily; he seeks to hide
their Doctrine, and beguile the simple Reader: Calvinist^ blasphemous Doctrine
of God's forcing and decreeing Men to Sin*
Since P. Martyr upon Romans 1. says expressly, That God forces the Will of
Wicked Men unto great Sins: And Piscator says, That the Wicked are absolutely
Decreed Necessarily to sin; and therefore to sin, that they may be justly
punished: Now, these being More Eminent Divines among them, than I suppose J.
B. presumes (for all his Scribbling) he is to be Accounted; The Reader may
judge, and by the passages elsewhere cited by me, Whether he does not here most
untruly Charge me with an Untruth? That the Sins charged upon the Gentiles were
only such, as were against the Light of Nature, he has affirmed p. 217. but not
proved: For the great reason of their Condemnation is, because What was to be
known of God, is manifest in them; and that this is not only the Light of
Nature, will after appear. If, what he urges from Romans 11. concerning the Jews,
and the Imprecation those brought upon themselves, who said, His Blood be upon
us, and upon our Children, hold True, we must suppose, no Jew since that saying
of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.46. to have been really Converted: But how came
any of them to be Converted before, since that Imprecation was long before Paul
and Barnabas spoke these Words of their turning to the Gentiles? and according
to this Reasoning, all the Preaching of the Gospel, which the Jews have since
heard, and do hear, is in Vain. I have sufficiently explained, The Day of God's
Visitation to Man, spoken of.
what I mean by this Day of God's Visitation to every Man, in the explication
of the 5 and 6 Theses in my Apology, N. 17. And albeit he think otherwise; as I
know I have satisfied many Moderate Readers, who are not Quakers, so I hope to
have satisfied all, that are truly Vnprejudicate. After he has ( p. 218.) given
large Citations, to show their Doctrine out of the Confession of Faith and
Catechism, and thereafter made a kind of Preachment thereupon he comes at last
( p. 221.) to Examine the Proofs I bring for my Assertion.

2. And first to my Argument drawn from the Reproofs in Scripture to Men, for
rejecting of God's Visitation and Love, he answers, That my Proposition is
Universal, and these Complaints and Reproofs only particular; and so can prove
nothing. The like he answers ( p. 224.) to what I urge from Esai 5.1.2, 3, 4.
where the Vineyard is Expostulated with; as likewise Mat. 23.33. Mark 12.1.
Luke 20.9. and p. 225. To what I urge from Mat. 23.37. Luke 13.34. and 19.41,
42. where Christ Expostulateth with, and Lamenteth over Jerusalem: But for
Answer to all this, albeit these Places were granted all of them to be
particular; yet so much is gained by them, Some that did perish, had a day of
Visitation, contrary to J. B.'s false Position.
that some, that did perish had a Day of Visitation, in which they might have
been saved: And thus his Doctrine, Salvation was never possible to any, but to
such as must necessarily be saved, is overturned; and he should at least have
answered them, as to this. Further, all the Scripture-Proofs and Complaints are
not particular, but some of them general; and one general one is enough to
prove my Assertion: (albeit as to that, I may see what he says hereafter to
Answer that; as to the Universality, it is more particularly proved in my
Apology) such as Genesis 6.3. which is spoken of Men Indefinitely. And whereas he
supposes, This striving of God with Men to be only by his Word and Servants,
meaning the outward Word; he does but beg the Question. Likewise that of Micah
6.8. he has shown thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
where the Word [ but] does show, this is all, that is required; and that no
more is Required, than is shown to Man Indefinitely: Others might be
mentioned. And whereas in this and other Places he says; My Argument will not
prove, that Men have Power to lay hold on Salvation without the Grace and
Spirit of God; It is true: For as I never affirmed any such thing, as is above
observed; so I never intend to bring any Argument to prove it. Page 222, N. 14.
in answer to 1 Pet. 3.20. brought by me, he says; I fore saw, it would be
answered, that the long-suffering of God there mentioned, was not unto
Salvation: But the Man is Unhappy in his Conjectures of other Men's Thoughts. It
will not follow, it was not to Salvation, because the Parties, toward whom it
was, remained Obstinate, and so perished: And albeit the Apostle Peter (2 Pet.
3.15.) be speaking to his Brethren, who might have been advanced in Grace; yet
he shows not, how it thence follows, that the Long-suffering there mentioned,
is restricted to them only: The Text says no such thing. And what, though this
Epistle of Peter was not particularly directed to the Romans, to whom Paul
wrote; yet this being a general Epistle, Included the Church of Rome among the
rest: And others had need to have seen Paul 's Epistles to the Romans; since
(a^cording to him) it was a part of their Principle, and only Rule of Faith and
Manners, But to overturn, what I observed here from Peter's taking notice of
Some Wresting Paul 's Writings, he brings nothing, but his own Affirmation.
His Answer, to what I urge from the Riches and Bounty of God toward Men,
spoken of Romans 2.4. which could not be, if Salvation were Impossible to them;
is That the [Riches] there mentioned is understood of the good things of this
Life: Contrary to the express Words of the Text, J. B.'s Explanation of the
Riches of God's Goodness, etc. contrary to the Text.
which shows, That the Nature of that Riches and Long-suffering is, to Lead to
Repentance; and ver. 7. Eternal Life is proposed, as the Reward of such, as by
not despising of those Riches are led to Repentance, and continue in
well-doing. And whereas he adds, This cannot be done by the mere Strength of
Nature without the Grace of God; I never said so: And therefore like to this
Calumny is what he says p. 225. where, that he may take occasion to Rail and
Reflect, he would make his Reader believe, that I argue, That because Men can
do evil, they have therefore a Power to do good; and then pleases himself to
add: These are Quaker- like Inferences, that want all solidity, and no little
of Sobriety. At last he desires me to prove, The Talents, saving Grace.
that by the Talents mentioned Mat. 25.15. is understood Saving Grace: But if
he think, that be not meaned by them, I would know of him, what is meaned? For
it is observable, he does not (because de dare not) deny, that Saving Grace, or
the means of Salvation is meaned by them. Does not Christ make use of this
Parable to Compare the Kingdom of Heaven to it? and is it not of the same
Import with the former of the Ten Virgins, five whereof, who had Oil in their
Lamps, (I suppose he will Confess, this was Saving Grace) entered with the
Bridegroom? Is it not said to those, that Improved their Talents, Well done,
good and faithful Servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord? It is much, the Man
had Confidence to insinuate so much as a Denial, that Saving Grace is here
meaned. As to what he adds of this being not Universal, and not proving, that
Men have Power of themselves without Divine Help and Grace, I have answered it
above.

3. I come now to his Tenth Chapter, Entitled, Of Universal Grace and Light;
where he grows warm to purpose, and Rails almost Constantly. He is scarce well
entered this Chapter, when he accounts the further Piece of our Divinity, (as he
terms it) and against which himself writes as Nonsense, and the foaming of a
distracted Brain; yea, p. 228. such, as he doubts whether it can be understood
at all: page 230. whose Meaning is Unintelligible. But what need he bestow near
forty Pages, J. B. bestows near 40 pages to refute Unintelligible Nonsense, as
he calls it.
to Refute Unintelligible Nonsense? For if it be so, he cannot be sure, he has
Refuted it; since no man can be sure, he has answered that sufficiently, he
does not Understand. And his Malice has so Over-driven him, that he writes
down his own Judgment, saying; ( page 227.) Some may justly blame him, for
spending Words, and wasting Time upon such a non-Sensical, self-Contradictory
Proposition: Yet the Man will be doing that, for which he Confesses, he is
justly Blameable; and so much the more, as he further Confesses, p. 261. That
Nonsense cannot be well Answered. Of this Violent Railing take one Instance p.
248. where (in Answer to my saying, That the Light of Christ will not Consent
to any Abomination, but takes away Blindness, opens the Understanding, and
directs the Judgment and Conscience; J. B. 's Railing Stuff against the
Quakers.
he adds: And while the Quakers preach up this, as a sure Guide to Life
Eternal, they are abominable Pelagian and Socinian Deceivers, who should be
fled from, as the most impudent and sworn Enemies of the Grace of God, and of
his Gospel, that ever appeared out of the bottomless Pit; a company of pure
Pagan-Preachers, whose Doctrine is Paganism, and drives thereunto. The Reader
may judge of the rest; which he may find in Terms no less Abusive very
frequent, page 227, 233, 234, 237, 238, 240, 248, 258, 260, 261, 266. All which
Railing, as it occurreth in these pages, needs no answer; but that of Michael
to the Devil, who is the Author of such Stuff, The Lord Rebuke thee. This
Method of Answering is no less Unreasonable, than his Railing; for it is either
by supposing things not proved by him, by concluding things not following from
my Assertions, or by manifest Perversions, all improved by the height of Abuse
to render the things, that displease him, Absurd and Ridiculous: Of these I
shall take notice in order. First: He supposes Nothing to be the Gospel, J. B.
supposes nothing to be the Gospel, save the Outward Preaching.
save the outward preaching; and that there is no Gospel, where there is not an
outward Administration of it: And this he never offers to prove. What he says,
to Contradict my Asserting the Gospel to be, where the outward may not be, will
after be Examined. Upon this his mere Supposition he accounts me Absurd page
226. and upon this Supposition he urges all men's not having Grace, as not
having the Gospel, p. 235, 236, 240. That to preach the Light within, is to
despise the Gospel, p. 244. That, according to me, the preaching of the Gospel
is not necessary to Salvation. Another of his Suppositions is, That because the
Light within is common to all, therefore it can be nothing but Nature. And upon
this false and unproved Ground he Raileth and Enlarges, p. 229. where he calls
it the Pelagian Grace of God, that is Man's Free Will; doubting, whether I will
say so much as did Pelagius: Which is nothing to the purpose, neither proves
his Inference, which is false; as the Scriptures brought by me in my Apology to
prove, There is a Saving, Spiritual Grace given to all, do Evince: What he
says in Answer to any of them, as it occurs, will hereafter be considered. And
yet upon this false Inference he Concludes p. 233. The Height of the Quakers
Divinity is but, what a Natural Conscience can teach a Man-eater; and to the
same purpose, p. 234. and then battereth against it, p. 237. saying, Christ in
the Saints, the Hope of Glory, is not brought about by Nature: Which I never
said; and therefore he but fights with his own Shadow, as he does upon the like
Occasion page 231, 232-236-238, 241, 256. where he says: That Men are not made
partakers of the Privilege of the Saints in their Natural State; and the
Scripture says not, There is any thing in the Heart of Man by Nature, which
produces Christ in the Soul, etc. which things were never Asserted by me. More
of his Mistakes of this kind may be seen page 257, 262, 265. where he
concludes, The Quakers Religion and Gospel to be nothing, but what mere Nature
teaches: But it is observable, that in that almost one and only Argument,
which he brings to make this Inferrence good, (albeit much of his Work and
Exclamations depends upon it) he involves himself in a notable Contradiction.
For ( p. 234. n. 7.) to prove, There is no Universal Light, or Seed, that
bears Witness against all evil Deeds, he asks; J. B. denies the Light to
bear Witness against Evil in the Cilicians and Messagetians.
How came it, that this Light and Seed did not bear Witness against the
Cilicians, who lived upon Theft? and against the Messagetians, who use their
Wives in common? -- and against such as used to kill Men, and eat them? Now,
these can make nothing for his purpose, unless for this Reason, that because
these People Commonly and Avowedly did these things, therefore they had no
Light, that Reproved them for them; otherwise their doing of them will not
Import, the Light did not bear Witness against their so doing: more than Men
under the Presbyterian Ministry committing Adultery and Murder, will import,
there was no Witness born against these Sins by the Presbyterian Preachers. But
he has overthrown this his Reason himself, by affirming, p. 232. and 235. J. B.
overthrows his former Reason, asserting the Law of Nature in every Man.
That there is a Natural Conscience, or the Law of Nature left in every Man, as
God's Deputy, informing of some good, and testifying against some Evils; of
which elsewhere he particularizeth Murder and Adultery: and yet here he says;
It is observed, there is hardly one point of the Law of Nature, which some
Nation has not Violated not only by their Customs, but by their very Laws. If
then their thus violating the Law of Nature do not prove, they had not the Law
of Nature, or were not Reproved by it (which he himself has Confessed all had)
then neither will their doing those things prove, they had no Divine Light nor
Seed, or were not thereby Reproved: for if it prove, they had not that, it will
as much prove they had no Natural Conscience, no Law of Nature; which yet he
confesses is in Every Man.

4. In this Chapter also he would Insinuate and Infer, to render that which he
writes against, Odious, That the asserting of an Universal Gospel, by which
Salvation may be possible to such, as want outward Preaching, renders outward
Preaching needless: but this Cavil used often before by him, is already
Answered in the 3 and 4 Sections; and therefore what he repeats of this again
here, p. 229.236.245. needs no further Answer. And whereas he asks upon this
Occasion, p. 244. The History of the Gospel is necessary.
How can the believing of the History of the Gospel be necessary (as I say it
is) to such as hear it, if they may be saved without it? Because God Commands
every one to believe these Truths, to whom he brings the Knowledge of them
(albeit not them, to whom he has rendered it Impossible.) Has he forgotten
their own Distinction of some things being necessary Necessitate praecepti,
that are not so Necessitate medii? Neither do I intend by this Belief (which
the proposing of the outward Knowledge requires) a Belief merely Historical;
Necessitas Praecepti, and Medii.
as he maliciously would Insinuate. I shall now take notice of his gross
Perversions and Calumnies, which, as he advances, I observe grow thicker, and
are in this Chapter very Numerous. As first, from my saying, That we understand
by the Light or Seed, a Spiritual and Heavenly Principle, in which GOD, as he
is the Father, the Son and the Spirit, dwells: from this he infers, p. 231.
It may be he does not acknowledge a Trinity, etc. But if there be any ground
for such an Inference from these words of mine, I leave it to all Rational men
to Judge. Page 255. Because I say, It is Christ's Flesh and Blood, which came
down from Heaven, he asks; If Christ had no other Flesh and Blood? and then, as
if I had answered He had not; he Concludes Us Deniers of the Incarnation of
Christ, asking: Whether the Death of Christ, his Resurrection and Ascension,
and all the History of his Life be but Dreams and Lies? Which Malicious
Insinuation and Perversion is returned upon him, as false and groundless. And
whereas he says here, He will ask one word more; Where I read, that Christ's
Flesh and Blood came down from Heaven? (for so my words should be Translated)
it seems, he is either very Ignorant, J. B'S. Ignorance of the Scriptures.
or forgetful of the Scriptures; and therefore let him read John 6.51. where
Christ says, he is the Living Bread, that came down from Heaven, adding; that
Bread to be his Flesh. In like manner is his other Malicious Perversion denied,
and returned upon him, where he would Infer upon us, That each of us esteemed
our selves as much the Christ of God, as Christ was: so that the Blasphemy he
exclaims against, is his own, who speaks evil of others without a Cause.
Another of his Perversions is, p. 236. where repeating my words he rendereth
them thus out of the Latin: J. B. falsely Translates the Author, to seek
Advantage against him.
This is that Inward Christ, of which we Only and so often speak; whereas it
should have been Translated, Which we so much and so often speak for, as the
English Edition does verify: the Latin word tantum signifies so much, as well
as only; and was so intended here by me: that it must be so, both the Context,
and what I say elsewhere, shows. But he would have it only, that he might
pervert and rail the more liberally: albeit he cannot be ignorant, that the
Latin word tantum signifies so much, as ordinary Dictionaries show; and Cicero
saying, Nec tantum proficiebam, quantum volebam, nec quicquam posthac non modo
tantum, sed ne tantulum quidem praeterieris. Those who debate fairly, use not
to strain their Adversaries words to abuse them, when they know, they may bear
a better Interpretation. His next Perversion is yet more Gross and Abusive, p.
238. where from my denying, That we equal our selves to that Holy Man, the Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, He
Concludes I affirm him to be no more, but a Holy Man; and because I use the
words plenitudo Divinitatis, that I deny his Deity: which is an abominable
Falsehood. I detest that Doctrine of the Socinians, and deny, there is any
ground for their Distinction; and when I Confess him to be a Holy Man, I deny
him not to be GOD, as this Man most Injuriously would Insinuate: for I Confess
him to be really both True God and True Man. Christ true God and true Man.
And whereas he rails and exclaims here and in the following page at a
monstrous rate, as if the Comparison I bring of the Difference betwixt every
Saint and the Man Jesus, from the Sap its being other ways in the Root and
Stock of the Tree, than in the Branches, did further Confirm our Equalling our
selves to him; he does but show his Folly: since Christ himself uses the same
Comparison, Joh. 15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the Branches; to which I alluded;
And upon this he runs out in a vehement strain of Railing, p. 239.
exclaiming against us, as if we denied the Deity of Christ and his Incarnation;
which is utterly false: and therefore his work there, to prove what I deny not,
is in vain. And yet he repeateth this Calumny p. 242. adding; That my saying,
That we believe what is written of the Conception, Birth, Life and Death of
Christ, etc. to be true, does not vindicate us from it: and then he subjoins;
Do you believe, that that Body, which was Crucified at Jerusalem, Rose again,
and is now in Glory? Speak your mind here, if you dare? This Defiance to all
Men of Reason will Insinuate, as if I did not believe this, or durst not speak
my Mind of it: and therefore if this be found false, he must in the judgment of
all sober Men pass for a malicious Perverter. For answer then I say; I do
believe, that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was Crucified at
Jerusalem, Our Belief of the Body of Christ Crucified, Raised again and
Glorified.
was again Raised by the Power of God; in which glorified Body the Lord Jesus
Christ dwells: and I dare him to show, where in my Apology, or elsewhere I
ever said or wrote any thing to the Contrary? Of the like nature to these
Perversions is, what we says p. 264. where from my urging from Heb. 4.12, 13.
the Word of God is said to be a Discerner of the Thoughts of the heart, he
would Infer; That the Quakers then must know other Men's Thoughts, who have this
in them, and are sensible of it: But the Absurdity here is his own. Do not they
say, Every true Believer has the Spirit of God in them? And albeit the Spirit
know all things, yet Every Believer knows not all things. Since he is so
ready by Consequences to make Men Blasphemers for asserting Scripture-Truth;
how can he avoid passing this Censure upon the Apostle, who says, 1 Cor. 2.15.
He that is Spiritual, judges all things; and no Man can judge any thing, He
that is Spiritual, judges all things.
but what he knows? And whereas he Rails here, in saying; We ascribe to the
Light within the property of God, and have no other Christ: as also to the same
purpose, p. 242.237. saying, The Christ we Command to believe in, is not the
Christ the Scriptures testify of; but one born with every Man, neither God nor
Man, etc. is all answered, and the Absurdity he draws from it, Removed, by what
George Keith has said in his Book, called The Way Cast up; wherein he shows by
the Extension of the Soul of Christ, how this is no denying of the Man Jesus,
but on the Contrary. And if either I, or any other have called the Light within
GOD, or ascribed to it the Property of God, it is no more upon this Hypothesis,
than they do, who say, The Man Christ is God, and by reason of the Personal
Union ascribe sometimes the Actions of the one nature to the Person denominated
by the other; The Personal Union in Christ.
as the Westminster Confession it self acknowledges Chap. 8. And since R.
Macquair has promised a Refutation of that Book of G. K. by J. B. in his name,
when we see it, this may be further spoken to, if need be: upon which also will
depend the full Discussion of that Question mentioned p. 240, 241. Whether the
Seed be a Substance? since he will not deny, the Soul of Christ is a Substance,
and consequently distinct from Reason: as also that of Christ's being Crucified
in the Wicked, which p. 246. he calls a Non-sensical Dream; and of the Seed's
being a distinct Principle from the Soul, spoken of p. 247. The full Treating
of all which being Referred, until that promised Work of his appear. As to that
I shall only say in short at present, that whereas I say, This Seed is not the
being of God simply considered, he adds p. 230. That then all Men are
Partakers of the being of God some other way Considered; and what Blasphemy is
wrapped up here, he leaves to any that will, to Judge. But there is no Man of
Reason dealing Impartially, will Judge any Blasphemy to be here, more than in
the Apostle's Concession to the Athenians, Act. 17.28. That we are the
Offspring of God, That the Seed is a Substance.
and live, and move in him. And whereas he Mocks (p. 241.) at my saying; The
Seed is a Substance, because it abides in the hearts of the Ungodly, even
while they remain in Ungodliness, asking; Does not Pravity, Ignorance,
Rebellion, etc. remain in their hearts? Are these therefore Substances? But he
allays his own Windy Triumphs by my following words; that notwithstanding this
Seed is in them, they are not denominated by it, which Wicked Men are by their
Wickednesses, while they continue in them: and therefore it is a Substance;
since no Accident can be in a Subject, unless the Subject be denominated
therefrom. To this he asks, Why a Man, in whom this Seed and Grace is, may not
be denominated Graced and Enlightened? and as if it were Absurd to deny, they
might be so denominated, he Concludes, And thus this Substance shall be turned
into an Accidens by this Man's Philosophy. But the Reason is Clear, because
they partake not of the Virtue of it, nor have not suffered it to Work in them;
as by the Example of Physic being in a Sick-man I did show: and therefore he
has no go-by for this; but a pitiful Impertinency, That if there be such a
difference betwixt this Seed and Holiness, as betwixt Physic and Health, then
it is no part of Holiness: for I never said, there was such a Difference in
every respect* but only in respect of the Difference betwixt a Substance and an
Accident, for Clearing of which only, the Example was brought. And whereas he
would several times Insinuate here in this p. 232, 233. my Asserting the Seed
to be in all, did import Christ dwelling in all; that no such thing follows,
I have shown in my Apology, which himself elsewhere observes: for I shwe,
there is a difference betwixt mere In-being, Christ's Inhabitation imports an
Union.
and Inhabation; the last imports Union, and not the first. Themselves Confess
God to be everywhere; and yet they will not say, God dwells in the Wicked:
yea, notwithstanding God's Omni-presence, it is said, Some are without God in
the World, by reason of their being not United to him. And thus are answered
his Cavils, p. 243. so that I need not further urge (until he has removed this
difficulty) from Amos 2.12. Only it is observable, how great pains the Man is
at here to show, how faulty their Translation of the Bible is; But how can it
then be a Sure Rule of Faith to any? And whereas he says, p. 236. That when it
is said, The Seed is received in the heart, it is supposed, it was not formerly
there; I deny that Consequence. Money may be brought unto a Man's house, and
yet he not have received it: The piece of Silver, which the Woman, Luke 15. in
the Parable had lost, (and to which the Kingdom of God was Compared) was in her
House; and yet she rejoiced not, until Lighting the Candle, and Sweeping the
House she had found it. What he Repeats so often (to make an odious Noise) of
my making this Grace Universal, That Turks, Japonians, Cannibals, etc. have it,
who never heard of Christ, is Impertinent; since he has a Chapter afterward
for that of purpose, where it shall be Examined: As also what he says p. 245.
he thinks strange, Any such should partake of the Benefit of this Mystery; for
I speak not of their knowing the Mystery: That Is one of his usual Tricks, to
foist-in other Words, to alter the Matter.

5. Having thus Traversed his Tedious Perversions unto p. 251. N. 25. where he
pretends to have Traced me to my Den, while he has only fallen into the Pit of
his own making; I come to Examine his pretended Examination of the Grounds I
bring: for this he terms my Wild Assertion. And first unto Joh. 1.9. J. B'S.
vain Quarrels and Objections against the Universality of the Light Asserted by
John (c. 1.9.)
That was the True Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World,
In stead of an Answer he tells a long Story of some taking it one way, some
another. Then after he has played the Dictator a while, in telling his own
Conception, he Concludes at last, That [every one] is not to be understood of
[All] without Exception; because the Scripture tells of many, whose
Understandings are darkened, who are under the Power of Darkness, who abide in
the Darkness. What then? that will not prove, that Light is not Come to them in
order to bring them out of that Darkness; since Christ says expressly Joh. 3.
of such, that Light is come, but Men love Darkness rather; and those that love
it, are under the Power of it: And as they continue to love it, and hate the
Light, they abide in it. But it seems, not being satisfied with his own Answer,
he proceeds p. 252. N. 26. to Confess, All Men are enlightened, but not
spiritually, supernaturally and savingly; but for this he gives no proof, but
his own Assertion: And truly, he must be much puzzled with this Scripture, for
he knows not, what way to take it. First, he understands Every Man only of
Believers; and then he will have the Enlightening to be Saving and Spiritual:
then he understands it of All Indifferently; and then he will have it to be
Common and not Saving: But with these his Guessings and Divinings he is not
like to satisfy any sober Christian. He goes on at the same rate of
Uncertainty, p. 253. upon these Words; That the Life is the Light of Men,
doubting, what is the meaning of them? After he has told Calvin's, Origen's and
Marlorat's Thoughts, he Concludes; That though Light be come into the World,
yet Men love darkness better, and none become Children of the Light, but by
believing: And that all are not Children of the Light; which I never denied. He
goes on to tell Calvin's further Thoughts of the following Words; all which
shows, this place pains him: But overturns nothing, of what I have Asserted.
And then p. 254. N. 29. he refers me to his eight Chapter, to prove, That
[Every Man] here admits an Exclusion, which a little before he Confessed it did
not; adding, That the Text it self infers a Restriction, when it tells,
Darkness did not comprehend the Light. But this imports no more, than some's
Rejecting, which I deny not; but not, that the Light shined not: For it is
expressly said, It shined in the Darkness; so it was there, which is the thing
in debate: and the Text says positively, This true Light lights every Man;
and therefore it is but to Cover his own Shame and Weakness, that in stead of
something more solid, he closes this Paragraph with a Ridiculous Bob, saying;
Quakers are good at Dreaming: But this silly Covering will not serve him with
such as are not Blind. To what I have said to show, that (...) is to be
referred to the Light, (...) sc. (...). That all Men through it (the Light, not
John) might believe.
and not to John; he returns his contrary Assertion in stead of Reason: My
showing it, by its being said, That all might believe through him, which all
could not do through John, as not hearing him: in stead of Answering he tells
me, I may learn thence, how to take the particle [All]; which in Effect is
nothing, but by his own bare Authority to Command me to take [ All] not
Universally: But I find no Virtue in his Order to persuade; and therefore will
wait for Probation, ere I Obey. That John, as an Instrument, might be useful to
bring People to believe in the Light, I deny not; and therefore he might have
spared his pains in this Page to prove that: But it will not thence follow,
that (...) is referred to John, until he first remove the Ground given against
it by me, in showing, [ All] is not understood here Universally; which is
incumbent for him to do, since he denies it.

6. Page 256. N. 31. In answer to my arguing, That this Light is saving and
sufficient, because it is the Light of Christ, whereby all ought to believe, he
says; They know no Light sufficient, which is not Efficacious, that is, which
certainly does not save: But besides that this Answer is but a mere begging of
the Question, J. B.'s Quibbles against Saving Light.
it is Contrary to many Scriptures, which I have at length shown before, in
proving, Many that have had a Day, have resisted the Mercy and Grace thereof.
What he says further here against those, who affirm, That the Improving of
Nature aright, shall obtain Grace, Touches me not; who affirm no such thing.
He begins his N. 32. p. 257. with a Perversion, as if I denied, that we
received what is Natural and Common, from Christ, because I say, The Evangelist
John c. 1. is treating, of what we receive from Christ as Mediator; therefore I
deny, we receive from Christ, what is Common and Natural. But in Answer to my
urging the Light's being Supernatural, (to pass by his pedantick Quibble, which
he adventureth not to Insist upon) because the Darkness, that is, Man in his
Natural Estate Comprehends it not; but Man in that Estate can Comprehend,
what is Natural to him; he tells me, they thence Infer, That Man in that Estate
is void of all Spiritual Light: Is not this a Learned Refutation of my Reason,
Reader? But suspecting, this would not serve, he adds another Quibble upon the
Word Comprehend; That though Man in his Natural State can Comprehend that which
is Natural, yet he cannot Comprehend the God of Nature. I say not, To
Comprehend, to receive, or apprehend. (...).
that in his Natural State he can, nor yet in his Spiritual; Comprehend, being
taken in the most Comprehensive Sense: But otherwise being understood of
Receiving or Apprehending (for so (...) may be understood) he may Receive it by
virtue of the Power, which from the Light he Receives so to do. That the
Quakers exhort People to believe in a mere Creature, Is a mere Calumny; with
which like Stuff this Page is filled: And therefore my Argument of the Light
being saving and Supernatural, because we are commanded to believe in it,
Remains Unremoved. Page 258. In answer to what I urge from the Parable of the
Sower, Matthew. 13. and the Word of Faith, Romans 10. and the Engrafted Word, Jam.
1.21. he only opposes his mere Assertions and Railing, calling it
Quaker-Dotages, and a fanciful Dream. And to the Argument drawn from the
Talents, Mat. 25. he denies them to signify Saving Grace; of which above. Page
259. When he comes to answer, what I urge from Col. 1.23. of the Gospel's being
preached in every Creature, which is not only a Declaration of good Things, but
the Power of God; he gives his mere Assertions, That the Gospel was the
Doctrine delivered by Men; J. B. asserts the Gospel to be the Doctrine or
Declaration of the Power of God.
but the Doctrine was not the Power of God, which the Gospel is, albeit it
declared of it: No more than a Receipt of Physic is the Ingredients. Next he
asserts, That if the Gospel be in them, it needs no Preacher; but this he
proves not: A Man may have good Herbs in his Garden, and yet need another to
tell him the Right Use of them; yea, and discover them unto him. And what if I
would say, as he desires, That it was preached from the beginning of the World
in a Measure, that it wrought in men's Hearts in order to save them; albeit the
full, plain and manifest Discovery, and precious Effects thereof was reserved
to the Ministration of Christ and his Apostles? And therefore his Assertion in
the next page 260. is false, That according to the Quakers Principle, the
Gospel was alike manifest in all Ages. Was not the promised Seed a Preaching of
the Gospel to Adam? How poorly he has shown the Restriction of the Particle All
(albeit the Words here be Every Creature, which is more pathetick) in his
Eighth Chapter, is before Evinced. And whereas he desires to know, Where the
Gospel is taken properly for that Inward Strength, that is Common to all Men? I
have shown him, the Gospel is called the Power of God expressly, Romans 1. and
that is an Inward Power and Strength: And then again I have shown him, that
this Gospel is preached to or in Every Creature, which are plain Words; what is
preached to Every Creature, is Common to all Men: And therefore until he answer
this, his calling me a Babbler and a Pagan-Preacher (as he does in this Place)
with such like Stuff, will have little Weight with Men of Reason. To Assert the
Manifestation of God in Man to be the Gospel, J. B. calls Heathenism, Pelag.
Socin. Armin. and Jesuitism.
The rest of this page and the following, 261 and 262. is a Complex of Railing,
That the Quakers Gospel is mere Heathenism, worse than Pelagianism,
Socinianism, Arminianism and Jesuitism, because they say, that what is manifest
from God in Man, is by the Gospel; and that which Reveals Justice and Equity,
is the Gospel: Which this Man supposes only to be the Light of Nature, and
thereupon concludes, The Quakers Gospel is but Nature's dim and corrupt Light.
All which is but to beg the Question; as he does, where he supposes, That Man
naturally can perceive the Eternal Power of the Godhead in the outward
Creation, without any supernatural Light: Which he should prove, and not mock
at my being otherwise minded; for this savours more of Pelagianism, than any
thing asserted by me. He asks me, by what Authority I make (...), that is, what
is to be known of God (for it seems, he was afraid to speak plain Scots of it,
lest every one should have seen his Impertinency) and the Knowledge of God one
and the same? For to see this, he says, he wants the Quakers Spectacles. But
indeed, he must be as dark-lighted inwardly, as these are outwardly, that need
Spectacles, if he deny, That the Knowledge of God is somewhat, of what is to be
known of him; and then what is to be known of God Indefinitely, must Comprehend
the Knowledge of God. He adds; That if by Inward Revelation the Heathens know
the Will of God, then the Apostle was quite out here: But this follows no more,
than that a Master teaches not his Scholar Navigation, because he makes use of
the Compas's and outward Observations to demonstrate it to him. Page 262. N.
38. as also N. 40. J. B's. prooffess Answers*
In answer to what I urge from Romans 10. of the Word being near in the Heart and
in the Mouth, he returns Railing and mere Assertions: For his saying, That
this Word is not in Every Man, is but to affirm strongly, not to prove. As for
his Asserting, That the Apostle speaks of outward Preaching, I deny not; and
that by an outward Testimony the Mystery, that had been hid, and even sparingly
Revealed in the visible Church, was openly declared by Christ and his Apostles,
I Acquiesce to: But from all that it will no ways follow, that the Apostle
spoke only of Outward Preachers, and that it was not in the Hearts of all Men,
though they had not a distinct Knowledge of it. He Confesses, The Mystery of
Adam 's Fall was not known to the Gentiles, but by the Scripture; yet that
hindered not, but they were hurt, yea, and according to him, all of them
defiled by it. His saying, That I Confirm here my desperate Design, and
overturn the Foundations of the Christian Religion, and foolish Exclamations,
etc.
with his Exclamations, O desperate Souls! O wretched Error! with much more of
this kind of Stuff, uttered by him for want of better Arguments, may fright
Fools, but will not move Men of Reason. At last, to Conclude this Chapter he
alleges, The Testimonies of the Fathers brought by me, do not expressly prove
my Assertions; yet he taci^ly and indirectly acknowledges, Such Testimonies may
be found among the most Ancient of them, while (albeit to their Disadvantage)
he says, It is observable, that some of them had so put on Christ, as not
fully to have put off Plato.

7. Page 267. Comes his Eleventh Chapter, Entitled, Of the Necessity of this
Light to Salvation: Where, according to his Custom, he begins with proofless
Affirmations and Railing, saying; The Universal Gospel pointed at by me, is no
Gospel, not the Gospel Revealed in the Word; making the whole Gospel and Grace
of God null and void, as that, by which the outward Administration thereof by
the Apostles is unnecessary: To which is Answered before. And then after an
Enumeration of many Scriptures, wherein the Apostle Paul glories in his being
an Instrument of the Preaching of it, with which he has not shown our
Doctrine Inconsistent, he concludes; O what wretched Desperado's must these
Quakers be, who thus undervalue and trample upon the Riches of the Wisdom and
Grace of God, and instead of the true Gospel give us pure Paganism! This is a
fit Introduction for such a Chapter, wherein there is much of the same sort of
Stuff (which I shall willingly pass) and which, that he may end as he begins,
has the like Railing Conclusion, p. 281. Then when he enters upon the Matter,
N. 5. and p. 269. and comes to Examine what I say, to show, Wherein we differ
from some other Assertors of Universal Redemption, and for that end to show,
Why one is saved, and not another, seeing all have sufficient Grace; among
others he mentions these my Words: Grace in Man, if not Resisted, works his
Conversion.
Moreover we believe, that in that special time of every Man's Visitation, as
Man of himself is wholly Impotent for working with Grace, so neither can he
make the least Progress out of his Natural State, till Grace lay hold on him:
So that it is possible for him to Suffer, and not Resist, as it is also
possible for many to Resist. By these Words of mine cited by him, the Reader
may easily observe, how falsely he charged me in the foregoing Chapter with
Asserting, That Men could be saved by mere Nature, without the Operation of the
Grace of God; and yet he is not ashamed to re-iterate the same Calumny here, p.
279. But to proceed, he says; This my Answer is not satisfactory: The Reason
of which (besides some tedious Discourse of the Opinions of the Arminians,
Jesuits and Molinists, concerning the difference betwixt sufficient and
effectual Grace (which is not my Work to answer, neither needs any, as he gives
it here and there, p. 270, 271, 272-274.280.) amounts to this, That since the
working of the Grace comes from this Non-resistance, which (he says) is a
positive Act of Man's Will; then Salvation depends upon Free Will: And this he
labors to Aggravate by diverse odious and sometimes ridiculous Expressions,
such as, Grace must stand Cap in Hand to Lord Free Will, and more of that kind;
alleging, That the two Examples of Sick Men, and Men living in a deep Cave,
brought at length by me in my Apology ( Lat. Ed. p. 91. N. 17.) do not free me
of this Absurdity. To which I reply (1) That the Question is here only
concerning such, as have only a Sufficiency of Grace, and not of those who have
a Prevalency of Grace; which I Confess to some. (2) That I say not, that any
Man can Convert himself by any Light, Grace or Seed in him, until quickened,
visited and stirred up by a New Visitation of Life from God. (3) That on both
hands it is Confessed, that there must be a Concurring of the Will of Man in
the Act of Conversion: For no Man is saved against his Will. (4) That I say, as
well as he, That this Concurrence of Man's Will, and Pliableness to the Grace
of God proceeds not from Man's Will naturally, but is the Product and Effect
of the Grace: Then what has Man to glory in? O (says he) such as are saved,
may say, I was not so ill disposed; my Will was not so averse as another, that
had the like sufficient Grace: And what then? His Aversion and Resistance is
the Cause of his Condemnation, that is not denied; but it follows not from
thence, That the Non-resistence is the Cause of the others Salvation: I deny
that Consequence; for his Non-resistance did not procure him that Visitation
from God. Where then is his Absurdity? It may resolve in one of these two, That
it was possible for those that are damned, The possibility of Salvation for all
demonstrated.
to have been saved; or, for some of those that are saved, to have been damned.
What will the supposing, that those that are damned, might have been saved,
amount to, but that their Damnation is of themselves, which all acknowledge?
And if he think, it is Absurd to say, Any that are saved, might have been
damned; why is Salvation preached to any? or to what end is pains bestowed upon
any in order to Salvation? or how does that signify any thing really to their
Salvation, if Damnation was altogether Impossible to them? When he has
sufficiently answered this, he will solve his own Difficulties. But because the
Man will always be nibbling, where he cannot give a solid Answer, therefore he
falls a quarrelling at some Comparisons brought by me p. 273-275-277. showing,
they do not hit in that, for which I did not bring them; whereas I took notice,
that the Comparison did not hit every way (since All Comparisons claudicant.)
The first is, because I say, That Grace softens the Heart, as the Fire softens
the Wax; therefore he concludes, That according to me, Grace does not Change
the Heart, because Fire Changes not the Nature of the Iron; and what then? It
was only with a respect to the softning, that I brought the Comparison: albeit
had he been a good Chemist, he might have known, By Fire the Nature of Metals
may be changed also.
that by the Fire the Nature of Metals may be Changed also. The Example Of the
Sun's hardening Clay, and softning Wax was brought by me to show, That the Sun
loses not its Effect, though the Operation in the subject be different, and
for no more; albeit the Sun also work a Disposition toward the producing its
Effect in some Creatures, which by their Resisting or Not-resisting may be
hindered.

8. When he comes p. 277. to Examine the Proofs I bring to prove the Necessity
of this Grace to Salvation, he mistakes the End, for which I bring them; and
thence either alleges upon me false Insinuations, or judges them
Insufficient for not proving of that, for which they were never intended. For
the End, for which I bring these Proofs here, is to show, that whatever use,
profitableness or necessity of believing to those, to whom they are Revealed,
may be in outward Knowledge; yet Salvation chiefly depends upon the Inward Work
of Grace, bringing about Regeneration in the Soul: and this in order to show,
that where this is wrought, (albeit the outward be wanting) Salvation will
follow. Now when he shows, this is not proved by the Arguments I here bring,
he may be answered; and till then it is in vain for him to say, I would infer a
destroying of the Ordinances of Christ, which is false: or, That this does not
prove, that this common and sufficient Grace is able to Effectuate the New
Birth; that not being the matter here to be proved. Page 178. N. 13. He
denies, the New Creation spoken of 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. proceeds from this Light
and Grace: But his Mistake herein will be shown hereafter from Tit. 2.11. when
I come to speak of that place. He says, That the Manifestation of the Spirit
given to every one, spoken of 1 Cor. 12.7. is only understood of those within
the Church; but for this gives no Proof: If there be an Enumeration made of
all the several Virtues wrought by it in the Visible Church; it does not thence
follow, that none have it without it: The Text says [It is given to every Man]
Indefinitely and Absolutely, not to every one only within the Church; that
remains for him to prove. He would fasten a Contradiction upon me p. 279. N.
14. because I fay [The Seed is small in its first Manifestation; and though it
be hid in the earthy part of Man's Heart] because a thing cannot be both hid
and manifest: And upon this he Triumphs, as if he had discovered a great
Absurdity. But does he not know, That that may be said to be hid with respect
to a great, and clear and full manifestation, which yet may be in some respect
manifest at sometimes? I do not say, That absolutely it is hid and manifest at
one and the same time. In answer to Luke 17.20, 21. brought by me, where Christ
says, The Kingdom of God is in the Pharisees, he tells; Judicious Calvin
thinks, these Words were spoken to the Disciples: But he, it seems, is not of
his Mind (and therefore I know not, to what purpose he brought him, since he
follows not his Sense) for he will have it to signify [ among,] and the meaning
to be, The Kingdom of God is within, ((...), intra) not among you, as J. B.
says.
That the Kingdom of God was near and among them. But his Proof for this is not
valid; for (...) is sometimes Interpreted among: But the Question is, If it
should be so Interpreted here? and till he prove that, he says nothing. But
his Mistake here is greater, than he is aware of: for the Greek Word is (...),
not (...), which signifies intus, [within]; and I desire him to show me in the
New Testament; where it signifies among? All the Scriptures brought by him, are
Impertinent, none of which is (...), as in this place, but (...). He
confesses, p. 280. The Calvinists make Grace an Irresistible Power.
The Calvinists make Grace an Irresistible Power; and says, That they have
Reason so to do, because the Scripture speaks of Grace, as a Drawing and
Teaching; But that may draw, which draws not Irresistibly. And because I say,
[The Papists, Socinians and Arminians deny this little Seed and Manifestation
of Light to be that supernatural and Saving Grace of God given to all to
Salvation] he brings two Passages of the Arminians, wherein they confess, The
Spirit of God works immediately upon the Will, giving it Strength to believe;
desiring me then to tell him, Wherein I differ from Arminians? But will my
Agreeing with Arminians in this prove, I differ not from them? Does not himself
Agree with the Arminians in saying, (as he affirms they do) That the Power of
believing is conferred by Irresistible Grace? And if he Agree with them as well
as I, may not I ask him the Question as pertinently, as he does me, Wherein
differs he from them? Has not he himself affirmed, That as to our Doctrine of
the Saving, Substantial Seed being in all, page 226. neither Arminians nor
Socinians ever spoke of it? What then needs he ask me, Wherein we differ from
them? But it seems, he that fancieth, Men can dream waking (as he sometimes
speaks of the Quakers) has been in that Posture, when he wrote this; which
helped him to conclude this Chapter with Railing.

9. Now I come to his Twelfth Chapter, Entitled by him, Of the Salvation of
the Heathens without hearing the Gospel; he should have added, Outwardly, that
is the thing in debate: But as in the Title, so in the Chapter he begs the
Question. And that he may begin with Railing, as he ends it with a Flood of it,
p. 292. he says; To say, Men may be saved without the outward Preaching, must
be true with this Quaker, though the Apostle says the Contrary: For this
citing Romans 10.14. Ephesians. 2.12. 1 Cor. 1.20, 21, 22. All which say nothing
Contrary to my Assertion, J. B.'s Proofs against the Heathens Salvation
disproved.
unless by the Hearing there he prove is meant only Outward Hearing. And what!
though the Apostle say to the Gentiles, That they are Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, and That by Wisdom they knew not God, and That the
Preaching of the Gospel was foolishness to them? All this may be said of some
living in, and esteemed Members of the Visible Church, who have the Advantage
of the outward Preaching: and therefore it cannot prove, that the Want of this
takes away the Possibility of Salvation. To that of Peter I agree, Act. 4.12.
That there is not Salvation in any other, etc. but it follows not therefore,
that none can partake of his Salvation without the outward Knowledge: himself
overturns this Conclusion, by granting, Infants and Deaf Persons may. Page 287.
To my Argument, That since the Gospel is preached to Every Creature, they may
be saved by it, he says; A [May be] will not evince a [Shall be]: but I said
only, may be saved, not shall be saved; and if it evince that, it does my
Business. That some have been saved without it, himself acknowledges in the
Example of Job. Page 288. To overturn my using of the Gospel's being preached
to every Creature, he refers to his former Answer to this Place; and so do I to
my Reply: Beza's Sense, to whom he refers me, moves no more than his does; but
when it is Agreeable to Truth. J. B. restricts the Word ( All) only to the
Elect.
Next he comes to answer my Argument drawn from Tit. 2.11. For the Grace of God
that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men: And for Answer he will have
[ all] here not to be understood Universally, but with a Restriction;
alleging, It is my part to prove it: But that needs no more Proof, than to
prove, That John Brown signifies John Brown; and for all his pretended Skill in
the Rule of Dispute, he is under a Mistake. To take it Universally, is to take
it, as the common and proper Signification of it; so by the Rule of all
Commentators we are to hold the Words of Scripture so, until by solid Reasons
we be moved to the Contrary: and therefore it is his part, that denies it, to
give the Reason. That [ all] sometimes is taken with a Restriction, I deny not;
that therefore it is so taken here, does not follow. That the Gospel is said to
be preached by Men outwardly, I deny not; but that therefore it is only so, and
never preached, but when outwardly by the Ministry of Men, is no Conclusion:
Himself acknowledges in the Example of Job, who he says was Taught by God
without Scripture. His other Explications upon this place are his mere
Assertions, not to the Business: He calls it upon the Credit of his own
Affirmation, false and childish pedantry to say, They take [all] for the lesser
part, because they take it indefinitely; while yet they understand, that
Indefinite Number to be the lesser part: But do they not take the Whole World 1 John 2.2. for the far lesser part of the World? Which is yet more Absurd. To my
Argument taken from Romans 5.18. where it is said, As something came upon all to
Condemnation, so something is come upon all to Justification: Which shows, the
last [All] to be of as large Extent, as the first, which they confess is
Universally taken. He says, This will prove more, viz, That all Men are and
shall be saved, because Judgment came actually upon All to Condemnation by Adam
's Fall: But this is only his own Assertion. The Word Judgment is not in the
Text; The Apostle's Words, Romans 5.18. Adulterated by the Translators.
and Beza's putting in Reatus or Guilt, proves not, It ought to be so:
Whatever he do, we account not Beza Infallible; and therefore reject his Sense,
until he prove it Agreeable to Scripture: nor yet his Enlargments afterward
upon the Place, because alleged without Probation. Page 285. N. 5. He
accounts my citing Esai 49.6. where Christ is said to be given for a Light to
the Gentiles, Impertinent; because albeit the Gentiles are not excluded from
the Dispensation of the Gospel, it will not follow, that such as hear not of
Christ, can be saved, as well as such, as are brought within the Church. But
this Answer is founded upon the Supposition, that I affirm, That any are saved,
which are not within the Church Catholic or Universal; which is false: And how
Men may be of the Church, who want outward Preaching, will after appear. I
think, no sober Man will say (supposing Salvation possible to the Gentiles
without outward Preaching) that it is blind Charity to judge, some of them have
been saved; for upon that Supposition it were against all Charity to say, None
of them were ever saved. His Example of the Captives (to whom one, that
Redeemed them, did not communicate the Conditions, remaining real Captives) to
answer my Argument from the Rule of Contraries, That as Men are hurt by Adam 's
Fall, who know not of it; so they may be benefitted by Christ's Death, who know
not of it, hiteth not the Matter: It is as strange for Men to be Captives, and
not to know How? nor by Whom? as to be Redeemed, and not know How? nor by Whom?
If he suppose the first, he may do the last: And this Example himself
Overturns, in what he grants of Deaf Persons and Children, as will after
appear. To my asking [ Why Men cannot be saved, who never heard of the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, as well as Men are damned, who never heard of Adam
's Sin?] he tells me very fairly; Because God has appointed this way of
Salvation by Faith in Christ, which cannot be without the Knowledge of Christ:
By which he meaning the Outward (as he needs must) his Answer is none at all,
but a ridiculous begging of the Question: As he does also, when he mentions
that of Esai 53.11. By his Knowledge shall my righteous Servant Justify many:
For though that should be understood of outward Knowledge (which yet remains
for him to prove) it will not follow, because Christ shall Justify many by that
Knowledge, that therefore he shall Justify none without it.

10. When he comes page 186. N. 7. to answer, what I urge from the Example of
Deaf Persons and Infants, the Reader may observe, how much he is pained; so
that he is forced, after so long Contending and wearisom Wrestling at last to
give-away his Cause, by confessing, J. B. excepts Deaf Persons and Infants from
having the Gospel, and why?
They except both these from the necessity of outwardly Hearing the Gospel: If
so, then Salvation is not Impossible without the Hearing of the Gospel, and the
outward preaching of the Gospel is not of absolute Necessity to Salvation. But
why are they, and they only Excepted? In which resolves my Question, (which
does so vex him, that instead of answering he tells me, I am a deluded Quaker)
of which this is one; Is not one in China or India as excusable for not knowing
that, which they never heard, as a deaf Man, that cannot hear, since God, that
has permitted the one to be naturally Deaf, has also permitted the other to be
necessarily Absent? To this I cannot find his Answer, save only this, That
these Deaf Persons and Infants are Members of the Visible Church, but not the
other: Of which this must be the Consequence, That none can be saved, but such
as are Members of the Visible Church; for his saying, That none are Members of
the Invisible Church, but such as are of the Visible, clearly imports it. But
has not he, or at least the most-Eminent of his Way said, That the Church was
many Ages Invisible, and in the Wilderness, and yet denied that all were damned
during that Time? Or will he say, The Church of Rome was the Visible Church of
Christ all that Time, of which they were Members? What then becomes of the
Testimonies of those, who termed her Antichrist, the Mother of Abominations,
the Synagogue of Satan? which albeit True, ye^ begins to be Eaten up again by
the Clergy, yea even the Presbyterians; who begin by degrees to Creep back
again to acknowledge their Old Father the Pope, to establish their Succession
and Ordination, especially, when pinched by by the Quakers: as is at more
length shown in G. Keith's Book, called Quakerism no Popery? Outward Hearing
makes no Churchmember.
But further: It seems, the outward Hearing is not necessary to make a Man a
Member of the Visible Church? and then what becomes of all his tedious
Reasonings from Romans 10. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? which he urged before so vehemently, but now has overturned? He thinks,
the Instance of Cornelius not to the purpose, because he might have had the
Knowledge of the Messiah from the Jews: But his bare Supposition is no Answer.
Besides, that he was no Jews Proselyte, is manifest, else Peter should not have
been quarrelled for Conversing with him; and unless he had been such, or had
received the Gospel, according to him, he must be esteemed to have been within
the Covenant: And yet before any of these he is said to have been Heard of God,
and Accepted. Page 289. He confesses, Job lived before Moses, and was taught
of God without Scripture: And then is it not thence manifest, that some have
been saved, to whom the Gospel was not preached by the Ministry of Men? This
also overturneth his Arguments from Romans 10. Because he knows not, how to
answer my Argument drawn from Romans 2. therefore to amuse his Reader, he raises
a Storm of Railing, calling me no less (with an Exclamation) than a Miserable
Miscreant, who make the Apostle contradict himself. My Argument lies in the
Apostle's positive Words, who says; The Gentiles did the things contained in
the Law; The Apostle does not contradict himself, in saying, The Doers of the
Law are Justified.
and again in the same Chapter, ver 13. The doers of the Law are Justified:
Whence in the very Words of the Apostle, without any Commentary I argue, That
if the doers of the Law be Justified, then the Gentiles, who did the things
contained in the Law, are Justified: Do I therefore make the Apostle Contradict
himself? Yea, says he, because the same Apostle says, That by the Deeds of
the Law no Flesh shall be justified, but will he say, that these two Sentences
of this Apostle, The doers of the Law shall be justified; and, By the deeds of
the Law no Flesh shall be justified, are Contradictory? I say, they are not* If
both these Sayings be true, his Challenge is in vain, if he will speak-out that
which he must; else manifest his Abuse of me, and say, they Contradict one
another: then let the Reader judge, who is the Miscreant? and observe, how he
falls himself into the Pit, he had prepared for another. But to show, how this
distinct, outward Knowledge was not absolutely needful to Salvation, I
instanced, how that diverse of the Patriarchs, yea Mary, and the Apostles
themselves had not so Clear a Knowledge of it; but appeared ignorant upon
several Occasions: To this p. 289. he would make the Reader believe, that I
Conclude, The Patriarchs had no saving Knowledge of the Messiah, because the
wicked Jews Crucified him: Which is false. I show indeed, according to
Scripture, That the Jews, that Crucified him, wanted this distinct Knowledge,
notwithstanding they had the Scripture. His further answer to this Confutes
himself, saying: The Apostles did understand so much, at was then Revealed; and
if this was sufficient for them (as he must say, if he speak sense) the like
may be said of the Heathens: For if the Apostles were not Condemnable for not
believing nor understanding more, than what was Revealed to them; neither could
the Gentiles. But to make his unwary Reader believe, as if all this said by me
brought no Relief to my desperate Cause, as he terms it, he concludes this 11
Paragraph, p. 290. with one of his sententious Sayings, Quakers can dream
waking, I see. He goes on in answer to my Proofs brought from the Ancient
Philosophers to Confirm this; to which he resumes little but Railing: Wherein I
will not trouble the Reader to follow him; since without them the thing in Hand
is sufficiently proved by Scripture: Yet if he will affirm the Citations to be
either False or Fictitious, they may be proved by production of the Books
themselves. He thinks, The Impertinency of my citing Augustine 's Words is
discovered by the bare Reading; and little less he says to those of Buchanan:
Which I refer to the Reader's Judgment, as he will find them in my Apology
toward the latter End of the Explanation of the fifth and sixth Propositions;
and I will leave him concluding this Chapter with Railing and Empty Threats,
which I neither Fear nor Value, as being without Ground, and the Fruits of no
better Spirit, than that of Rabshakeh.

SECT. VII.
Wherein his Thirteenth Chapter of Justification is Considered.

1. I Come now to his Thirteenth Chapter Of Justification, where, after he has
begun by telling, This Doctrine has been principally questioned by Heretics,
which I deny not; and given us (according to his Custom) some large Citations
out of their Confession of Faith and Catechism, with the supposed Sense of
other Quakers from some of his formerly mentioned partial Authors; at last he
comes page 296. N. 4. to Examine, what I say in this Matter: Where, according
to his Custom, he begins with a Calumny upon his own false Supposition, J. B.
proceeds upon his own false Suppositions and Perversions.
As if the Justification I plead for, were not the true Justification of the
Saints, because proceeding from the Light, which (says he) is but the dim
Light of Nature. This he takes for granted to be true, and thence falsely makes
his Inference, page 297, 298, 307, 308, 324. To this he adds another
Perversion; As if, because I say [from the Light received proceeds an Holy
Birth] therefore there were no Infusion of any gracious Principle or Virtue,
etc. which is false. Men use to say, that where Seed is Received in the Earth,
it grows up to Fruit; yet not without the Influence of the Sun, and descending
of Rain: so is it with this Spiritual Seed; but with this Difference: that
wherever this Seed is, God is never wanting to give his Heavenly Influences
toward its Growth and Advancement. In this Chapter also he omits not his
Railing, calling us poor, deluded Wretches, etc. with the Repetition of which I
will not trouble the Reader; if he be pleased, he may observe it page 227, 299,
316, 318, 319. and in several other places, but especially where he ends the
Chapter, p. 324, 325. I needed not at all trouble Reader with his often
Re-iterated Accusation of my Joining with the Papists, since he says, I am
Worse and less Orthodox, than they in this Matter, p. 301, 309. were it not to
show him, how his Malice has blinded him: For he Confesses p. 300. N. 8. That
I condemn their Meritum ex condigno, and placing Justification in such Works,
as are rather evil than good; and yet p. 305. he asks; J. B's. Patronizing the
Papists.
Wherein I differ from the worst Papists? So then, such as Assert Meritum ex
Condigno, and those other things denied by me, are not in his Sense the Worst
Papists: let him reconcile this with the general Sense of Protestants. Yea,
with great Bitterness he quarrelleth me for Wronging the Papists, p. 301.
calling it a base Falsehood, and Deceit in me to say, Papists do not place
Justification in any real, inward Renovation of the Soul; citing the Words of
the Council of Trent and Bellarmin to the contrary. But he must know, if he
will, I will not be Cheated by the fair Words of Papists, contrary to what mine
Ears have heard, and Eyes seen to be the general Practice of their People and
Preachers, and that in a Kingdom, where their Superstition less abounds, than
any Place of their Territories. I know, they place more Virtue toward the
Inward Renovation of the Soul in such things, as are justly Condemnable, than
in Obedience to Christ's Precepts: And were it not, that he is even glad to
patronize the Papists, that he might get some occasion to Rail against me, he
could not but acknowledge this; since he cannot be ignorant (whatever
Distinctions and fair Words they have invented now to smooth their Doctrine)
that all the first Reformers do with one Voice affirm, that before the
Reformation there was a profound Silence of any thing, save their superstitious
Works, Papists Pilgrimages and Indulgences.
Pilgrimages and Indulgences in the Point of Justification, not only as to
making Just, but even as to Remission of Sins, which they asserted to be
attained by such Means. Yet this Man's Charity can extend to palliate their
Hypocrisy, that he may Accuse me; while yet in the same page, as to me, he lays
aside all his Charity, alleging most Abusively, That it is but good Words I
give them about the Satisfaction of Christ, and that I deceive them with
Socinian Glosses, and Metaphorical Senses: Which is a gross Calumny. Like to
which is his Calumny p. 317. where se says, The Quakers talk of Christ's
Sufferings and Death, etc as all done within Man.

2. That the Reader may not be interrupted in the through- Examination of this
point by his Calumnies, Perversions, and malicious Insinuations, which he
bestows throughout most of his Work to squeeze out my words, that he may render
me either odious, or ridiculous; I will remove them in the first place, Good
Works in what respect they help to Justification.
ere I come to the main matter. Of this kind is what he says p. 297. where he
plays upon me, saying; That Justification is not by our Work or Works,
considered by themselves: as if this were a mighty A^surdity to say, Works
wrought in a Man could in any sense not be called his; which he reckons
Phanaticism in Folio. But if this be so, he must accuse Christ and the Apostle
Paul of this Phanatcism, and it shall not much trouble me to be accounted
guilty with them, albeit I lie under J. B.'s Censure for it. For Christ says
to his Apostles, Mat. 10.20. For it is not ye, that speak, but the Spirit of
your Father, that speaks in you: and Mark 13.11. -- for it is not ye that
speak, but the Holy Ghost: yet they uttered the Words. He must either here
confess his shame (albeit he term me a Shameless Man) for saying, That Christ's
words Confirm it; or else Condemn Christ: was not this Speaking a Work of the
Apostles? and does not Christ say, It is not they? and dare he call this a
Contradiction? So then he may see, in what respect good Works, considered
otherwise than as merely the Works of Men, help in Justification: see also 1
Cor. 15.10. -- But I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the
Grace of God, which was with me. So here the Apostle's labor is ascribed to
the Grace; so as he says, it was not he: and yet this Man asks p. 248. If to
be justified by Christ within, be not to be justified by our Works? adding (to
render me odious) especially seeing, this is Christ formed within, and not
Christ who laid down his Life a Ransom for Sinners, Christ formed within is he
that died and suffered.
which Christ in our account (he says) cannot cleanse, nor do any good: which
is a gross Calumny. But the Evil he intends here to us, returns upon his
own Head. For if to Assert, Christ formed within, be to Assert another Christ,
than died and suffered, Then the Apostle was guilty of this Crime, Gal. 4.19.
-- I travail in birth again, until Christ be formed in you: yea, he calls
Christ within, the hope of Glory, Col. 1.28. Will he thence dare to say, the
Apostle held another Christ, than he that died? And let him prove, if he can,
that in our speaking of Christ formed within, we say more than the Apostle.
Another of his Calumnies is, p. 302. where, because I say, That all have
sinned, that come to man's Age; therefore I deny, that the wicked Actions of
such, as are not come to be Men and Women, are Sin; which is utterly false: as
I never said so, so I never intended, as he maliciously affirms, to Insinuate
any such thing. Page 303, 304. he would screw my words speaking of a Twofold
Redemption (whereof the first is, A Twofold Redemption purchased and wrought by
Christ.
the Capacity of being Redeemed, purchased by Christ without, and the Receiving
of and Enjoying that, wrought by Christ in us) to make an Absurdity, because I
say, That as to us, they cannot be separated: Then all must be Redeemed the one
way, who are Redeemed the other; and that then every Man must be Redeemed from
the power of Corruption, and saved. But here according to his Custom, he cites
not my words justly, which are [ That they are both perfect in their own
Nature, albeit in their Application to usward they cannot be separated] that
is, he that comes Effectually to Enjoy the Benefit of the one, must Enjoy the
other; he that Receives the second, partakes of the first also; he that really
receives the first, receives the second also: but that hinders not, but many
may be offered the Benefit of the first, and by rejecting and resisting it,
lose the Benefit both of first and second; and he that rejects it at any
time, albeit he receive it for a season, as by his falling he loses, what of
the second is wrought in him, to wit, of Purification, so he does also lose the
first, which was Remission of Sin. His last Cavil at this is very Impertinent,
which is by way of Question; That if this second Redemption be necessary to
Salvation (as indeed it is) what shall become of the Child of God, that has no
Light? What shall become of them, J. B's. Absurdities, that Saints may be
United to Christ and not see it.
that have true Grace uniting them to Christ, etc. and yet through darkness can
see and acknowledge no such thing? For to pass-by the Absurdities here
supposed, that Saints can be said to have no Light, or have Grace, and be
United to Christ, yet neither be able to see it, nor acknowledge it, and that
not during their lifetime here; for unless this be also supposed, he cannot
Conclude what he will: for that a Saint may be clouded at a time, is not
denied; yet this makes nothing for his purpose. Will it follow, because they
see it not, that it therefore is not needful to their Salvation? His own words
Imply a Contradiction to this. And thus the Man Confutes that, by which he
would urge another, in the very words by which he expresses it; For is not
Grace to unite the heart to Christ necessary to Salvation? He will surely say,
Yes: If then the acknowledgment of that, and seeing of it, which is needful to
Salvation, be not needful, then the not-seeing or not acknowledging of a thing
makes it not a thing unnecessary to Salvation; which is the Absurdity he would
Insinuate.

3. Thus having removed out of the way his most obvious Perversions and Abuses,
I come to Treat of the main matter, which all depends upon this one Question;
What is that, whereby a Man is Justified, so as to appear truly Just in the
sight of God? This he supposes to be done by the Righteousness and Death of
Christ without, even before any work of Righteousness be wrought in Man; even
as a Cautioner (to whom he Compares Christ in this case) frees him, whose Debt
he pays. I on the contrary affirm; By the Death of Christ no Man can be said to
be Justified, until Christ received in the heart there Renew and make him Just.
That albeit Reconciliation and Remission of Sins be by the Death of Christ
without, and the door opened, so that all may be at Peace by the Offer of Grace
made in Christ, if they reject it not, yet hereby no Man can be said to be
Justified, or appear Just properly, until Christ be received in his heart there
to renew and purify him, and make him Just: so that, however Justification may
be distinguished from Sanctification, yet not divided; nor yet so
distinguished, that a Man can be truly said to be Justified, who is Unholy and
Unsanctified. And therefore upon the Examining of what he urges against this,
and for his Position, as also what he answers to my Probations for it, depends
the whole matter: But before I enter particularly upon this, and that there may
no Interruption meet me, when entered in it, I will first take notice, and
remove his Mistakes and Misapplied Proofs thereupon, both in what he Opposes
me, and Affirms for himself; as also here take notice of his mere Assertions.
And first then, page 299. he supposes, There can be no Reconciliation by the
Blood of Christ's Cross, etc. unless for such, in whose Room Christ died, as a
Cautioner and Surety, and so made Satisfaction, that they should be Redeemed
and Delivered. But albeit upon this Notion and Affirmation all depends, yet I
miss the Proof of it; if his After-Proofs say any thing to it, I shall Examine
them: That which he mentions here written Romans 8.3, 4. is so far from doing it,
that it proves the Contrary. For albeit the Death of Christ was, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; yet it follows not, that the
Righteousness of the Law must be fulfilled in all, for whom he died: yea, the
following words -- who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, show,
The Benefit of Christ's Death is to them that Walk after the Spirit.
this to be the Condition Requisite on our part, that we may partake of the
Benefit of his Death. If to prove, that Man should be Reconciled, Redeemed and
Delivered by the Death of Christ, he bring the Instances of the Righteousness
of the Law to be fulfilled in us; then Men cannot be said to be Reconciled,
Redeemed and Delivered, until this Righteousness of the Law be fulfilled in
them. What he adds to this, That we cannot be said to be accounted Righteous,
and absolved from Accusation upon the account of our works of Righteousness, I
say no such thing; freely confessing, that not only pardoning of Sin, but
removing of the Filth, as well as of the Guilt, is the Act of God's Mercy and
Grace, as says the Apostle, Tit. 3.5, 6. And yet we are saved, The removing
both Filth and Guilt of Sin is the Act of God's Grace and Mercy.
and consequently Justified according to his Mercy, by the washing of
Regeneration: since this is the Fruit of the Grace and Spirit of God freely
given us. And therefore it is not enough for him page 203. to affirm, That I
pervert the Apostle's words, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. -- God was in Christ reconciling
the World unto himself, upon this bare supposition, That this [World] is only
understood of the Elect: for if this Reconciliation had been Absolute, and not
in part only, that is, a Readiness on God's part to be Reconciled with them, if
they Repent, which I affirm; to what purpose should the Apostle, as an
Ambassador Entreat them to be Reconciled? there needed no Entreaty to that,
which was already done: neither are his mere Assertions to this, p. 303. any
Answer. It is strange, that to prove, That all, for whom Christ died, are
certainly made alive one time or other, he brings these words; And that he died
for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him, which died for them, etc. For he does not say here, that All he died
for, are made Alive; but that they that are made Alive, should so live: neither
does the saying, Christ has born the sins of all in his own Body on the Tree,
Import any being actually freed of the Guilt of Sin, until they receive the
Condition, as above; Be ye therefore Reconciled unto God. But he overturns,
what he earnestly pleaded for before p. 310. N. 23. where he says; They own
not, that Reconciliation was so perfected by Christ on Earth, that there is
nothing to be done by Man in order to his Actual Justification: If so, than no
Man is Actually Justified, until something be done by him; and this doing
Imports a Work: so here a Work of Man is necessary for Justification; and this
is rather more, than I say. And if something be to be done on Man's part, ere
Actual Justification be obtained; then that which is done by Christ before,
must be only a Potential Justification: and what is this more, than a Capacity
of being Justified? Which yet he batters against in me; J. B. proves to be One
with the Antinomian Doctrines.
and yet he must Confess this, to distinguish himself from the Antinomians,
whose Opinions albeit he diverse times disclaims, yet he shows not, how he can
liberate himself from it: and therefore in Contradiction to what is here
observed, both his Assertions and Proofs resolve in the Antinomian Doctrine,
and conclude for it, as much as for him; which I might therefore pass all, as
Impertinent. But for Instance his great Example of a Cautioner or Surety, used
often, as page 299.310, 311. for when a Cautioner pays a Man's Debt for him, so
soon as he lays down the Money, which is a sufficient Intimation to him, to
whom the Debt is due, the Person, for whom it is paid, is really Acquitted;
albeit he have done no Act, yea know not of it: and this, as I observed before,
himself acknowledges in the Application, saying p. 304. That some, who are
united to Christ by Grace, (and surely, such are Justified) can neither see it,
nor acknowledge it. So then, if this Example of his Surety hold true, Men are
Justified before they Believe, The Antinomians Imputative Justification Refuted.
as say the Antinomians; and therefore all the Scriptures brought by him p.
308. to prove, That Christ made a proper, real and full Satisfaction in the
behalf of Men, will conclude for the Antinomians, as much as for him: whereas
p. 314. he looks upon it as a Calumny to say, They speak not of a real
Justification; for he concludes, p. 312. That Imputative Justification is Real.
He argues for the Antinomians also, since he accounts this Imputation to be
only of Righteousness wrought without Men by Christ in his own Person; for if
by this Imputation Men be really Justified, then they are as much, or at least
as really Justified before they believe, as after; since Faith is an Act of
Man's will, and no such thing according to him can have place in Justification:
and yet (to go round) he says p. 308. That they say not, That God Justifies
any remaining in their Sins. But do they not say so? since taking his Opinion
the safest way, and furthest from Antinomians, he concludes, A Man Justified
in the Act of Conversion? And such he supposes to have been great Sinners; yea,
and that they may not be purged from them many years after: yea, and how can
they, if they must Sin daily (as they say) in Thought, Word and Deed? (of which
more hereafter:) Are not such then Remaining in their Sins according to them
Justified? Page 306. N. 26. he would Infer a Contradiction upon me, from
saying, Good Works are necessary as Causa sine qua non; for this (he says)
Contradicts my saying. We are Justified by the Inward Birth, Good Works are the
Consequence or Effect of Regeneration.
and not by our Works, seeing Works, being but the Consequence of that Birth,
are but the Effect; even as Causa sine qua non -- must be before the Effect: on
which he also insists, p. 319. n. 38. But this Contradiction is founded upon
the Supposition, that this Birth is brought forth without good Works, which I
deny; seeing Regeneration is a Work of the Spirit in us, by which we are
Justified, that is really made Just: and the Works, which proceed therefrom,
are but a Consequence of it. And now as to his Proofs, and also his Examining
of mine, they are inserted page 204. n. 13. where he says; That the Redemption
of Christ is a far other thing, and has far other Effects, than to make Men
Capable of Salvation, even Remission of Sins. But I never denied, but that it
brought Remission of Sins to such, as embrace and receive it; neither do the
Scriptures cited by him prove more, 2 Cor. 5.19. Dan. 9.24-26. Col. 1.19, 20.
Ephesians. 1.11-15. Joh. 17.2. Heb. 9.12, 13. 2 Cor. 1. v. 20. none of which speak
of the Reconciliation made by Christ to be in it self more, Reconciliation made
by Christ, laid hold on by Believers.
than procuring a Capacity of Salvation otherways, than as received and laid
hold-on by Believers: and when it is spoken of with respect to such, I never
denied, but it was more; for the Capacity is brought unto Action. He adds,
The very Texts cited by my self make against me, Ephesians. 2.15. He died to make in
himself of Twain one new Man; so making Peace: ver. 13. but now in Christ
Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ;
Asking, Was this only a Capacity of coming near? But the Apostle here speaks of
those, who had Received, and not Resisted the benefit of that Capacity. And
whereas he says 1 John 4.10. The Son of God's being said to be a Propitiation
for our Sins, is more than a mere Possibility of Friendship. But does not the
same Apostle say, He is a Propitiation for the whole World? yet he did not
actually Reconcile the whole World, save in a Capacity. Ezekiel. 16.6. he gives a
Question instead of Answer, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our Sins in his
own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sins, should live unto
Righteousness, by whose Stripes ye were healed: Noting 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has
once suffered, that he might bring us to God; but it says not that Christ by
his Sufferings did bring us to God, which would have more made for his purpose:
and though it had been so, yet neither that, nor what is above cited, prove any
thing. being spoken to those, who had received the Second Redemption, as well
as the first. Then he notes these following, Col. 1.14. Gal. 1.4.3:13.14.4:5.
Rev. 5.9, 10, and 14.3, 4. Tit. 2.13. all which I have looked, but find not,
that they prove, what he intends: some were spoken not only to those, who had
already received the Benefit of Christ's Death here; but of such, as were
already glorified in Heaven, if he think, they will prove his matter, he must
show, How? the next time he writes.

4. Page 309. N. 21. He brings my Argument showing, That where there is a
perfect Reconciliation, there is no Separation: Why does God then so often
Complain of his People for their Sins? from this it would follow, that Sin made
no Separation, or that their good Works and worst Sins are the same in God's
Account. His Answer to this is; J. B's Faith* that God declares Men Just,
whilst in their wickedness.
That a Man may be in a Justified State, and declared Just, because Constituted
so; albeit unrighteous as to his Person, because of his unrighteous Actions, in
which sense he is not Justified nor Approved of God: That is (in plain Scots)
to say; God constituteth and declares Men Just, albeit they be Wicked Men, and
really Unjust; the first being understood of their Condition, the second of
their Person. But the Misery is, there wants something to knit this Incoherent
matter together, and inform us, How a Man as to his Condition, is Just, while
in his Person Unjust? And indeed, he brings no Proof for all this. And albeit I
wonder not at this Omission, since he could do no better; yet I desire, he may
let me know the next time, why I should receive his Answer without Proof? That
every Sin, which may be Committed by a Saint, does not Vnsaint him, or destroy
his Condition, I acknowledge; but they suppose, no Sin, to do it: For when they
affirm* Murder and Adultery, and Treachery not to have done it, (as they do) If
these Sins are not destructive and killing, as to Man's Condition, I know none;
and desire to be Informed, how by Scripture it can be made appear, that these
do not? So my Argument still remains in Force, and his Charge of Antinomianism
against me falls to the Ground. Page 311. He brings my Argument, showing the
Absurdity of their Objection from 2 Cor. 5.21. thus; J. B.'s gross Opinion of
Imputative Righteousness.
If we be just, as Christ was a Sinner by Imputation, then as there was not the
least Sin in Christ, so there is no necessity for the least Righteousness in
us: To which he answers, Neither is there to our being Justified upon that
account. The Reader may judge of this Doctrine, which the Man either
forgetting, or being ashamed of, plainly Contradicts in the same page, saying;
That Sanctification is inseparably joined with Justification: for then sure
Righteousness must be necessary to be Justified upon whatever Account. And yet
to go round again, within five Lines he cites Joh. 6.29. and 9:35.36. and
10.38. and 12.36. and 14.1. and 16.9. to prove, That Christ would have People
resting upon a Righteousness merely Imputative for Justification; for that is
the thing denied by me: For if Sanctification be unseparable from
Justification, it is Impossible to Rest upon that which is merely Imputative.
That these Scriptures prove no such thing, the Reader may see: all of them
press believing in Christ; but that to believe in Christ is to rest upon a
Righteousness merely Imputative, remains yet for him to prove. But to proceed
with an unparalled Confidence to Answer to my saying, Sanctification is
Inseparable from Justification.
[ That to my Observation that Sentence [the Imputed Righteousness of Christ]
which they so much urge as the Foundation of their Faith, is not to be found in
all the Scripture] he notes diverse places of Scripture, in not one of which
there is any such thing. And indeed, this Controversy being of Matter of Fact,
can be easily decided by any, that can Read, who can easily see, whether that
Expression be there or not: For the Question is of the Expression in Terminis,
not of what he apprehends, may by Consequence import the like. What he says
in answer to my proving, Justifying to be understood of being really made Just,
from I Cor. 6.11. he overturneth himself in a few Lines, Confessing, That the
Corinthians were really Changed; and if so, we need not doubt, where it is
said, They were Justified, but they were really made Just, that is, Changed
from Unrighteousness, as he Confesses they were.

5. Page 312. N. 26. He comes to take notice, of what I urge from the Word
Justification, and from the Etymology of it; and having Introduced himself with
a Scoff, he says: I do place this upon the Authority of the Vulgar Latin
Edition; but therein he is Mistaken: The Greek Word (...) will make as much for
my purpose, as the Latin. He passes from the Etymology, (...) Justifico.
p. 313. and says; The Words usually import a Juridical Absolution by the
Sentence of a Judge: But what then? Is not that, because Judges usually at
least Absolve Men upon the account of their Innocence? And so his Comparison of
a Surety will not here hit: For when Men are Accused of Murder or Adultery, or
Theft, and that the case is Proved and Confessed; what Judges use to declare the
person Acquitted upon Surety given by another Innocent Person? And therefore
Justifico, I justify, signifies the declaring of one Just, To justify signifies
the declaring of one Just, who is so.
who is so: And though Justifico, as being sometimes taken in a Law-sense, does
not in the Indicative answer to sanctifico, because it is there Active, and has
relation to another Person; yet in the Passive, when relating to the Person
Sanctified, it is understood one way: For Justificatus and Sanctificatus
signify the same. But he overturneth all his Quibbling here p. 313. N. 27. by
asking; Whether they say, That a Man is said to be justified, who is not really
Just? which imports, they say not so; and then we are Agreed. Only I would ask
him, How a Man is really Just, while committing actual Wickedness and
Unrighteousness, as to his Person? and yet he said before, Such were Justified;
and yet in the next p. 314. he faith, I maliciously Calumniate them, to say,
they make use of the figurative Sense of the Word: Let the Reader judge of
these Consistencies! And whereas I cite some Scriptures, that Justifying is
spoken of some, who arrogate Righteousness to themselves, though it do not
belong to them; and at these he carpeth, saying: The very first (Exodus 23.7.)
is spoken of God himself (he should have said, It is God speaking of the
Wicked, that he will not Justify them) some of them speak of a not Justifying,
Joh. 9.20. and 27.5. And what then? the Places were marked to show the Import
of the Word Justify, and to show, that many of them speak nothing of Justifying
at all; whence he concludes in these Words: So unhappy is the Man in his
Citations. He notes first Esai 5.23. but it seems, he has been in haste; and
therefore to rectify his Mistake, let him read the Words, which are: Which
justify the Wicked for Reward. And what! though where many Scriptures are noted
together, by the Mistake of the Transcriber or Printer the Figures may be
misplaced, and so miss? Truly, they must be very happy, that can secure
themselves from this hazard: he has not been so happy, who denied the Words to
be in a place, where the knowing of it depended not upon the diligence of
others, but of his own locking to it; as I have just now shown. Page 315. to
prove, That Justified is not taken in the Epistles of the Apostle Paul to the
Romans, Corinthians, Galatians for Making Just, as I affirmed in the Passages
cited by me, he says; To take it so, would make the Apostle Contradict
himself: But this he affirms upon the mere Supposition, that the Apostle with
him Excludes all Works from Justification; which is but to beg the Question, as
will after appear. What he adds here and in the following page, in answer to
the Citations I bring out of diverse Protestant Authors, I need not trouble the
Reader with a Reply to it; because he turns by the most material of them, as
not having the Authors by him to examine them. Others he positively Rejects, as
not agreeing with them, as Forbes and Baxter: And at last Insinuates, That the
Trial is not to be by Humane Testimonies; for such he accounts all the Writings
of his Brethren, whereunto I do very well agree: Only I brought some of his own
Folks, not as if I needed them to Confirm me in my Opinion; but as having
Weight with those, among whom they are esteemed Doctors. In this page
answering, what I urge from Romans 8.30. showing, how in that Golden Chain
Sanctification must be excluded, or Justification must be taken in its proper
Sense, he says; That Sanctification is comprehended under Vocation. If this be
true which he asserts, then he gives again away his Cause; for then no Man is
sooner Called, than he is Sanctified: and since he will not say (seeing he
disclaims to be an Antinomian) that any Man is Justified, before he be Called;
it follows then necessarily, That no Man is Justified, No Man is justifed,
before he be Sanctified.
before he be Sanctified: and then to what purpose has he been fighting and
wrestling all this while? Page 316. N. 33. he acccuses me of Vnparalleled
Falsehood, Impudency and Boldness for saying, That I have sufficiently proved,
that by [ Justification] ought to be understood [ to be made really Just;]
whereas I undertook only to prove, that the Word might be so understood without
Absurdity: Adding; I wonderfully conclude a [must be] from a [may be] etc. But
the best is, his greatest Charges are built either upon forged Calumnies, or
his own pitiful Mistakes. I never Concluded, by Justification ought to be
understood to be made really Just, only upon that which I said from the
Etymology of the Word; nor by [ Justification] there did I understand merely
the Word; but I conclude from all my Scripture-Arguments of the thing, as my
following Words manifest, where I say, We know it from Sensible Experience: But
he may be sure, it is not the Etymology of the Word, we know so. And if thence
he urge, That this falls not under the inward Sensation of the Soul; he but
fights with his own Mistake: For that the Real Justification of the Saints
falls under the Inward Sensation of the Soul, I think no Man of Sense will
deny; for Christ is formed in the Mind, where he is said to be Revealed
Inwardly, and that gives a Sense of Justification: Albeit he seem to wonder at
it, asking; What Scripture speaks so? He may read Gal. 1.16. Whether was not
the Apostle here Justified, and under the Sense of it? He is angry ( p. 317.)
that I call the Life of Christ an Inward and Spiritual Thing; but will he say,
it is an Outward and Carnal Thing? The Life of Christ is an Inward and
Spiritual thing.
But what thinks he of 2 Cor. 4.10, 11? He Confesses, This Life of Christ
supported and carried the persecuted Apostles through many Miseries and Deaths;
Will he say then, it was not an Inward and Spiritual thing, that carried them
through these Trials? But he adds; But who, except a Quaker could say, That
the Apostle says, We are Justified by this Life? I answer, All; except such
Absurd Men, as will deny, that where we are said to be Saved by a thing, we are
said to be Justified by it. Romans 5.10. Tit. 3.5. we are said to be saved by
Regeneration: And whereas he says, The Apostle says not, That this is the
Formal, Objective Cause of Justification: These are Words the Apostle uses not
at all; and therefore no wonder, there be no Word of it here. He looks upon it,
as being Absurd for me to think, that Reprobation is Non-justification; but I
would know of him, if there be any Reprobates, who are Justified? That the
Marks and Evidences are not always taken from the Immediate, Nearest and Formal
Cause, I confess; but that therefore the not having Christ revealed in the
Soul, is only a Sign, and no Cause of Reprobation, remains for him to prove.
The Cause Reprobation.
Wickedness is a Sign of Reprobation; will he therefore affirm, it is not the
Immediate nor Formal Cause of it? After the same manner he denies p. 319. That
we must lean to that which the Apostle calls (Col. 1.27, 28.) Christ within
the Hope of Glory; his Reason is, because the Apostle says, Phil. 1.28. And in
nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is -- to you an evident Token of
Salvation, asking, Must we also lean to that in Justification? But will he say,
there is no difference betwixt that, which is only a Token, and Christ within?
If there be, his Reason concludes nothing.

6. Lastly; he comes to answer, The Necessity of Good Works to Justification.
what I say of the Necessity of Good Works to Justification: And what I urge
from Isai 2. he confesses, that Good Works are an Instrumental Cause; Which
Concession does prove all I Affirm: If they be an Instrumental Cause, they must
be a Cause sine qua non, and Necessary; since the Instrumental Cause of a thing
must be necessary toward its being: What! though Abraham was Justified, before
he Offered up his Son, it will not follow, that he was Justified without Works.
His Absurdity, as if it would thence follow, That no Man is Justified, when he
sleeps, or is not actually doing some Work; looks liker the Objection of a Man
Sleeping, who knows not what he says, than of one Awake: for by the same way
it might be said, that Faith is not Necessary, since Men do no more actually
believe, than do Good Works, when they are sleeping. My Argument deduced from
Heb. 12.14. Matthew. 7.21. John. 13.17. 1 Cor. 7.19. Revel. 22.14. he says,
proves the Necessity of Works unto final Salvation, but not to Justification;
and if it do so, it does the business, unless he will say, that full and
perfect Justification is not sufficient to Salvation. My answer to their first
Objection he observes, but replies not: To the second; answering what they urge
from Romans 3.20. by the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified;
Works of the Moral Law Justify not.
which I show, is to be understood of Works done, and not by the Grace of God:
he answers; That such are no good Works at all. But may not a Man do some of
the Works* which even the Moral Law commands, such as not to commit Murder,
Theft or Adultery, without the Grace of God? Has not he confessed as much of
some Heathens, whom he judges not to have had the Grace of God? and will he
say, these Works are not materially good, albeit not formally, with a respect
to any advantage as to Salvation, they receive by them? And though it should be
confessed, That all is not always Requisite to be Antecedent to Justification,
which falls out to be Antecedent to Salvation; yet the Question is, Whether
there be anything absolutely Requisite to be Antecedent to Salvation, which is
not also absolutely Requisite to be Antecedent to Justification? If not, then
if Works be absolutely necessary, or so far as they are absolutely necessary to
Salvation, they must also be so to Justification. If he say other ways, then
(as I observed before) full and perfect Justification according to him must not
be esteemed sufficient to Salvation. J. B. pleads the Works of the Spirit to be
Impure.
Page 322. N. 42. He comes to prove the Best Works, even those wrought by the
Spirit in the Saints, to be Impure; which before also he had affirmed page 307.
there he would Infer, we say the same of good Works, because I affirm, That
Works done by Man's own Strength, are polluted: But it will not thence follow,
we believe Works done by the Grace of God to be such. But for this Impurity of
good Works he marks Psalm. 143.2.130:3. Job. 9.16. none of which speak one Word
of good Works thus understood. Then he mentions Esai 64.6. All our
Righteousness is as filthy Rags; but silently passes over, how I show their
own Authors, as Calvin and Musculus, etc. affirm this not to be understood of
Evangelical Righteousness: and himself overturns, what he urges from this,
Works of the Spirit to be pure and undefiled, confessed by J. B.
affirming; That we ought not to call the Work of the Spirit of God in his
People, Filthy Rags: But if they were so, they might be so called; and yet he
overturns it further, by confessing, Some Works wrought by the Apostles, were
undefiled: then all the Works wrought by the Spirit in the Saints, cannot be
said to be Impure; which is their Assertion. And the Instance of Clean Water
passing through an Unclean Pipe, does not hold; which is their great probation.
He will not Contend, with what I say about the word Merit, neither has he much
against my Conclusion in this matter: yet that he may end this Chapter like
himself, he concludes it with a gross Lie and Railing, saying; I affirm, A Man
may be Regenerated without the least help of the Grace of God: J. B's. gross
Lie.
which as I wholly abhor, so there cannot be a greater Falsehood alleged upon
me.

SECT. IX.
Wherein his Fourteenth Chapter Of Perfection is Considered.

1. I Come now to his Fourteenth Chapter Of Perfection, where, after he has
repeated my Eighth Proposition, he reckons it Confidence in me, to Accuse their
Answer in their Larger Catechism, of speaking against the Power of Divine
Grace, which says; That Man is not able by any Grace of God received in this
Life to keep the Commands of God: But in stead of justifying this Assertion, he
says; They are not ashamed of it. Then he recurreth a little to his Author
Hicks, according to his Custom, and falls a Railing; where among other great
Charges he accuses the Quakers of Reproaching, Reviling, Calumnies, Scolding
and the like: J. B. a Railer exceeding others, confessed by his own Party.
Also page 329. speaking of bridling the Tongue. But he of all Men should have
been silent in this, who is such a Railer in the Superlative Degree, that some
of his own Faith, who have Bad enough Thoughts of the Quakers, have said, that
he not only Equals them, but Exceeds them in Railing: Of his Railing in this
Chapter the Reader may further observe page 332, 345-349. Here, as in his
former Chapter, to enervate the Perfection asserted by me, he brings forth his
old and often-repeated Calumny, as if I asserted This Perfection to proceed
merely from the Light of Nature, affirming, The Light pleaded for by me, p.
227. to be such, His false Charges.
as never came from the Grace of God; to be Flesh, Blindness, Enmity to God,
Natural, Sensual, etc. affirming that I say, Man is Regenerated, Sanctified,
Justified, though not one Ray of Divine Illumination has shined into his Soul,
nor one Act of Grace has reached either his Intellect, Will or Affection to
cause this Change: The like p. 331. All which is most abominable false, and
never either believed or asserted by me; and therefore all he concludes upon
this malicious Assertion, falls to the Ground, and needs no further Answer.
Next, he bestows much Pains p. 328, 329. to show from the Hebrew and Greek
Word, that Perfection is sometimes understood of Sincerity and Integrity; and
Perfection in these Respects he thus Defines: In Regeneration the whole Man is
changed, Perfection defined.
so that he is now born a New Creature, sanctified wholly in Mind, Heart,
Spirit, Affections, Consciences, Memory and Body, though but in a small Measure
or degree: and again; Yielding impartial Obedience, through the Grace of God,
unto all God's Precepts, waving none. But if he will stand, by what he here
Asserts, I will desire no more; albeit he falsely say in the following page,
That all this will not satisfy us: For I would desire the next time, Breaking
the Commands daily, etc. is not Perfection, nor a growing in Grace.
he would Reconcile this with Breaking the Commands daily in Thought, Word and
Deed. To prove this he insists (in Contradiction to what he said before) p.
330. N. 7. and his Proofs are (1) Because in Christ's House there are diverse
Sizes and Degrees of Persons, as Babes, or little Children, young Men, old Men:
And this is not denied; but the thing he should have proved is, that none of
those Degrees can be without daily breaking God's Commands. His Second Proof is
yet more rare: Christians are exhorted to grow in Grace, to put off the Old
Man, which is corrupt, to put on the New Man, to mortify their Members; Very
good: But is To break the Commands daily in Thought, Word and Deed, the way to
grow in Grace, to put off the old Man, and on the New? If this be not to
pervert Christianity, what can be said to be so? If Men can dream waking (as he
sometimes supposes) he has sure been in this Posture, when he brought this
Proof. But he adds; That this Perfection renders Gospel-Commands useless: But
are the Laws useless, if Men obey them? This, says he, takes away the Exercise
of Repentance, the Exercise of Prayer, and makes the Petitions of the Lord's
Prayer useless [forgive us our Sins:] On this he also insisteth page 345,
346.349. That because all have sinned, they have need to Repent, and pray for
Forgiveness, and the Continuance of it, I have shown in my Apology: But if
this his Argument hold true, to prove, That Men must sin all their Life time,
and break the Commands every day in Thought, Word and Deed, then the greatest
Sinners and most Wicked, profligate Villains do less make useless
Gospel-Commands, than others, because they afford more Matter to Exercise
Repentance and Prayer for Forgiveness of Sins. J. B. believes, Perfection
foments Pride, and^ and takes away the Usefulness of Ordinances.
But he proceeds, That this tends to foment Pride and Security, and takes
away diligent Watchfulness, and holy Fear, Humility and the Usefulness of the
Ordinances of Christ: But where dom from Sin is, where can Pride and Security
have place, or Diligence and Humility be wanting? But with him to sin is the
way not to be proud and secure, but to be watchful and humble. Let the
Judicious Reader judge, whether they, that break the Commands daily in Thought,
Word and Deed, and affirm, they must do so all their Lifetime, be more
diligent and humble, and less proud and secure, than such as keep and obey
them? for such Ordinances, as must be made useful by daily breaking God's
Commands in Thought, Word and Deed, I resolve never to Cry up, but always Cry
down by the Grace of God, however J. B. may Rail at me for it. Some Scriptures
here added by him will come herereafter to be Examined.

2. Page 332. N. 9. When he comes to take notice of my stating this Matter, as
not being such a Perfection, as cannot admit of a daily Increase, but only a
being kept from Sin, and receiving Strength to fulfill the Will of God; (for
these are my words) he would upon this, both in this Place and elsewhere ( page
333, 341. etc.) urge this Absurdity, That since the least Sin is a
Transgression of the Law, it follows, that no Regenerated Man can sin, and that
no Man that sins, is Regenerated: But we will not wonder at his Inference
here, considering his many other Perversions. But to show, he has no ground to
urge this Absurdity, let it be Considered, Regeneration begun, carrying on, and
perfected.
that we are to consider Regeneration as begun and carrying on, and as
perfected and accomplished; -- he which has begun a good Work in you, says
the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.6. And again, Ye did run well, Gal. 5.7. with many
other Places, which might be mentioned: Whereby it is clear, That Regeneration
is not wrought in an Instant, (and if he think so, he must prove it, ere he
conclude any thing from it) and those were already Converted) and Regeneration
begun in them. Now albeit such may Sin, and that every Sin does Hinder and Impe
the Work of Regeneration, yet it does not Destroy it, nor wholly Annihilate it.
Physic given to a Man, Physic does not Cure in an instant.
in whom there is an Inward and Inveterate Disease, does not Cure Instantly;
and albeit by some heedless Actions he may hinder the Cure from being
perefected so soon, yet every one of these Actions do not render it altogether
Vnsuccessful. Also as to the Comparison of a Child, which he accepts of, A
Child has not the Strength of a Man: So those that are born of God.
albeit he have all the Integral Parts of a Man, yet he has not that Vigor and
Strength of Body, nor yet that Understanding nor Exercise of Mind, that a Man
has; and thence can neither defend himself, nor do either in Body or Mind,
that a Man can do. Now what I speak of such as are born of God, saying, That I
dare not affirm, but there may be some that cannot sin; I understand this of
Absolute, Complete and Full Regeneration: Not that I deny, but such as are
Entered, and in part Regenerated, may be also said to be born of God, though not
in that absolute Sense; and therefore still under the possibility of sinning,
and Capacity thereunto: And thus his great Absurdity, upon which he Insists so
much, is removed. Next he proceeds, p. 334. to show my Agreement with the
Pelagians; but the very Citation he brings to prove it out of Vossius History,
bewrays his Weakness, and shows the Contrary: where it is manifest, that the
thing Condemned in Pelagius, was his affirming, Men might keep the Commands by
the Power of Nature; which I never said, but always denied. The Fathers
believed a Freedom from Sin.
And whereas he cites the Fathers Saying, That none by the Strength of Grace
did live all their Days without sin; That the perfection ascribed to some in
Scripture, was not from Nature, but from Grace, etc. This clearly shows, they
believed, Men might be free from Sin by Grace sometime, though none had been so
far all their Lifetime: Which shows, they were far from believing, Man must
break the Commands daily in Thought, Word and Deed, Which is his Affirmation.
What he adds of the Fathers Arguments against the Pelagians, and of the
Opinions of the Socinians and others in this Matter, I judge it not my Work to
meddle with it; I heed not in this, what these Sects say, but believe the
Truth, (without respect to them) as it is clearly proposed in Scripture. I
could easily Recriminate, by showing things, wherein he Agrees with Papists,
Socinians, Arminians, Antinomians, Pelagians, Anabaptists and others against
us, if I judged it pertinent to be filling up Paper with such Stuff to make a
Noise, as he does hundreds of Times to nauseating; but I love to abstain from
such Superfluities, and come to the purpose: And will now Consider, What he
says in Answer to my Arguments.

3. He begins page 337. n. 18. and to my saying, Their Doctrine is against the
Wisdom of God, who is of purer Eyes, than he can behold Iniquity, he asks; Is
it against these Attributes of God, that Sin should be in the World? But my
following words show, I spoke of the Godly; neither will it follow what he adds
after, That then they must be as free of Sin here, as in Heaven, and that at
first: for I urge it to be Contrary to God's Wisdom, to make this Freedom
Impossible unto them only; Means for their being free being given them, and not
his permitting Sin. And whereas he proceeds in Answer to my saying, [That if
Man be always joined to Sin, he should be always disjoined from God, according
to Isaiah 59.2. whereas on the contrary they, to wit, the Saints, are said to
be Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and one Spirit with him, 1 Cor.
6.17.] he answers; All this would plead for a Sinlesness from the very first
Instant of Regeneration: In the absolute Sense above mentioned it does, as also
for the necessity of pressing after, Regeneration begun, and Perfection pressed
after.
and for the possibility of obtaining it after Regeneration begun; since so far
as Man is joined to Sin, his perfect Regeneration is Retarded. Yet, as himself
toward the end of this Paragraph says, It may be begun, where some Members
may yet be to be mortified: and albeit some Corruption be not wholly purged
out, yet God can have Fellowship with his own work of Grace in the Soul, and
with the Soul, so far as it is sanctified and renewed, but no further. Page 339
n. 19. he says; I wickedly dispute for God, etc. to say, [ It is against his
Wisdom not to have found Means, whereby he might be served; but by such
Actions, by which the Devil is no less, yea, is more served.] But his Charge is
upon the naked Supposition, that their Doctrine is the Truth; which is
pitifully to beg the question. Yea, he indirectly (notwithstanding much winding
about to avoid it) Confesses my Charge; saying: There is no formal service
performed to the Devil; so he grants some Material Service to be performed to
him: Is not the Devil served, and that Service justly displeasing to God,
unless it be a Formal Service? for to serve the Devil formally, is to
acknowledge him as their Master, and give him Service, as due to him: which
many do not, who yet may be said truly enough to serve him. He adds, The
Spiritual Warfare J. B. pleads for is not to Overcome; but to break daily the
Commandments of God in Thought Word and Deed.
That God bath seen meet, his Children be in a spiritual Warfare: What then?
Can no Man be in a Warfare, unless he be Overcome? Men may be Engaged in War,
and may be liable to be Assaulted, yea, may be oftentimes narrowed; straightened
and beset by the Enemy, and sometimes wounded, and yet never overcome: but what
he pleads for, is not only a Warfare, but a being Worsted and Overcome, and
that Every Day; for so truly are such Overcome by the Devil, Who daily break
the Commandments of God in Thought, Word and Deed, as he affirms of all God's
Children. He goes on n. 20. to say, I run my self blind, in saying, it is
against God's Justice, to require Men to abstain from all Sin, and not enable
them to do it; because it would prove, all the Wicked are Perfect, for God
requires of them Obedience. But it seems, himself has been blind, when he made
this Answer: I never urged, that because God gave Men power, therefore they are
perfect, as he foolishly throughout this Paragraph Imagines; and then
battereth against this Man of Straw of his own making: And that this proves,
that Wicked Men might, if they had not Resisted God's Grace, have forsaken
their Wickedness, and been Perfect, I deny not; neither does he prove the
Contrary. He confesses, Man^s Imperfection to be of themselves; but he thinks,
it cannot be accounted Unrighteousness in God to Require, and yet not to give
that measure of Grace, whereby Men should become Perfect: because that power,
which was once given, was sinfully Cast away. But all this depends upon the
Supposition, that Man lost his power in Adam: which was before Discust; and is
now in him but a begging of the Question. And when I show, That their Doctrine
makes God more Unjust, than the vilest of Men, J. B.'s Doctrine makes God to
give a Stone instead of Bread, etc.
who will not give to their Children, asking Bread, a Stone, etc. he
reproacheth me as a Blasphemous Tongue. But let us see, how he frees their
Doctrine of this foul Consequence: The Lord forbid (says he) they hope for a
full Deliverance, but it is in Heaven. This Answer confirms the Charge, and
does not lessen it; and so for all his Brag, the Stone yet remains (according
to them) instead of Bread, and is like to Choke him, unless he find some better
way to digest it than thus; for God requires to forsake Sin here, and yet
(according to them) denies the power here: for concerning being free from Sin
in Heaven, there is no question. He adds, page 341. That my saying, [Their
Doctrine is Injurious to the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, which was To take
away Sin] destroys all I said of Universal Redemption: but he forgets to show,
How? perhaps we may Expect it next, since his 8 th Chapter is already Answered.
His saying, They affirm, that the stain of Sin is taken away, and Victory
obtained, does not answer, because they refer that to another Life; and the
question is concerning this. And to my saying, That if the Children of God Sin
in Thought, Word and Deed daily, then there is no difference betwixt the Holy
and Profane; he answers: The difference is great, because what the Wicked do,
is done with full purpose of heart, etc. but the Other mourns over and
repents of his Sin. This difference is in respect of Repentance, not of
Sinning: in their Sinning they are both alike. That there is a Difference
betwixt him, that Continues in Sin, J. B.'s Godly continue in Sin all their
Lifetime, and Sin daily.
and him that Repents, I deny not; but since he supposes, the Godly to
Continue in Sin all their lifetime, yea, in daily Sinning, the Similitude
still remains: and such will do well to take heed, Who break God's Commands
daily in Thought, Word and Deed, lest notwithstanding they may be in J. B.'s
Account the Godly, yet in Jesus Christ's they prove such, to whom it shall be
said, Depart, ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you not.

4. Page 343. N. 23. Instead of answering my Argument showing, Their Doctrine
makes the Work of the Ministry, Preaching and Praying useless, he says; Hence
we see the necessity of a standing Ministry, which I am against: This is false,
as shall appear. He adds, The Ministry is to bring them on toward Perfection;
but the question is, Whether that Perfection is not attainable here? For a
Perfection, that admits not of a growth, I plead not. If he would have had
this Answer understood to be to the purpose, he should have said, That such as
Sin not, cannot be said to admit of a growth; which he does not so much as
attempt, nor offer to prove. What I affirm to the Contrary in the Example of
Christ, who, notwithstanding he was always free of Sin, is said to Increase
both in Favor with God and Man, Luke 2.52. To this mentioned in my Apology
(notwithstanding his Prolixity) he is as Mute, as a Fish. How their Doctrine
makes Prayers useless, I have shown before: Instead of answering Col. 4.12.
where Epaphras is said To labor fervently in Prayers, Perfection prayed for,
and Vnblameableness, etc.
that the Colossians might stand perfect and complete in all the Will of God;
and to 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13. where Paul prays That the Lord would make them
increase and abound in Love, etc. to the end he might establish their Hearts
unblameable in Holiness; I say, instead of Answering, he makes Commentaries
upon these places, (which in themselves are as plain as can be) that this is,
They should walk in Sincerity, and always be growing. And what if all this be
granted? it will not follow, that it is Impossible, Men should be free of Sin
here even by the Grace of God. And sure, where Men are Perfect and Complete in
all the Will of God, and Unblameable in Holiness, they are not Sinning daily in
Thought, Word and Deed. Thus the Reader may judge of this Man's Confidence, who
says, These Scriptures make against this Imagined Perfection, meaning that
which is asserted by me. Page 343. he says, My affirming, Men are called
Justified or Reprobated in respect of their being leavened with Sin or
Righteousness, (fermenting is a piece of his own Pedantry, and none of the
Quakers Dialect) would prove full Perfection to be Essential to the State of
Christianity: Therefore I must answer it, as well as they, who deny that to be
Common to all the Regenerate. But it seems, he has not well understood his own
New-Coined English word [ fermenting:] for one thing thing is not said to be
leavened with another; but where it has much prevailed: Every Touch or Taste of
a thing does not leaven him with it, that so touches or tastes it; as all
Men, that understand common Language, know: and so every Sin is not enough to
denominate a Man leavened with Sin. And so with his own Answer that follows, he
loses the Knot he imagined I was Tied by. What he adds afterward of
fulfilling the Law, urges nothing, but upon a Supposition of its being
fulfilled by the mere strength of Man; which I never affirmed. That no Man is
called Just, because of inward Righteousness, is but his bare Supposition: as
for the word Inherent, so often repeated by him, it is none of mine. And to my
urging, That the Subject is denominated from the Accident, he says; A Wall
that is more Black than White, cannot be called White; So J. B.'s breakers of
the Commands daily, and yet such as have renounced the Works of Darkness.
Yet that a Wall is called White, though the Whiteness be not Perfect: But it
is not called White, if it be more Black, than White; which was the pinch I
urged, but slily over-slipt by him: and such must be those, that break the
Commands daily; for how such can be said to be more Just, than Sinful, is more
than I can Reconcile either with Scripture or Reason: sure, the Answer, which
he gives, does it not. To this question, Where are then the Children of God,
and of Light? His Reply is with a notable piece of Inconsistent Presbyterian
Canting: Even where these are, who are giving to Christ much work (to speak so)
to wash and make them clean from their daily Pollutions and Defilements, and
have renounced the Works of Darkness, etc. I desire to know of him the next
time, how these can be said to have Renounced the works of Darkness, who have
need to be washed from their daily defilements. To my Argument showing, That
Christ's Command to be perfect, proves it possible; he says, p. 344. That this
only proves, we should Endeavor after it: But for this he adds no Proof; we
must rest contented with his mere Affirmation: As we must also do throughout
the next N. 26. where he confidently Preaches his own sense of Scripture,
instead of Answer or Reason; and then concludes with a Railing saying, I am led
by an anti-Evangelical and Diabolical Spirit. He says, that Matthew. 7.21. and
some other places cited by me, prove nothing, without supposing, that no Man
shall be saved, who ever Sinned; but without giving any Reason. That the
Unconverted may be by the Grace of God Converted, and consequently made
Perfect, I deny not. He says, Romans 6. speaks only of the Dominion of Sin: And
what then? Does not every Sin bring him, that commits it, under the power of
that Sin in so far? To the Instances of Enoch, Noah and others, Enoch, Noah,
etc. called perfect in Scriptures.
whom the Scriptures call Perfect, he goes about to prove, they sometimes
Sinned: And what then? The question is not, Whether they always were without
Sin? but Whether they never were without it, and Sinned daily? which is his
Affirmation: Which if they had done, they could at no time have been called
Perfect. As for his other Glosses, it will be time to receive them, when he
proves them; it is not enough to make them Authentic with me, though Augustine
had approved: If he will subscribe to all Augustin's glosses of Scripture, I
may give him a further Answer.

5. Page 346. n. 28. He comes to take notice of my Answers to their Arguments:
and first to my Answer to their arguing from 1 John 1. v. 8. If we say, we have
no Sin, we deceive our selves, etc. That this will not prove, the Apostle
includes more than James c. 3. v. 9, 10. He answers, The Apostle is
included, though not for the present time: If it be not for the present time,
J. B.'s pretended Proofs for Sinning daily.
then it will not plead for Sinning daily in Thought, Word and Deed, which is
the case in hand. Next, supposing the Apostle were not Included, he says; It
is enough, that Believers are Included: But this he affirms without proof;
troubling himself and the Reader to prove, that those John wrote to, were
Believers, which no body will deny: yet though they were Included, it will not
prove such a continual and daily Sinning, as they plead for. In answer to my
showing, the words are, -- Have not Sin, and not, -- Ye Sin not; he only
proves, That they did, or may Sin: which I deny not. And then when I say, It
may be affirmed of the Seed of Sin, he concludes This to be Sinful, so as to
affect the Man; but minds not to prove it: and with this manner of begging the
Question he concludes this Paragraph. page 347. To my showing, that in 1 King
8.46. and Eccles. 7.20. there is nothing said of Sinning daily, he answers; It
is express in Ecclesiastes [ That there is not a just Man upon earth, that does
good and Sins not] clearly Importing, that even in their doing good, they
Sin: But that this is clearly Imported, he affirms, but proves not; though
there be no Man that Sins not* it will not follow, they Sin daily. And for
his Alleging, That my Answer [That it will not thence follow, that though
there was none that did not sin at that time, there are none such now, or that
it is Impossible, there should be such] will infer, there was none then
Regenerate, no not Solomon himself: What if I should say so, understanding
Regeneration in the absolute Sense? To what I show from the Hebrew Word, that
it may be Interpreted, not That sins not, but That may not sin; he tells me
in sum, That it is but Vanity, and this, he says, is obvious to every Reader:
The Apostle's Saying, I am Carnal, etc. made a Plea for Sin by J.B. with his
Meaning put without Proof.
To whom we will then leave it. To my affirming, That the Apostle is not ( Romans
7.14.) speaking of himself, but personating others in that State, after he has
told me, that Socinians and Arminians say so, he tells me; The Circumstances of
the Text evince the contrary: and then gives a kind of a Preachment upon the
Place, which I shall accept, as a Declaration of his Sense; but must wait the
next time to have him prove it. He says, The Apostle does not Contradict this,
Chap. 6.2. That the Apostle does not Contradict himself, is without doubt to
me; but he must endeavor to Reconcile the Meaning he gives to the Apostle's
Words, when he has leisure. He says, Paul in a respect was a Carnal Man; but
unless he prove him to have been so in respect of sinning at that time, he
says nothing. To my urging Romans 8.35. where the Apostle says, Nothing shall
separate him; because where Sin is Continued, there is a Separation: He
denies, that where Sin is striven and wrestled against, it makes a
Separation; but the matter is, How he proves, that those, who strive and
wrestle aganst Sin, do daily commit Sin? And until he do this, he but begs the
Question. To prove the Impossibility of being free from sinning daily, from the
Examples of Noah's and David's Sins, he uses this Argument: J. B 's. Argument
for sinning daily, in Thought, Word and Deed --
If these Men, whom the Spirit of God styles Perfect, and Men according to
God's Heart, have had their Failings, and these Failings are Registrated for
our use; Then we have no Scripture-Warrant for such a Pefection here, as is not
attended with Sin: [ he should have said, as does not admit a sinning daily in
Thought, Word and Deed, if he would have concluded according to the State of
the Question.]

But the former is true: Therefore, etc.



-- Refuted.
But I deny the Consequence of this Proposition, or the Connection of the Major:
Besides the Argument is defective diverse ways, if he had stated and then proved
it, That if such, whom the Scripture call Perfect, did break the Commands daily
in Thought, Word and Deed, then he had argued to the purpose. And for their
Failings being recorded to our use, it cannot infer the Necessity of our
sinning daily, unless he will be so absurd, as to say, that they are therefore
Recorded, that we may Imitate their Failings, and not avoid them. In fine, let
him cause his Argument conclude in the Term of the Question, to wit, That every
Man, notwithstanding any Grace received, must sin daily in Thought, Word and
Deed, and prove his Propositions, and he shall not want either an
Acknowledgment, or an Answer. And lastly, to conclude this Chapter, he says; I
should rather have cited the old Begardi, than the Fathers, and the old
Alumbrados, who had the same Opinion, and Practices suitible: But if their
Opinion was, That Men may be free from Sin, The old Begardi and Alumbrados
mentioned by J. B. to have the same Opinion of Perfection.
and their Practices suitable, sure then they were perfect; and if so, deserve
more to be followed, than J. B. or his Brethren, whose Principle and Practice
(as himself confesses) is for Sin, and daily continuing in it, against any
Perfection, except such as can admit of Sin: For To be Breaking the Commands
daily in Thought, Word and Deed, is Essential to his Christianity.

SECT. X.
Wherein his Fifteenth Chapter Of Perseverance, is Considered.

1. IN this Chapter of Perseverance it would seem, the Man fancieth, he hat got
into the Pulpit; for he Affirms, as if all that read him, were bound to believe
without further Inquiry. For after he has Introduced himself with his old
Accusation of Pelagianism, he Concludes, This Doctrine of the possibility of
Falling from Grace to depend upon Free will; and ushereth in a long Invective
against this, as maintained by me upon the Supposition of his old, reiterated
Calumny, That I asserted, All the Regeneration of the Saints to proceed only
from the Light of Nature, without the effectual Operation of the Spirit of
Grace: which how false it is, has above been shown. He gives us a large
Citation out of their Confession of Faith, with an Account thence deduced (or
Explanation thereupon) In what respect they hold Perseverance* Wherein if he
will hold to the first Asserted by him, to wit, That they assert not the
Perseverance of any, that are not truly Regenerated, we are Agreed: for in that
Sense I never did deny it. And then he gives Eight Considerations for their
Doctrine; all which conclude nothing, but upon the Supposition of the Truth of
their former Principles, especially of Election and Absolute Reprobation: so
that it is but a begging of the Question, as his very Eighth Consideration
shows, page 356. N. 14. to wit, That the affirming this Doctrine (to wit, That
there may be a falling away from beginnings of true and saving Grace) will give
a Blow unto many Articles of their Faith: But can this have any Weight to
Convince such, as do not believe these Articles of their Faith? It seems then,
it is not for me, or any Quaker, that this is written; so we are the less
concerned to trouble our selves with it.

2. At last he comes page 357. N. 15. to Examine my Arguments: And first to what
I urge from Jud. verse. 4. where it is spoken of some, That turned the Grace of
God into Wantonness, he says; This is not understood of the true Grace of God;
but External Grace, such as is that Tit. 2.12. which teaches to deny
Ungodliness: But for this he gives no Proof. Next, it seems to him, The Grace
of God, that teaches to deny ungodliness, mentioned Tit. 2. v. 12. is not the
true Grace of God: Where learned he this? or how proves he it? He says, To
understand the Faith, which some are said to have made shipwreck of, 1 Timothy
1.19. to be true and saving Faith, is contrary to 2 Timothy 2.17. and other
Places, J. B. Asserts That the Grace of God, that teaches to deny Ungodliness,
is not the True Grace; and the falling from Faith, a falling only from the
Doctrine of Faith.
where the Doctrine of Faith is spoken of; thence he concludes, It was only the
Doctrine of Faith, they fell from: But this is a Conclusion fit only for
Credulous Persons, and proves nothing; unless he will argue, because in some
Places the Doctrine of Faith is spoken of, therefore where ever Faith is spoken
of, it must be understood of the Doctrine of Faith, and not of true and saving
Faith: which were most Absurd. He says to Heb. 6.4, 5. The Words are not
Absolute, but Conditional if they fall away: but such a Condition imports the
thing supposed to be possible, being given for a Caution. He adds; There is
nothing there, that is necessarily to be understood of true and saving Grace:
but let him Inform according to Scripture, How any Man can come to taste of the
Heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the Life to come, and be made partaker of
the Holy Ghost, without true and saving Grace? For what he adds to this, being
built upon the Supposition of Election, I refer it to what is abovesaid upon
this Subject. He Concludes Vossius's Testimony to be false, in saying; That
this was the Common Opinion of the Ancients: But if so little Credit be to be
given him, he did not well that made so much use of him to prove, what was
Pelagius's Doctrine; as he has done throughout this Treatise. For John Owen's
Citations, I have neither Accommodation nor Time at present to Examine them; it
is enough to me, that this is Contrary to Scripture, though all these he
mentions, had said so. To prove, That Men may have a good Conscience, and yet
want true Faith, he brings Paul's Words Acts 23. v. 1. where speaking of
himself, while a Pharisee, he says; He lived in all good Conscience before
God, etc. but that will not meet this Case. Those 1 Timothy 1.19. who are said to
Make shipwreck of a good Conscience, are such, who believed the true Doctrine
of Faith in Christ; A Man may live in good Conscience to other Principles,
while Ignorant of the true Faith in Christ.
as himself before acknowledges: Now, albeit a Man may be said to live in good
Conscience to other Principles, while Ignorant of this; yet he should prove,
How a Man can be said to have a good Conscience with respect to the true Faith
of Christ, held by him, and yet without saving or true Grace? With Railing he
tells me, page 358. N. 18. that Phil. 1.6. and 1 Pet. 1.5. speak of God's
beginning and perfecting the Condition: And what then? yet God does not this
against our Wills; it is with a respect to our performing the Conditions on our
part: which yet we cannot do without him. Then he goes about to prove, That
Paul could not fall, in answer to my saying from 1 Cor. 9.27. That Paul
supposes a possibility, that he might become a Reprobate: But if the Reader
Consider, how I bring that in my Apology, he will find, he had no reason for
this Cavil; for I alleged it only to Reprove those that are too too secure,
showing, where Sin was, there was always a Ground of Jealousy: Since the
Apostle did reckon it needful to keep under his Body, to subdue Sin, that he
might not become a Reprobate: Which since the Apostle did, but upon this
Supposition, if he did not keep under his Body, suppose possible, others had no
Reason to presume.

SECT. XI.
Wherein his Sixteenth Chapter Of the Church, his Seventeenth Of the
Ministerial Call, his Eighteen, Nineteen and Twenty First, Of their
Qualifications, Office and Maintenance; and his Twentieth Of Women's Preaching,
is considered.

1. HIs Chapter of the Church is soon dispatched; for it contains scarce any
thing, but Perversions and Railing. For after he has given a large Citation out
of their Confession of Faith, and then added some Enlargements of his own, and
some little, nibbling Cavils, to what I say of -- No Salvation being without
the Church, page 361. he goes on with his old reiterated Calumny, That I
suppose, Men may be made Members of the Catholic Church by the Light of
Nature; which is utterly false. And upon this false Supposition is built his N.
5. page 362. as also what he says, page 364. But N. 4. he screws this to a
greater Pitch of Falsehood, affirming, J. B.'s gross Calumny, That our Faith and
Principles are only taught by the Light of Nature.
That what I say of a Particular Church, gathered together in the Faith of the
true Principles and Doctrines of Christ, by the Spirit of God and Testimony of
some of his Ministers, is, that these are Persons only taught by the Light of
Nature, and by such Ministers, as preach nothing of the Gospel. Against a Man
thus desperately resolved and determined to Lie and Calumniate, there can be no
Guard; bu sure all sober Readers will abhor such Dealing. What I speak of a
Church in this Respect, is only of such, as have the Advantage of the outward
Knowledge of Christ, as my Words afterward show; where I say, Such were the
Churches gathered by the Apostles, of which the Scripture makes mention. And
therefore what he Objects, That cannot be done by Pagans, is wholly
Impertinent; and does but verify the grosness of his Calumny; which he
endeavors to inculcate as a Truth to his Reader, page 363. as if, what I say
further of the things requisite to be a Member of this Particular Church, were
a third Sort, and not a more particular Description of the former: Which the
Reader may easily observe by looking to the Place, to be a mere Fetch of his,
to afford himself some matter of Cavil. Which imagining he has got, he fills up
the Paragraph with gross Lies and Railing, saying; That the Quakers believe not
the Holy Truths set down in the Scriptures, because they oppose and contradict
them: J. B.'s further Lies against us, of the Scriptures, of Christ, and our
Faith.
That they believe not in, nor make Prof^ssion of Jesus Christ Revealed in the
New Testament, because they oppose him and all his Institutions: That Faith,
according to them, is not wrought by the Spirit of God; but that Nature can
sweetly and naturally Incline, yea Compel thereunto: All which are Gross
Calumnies. And then he concludes, saying; And thus we have Run round, and are
again where we began: which is very true; for he began with Calumnies, and
having run round the same way, his Work Resolves in them. Page 364. He
affirms, Men may be Members of the visible Church (and consequently ought to
be reputed such) who are ungodly and without holiness: and offers to make it
good, if I will form a Dispute upon it; but I leave him, as to this, to Dispute
with his Learned Dr. Owen, whose Works he has Applauded in this Treatise: and
whom his Postscript-Brother R. M. has in his Preface to this J. B.'s Book
highly Commended, as a Gracious Man. As for his Silly Argument, that from the
Apostle's saying, Act. 2.39. -- The Promise is unto you, and to your Children;
and 1 Cor. 7.14. it follows, Men become Members of the Church by Birth; I leave
him to debate it with his great Author Thomas Hicks, who will tell him (if he
be Consonant to his own Principles) it is a Babylonish Invention. But J. B.
has here unawares Contradicted himself: for if these Scriptures prove, Men
become Members of the Church by Birth, then the Sprinkling them with Water
sometime after they are born, or their Baby-Baptism, J. B. shuts out their
Baby-Baptism, from making them Church Members.
is not necessary to make them Members of the Church; and they are to be
accounted such without it. He says; I am mistaken, when I say, Antichrist
built his Structure upon this foundation, (to wit, That Men without Holiness
may be Members of the true Church) because he applies all the Privileges of
the Invisible Church unto his Visible Synagogue of Satan: whereas this shows,
that I am not Mistaken; but that my Affirmation is true: for if he, to wit,
Antichrist did believe Holiness to be necessary to make a Member of the true
Church, he could not apply the Privileges of the Invisible Church unto his
Visible Members; most of which he well knows (as often times himself) are not
only void of, but Enemies to Holiness. It is false, That I agree with him in
his not distinguishing betwixt the Visible and Invisible Church; and yet much
more in un-Churching all, who are not of his Combination: In which albeit J. B.
most Impudently insinuates, I approach to him; yet himself cannot but know it
to be a most manifest Falsehood: since I suppose, some of all Sects of
Christians may be Members of the Catholic Church; and he knows, and has
observed here, how Contrary the Pope is to this Doctrine. At last he concludes
this Chapter with a fit of Railing, of which the last words must not pass
without observation; J. B. condemns a Morality, which himself has confessed to
be Just, Holy and Good.
to wit, That instead of true Holiness I press upon them a Natural, Dead and
anti-Evangelical Morality. Now this Morality, as pressed by me, he himself
confessed before to be such, as the Law of Nature taught, (albeit in Truth I
pressed none, but what is through the Light of Christ, or Grace of God that is
by Christ) which he acknowledged did lead Men not to Murder, not to Steal, not
to commit Adultery; which he confessed also was Just, Holy and Good. And so it
seems, according to him that which is Holy, Just and Good, not to Murder, not
to Steal, not to Commit Adultery, is no part of true Holiness; yea is
Anti-Evangelick and contrary to the Gospel. Now if I would insist after his
Method, having much more Reason than he, I might at large show, what a
Pagan-Gospel to purpose his must be, that is contrary to Honesty, Chastity and
Innocence; albeit I deny not, but the true Gospel teaches more, than the
height of mere Morality.

2. He begins his 17 th Chapter, Entitled, Of a Ministerial Call, after the
Repetition of some part of my 10 th Thesis, with his old reiterated Calumny and
false Supposition, That I affirm, Men to be called and qualified to the
Ministry by the Light of Nature: and to this purpose to help him to fill up the
Paper, he insisteth p. 369, 370, 371. Which being false, all that is built
upon, it falls to the Ground. In this Chapter also he is very liberal of his
Railing: Take one Instance, page 372. where he says; That the Quakers are
Pagan-Preachers, who know not the Gospel; but are sworn Enemies to it, and
plain Subverters of it, and all the Ordinances thereof: And page 378. he says;
They are a Company of the most desperate, Antichristian Opposers of Christ and
all his Appointments, that ever the Sun shined on. More of this kind may be
seen page 374, 375, and 376.

Page 366. N. 3. He says; When I speak of a True Call to the Ministry, I must
suppose Ten things; which he after ennumerateth: and albeit I judge not my self
obliged to follow him in such Excursions, yet for the Reader's satisfaction let
it be observed, That I deny not, but what I speak here, is with a relation to a
visible Church, which is his first Supposition. Secondly, That I acknowledge,
that in it there must be a standing Ministry, which is necessary; Properties of
a True Call.
and this is his second and third. That I acknowledge this to be an Institution
of Jesus Christ; which is his fourth. That None ought to take this upon him,
without being lawfully called thereunto; which is his fifth. That also None may
take upon them that work, but such as are Called to the Ministry, so as to
exercise it constantly, as exercised by Ministers; yet a Man may, when
particularly called by the Spirit thereunto, do that which is the Work of a
Minister: which his doing pro hic and nunc makes him not a Minister properly;
and this is his sixth. That neither the Work nor Office is common to all the
Members, so that they may not do it simply, as Members; which is his seventh
and eighth. That a Call differs from Gifts and Qualifications; which is his
ninth. And lastly, That there are some Rules in the Scripture (if he understand
general Rules, as I suppose he does) which distinguish a true Call from a
false; which is his Tenth Supposition: Now wherein I here disagree from other
Quakers, or my self, as he insinuates, he may be pleased next time to inform.
I might pass, what he says in the next Paragraph, J. B. his diverse sorts of
Calls recited.
page 368. concerning the several sorts of Calls to the Ministry, as containing
no Answer to me; were it not to show, that he there but begs the question, and
contradicts himself. (1.) He begs the question, while he supposes that the
Approbation and Concurrence of Men in a Call hinders the Call from being
Immediate; and that there is no Immediate Call now: which he all affirms
without Proof. (2.) Of Mediate Calls he says, some are Rare and Singular, when
a Church is erecting; and other Ordinary, according to the Rules set down in
the Word. So it seems, the Rare and Singular Call, which is usually ascribed to
that of the first Reformers, was not according to the Rules prescribed in the
Word: But if such Rules be set down, by what Authority without the Word can he
affirm, they may be despensed with, if he Contradict not his own Principles?
(3.) He says; There must be an Inward Call, which is the signification of
God's mind of his Calling and Appointing him to the Ministry: This is good; and
it is false that he says page 372. That this will not satisfy us. Yet he
cannot stand to this, but contradicts it, page 372. speaking of my words thus;
What means he by this [must be called by the Spirit?] Is this an Inward
Inspiration or Enthusiasm, saying to the Man, he must go Preach? We reject all
such Fancies, etc. But is not an Inward Call signifying God's mind to a Man,
The True and Inward Call.
of his Calling him to the Ministry, an Inward Inspiration, telling him, he
must go Preach? Or can an Inward Call be without an Inward Inspiration? The
Reader may judge of these Inconsistencies. As to his question, page 369.
Whether to be instructed by the Inward Virtue and Power of God in the Heart, be
so necessary to a Minister, that he cannot be without it? I say, it is; and the
Reader may observe, how he is pinched, while himself is loath to say otherwise,
page 370. yet at last he says, He dare not say it; referring to his Learned
Mr. Durham (as he calls him) and giving the Example of Judas, J B.'s
Gospel Ministers Call and Qualification may agree to the Devil himself; whom
yet they will not turn away from.
of which hereafter. However we see, according to him, That not only one who
wants Holiness, but even a Devil may and ought to be esteemed, heard and
obeyed as a Minister of Christ; and that all they judge needful in the Call and
Qualification of a Gospel-Minister, may agree to the Devil himself: nor can
they be sure, but their Ministers may be all Devils, for ought they know. It is
false, that he adds in this page 370. That I agree with Socinians and
Arminians, in affirming, That whoever understands the Truth of the Gospel, and
are able to instruct others, may and have Right to Teach: This I nowhere
affirmed; and do wholly deny, whatever Knowledge or Ability a Man have to
Instruct, by reason of his Gifts either natural or acquired, that he ought to
take upon him to Teach, without being particularly Called thereunto: and
therefore the Scriptures he brings against such, as say so, are not to the
purpose against me. To my first Argument he confesses, That it proves the
necessity I speak of, to make a Man a real, upright and sincere Minister before
God; but that any, that are not real and upright, are to be esteemed Ministers
at all, or heard as such, I deny; and remains for him to prove. Why are we so
often forbidden to hear false Teachers? And that this is not only with respect
to Teaching false Doctrine, the Apostle shows, 2 Timothy 3. v. 5. where he exhorts
to Turn away from such, as have the form of Godliness only (which cannot
consist with false Doctrine.) To my Second Argument mentioned page 372, he
Confesses: what he says further in that Paragraph is above answered. To my
Argument showing, That if the Inward Testimony of the Spirit be not thought
needful, the Gospel Ministry should be postponed to the Legal, he most
ridiculously answers; Then the Jews needed to doubt of the Priests and Levites:
whereas my Argument was, If they were certain, and we should be uncertain, it
would make the Evangelical worse, than the Legal; and therefore to this he
returns nothing further but Railing. Page 373. n. 10. he asks, How I will
prove, That all such, as want the Call of the Spirit, come not in by the door,
but are Thieves and Robbers? affirming, Here a Man may come in the Way
appointed by Christ, though they want this: whereas before page 369. and in the
end of this page he affirms the Necessity of an Inward Call, saying; They must
have an Inward Call. I run not out, as he alleges, upon a Mistake, in saying,
The Succession of the Church is objected against this Doctrine; albeit J. B.
and his We may not do so: since I write to others, than he will perhaps include
in his We. He bestows his n. 12. page 374. in Railing, and referring to what
is formerly said by him, page 375. n. 13. To my Answer to that Objection, That
who pretend to an Immediate Call, should prove it by Miracles, showing, It was
the same Objected by Papists against the Primitive Protestants; he in a frothy
manner desires me to take it thus, and it will be too hot for my Fingers: That
they, J. B. pleads for Miracles, etc. to evidence a Call.
who had Immediate Calls from God, were able to give evidence of the same by
Miracles, or some other evident Testimony of the Spirit; which to contradict
had been Iniquity, and utterly Unreasonable: I grant the whole; and therefore
desire him to show me, and prove it, What way the first Reformers did thus
evidence their Call, which is not done by those called Quakers? But his
Probation must be somewhat solider, than the Railing, with which he fills up
the rest of this Paragraph. Page 376. n. 14. (as it should be marked) he
argues against my saying; That such as receive and believe the Call of true
Ministers, verify it, and become the Signs of their Apostleship. 2 Cor. 13.3.
albeit this was the very Answer given by Beza to Claudius Espenseus at the
Conference of Poissy by Papists against Protestants: and let him urge this if
he can, any way against us, which may not be as well urged by Protestants
against Papists? and if he cannot, he does but work for his great Father the
Pope; to whom (to their great Shame) the Protestant Clergy begin to Recur to
Justify their Calling.

Having ended this Paragraph with Railing, he begins the next with a silly,
groundless Perversion and Inference, The Inward Life is their true Call and
Title.
viz. That because I say, that this, to wit, the Inward Life and Virtue, which
is in true Ministers, is that, which gives to the Minister the true and
substantial Call and Title; it follows, That the Extraordinary Call was no true
and substantial Title: As if any Extraordinary Call wanted this Life and
Virtue; and that albeit it prove an Evidence to such as receive them, yet some
may have it, who are Rejected of Rebellious Men. To prove the necessity of
Laying on of Hands, he asks; Why then were Hands laid upon Paul and Barnabas?
Act. 13.3. citing other places. Answ. Because there was then a Spiritual Virtue
Communicated by that Action, which they ascribe not to theirs; yea, the places
cited by him prove it, as Mark 16.18. Luke 13.13. where the Laying on of hands
is said to Cure the Sick. I said not, The Apostles and their laying on of
Hands, do differ from J. B.'s etc.
that the laying-on of hands always was the giving of the Holy Ghost; it is
enough, if it was a Communicating of some spiritual Virtue: which by their own
Confession theirs is not. Af^ he has ended this Paragraph with Railing, he ends
this Chapter with observing the Infallibility pleaded for in Ministers by some
Quakers: but if he judges them to Err in this, he should have applied himself
to them, answering the Arguments, by which they vindicate what they say in that
matter.

3. I come now to his Eighteenth Chapter of Ministerial Qualifications: Where,
after he has begun and repeated some Words of mine, The Grace of God does
Qualify the Minister or Preacher.
he will have the Grace of God to respect not the esse or being, but been esse
or well-being of a Minister; albeit elsewhere he would be mincing this, and
eating it up, yet it appears to be his Belief. To prove which he asks, page
380. What I think of Balaam, who is called a Prophet, not a false Prophet? But
he has not proved, That no more is Required in a Gospel-Minister, than in a
Prophet merely to foretell things to come. God's speaking to him urges
nothing: For God spoke also to Cain, as himself confesses, Chap. 3. yet it
will not follow, that Cain had all the Qualifications requisite to a
Gospel-Minister. To my answer of Judas, that they had not proved he wanted
Grace when Called; he Refers, to what is written of the Possibility of falling
from Grace: To which also I Refer it. And in this also resolves, what he says
page 380. N. 4. In his very first Paragraph he has his Old Calumny; That all
the Power, Virtue and Life of the Spirit, according to me is not to be
understood, of what is imported by these Words in Scripture: And this he
insinuates again page 379, 380, 384. But as this is false, so what is built
upon it, falls to the Ground. Because I deny the absolute Necessity of Humane
Learning to the Ministry, therefore he insinuates, as if I thought it utterly
Useless, page 379. which is false. And so what he says p. 382, The Sciences
may be of Use, but make no Gospel-Teacher.
383, 384. to prove the Usefulness of Natural Sciences, is to no purpose
against me, who deny not their Usefulness among Men; nor yet say, when well
Improved, they are Useless to a Minister, or that such things may not be
Improved by a Minister, when acted by the Spirit so to do, as Paul did the
saying of the Heathen-Poet. The thing then I only deny is, That they are
absolutely needful Qualifications to a Minister. What he mentions to be said by
Calvin of the Philosophy spoken of by Paul, Col. 2.8. I can very well agree to,
without Prejudice to any thing said by me; I do not say, as he falsely affirms
p. 383. That Learning and Grace are contradictory. And whereas he says, He is
far from saying, that Learning is more necessary than Grace; he does but Cheat
his Reader, and Contradict himself and his Learned Mr. Durham, who makes Grace
only needful to the well-being, but Learning to the being of a Minister: And
their Admitting of Ministers shows this; for they will Admit none, till they be
sure he has Learning. But many, whom they are not sure have Grace, yea, upon
the Supposition they want Grace; yet they think, they ought to be held and
reputed by the People as true and lawful Ministers. And whereas he insinuates,
page 383. that I bring in a Fable, which he says, I have ready at Hand; if he
dare Charge me in this with the Asserting of a Falsehood in Matter of Fact, I
will give Evidence for Proof; the Persons being yet alive: But until he do
that, Without Grace none can be a Member of Christ's Body, which is the Church.
my knowing the thing to be True, gives me ground enough to Assert it. To my
Argument showing, That without Grace a Man cannot be a Member of Christ's Body,
which is the Church, far less a Minister, in stead of Answer, after he has
accused me: as not understanding the Difference betwixt the Visible and
Invisible Church, he tells; Christ is an Head to both: Which I deny not. That I
apply Ephesians. 4.7.11.16. 1 Cor. 12. solely to the Invisible Church, so as to
exclude the Visible, is his Mistake, not my Ignorance. Then he goes about to
show the Difference betwixt Gift and Grace; but that any had the Gifts there
mentioned, who were altogether void of Grace, remains for him to prove. Besides
what is mentioned, he is not sparing of his Calumnies in this Chapter: as where
he says; page 382. That I deny, that about the Time of Reformation there was a
Christian World: which is false in respect of Profession; in which Sense I only
here understood it. And page 385. albeit he find me calling the Heresy of Arius
horrid; yet upon the Trust of his Author Mr. Clapham he affirms, The Quakers
to be in this Erroneous: But sure, I have better Reason to be acquainted with
the Quakers Doctrines, than any of his lying Authors. Another of his Calumnies
is, page 386. That we lay aside all Means in coming* to the Saving Knowledge of
God's Name: And albeit his Railing in this Chapter be thick enough, that the
Reader may easily observe it; yet for his more particular Direction let him
observe 380, 381-385, 386. And whereas page 386. N. 11. he enumerateth several
Particulars, wherein he affirms, We agree with Papists; he may find them
Refuted and Answered in G. K.'s Book, called Quakerism no Popery. And in the
last two Sections of that Book written by me, he may find himself and his
Brethren proved far more guilty of that Crime, than we: which because the
Professor John Menzies, If Number and Increase bespeak Delusion, J. B.'s
surpasses Ours; and leaves him in Confusion.
against whom it is written, found not yet Time to Answer; he, as having more
leisure, may assume that Province. If the Increase of our Number be, as he
says, a Clear Verification of 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. That we are of the
Deluded ones there spoken of; then it must be a Clearer Verification of it, as
to them, that they are of that Deluded Company, since they are more Numerous
than we, and also Increased more suddenly. As for his Exhortations and Wishes
in the end, because I will be so Charitable, as to suppose they come from some
Measure of Sincerity, I do not wholly Reject them: only I must tell him, that
nothing has more Conduced of an External Mean, to Confirm me in the Belief of
the Verity of the Principles I hold, than his Treatise, because of the many
gross Calumnies, manifest Perversions, J. B's. gross Calumnies, Perversions and
Railing: Truth needed no such Way and Method of Defense.
and furious Railing in it; since I know, the Truth needed no such Method to
defend it: and I can not believe, one in the Truth would use it; since Lying is
contrary to the Truth. Therefore if he will lay aside all this Falsehood and
Passion, he may have a more sure Ground of hope to see the Truth manifested to
the dispelling of Error.

4. He begins his Nineteenth Chapter of the Ministerial Office with
supposing, That their Order is according to Scripture; and that what we plead
for, is quite contrary: And so ushereth himself into a Rant of Railing, with
which he concludes this Paragraph, saying; That the Evil Spirit, that acts
us, is such an Enemy to all Gospel Order, that it cries up only Paganish and
Devilish Confusion. More of this kind the Reader may observe page 388, 389,
391, 392-394. His Calumnies and Perversions are also very frequent in this
Chapter: as page 387. where he says; We cast away all Order, and in stead
thereof bring in the Confusion of Babel: and page 388. because we are not for
the Shadow without the Substance, therefore he says, We make a Repugnancy
betwixt them; which is also false: And again in the same page N. 4. because I
say [It was never the Mind of Christ to establish the Shadow of Officers,
without the Power and Efficacy of the Spirit] therefore he concludes, That the
Quakers think, that Men can establish the Spirit: Which silly Perversion will
easily be manifest to every intelligent Reader. And after the like manner page
389. N. 5. because I say [That upon setting up mere Shadows, where the
Substance was wanting, the Work of Antichrist was erected in the dark Night of
Apostacy] he concludes, that then (according to me) Christ and his Apostles
wrought the Work of Antichrist and Mystery of Iniquity; accusing me thence of
Blasphemy: But who can be so blind, as not to see this manifest Perversion? And
again page 390. he says; I will, that every Man According as his own Spirit
(falsely called the Spirit of God) moves him, setting to this Work, (meaning
that of the Ministry:) Which is a false Calumny never said by me; who deny all
false Motions of Man's own Spirit however called. False Motions are denied.
And page 391. he says; That Malice prompteth me to Charge them with owning
the distinction of Clergy and Laity, though I know they do not: Where the Man
supposes, that what I write, is only written against the Presbyterians; while
he cannot but know, that I write against others; since in his first Chapter he
charges we with Writing against all the Christian World: So it is his Malice to
say, I Charge them with it; if any of those I write to, be guilty of it, it is
enough: albeit I doubt, whether the Presbyterians can free themselves of it.

5. Having thus far discovered his Perversions; I come to the main Business.
Page 388. he says; They plead not for shadows, but own the Ordinances, as
Christ has appointed to remain and continue for the perfecting of the Saints,
etc. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And page 389. N. 6. he asks, Whether the Primitive
Church was not Instituted by Christ, and gathered by God, in whose Assemblies
he was Ruler and Governor? asking; Were there no distinct Officers, particular
individual Persons set apart for the Work of the Ministry in the Apostles Days?
And p. 391. N. 7. he argues against my Saying, That these mentioned 1 Cor.
12.28, 29. and Romans 12.6. were not distinct Officers; but only different
Operations of the same Spirit: And against this also he pleads p. 393. N. 11.
and p. 394. To all which I answer distinctly and particularly. J. B. his Plea
for a Defective Number of Officers from Scripture.
That they can plead nothing from Ephesians. 4. unless their Church had all the
Officers there mentioned, which it has not; yea, and which themselves affirm,
are Ceased: Such as Prophets, Apostles, which are said to be given for the Work
of the Ministry and perfecting of the Saints, nothing less than the other. And
by what Authority do they then Turn these by, and plead so tenaciously for the
other? Let him give a Reason for this next; and by the same we shall Answer,
what he urges from this: But he must remember, it is not enough for him barely
to say, These were extraordinary, and are ceased, and the other ordinary, and
remain; but he must prove it by plain Scripture, or else be justly Rejected, as
but begging the Question. As he does page 394. where he supposes, there were
only 13 Apostles, or perhaps 14. if Barnabas be accounted one; since he
confesses, the Word signifies One Sent: and therefore whoever is Sent, is
properly an Apostle. Thus also will his other Argument return upon his own
Head: for since such (as he says) were settled and ordained in the Church by
Christ and his Apostles; how come they to walk so contrary to Christ's Order,
as to want, yea and to judge such unnecessary in their Church? And as for all
the Scriptures cited by him, to show the distinction of such Church Officers
from other Members, they are not to the purpose against me; who deny not, but
Members were to be distinguished: but yet that proves not, that any Member was
barred from these Exercises, when called by the Spirit thereto; which is the
thing in question. As for his saying, That the Apostle is speaking of the
Church, 1 Cor. 12. as an Organical Body; if he means, the Apostle is Comparing
the Church to a Body, to which it answers in many respects, I deny not; but if
he say, that it answers in all, I leave him to prove it: however then, if we
make Application of it, as the Apostle illustrateth it; their Church will prove
a very lame one: for in this Body (as J. B. himself observes) the Apostle names
Apostles and Prophets; J. B.'s defective Church if wanting Eyes and Ears, must
needs be Blind and Deaf.
and if we may suppose, that these, as being the most Eminent, are the Chiefest
Members, as the Eyes and Ears of the Body; their Church that wants these,
must be Blind and Deaf. And whereas he would make my saying [ That the Apostle
meaned here different Operations] Ridiculous; he but shows his own Folly: for
if the Apostle point at different Offices, they will not only want Apostles,
Prophets and Evangelists, but a great many more. For the Apostle names also
verse 28. Miracles, Gifts of Healing, Helps, Governments, Diversities of
Tongues; etc. These then must all be distinct Offices also: how come they to
want them in their Church? or how can they plead for these they have, more than
for such, as are placed nothing less by way of distinct Officers, than they?
Yea, all the several Titles enumerated by him page 390. will prove the same way
distinct Officers; and how came they to Cashier all these, and reduce them to
so few a number? By what Authority and Scripture-warrant do they this? But I
would Inquire at him, what an Office is? if it be not an Operation of the
Spirit, more particularly working in some Persons under such a designation? And
this is proved by the Coincidency of these Offices in one Person, which he
confesses: That some are thence more particularly called to the Work of the
Ministry, I acknowledge, and he observes it. That God will move none to violate
the Order established in his House, I deny not; God violates not Order; ye may
all Prophesy; not only Prophets.
but that to move some at times to speak, is a violation of that Order, I deny:
since the Apostle says to the contrary, 1 Cor. 14.31. We may all Prophesy. In
answer to which he supposes, this is Restricted to Prophets; but the Text
says All, not All Prophets (albeit it were no absurdity to suppose, All the
Lord's People to be Prophets in this sense, as well as they are said to be
Kings and Priests) and the words following show it, That all may Learn, and all
may be Comforted: for it were Nonsense to understand this with a Restriction.
And therefore his bare asserting, That this contradicts the plain Scope of the
place, is no Argument for Men of Reason, who resolve not to build their Faith
upon his mere say so. Page 395. he thinks, My acknowledging, That some are
more particularly called to the Work of the Ministry, than others, is not
enough; because they are not to Exhort, but when moved by the Spirit, and
others when moved, may as well as they: so there is no difference. That
Ministers ought not to Preach or Exhort without the Spirit's Motion or
Assistance, will come afterward to be proved: and to suppose, God cannot or
will not move any but Ministers by his Spirit to Exhort, were to limit him;
which is presumptuous in us to do. But in this appears the difference, Some
do not Speak, although endued with the Spirit in Public.
that we Confess, many may, and know Thousands among us, whom we acknowledge to
be good Men, and sufficiently Endued with the Spirit toward the work of
Regeneration in themselves, and brotherly Love and Care to their Brethren, who
never find themselves moved to speak a Word in Public; and there are others,
whom God calls to make Teaching and the Oversight of the Church so their
Constant Business, that they are less engaged in worldly Affairs, than the
generality of those called Clergymen, even among J. B.'s Brethren: and
therefore are owned and honored, and so far as need requires, maintained by
the Church. But to say, that no Man ought, without he be thus particularly
Called, at any time speak in a Public Assembly, (since we say, that they ought
not, but when moved by the Spirit) is not only to accuse us, Yet none to bind
up God from moving with his Spirit, when and in whom he please.
but imperiously bind up God, from moving with his Spirit, whom and when he
pleases. And this being Applied, will Answer his Queries page 369. where n.
14. he affirms; That to suppose, Ministers may use an honest Trade, is to
account the Work of the Ministry a light business: But this is to account it no
more a light business, than the Apostle did, who recommended Working with their
Hands for a livelihood to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.34, 35.
giving them his own Example in so doing. But they indeed must have small
Experience of a true Ministry, who do not know, a Man may be better qualified
to discharge it, by being inwardly exercised in the Spirit, and Instructed
thereby, than by all the Labor and Study they can derive from their Books; and
perhaps it may be true, Book-Study will not do: Paul labored with his Hands.
which he after affirms, that such, who bring their Preaching always out of
Books, will find little time to follow another Trade: but it seems, such
Preachers are incapable to follow the Apostle's Exhortation above mentioned;
and therefore we will justly conclude them to be no true Gospel Ministers.

5. That he may be like himself, he begins his 20 th Chapter of Women-Preachers
with Railing, saying; The Quakers are against all the Appointments and
Ordinances of Christ: then he goes on at a high rate, Inveighing against the
Liberty of Women's speaking, from Paul's words 1 Cor. 14.34. as being against
the Law, as being contrary to Modesty and Shamefacedness; urging page 398. the
Apostle's Authority in Writing that Epistle, which we deny not: And then he
urges against us 1 Timothy 2.11. alleging; That its being said, Adam was first
formed, and then Eva; and Eva being first in the Transgression, infers, that
Women's Preaching is against the Law of Nature; and that this Silence is imposed
upon Women, as a just Judgment for Eva 's Transgression. For this last
Inference we have nothing, but his Affirmation: To the former I answered in my
Apology, showing, that these words of the Apostle cannot be taken absolutely,
and without limitation; since the same Apostle gives Rules, How Women ought to
Pray and Preach, the Apostle tells.
how Women should behave themselves in their Praying and Preaching in the
Church. But he reckons, that this is for me to make the Apostle Contradict
himself, while this is his own Case, who takes the Apostle's words without
limitation; else there is not the least Contradiction: yea, his desiring them
to Ask their Husbands at home, shows, that it cannot be taken Universally,
seeing all Women have not Husbands. And for his saying, That what the Apostle
says, Chap. 11. v. 5. But every Woman, that Prays or Prophesies with her
Head uncovered, etc. is not to be meant of their carriage, when they are
Praying themselves; but when they are present at others doing of it: This is
his bare Affirmation without Proof, Contrary to the express words of the Text,
which says; Every Woman that Prays, etc. not when she hears another Pray.
And by this way it might be as easily affirmed, where the Apostle in the same
place speaks of Men's Praying with their Heads covered, that it is not, when
they Pray themselves; but when they hear others. And that there must be a
Limitation, he confesses, saying; That the Lord made use of Prophetesses of
Old, and that he is free to make use of whom he will: If so, then if the Lord
do so now, who dare plead against it? Yea, the practice of J. B.'s Brethren
does Contradict this Scripture, if they will not admit a Limitation. For will
he deny, but heretofore at Presbyterian Meetings, where sometimes 20 and 30.
and more have been together. Women have both Spoken and Prayed, And have not
Women Spoke and Prayed at your Meetings, yea, been Invited too?
yea been invited and urged to do so by Eminent Preachers there present? And is
not that properly a Church, where Christians are met together to Worship God,
and Edify one another? If he say, this was only private, I answer; However
Private it was, it was still a Church: for it is not the Greatness of the
Number, that makes the Church; since the fewer Number may more properly
sometimes be Esteemed the Church, than the greater. And if he take the
Apostle's words absolutely without Limitation, it will Exclude Women from
speaking in any Assembly met for Religious Worship and Exercise; unless he will
be so Superstitious, as to ascribe the Churchship to the old, Popish
Mass-house-Walls (and if so, What! is the Church Old Popish Mass-House-Walls?
it will trouble him to prove, there were any such in Corinth used by
Christians, when the Apostle wrote to them) so as to think that if Women speak
not there, they do not speak in the Church. And yet how comes it, that by the
Acts of the General Assembly Whores are not only permitted, but constrained to
speak in the most public Assemblies, and that in a place allotted for them, no
less Eminent than the Pulpit? Sure, if such Women may there speak of their
sins, and tell, how they have been Tempted of the Devil; good Women moved by
the Spirit of God may tell, what God has done for them, in preserving them from
such Evils. Neither will it serve to say, that it is not Authoritative
speaking; for the Apostle's words are, I permit not a Woman to speak; not, I
permit her not to speak Authoritatively: for the words added, Nor to usurp
Authority over the Man, is a distinct Precept. Women may usurp Authority over
their Men, who never offer to Preach in the Church; as also some may speak
there, who may be very subject to their Husbands: Besides, they permit Women to
Sing publicly, which is a speaking, and actual part of God's Worship. Now,
there is not a word in the Text of these Exceptions, more than the other; and
let him prove them, if he can, from the Scripture, without making way for
Womens-Preaching. He confesses page 400. That Women may be Instrumental in
Conversion privately, but not publicly: and for his saying, He will suspect
the Conversion that way wrought rather to be a Delusion, he but tells his own
Conjecture; that so he may Conclude this Chapter, according to his Custom, with
Railing.

7. Page 401. He begins his 21 Chapter of Ministers Maintenance, with a
manifest Perversion, Insinuating; As if I were Joining with such, who are
against Ministers Maintenance: which is utterly false; as by what I say upon
that subject does evidently appear. But indeed, the Man contendeth here very
warmly, and with might and main, The Maintenance allowed to Ministers in
Scripture.
and tooth and nail, as they say; albeit the thing he pleads for, as to the
substantial part of it, be not denied: but it will not satisfy him to grant, as
I do, that the Ministers should receive Temporal things from them, to whom they
minister Spiritual, or that their Necessities should be supplied; No: he will
have it to be an Honorary, as he calls it, and that a large one too. For so
page 405. he interprets 1 Timothy 5.17, 18; as if Double Honor could not be given
without large giving of Money. The Honor due to them is not a Money-Price.
It seems, poor Folks with him cannot give Double Honor, nor fulfill this
Command of the Apostle; it is only the Rich Folks Honor, who can give largely,
that he regards: yea, he reckons this giving liberally to Ministers a Sowing to
the Spirit; for so he interprets Gal. 6.8. By all which it is manifest, that
to give liberally to Ministers goes with him for a great Article of Faith. But
the Question only lies betwixt us concerning a Limited and Forced Maintenance:
for a Sumptuous he cannot for shame but seem to disclaim; and a Necessary, yea,
what in any true sense can be so called, I confess: Therefore, as what he says
of our denying it, is false; so what he urges to prove it as to us, is
superfluous. As for a Constrained or Forced Maintenance, They are not by
Constraint to force their Maintenance, which neither Magistrate nor People can
make Lawful.
I desire him next time to prove it from Scripture, since he has not yet done
it: nor indeed can he by any thing there written; since what is there said, is
only by way of such Exhortation, as Liberality and Charity is enjoined: which
albeit he says confidently, he has Convicted of Falsehood; but he has said it,
and that is all. For there were then no Christian Magistrates to Limit or
Constrain such as would not Give; The Conclusions and Determinations of the
Magistrate and People make it not lawful in it self, as all that has been
given either by Heathen-or Popish Magistrates, or People out of Superstition,
may be lawful for Ministers to receive: And indeed, many of them begin to call
that the Churches Patrimony, and reckon it Sacrilege for others than
Churchmen (as they call them) to meddle with it. He knows not how to turn-by
Paul's Exhortation to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.33. and therefore at last,
after some ado, he agrees to it: but to make it have the less weight, he tells,
How Paul took from other Churches; which is not denied: But it is manifest,
Paul preferred the Not-taking, but Working with their hands to supply their
Necessities, as that which was rather to be done; else to what purpose desires
he them to Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, That it is more blessed to
give, than to receive? But it seems, J. B. and his Brethren think it the Most
blessed thing to be getting large Augmentations. My speaking of their
Complaining of the hardness of Christians indefinitly, does not hinder
Exceptions; and therefore his Carping at it, p. 409. is frivolous. And albeit
Paul did not plead for a Carnal Ministry in reasoning for Maintenance (as he
says p. 410.) yet it very well follows, that such are but a Carnal Ministry,
that will not preach, without they get Money: yea, himself confesses in the
former page, That True Ministers must speak, whether they get Aliment or not;
and Commends some for so doing. But he has given in this page 410. a notable
Example of his Sottishness and Malice both together. For in answering what I
say [That a Carnal Ministry wants the Life and Power, and therefore needs a
fixed Maintenance; but a Spiritual Ministry can confide in God, who will
provide for them.] To this he tells, And are not the Priests now a days Richly
provided for, whilst the Servants of God have been put to great Straits and
Sufferings, and by them in N. England to hanging; shall we therefore say, these
Persecuting Priests, etc. are the Called of God, sent forth in his Authority
and Power, J. B.?
That the Priests in the Days of Jezabel were richly provided for; and the
Servants of God put to great Straits: Shall we therefore (says he) say, that
these Priests of Baal were the only Called of God, sent forth in his Power and
Authority; and that the Servants of the Lord were but a Carnal Ministry? This
were to argue Carnally with Belly-Arguments, as our Quakers do. The sober
Reader may judge of the sottishness and malicious Perverseness of this Answer:
Sottish it is, because no ways to the purpose; for I never made the Being
richly provided a token of a Spiritual Ministry, as the whole I say of this
Matter, evinceth; but on the contrary with Christ and the Apostle I think, they
are most blessed, who receive least. And will he say, that my saying [that
Spiritual Ministers can depend upon God, who will provide for them, so as not
to need a fixed Maintenance] Infers any such thing, it is malicious; because he
would insinuate to the Reader, that this gross Assertion were mine, affirming,
we Argue with Belly-Arguments: which is a Base, but Bare Calumny: How much more
his Arguments savor of that, the Reader may judge; and that his extreme
Keenness in this Matter shows, how near of Kin he is to those, whose God is
their Belly, who Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and look for their Gain
from their Quarter. What he says of the Quakers Riches, is both False and
Frivolous; for they are none of the Richest People; and their Preachers,
especially such as receive Maintenance, are usually the poorest among them: For
such as have of their own, and are called to the Ministry, do not use to
Receive; but following the Apostle, Labor to make the Gospel without Charge.
He turns by what I say in the Conclusion of my Explication of my Tenth These,
where I show by many Scriptures the Distinction betwixt a True and False
Ministry, showing, how we plead for the True; and deny the False: This he calls
false, groundless and Impertinent; but he passed it so hastily, because it was
too hot for his Fingers: And having given it this passing Sentence, he
concludes with his Old Calumny of our being Pagan-Preachers, and designing
Paganish Antichristianism.

SECT. XII.
Wherein his Twenty Second Chapter, Of the Quakers Silent Worship: His Twenty
Third, Of Preaching: His Twenty Fourth, Of Praying: And Twenty Fifth, Of
Singing Psalms, are Considered.

NOw follows his Twenty Second Chapter, Entitled, Of the Quakers Silent
Worship: wherein if I should return him no Answer, but that of Michael to
Lucifer, the Father of Lies, I should do him no Injustice; it being a Heap
either of manifest Calumnies, gross Perversions, or abusive Railing. Wherein,
as if he were Constituted Judge by GOD over the Quakers, he concludes them over
and over again to be Acted and deluded by the Devil, J. B.'s ungodly Railing
and to be such, as wholly lay themselves open to him to possess them, and work
in them at his Pleasure; with much more of this Stuff: For which I need not
particularly note Pages, for the Reader will scarce look seriously unto any one
of this Chapter from p. 412 to 419. but he will find it very thick. And for a
sufficient Refutation of it I recommend to any sober and unprejudicate Reader,
seriously to Compare and Read with this Chapter that to which it relates, to
wit, the Explication of the Eleventh These in my Apology; which I judge may
suffice to give a sufficient Disgust of this Chapter. But lest he should think,
this were too slightly a passing over his Matter, and for the Readers more full
Direction and Satisfaction, I will propose to him to be considered these things
following.

1. And first, his Calumnies, as page 411. where he says; I would have them
understand, Christ's Spiritual Resurrection was never till now: Whereas I speak
only with reference to the Time since the Apostasy, and not to the Primitive
Times before. And page 412. he says, We acknowledge no Motion or inward
Breathing of the Spirit, but what is Extraordinary and merely Enthusiastic; as
also that we abstract from all Means: This is false. But as for his supposing,
That Studied Sermons are a mean appointed of God, J. B.'s Egregious Plea for
studied Sermons.
and that not to do it, is a sure way of Tempting God, and Inviting the Devil
to deceive and delude: Which he affirms he has shown; I have not seen it, and
will expect, That next time he will make it more manifest. His 413. page
contains a Mass of Calumnies, to wit; That there is no Word in our Assemblies
of the Scripture; That we apply them not for Instruction, J. B.'s many false
Charges without Proof, against the Quakers.
Reproof and Edification of the People; That the Scriture is no Rule to us in
our Walk, nor has any Place in our Worship; That there is to be found in all
our Solemn Service neither Preaching, nor Prayer, nor Praise. And page 414. he
has his old, reiterated Calumny, That the Power and Life the Quakers speak of,
proceeds not from the Grace of God, but is the mere Operation of Nature: To
this purpose he has over and over again page 415, 416, 417, 418, 421, and 422.
He supposes p. 414. that it is affirmed by me, That at all times the Quakers
meet, all of them are truly gathered unto the Sense of the Power, and whatever
any says, comes from it, and is not to be questioned: Which is wholly False. I
show their manner of Meeting, and their Duty when Met, according to their
Principles, and the Consequence thereof, when they truly perform it; but it
does not thence follow, that none of them ever Miss in their Performance: No
more than if he should relate their Manner of Worship, and the good Effects he
may suppose it sometimes has; it would follow that whoever set about it, and
got up to the Pulpit, and read his Text, could not preach False Doctrine, nor
speak Impertinently: And therefore what he builds upon this here, as also page
416. N. 7. page 517 and 429. falls to the Ground. But he seeks to uphold this
with another Calumny; As if all, that frequent the Quakers Meetings, and are
accounted of their Number, Of Perfection see above, p. 819.
were supposed by us to be perfect, asking; How can the Power of Darkness work,
if they be made free from sinning? which is false: How we affirm this absolute
Perfection, even of such as we account our Brethren, I have shown in my Section
of Perfection. A Sixth Calumny is p. 415. which he also has page 424. where he
supposes it to be our Doctrine, J. B. is for praying without a previous Motion
of the Spirit.
that there is No setting about Prayer or other Duties without a previous
Motion of the Spirit; and upon this he insists as an Absurdity. But we speak
not of a previous Motion in Order of Time, as absolutely necessary; it is
enough, if it be in Order of Nature, which he knows may be without any priority
of Time: And so his Absurdity upon this page 424. evanisheth; which I also
answer, speaking of Prayer, in my Apology. A Seventh Calumny is p. 426. where
he concludes, because I say [ Gospel Worship is not to be in outward
Observations gone about by Man, in his own Will and proper Strength] that I
affirm, Gospel Worship puts away all External Actions; which how false it is
and inconsequential, any ordinary Reader may easily Judge: And yet upon this
false Inference he thinks to bind upon me a Contradiction, in owning
afterward External Acts of Worship; for to say, Worship may be performed
without these Acts, and that Worship cannot be performed in these Acts, is very
different: The last I deny, but own the first. An Eighth Calumny is page 418.
where because I say [That it sometimes falls out, that one come into a
Meeting upon a sinistrous Account, may by the Power Raised in the Meeting be
Reached, if the Day of his Visitation be not Expired] he concludes; If any such
come in, and be not thus changed, his Day is gone; and it is impossible to him
to be saved: Which is a gross Abuse. For albeit the Not-expiring of his Day
must be presupposed to a Capacity of Salvation; yet his not presently, yea,
after diverse times not being Converted, does not suppose his Day to be over:
Since it was never our Principle to say, God affords Men no Opportunity, but
one. Are J. B's Prayers without a previous Motion of the Spirit any better than
his Dumb Mummery, he speaks of?
Besides these there are many other Perversions scattered up and down, such as,
page 421. his saying, That the Waiting we plead for is such, as puts away
Prayer; that we plead for it, to shut out the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and
to give God no more for all his solemn Worship, but a dumb Mumry: Which Word
pleases him so well, that he has it several times over.

2. His great and mighty Charge in this Chapter is indeed great enough, J. B.
calls the Movings of the Power of God upon the Quakers, Devilry; and that they
are certianly acted by the Devil in their Assemblies.
if he could make it out; and that is, That the Quakers are guilty of Devilry,
and are certainly acted by the Devil in their Assemblies. But this he only
strongly affirms, without Proof, unless one; which, whether it be valid or not,
comes now to be Examined. And that is page 418. from my saying, That there will
be sometimes an inward Struggling, yea so, as the Body will be strangely moved:
To this he adds a Story of one Gilpin, long ago answered; and describes these
Motions of the Quakers to be, Foam, Swell and Froth at the Mouth: Which is
false; and returns upon him as a Calumny, however he compares these Motions
of the Body, as Asserted by me, to the Work of the Devil, and the old
Pythonicks. But it seems, Malice has wonderfully blinded the Man here, else he
would not have given his own Cause, which he esteems The great Cause of God, so
deep a Wound. For in the Book called The Fulfilling of the Scriptures, a
Treatise much applauded by them, whose Author is said to be Robert Fleeming,
Unusual Motions Asserted by J. B's party of their own Hearers as of the Power
of God; which J. B. calls Devilry in others.
one of their Nonconforming Brethren, he relates as a Convincing Proof of the
Power of God, how some were so choked, and taken by the Heart, that they were
made to fall over, and so carried out of the Church: And as a convincing
Appearance of God and down-pouring of the Spirit, that there was a strange and
unusual Motion on the Hearers; which by the Profane was called [ The Stewarton
Sickness] from the Name of the Parish. Now, what difference is betwixt this,
and my speaking of Men's being strangely moved by the Power of God? Will not
this prove as much, that all this way Devilry, and the passions of the old
Pythonicks? Since these Motions are made the great Argument, why the Quakers
are said to be Acted by the Devil, let him the next time assign clear Reasons
according to Scripture, Why these Motions upon the Presbyterian Bodies are a
Convincing Sign of the Working of the Power of God among them; but that the
Motions on the Quakers Bodies are enough to Confirm, they are Acted by the
Devil? And if he do this effectually, he may be in some Hopes of gaining a
Proselyte. Next to this I come to consider, what he urges as a great Absurdity,
to wit, That the Quakers turning their Minds inward (which he will needs term
Introverting, and not interpret the Word, that he may make Ignorant Folks
believe, For Men to abstain from their own Thoughts, is in. J. B's. Sense a
becoming worse than Brutes,etc.
it is a piece of the Quakers Devilry) and laying side all their own Thoughts,
and Imaginations, were a laying aside both Christianity and Humanity, a
becoming no Men, but Brutes, and worse, and most capable to be deluded by the
Devil. Upon this he insists page 414, 422. and elsewhere; as if for Men to
abstain from their own Thoughts and Imaginations, were the way to Vnman them:
Yet if he will understand it of the Old Man, the Man of Sin, that is Corrupted;
we will say with the Apostle, That ought to Die, and be Crucified: And are so
far from thinking, this is against Christianity, that we believe according to
Scripture, it is the Way to become a Christian, and to overcome the Devil; not
to lay our selves open to him. And therefore his Railing against Man's Silence
from his own Thoughts, That God may speak and work in him, does evidence his
great Ignorance in the work of a true Christian; for this is so far from
Descending from Humanity to Brutism, that it is rather an Ascending from
Humanity to Divinity: so that, albeit in one sense we are said to Die, or be
Emptied as to our selves; To Die to Self is Life and Love in Christ the
Crucified.
yet we do more truly Live and Exist. And if he think this a Contradiction; let
him consider that of the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and this if rightly
Considered, will answer his Questions page 422. by answering of which he would
have me Clear my Way of Devilry. As for any Arguments in this Chapter, that
have the least show of solidity or weight, I have looked narrowly, but can find
none; only instead thereof he has some little nibbling Quibbles and Questions:
which albeit they be so Inconsiderable, as scarce deserve the pains to Answer;
yet lest he may think something of them, if omitted, I will now take notice of
them, and Answer them. As first page 412. he asks, Set times and places for
to Worship do not stint the Holy One.
Whether the appointing of set Times and Places be not a limiting of the
Spirit? Answ. If it were to Exclude other times and places, when God moves
thereunto, it might be so judged; but other ways it is not: for Meeting
together is not an Immediate Act of Worship; but a matter of Outward
Convenience: and therefore needs not always a particular Motion. As for his
desiring me in this page to Answer, what he has said of the Sabbath (the
denying of which in their sense he accounts a great Error) I must wait then,
till he come to his matter, which he has not done in his first Tome, (which I
have only seen as yet) albeit it be a Book about an hundred Sheets of Paper:
and when he has written all that he can say upon that Subject, I doubt, whether
it may not be sufficiently Refuted by a few Lines, which Calvin has written
thereon; Inst. lib. 2. cap. 8. 34. from whom, as well as the generality of
Protestants, I know not that I differ in this matter. J. B.'s Preparation to
Worship proceeds in Infinitum.
Page 413. he proposes as an Exception against the manner of Worship expressed
by me, That it wants that preparation requisite; which he accounts to be some
Impression of that Divine Majesty, with whom they have to do: But I see no
reason, why he should Accuse us for Want Of this; since none can be more fit
than such, as make Silence and an Inward Turning of the mind necessary to their
Entering to Worship: but if he understand this by Outward Prayer, meaning, this
should be done first, since it is an actual part of Worship, by which we draw
near to that Majesty; there would be a preparation to that by the same Rule,
and another to that, and so a progressus in infinitum. But a Godly Frame of
Spirit, The true Preparation.
and a Studying to be found always in the sense of God's holy fear in all
things, is a good general preparation to all Acts of Worship. And for his
crying out against Silence, as that which cannot Edify, and thinking it so
strange, that Life or Virtue should be transmitted from one to another, when
they do not hear one another speak, as page 415.420.426. what will he say, to
what is reported by the foresaid Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures,
Unusual Motions by Praying Instanced of J. B.'s party.
page 432. how Robert Bruce his Praying caused unusual Motions upon those who
were not in the Chamber with him, nor knew the Cause, how that came upon them?
And yet this is given as an Instance of his knocking down the Spirit of God
upon them, as they themselves phrase it? Page 420. he wondreth and asks, How
one, in whom the Life does flow, so that he might speak, yet may forbear, since
that is a sufficient Call? and how dare they follow their own Choice? But this
is a silly Quibble: The flowing of Life may sometimes give Ability to speak
Justifiably, and yet it may be no sin to forbear; since albeit it gives a
sufficiency of Authority, yet not a peremptory Command: and this is no
Contradiction. The Apostle John could have written more, and that no doubt from
the Spirit; and yet did it not: 2 John 12.3 Joh. 13. and I suppose J. B. will
not dare to say, he sinned in this forbearance. He goes about page 420. n. 12.
to Examine the Scripture-proofs I bring for Waiting; The Waiting in Silence in
our Meetings Vindicated.
and then he shows, in what respect Waiting is there understood; which nothing
hurts my using them. What if Waiting be understood, as he says, in
Opposition to Freting? may not that be in Silence? But as to this, since his
Brother R. M. in the Postscript has promised us his Answer to G. K.'s Book,
called The Way cast up, we will Wait to see, what he Answers to his 15 th.
Sect. and to the Scriptures brought by him there to this purpose: and that he
may more fully consider that matter, I recommend to him the serious Perusal of
G. K.'s Book, called, The Glory and Advantage of Silent Meetings. He alleges
falsely page 423. that I say, Men cannot Wait upon God in Prayer; I say only,
that Waiting in it self rather denotes a Passive Dependence, and that true
Prayer presupposes Waiting: and that therefore their Objection is frivolous,
that ascribe Waiting of it self or simply considered, to such Acts: but I never
denied, that a Man in Prayer might be said also to Wait. Another of his silly
Quibbles is page 424. n. 17. where, because I say, The Devil works in and by
the Natural part in man.
That the Devil can only work in and by the Natural Man (for so he may be
pleased to Translate my words, or at lest he must suffer me so to do:) he
says; He thought, he could also work in a Spiritual Man, as in Peter, etc. But
not in and by the Spiritual Man: It was in and by the natural part both in
Peter and Paul, that he wrought; if he thinks not so, let him say the Contrary.
Page 425, in answer to what I say of the Excellency of this Worship, as that
which cannot be Interrupted, to prove; That Christ's Kingdom needed outward
power to protect it, he tells of the promise, that Kings shall be nursing
Fathers. What then? That may be an Advantage; yet it will not follow, there is
an absolute Need for it; else Christ's Kingdom could not be without it. But
indeed, such a sure, outward Kingdom the Priests always Covet, where they may
be upheld by the Magistrate, Christ's Kingdom needs not an outward Power to
protect it.
and supplied with daily Augmentations; and have all others that differ from
them, severely persecuted: for where this is wanting, they cry out, Alas! like
Babylons Merchants; and think, it goes not well with their Zion. The rest of
this page he concludes with Railing; but for Answer to it he may know, that the
Quakers Meetings in Scotland, albeit few in number, have met with more Injuries
from wicked Men, than the Presbyterians; and that they never defended
themselves with Force of Arms against any, far less against the Magistrate, as
his Brethren have done: or with shedding of Blood. As for his other Quibble,
page 427. That ceasing to do evil, is not without all action of the mind: not
to Contend with him about it, I shall not plead for a further Cessation, than
such a simple forbearance imports; and let him call it an Action, if he will.
His Chief Reply, to what I say in Answer to what they Object of Silence
(besides some scoffs) is; That what I allege, Silence and Inward Watching
Controverted by J. B.
is not spoken of an Introverting Silence (for he will needs use this Latin
word, and not translate it) But can there be any true Silence in order or with
respect to the Worship of God, where the Eye of the mind is not Inward, since
the Spirit of God, by which Christians are led and instructed, is said to be
within them? But page 424. n. 16. he says, That Watching is not a Turning
inward, but a looking outward also. Indeed they, who look outward, go the way
to be Tempted; for outward Objects is not that, which delivers Men from
Temptations; but often draws them to them: But it would seem according to him,
that Men, if their Eyes be shut, or in a dark Room, cannot Watch in a Spiritual
Sense; and then what became of many Saints, that have been put into Dungeons?
As to what he adds out of Dr. Stillingfleet's book Of the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome, and Taulerus Sermons, which takes up about 7 whole pages (by
which the Reader may see, how his Book grows so bulky) he misseth his Aim: for
he will never prove, that the first and most-Eminent Preachers among the
Quakers, who both practiced and commended this Way of Worship (as well as
Thousands of them yet) did ever know, that there was such a thing spoken of
among Papists, or that there ever lived such a Man, as Taulerus. So that he but
wastes his Paper in seeking to prove, They have borrowed their Doctrine thence:
and albeit I will not Justify many of the Expressions used in the pages cited
by him; yet I will not scruple to affirm, that some of them Savor more of
Christianity, than his Lies, Calumnies and Railings.

3. He begins his 23 d. Chapter of Preaching (that he may be like himself) with
a Calumny, saying; Preaching, Praying and Singing owned by us.
I have something against Preaching, Praying and Sinning; which is false: I am
against none of those Duties, as truly performed according to the right
Gospel-Method; as by the sequel will appear. And that he may go on at the same
rate, he seems to be glad, that I acknowledge the necessity of Worships being
Consonant to Scripture; but then, that he may not want something to Cavil, he
Entreats me to Reconcile this with what I say of the Scriptures: but he should
first have shown me, wherein the difference is? for I profess, I see none. He
desires also to know from Scripture the Necessity, when Men are Met together,
of Turning their minds Inward; A Turning of the Mind inward, is an Abstracting
from all Worldly Thoughts to mind God in the Soul.
which he still will express (to make it the more frightful) by the Latin word
Introversio: and this he thinks so hard, that he often insists upon it, as page
446, 447, 448. But is it not needful to Assemble in the Name of Jesus? And can
that truly be without Turning the mind Inward? unless with superstitious
Papists he thinks it is enough for meeting in the Name of Jesus, to say, when
they begin, In Nomine Domini; however their minds be abroad. Can there be any
true sense of God's Majesty, as him to whom we draw near (which himself confessed
before to be needful) without a serious Turning of the Mind Inward, that is, an
Abstracting from all worldly and vain Thoughts, to mind GOD and the Operations
of his Spirit in the Soul? Let him read Psalm 46.14. and 62. 1 Eccles. 5.2.3.
Zach. 2.3. It were hard for him to forget his Old, often-reiterated Calumny,
and therefore he has it here oftener than once, as page 441, 442-447. alleging
most falsely, That all, that, by which the Quakers preach, or require as needful
to preach, is but the dima, and darkened, and malignant Light of Nature. Neither
will he forget here his constant trade of Railing; J. B.'s abusive Railing.
take one Instance, page 447. where he says; That before I want Revelations, I
will go the Devil to get them, as Saul did to the Witch of Endor. More of such
Railing Stuff the Reader may find, and that very plentifully page 440-442-448.
He wants not here also his malicious Insinuations, as page 439. That the
Quakers use Legerdemaine, to make People believe, they speak all without a
previous Thought in their Preaching; and yet have all, to a word, well studied:
If he accuse the Quakers of this, let him prove it, if he can; for we deny it,
as a gross Calumny. Another is page 441. That we would have all Study, all
Meditation, all Prayer and Wrestling with God in Prayer laid aside; which is
also false. But to proceed: he sounds what he says in this matter upon two
great Mistakes; which being removed, the Superstructure will fall of it self.
J. B. pleads Study and Premeditation to Preach, from Paul's citing
Heathen-Poets, etc.
The first is page 438. where, to prove the Usefulness of Study and
Premeditation to Preaching, he tells, How Paul made use, of what he had read
out of a Heathen-Poet; his recommending Reading to Timothy; his desiring Titus
to hold fast the faithful Word, as he had been taught, etc. and Apollos being
instructed by Aquila and Priscilla: all which are nothing to his purpose. For
we never said, it was Unlawful for Men to read Books, especially the Scripture;
or that by such Reading Men may not acquire knowledge, which may prove Useful
in Preaching or Defending the Truth; but the question is, Whether Men may make
use of these things in public Worship, otherwise than as led, and acted, and
influenced by the Spirit so to do? and Whether any of these places will allow
Men to preach in the strength of their Natural or Acquired parts, without being
acted therein by the Spirit? Let him prove this, if he can, for this is the
matter in question; and remember Robert Bruce his Censure of Robert Blair his
Sermon recorded in The fulfilling of the Scriptures. His second Mistake is page
443; where he supposes, That to be led by the Spirit, To be led by the Spirit
does not exclude the Reading of the Scriptures.
excludes, or is inconsistent with Reading Scripture, and with all the
particular Instructions given by Paul to Timothy and Titus, who might have said
(as this Man argues) I cannot be stinted unto these Doctrines, which you desire
me to put the Brethren in remembrance of; for I must speak as the Spirit
speaks in me, and the like. But will he say, that Timothy was not to speak,
as the Spirit spoke in him? To suppose this, as Inconsistent with such
Instructions, is to beg the question: and that these are Consistent, I have
shown above in my Third Section of Immediate Revelation: or let him tell
plainly, if Timothy could do those things acceptably without the Spirit, since
all Worship is commanded by Christ to be done now in the Spirit. And yet he
seems to agree to the Nacessity of the Spirit; else why quarreleth he me page
448. for insinuating, as he says, That their Ministers preach not in the
demonstration of the Spirit? giving an Enumeration p. 439. of several ways,
which he says, I know not, but their Ministers are led to preach by; among
which this is one: What know I (says he) but there may be some, that never
digest their Preachings so, as not to lie open to the Influences of the Spirit;
and to welcome his seasonable and useful Suggestions, and to speak many things,
which they had not once premeditated? But I would ask him, Whether it be lawful
for any so to digest their Matter, as not to lie thus open to the Spirit's
Influences? He would seem to say, It were; since it is but some, and a [ may be
some] too with him, that do so. And whereas he tells of some, that are
constrained to change their Text; and what they had purposed to speak upon it:
This shows, the Case is but rare; and therefore I am not to be blamed, for what
I say in general of Preachers among Papists and Protestants, whose general way
is, To prepare aforehand, Both Protestants and Papists prepare a forehand, what
to Preach.
what they preach, and then speak it to the People at a set hour, without
waiting for the leading of the Spirit, or whether they have its Influence, or
not. And for all the Weight, that this Man would seem to lay sometimes upon the
Spirit's Influence and Concurrence; yet he gives shrewd Presumptions, that he
does it but pro forma: Else how comes he to urge as an Absurdity, page 445.
That all that Ministers preach by the Spirit, must be true? And why not? If it
be from the Spirit, it cannot be other ways: Yet Men, whose Principle it is to
speak from the Spirit, may through Weakness and Mistake preach false Doctrine;
yet the Spirit is not to be blamed for it, but those who keep not purely to it.
I suppose he will not deny, but all that, which Men preach according to the
Scripture, is Infallibly True; it will not thence follow, that all that, which
Men (whose Principle it is to preach according to Scripture) preach, is True;
because that through Weakness they may mistake the true Meaning of the
Scripture. Also what he adds; If the Matter be thus, It is not ye that speak*
but it is your Father's Spirit which speaks in you.
it is all one, whether the Preacher be young or old -- for it is not he that
speaks, but the Spirit in him; for this savoureth not of a Christian Spirit,
to seek to draw an Absurdity, or make a Mock of that, which is no other than
Christ's Express Words, Matthew. 10.20. Mark 13.3. And indeed, what he says in
this page N. 9. in answer to these Scriptures, seems rather a Mock at Christ
and his Apostles, than any Answer; asking me, If I know not, that Christ gave
them their Preaching with them, telling them what they should say; And as ye
go, preach saying, The Kingdom of God is at Hand? And a little after he says;
They had their Sermon taught them beforehand: But dare he say, That Christ's
Words beforementioned were therefore false? This he must say, or else prove
nothing. Or will he say, that the Apostles in all that Progress said nothing,
but these seven Words, The Kingdom of God is at Hand? For according to him,
this was all they said, which they had learned aforehand; and not as the Holy
Ghost taught them in that Hour, what to say, albeit it be Christ's Express
Words Luke 12.12. Page 447. to my Argument, that according to their Doctrine
the Devil himself ought to be heard, seeing he knows the Notion of Truth, and
excels many of them in Learning and Eloquence; he answers: Why does the Man
thus speak Untruth? Do we say, that every one, though he were the Devil, if he
speak Truth, should be heard? Do they not say, That Men ought to be heard and
accounted as Ministers, albeit void of the true Grace of God, if having the
formality of the outward Call? And to prove this, do not they bring the Example
of Judas, whom Christ called a Devil? And they suppose him to have been such,
even when sent by Christ, and deserved to be heard, as his Apostle. Let him
consider then, how he can shun, what I have affirmed? And albeit the Devil may
speak without Study; J. B. argues for acquiring the Gift of Preaching by
outward Study of the Letter.
yet he cannot be said to Speak by the Spirit of God: which is the thing we
affirm needful to Gospel-Preaching. And for his last Argument page 448. That
since extraordinary Gifts Ceased, there has been no ordinary way of Preaching,
but by ordinary Gifts studied and acquired; It is but a bare begging of the
Question, and the same upon the Matter with his new-enforced Objection; which I
answered toward the beginning of my Third Section of Immediate Revelation.

4. I come now to his Twenty fourth Chapter of Prayer: And as to his first
Paragraph, there needs no Debate; for (except some Railing intermixed) I own,
what is asserted in it, as to the Necessity of Prayer, and its being through
Christ, as Mediator. In the next he alleges, I speak untruly in saying, That
the Acts of their Religion are produced by the Strength of the Natural Will;
for they can pray, when they please: But how truly this is affirmed concerning
them, will after appear. Albeit in opposition to it, after citing a passage out
of the Larger Catechism, J. B. owns the Spirit necessary to Prayer.
he says; They own the Influences of the Spirit, as alsolutely necessary to
this Duty: Which if he would hold to, there needed no further Debate; I should
agree to it. For he does untruly state the Question, when he says a little
after; That the Motions and Inspirations I plead for, are extraordinary; which
is false, and never said by me: And therefore his building on it is in vain as
well here, as page 452-457-459, 461. where he insinuates, That I judge not the
gracious and ordinary Influences of the Spirit a sufficient Warrant to pray;
which is false. What he says page 451. of the Necessity of Prayer at some
times, and of the Scriptures mentioning, Prayers being made three times a day,
I deny not; nor is it to the purpose: The Question is, Whether any can pray
acceptably without the Spirit? We see, he has granted, they cannot; then the
thing to be proved, is, Whether the general Command authorized any to set about
it, albeit in a manner, which is granted, will not avail, and is unacceptable?
So the matter resolves in Examining, what he can say from Scripture or other
ways, to prove this. And that there may be no Mistake, let it be considered,
that I deny not the General Obligation to pray upon all; so that they, Who do
not pray, do sin.
who do not pray, sin; albeit they be not sensible of the Spirit's Help
enabling them to do it: But that the way to avoid this Sin, is not to Commit
another, to pray without the Spirit; but to Wait for the Spirit, that they may
pray acceeptably: seeing without it, though they should use words of Prayer, it
would be no fulfilling of the Command. And first then to what he argues page
452. from the Reiterated Commands of God to pray, I answer; That God's Command
lays upon Man an Obligation to pray, I deny not; but God commands no Man to
pray unacceptably; God Commands the right Performance of Prayer; and this he
has confessed cannot be without the Spirit; therefore God commands no Prayer
without the Spirit, God Commands no Prayer without the Spirit.
neither is the Command answered or fulfilled by such as pray without it. To
this he Objecteth, page 453 and 458. That the same Moral Duties might be
shifted, until the Spirit lead to them; and also Natural Acts of Sleeping,
Eating, etc. which are Abomination in the Wicked: And yet to go round, he
accuses me p. 454 (albeit falsely) of saying; Men may pray without the Grace of
God: Which by this Objection is his own Faith; since he will not deny, but Men
may Sleep and Eat without the Grace of God. But to this Objection I answered in
my Apology, showing the difference betwixt these Acts, and Acts of Worship;
which he grants page 461. And albeit I confess (which he urges here) that
these profit not the Man at all, as with respect to God's Favor, when done
without the Spirit; yet they really fulfill the Matter of the thing Commanded in
relation to our Neighbors and to our selves, in Eating, Drinking, Sleeping,
else it would be Self-Murder. But in Prayer the matter is not fulfilled without
the Spirit, which relates only to God, to whom every Prayer without the Spirit
is an Evil Savor, and not in any true and proper Sense a Prayer: for Prayer,
as to the material Part, cannot be performed without the Spirit. He confesses
according to their Catechism, That the Spirit is needful to know, what to pray
for; which is the material part: but the necessity of the Spirit as to these
other things, is only as to the formal part, The formal part of Nature's Acts
directed by the Spirit.
or right manner. And this pleading for Praying from these Natural Acts shows,
how he Contradicts himself, in saying; It is untrue, that they are for Prayer
without the Spirit; for if they be not, this Argument were Impertinent, which
is; As these ought to be done without the Spirit, so ought the other. And yet
he more manifestly Contradicts this page 456. saying; That God requires not
Men to feel the Influences of the Spirit, as a preparation to Prayer; yea, that
Men ought to pray, even when, and because they feel they: want them: For if it
be true, that he said before, That these Influences are necessary to the right
performance of Prayer; either Men ought to perform Prayer wrong, or this must
be a manifest Contradiction: But since this manner of Prayer is owned really in
their Praying at set times; whether they have the Spirit's Influence or not, it
shows, I spoke no Untruth of them; and that his saying so was untruly said by
him. And hence also the Man's Impudence may be seen page 460. in saying; I am a
liar in affirming, they profess, they may pray without the Spirit, and have
their set times: But the thing I say, is, Professors limit themselves to pray
at set Times, without Waiting for the Spirit,
That they limit themselves so, as to lay a Necessity upon, themselves to pray
at set Times, as before and after Sermon, and before and after Meat; and this
he cannot deny: Or if he should, their Universal Practice would declare him a
Liar. And if they pray at set Times, and that professedly, without Waiting for
the Spirit's Influence, yea, when they are sensible they Want it; do not they
profess to pray without the Spirit? What he says here and elsewhere, that this
was the Opinion of Swenkfeldius and the Familists, is not to the purpose: For
what we believe in this, we do it as being the Truth, and not with respect to
such, of whose Belief we take no notice, so as to make it any Ground for our
Faith. And to show, how Impertinent this Classing us with others is, to render
us odious upon every occasion, I may tell him here once for all; That even as
to this very thing of Prayer he agrees against us with Papists, Socinians,
Pelagians, Episcopalians, Independents, Anabaptists, Lutherans, Arminians,
Antinomians, yea, and with Pagans, Turks and Jews; all which affirm with him,
That Men may and ought to pray at certain Times and upon certain Occasions,
albeit not having any present Motions or Influence of the Spirit of God so to
do.

J. B. pleading for Prayer forgets to Pray for, but not to Rail against such he
accounts his Enemies.
5. What he says here in several Places of Introversion, I refer to what is
said before, to avoid Repetition. It might have been thought, that in this
Chapter of Prayer (and where he urges it so much from the general Command, that
he would have minded) it would have been more suitable to pray for such, as he
may account his Enemies, and even Heretics, than Rail at them; but the
Treating upon this Subject has had no such Inference with him: And therefore he
is sure to keep here his Old Style of Railing; which the Reader may observe
page 452-456-459, 460, 461. He has diverse little Cavils and Quibbles in this
Chapter, which I willingly omit, as not concerning the Weight of the Question;
only to give the Reader a Taste of them, I shall note one or two. Page 455. upon
these Words, sub degustationem, he fancieth; The Quakers hold a State of Prayer
distinct both from Public and Private: But if he had not been very Critical,
and ready to Catch (albeit he omits more weighty things) he had not troubled
himself with this; which is an Error either of the Transcriber or Printer: for
it is in my Copy, ad cibum, meaning the Prayers before and after Meat; and that
the other Word does also signify. The next is his asking, What I mean by
Ejaculations emitted to Man's self? Ejaculations quibbled at by J. B. allowed
in Scripture.
and this (he says) looks like a piece of Quaker- Idolatry. This shows the
Man's eagerness to stretch every thing to make an Accusation; for by this I
intended nothing, but to express such Prayers, as Men make unheard of others.
And if this be a piece of Quakers Idolatry, it is such, as he must account the
Apostle Paul guilty of, as well as I; whole words are 1 Cor. 14. v. 28. (...),
sibi ipsi loquatur, let him speak to himself, as both Arias Montanus and Beza
translate it, as well as the English: And that this is understood of Prayer,
see from verse 24. So the furious Man may see, whither his Malice has driven
him! He forgets not also in this Chapter his old Calumny, and therefore has
it here oftener than once; that As all the rest, so the Prayers of the Quakers,
as well as Preparations thereunto come only from that Light of Nature, as page
455, 456, 457. and hence he accuses me of Pelagianism, A Man can no more Pray
without the Spirit, than he can see without Eyes.
p. 459. for saying; That to Command a Man to pray without the Spirit, is to
command him to see without Eyes, and work without Hands; because Pelagius said,
that whatever God commanded us to do, he gave us sufficient Strenghth to do it.
But if Pelagius said so, he understood it of an Ability without the Spirit of
God; for which the Ancients condemned him: Whereas my very Assertion here is in
as opposite Terms to that, as any thing can be; since I argue, that a Man can
no more pray without the Spirit, than he can see without Eyes. And indeed, all
this Man's Reasoning in this Chapter savors strongly of Pelagianism, where he
pleads throughout for Men's setting about Spiritual duties without the Spirit;
yea page 463. he says, That the Divine Indulgence toward such, as have begun
to pray without the Spirit, and afterward have found it assisting them in
their Prayer, is a strong inducement and encouragement to them: For this agrees
exactly to the Semipelagian principle, Facienti quod in se est, Deus non
denegat gratiam, i. e. God will not deny Grace to such, as do what they can.
And indeed, this allowing Men to perform Spiritual duties without the allowance
of the Spirit, as this Man does, pleading for it, and reckoning the contrary
Absurd, page 453. is Complete Pelagianism; and does clearly import, that Man by
the working of Nature can acquire the Spirit, and can do something in order to
obtaining the Spirit of himself, before he have it: J. B. with Pelagians plead
for a Prayer from Nature's Law and Light.
and thence this Man pleads so much page 451. for the general Use of Prayer
from the Light and Law of Nature: Let him Reconcile this, if he can, with his
other Doctrines, and Clear himself of Pelagianism. And it is so much the more
considerable, that he has fallen into this Pit, of which he so often falsely
accuses me, as also page 461. He asks again, page 460. Why we come to their
places of Worship, if our Conscience be hurt in joining with them? and thence
he concludes, J. B.'s false Accusation why we come to their places of Worship?
It is to do open Contempt. This is but his malicious Conjecture: We come not
there, but in Obedience to the Lord, when moved by his Spirit so to do, to bear
a faithful Testimony against all Superstition and Will Worship. For it is not
pleasant to us to come there, where for the most part we are saluted with
knocks and stones, and other such brutish and Paganish dealings by their
Church Members; which is the fruit of their holy things, and whereunto the
People are often encouraged by their Preachers, who sometimes show an Example
of this themselves: and of whose barbarous Actions even by the
Presbyterian-Preachers there is a Book Extant, entitled, Fighting Priests
falling upon the Innocent with their own hands.
Of Fighting Priests; giving account, how many of them fell upon these Innocent
Servants of the Lord with their own hands: and I my self have seen of the
present Preachers of Scotland do it. As for his flouting at the Quakers, for
laying claim to a Spirit of discerning, so as to distinguish, who pray from the
Spirit, and who not; he does but therein declare himself to be none of Christ's
Sheep, who are said to know his Voice from that of a Stranger. And as for his
saying, That the Quakers judge of this by the Mimical posture of the Body, it
is false; and would agree far rather to his Brethren, whose affected Postures
of Body, as well as their Nonsensical and Absurd Expressions in Prayer have
disgusted many of their Way: of which I could give some eminent Instances, but
that I spare them at present. The Example I gave of their Excluding some from
their Sacrament of the Supper (so called) does not halt, as he affirms, page
462. as to the main: for if the Command to take it, is with presupposition of
Examination; so the Command of praying is with the presupposition of its being
in the Spirit, in which all Worship is now to be, Praying always -- in the
Spirit Ephesians. 6.18. To my showing, in answer to their Objection of Peter his
Commanding Simon Magus to pray, that he says, Repent and Pray; after a mere
Assertion without proof he says; He sees, that with our Quaker a graceless
Person can Repent, but not Pray. To which I answer: If he speak of possibility,
I believe, a graceless Person may both Repent and Pray; but as he cannot Repent
without Grace, so not Pray without the Spirit: but Grace works in all, if not
Resisted; as the Spirit does in all to Prayer, when they have received the
Grace in measure: but that some Measure of Repentance must go before Prayer, A
measure of Repentance goes before Prayer in a sense of Iniquity and desire of
Deliverance.
himself I judge will hardly deny; since the very offering to Pray imports in
the Person applying himself thereunto a sense of his Iniquity, and a desire to
be delivered from it; for which end he approaches to God to demand Pardon, and
help to Amend.

6. Now I come to his 25 th Chapter of Singing Psalms; where I shall not need
to be large. J. B. endeavors to Justify their Custom of Singing David's
Conditions, and their speaking Lies.
I deny not (as he observes) Singing: But to Justify their Custom of singing
David 's Conditions, by which many are made (as I observed in my Apology) to
speak Lies in the presence of God, he objecteth the practice of the Jews; but
their practice in matters of Worship, without a Gospel-precept, is not a Rule
to us. Neither does the Instance given by him of Psalm. 66.6. answer the matter:
for the Jews might very well praise the Lord for the deliverance of their
Forefathers out of Egypt; but that will not allow Drunkards and Impenitent
Persons to fay, They water their Couch with Tears: as by singing Psalms many
do, which is false. As for his saying, They do but praise God, for what he has
done for others; why do they not express it so then? And whereas he asks;
Whether the Spirit inspireth the Meeter in the Song, and the Tone of the
singing? he shows his Folly and Lightness, while he ridiculously supposes,
that Meeter is necessary, or any other Tone, than Nature has given to every
one; of which God by his Spirit makes use as an Instrument, as he does of
other parts and faculties of the Body to the performing of Spiritual duties.
And the like Folly he shows, when he tells, What they do not in Scotland;
since he knows, it was not particularly or only against the things practiced in
Scotland, that I write in that Apology.

SECT. XIII.
Wherein his Twenty Sixth Chapter Of Baptism is Considered.

1. OUR Author to show, how angry and froward he resolves to be in this
Chapter, J. B. a Complete Railer.
makes his first Paragraph a Complete stick of Railing. He begins with telling,
That the Paganish, Antichristian Spirit, which reigns and rages in the
Quakers, manifests a perfect and complete hatred at all the Institutions of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and he ends with this Exclamation, O! what desperate
Renegado's must these Men be? More of this kind may be seen page 472, 473,
474.480, 481. As for what he adds from several Scriptures of Baptism, page 466,
467. what of it relates to the weight of the Question, will be Examined
afterward. He gives us here a Citation out of their larger Catechism, and then
comes at last page 468. n. 4. to Examine, what I say in the matter; where upon
my urging the many Contests among Christians concerning these things called
Sacraments, as one Reason against them, he concludes, Contests about their
Sacraments among Christians (so called.)
I might as well plead against all Christianity, because of the many Debates
about it: and with this Conceit he pleases himself a little; which only
evidenceth his malicious Genius: for I should never have used that as an only
Argument; and did not use it at all, but as having many other Considerable ones
against their Use of these things: and therefore I add, That these things
contended for, are mere Shadows and outward things. Then to cover their making
use of the word Sacrament, which is not to be found in Scripture, he objecteth
my making use of the word Fermentation, and of the Vehicle of God: but I use
not to make use of these words, when I speak Scots or English; but these words,
when Interpreted, are made use of in Scripture: For the Latin fermentum, which
signifies Leaven, Fermentum or Leaven is often used in Scripture.
is often used, even as compared to Spiritual things; as Matthew. 13:31. Luke
13:21. 1 Cor. 5:6, 7, 8. yea, the word Leaven and Leavened is to be found in
Scripture above 30 times: but the word Sacrament never so much as once. And it
is not (as he says) a poor thing to Challenge them for expressing the Chief
Mysteries of their Religion in words, that cannot be found in all the
Scripture; while they affirm it to be the only, adequate Rule of their Faith
and Manners. That we deny the thing truly imported by the Trinity, is false. As
for the word Vehiculum Dei, The like of Vehiculum Dei, a Chariot or Vehicle,
signified by the Hebrew words (...) and (...)
as having a respect to Christ's Body or Flesh and Blood from Heaven, that it
is a Scripture-word, see Cant. 3.9. King Solomon made unto himself a Chariot of
the Wood of Lebanon; and v. 10. Vehiculum ejus purpureum: the Hebrew words for
Chariot and Vehiculum are (...) Appirion and (...) Merkabh or Merkaba, both
which signify a Chariot and Vehicle; and that by Solomon is mystically
understood Christ, of whom Solomon was a Figure or Type, Solomon a figure of
Christ.
none who are spiritually minded can deny; and consequently, that this Chariot
or Vehicle must be mystically and spiritually understood. Nor can it be meant
of Believers, or the Church, because it is said, The midst of it being paved
with love for the Daughters of Jerusalem, i. e. for Believers: so that they are
received by Christ into this Chariot or Vehicle; and therefore not it, but
distinct, as the Contained is distinct from the Containing. But for the further
understanding of these Hebrew words see Buxtorff his Hebrew Lexicon, and the
Book called Apparatus in lib. Sohar. part. 1. p. 144. and 553. And however he
might Cavil upon this Mystical Meaning; yet the word is Scriptural, which their
Barbarism Sacrament is not. And to his saying (in answer to my showing, that by
laying aside this Unscriptural Term, the Contest of the number of the
Sacraments will evanish) that it will Remain, if instead of Sacrament they use
Signs or Seals of the Covenant: This is but his bare Assertion, until he prove
by clear Scripture, that there are only Two Signs or Seals of the Covenant:
which he will find hard; and yet harder, that these two are they. Page 469. n.
5. he denies the Scripture says, There is one only Baptism; instancing the
Baptism of Affliction: But I speak here of the Baptism of Christ in a true and
proper sense; and Ephesians. 4.5. will prove as much, The One Baptism.
That there is one only Baptism, as there is one only God; which is in the next
verse. But before I proceed any further, I must desire the Reader to observe,
What J. S. understands by Baptism of the holy Ghost, which in his Account is
Ceased.
how this Man, speaking of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, understands it only
to relate to the Extraordinary Gift of speaking with Tongues, which the
Apostles had; and not as any thing Common to all true and really Regenerated
Christians: so that he concludes, the Baptism with the Spirit and with Fire now
to be Ceased. And upon this his supposition he builds page 471-473, 474-478.
without so much as offering to prove it. And to this he adds a gross Lie upon
me, page 472. That I will have none to be Baptized in the Spirit, but such as
are endued with these Extraordinary Gifts; which I never said, nor believed:
and therefore this his false supposition I deny; and consequently till next
time, that he take leisure to prove it, all that he builds thereupon, is merely
precarious, and needs no further Answer. John the Baptist speaking of the
Baptism of Christ in general, as Contradistinct from his, says; He that comes
after me, shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire: which could not
have been the mark of Distinction, if this had only been Restricted, to what
the Apostles Received the day of Pentecost; and not of the Baptism, wherewith
Christ baptizeth all his Children. But to rectify the Mistake he supposes I am
in, J. B.'s One Baptism not the True One.
concerning the One Baptism, he tells me; The One Baptism comprehends both
the outward Element, and the thing Represented and Sealed thereby: but the
Reasons he gives for this, are so weak, that thereby I am Confirmed, I am not
in a Mistake. I might say (says he) there were two Circumcisions, because
Circumcision is called Circumcision of the heart: And what then? In that sense
there were Two, so long as the Outward continued, to wit, the Outward and the
Inward; that of the Flesh, and that of the Heart: and if he can Answer this no
better, than by smiling at it, we must pity the levity of his Spirit; but not
be moved by the weight of such airy Arguments. What he adds of the Object of
Faith being called Faith, as also the profession, albeit the Apostle say, there
is One Faith, is not to the purpose; since these are included in the One true
Faith the Apostle speaks of: but for him to fay, That the Baptism of Water is
included in the One Baptism, spoken of there by the Apostle, is only to beg the
question; And yet all he does, is strongly to Affirm this, without proof. So
that all that he says in Answer to me, being built upon this and such like
Mistakes, needed in strictness no more Reply, as his Answer to my Argument page
471. shows; where he supposes Two Baptisms, one administered by Men, another
administered by Christ himself by his Spirit, and not by Men: That Water Baptism
cannot be the Baptism of Christ.
But he should have proved this, ere he had used it as a distinction; and till
he do so, my Argument, to wit, That since such as were Baptized with Water,
were not therefore baptized with the baptism of Christ, therefore Water Baptism
cannot be the Baptism of Christ; will stand for all his blowing. I desire the
Reader take notice here of his Insinuation, as if I had borrowed this Argument
from Socinus; which he has over and over again afterward, as to others,
speaking expressly page 433. of my Stealing Arguments from Socinus: But to show
him, how unhappy he is in being so apt to speak Untruth, he may understand,
that I never read three Lines of Socinus's Writings hitherto; nor knew, what
Arguments he used, till now he Informs me, in case his Information be true.
Instead of Answer, to what I urge from 1 Pet. 3.21. in my Apology, he gives a
Preaching made up of mere Assertions built on the former Mistakes, and Railing;
his Answer is built upon the supposing, That Water Baptism goes to the making
up of Christ's Baptism, which is now to Continue; which yet remains for him to
prove: And on the other hand supposing, That I affirm, that by the Answer of a
good Conscience there mentioned, is to be understood the Extraordinary Gifts of
the Spirit: which is false. And upon the same two Mistakes he grounds his
Answer page 473. N. 8. to what I urge from Gal. 3.27. and Col. 2.12. as a
supplement, That the putting on of Christ there mentioned by the Apostle, may
be understood of putting on Christ by profession, though not in Truth and
reality; which he also has page 438: for which Exposition I shall expect his
Proof next time, if he have any.

2. Page 474. He proceeds upon the same unproved Supposition, That
Water Baptism was Instituted by Christ; and here he denies, J. B.'s
supposition, that Water Baptism was Instituted by Christ, Invalidated.
that John's Baptism was a Figure. But since John's Baptism was a washing with
Water, and that the Apostle ascribes the putting on Christ to the Baptism of
Christ, as Washing with Water typifieth or signifies the Washing of
Regeneration; so does John's Baptism that of Christ. He concludes this
Paragraph with a silly Quibble, where, in Answer to my urging John's Words,
saying, I must decrease, and he must increase, he adds; J. B.'s poor Shift,
that by John's Decrease is not meant his Baptism, etc.
As if John and Baptism with Water were all one; and Christ one and the same
with the Baptism of the Holy Ghost: Poor Man! he has been sore pinched, when he
betook himself to this silly Shift. Will he say, this is to be understood of
John's and Christ's Persons, and not of their Ministry? Then we must suppose,
John grew less and decrepit as to his Person ever after this; and Christ grew
bigger and taller: Let him remember to prove this, when he writes next. He goes
on page 475. upon his old Mistake, supposing, That Water Baptism was instituted
by Christ, and that he gave Command to his Disciples so to Baptize; and that
Matt. 28.19. is to be understood of Water Baptism; all which is merely to beg
the Question. He says, That to say, John's Baptism is not Pure and Spiritual,
or that it is a Legal Rite, is to Condemn John, Christ and his Apostles;
because God gave John an express Command for it: And what then? The Legal Rites
had a Command, as well as John's Baptism.
God Commanded the Legal Rites also; that did not hinder them from being such,
to say, he needed not such a Command: If it had of the Nature of the Legal
Rites, is but a presumptuous quarrelling with God, seeing on all Hands it is
granted, he Commanded it; and a mere affirming, it is not such, in stead of
proving of it. As for the Apostle his making honorable mention of Baptism in
his Epistles, and of its Ends, which he points in several Scriptures; all which
is granted: But it does not thence follow, that all this is to be understood of
Water Baptism; and while that still remains the thing in debate, he can prove
nothing from these Scriptures. But it is no wonder he thus forgets himself here
as to me; since in the following Words he quarrelleth with the Apostle Paul,
saying in Answer to his Words, 1 Cor. 1. v. 17. That he was not sent to
Baptize. J. B. quarrelleth with the Apostle.
If Paul had not been sent to Baptize, why would he have done it? I think it
needless to me to answer the Absurdity he would here fix upon the Apostle;
since it suffices me, and I hope, will other good Christians, that the Apostle
says positively, That he was not sent to Baptize: And for his Baptizing of
some, we will suppose he had a Reason, though not from his Commission, which he
expressly denies; whatever John Brown may Brawl to the Contrary. As for his
saying, That it seems then, the other Apostles had another Commission, than
Paul had, It is built upon the Supposition, that they had a Commission to
Baptize with Water: which remains for him yet to prove. And not to contend with
him (for brevity's sake) about that of Hosea 6.6. whether [ not] there be only
to be understood of less principally; yet though it were, it would not follow,
it should be so understood here also: I show him by an Example 1 Cor. 2.5. what
wild Work such an Interpretation would make, if ordinarily applied; but he, it
seems, judged it most convenient not to take notice of it in this his Examen,
albeit in Reason he should have done it, if he would give a Complete Answer:
For he must either prove [ not] always to be understood of less principally: or
otherwise he must bring particular Reasons, why it should be so here, and not,
that it sometimes is so understood: For such a Particular will not infer the
Consequence.

Christ submitting to Water Baptism proves not its Continuance.
3. The Reason he gives of Chrift's submitting to Water Baptism, to prove it
now to Continue, is his saying; For thus it becomes us to fulfill all
Righteousness: But may not that be applied also to Circumcision? and yet its
Continuance will not thence follow. John's receiving a Divine Command to
Baptize, shows, there was a Divine Institution for it under the Law; because
the Law was not as yet abrogated, nor the Legal Ministration accomplished, till
Christ was offered up: As for Christ his Consecrating it in his own Person; the
like may be also said of Circumcision. I come now to see what he says n. 14.
to prove Matthew. 28.19. to be understood of Water Baptism. J. B.'s further
Reasons for its Continuance Examined.
And first, after a little Railing he says, This was but an Enlargement of
their former Commission, as to the Object; And before this we heard of their
Baptizing with Water, with Christ's Warrant and Authority, etc. Answ. We have
heard him say so indeed; but must wait, until he prove, ere we be so forward as
to believe it. And next, what if it were all granted? We heard before of the
Disciples preparing and Eating the Passover with Christ's Warrant and
Authority; will it thence follow, that that practice is still to Continue in
the Church? (2.) Because it is joined here with Discipling; and Baptizing was
the way of making Disciples among the Jews: So was Circumcision, and that no
less constantly and necessary; will it therefore follow, that Circumcision is
to Continue? (3.) He says, Their Constant After-practice declares this to be
the meaning of the Command: But the Apostle Paul's Practice and Testimony
declares this to be false* (4.) He says; This is the proper Import of the
word: But I deny it is so in Scripture; since we see no necessity in most of
the places of Scripture to understand the Word of Water Baptism: And when he
shows the Necessity, he may be answered; and the Scriptures so frequently using
it, where Water upon all hands is confessed not to be understood, prove this to
be True. And as for his saying, That it cannot be understood here of Baptism
with the Spirit, it falls to the Ground; because only built upon the
Supposition, that that is only understood of Extraordinary Gifts. He urges
Christ's Saying, Luke 12.50. I have a Baptism to be Baptized with; and how am I
straightened, till it be accomplished? As if this were to be called Christ's own
Baptism; and so I shall grant it, with a respect to his Personal Sufferings:
But when I speak of Christ's own Baptism, I speak of that which is his, as
being instituted by him for others; and that Contradistinct from John's. Page
479. he says; The Words of Baptizing into the Name, (...), J. B's false Gloss
upon the Words (...).
is only to be understood of a dedicating to God, and not a being Baptized into
the Power and Virtue: But this is his own Assertion. Neither does Paul's saying
1 Cor. 1.13. Were ye Baptized in the Name of Paul? make it clear at all: For
making it unto Paul, will render the Apostle's Argument more forcible, to show
the Corinthians their Folly, in saying, they were of Paul, or other Men, into
whose Power or Virtue it was absurd to say, they were Baptized; as must be said
of all true Christians, being baptized into the Name of Christ. That I Condemn
their manner of Baptizing, is true; but that I do it, because of their doing it
in the Name of the Father, is his false and foolish Conjecture: And therefore
his troubling himself to prove that, is to no purpose. For his saying, That if
Matthew. 28.19. be not understood of Water Baptism, it would make a Tautology; I
answered that ( n. 8.) in my Apology of Baptism; and here he only repeats the
Objection, without taking notice of my Answer: Which shows, how defective his
Examen is. He goes on page 480. upon the Supposition, That the Apostle's
Baptizing with Water was not by mere permission; The Apostles baptizing with
Water proves it not Evangelical.
and yet the Apostle's Commanding the Gentiles to Abstain for a time from
things strangled, and from Blood, which was a Jewish Rite, shows, their Using
Baptism with Water does not prove it Evangelical. He confesses here, They did
not fully at first comply with their Commission; and he must also say, they did
not understand it, though he would here wave it: And because he knows not well,
what to say; he falls to Rail, saying; He sees, what Quakers cannot do with
Reason, they must do with Confident and bold Lies: But the Reason he gives of
all this Accusation (so strange Confidence) is my saying, That the Chief of
Christ's Disciples had been John's, adding; Will he tell us, who these Chief
were? Yes I will, seeing he is so ignorant: Joh. 1.35, 37. where he may see,
Two of John's Disciples followed Christ, one of which is, expressly mentioned to
be Andrew the Apostle; Some of Christ's Disciples had been John's.
and it is there clearly enough imported, that Peter was another: And such may
without Absurdity be accounted among the Chief of Christ's Disciples. Page 481.
He most falsely says, That I Condemn Peter and all the Apostles for resting
satisfied, with what he had done: His saying here, That they do not urge their
Baptism from Peter 's Baptizing Cornelius, shows, he sees a Necessity of not
laying great Stress upon that: But for his adding; That Jesus Christ has
commanded, he does but say, and not prove it. He says, That Gal. 2.12. will
not prove, that Peter constrained the Gentiles to be Circumcised: But verse 14.
to which my words alluded, says expressly, -- Why Compellest thou the Gentiles
to live, as do the Jews? and sure, that was to be Circumcised. For his
malicious, false Asseveration, That we with the Jews design to destroy
Christianity; it needs no Reply: That there were Baptisms among the Jews, is
clear from Heb. 6.2. albeit Paulus Riccius were not alleged to prove it, nor
any Debate used about the Antiquity of the Jews Writings; but that some of them
wrote before the year 200, Josephus's History is an Example. He confesses, The
Etymology of the Word infers Dipping; and albeit we deny not that, yet this
shows, with how little Reason he urges that Etymology upon us: If the Reader
will but seriously read, what I have written in my Apology of Baptism, he will
easily find, how slender his Answer is, albeit I had not written this Reply.

SECT. XIV.
Wherein his Twenty Seventh Chapter, Entitled, Of the Lord's Supper, is
Considered.

1. THE Reader before this time has had so much Opportunity to Discern the
Temper of this Man's Spirit, that he need not wonder to find him begin this
Chapter of the Lord's Supper, with an Heap of Railing; accounting us such, as
Overturn Christianity, and Introduce Paganism, yea, as are posting toward it.
And then having given a large accout, page 48, 484. of their Confession of
Faith and larger Catechism, J. B's. good Experiences of this Suffer prove not
its Continuance.
page 485. he comes to tell the Good Experiences many have had by their Use of
this Supper; which to make strong in his Conceit, he uses a Continued Style of
Railing against us, as Men only led by our own Imaginations, and given up to
the working of the Prince of Darkness: And thus he goes on. But such
Experience, albeit granted, will not prove the Necessity of its Continuance:
for the Assembly of Divines (so called) in their Preface to the Directory, do
speak of the good, which was Experienced by the Liturgy of the Church of
England, and of the Religious Intentions of the Compilers of it; while yet they
are rejecting and abolishing it, as that which proved an Offense to the godly,
and occasioned much Mischief: Therefore that is no Argument. Page 586. N. 5. He
comes to Examine, what I say in the Matter: and then after a Reference to his
Tenth Chapter, he has his Old Calumny, That the Celestial Seed, J. B's Railing
against the Light.
and Spiritual Substance is nothing, but the dim Light of Nature; he falls
into a new Fit of Railing, which holds him to the end of this Paragraph;
terming us such as are Judicially blinded and deluded, acted and driven by the
Devil into a Profane and Paganish Contradiction to the Ways of Grace. And with
the like Shame, and upon the same old Supposition of our Exalting the Light of
Nature (which is most False) he fills his N. 6. and also his 7. p. 488. For
what he says there of the Absurdity of God's Revealing himself to Heathens, or
such as were Idolaters, I have spoken before, writing upon that Subject. And
here he Concludes, That my Asserting of a Spiritual Body and Flesh of Christ,
at one Blow is a denying the Christ of God, and overturning Christianity: But
instead of proving it, he proposes some Questions; Had Christ two Bodies? Yes:
and let him deny it, if he dare, without contradicting the Scripture. Christ's
Flesh which came down from Heaven, was not the Flesh he took from the Virgin
Mary.
Joh. 6.58. Christ speaks of his Flesh, which came down from Heaven: but this
was not the Flesh he took from the Virgin Mary; for that came not down from
Heaven: but he had a Spiritual Body, in which his Soul Existed long before he
took Flesh of the Virgin; and we will see, how John Brown proves this to be an
Error, in the Refutation that is promised in his Name of G. K's Book. And for
the rest of his Conjectures, such as, We have two such Bodies too, is but a
Fiction of his own Brain: We call no Body of Christ Carnal; but believe, That
that Body, which Christ took of the Virgin, which was of the Seed of Abraham
and David, in which Christ walked upon the Earth, and was Crucified, did Arise
the Third Day, was glorified, and remains in Heaven; wherein the Center of
his most glorious Soul remains for Ever: And let him show, if he can, how
this is a denying of the Christ of God, or overturning of Christianity? He
proceeds page 489. at a most violent strain of Railing, upon the Supposition
of his Old Calumny; and here, that it may be complete, J. B. makes a Preaching
to the Devil.
he makes a preaching to the Devil: For which Blasphemous Abuse I wish
heartily, the LORD forgive him! that these Devils, to whom he preaches, be not
permitted to give him his Reward for his Sermon. But seeing, he blusheth not to
do this in Print, I shall not think the many gross Abuses, I have heard to have
been uttered by Presbyterian Preachers, so Incredible, as I have been apt to
do; especially that, which I have been informed of of late of one, A
Presbyterian Preacher Praying to the Devil to take the Bishops and Curates, to
him, that they might be quit of them.
who at a Conventicle in the South near Legerwood, not far from Lauther, made a
Digression in his Prayer to the Devil, saying; O Devil! thou have troubled us
much with the Bishops and Curates; We beseech thee, Devil, take them to thee,
and make us quit of them! This Prayer suits with John Brown's preaching: And
indeed, the Presbyterians will need a New Directory; for the Old one, by which
they are instructed to preach to Men, and pray to God, will not serve for this
New Ministry, by which they begin to Preach and Pray to Devils. And of the like
Strain is his saying, after much Railing, page 490. That if the Quaker write
Comments on Paul's Epistles, it must be of Paulus Paganizans: This sort of
Stuff is enough to give all sober Christians a Disgust of this Man's Writings.
In this page, after some Quibbles about Relation, he comes page 491. N. 11. to
affirm, That there may be a Relation, which is neither from the Nature of the
thing, nor from some Divine Precept; such as a Promise and Divine Institution.
But is not a Divine Institution a Divine Precept? And whereas he boasts here,
That my whole Discourse falls, as being built upon a Mistake; the Reader may
see, the Mistake is his own, and not mine; and then judge of his Discourse,
that is built thereon: as also how Airy, Vain and Ostentive he is in saying,
What will he now do? The Declaring of the Lord's Death has no necessary
relation with partaking of Christ's Body and Blood.
His Light has confounded him, so as he knows not what he says: Is this
Language becoming a Gospel-Minister? That what Luke says, does not import a
perpetual, but temporary Command, will after appear: Of what Paul says, 1 Cor.
10. will be spoken hereafter. To my showing, that 1 Cor. 11.26. Paul expreseth
the End of this Ceremony to be a declaring of the Lord's Death; which has no
necessary Relation with partaking of Christ's Body and Blood: he answers,
That a declaration of Christ's Death is a comprehensive End, etc. And what
then? That proves not the Necessary Relation; nor yet what he adds in this
Paragraph: therefore I entreat him, next time to speak to the purpose. Page
492. n. 12. He Raileth at me, as perverting, the Apostle's words; but gives no
Reason, unless his own mere Affirmation and Queries be esteemed sufficient. J.
B.'s proofless Proofs for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (so called.)
He asks, What signified Christ's blessing of the Bread, breaking, giving it
to his Disciples, desiring them to eat? Answ. Christ blessed the Bread, brake
it, and gave it to his Disciples to eat, and they to others; where themselves
confess no such Mystery or Sacrament, as they would have here, is deducible:
see Matthew. 14: v. 19. Mark. 6.41. He insinuates, I speak falsely in saying,
there is no mention of this Ceremony 1 Cor. 10.16. but is not so Charitable as
to point to me, where? if there be any such thing. As for his mere Affirmations
and Distinctions here about the Bread, I will wait the next time to have them
proved by Scripture; then will judge them worth the Considering. I have shown
in my Apology, that the Corinthians being in the Use of this Ceremony, and the
Apostles rectifying the Abuse they were in, in the Use of it, nor yet its
having been done upon a Religious Account, or in a general respect to the
participiation of the Body and Blood of Christ; will not prove the Necessity of
its being now to be performed: and therefore what he says page 493. n. 14.
evanisheth. And as for his adding here, That then it was an Act of Will Worship
and Superstition, and that I conclude, the Apostle encouraged such a thing:
whence he takes occasion to Rail at me, as blasphemousty imputing
Unfaithfulness to the Apostle, and to the Spirit of God that acted him; I
answer: What is done by permission for a time, is not Will Worship and
Superstition; and he confesses, he argues not from the Corinthians practice:
and for his Railing, the ground of it being false, it needs no Answer. As for
his denying, the Jews had such a Custom at the time of their Passover; his mere
Negation is not sufficient to Elide the Testimony of far more Credible Authors,
than he himself in this matter: and as for the words of Luke, Do this in
Remembrance of me, Do this in Remembrance, is no perpetual Obligation.
It does not infer perpetual Obligation upon the Church in all Ages. He Raileth
at this, but without a reason, page 495. instancing the Apostle's 1 Cor. 24:25.
But I told him before, that the Apostle gives here an account of matter of
fact; which infers not a Command: and in this page the Man is miserably pinched
to show, how the washing of one another Feet, albeit commanded with as great
Solemnity, does not oblige as much now: but his Conjectures prove nothing.
What! albeit it was a Custom in the hot Countries, and that it was a sign of
Christ's Humility; how does all that Abrogate the express Command to do it? Let
him show an Exemption from this from plain Scripture: The Washing of Feet
commanded with as great Solemnity yet Ceased.
for his mere Assertions have but small weight; and by which I am not like, nor
yet any Man of reason, that is not resolved to set up John Brown as a Pope, to
believe all he says from his bare words, to conclude the differences. He
thinks page 496. That their not keeping exactly to the Method used by Christ in
this thing, signifies nothing; Professors not keeping to the Method Christ
used in the Supper.
but he should prove by Scripture, how they are safe in practicing one part,
and not the other? and by what Rule he accounts the one part Circumstances, and
not the other? for as to the matter of the thing he will confess, there is
nothing in it, but by reason of Christ's Command and practice; so that Affects
all parts alike: and indeed, he gives a very summar Answer, to what I urge as
to this, as the Rader by comparing his N. 17. with N. 6. of my Apology upon
this subject, may observe. It passes my mean Capacity to see any solid Reason
given by him page 497 n. l8. Why Act. 2.42. should be understood of other than
their Common Eating? unless this may be esteemed one, That to say so, is a mere
groundless Fancy; like many of the Quakers bold Notions. To prove Act. 20.7. to
be understood of Sacramental Eating, he says; It required Paul 's Preaching:
but for this we must wait his proof. That Paul preached not upon other
occasions, because not mentioned, is but his mere Conjecture; and his Inference
from this being the Christian Sabbath, is but a silly begging of the question.

2. Page 498. n. 20. He stateth my words, showing; How the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.
says; When ye come together, J. B. forgets to Answer.
this is not to eat the Lord's Supper; and not, that it was not to Eat aright:
and I expected his Answer to this to follow, but in vain; for I found not any:
perhaps he has forgotten it; and therefore I desire, he may remember it next.
Also here instead of giving a Reason, to prove the Apostle gives here a
Command, and not simply a Relation of the matter of fact; he returns Railing:
I Entreat him next to lay-aside his Railing, and give a Reason. That the
Corinthians were Babes in Christ, and some of them even further advanced, I
acknowledge; yet that will not prove, that some things might be Indulged to
them, which is not needful to us now: The Christians, that had been Jews, were
also Babes in Christ, and even more; such as the Apostle James, who desired
Paul to purify himself in the Temple: and yet we are not thence obliged to
Imitate such practices. Paul purifying himself in the Temple, Christians are
not thence obliged to Imitate such Practices.
Whether the Syriack Version mentioned by me, make not to my purpose, I leave
to the Reader's Judgment; my Using it will not infer my Acknowledging that
Version in all things to be Authentic, more than his own Using it: And albeit
I think, it might have been sufficient to have given the words upon the Credit
of the Interpretation in the Poly-glotta; yet to show him, how apt he is to
fall into false Conjectures, he may know, I did it not: and if he could hence,
as well as from several other Occasions heretofore observed, learn not to lay
so much Stress upon, and so forwardly Vent his own Conjectures, he would do
himself a Courtesy. Page 409. n. 21. He can easily turn-by the Apostle's
express Command, Act. 15.29. as being a part of the Ceremonial Law: but I hope
he will acknowledge, that the Obligation upon the Christians (especially such
as had not been Jews) to observe it, was not its being a part of the Ceremonial
Law; but its being now a Command of the Apostles, or rather of the Spirit of
God, to whom it seemed good so to Command: And he should show next time, how
this is more Abrogated in the Epistles of Paul, than the other? and
particularly, how that Romans 14.17. does touch the one more, than the other? And
this Command Act. 15:19. being after the pouring-down of the Spirit, and
Universal Preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, has as much of a
Gospel-Institution, as any thing Commanded before by Christ can have; if not,
let him give us a Reason from Scripture: till then, his mere Assertions page
500. will not do the business. To my showing, That this is not to distinguish
the Gospel from the Law, he thinks it enough to say; This is a Socinian
Argument formerly spoken to: And he is very Careful not to weary the Reader
with Repeitions; I wish, he had minded this all along. J. B.'s Proof of their
Authority to Administrate this Sacrament Invisible.
He also refers the proof of their Authority to Administrate this Sacrament
to his 17 th Chapter: but they must be very Clear-sighted, that can observe any
such thing there. And to conclude with some show of Victory, he in a most
ostentive way says; That I have fought, until I can stand no longer; and
finding my self weak, and unable to fight any more, I come to something like a
Parley, by saying [Such as out of Conscience will perform this Ceremony, as the
first Christians did, might be Indulged in it] but he Concludes; These things
I Affirm being proved, none can be supposed to do it out of Conscience: But
some may not have such a Clear Sight of it; and thence may stick in these
things. He dispatcheth, what more I say as to this, as being A bundle of
groundless Whimsies without Truth, Sense or Consistency: But indeed I must say,
The weak Proofs J. B. brings to Vindicate the great Sacraments of their
Religion.
I wonder to see the Man so Weak upon this Theme, as well as the former of
Baptism; considering, they are the great Sacraments of their Religion: but it
seems, his Rage in these has Robbed him of his Reason. I will Entreat the
Reader seriously to peruse, what I have written upon both these in my Apology;
that Comparing it with his, he may easily perceive (albeit this Reply had not
been Written) how Weak all is, the Man brings for the Proof of these things.

SECT. XV.
Wherein his Twenty Eighth Chapter Of Liberty of Conscience is Considered.

1. AS he ended his last Chapter with Railing, so he begins this, comparing the
Quakers to Thieves and Robbers, adding; That their being conscious to
themselves of the Evil of their Ways (which after he has a little Amplified in
as black a manner as he can, he Concludes, that) they thought it best for their
own safety to add this to the rest of their Errors, that Magistrates have no
lawful power over them: In which (besides his Railing) are two gross Lies.
First, That the Quakers are conscious of their own Evil Ways; J. B.'s Malicious
Assertion against our Acknowledging the Magistrates to have a Lawful Power over
us.
and that moves them to Assert Liberty of Conscience: which being a gross
Falsehood, has no bottom, but his own malicious Conjecture; where he
presumptuously presumes to Judge of other Men's hearts. The second is: That the
Quakers say, The Magistrate has no lawful Power over them; A most gross Lie;
The Contrary whereof is expressly Asserted in the These in these words; Provided
always, that no Man under the pretense of Conscience prejudice his Neighbor in
his Life or Estate, or do any thing destructive of, The Lawfulness and Justice
of Magistracy Asserted by us.
or inconsistent with Humane Society; in which case the Law is for the
Transgressor: and Justice is to be Administered upon all, without respect of
Persons. Who will but open their Eyes, may see here the Man so desperately
Resolved to Calumniate, that he neither seems to Regard his Conscience toward
God, nor his Reputation among Men; that he may fulfill his Envy in this
particular: but such gross Abuses will not hurt, but help the Quakers. Yea, in
the very next Page he takes notice, That I grant to the Magistrate only
Liberty to judge in matters touching the Life and Goods of others, etc. So here
is some lawful power. As for the malicious Insinuation that follows, it needs
no other Refutation with Men of Sobriety, but to Repeat it, to wit; But
probably not of Quakers, for they are perfect, and so cannot do wrong: Is not
this solidly, and learnedly and Christianly argued, Reader? Think thou, that
to say, That this Restriction is destroyed; because Men may pretend Conscience
in wronging their Neighbors as some have done in committing Villainies, says
nothing, since the Proposition expressly allows the Magistrate to punish Acts,
that are materially injurious to Civil Society, albeit Conscience be pretended?
After (according to his usual manner) he has given us a large Citation out of
the Confession of Faith, and some Quibbles, about the word Conscience (which,
as not directly concerned in this Debate, for brevity's sake I omit.) Secondly,
he comes page 504. n. 5. to say; That I most perversely state the question, in
saying, The Magistate has not power to Compel Men against their Consciences in
matters of Region (and why? J. B. Asserts, that for Magistrates to force an
Outward Conformity is not a Compelling Men contrary to their Consciences.
) Because I distinguish not betwixt Elicit and Imperate Acts of Conscience;
that is (as himself explains) Inward and Outward: for as to the firts, he
confesses, The Magistrate is not to Compel Men, so as to hinder-them to think
judge, understand and conclude in their mind as they will; but only in
speaking, writing and open professing, which are visible and audible: yea he
thinks, the Magistrates Power does not only extend on this side to Prohibition;
but that he may also force them to Hear, and to the Use of Public Means, that
is in plain terms, to an Outward Conformity: and yet he says, This is no Force
upon Conscience. Well! then Popish Magistrates according to him used no Force
upon the Consciences of Protestants, in forcing them to hear Mass; nor yet the
Pagans upon Christians, in forcing them to go to Idol-worships: and to come
near home, the present Magistrates in Scotland use no Force upon the
Consciences of his Brethren, the Presbyterians in the West-country, in
Constraining them to go to hear the Bishops Curates (as they term them) where
they cannot pretend, there is any thing of Idolatry. As for his distinction of
the Magistrates having Power of Outward, but not Inward Acts, it were enough
for me to Reject it, as not being proved by him to be founded on Scripture; as
indeed it is most deceitful. For if the Magistrate Restrain me from doing that
Outward Action either of Confessing to Truth, or Denying Error; Abstaining from
Idolatry or False Worship, and practicing the True, which my Inward Persuasion
convinces me of; he Incroacheth upon, and takes upon him to Rule over my
Inward Persuasion, as well as the Outward, Christ requires an outtoward
Confession.
which follows naturally from the Inward: And without doing whereof, my Inward
could add nothing to me save Condemnation, seeing Christ requires an Outward
Confession. And if the Magistrates Power as to Outward Acts even in Matters of
Religion, be limited, then he of right may Decide and Judge of all outward
Matters relating to Religion; which John Brown may remember his Brethren have
strongly denied, reserving that only for the Kirk. For to say (as he adds,)
That the Magistrate has Power to punish Heretics, but not the Orthodox, is (as
I observed) miserably to beg the Question; since never any Magistrate was so
mad, as to persecute Truth, as Truth; but still under the Notion of Error. The
sum of what he says further upon this Matter, page 505-507, 508, 509. in
answer to me, resolves in these two Objections,

3. First; That my Arguments do no less take away the Magistrates Power in
Civils.

Secondly; That by the same Arguments may be denied and taken away all
Church Censures, which I grant; and in so doing contradict my self, or must
answer my own Arguments.

For proof of the First he tells; That many Magistrates have been or may be
incapable to judge in Civil Matters, as well as Religion; as also have done
Injustice in their Judgment. Answ. True: but all this will no ways infer his
Conclusion; The being of the Civil Magistrate is to judge of Civil, not
Religious Matters
because they still had that, which was needful to the being of Magistracy,
that is, being duly Constitute (for of Usurpers we do not here speak) however
they may want these Qualities, which might more accomplish them in their
Employment; or that they may Err in the Administration of it. But Christianity,
and consequently to judge in Matters of Religion, does not so much as pertain
to the Esse or being of a Magistrate: For if it did, no Man could ever have
been, or yet could be a true Magistrate, or ought to be so owned, unless a
Christian; which I suppose John Brown will not adventure to affirm; or if he
do, he will manifestly Contradict the Doctrine, as well as Practice of Christ
and his Apostles, who preached Subjection, and were themselves Subject to such
Magistrates, as were Enemies to Christianity. If then a Magistrate may be truly
a Magistrate, and ought by Christians to be acknowledged and submitted to as
such, who is not a Christian; to deny to Magistrates that Power of Judgment,
which they can only have as being Christians, will not necessarily take away
any of their Power, as Magistrates: For Christian Subjects, especally being
private Persons, may and ought to submit and obey their lawful Magistrates,
albeit committing Errors in the Government, and commanding things hurtful to
the State; and if they do other ways, may be justly punished, where the Nature
of the Government gives them not Allowance so to do. Magistrates Commiting
Errors in Government.
But if the Magistrate shall Command any thing contrary to the Law of God, or
Impose in Matters of Conscience contrary to Truth, J. B. will with me confess
(unless he Condemn himself) that every private Christian may, without being
justly accused of Contempt, refuse to Obey: Magistrates Commands ought not to
be contrary to the Law of God, nor forcing Conscience.
As many of John Brown's Friends do in not going to the Parish-Kirks, (where
the same Faith and Doctrine they hold, is preached) Contrary to Acts of
Parliament: For he has not proved, That a Magistrate by being a Christian
acquires more Power, than he had before, or is more a Magistrate; though he may
be a better. For albeit, as he observes, Fathers be desired to Instruct their
Children, which Pagan-Fathers cannot do; yet they are not more Fathers than
before, nor have more Authority or Power over their Children to force them,
than before: So a Magistrate being a Christian, may Instruct, Countenance and
Advance Christianity by the Advantage of his Place; but acquires no more Power
thereby, to force his People upon that account: J. B. if he judge so, will do
well to prove it by Scripture.

4. The Reason of his Second Objection is; Because a Church may Err in their
Judgment, being defective (as he supposed the Magistrate in the former
Objection) and so may Condemn Truth for Error: But how Weak this is, is very
apparent. For if he can show us a Church having the True Being of a Church,
which ought to be acknowledged and submitted to by Christians as such, which
yet is wholly a Stranger to, yea, an Enemy and Persecutor of Christianity (as I
did him in the case of Magistracy) he will say something; but other ways
nothing at all. Next: The Censure of a Church (however he seems to judge
otherwise) cannot be called forcing of Conscience in the Sense I grant it,
Church Censure is not a forcing the Conscience.
which is only for to deny the Persons Censured their Spiritual Fellowship;
since he himself by his differing from them breaks it off (as in my Book,
Entitled, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. written concerning
Church Government, I have at large shown.) And if the difference be such, as
the Church judges in Conscience, they cannot have Spiritual Communion with one
so principled; it were in him a forcing of their Conscience to urge it upon
them: For since he takes the Liberty out of Conscience (as he judges) to
differ from all his Brethren, it were a most unreasonable thing in such a one
to deny them the Liberty (being persuaded in their Conscience they ought) to
Withdraw from him; seeing, the Band of their Unity, which at least in part was
an Agreement in Doctrine, is so far by him broken: But as he does not fall upon
them to Beat, Imprison or Kill them; neither ought they to do so to him.

As for his Answer, That they are not for propagating Christianity by Force, or
that the Ministers should use Fire and Sword, page 508. It is the same
Deceitful Return, that the Pope and the Jesuits (his Janissaries) give upon the
like occasion, (with whom the Presbyters in most things of this Nature do most
unanimously Agree) who it is said, after they have judged any one Guilty of
Heresy, deliver him over to the Magistrate; because (alas! merciful and
tenderhearted Men! as is usually spoken by Contraries) They will not meddle
with Blood: But how would they Thunder the Magistrate, if he did not proceed to
Execution! The same way do the Presbyters: For we know, Presbyters with their
Church-Censure no less Bloody and Cruel, than the Popish Inquisitors.
what naturally follows upon the Church-Censure, or Disobedience to their
Orders; as by many Examples during the Reign of Presbytery in Scotland might be
proved; and which I may instance, if further provoked thereto: By which it
shall appear, that they are no less BLOODY and CRVEL, than the Popish
Inquisitors; and that both the POPE and the PRESBYTERS, assuming the Power of
Judgment to themselves, leave nothing to the Magistrate, but the dishonorable
Office of being their Executioner, or in plain Scots, Hangman: while both most
deceitfully wipe their Mouths, as if they were Innocent of the Bloodshed
procured by them.

5. In stead of giving any direct Reply to my Answer to their 0bjection drawn
from Deuteronomy. 13. where false Prophets and Idolaters are Ordained to be Killed; he
seeks maliciously to infer, That I deny all Authority of the Old Testament:
Which is a horrid Calumny. But since there are many things Commanded there,
Many things Commanded in the Old T. are not binding upon us now.
which himself will acknowledge are not binding upon us now; what shall be the
Rule, whereby we shall Judge, what we are now Tied to, and what not, unless as
the same is Ratified, or again Commanded by Christ in the New? And for Clearing
of this, let him tell me, if he can, What is incumbent upon us now from the Old
Testament, which has no Precept or Authority in the New? But further, aster he
has manifestly wrested the Place, to Evite what I urge from Deuteronomy. 5.9. (as the
Reader by comparing it may judge) at last he Confesses to it; only alleges,
It was a Circumstance: But feeing, this Circumstance was Commanded, as well as
the rest; he should show, where the one is Repealed, and not the other? And how
it comes to pass, that it should be Duty to obey the one part of the Command,
and yet Murder to obey the other? Or (if he will, the Circumstances commanded
Conjunctly with it, as I hope he will Confess it should be) for any now to kill
their Brother or Sister as an Heretic or Blasphemer, without bringing them to
a Judge? He has a quick way of answering, what I say page 323, 324. in
alleging, That it is not to the purpose; as also what I say page 328, 329. in
answering it by two or three Lines of Railing, page 513. But me thinks, since
he gives his Reader as a Reason of his prolixity, That he left nothing said by
the Quakers unanswered; It is strange, he jumps so quietly over that place,
Presbyterians and Jesuits pretending Subjection, Tyrannize over Magistrates
Consciences.
( page 324.) where I show, That the Presbyterians as well as the Jesuits,
notwithstanding their pretended Subjection to Magistrates, and Pleadings for
the Extension of their Power, and Accusing us for denying it, do not spare to
Tyrannize over the Magistrates Conscience, when they can; as by the Example of
the Presbyterians behavior toward this present King of Britain I did prove:
It is enough for him to this to say, This page is not to the purpose. But the
Judicious Reader will rather judge, that he is here so Silent (being elsewhere
upon less Occasions so Clamorous) because he knew not well, what to Answer to
the purpose. With the like hasty and pitiful Stuff he would turn by the many
Citations of the Ancients brought by me against Persecution, because of his
deceitful Popish Concession, above observed: but he should have shown, how
these things of the Ancients are Consistent with the Civil Magistrates using
any Force in matters of Religion, as being a thing Inconsistent with
Christianity; which the Reader by reading over these places may easily observe,
and thence find, why he made such Have, and gave all these Citations no other
Answer.

6. But as he is Hasty in passing over, what he finds he cannot Answer; so to
fill up the pages, he spares not to insist upon Trifles, or things of no
Moment, or which only serve to show his own Folly and Impertinency: as in page
503. is manifest, where he says; J. B.'s Doubts, whether it be 25 years, since
the Author did Unite with the Quakers, Answered.
He doubts, whether it be 25 years, since I adjoined my self to the Quakers.
But whether it be so or not, it nor Adds to, nor Takes from the Controversy:
only to solve him of this doubt, he may assure himself, It is not; since I have
not yet seen the 30 th year of my Age. But because I say; It is about 25 years,
since they were a distinct and separated People; thence he says: He sees, it is
not an Old Sect, and so has less Affinity with true Christianity; because he is
sure, Christianity is older. But what Protestant in his Wits (if Malice did not
blind) would use such an Argument, knowing, how easily the same may be, and has
been Objected by Papists, that use to ask us, Where our Religion was, before
Luther and Calvin? That Christianity is older than 25 years, I am sure, as well
as he; but it will not thence follow, but that it may be a short time, since
God raised up a separated, gathered, visible People, A People raised of God to
shake-off the Corruptions of Babylon, and restore the pure and old Christianity.
to shake-off the Corruptions of Babylon, and Restore the pure and old
Christianity, as it was before the Apostasy entered. And if he will not admit of
this to the acknowledgment of his own Impertinency, he must needs own the like
Argument in the Mouth of Papists to have been Valid against our great
Grandfathers; and consequently give away the Protestant Cause.

7. But the Man seems not to have heeded, what he wrote in this page, by
another, yet more palpable Mistake: for while in the Calculation of the
Appearing of the Quakers he goes about to find me Contradicting another Quaker,
he shows his own Senslesness. My account, says he, of 25 years, being
numbered from 1676, J. B.'s Senseless Calculation of the Quakers first
Appearance in England.
will fall into Anno 1651; but another Quaker in Anno 1659 says, it is now
about 7 years, since the Lord raised us up in the North of England, etc. Now
number 7 back from 1659, my Arithmetic tells me, it will be 1652: and if I
account it 1651, and the other reckon it about 1652, it comes to one Reckoning.
But John Brown will have mine to 15 years later, as if 25 years back from 1676
were 15 Years after 7 Years back from 1659, that is, that 1652 is 15 Years
before 1651: so far has the poor Man missed of his Numeration. He sometimes
reproachingly and scoffingly says; He sees, the Quaker can dream waking: but it
is a question, whether he was dreaming or not, when he proclaimed his
Sottishness thus to the World; which cannot be reputed an Error of the Press,
since he is at pains to Reconcile this Imaginary difference, saying; But
perhaps I mean of those in the North of Scotland, the other of the North of
England; and therefore he will not contend about it: He will find, he has
Reason, when he sees his Mistake. Yet he must have one Observation, that
according to the old Proverb All Evil comes out of the North: but no wonder,
the Man has been here benumbed, since he will, ere he want something to
Reproach the Quakers, make use of old Proverbs; albeit to Contradict
Scripture-Prophecies, Jer 50:3. where the Prophet speaking of the Judgment of
Babylon, A Nation coming from the North against Babylon.
says; For out of the North there comes up a Nation against her, which shall
make her Land desolate: and verse 9. I will Raise and cause to come up against
Babylon an Assembly of great Nations out of the North-Country: But an old
Proverb with him it seems is of more weight, which can hit the Quakers, than
the Scriptures, for all the Reverent Esteem he pretends to them. Yet that an
Evil has or may come out of the North, I shall not deny; for of that the
PERSECVTING Spirit of PRESBYTERY is one Example: which as to its Rise in
Scotland was more Northerly, than the Appearance of the People called Quakers.

SECT. XVI.
Wherein his Twenty Ninth Chapter, Of Wars, and Thirtieth, Of Oaths, is
Considered.

J. B.'s Malicious Insinuations because of our Testimony against Wars and
Fighting.
. 1. AFTER having Classed us (according to his Custom) with such as he accounts
Odious Heretics, for our Opinion of Wars, he proceeds with his old Trade of
Malicious Insinuations and Railings, questioning; Whether our Intent may not
be, that we may obtain Freedom and Liberty to Rage over all? And whereas he
says, He leaves our selves to Judge of this; Truly, we can sincerely Judge in
the Sight of God, that this is a gross Calumny; of giving any Color for which,
we are altogether Innocent. And like to this is that malicious Insinuation page
515.521. wherein he charge us with a Bloody design, in seeking to reduce them
to Paganism, and by disarming Christians, give up Christendom as a Prey to
Turks and Pagans. To which I shall only Answer; That as it is obviously enough
Malicious, so he shall never prove it True: and therefore I wish, the Lord
rebuke him, and forgive him for these his Evil Thoughts! What he says here, as
well as page 517, 518.522. of the necessity of defensive War, J. B.'s
Atheistical Doctrine of the Necessity of a Defensive War.
to defend from those that unjustly Assault, and Thieves, and Robbers, and
Cutthroats, etc. he speaks more like an Atheist, than a Christian, and like
one, who believes nothing of a Divine Providence of Restraining evil Men at
his pleasure, and not suffering them to go further, than he sees meet. Does he
think, that all the Endeavors of the Wicked Men of the World can do any thing,
but as GOD permits them? and that all the Opposition to such by force of Arms
can prevail, but by Gods blessing? If so, he must not think, that such Carnal
and Atheistical Reasons can brangle the Faith of those, who out of pure
Obedience to God desire to be Conform to the Image of his Son, according to the
measure of the Grace given them, so as to make them think, they are less secure
under the protection of the ALMIGHTY, than by their Guns and Swords. But this
is Consistent with his Faith, the most-Eminent of whose Brethren have learned
to Preach with Sword and Pistols; His Brethren Preach with Sword and Pistols.
and instead of the guard of a Christian Boldness and a good Conscience (which
the Primitive Christians and Apostles used) will be guarded with Men in Arms
and that in Opposition to the Authority of those, they confess to be their
lawful Magistrates. And if he say, That we must not lay-aside lawful means; I
ask him, Whether he thinks, not to defend a Man's self from a principle of
Conscience, be simply Unlawful? Let him remember, The most remarkable
Deliverances of God's People have been without the Arm of Flesh.
the most remarkable Deliverances that God's People met withal, were, when
there appeared least of outward Help, and where the Arm of Flesh had least hand
in it; as the Children of Israel's Deliverance out of Egypt, as also Judges c.
5: from ver. 16. to the end, 2 Kings 6:17, etc. and Chapters 7, 13. and 19.:
35. and in other places. To prove, That Christ in the 5th of Matthew. commands no
more than in the Law, he refers to the Writings of their Divines: but he
might have done this to all he has Written, if he judge it sufficient; and so
have saved himself a great deal of labor: since he says elsewhere; All I have
written, is Confuted long ago. How can Men love their Enemies, and yet kill and
destroy them?
How Men can Love their Enemies, and yet kill and destroy them, is more than I
can reach: but if it were to, such as rather suffer, than do it, do surely more
love them; and to do so, is no Injury to our Selves, nor Neighbors, when done
out of Conscience to God in answering our Duty, to whom we must not Regard our
own, or Neighbors profit. And if what I grant of the Lawfulness of Fighting to
the present Magistrates and State of Christians, be considered, it will render
all his Arguments superfluous; since he confesses, A time will come, in which
the Prophecy of Isaiah 2:4. Mic. 4:3. will be fulfilled; and thinks fit, there
should be a Praying for the fulfilling of it: and what, if some believe, that
(as to some) there is a beginning already of the fulfilling thereof? We do
nothing doubt, but that of Rev. 16.5, 7. which he mentions page 522. will in
due time be fulfilled; but we see no necessity of believing, that that will be
performed by outward Fighting, or that the Saints shall need to draw Carnal
Swords or shoot Cannons toward the performing of it. When he says, Fighting
is from the Corrupt Nature of Man.
that the Argument of Fighting is not taken from the Corrupt nature of Man,
page 519. he must have forgotten himself; since, had not Man fallen, and so his
nature been corrupted, he may infer, if he can, where there should have been an
occasion for Fighting with Carnal Weapons? And since he Confesses, That in
nothing more, than in War is seen the Fruits of Man's Rebellion against God; He
may thence see, how little need Christians have to plead for it. As for the
Citation out of the Confession of Faith, wherewith to fill-up, he closes his
Chapter, I know not to what purpose he did it; since no Man doubts their Faith
in this matter.

2. He begins his 30 th Chapter of Oaths, with saying; We deny their
lawfulness, that we may destroy all Policy and Government; But it must only be
the Devil's Government: for where the Government of Christ prevails, and Men
speak Truth, there all must Confess, there is no need of Oaths; and also, where
the like punishment of Perjury is inflicted for speaking falsely, Where Men
speak Truth, there is no need of Oaths.
the End of Oaths is obtained, and that without breaking Christ's Command. Thus
according to his own Concession, since the Verity may be had as well without an
Oath, none should be urged to take an Oath. But let us see, what after a
Citation out of their Confession of Faith he says, to Answer Matthew. 5:34. and
James 5:12. which says so expressly, Swear not at all: Swear not at all.
To this he says, That Christ is only Interpreting the Law, and not Adding any
thing to it; and that it only relates to ordinary discourse: but for proof of
this he has nothing, but an Heap of words asserting the thing: To all which,
till he bring some Scripture Proof, there needs no Answer. But to oppose
Christ's and James's words, Swear not at all -- It is not said, Except ye be
called before a Judge; let him prove this Exception by Scripture next time: and
therefore till he do so, his Affirming over and over again, That Christ forbad
no more, than was forbidden in the Law, page 525. is to no purpose. The Law
forbad idle Swearing and Oaths in Communication; but Christ's Resumption shows
throughout that Chapter some more to be urged, to any that understand plain
words, and will not shut their Eyes. That its being said, Deuteronomy. 6:13. Thou
shall swear by his Name, is urged as an Explication or Comprehensive part of
Moral Worship, I deny; and remains for him to prove: or that it was more than a
Command to the Jews to Swear by the true God, that they might not Swear by
Idols; and till he prove this, Arguments founded upon it need no further
Answer. As for what he adds N. 8. to prove Swearing not to be of the Devil,
because commanded of God; and afterward Concluding, That my urging against it,
as being of the Devil, is pregnant of Blasphemy, because it would infer, some
of the Ceremonial Laws of God to have their Rise not from the Will of God, but
from the work of the Devil; he shows here more Malice than strength of
Reason. The Bill of Divorcement permitted in the Old Test. because the hardness
of their hearts.
Was not the Command Deuteronomy. 24: v. 1. Let him write for her a Bill of
Divorcement, A part of the Ceremonial Law? and yet Christ says Matthew. 19.7.
that Moses did this, because of the hardness of their Hearts; and is not
hardness of Heart, which gave a Rise to this Command, of the Work of the Devil?
Let him then make the Application, and then Answer the Empty Bluster he has
made of Blasphemy. And does not, what Christ says of this matter of Divorce
Matthew. 5: v. 31, 32. show, Christ Commanded more there, than was Commanded
under the Law? He confesses page 529. That God cannot be said properly to
Swear: Albeit some things being ascribed to God, makes them not Unlawful to us;
yet any things being ascribed to God, makes it not Lawful to us, when Christ
commands the Contrary. Christ's and the Apostles Asseverations were not Oaths.
That Christ's saying, Verily Verily, is more than Yea and Nay, I deny; and it
remains for him to prove it: That the Apostles Asseverations are Oaths, he
affirms in like manner, but proves it not. His thinking, We, in being willing
to do as much as the Apostle did, do strain at a Gnat, and Swallow a Camel, is
but an Evidence of his Railing Genius; as it does of his Malice, in Catching
what follows: That the Question is not, What Paul or Peter did? but what their
and our Lord? For that is not said by me: he has but said it, as believing,
they did Swear, or that their Words were Oaths. But the giving (not granting)
it had been so, to show, it would not prove this thing now lawful, and that
Peter and Paul both had their Failings, so as all, though not in that, himself
will not deny: which is enough to show, their practice in all things is not to
be our Rule. His 531. page needs no Answer, being but his own Affirmations
and Conjectures in stead of Answers; these may be considered, when he proves
them. That Paul swore any way, Abraham's and Practice will not warrant our
Imitation of it.
we deny; and neither Abraham's nor Jacob's practice, nor yet that of Angels
will Warrant us to Imitate them, when Christ has commanded the Contrary: And
albeit he acknowledge The Testimony of Pythagoras, Socrates and Plato does
shame many Christians for their Swearing; yet he cannot omit here his ordinary
Reflection at our Religion, as Paganish. He Confesses, That many of the
Fathers were against Swearing; and indeed, none any ways versed in Antiquity,
can deny, this to have been the General Faith of the Primitive Church.

SECT. XVII.
Wherein his Thirty First Chapter of Civil Honor, and Thirty Second, called, A
View of the Conclusion is Considered.

1. AS he Enters upon this Chapter of Civil Honor, he Accuses me, as being
Effronted and Shameless, for saying, [All our Adversaries plead for the
Lawfulness of Superfluity of Apparel and Plays:] And to make this appear the
more probable, he would seem to be much against these things; and wishes,
there were less of them. But all will not do, nor Hide him in this Matter: No
Laces and Ribbonds denied by J. B. to his bountiful Ladies.
For he will not deny the Lawfulness of Laces and Ribbonds? the Man will not
Offend the good Ladies, to whose Bountifulness they are so much obliged, so as
simply to deny their Superfluities. And how can he? since it is become a
Practice of some Eminent, Presbyterian Ministers, which they have Learned from
their Friends, the Popish Priests and Jesuitish Emissaries, not only to go up
and down with their Sword and Pistols, to evidence, they are Men of Blood,
Presbyterian Ministers go with their Sword and Pistols, Laced Bonds and Cravats.
and Brethren in Politics; but also in their Laced Bands and Cravats,
Perriwigs and Gilded Belts, to make them look like Monsieurs. But if he think,
that I wrong any of our Adversaries in this, let him tell me, which of them
dogmatically hold it as a General Principle, That Superfluity of Clothes, and
the use of Plays in general is unlawful (whatever some Particulars may do,
whereof I made an Exception?) As for any their laying aside these Vanities out
of Pride, I do not Justify it; for him to Insinuate that, as to us, is but his
bare, malicious Assertion. After that ( page 534.) he has told his Reader, he
comes to Treat of that, which is peculiar to the Quakers, he gives him a large
List of Strange Heretics; as among others, Heracleonites, Carpocratians,
Gnosimachians, (enough to fright Ignorant folk) telling: That what the Devil
could not effectuate by all these, he thinks now to accomplish by the
miserable Quakers. It seems, the Man must be one of the Devil's Counselors,
that he is so well acquainted with his Purposes: But I shall not Covet this his
Preforment, nor seek to Imitate the Language he has learned of that Court;
which he bestows in the following page to Rage at us, as Rude and Uncivil, and
such, as deny to give the least Signification of Civil Honor to Equals, or
Superiors: which is false. And then by a strange Figure he will seem no less
known in God's Counsel, than he before would appear in the Devil's; and
therefore Magisterially concludes, That God has given us up to the Vnmanning of
our selves, who have renounced all Christianity, and every thing, that looks
like serious Religion. It seems, Bowing and Taking of the Hat, and Complemental
Titles, is the Man's Christianity and serious Religion, which the Quakers have
Renounced; I will next Examine, how he proves it.

2. Page 536. He tells, That Honor is to be rendered, to whom Honor is due;
but this we never denied. The Question is, Whether Honor may not be Rendered
without Bowing or Taking off the Hat? The Scriptures he brings here to prove
this, are so far from doing it, that most of them are egregiously Impertinent;
as will appear. For as to Abraham's and Lot's Bowing there mentioned, I show in
my Apology, Abraham's bowing and Lot's is no Rule.
how their Practice in that was not to be a Rule to us. But he brings Act.
14.15. where Paul and Barnabas are said in our English Translation to say,
Sirs; and Acts 27. v. 10. where Paul says, Paul's saying Sirs, in Greek it is
(...), i. e. Men.
Sirs, to the Mariners, to prove, They gave a Title of Honor; as if Sirs did
infer the plural Number, of what usually Sir to one Imports with us: But if he
had looked the Greek, he would have found in both Places (...), which signifies
Men. I would willingly know, if the Man will be so Void of Ingenuity, as not to
acknowledge his Folly here? For as for the Jaylour's Practice, he will have
much ado to prove it a Rule to Christians. Neither is he less Impertinent, when
he brings the Instance of Mary saluting Elizabeth; Alleged Salutations from
Scripture, they were not a Taking off the Hat, and bowing to each other.
Paul the Church of Corinth; Christ desiring his Disciples to salute the House;
and Paul in his Epistles desiring such as he wrote to, to Salute others in his
Name: For who will not Condemn him of folly, in Imagining, that the Apostle by
these Christian Salutations desired them to Take off their Hats, and Bow to one
another in his Name? or that this was the Way Christ willed his Disciples to
salute the Houses they came to? He must remember to prove this next time; and
know, we deny neither Salutations, nor Civility: But have not yet heard him
prove, That they consist in such P^^^tices. He confesses page 537. That
several of the Titles used, may be granted not to be lawful to Christians: But
thinks, That makes nothing for our Blant and Rustic (as he terms it) Thou
and Thee, To Thee and Thou a single Person says J. B. is Blunt and Rude.
with which we speak to Magistrates and great Persons, no otherwise, than we
would do to our Foot boys. But since he confesses, they use this Thou and
Thee, which he thinks so Blunt and Rude, when speaking to God; I desire, he may
Acquaint me next time, Why they speak to God no other ways, than they would do
to their Foot boys, to whom, I hope, he will say, they own great Respect, than
to any Magistrates or great Personages whatsoever? And this shows, it was no
Rudeness in me to Address my self thus in my Epistle to the King. Besides that
what he quarrels being written in Latin, shows his folly; In Latin the
Singular used to Kings.
since it is Usual for themselves writing in that Language, to use the Singular
Number even to Kings. And forasmuch as he thinks this so Absurd, that in a
silly Scoff he says; Under favor of my Thou- ship: And page 540. he accounts
this in us Singularity, Contempt, Pride; yea, and to proceed from a more
stinking Root: I will desire of him to know, how it comes, King's Coronation
Act Instanced.
that the Bishop of Canterbury in the Coronation of this present King in most
of his Addresses to him during that Solemnity, terms him Thee and Thou, as
Philips in his History relates, printed at London Anno 1670, page 764. 765? But
if he think this of little Weight, as being the Practice of a proud Prelate in
his Esteem; what will he say of his Reverend Brethren the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster, Are the Divines at Westminster an Irrational Pack, for teaching
Thee and Thou, J. B.?
who Teach us in their Directory to use this Thee and Thou, as in the Form
prescribed for Marriage, in these Words, I N. do take thee to be my Wife, etc.?
He must say, that either they had a Reason for this, or they had none: if none,
he must conclude them to have been an Irrational Pack; which I think he will
hardly do: if they had, when he gives it, let him free them of Pride, Contempt
and Singularity, or something more stinking, (to use his own Phrase) and find
us Guilty of it. For his Proverb of being as Proud as a Quaker, we think, he
has hardly Authority to make this pass for one; though by Coining this, it
seems he affects to be a Proverb-Monger: But if Vulgar Proverbs were of any
great Weight, I could tell him of more Ancient and Authentic long ago ascribed
to his Brethren. Page 537. he says: The Titles of your Grace and your Eminency.
The Terms of Grace and Eminency are not given, because of personal Endowments
corresponding thereunto; but because of Place and Power: But he should prove,
that to do so, where these Virtues are Absent, is either proper, or lawful;
since in Addressing our selves to any, in saying, Your Grace, or Your Eminency,
we suppose them to have these Endowments; which if they have not, we speak a
Lie, Christians not to speak Lies.
and that is not lawful to Christians. To prove the Lawfulness of the
Compellation of Majesty to Kings, he tells, That the Lord bestowed upon
Solomon Royal Majesty, and Nebuchadnezzar, saying, Dan. 4.26. That Excellent
Majesty was added unto him; The like of Excellent Majesty.
in both which places it imports no more, than an Outward Glory: But where
finds he, that any Addressing themselves to Kings, use the Compellation of
Excellent Majesty, as is usual now adays? he will read his Concordance often
over, ere he can find this. As for his Jeering me about my Concordance, and
saying; I cite Scriptures at random, for that Psalm. 29.4. Majesty is ascribed
to the Thunder; he but declares his own Folly: Majesty is there ascribed to
GOD; for what is ascribed to God's Voice, is ascribed to him: He may say also
then, That Powerful in the fame Verse is not ascribed to God, but to the
Thunder; if he resolve to be Ridiculous. What he says page 540. N. 11. That we
salute no Man, is false; but the Question is, Whether there cannot be
Salutations without the Uncovering of the Head, or Bowing of the Body? this he
should have proved. He says; Abraham's Bowing was against no Law of the
Creation; but so was Abraham 's practice in the Matter of Hagar (which I
brought, Abraham's and Jacob's Practices were by Permission to them, not for
our Imitation.
to show that Abraham's Practice was not to be our Rule) But since Abraham's
Practice in the matter of Hagar, and the like practice of Jacob and the Jews
was permitted to them, and yet thence we are not allowed to do the like; that
shows, that Argument deduced from Abraham's simple practice, is of no weight.
He thinks it silly to say, that bowing of the Body and Knee, and Uncovering of
the Head are only External Signs of our Adoration of God; because it may as
well be inferred, that a Man must never Bow his Body to Tie his Shoos, or
Uncover his Head to have his Hair cut. But this his Answer is Silly: Since Men
do not these things, as a Signification of Honor, which is the End of their
Bowing to one another, and the thing here in Question; and therefore his
Repetition of the same in the following page needs no Answer. He would make
Mordecai's Case singular, J. B.'s Uncertainty in stating Genealogies.
because Haman was an Agagite, one come of Agag: But since he is so good at
Genealogies, let him prove this next time; for if the Similitude of the Name
were enough, might we not say with as much Reason, That John Brown is a
Brownist? and yet perhaps he would think this a Reproach.

3. But the poor Man thinks, (it is like) he has hit the Nail on the Head to
purpose, when he says page 542. upon this Subject; One thing I would ask, J.
Naylor's Case Objected and Answered.
what he thinks of that Honor and Worship, that was given to James Naylor,
as he rode into Bristol Oct. 24. 1656? I answer, I think it was both Wicked and
Abominable, and so do the People called Quakers; who thereupon disowned him,
and all those that had an Hand in it: As by the several Letters found written
to him, and other Papers, if need were, I could at large prove. But it
suffices to inform the Reader of this, that he was denied by that People, and
not any ways afterward owned by them, until several Years after, that he
testified his full Repentance for that thing in a Public Assembly upon his
Knees, J. N's. Unfeigned Repentance.
with many Tears; signifying the same also under his Hand, which also was
printed. And thus is swept away his Malicious Insinuation page 530. as to this;
and also what his Brother R. M. C. says so often in his Postscript, in terming
us Naylorists, as if J. N. had been the First among the Quakers; hence John
Brown in the List he gives of the Quakers Errors of Civil Honor, calls him
their First Father: But to teach him not to be so forward to Lie next time, he
may know, That Years before J. N. joined with the Quakers, there were Hundreds
went under that Name; and who both preached and practiced their Way. This may
show the sober Reader, how apt these Men are to print Malicious Lies; and R. M.
C. so frequently seeking to denominate us from that Name because of this,
shows, how frivolous and false it is. I must mind, That it were but a Just
Retribution, and no Injury done to them, (as this of theirs to us is a manifest
one) if I should mind them of no less Abominable Actions, than ever was or
could be proved against J. N. not many Years ago done by some Eminent among
them; who died without any Sense of True Repentance (whereof J. N. gave
singular Evidence.) What would he think then, if I should thence term them --
ists? But I spare them at present, in hopes they will see their Folly, and
amend. After this thing of J. N. he ends this Chapter with Railing: But I
observe, he makes an Entire Omission, of what I say N. 16. upon the last These
in my Apology; which I therefore refer to the Reader's Serious Consideration.

4. I come now to his last Section, Entitled, A View of my Conclusion: Where
coming to Examine the few Lines, wherewith I Conclude my Apology, he bestows
upon me a Flood of most Unreasonable Railing. I did in that Conclusion
Recommend to the Reader the System I had presented to him of the True Christian
Religion; which this Man here with many bitter Words affirms to be other ways:
But we must leave the Judgment of this to the Reader, when he has seriously
Read both what he says on the one Hand, and I on the other. And whereas I in
my Conclusion did show the Reader, J. B.'s false Charges against us from the
Books of our manifest Opposers.
how falsely we are Charged with denying the outward Appearance of Christ; the
real Existence of Heaven and Hell, as a Place without us; the Last and General
Judgment; the Resurrection of the Body; by telling him seriously, and in the
Presence of God, that these Accusations are false, and that we really believe
these things; he with a most effronted Impudence reckons it Boldness in me to
say so, page 554. and that because of the Testimony of Faldo and some others of
our manifest Opposers: as if they should know, what I and my Brethren believe,
better than I my self do; or should be more credited in giving Account of our
Faith, than our selves. Who can secure themselves from being stigmatized, as
the Vilest and Grossest of Heretics from the Malice of Liars, if this Method
be to be followed? But to proceed, to show his Injustice and Vnfairness in this
Matter in the highest degree, contrary to the Rules of fair Disputing, and all
honest Dealing in Matters of Controversy, it does manifestly appear, in that
notwithstanding in his Title he declares, He intends an Examination of the
Quakers Religion, as the same is presented to the World by me; when he has
labored all he can, by turning, perverting, commenting and divining to squeeze
out of my Words, all that may seem Absurd and Erroneous, or at least, which he
will have to be so, and that he cannot find enough there to render the Quakers
such horrid Monsters and Vile Blasphemers, as he ever and anon proclaims them
to be; Then away he runs from R. B's Apology, (which is the Theme of his
Examination) and comes off with a -- But is not the Man of this Opinion? or,
May we not Conjecture, that he is of such and such an Opinion (which to be sure
is more Absurd) as such and such a Man, as Mr. Stalham, Mr. Norton, J. B.'s
Authors for his Refuge of Lies cast out against us.
or Mr. Hicks and Faldo relate of such and such Quakers, that say so and so? --
Is this Justice? Is this Christian Dealing? Is this Honesty as among Men, in
writing against a People not to seek their Opinions and Faith from their own
Mouths and Pens, but from those of their manifest Enemies and Opposers? Does
not this bespeak the height of Malice with a Witness, and show a determinate
Resolution to Calumniate at any rate? Is this to walk according to the Royal
Law, To do as he would be done by? Dare J. B. say, he would be content to be
done so by? Would he judge it Equal Dealing, if one writing against Presbytery,
should Represent them not as they declare themselves to be; but out of the
Writing of their manifest Opposers; as to give credit to Spotwood's History, in
judging of the Rise and Growth of Presbytery? Would he judge it fair Reasoning,
if one writing against the Calvinistical Points of Reprobation, should in stead
of making use of their own Authors, or when he could not make the Matter bad
enough there, tell, the Case is so and so, as Arminius or Episcopus relates it?
or one writing against Protestants should, in the representing of their
Principles make use of Bellarmin, and other Popish Writers? If this then would
justly be accounted Ridiculous and Absurd, let the judicious Reader judge, what
Character may John Brown so doing deserve? But above all is singularly to be
noticed J. Brown his Venerable Esteem of his beloved Author Mr. Hicks (as he
terms him) of whom he has so high an Esteem, that he has given him more place
in his Book, than any other; there being no Author to my observation, so
frequently Cited by him: Hicks most Abusive to the Quakers, most Esteemed by J.
B.
Who, because this Thomas Hicks has been the most abusive and grossest Liar and
Calumniator, that has appeared against us; therefore he receives him with the
most kindly Entertainment. For as Malice against Christ of old Cemented Pilate
and Herod to put up their private Quarrels; so at this Day it has done these
Men against his Truth and Followers: Else what should it mean, that a fierce
Presbyter should so heartily embrace a keen Anabaptist-Preacher, since the same
Man often upbraids the Quakers with their Affinity to the Anabaptists? A
Presbyter and Anabaptist, thus Contract Affinity.
Certainly, the Presbyters Cause must be at a low Ebb, and he in mighty fear of
the Quakers prevailing, when he can so cordially shake Hands with his beloved
Anabaptist Brother Hicks, to help at a dead Lift against the Quakers, and take
him for his Auxiliary with his Lies and Forgeries, to make a Noise, when other
Matters and Arguments fail. But it had been more wisely done in J. Brown, ere
he had given the Anabaptist Hicks his Writings so much Place in his Book, to
have considered the Answer to the first Dialogue and Continuation thereof,
written by W. P. Entitled, Reason against Railing, and Truth against Fiction;
and the Answer to his Third Dialogue by the same Author, Entitled, The
Counterfeit Christian Detected, and the Real Quaker Justified: For I question,
if J. B. will judge it safe to take Implicitly upon Trust in Matters of
Controversy of Religion (without Examining) the Word of an Anabaptist, unless
it be against the Quakers; where any Witness (it is like) with him may be
admitted: For if he do but speak Evil enough, it will be acceptable, whether
true, or not. And J. B. should also have done well to have Informed himself,
how this Thomas Hicks, being publicly called to an account before several
Thousand Witnesses for his gross Abuses, in framing Answers in the Quakers
Name, which was never said by any Quaker, and in other ways perverting, and
misapplying Sentences of their Writings to Questions of their own framing, so
that he might make them as Impertinent and Ridiculous, as he was willing others
should Esteem them to be; did pitifully Succumb: so that his best Defense to
come off, was to plead the Infirmity of his Lungs, which made him desert the
second Meeting held for that purpose, and substitute in his Place a
Free-will-Anabaptist (with whom I suppose J. B. will yet have less Fellowship)
who made a Noise and Brawling to keep off the Chief Matter. And yet the
Grosness of Thomas Hicks's Dealing was so discovered, that some of his own Way,
and others who are not Quakers, did publicly, yea, The Grosness of T. Hicks
his Dealing discovered and abhorred in Print by others.
and in Print declare their Abhorrency of his Forgeries: As appears by a Book
written at that time, Entitled, The twelve Pagan Principles Considered, upon
which Thomas Hicks undertakes to Unchristian the Quakers; and another,
Entitled, Quakerism no Paganism; and another, The Christian a Quaker, the
Quaker a Christian; all written upon that accasion by Men that were no Quakers.
Yea, Th. Hicks's Abuses and Lies were so far from doing us hurt, that they were
Instrumental to bring among us a young Independent Preacher of good Repute, An
Independent Preacher embracing Truth.
and well received and heard among them; who has told my self, That the Reading
of Hicks's Dialogues, and seeing his gross Lies and Abuses gave the first Rise
to his searching after, and embracing the Truth. And when Th. Hicks and his
Accomplices were further pursued by the Answer to their pretended Narration of
these Debates, Entitled, Forgery no Christianity, written by Thomas Elwood;
and another Paper Entitled, A Fresh Pursuit, by the same hand, wherein he
arraigneth the said Hicks and his Accomplices of Falsehood, Lying, Forgery, and
requires them to make them good, or else abide under the Just Condemnation of
so manifest Guilt; which they were glad to do, and have not so much as peeped
out now these three Years since the last of these Transactions, until now this
Vomit, of which all sober Men are ashamed, and from which the Authors have
shamefully shrunk, is licked up by John Brown, and is become the Chief
Authority of his Tract. J. B. has used the Lies, Forgeries and Abuses of a
Shameless Anabaptist against the Quakers.
Will it savor well in the Mouths of sober Professors, that the Chief Gun,
that J. B. uses against the Quakers, are the Lies, Forgeries and Abuses of a
shameless Anabaptist? Certainly, when J. Brown considers these things, he will,
if Malice has not altogether blinded him, find, that he has too suddenly laid
Hands upon his Brother Hicks, ere he well minded the Consequence of it; and
that so great an Infusion of Hicks his Anabaptistical Dirt, which takes the
best share of not a few pages of his Book, will make the rest to stink, albeit
it were more cleanly Stuff, than it is. And for Faldo's Books, out of which he
copieth not a little in this Chapter, he may find them both answered by W. P.
the one called Quakerism a new Nickname to old Christianity; and the other,
The Invalidity of John Faldo 's Vindication: in which, page 430, 431, 432, 433.
he may find a List of John Faldo's Miscarriages in citing Assertions said by
Quakers, without telling the Books, and of Books without Parts; Chapters and
Page of these Books falsely cited, of Passages clipped and maimed, and others
perverted by Additions: and which makes up above 70. to which John Faldo has
never had Face yet to Answer. So that this Man may see, what kind of Authority
he has made use of; and how his Proofs are bottomed. And lastly, of our full
Belief of Future States, Of future States and of the Resurrection.
and of the Resurrection, he may find a large account in a book called, The
Christian Quaker and his Divine Testimony Vindicated, by W. Pen and G.
Whitehead, printed in the Year 1674. from page 146 of the Second Part to the
End.

SECT. XVIII.
Wherein Robert Macquare his Postscript is Considered.

1. AS to R. M. C. his Postscript, which I come now to in the last Place, I
shall not need to be large; it being a Compound and Heap of most Abusive and
Unreasonable Railing against me and my Friends on the one Hand, Rob. Macquare's
most abusive Railing against us and our Doctrine.
and a most fawning, manifest piece of nauseating and shameless Flattery to his
Brother J. Brown, on the other. In the very Entry he brands our Doctrine, as
the Devil's, and our selves as his Ministers and Amanuenses: and a little after
he Exclaimeth thus; O what horrid, what Hell-hatched, bold Blasphemies this
black Brood belcheth forth! And for me in particular, page 559, 560. in a few
Lines he calls me both a Turk, and a Devil; and what more his Railing Spirit
affords him: To all which I shall only say, the worst I wish him, is heartily
to desire the Lord to forgive him, as by the Strength of his Grace I freely do.
As to his Brother J. Brown, he accounts him singularly Acute, solidly Learned
and truly Gracious; so that he conceits, if the Devil, who he supposes drew
me on to write, had his, Dictates again, he would bury or burn them. R. M.'s
Shameless Flatteries of J. B.
Thence he highly Exalts the great depth of this his little Presbyterian David,
(as he calls him) in the shining Light and sharpness of his Examen: Sober Men
will blush to read such shameless Flattery. And truly, this Presbyterian Prince
looks liker Cursing Shimei, than little David; and he himself looks like the
daring Philistine, who thus Commends him, proclaiming a Defiance in his Name,
as if no solid Answer could be given: But such Crying of Triumph beforehand
will have small weight with Men of Reason. His jeering Quibble at my Words in
my Book of Universal Love, where I speak overly of the Felicity of my
Understanding, shows, he wanted Matter, but not Malice: Many modest Men will be
found to have said as much of themselves. The Author glories not in Natural
Endowments.
Neither did I that, as a thing, by which I would have any to measure now
either me, or my Writings: The greatest Natural Understanding (wherein I
confess my self freely to be Inferior to many) avails but little (yea, often
hurts) to the Chief thing needful, to wit, Regeneration; which is by Grace,
and not by Nature, and therein I desire to Glory. His petty Remark upon
Barclaii Argenis is both Childish and Malicious; he must know, That the Quakers
and my self do both Abhor and Condemn such Books: And truly, my Love to my Name
is not so great, that I would have that Exempted; and therefore I could freely
give my Vote, that all Romances were burnt. And he will find it hard to prove,
That such are used by any of us; whileas I know some, who passed and yet go for
Pious and Elect Ladies among them, that bestowed no small share of their Time
in Reading them. And Preachers may be found Eminent enough, whose Closets are
well stored with most approved Romances; and some being Challenged, even of
Note among the Presbyterians, by some serious Professors for their reading of
them, did Justify it, as that, whereby they were helped in their Pulpits to
give their Sermons a better Luster. So he may see, these Books are of more use
to his Brethren, than us; Presbyterian Preachers read Romances to give their
Sermons in the Pulpit a better Luster.
who can content our selves with such homely Language, as the Holy Scripture
Teaches. For what he says of James Naylor, I need return no Answer; having
sufficiently done it in the former Section. And whereas he gives the Example of
the Antinomians, to show, The Quakers are not singular, in not being called
after a particular Person; he does but miss of his Aim: For the Quakers are
known by that Name as such, being an Imbodied People, consisting of several
hundred gathered Churches or Congregations: but the Antinomians are only here,
either some having these particular Notions, and no such Imbodied People; else
let him tell us, where we may find these Antinomian Churches? I need say no
more to this Postscript, which has nothing in it, but mere Railing Assertions,
as to me; and that the rather, as I suppose R. M. C. will, long ere this appear
in print, See the Letter following.
receive a solid and grave Letter from an Old Friend and Acquaintance of his,
which may make him sensible of his Iniquity in this Matter; if there be yet any
Christian Ingenuity abiding with him, and that by Prejudice he is not totally
blinded.

. As for his Railing Assertions of George Keith's Book, we will see, how it is
Refuted in the Promised Answer to it; and then it will be time to Answer them,
as to that; as well as to the Blasphemous Assertions, which they pretend they
have gotten out of it: Their Charging us with Blasphemy from the Apostle's
Words.
But all Christians may judge, how they are like to prove it Blasphemous, when,
as an Instance of the Blasphemous Assertions, they give G. K's saying, That the
Man Christ Jesus is the Mediator. And to help them to do their Work fully, I
desire them, when they go about to prove this Assertion to be Blasphemy, they
may not forget the Apostle's Words, 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is One GOD, and One
Mediator between GOD and Men, the MAN Christ Jesus; and show; how G. K's Words
are more Blasphemous, than these of the Apostle: which, to make it more plain
to the Reader, I will add thus;

G. K's Position, which J. B. and R. M. C. two Eminent Presbyterian Preachers,
in the Index at the end of J. B's Book, affirm to be one of the Abominable
Heads of Quakerism, is; That the MAN CHRIST JESUS is the MEDIATOR.

The Apostle his Assertion (1 Timothy 2.5.) is,

That there is One MEDIATOR between GOD and Men, the MAN CHRIST JESUS.



We desire the Sense and Censure of the Presbyterian Ministry upon this; or
otherwise we hope, they cannot in reason be offended, if justly reputed
Accusers of the Spirit of God, that taught the Apostles to speak, and thence
Condemned, as signal Calumniators and Heretics.

The Letter of Lillias Skein to R. M. C.
An Expostulatory Epistle, Directed to ROBERT MACQVARE.
Friend ROBERT MACQUARE,
MY tender Love and Sympathy was great toward many of the Non-conformists, who
were suffering for Conscience Sake, and not for Interest espousing that
Opinion; of whom thy self being one, thou wast often very near me,
notwithstanding I knew, generally the Non-Conformists are more Imbittered and
Prejudiced against us, called Quakers, than any other Men: Yet this I often
Constructed to flow from Misinformations concerning us, Misinformations to
prejudice and bitterness gives often great Occasions.
being so little Acquainted with and Conversant among us; whereunto your being
so Shy, was but like the Disciples in a Storm seeing him Appear in a manner,
they had not seen him before, thought, he was coming nearer them for
Deliverance; yet they Cried out through Fear, as if it had been the Appearance
of some Evil Spirit. Other times I have looked upon the great Prejudice many
had against us, answerable to Christ's saying; No man having drunk Old wine,
straightway desires to drink New, they say, the Old is better: Which hitherto
has, and yet does cause me bear with you, and love that which is good amongst
you, wherever it appears. And so because of this Love toward thee I am the
more concerned at this Time, with what thou have lately published. For though
my Acquaintance and Intimacy with thee was not so much as others; yet it being
in a very serious Season with both of us, as I very well Remember (when thou
wast shut up close Prisoner, and wast daily in Expectation of the Sentence of
Death) thy Deliverance, from which I retain the fresh Sense of; and it was and
is with many such like Seasons, wherein the Lord prepared my Heart, and bended
his Ear: a sweet Encouragement to trust him, and a singular Engagement on me to
Wait for his Immediate Leading's and the Manifestations of his Will at all
Times. But Oh! since I heard of and read thy Postscript to John Brown's Book,
and S. R. his Letters (as is supposed) I am astonished, and much ashamed on thy
behalf! O! Is the best Fruits of so many years Affliction thou have to publish
to the World, That one called and suffering as a Non Conformist (to this sinful
Time) should have learned no more Conformity to meek, lowly Jesus (of whom it
is said, He learned Obedience by the things which he suffered) Surely, none who
read thy Language, will say, this Man has been with Jesus; but rather say,
whose-soever's Company thou have been in, thou have learned to be a Cunning
Artist at the Scolding Trade, and art therein vainly puffed up, R. M's
Exaltedness and Railing Spirit Rebuked.
that thou even fleest aloft (though with Waxen Wings) above the lowly,
harmless, meek Spirit of Christ. And verily, had I all thy Rhetoric (whether
natural, or acquired) which thou so much Mis-improv'st to the gratifying of
that, which needs more to be Crucified in thy self and many, who are ready
Implicitly to follow thee; it is not in my desire to follow thy Example: Nor
shall I wish, that ever thou have an Answer from any of the Lord's People in
thy own Terms, which are such, as all sober, unprejudiced People, who read
them, will see thy Spirit most strongly Imbittered, when thy Pen is so dipped in
Gall. I say, it is not in my desire to bring forth one Railing Accusation
against thee, neither to answer many things thou have vented against the Lord's
present Work and Witnesses, whom thou despisest and Abhorrest more than Dung
under thy feet, and crowest over: yet if the Living God (a part of whose Host
they are) see it meet, he can raise up the least of them, Worm Jacob is a
Threshing Instrument.
and make thee feel Worm Jacob a Threshing Instrument with Teeth to deal with
thee, and Thresh that Lofty, Malicious Spirit of Prejudice, that breaths
through thee. The Consideration whereof upon thy own Soul's account is the
occasion of this Letter: wherein I desire to lay some things before thee, which
are with Weight upon me; my Compassions being kindled toward thee, that when
the Lord comes to Visit the Earth, thou should be found among them, who are
Beating their fellow servants; the Hazard of which State thou know, and
many will feel, when the Lord rises up to Prey: for his Eyes are upon the
Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Cries. Though now he be Trying the
Children of Men, and permitting some to Suffer, and others to do hard things;
yet a hope lives in me, the time approaches, wherein the Lord will more
manifestly Appear to the Joy and Refreshment of the single in Heart, who Suffer
with him, and patiently Wait for him; and for the Shame and utter Overthrow of
his malicious Opposers.

And so One of the Particulars I would lay before thee, is a Desire, Search thy
own Heart in the Light of the Lord.
thou would yet in the Lord's Light search thy own Heart more, till thou
find out, what secret Affinity has remained with thee to any of the Lord's
Enemies in thy own Heart: for if all were brought under the Government of the
Son of God inwardly, I am fully persuaded, thy Outward Opposition to the Lord's
Work could not long stand. The Outward is a true Figure of the Inward; and I
know by true Experience, all that Despite, and disdainful, undervaluing
Epithetes thou squeezest up thy Engine to Coin (which one may feel answers not
fully thy own Satisfaction) for bespattering and loading that People and their
Principles, is but (alas!) a Mirrour-glass set up to represent the low, mean,
The Mean Appearance of Christ despised by the Learned Rabbis.
unworthy Esteem thou bear to the Light of Christ in its Inward Appearance
in thee, as a Reprover: for whosoever turns universally at the Reproofs of
God's Light in the Conscience, shall witness the pouring forth of his Spirit in
larger manifestations; according to Prove. 1.23. But that Spirit speaks in
thee, of which Isaiah prophesied, Isa. 53.2, 3, etc. concerning the outward
Appearance of the same Christ, our Head, and the Captain of our Salvation
(whose Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Glory we dearly own, and wait from
Day to Day more to feel the precious Virtue thereof) although he then was and
now is Rejected and Despised of Men, who hide, as it were, their Faces from
him, because his Outward Appearance was as a Root out of a dry Ground, in whom
there was no Form nor Comeliness, nor Beauty, that he should be desired by that
Mind, which was looking after great things, add expecting much outward Glory
and Advantage. And so Christ's Appearance was mistaken by the Learned Rabbis
in that Day; notwithstanding they had Moses and the Prophets Testimonies, and
were not wanting in Reading the Letter, as others now: For as it was then, it
is now, he was and is mistaken by all, who seek any thing to glory in, save the
Cross of Christ. For the Wisdom of the Flesh has and does lift fallen Man
above the innocent Seed in themselves, only through which they can see the
Invisible Glory of the Kingdom of God; and find an abundant Entrance unto the
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, whereof it Consists. Wherefore
take heed of being lifted up above the Seed, Light, Life and Spirit of Christ
in thee, and so thou will see matter to Work out thy Salvation in Fear and
Trembling, and wilt not sit down upon former Seize or Experiences, when
the Life is gone.

The great Danger of Sin at the Waters of Strife.
Another thing I would put thee in Remembrance of in these present times is, The
great danger of Sinning at the Waters of Strife; whereof Moses his Example may
be a standing Monument to all Generations: of whom it was said, He was the
meekest Man upon the Earth, yet at the Waters of Strife he spoke unadvisedly
with his Lips; because of which he was debarred from entering into the promised
Rest. And are there not some living at this Day, who with sorrow of Heart have
observed the Heat and Bitterness of Spirit, that has arisen, because
Differences and Controversy concerning Religion have eaten out the Life of that
Love and Tenderness, that was with many? And having hurt the green thing in
themselves and one another, has brought on Death, Darkness, Dryness, and
sensible Withering; and cannot choose but so to do; seeing bitterness of Spirit
and Prejudice, and such like Frames in Man or Woman separates from God, Dwell
in Love.
while there any one abides. For God is Love, and he that dwells in God, dwells
in love; and Christ has said, Unless ye abide in me, ye cannot bring forth
much fruit: so not abiding in that pure Love to God, and his Image in his
Children, has caused many fall short, and has let their Progress, and made
many lose sight of their Way, and the Guide of their Youth; and so they have
not followed the Lord fully, nor followed him in the Regeneration, Renewing
according to the Increase of Light and the Measures of his Manifestation,
whereby they should know, even in this Life, a being Changed from Glory to
Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. Thou mentionest in thy Postscript, to J.
B. page 557. Many, who may remember with Shame and Confusion of Face their
Laughing at, and making light of the Appearance of that Prodigy, and that it
may cause some go groaning to their Grave, being an Evidence, that ye knew not
the Signs of the Time, and what they called you to do. To which I answer:
Lightness and Laughing among People, that lay claim to Religion, is none of the
least Causes of Mourning; but I also believe, if the Appearance of Quakerism
(so called) had in the beginning been looked on, The Forerunner of the
Downfall of a Man-made Ministry.
as the Forerunner of the downfall of a mere Man-made Ministry in these
Nations, it is like, it would have moved those, who laughed most, to have
mourned most even then; and Babylon's Merchant's would have cried, Alas! Alas!
But since now thou acknowledgest, in the space of a Score of Years at most Thou
see Cause to mourn for that, which ye then laughed at; I am very willing to
admit of your own Acknowledgment for a Ground of Hope, that the Single-hearted
among the Non-conformists may outlive all the Clamor they are now making
against us; and in less than as many years more, may work through the Foggs and
Mists, that now darken their Understandings concerning the Signs of this Time,
and look back with Shame and Confusion on their great Darkness, that would have
mourned for that, which was matter of Joy. And this is no far-fetched
Consequence; for ye had then, and now the same Acquaintance with the Letter of
the Scriptures, and as much Humane Learning, and Sharpness and Natural
Abilities for an Acute Examen: and so it follows by the Rule of Contraries, and
may it not be without presumption concluded, Ye needed then, and do now, the
help of the Spirit's immediate Teachings in your own Hearts, without which ye
will not yet understand the Signs of this Time aright? which if ye did, The
Lord is Staining the Pride of all Flesh.
ye would see the Lord Staining the Pride of all Flesh, and bringing into
Contempt all the Honorable in the Earth, that the Lord alone may be Exalted,
and see him coming out of his Holy Habitation to silence all Flesh. Has not
the Lord removed most of all those, who were Eminently Instrumental to serve
him in the Work of the Ministry? And is he not daily making their Skirts bare,
who remain, and daily making them to Cease out of the midst of the National
Church, who rejoiced in her Pride? Is not his Voice sounding aloud unto such of
you, as yet remain? Ye shall no more be haughty, because of my holy Mountain:
If to day ye will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts; for I am sure, the
Teacher, that will tell you infallibly, what ye are called to do, is near, and
is not removed into a Corner. But it is the Enemies Work to Vail and Cover
present Duties and Opportunities, and represent what is past or lost, as very
desirable, and even to prompt a People or Person to lament and bewail their
bypast Failings and short-comings, who do little heed or regard the Worth of
the remaining Season, and so to Redeem the Time. Wherefore my Advice in tender
love to thy Soul is, That thou Wait on the Lord to understand aright the Import
of such Signs, as are now appearing, when the Lord is proceeding to work
mavelous Works and Wonders in the Earth, The Lord is angering the Wise and
Learned, by pouring out his Spirit upon Illiterate Tradesmen, not bred up at
Schools and Universities.
and is making the Wisdom of the Wise to perish, and the Understanding of the
Prudent to be hid; and pouring out his Spirit upon Sons and Daughters, Servants
and Handmaids, provoking to jealousy, and angering the Mighty, Learned, Wise
Men in this Generation by the foolish Appearance of a Company of Illiterate
Tradesmen, who were never bred up at Schools and Universities, Weavers and
Shoo-makers, and Fishers. Yea, is not one of the dreadful Signs of this Time
fulfilling in thee and thy Brethren, Rev. 16:8, 9. -- The fourth Angel poured
out his Vial upon the Sun, and power was given unto him to scorch Men with
fire: And Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God,
which has power over these Plagues; and they Repented not to give him Glory?
And whether this plague be not poured out upon your Antichristian Sun, The
scorching Plague on Antichrist his Dialect does show.
and ye be the Persons, that are thus scorched, your Dialect does sufficiently
declare unto all those, whose Eyes the Lord has opened. I also desire thee to
consider, how Inconsonant with true Christianity a spirit of Persecution is,
and how much more unsuitable, and unequal for a People or Person under the same
Condemnation? Surely, that poor Man, who had been but a little time in Christ's
Company, was so far influenced by his meek and moderate Spirit, as not only to
forbear Railing himself against suffering Christ, but to rebuke his
fellow-Companion for so doing: which Instance will stand in Judgment against
thee for the contrary Practice. Neither will thy denying us to be Members of
Christ, and not suffering for well-doing, Gross Railing rebuked.
and thy accounting us Demoniacks, avail thee, nor cover thee from that Woe (if
thou obtain not Mercy to Repent) denounced against such, as call good evil, and
evil good, and Light darkness, and darkness Light, in that day, when the Lord
Jesus shall declare before Men and Angels, we are his Friends and Followers. O
Robert! thy hard Speeches have manifested thy own sad Acknowledgment to be very
true: the Holy-Fire is gone out with thee indeed; in place of which that which
never was, nor is of God's kindling, is brought forth: And this is not now to
be found by secret Search in Corners by secret Surmises; but is by many of you
laid open, and in thy late Postscript, as on a Theater set up, as those who
run, may read, the Holy Fire, if ever there was any, is quite Extinct.
Concerning which Compound of unjust, groundless Accusations and malicious
Inventions, I hope, I may say, there are many sober, serious People, who fear
and serve the Living God, inward Jews, whose hearts the Lord has Circumcised
to love him; who desire continually in the Integrity of their hearts to serve
him; against whom I know, no Divination nor Enchantment of Devils or Men shall
prosper. Of which Blessed Company I do avouch my self one, through the Free
Grace of God; and I hope, I and many with me have put all thine and thy
Brethrens Writings in the Lord's own hand to Answer, for the Vindication of his
Glory, and the Manifestation of his Truth: and I desire to make no worse use of
thy Postscript, than Hezekiah made of the Writings of Rabshakeh in that day.
Unto the Righteous Lord, who searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, do I
Appeal, for whose Immediate Help, and seasonable, powerful Appearance I desire
both to Hope, and patiently to Wait, until he have performed his whole Work in
Zion and Jerusalem both amongst you and us: The Lord will plead out Cause.
then shall be brought to pass the sure Promise, The Lord will punish the Fruit
of the stout heart of his Adversary, and the glory of his high looks. In that
day he will inwardly and outwardly both plead our Cause, and execute Judgment
for us: He will bring forth our Righteousness, as the Light, and make his
Judgments for us manifest, as the Noon day; although we lie among the black
pots of your Reproaches. Now, the Lord will bring us forth unto the Light, and
we shall behold his Righteousness fulfilled in you, or manifested upon you: My
Witness is in Heaven, I am one, who desires not the Evil Day, but am willing to
embrace all the sweet opportunities of the drawings of my Father's Love, and
the arisings of his Life to stand in the Gap for the single-hearted among you:
and I must declare for the Exoneration of my own Conscience, I am an
experimental Witness, how grievously thou violatest the Truth, in
misrepresenting the things, which thou call, the bitter Root springing up in
these sprouts of Hell. 1. Men's not receiving the love of the Truth. 2. Their
pleasing themselves with Names and Notions, while Christ was not received to
dwell in the heart. 3. Their not departing from Iniquity, who seemed to call on
his Name. I am a Witness when the Lord called me out from among the
Presbyterians, I was one, who according to my Education and Information, and
Inclination from my Childhood was a true Lover of that called the Glorious
Gospel, and a constant Attender upon the Declarations thereof; and the
Messengers Feet, that published it, were beautiful to me, so long as those
Ordinances of man were unto me, as the Ordinances of Christ; which was more
than 30 years: I loved them more than all things in this World; I passed
through them hungry, and hardly bestead for many years, feeling after Life and
Immortality, but could not find that: somewhat was raised in me, that Words and
Reports could not feed; Names and Notions I minded little; but Christ to dwell
in me, was that and is, that more and more I press after.

And now I must for the Truth's sake say somewhat, which I humbly mention with
a fresh Remembrance of the Love, L. S. his first Convincement.
Power and tender Mercy of God, who enabled me (I know, the Lord will not
impute it to be boasting) in that season, wherein the Lord Revealed the true
way to Life and Immortality to me, by his Inward Appearance in my Soul: it was
a time, wherein he had mercifully turned me from all, that ever his Light
inwardly and Law outwardly had Condemned me for; my heart also did bear witness
for me, that whatsoever I had known would please him, I was choosing to do that:
not that thereby I was seeking Justification in my own Righteousness, but a
sure Evidence of my Interest in him, who was made unto us Righteousness,
Justification, etc This blessed Glimps of my begun Freedom was given me in a
seasonable time, that I might thereby be enabled to speak with mine Enemy in
the Gate, and be encouraged to believe in the Light, and wait upon the Lord, to
feel his virtue perfectly to Cleanse me from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit. Neither was I an Vnder-valuer of the Scriptures; they were my Rule
then, and I hope for ever my Life shall answer them: I think, To whom and how
the Scriptures are a Rule.
they honor the Scriptures most, who live most according to them; and not
they, who call them the Only Rule, yet do not make them their Pattern. The
Scriptures of Truth were precious to me, and by them was I taught not to walk
nor worship in the Way of the People; the Spirit showing me his mind in them:
and then I saw in his Light, that it is not the Scriptures many Adore so much,
as their own Corrupt Glosses upon them. Neither can my Experience go along,
with what thou affirmest of the hazard of Converse with that People: It is
very well known to all, that lived in the place, where I sojourned, I was none,
who Conversed with them; I was never at one of their Meetings; I never read one
of their Books, unless accidentally I had found them, where I came; and looked
to them, and laid them by again.

So now it remains with me to tell thee, what was the Occasion I joined with
them? The occasion of L. S. (...) joining with the Quakers.
since it was none of those thou mention'st; which I will very singly, and can
very comfortably do. It was that thing, ye Schoolmen call Immediate, Objective
Revelation, (which my desire is, ye were more particularly and feelingly
acquainted with) whereby the Lord raising in my Soul his feeling Life, I could
not sit down satisfied with hearing, of what the Son of God had done outwardly,
(though I believe, thereby he purchased all that Grace and Mercy, which is
inwardly wrought in the hearts of his Children) until I should be a partaker of
the Virtue and Efficacy thereof, whereby I might possess the Substance of
things hoped for. I saw, an Historical Faith would neither Cleanse me, nor Save
me; if that could save any, the Devils were not without a Door of Hope: I felt,
I needed the Revelation of the Son of God in me; all that ever I read or heard
without this, could not give me the Saving Knowledge of God. None knows the
Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son Reveals him; through the Virtue
whereof mine Eyes were more and more by degrees opened. For the tenderhearted
Samaritan had pity upon my wounded Soul, when both Priest and Levite passed by,
and the Watchmen rent my Vail; and when there was no Eye to pity, nor Hand to
help me, he drew near, and poured in Wine and Oil, as he saw needful, and
fulfilled the Promise in measure, wherein he had long caused me to hope, He
that follows me, The Scriptures made Comfortable by the Spirit of Truth.
shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life: and that sweet
saying, whereby I am confirmed and comforted; If evil Parents know, how to give
their Children good things, how much more will the Lord give his holy Spirit to
those who ask him? When your Children ask bread, will ye give them a stone? or
when they ask a fish, will ye give them a serpent? These precious Scriptures,
and many such like, being opened up and applied by the Spirit of Truth
powerfully and seasonably (in saying; Be not faithless, but believing) times
above number before and since has made me set to my seal to these words of
Christ, The words that I speak, are Spirit and Life, and as I walk with him,
and abide in him, watching at the posts of Wisdom's gates, traveling in Spirit
more and more to bring forth Fruit unto him, and walk worthy of him, unto all
well-pleasing, daily to die unto self, that Christ may live in me, I becoming a
passive Creature, and he an active Christ, in the Increase of his Government I
feel the Increase of my Peace.

And so, My Friend, thou have here by some Touches at things occasion to see,
how far thou art mistaken concerning us, and how far contrary to the Truth, as
it is in Jesus, thou represent'st many things to the world, speaking evil of
things which thou know not; and if thou do, the greater is thy sin. Two
Particulars indeed I cannot strain Charity so far as to believe, Christ owned
and the Scriptures.
thou think. Do we deny Jesus Christ, and Justification through his
Righteousness, because we make the Sufficiency thereof of a more universal
Extent, than ye? or because we love whole Christ so much, and his seamless
Coat, that we will not have it divided? Nay, we dare not divide Justification
and Sanctification, neither confound them; we have felt the Blood and the
Spirit distinct things, yet inseparable. Neither can thou think, We make void
the Scriptures; because we honor the Spirit, that was before the Scriptures
were written, and bear Testimony against all, who deny the Spirit's Immediate
Teachings to be the Universal Privilege of his People: whereby ye take away
the key of Knowledge, and neither enter the Kingdom, nor suffer others who
would; but monopolize Knowledge to your selves, Monopolized Knowledge by
Professors.
and intrude your Meanings upon the Consciences of men, as the Rule: which
Meanings indeed I do not own, either as the only, or any Rule, but as the
Spirit of Christ in my Conscience answers it. The Testimony of the Spirit of
Truth in Thousands with me will stand and rise up against thee, in the presence
of the Lord, when all thy Unjust Reproaches and Malicious Accusations shall
melt away before the presence of the Glory of the heart-searching God; before
whose Tribunal I desire daily to stand, that he may more narrowly search me by
his Light, and both discover and destroy, what he finds contrary to his Pure
Nature and Holy Will, whether mediately or immediately Revealed: and before
whose Tribunal thou and I will ere long more solemnly appear to give an Account
of things we have done in the body. Which that thou may do with Joy, and not
with Grief, hereafter, when thou commend'st thy Advice to the Readers of thy
Epistles, have so much Mercy upon thy own and the Souls of those thou writ'st
to, as to desire them to ponder their path, and be establisbed: and be sure,
they be come to the holy Faith, and not to an Implicit believing the Tradition
of men; for by so doing indeed, thou, and as many as thou can influence, may
come to fare well, according to Prove. 4:26. Ponder thy path, and be
established, and turn not to the right hand, nor the left. I am one,

Newtyle, the 8th. of the Fourth Month, 1678. Who, in my measure, Travel for
the Redemption of the Seed of God in all Souls, and in thine. LILLIAS SKEIN.

A Catalogue of some of the many downright Lies and Calumnies, which he asserts
in the Index before his Book, to be the Assertions of the Quakers.
All these things he Asserts falsely of us.
1. THat we arrogantly Style our selves the Servants of God. 2. That we glory
of the Title Quakers. 3. That we account our selves the only Teachers of Truth,
Equalizing our selves to the Apostles. 4. That we say, we are perfect without
Sin. 5. That we only taste, see and smell the Inward Light. 6. That we Assert
our Experiences, in matters that cannot be experienced. 7. That we assert our
selves to be Equal with God. 8. That we say, all is done without the Spirit,
that is not done in our Way. 9. That we remain Covered, when they Pray or
Praise, really to Mock. 10. That we ascribe as much to our own Writings, as to
the Scriptures. 11. That we speak basely of Learned Men. 12. That we Condemn
the Study of Original Languages. 13. That we speak most basely of the
Scriptures. 14. That we say, they are no Rule to us. 15. That we call them
Imperfect. 16. That we dissuade from Reading and Studying them. 17. That we
say, God only works a possibility of Salvation. 18. That we say, God
ordains nothing from Eternity. 19. That we deny Christ's second Coming. 20.
That we are not Clear concerning Jesus of Nazareth his being the Son of God.
21. That we acknowledge no Christ, but a Christ within us. 22. That we make him
nothing, but a mere holy Man. 23. That a Christ without us is but a Carnal
Christ with us. 24. That we are unclear touching the Sin of Adam, and the Fall.
25. That we make Original Sin to be a Substance. 26. That we deny, that
Heathens have any thing of the Law written in their Hearts. 27. That we say, a
Pagan can perform all inward Worship easily. 28. That we confound Revelations
with the gracious Operations of the Spirit. 29. That we succeed to the Old
Enthusiasts. 30. That we turn the History of Christ's Death into Allegories.
31. That we Wildly describe it. 32. That we say, there is no more Advantage to
be had by the History of Christ's Death, than by the History of other Saints.
33. That we miserably mistake the Judgment of the Orthodox about Reprobation.
34. That in exaggerating the matter of Reprobation, we miserably belch out
against God. 35. That we deny Faith and Repentance to be the Gifts of God. 36.
That we vilify the Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's Satisfaction. 37. That we
deny all Imputation of Righteousness. 38. That we say, the Patriarchs had no
Faith of the Messiah to come. 39. That with us all Members of the Church are
Officers. 40. That we say, all Worship must be done by inward Inspirations, as
to Time, Place, and Duration. 41. That we make no Use of the Scriptures in our
Worship. 42. That in our Worship we Unchristian and Vnman our selves. 43. That
we deny Magistrates to be lawful, that are not of our Way. 44. That we are
against giving of all Honor and Respect to Superiors or Equals. 45. That we
assert no Heaven nor Hell, but what is within us.
I could have noted several others, which are direct enough Lies, set down in
the Index, besides not a few he has in the Book, which are not in his Index;
and which the Reader will in this Vindication observe. There are also several
in the Index, which are false, and not owned by us, in the Terms he writes
them; of which I shall give the Reader a few Examples, that he may judge
thereby of his Fallacy in most of the rest. As where he says;

1. That we say, The Knowledge of the Fall is not necessary.

Now this is false, for we hold it necessary for all to be sensible of their
Loss and Want; only we say, a distinct Knowledge of the History of Adam's Fall
is not of Absolute Necessity to such, as God never afforded the means of
knowing it.

2. That we deny, bodily Death to be a Punishment for Sin.

This is also false; only we say, that it is not a Punishment for Sin unto all,
but rather a Pleasure and Satisfaction, according to the Apostle's Words, To me
to die is gain.

3. That with us the Preaching of the Gospel is not Necessary.

This is a mere Fallacy: for we say, the Preaching of the Gospel is absolutely
Necessary; only we do not think, the External Knowledge of Christ to be only
the Preaching of the Gospel: and that the Preaching of the Gospel has been or
may be, where this is wanting.

If I should go through the rest of the Index thus, I should find very few
particulars, in which there is not some such Perversion or Fallacy; so that
very few are set down, as they are truly owned by us: Some indeed are, such as;

1. That we deny Men to be Christians by Birth: for we believe, That Men by
nature are born Children of Wrath; and yet this may have Exceptions, as in the
case of Jeremiah and John the Baptist, who are said to be sanctified from their
Mothers Womb.

2. That we would have Ministers learning Trades, whereby to live. We truly
think, it were no Disparagement for Ministers to work with their Hands, as the
honest Apostle Paul did, who commended the same to the Elders of Ephesus, Act.
20.34. And yet we think, a Man may be a good Minister, though he have not a
Trade, and Work none; but yet never the Worse, if he have one.

3. That in Worship we think Men should be silent in the first place: Yes; for
Silence goes before all solemn Actions of Speaking.

4. That we think to Command Men to pray without the Spirit, is to Command Men
to see without Eyes: Yes; because we know not what to pray for, as we ought,
without it, Romans 8.26. and no Man should be Commanded to Pray, as he ought not.

But as to these which are indeed owned by us, thou will find them at large
vindicated by Scripture and Reason, either in my Apology, or in this Treatise.
I could have made a further Remark in this his Index, to show thee, how many of
them he sets down, as our Assertions, are not, nor ever were Asserted by any of
us, nor by him Affirmed to be so, where he has them in his Book, but only his
own mere Conjectures and Consequences; but I am loath to detain thee any longer
in this: by looking the Pages, to which he refers, thou may easily
observe it.


Toward the Foundation and Ground of True FAITH, proved in a Letter writ in
Latin to a Person of Quality in Holland; and now also put into English: by R.
B.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THIS serves to Inform thee, That it is above seven Years, since this Epistle
was Printed in Latin: The Person to whom it was writ, the Here Paets, is a Man
of no mean Account both in the Learned and Politic World; The Conference I had
with him, was lately after his Return from Spain, where he had been Ambassador
from the United Netherlands. I discoursed with him on the same Subject, last
Year at London, where he was one of the Commissioners for the Dutch East-Indian
Company; but could not find him propose any thing New, nor what I could
Conceive, had any Weight toward a Reply. What his Reasons were, not to
prosecute this Matter further, I shall not determine: But thus far he readily
yielded, That he had been mistaken in his Notion of the Quakers; for he found,
they could make a Reasonable Plea for the Foundation of their Religion. Upon my
reading it over again, I found an Inclination in my self, and was persuaded by
some Friends to publish it in a Language more obvious to all my Country Men. It
is a Question now frequently tossed, The Ground of Faith and its Foundation,
Revelation.
What is the Ground and Foundation of Faith? And when the Matter is sifted to
the bottom, it resolves in Tradition, or Revelation: For those who lay claim to
the Scripture, and would make it the Foundation of their Faith, do resolve it
but in a Tradition, when the Motives of Credibility are Inquired into; since
the subjective Revelation, which they yield, comes but in the last place, and
is by themselves termed Medium Incognitum Assentiendi. And such a Revelation
those of Rome will not refuse, to influence them to Assent to the determination
of the Church: So those Protestants, who say, The subjective Operation of the
Spirit influences them, (though they know not how) to believe the Scripture,
presented and conveyed to them by Tradition, as the Dictates of GOD's Spirit,
and so understand them, as their Preachers interpret them; differ not much, or
at least have not Reason to differ from the Church of Rome, who say, The Church
of Rome 's Belief concerning Scriptures.
The Spirit Influences them to believe the Scriptures, as proposed by the
Church, and according as her Doctors and Councils Interpret them: And neither
has any better Foundation, than Tradition. And to speak the Truth plainly, the
Faith of both resolves in the Veneration they have for their Doctors: but
whereas the one affirms, they do it by an Entire Submission; they think it
decent to say, they judge them Infallible. And certainly, it is most
reasonable, that such as affirm the first, believe the last. The other, because
they pretend, they believe the Church but conditionally, have denied to her
Infallibility; though generally they be as Credulous, as the other. And I find,
the Doctors of their Church as angry to be Contradicted* as the other; that is
an Ingredient goes to the Composition of all Clergymen, since it became a
Trade, and went to make a part of the outward Policy of the World; from whence
has flowed that Monster PERSECUTION. In short, the matter is easily driven into
this narrow Compass: We believe either because of an outward or inward
Testimony, that is, because it is outwardly delivered to us, or inwardly
Revealed to us. For my part, I think, the Papists do wisely in pleading for
Infallibility; for certainly, the true Church never was nor can be without it:
And the Protestants do honestly in not claiming it; because they are sensible,
they want it. I should therefore desire the one to prove, That they* are
Infallible; and advise the other to believe, They may, and seek after it: But I
am sure, neither the one is, nor the other cannot without Immediate, Divine
Revelation. Therefore as to deny Revelation, is a bad way to prove
Infallibility; so to deny Infallibility, is a bad way to make a Reformation:
Since they, who do Reform, had need to be certain, they are doing so. The
asserting of Infallibility in the Church of Christ, is not the Error of the
Church of Rome; but the pretending to it, when they have it not, and placing it
where they should not: But since those who oppose Immediate Revelation, do it
on the account, that they reckon it either Impossible, or Unnecessary; I hope
there will be as much found in this Epistle, as will evince the Contrary. I
have now Exceeded the Limits of an Advertisement; but being known not to be a
Man of Form, I hope, my Reader will Excuse me: to whom I wish true Certainty of
Faith, and so bid him heartily Farewell!

The 9. of October. 1686. Robert Barclay.

My Friend,
ALBEIT I Judge, I did fully Answer to all thy Arguments in that Conference we
had, concerning the Necessity and Possibility of Inward, Immediate Revelation,
and of the Certainty of True Faith from thence proceeding: nevertheless,
because after we had made an end, and were parting, thou would needs Remit
to my further Consideration the strength of thy Argument, as that in which thou
supposedst the very Hing of the Question to lie. That I might satisfy thy
Desire, and that the Truth might more appear, I did further Consider of it; but
the more I weighed it, I found it the Weaker. And therefore that thou thy self
may make the truer Judgment of it, I thought meet to send thee my Further
Considerations thereon; (which I had done ere now, had not I both at London and
elsewhere been diverted by other necessary Occasions) wherein, I doubt not, but
thou will perceive a full and distinct Answer to thy Argument. But if thou
can not as yet yield to the Truth, or think mine Answer in any part to be
defective, so that there yet remains with thee any Matter of Doubt or Scruple;
I do earnestly desire thee, that as I for thy sake, and out of Love to the
Truth have not been wanting to Examine thy Argument, and to Transmit to thee my
Considerations thereon; so thou may give thy self the Trouble to Write and
Send me, what thou haft further to say: Which my Friend N. N. who delivers thee
this, will at what Time thou shall appoint, Receive from thee, and Transmit to
me thy Letter; that at last the Truth may appear, where it is.

And that the whole matter may the more clearly be understood, it will be fit
in the first Place, To propose thy Argument, whereby thou Opposest the
Immediate Revelation of GOD in the Saints; thence concluding, thou have fully
overturned the Foundation of the People called Quakers. Which Argument of thine
is;

H.P's Objection against Immediate Revelation stated, by way of Argument.
That since (as thou Judge) the Being and Substance of the Christian Religion
consists in the Knowledge of, and Faith concerning the Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ Jesus, thou considerest the Substance of
the Christian Religion, as a Contingent Truth; which Contingent Truth is matter
of Fact. Whence thou reasonest; That -- Matter of Fact cannot be known, but by
the Relation of another, or by the perception of the outward Senses; because
there are naturally in our Souls no Idea's of Contingent Truths, such as are
concerning Necessary Truths: To wit, That GOD is; and that the Whole is greater
than the Part. -- And since it may without absurdity be said, That

GOD cannot make a Contingent Truth to become a Necessary Truth; neither can
GOD reveal Contingent Truths or Matters of Fact, but as Contingent Truths are
Revealed: But Matters of Fact are not revealed, but by the outward Senses: --
From whence thou Concludest, That

Men are not even obliged to believe GOD producing any Revelation in the Soul
concerning Matter of Fact, whether of a thing done, or to be done, unless there
be added some Miracles obvious to the outward senses, by which the Soul may be
Ascertained, that that Revelation comes from G0D.



And this thou endeavourest also to prove from the Scripture, The Proofs of the
Argument.
Romans 10. where the Apostle says, Faith comes by Hearing: And because the
Apostle speaks afterward of those, who were sent, in the Plural Number;
thence thou concludest, That to be spoken of outward Preaching by the Ministry
of Men: And since the Apostle uses a Question, saying; How shall they believe,
unless they hear? Thou gatherest from the Induction and Connection of the Text,
that the Apostle treats only of outward Hearing; thence Concluding, That
without outward Hearing, Faith cannot be produced: And therefore, that there
can be no Immediate Revelation by the simple operation of the Spirit in the
Mind, unless there be somewhat proposed to the Outward Senses.

Before I proceed to a direct Answer to this Argument, some things are
necessary to be premised:

First then; That is falsely supposed, The Christian Religion consists not in
the Historical Knowledge of Christ.
That the Essence of the Christian Religion consists in the Historical Faith
and Knowledge of the Birth, Death, Life, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.
That Faith and Historical Knowledge is indeed a part of the Christian Religion;
but not such an Essential Part, as that without which the Christian Religion
cannot consist; but an Integral Part, which goes to the Completing of the
Christian Religion: as the Hands or Feet of a Man are Integral Parts of a Man,
without which nevertheless a Man may exist, but not an Entire and Complete Man.

Secondly: The Historical Knowledge of Christ is not commonly manifested to us,
but by the Holy Scripture.
If by Immediate Revelation be understood such a Revelation of GOD, as begets
in our Souls an Historical Faith and Knowledge of the Birth of Christ in the
Flesh, without the Means of the Holy Scripture, we do not contend for such a
Revelation, as commonly given, or to be expected by us or any other Christians.
For albeit many other Evangelical Truths be manifested to us by the Immediate
Manifestation of God, not using the Scripture as the Means; yet the Historical
Knowledge of Christ is not commonly manifested to us, nor to any others, but by
the Holy Scripture, as the Means, and that by way of a Material Object: Even as
when we see the Person of Peter or Paul to our visive Faculty Immediately, yet
not without the Medium of that Person concurring as a Material Object to
produce that Sight; while the Light of the Sun concurs, as the formal Object of
that Vision or Sight. So that when we Livingly and Spiritually know the History
of the Birth of Christ in the Flesh; the Inward Revelation or Illumination of
GOD, which is like the Sun's Light, proceeding from the Divine Sun, does shine
into the Eye of the Mind, and by Its Influence moves the Mind to Assent unto
the Historical Truth of CHRIST's Birth, Life, etc. in the Reading or Hearing
the Scripture, or Meditating therein.

Thirdly: God can manifest the Historical Truth of Christ to our Minds without
the Scripture.
Nevertheless we do firmly Assert, That GOD can most easily, clearly and
certainly manifest to our Minds the Historical Truths of CHRIST's Birth, etc.
when it so pleases Him, even without the Scripture, or any other outward Mean.
And because this Argument seems to be formed against the possibility of such a
Revelation, therefore I shall proceed to discuss it: But first thou may
mind, that the Prophets, who foretold CHRIST's Coming in the Flesh, and being
to be born of a Virgin, and afterward to suffer Death, did know these Truths
of Fact by the Inward Inspiration of GOD without Outward Means: For which see 1
Pet. 1.10, 11. Now that which has been, may be.

Fourthly: This Argument does at most Conclude, that we cannot know Naturally
any Truth of Fact, A Contingent Truth may be known by a Supernatural Knowledge.
but by the Relation of another without us, or by the perception of the outward
Senses; because there are naturally in our Minds no Idea's concerning
Contingent Truths (and every Truth of Fact is a Contingent Truth) as there are
of necessary Truths. This then proves, that we cannot naturally know any
Contingent Truth, but by the Relation of another, or perception of the outward
Senses: But that hinders not, but we may know a Contingent Truth by a
Supernatural Knowledge, GOD supplying the place of an outward Relator; who is
so true, that he may and ought to be believed, since GOD is the Fountain of
Truth.

The Form of Revelation is the voice of God inwardly speaking to the Mind of
Man.
Fifthly: When GOD does make known unto Men any Matter of Fact by Divine,
Immediate Revelation or Inspiration, GOD speaking as to the Ear of the Heart of
the Inward Man, or as by his Finger writing it therein, two things are to be
considered in such an Immediate Revelation.

1. (...) Materiale, The Matter of Fact or thing Revealed, which is Contingent.

2 (...) Formale, The Form or Mode, how the Revelation is made: which Form is
an Inward, Divine and Supernatural Revelation, which is the Voice or Speech of
GOD, inwardly speaking to the Ear of the Inward Man, or Mind of Man, or a
Divine Writing supernaturally imprinted therein. Now as to the Material Part,
or the thing and Matter Revealed, this is indeed a Contingent Truth, and of it
self is not manifest to the Mind; but because of the Form, that is, because of
the Divine Mode, and supernatural, Inward Operation, the matter is known to be
true. For that Divine and Supernatural, Inward Operation, which the Mind does
feel and perceive in it self, is the Voice of GOD speaking unto Man, which by
its Nature and specific Property is as clearly distinguished and understood to
be the Voice of GOD, as the Voice of Peter or James is known to be the Voice of
such Men. For every Being as a Being is knowable, and that by its own specific
Nature or Property proceeding from its Nature; and has its proper Idea, by
which it is distinguishable from every other thing, if so be it is Idea be
stirred up in us, and clearly proposed to us.

The speaking of God in Man is a Supernatural Being known by its Virtue.
Sixthly: Now as some Beings are Natural, some Supernatural; so some Idea's are
Natural, some Supernatural: And as when any Natural Idea is excited in us, we
clearly know it; so also when a Supernatural Idea is raised, we clearly know
that, whereof it is the Idea. But the Voice of GOD speaking to the Mind of Man,
is a Supernatural Being, and stirs up in us a Supernatural Idea, by which we
clearly know that Inward Voice to be the Voice of GOD, and not the Voice or
Operation of another, or of any Evil Spirit, or Angel, because none of these
has a supernatural Idea, as the Voice of GOD, and his Divine Operation has:
for it is full of Vigor, Virtue, and Divine Glory, as says the Psalmist, who
had often Experience of it; and we also in our Measures are Witnesses thereof,
for the Voice of GOD is known to be his by its Divine Virtue.

Seventhly: The Senses are either Outward or Inward; What the Inward
Supernatural Sense in Man is?
and the Inward Senses are either Natural or Supernatural: We have an Example
of the Inward, Natural Sense in being Angered or Pacified, in Love and Hatred;
or when we perceive and discern any Natural Truth, (such as the Natural Maxims,
to wit, That the whole is greater than the part) or when we deduce any
Conclusion by the strength of Natural Reason, that Perception also in a larger
sense may be called an Inward Sense. But an Example of an Inward, Supernatural
Sense is, when the Heart or Soul of a pious Man feels in it self Divine
Motions, Influences and Operations, which sometimes are as the Voice or Speech
of GOD, sometimes as a most pleasant and glorious Illustration or visible
Object to the inward Eye, sometimes as a most-sweet Savor or Taste, sometimes
as an Heavenly and Divine Warmness, or (so to speak) Melting of the Soul in the
Love of G0D. Moreover this Divine and Supernatural Operation in the Mind of a
Man, is a true and most-glorious Miracle; which when it is perceived by the
Inward and Supernatural Sense divinely raised up in the Mind of Man, does so
evidently and clearly persuade the Understanding to Assent to the thing
Revealed, that there is no need of an outward Miracle: for this Assent is not
because of the thing it self, but because of the Revelation proposing it, which
is the Voice of GOD. For when the Voice of GOD is heard in the Soul, the Soul
does as certainly conclude the Truth of that Voice, as the Truth of GOD's
Being, from whom it proceeds.

These things being thus premised, Contingent and Necessary Truths
distinguishes.
I now proceed to a direct Answer. For what is said, That GOD cannot make a
Contingent Truth to become a necessary Truth, I agree; but when any Contingent
Truth is manifest to us by the Immediate Revelation of GOD, there is in it two
things to be considered, to wit, the Thing Revealed, which is Contingent; and
the Revelation it self: which upon the Supposition, that it is a Divine
Revelation, is no Contingent Truth, but a most Necessary Truth. And this all
mankind will say, that this Proposition, Every divine Revelation is necessarily
true, is as clear and evident, as that Proposition, That every Whole is
greater, than its Part.

But thou will say; How know thou, that a Divine Revelation is a Divine
Revelation? I answer, how know thou, How a Divine Revelation is known to be
a Divine Revelation.
that a Whole is a Whole, and a Part is a Part? Thou will say; by the natural
Idea excited in me of a Whole, and of a Part. I answer again; Even so a Divine
Revelation is known to be such by a Supernatural Idea of Divine Revelation
stirred up in us, and that by a Divine Motion or Supernatural Operation. But it
is no wonder, that Men, who have no Experience of Supernatural Ideas, or at
least do not heed them, do deny them; which is, as if a man naturally blind
denied Light or Colors; or a deaf Man Sounds, because they experience them
not. Therefore we cannot dissemble, fervent Zeal even Divinely kindled in us
against such an absurd opinion, as affirms, That God cannot Ascertain us of his
Will in any contingent Truth, but by proposing it to the outward Senses. This
Opinion does in a manner turn Men into Brutes, as if Man were not to believe
his GOD, unless he propose, what is to be believed, to the outward Senses,
which the Beasts have Common with us: yea, it derogates from GOD's Power, and
imputes Weakness to him, as if he could not do that, which not only both good
and evil Angels can do, but which the meanest Creatures can do, and the most
unsensible. As for Instance: The Heat of the Fire, Natural and Spiritual Senses
distinshguisht by their Objects.
the Coldness of the Air and Water works upon us; yea, if a Pin prick us, we
feel it, and that by the outward Sense; because the Objects are outward and
carnal: But since GOD is a most- Pure and Glorious Spirit, when he operateth in
the Innermost parts of our Minds by his Will; shall not he and his Will be
clearly felt according to his Nature, that is, by a spiritual and supernatural
Sense? For as the Nature of G0D is, so is the Nature of his Will, to wit,
purely spiritual; and therefore requires a Spiritual Sense to discern it:
which Spiritual Sense, when it is raised up in us by a divine Operation, does
as clearly and certainly know the Voice or Revelation of the Will of GOD,
concerning any thing which GOD is pleased to Reveal however Contingent, as the
outward Sense knows, and perceives the Outward Object. And it is no less
Absurd, to require of GOD, who is a most-pure Spirit, to manifest his Will to
Men by the outward Senses, else not to be Credited; as to require us to see
Sounds, and hear Light and Colors. For as the Objects of the outward Senses
are not to be confounded, but every Object is to have its proper Sense; so must
we judge of inward and spiritual Objects, which have their proper Sense,
whereby they are to be perceived. And tell me, how God does manifest his Will
concerning Matters of Fact, when he sends his Angels to men, since Angels (as
is commonly received) have not outward Senses, or at least not so gross ones,
as ours are? Yea, when Men die, and appear before the Tribunal of GOD, whether
unto Eternal Life or Death, how can they know this having laid down their
Bodies, and therewith their outward Senses? And nevertheless this Truth of GOD
is a Truth of Fact, as is the Historical Truth of Christ's Birth in the Flesh.
And which is yet more near: How Good Men know, they are with God in Favor?
how do good and holy Men even in this Life most certainly know, that they are
in Favor and Grace with GOD? No Outward Revelation does make this known unto
them; but The Spirit (as says the Apostle) bears witness with our Spirits,
that we are the Children of GOD. For the mere Testimony of a humane Conscience,
without the Inward Testimony of the holy Spirit, cannot beget in us a firm and
immovable Testimony of our Sonship, because the Heart of Man is deceitful; and
if the Tistimony thereof were true, at most it is but a Humane Testimony, which
begets in us only an Humane Faith: But that Faith, by which holy Men believe
they are the Sons of GOD, is a Divine Faith, which leans upon a Divine
Testimony of the holy Spirit, witnessing in them, that they are the Sons of
GOD. Moreover, when a good Man feels in himself that undeclarable Joy of the
holy Spirit, concerning which the holy Scripture speaks, Privilege of the
Saints, how or whence feels he this Joy? Truly, this Argument concludes no less
against this Heavenly, Spiritual Joy, which is begotten in the Souls of the
Saints by the holy Spirit, then it does against the Immediate Revelation of
G0D: for there is no natural Idea in Men of this spiritual Joy, else mere
natural Men, yea such, as are profane and ungodly, would feel it as much as the
Godly: How Profane Men do feel the Wrath of God as Fire.
But because it is a Supernatural thing, Therefore it can have no true Idea,
but what is Supernatural. Moreover whence is it, that profane Men feel
sometimes in themselves the Wrath of GOD as Fire, when all things, as to the
outward, go as prosperously with them as with the Godly, and oftentimes more
prosperously? For there is no Natural Idea in Men of this inward Wrath of GOD.
There is also an inward Grief oftentimes raised up in Wicked Men from the sense
of this Wrath of G0D, which very much vexes and tormenteth their Minds; and
nevertheless this Grief has no Natural Idea in us: For oftentimes wicked Men
feel not this Sorrow; for God sometimes is, as it were silent, while the Wicked
sin, as in Psalm 50.

All which things do most clearly demonstrate, that there are in Men
Supernatural Idea's of Supernatural Beings; which Idea's are nevertheless not
perceived by us, unless they be stirred up by some Supernatural Operation of
GOD, which raises up in us Supernatural and Spiritual Senses, which by their
Nature are as distinguishable from the natural Senses, whether inward or
outward, as the natural Senses are distinguished one from another by their
specific Difference. Of which Spiritual Senses the Scripture speaks
frequently, as Heb. 5. and 14. where is spoken of the Spiritual Senses in
general, by which the spiritual Man has the discerning of Good and Evil:
Spiritual Senses discerning good and evil.
Which Good is of a Spiritual Nature, and conduces to feed in us a Spiritual
and Divine Life; and the Evil is of that kind, by which the spiritual Life is
in us hurt; to wit, Sins, whether Carnal or Spiritual: All which cannot be
discerned, but by such, who have Spiritual Senses stirred up in them, as says
the Apostle. In other places the Scripture also speaks of these Spiritual
Senses in particular; as of the Spiritual Seeing, Psalm. 34.9. Of the Spiritual
Hearing, Psalm. 85. and 9. Of Spiritual Tasting, Psalm. 34.8. Of Spiritual
Smelling, Cant. 1.3. Of Spiritual Touching, Act. 17.8. and in many other places
of Scripture we read of those Spiritual Senses in particular. Yea, it is the
Promise of the Gospel, that The Glory of GOD shall be seen of holy Men, such as
are clean of Heart, even in this Life: Isa. 33.17. Mat. 5.8. Which were
fulfilled in the Primitive Christians, fee John 1.14. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. 2
Cor. 3.18. and Chap. 4.6. But what is this Vision of GOD and Divine Glory,
which the Souls of the Saints enjoy in this Life, which is only as the Earnest
or first Fruits of that more abundant, glorious Vision in the Life to come,
concerning which the Scripture so much declares, which is the highest
Happiness of the Immortal Soul!

For this Argument seems to do no less Injury to the Saints, than to rob them
of this most glorious Treasure both in this Life, and that to come. For there
is in us no Natural Idea of this Divine Glory, as there is not of GOD himself,
which is any ways proportionable unto so great Happiness, which the Scripture
so much declares of, by which the Godly are Rewarded partly in this Life, and
plenarily in that which is to Come. The Existence of a most perfect Being
Asserted.
We confess indeed, there is in all Men, as well the Godly as Ungodly, some
sort of Idea of GOD, as of a most perfect Being; and that therefore this
Proposition, There existeth a most perfect Being, does as clearly appear to
Human Understanding, as that The whole is greater than the part: And therefore
this Proposition, That a most perfect Being existeth, ought to be numbered among
the Principles, that of themselves are manifest. But this Idea of GOD is as
manifest to Ungodly, as to Godly Men; yea, is as clearly perceived by the
Devil, as by the most holy Angels: For all the Devils know, that GOD is; but
yet how blind is the Devil, and all wicked Men as to the Vision of GOD, which
is the Chief Reward of the Saints.

There is then either no such Vision of GOD, neither in this Life nor in that
to come; or there is a Supernatural Idea of GOD in us, by which we are made
capable of this Vision: The Supernatural Idea of God differs from the Natural.
Which Supernatural Idea of GOD differs much from that Natural Idea of GOD,
which Cartesius and his Followers so much talk of, (albeit others long before
Cartesius did observe this Natural Idea of GOD, and spoke of it) But the
Happiness of the Saints consists not in Contemplating this Natural Idea of God,
else the Wicked would be as happy, as the Godly; yea, the very Devil, as the
most holy Angel: Since as is said, both the Devil and most Wicked Men do as
clearly perceive this Natural Idea of GOD, as the most Holy Men or Angels.

If the Scripture then be true, there is in Men a Supernatural Idea of GOD,
There is in all Men a Supernatural Idia of God.
which altogether differs from this Natural Idea: I say in all Men; because all
Men are capable of Salvation, and consequently, of enjoying this Divine Vision.
Now this Capacity consists herein, that they have such a Supernatural Idea in
themselves: For if there were no such Idea in them, it were impossible, they
should so know God. For whatsoever is clearly and distinctly known, is known by
its proper Idea; neither can it other ways be clearly and distinctly known: For
the Idea's of all things are Divinely planted in our Souls; for they are not
begotten in us by outward Objects, or outward Causes, (as the better Philosophy
teaches) but only are by these outward things excited or stirred up. And this
is true not only in Supernatural Idea's of G0D, and things Divine, and in
Natural Idea's of the Natural Principles of Humane Understanding, and
Conclusions thence deduced by the strength of Human Reason; but even in the
Idea's of outward Objects, which are perceived by the outward Senses: As that
Noble Christian Philosopher Boethius has well observed; Boethius a Christian
Philosopher.
to which also the Cartesian Philophy agrees. For when I see any outward
Object, whether it be a Man, or Horse, or Bird, the outward Object do^ not
treat in my Eye, nor yet in my Mind the Idea of those things; for the outward
Object does nothing, but Imprint in our sensible Organs a Corporal Motion. Now
there is nothing in a Corporal Motion, that can form in us the Idea's of those
things; The Motions of the Body and Mind distinguished.
for all Idea's are of a Spiritual Nature: Now, nothing that is Corporal, can
produce that which is Spiritual, because The less Excellent cannot produce the
more Excellent, else the Effect would exceed its Cause; which is against all
sound Reason, that it should bring forth, what were of a higher and more
Excellent kind. Therefore all Idea's, whether of Natural or Spiritual things,
are Divinely Implanted in our Minds: Which nevertheless do not always appear,
but sometimes appear, and sometimes are as it were hid in us; and sometimes are
stirred up in us by Causes outward or inward, and again do as it were sleep and
shun our observation, and seem not to be otherways distinguished by our Minds,
but as Thoughts and Perceptions of the Mind from the Mind it self; that is, as
the Mode from the Subject, or as a Bodily Motion from the Body, whereof it is
the Motion: For as is the Relation of a Bodily Motion to a Body, so is the
Relation of a Thought or Perception of the Mind to the Mind. In this
nevertheless they differ, that the Mind can move it self and operate in it
self; which a Body cannot do: but as a Body can be moved by another, so also
can the Mind after its manner be moved by another, and that both by outward and
inward Causes; but Chiefly by GOD himself, in whose Hand all Souls and
Creatures are. But of these things there is enough said at present; and I hope,
I have not thus far Impertinently Philosophised.

To return again to the matter in Question: It is already proved, That there is
in a Man a Supernatural Idea of GOD; from whence it easily may be concluded,
There are other Supernatural Idea's in Man also, to wit; Concerning Divine and
Supernatural Things: Yea, as the Saints Experience does prove it, neither does
sound Reason any ways Contradict it.

As there are then Natural Idea's concerning the things of the Natural World,
as for instance; Idea's of Light and Colors, Supernatural Idea's deducible
from the Natural.
Idea's of Voice and Sounds, Idea's of Savouring and Smelling, Idea's of
Tasting and Feeling, as of Heat and Cold, of Grief and Joy; it follows also,
that there are Idea's of supernatural things, concerning the Divine and
Supernatural things of the Divine and Supernatural World; as Idea's of those
things above mentioned in the Spiritual World. And as the Natural Idea's are
stirred up in us by Outward and Natural Bodies; so those Divine and
Supernatural Idea's are stirred up in us by a certain Principle, which is a
Body in Naturals in Relation to the Spiritual World, and therefore may be
called a Divine Body: Not as if it were a part of GOD, who is a most pure
Spirit; but the Organ or Instrument of GOD, The Flesh and Blood of Christ, by
which the Saints are nourished.
by which he works in us, and stirs up in us these Idea's of Divine
things. This is that Flesh and Blood of Christ, by which the Saints are
nourished; which is a Mystery to all Unregenerated and mere Natural Men, never
to be reached by them, while they remain in that State.

Now if there be such Supernatural Idea's, there are also Senses, or Perceptive
Faculties, by which those Ideas are perceived; for those are two Relatives,
that suppose and infer one another: But in Wicked men those Senses or Faculties
do as it were sleep (as the Visive Faculty of a Blind man;) But in the Godly
they are stirred up. Now by these Divine and Spiritual Senses, which are
distinct and distinguishable from all the natural Faculties of the Soul,
whether of Imagination, or natural Reason, Spiritual-minded Men do behold the
Glory and Beauty of GOD, The Beauty of God makes the Glory of this World
Despicable.
in respect whereof and for which all the Glory of this World is despicable to
them; yea, even as dross and dung: and tkey also hear GOD Inwardly speaking in
their Souls, words truly Divine and Heavenly, full of Virtue and Divine Life;
and they savor and taste of Divine things, and do as it were handle them with
the hands of their Souls. And those Heavenly Enjoiments do as really differ in
their nature from all false Similitudes and fictitious Appearances of them,
which either the mind of Man by its own strength can Imitate, or any evil
Spirit to deceive Man can Counterfeit; as a true Man differs from the dead
Image of a Man; or true Bread, Honey, Wine or Milk does from the mere Picture
of those things. And albeit either the Imagination of Man, or Subtilty of the
Devil may Counterfeit false Likenesses of these Enjoiments, by which Men may be
deceived; and no doubt many are deceived; that does not hinder, but that those
Divine Enjoiments are clearly perceived in such, in whom the Divine and
Spiritual Senses are truly opened, The Cause of Mistakes by false Likenesses of
Reason.
and the true Supernatural Idea's of those things truly raised up. And if there
be at any time a Mistake, the Divine Illumination is not the cause of that
Mistake, but some evil disposition of the Mind; as happens in those things
relating to natural Reason: For there are many false Appearances of Reason,
which differ as much from true Reason, as those false and pretended
Revelations, and Diabolical Inspirations from such as are truly Divine. Now,
how many Men, who would be esteemed Philosophers, are miserably deceived by
those false Likenesses of Reason, Judging their false Reasons to be the true
Similitudes of things, and solid Ratiocinations; which nevertheless moves no
Man of sound Reason to reject sound and solid Reason, as doubtful and
uncertain? For even sound, natural Reason is an Excellent Gift of G0D, and very
useful to mankind, when used in its proper place: Natural Reason comprehends
not things Supernatural.
But let none think, to comprehend by their natural Reason things that are of a
Divine and Supernatural kind. And as we use to do, when any one is deceived by
false Appearances of Reason, we endeavor to reduce them to Contemplate the
first natural Idea's of natural things, and to meditate therein, which is as a
Test or Touchstone, by which all the Appearances and Likenesses of Reason are
to be Examined; if they Contradict them, to be Rejected. So also when any one
is deceived by his own Imagination, or the Cunning of Satan, thinking, any Evil
Inspiration of the Devil to be a true, Divine Revelation; He that is so
deceived, is to be reduced to the natural Ideas of things (if so be that
pretended Revelation does contradict them, for no true, Divine Revelation can
Contradict the true natural Idea) or to the Supernatural Idea's of Divine
things, which are most simple, clear and obvious to the minds of men, if they
will turn their minds to the Divine Seed in them; or at least, those Ideas are
readily and easily stirred up: The Supernatural Idea's of divine things are
most Clear and Obvious to the mind.
For as in Natural Ideas, so in Supernatural some are more easily raised, than
others. For there is a certain Order both of Natural and Supernatural Idea's,
whereby they are gradually excited: Nor is there any Mortal Man, in whose Mind
at some time or other there is not stirred up some Idea, that is truly
Supernatural and Divine: and who has not felt in himself both the Wrath and
Judgment of GOD for his Sins? and also some tender and gentle Taste o^ GOD's
Love and Goodness, by which wicked Men are invited to Repentance? Now that
which is thought to be a Divine Revelation, and is felt to Contradict any
Divine and Supernatural Idea, which is clearly perceived in the Soul, it is a
manifest token, that it is not a Divine Revelation, but either a false
Imagination, or the wicked Suggestion of some Evil Spirit.

But to proceed: God has declared his Will even in Contingent Truths in the
Scripture.
If we will hear the Scripture (as all Christians ought) it testifies to us,
That GOD has declared his Mind and Will even concerning Contingent Truths to
come in the Prophets; as that of the first to the Hebrews does evidently
declare: GOD, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke to our Fathers
in the Prophets. Yea, let us hear the Prophets themselves: Hosea Chap: 1. says
plainly, That the Word of the LORD was made in him (as it is in the Heb.)
Habakkuk also says, As he was standing on his Watch, to see what Jehovah would
speak in him. And it is so manifest, Revelations were in the minds of the
Prophets by Inward ^nspirations.
that the most Heavenly Revelations are by Inward Illustrations and
Inspirations in the very Minds of the Prophets; that it is strange, how any,
that believes the Scripture, should doubt of it. And if it happened at any
time, such Revelations were made in the natural Imaginations of the Prophets,
or any of their Inward, Natural Senses; then it may be confessed, they could
not be Infallibly Certain, they came from GOD; unless they also felt God in the
Divine and Supernatural Senses, by which they did most nearly approach to him,
from these Superior and most-Inward Senses working upon the lower and less
noble Faculties of the Mind. But which ever way the Prophets were certain, that
they were Inspired of GOD, even when they foretold Contingent Truths to come;
it is without doubt, they were most certainly persuaded, that they were
Divinely Inspired, Which were most-certain without any Outward Miraculous
Demonstrations.
and that frequently, without any outward Miracle. For John the Baptist did no
Miracle; and many Prophesied, where there appeared no Miracle: as in the
Scripture may be often observed. And we also by the Inspiration of the same
Divine Spirit, by which the Prophets prophesied, do believe their Words and
Writings to be Divine concerning Contingent Truths, as well past, as to come;
else that Faith, by which we believe the Scripture, would not be Divine, but
merely Humane. And thence we need no outward Miracles to move us to Believe the
Scriptures; and therefore much less were they necessary to the Prophets, who
Writ them. For we see in many places of the Prophets, where they declare
Prophecies as revealed to them of GOD, there is not a word mentioned of any
outward Miracle, as that by Which alone they were Certain of it. Moreover the
Falseness of this Argument does appear, in that the Scripture does declare many
Contingent Truths to have been revealed to the Prophets in Dreams: Divine
Revelations by Dreams.
Now as natural and wicked Men do not see, what they dream, by a real
perception of the Outward Senses, but by Inward Idea's, which are presented to
the Mind, and perceived by it; so it is also in Divine Revelations of this
nature. Of which we have a clear Example in Joseph, the Husband of the Blessed
Virgin, who when he observed his Wife with Child, was told in a Dream, That She
had Conceived by the Holy Ghost: Now I would know, to which of Joseph's Outward
Senses was this Revealed? Or what Miracle had he to Induce him to Believe?
Which could neither be proved, (so as to make an Infallible Application to
Mary) by the Testimony of the Scripture; and which being against the Order of
Nature, did Choke his Reason. The Scripture mentions no Miracle in this matter;
and yet no doubt Joseph had highly sinned, had he not Believed this Revelation,
and not withstanding rejected his Wife, as an Adulteress. But if thou say,
That according to thy Hypothesis there must have been a Miracle; That is only
to beg the Question: And how false this Hypothesis is, The Apostle shows
clearly Corinth. 2.14. The Natural or Animal Man knows not, receives not the
things of GOD. Now Divine Revelations are of this Nature; The Outward Senses
cannot discern the things of God; for they are Spiritual.
and if either chiefly or only those things were to be Judged by the Outward
Senses, it would Contradict the Apostle. For natural Men, yea, the most-wicked
have the use of the outward Senses as true and exact, as the most-Godly. And
whereas the Apostle adds, For they are Spiritually Discerned; It puts the
Matter out of all Question: For thence it abundantly appears, that this
discerning is not by the Outward Senses, according to the following verse; for
the Apostle says: The Spiritual Man Judges all things; This then must be done
by some Senses or properties Peculiar to the Spiritual Man, and in which he
excells the Natural man, which is not in the outward Senses (as all do know.)
Therefore the Perception of Spiritual things cannot be by the outward Senses
either as the chief or only Means, as is falsely contended for.

Now as to these words of the Apostle, Romans 10. That Faith comes by Hearing;
Zuinglius observed well, That the Apostle intended not to affirm Faith to come
by the hearing of the Outward word: Whether Faith comes by the Outward Hearing?
Neither do the following words prove it; How shall they Believe, unless they
hear? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they Preach,
unless they be sent? For the Apostle uses these words not as his Arguments, but
as Objections which might be formed; as the same Apostle uses in other places:
To which Objections he answers in the same Chapter, as appears verse 18. But I
say, have they not all heard? Yes truly; their Voice went into all the Earth;
That is, of the Father and Son, Or the Father in the Word; which Word is not
only near us, but (according to the same Apostle, in the same Chapter) in our
Mouths, and in our Hearts. But further thou can conclude nothing from this,
but that Faith is begotten by Outward Hearing only, and no otherwise: For this
is the strength of thy Argument, That since Faith cannot be without Outward
Hearing; Therefore nothing can certainly be believed, but where somewhat is
proposed to the Outward Hearing. For if thou acknowledge, Faith can be begotten
any otherwise, than by Hearing, thou loosest the Strength of thy Argument: And
if that Argument hold, That Faith comes only by Outward Hearing, thou
destroyest the whole Hypothesis. For having before affirmed, That outward
Miracles are sufficient to render one certain of the Truth of any Revelation;
those Miracles, whether it be the Healing of the Sick, or the Raising of the
Dead, would avail nothing, because those (as for most part all Miracles) are
obvious to the Sight, not to the Hearing: And if it be not by Outward Hearing
only, thou can conclude nothing from this place. But I the more wonder thy
using of this Argument, considering the Discourse we had together, before we
entered upon this Debate. A certain Person placing the Certainty of every thing
in the Outward Senses.
For when we were speaking of the Opinions of a certain Person, who denied the
Certainty of every thing, but what was discerned by the outward Senses; thou
condemnedst as most Absurd; But Why? I cannot conceive, since there is no great
difference betwixt those two Opinions: The one says, There can be no certainty
concerning any Truth, whether they be Necessary, or Contingent, but by the
perception of the Senses; The other affirms the same of Contingent Truths,
though not of Necessary Truths. But among the number of Contingent Truths thou
Esteemest what belongs to Christian Religion; for thou reckons the Necessary
Truths only to belong to natural Religion. This then is all the difference,
that that other Person says; There is no Certainty of any Religion, neither
Natural, nor Christian, but by the perception of the Outward Senses: But thou
say, though thou Esteems the Certainty of Natural Religion to be without
them, yet not of the Christian Religion. But again, since thou Esteemest, that
not Natural Religion, but the Christian Religion is necessary to Salvation;
Thou must necessarily conclude, That those Truths, which are necessary to
Salvation, rre only known and believed by the benefit of the Outward Senses: In
which Conclusion (which is the Sum of all) thou yields the Matter to that other
Person. But lastly, If all the Certainty of our Faith, Hope and Salvation did
depend upon the Infallibility of Outward Senses, Outward Senses can be deceived.
we should be most miserable; since these Senses can be easily deceived, and by
many Outward Casualties, and Natural Infirmities, whereunto the Godly are no
less subject, than the Wicked, are often vitiated; and there are (as the
Scripture affirms) False Miracles, which, as to the Outward, cannot be
distinguished from the True: of which we cannot Infallibly Judge by the Outward
Senses, which only discern, what is Outward.

There is a Necessity then to have Recourse to some other Means.

From all which it does appear, how Fallacious and Weak this Argument is: But
thanks be unto GOD, who would not, that our Faith should be built upon so
uncertain and doubtful a Foundation. And whoever has known True Faith, or has
felt the Divine Testimony of GOD's Spirit in his Soul, will judge otherwise;
neither will be moved by such Reasonings. I pray GOD therefore to remove these
Clouds, which darken thy Understanding; that thou may perceive the Glorious
Gospel of CHRIST: This is that Saving Word of Grace, which I commend thee unto;
and that GOD may give thee a Heart inclinable to believe and obey the Truth, is
the desire of

The 24th of the Month. called November, 1676, Thy Faithful Friend, R. BARCLAY.
This Letter a Year ago at the desire of my Friend, R. B. I delivered into the
hands of the aforementioned Ambassador, desiring his Answer in Writing, which he
then promised; but not having as yet done, It was seen meet to be Published.

Roterdam the 28th of March, 1678. B. F.



R. B's. Testimony concerning his Father.
David Barclay of Vrie in the Kingdom of Scotland Received the Truth in the
Year 1666. being the Fifty Sixth Year of his Age about the Seventh Month, and
Abode in it, R. B's Account of the Death of his Father.
and in Constant Unity with the Faithful Friends thereof; having suffered the
Spoiling of his Goods cheerfully, and many other Indignities, he was formerly
unaccustomed to bear, and several Tedious Imprisonments after the Sixty Sixth
Year of his Age.

In the latter End of the seventh Month 1686. being past the Seventy Sixth Year
of his Age, he took a Fever, which continued with him for Two Weeks; during
which time he signified a Quiet, Contented Mind, freely Resigned up to the Will
of God: And gave several Living Testimonies to the Truth, and to the Love of
God manifest to him in the Revelation thereof. And though there be hardly to be
found one of a Thousand, like to him, for Natural Vigor of his Age, and that
his Fever at times was very strong; yet he never was Insensible, nor did any
wrong Expression or Actions proceed from him, nor the least Symptom of
Discontent or Fretfulness. He had been troubled with the Gravel; and after his
Sickness had very much Pain in Making Water: So about Two Days before his
Death, as those about him were helping him up for that End, feeling his
Weakness with the Pain, in an Agony he said, I am gone now; And then instantly
checking himself, added, But I shall go to the Lord, and be gathered to many of
my Brethren, who are gone before me; and to my Dear Son: This was his Youngest
Son, who died at Sea about a Year before.

Upon the Eleventh Day of the Eighth Month, between Two and Three in the
Morning, he growing Weaker, I drew nigh to him: He said, Is this my Son? I
said, Yea; and spoke a few Words, signifying my Travel, That he that loved him,
might be near him to the End: He answered, The Lord is Nigh; Repeating it once
again, saying; You are my Witnesses in the Presence of God, that the Lord is
Nigh: And after a little he said; The Perfect Discovery of the Dayspring from
on high, how great a Blessing it has been to me, and my Family! My Wife
desiring to know, if he would have something to Wet his Mouth? he said, It
needed not: She said, it would Refresh him; He laid his Hand upon his Breast,
saying, He had that Inwardly, that Refreshed him. And after a little while he
added diverse times these Words; The TRVTH is over ALL.

He took my Eldest Son to him, and Blessed him, saying; He prayed God, he might
never depart from the Truth: And when my Eldest Daughter came near, he said, Is
this Patience? Let Patience have its perfect Work in thee! And after Kissing
the other Four, he laid Hands upon them, and blessed them. He called for my
Father-in-Law, and two of his Daughters, that were present, and spoke some
weighty Words to them very kindly: And perceiving one of them, (who was not a
Friend of Truth) Weeping much, he Wished, She might come to the Truth; bidding
her, Not weep for him, but for herself.

A Sober Man, an Apothecary, that waited upon him, coming near, he took him by
the Hand, saying; Thou will bear me Witness, that in all this Exercise I have
not been Curious to Tamper nor to Pamper the Flesh: he answered; Sir, I can
bear Witness, that you have always minded the better and more substantial Part,
and rejoice to see the Blessed End, the Lord is bringing you to: He Replied;
Bear a Faithful and true Witness: Yet it is the Life of Righteousness
(repeating these Words twice over) that we bear Testimony to, and not to an
Empty Profession. Then he called several Times, Come, Lord Jesus, Come, Come!
And again; My Hope is in the Lord: And so slept now and then, about Ten Hours.
Observing a Countryman coming into the Room, he thought, it had been one of his
Tenants, who was a Carpenter; I telling him, it was not he, but another; he
said, See thou, Charge him to make no manner of Superfluity upon my Coffin.

About Three in the Afternoon there came several Friends from Aberdeen to see
him; I telling him, he took them by the Hand, and said diverse Times, They were
come in a seasonable Time: and after some Words were spoken, and that Patrick
Living stone had prayed, which Ended in Praises; he held up his Hands, and
said, Amen, Amen for ever!

And after they stood up, looking at him, he said; How precious is the Love of
God among his Children, and their Love one to another! Thereby shall all Men
know, that ye are Christ's Disciples, if you love one another. How precious a
thing it is, to see Brethren to Dwell together in Love! My Love is with you; I
leave it among you.

About Eight at Night several Friends standing about the Bed, he perceiving
some of them to Weep, he said; Dear Friends, all mind the Inward Man, heed not
the Outward: There is one, that does Regard, the Lord of Hosts is his Name.
After he heard the Clock strike Three in the Morning, he said, Now the Time
comes: And a little after he was heard to say; Praises, Praises, Praises to the
Lord! Let now thy Servant depart in Peace: Unto thy Hands, O Father, I Commit
my Soul, Spirit and Body, Thy Will, O Lord, be done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven! These Sentences he spoke by little Intervals one after another. And so
a little after Five in the Morning, the twelfth Day of the Eighth Month, 1686.
he fell asleep like a Lamb, in Remarkable Quietness and Calmness; there being
standing about to Behold his End above Twenty Persons, who were Witnesses, to
what is above said; though not all to every part, yet some to every part, and
some to all of it.

This Brief Account is only intended for the Refreshing and Satisfaction of
some particular Friends; else several other things might be added, which are
not Inconsiderable.

He was Buried in a Place allotted by himself for that End; and Discharged, any
should be Called to his Burial, but the professed Friends of Truth, and his own
Tenants: Yet the Time being known, a great Number of the Gentry came undesired,
and Conveyed his Body to the Grave.

Vrie, the 20th of the 8th Month, 1686.
A Table of the Chief Things Contained in this VOLUME.
A.
ABraham's Faith 278. The Jews Error of Abraham's outward Succession, 410.
Adam, (see Man, Sin, Redemption) what Happiness he l^st by the Fall? 311, 121.
what Death he dyed? 311. He retained in his Nature no Will or Light capable of
it self to manifest Spiritual Things, ibid. whether there be any Relics of
the heavenly Image left in them? 317, 470, 767 -- 769. Alexander Skein's
Queries proposed to the Preachers, 470. Americans confess to that, which Checks
within for Evil, 7. Anabaptists of Great Britain, 288. Anabaptists of Munster,
how their mischievous actings nothing touch the Quakers, 288, 289, 290, 516,
651 -- 653. Anicetus, 289. Anointing teaches all things: It is, and abides
for ever a Common Privilege and sure Rule to all Saints, 287, 116, 169.
Antichrist is exalted, when the Seed of God is pressed, 82, 337. his Work 284,
426, 428. -- The Body of Antichrist is but one, having many Members, 591. who
those Members be, 592 Antinomians their Opinion concerning Justification, 371.
Apostasy, 399, 425. Apostle who he is? their Number was not limited: and
whether any may be now a days so called? 465, 466, 429, 430. Calvin maintains,
that God raised Apostles and Evangelists in his Day, 37. Apparel, 543 -- 545,
556. Appearances (see Faith) Arians, they first brought in the Doctrine of
Persecution upon the account of Religion, 425. Arius, by what he fell into
Error? 425. Armenian, Greek and Ethiopian Churches indulged by the Pope in
some Ceremonies different from those commonly injoined and received, is rather
the Effect of Policy than Fatherly Compassion, 688, 689. Arminians, (see
Remonstrants.) Arminians, Lutherans and Calvinists hold, that there can be no
Salvation without the Explicit Knowledge of Christ, and Benefit of the
Scriptures; which Doctrine destroys the nature of Universal Love, 692. Articles
of Faith with respect to them that believe them, are Matters of Conscience,
213. Assemblings are needful, and what sort, 441, 444, etc. (see Worship) they
are not to be forsaken, 461. Assurance) a certain Assurance and Establishment
given of God to many of his Saints and Children, 402. Astrologer, 294, 295.
Atheism, see Superstition. Athenians directed to somewhat of God within them by
the Apostle, 307. Augustin's Testimony in the Case of Circumcision, observing
of Meats, Drinks, Washings and Sacrifices, 586. his Zeal against Pelagius, 311.
Aurelia, there ten Canonicks were burnt, and why, 593. Authority of Princes
justly owned, 710.
B.
Backsliders, like Salt that has lost its Savor, 192. Baptism is one, its
Definition 474, 476 to 483. 854 -- 860. It is the Baptism of Christ and of the
Spirit, not of Water 475, to 484. The Baptism of Water, which was John's
Baptism, was a Figure of this Baptism, and is not to be continued, 85, 86, 88,
475, 478, 481, 482 to 493, 653. Baptism with Water does not cleanse the Heart,
476, 479. nor is it a Badge of Christianity, as was Circumcision to the Jews,
484, 492. That Paul was not sent to Baptize, is explained 484, 485, 486.
Concerning Water Baptism Christ speaks of Matthew. 28.20. it is explained, 486,
487. How the Apostles Baptized with Water, is explained, 484, 485, 486, 649,
650. To Baptize signifies to plunge; and how Sprinkling was brought in, 490,
491. Those of old, that used Water Baptism, were plunged; and they that were
only Sprinkled, were not admitted to an Ecclesiastic Function, and why? 491.
Against the use of Water Baptism many heretofore have Testified, 493.
Infant Baptism is a mere humane Tradition, 475, 647. The Corrupt Acceptance of
the Word Baptism denied, 84. John's Baptism no part of the Gospel Dispensation;
but served only to prepare the way to Christ, 651. it differs from that of the
Spirit, as the Shadow from the Substance, 29, 30. Augustin^s Testimony of its
being Ceased, 586. Cyprian's Testimony of its being void, 648. None are to be
found, that have the Power of Administering it, 647. it being but a Carnal
Ordinance, 649. and no part of the Gospel Dispensation, 651. carrying a Repeal
in its bosom, 652. The Apostles had no Commission for it, but was used in
Condescension to the weak, 31. it being a Command only to particulars, 32. For
sprinkling or Water Baptism is not the Baptism of Christ, 87. it being
discontinued, as the Offerings of old, 89, 147. there remains the one Baptism,
ibid. 169. viz. that with the Spirit; which is sometimes ascribed to Godly Men,
as the Instruments, 488. [ Matthew. 28.19. explained, 651. John 3.30. explained,
653.] of Baptism, 856 -- 859, 830. Believers ought not to go to Law before the
Unjust, 208. such practice brings dishonor to the Truth, 209, 240. Beroeans
searching Scriptures, 307, 757. Bible) The last Translations always find fault
with the first, 302, 303. That one Man should take the Bible, and speak upon
it, the rest of the Congregation being denied that privilege, is an Invention
brought up in the Apostasy, 12, 13. Birth) The spiritual birth, 195. holy
Birth, 452. new Birth, 122, 163, 353. see Justification. The New Birth, the
inward Appearance of Christ and the Unity of the Saints with him, 163, 164.
Bishop of Rome, concerning his Primacy, 286. how he abuses his Authority; and
by what he deposes Princes, and absolveth people from the Oath of Fidelity,
523. Blood) To abstain from Blood, and things strangled, 169, 193, 511, 513,
653. Blood of Christ (see Communion) The Blood of Christ is felt within to wash
the Conscience, 10. Bloodshed and Contention about Forms of Worship, 489. Body)
to bow the Body, see Head. Bonaveentur, 444. Books Canonical and Apocryphal,
see Canon, Scripture. Bow) to bow the Knee, see Uncover the Head. Bread) The
breaking of Bread among the Jews was no singular thing, 504, 507. It is now
otherways performed, than it was by Christ, 506. whether Leavened or Unleavened
Bread is to be used? Also it is hotly disputed about the manner of taking it,
and to whom it is to be given, 506, 507, 169. (see Communion.) Daily Bread in
the Lord's Prayer may be Translated Supersubstantial Bread,
C.
Calvinists (see Protestants) they deny Consubstantiatian, 289. They maintain
Absolute Reprobation, 286. they think, Grace is a Certain Irresistible Power:
and what sort of a Savior they would have, 354, 355. their Faith of the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, 496, 497, 498, 499. They use Leavened Bread in the Supper,
507. they feign a Revealed and Secret Will in God, which are Contradictory,
694, 695. Calvin 514. Canon) Whether the Scripture be a filled up Canon? 308,
309 Whether it can be proved by Scripture, that any Book is Canonical? ibid.
see Scriptures. Castellio banished, 527. Ceremonies, see Superstition. CHRIST
(see Communion, Justification, Redemption, Word) he shows himself daily,
revealing the Knowledge of the Father, 271. without his School there is nothing
learned, but busy talking, 271. he is the Eternal Word, 274. no Creature has
Access unto God, but by him, 274, 275. he is the Way, the Truth and the Life,
275. he is the Mediator between God and Man, 275, 368. he is God, and in time
he was made partaker of Man's Nature, 275. yesterday, to day the same, and for
ever, 280. the Fathers believed in him, and how, 279, 280. His Sheep hear his
Voice, and contemn the Voice of a Stranger, 297, 418, 420. It is the Fruit of
his Ascension to send Pastors, 304 (see Gifts) he dwells in the Saints, and
how? 334. (see Birth.) His Coming was necessary, 335. by his sacrifice we have
Remission of Sins, 335, 358, 368. whether he be, and how he is in all, is
explained, 6, 63, 336. being formed within, he is the formal Cause of
Justification, 364, 379. by his Life, Death, etc. he has opened a way for
Reconciliation, 379, 380. his Obedience, Righteousness, Death and Sufferings
are ours; and it is explained, that Paul said, He filled up, that which was
behind of the Afflictions of Christ in his Flesh, 369. how we are partakers of
his Sufferings, 393, 394. for what end he was manifested, 390, 391. he delivers
his own by Suffering, 520. Concerning his outward and Spiritual Body, 466, 497.
Concerning his outward and Inward Coming, 510. Christ is compared to a grain of
Mustard Seed (Clem. Alex) 579. his Divinity, and being from the beginning, 162.
his Appearance in the Flesh, ibid. the end and use of that Appearance, 163,
117. his Inward Manifestation, ibid. he having fulfilled the Law and the
righteousness thereof, gave witness to the Dispensation of the Gospel, 187.
Christ at this Day speaks in his Servants, and will to the end of the World,
644. the Seed and Spiritual Body of Christ both in him and us, belonging to
Christ, is as really united unto the Word, as his outward Body was, 628. the
Seed is not our Souls: The Seed and Spiritual, Nature of Christ* is one and the
same both in him and in us, ibid. Christ's outward Satisfaction is owned
against the Socinians. The Sufferings of Christ in Men are voluntary, and yet
without sin: Christ's outward Sufferings at Jerusalem were necessary unto Men's
Salvation, ibid. the Doctrine of the Incarnation, Sufferings, Death,
Resurrection, etc. are necessary every where to be preached, 629. Christ
Crucified within, 9. his Indwelling and In being differ, 6, 796. without Inward
Holiness and Righteousness none can lay Claim to Christ, 26. It is absurd to
affirm, Christ is in none but those with whom he is united, 6, 63. Christ's
praying to save him from this Hour, explained, 783. what the Flesh and Blood of
Christ is? 861, 901. Christian) how he is a Christian, and when he cease so
to be, 269, 270, 273, 281, 282, 283, 285, 394, 410, 412, 418. the foundation of
his Faith, 294, 295. his Privilege, ibid. when men are made Christians by
Birth, and not by conversion, 405, 406. they have borrowed many things from
Jews and Gentiles, 475, 476. they recoil by little and little from their first
Purity, 486, 509. the Primitive Christians for some ages said, We are
Christians, we Swear not, 555. and, We are the Soldiers of Christ, it is not
lawful for us to Fight, 562. Concerning the Life of a Christian, what and how
it ought to be, 149 -- 157. Every Christian ought to be concerned in the Work
of the Lord, 707 a Judgment of several sorts of Christians must be made from
their respective Principles, and not from the Practice of particular Persons,
684. the Gathering of the Primitive Christians was an uniting of Hearts, and
not of Hands only, 697, 709. Christianity is made as an Art, 273. It is not
Christianity without the Spirit, 281 -- 283, 296, 297. It would be turned into
Skepticism, 423, 424, 484, 491, 492. It is placed chiefly in the renewing of
the Heart, 407. Wherein it consists not? 450. what is and is not the mark
thereof, 484 -- 486, 492. why it is Odious to Jews, Turks and Heathens, 498.
what would contribute to its Commendation, 534. What the Cause is of all the
Mischief in Christendom, 711, 713. the Essence or Being of Christianity placed
in the true and real Conversion of the heart, by virtue of the operation of the
Light, Seed and Grace of God, 700. that there is nothing but the Name, and
nothing of the Nature of true Christianity among Christians, is manifest in the
Clergy, 708, 709, 27. the Call of God to blinded Christendom, 356. CHVRCH,
without which there is no Salvation, what she is? concerning her Members,
Visibility, Profession, Degeneration, Succession, 403 to 417. whatsoever is
done in the Church, without the instinct of the Holy Spirit, is vain and
impious, 419. the same may be said of her, that in the Schools is Disputed of
Theseus's Boat, 431. in her Corrections ought to be Exercised, and against
whom, 508. she is more Corrupted by the Accession of Hypocrites, 521. the
Contentions of the Greek and Latin Churches about Leavened or Unleavened Bread
in the Supper, 506. the Luke-warmness of the Church of Laodicea, 411. there are
Introduced into the Roman Church no less Superstitions and Ceremonies, than
among the Heathens and Jews, 406. The Church of Rome's pretended Charity, 688,
689. the Church of Rome no Church, 647. the Basis and Foundation of that Church
stands in Confessing the Superiority and Precedence of Peter and his
Successors, and in believing, that Infallibility is annexed thereunto, 688. the
True Church is distinguished from the False by its real Sanctification and true
Holiness, 203. what a Church is, defined, 208. the Notion and Definition of a
Church, which arises from the Universal Principle of Light and Grace, does
Establish Universal Love, 702. the Cause of the True Church's gathering to a
Body, was a Sense of their Want, 697. such as are sanctified, properly
constitute the Church, 226. who is the Head, and who the Ministers thereof? 139
-- 144, 167, 168. God's Care over his Church and Heritage, 191, 192. Men may be
said to be within the Church, who want outward Preaching, 805 -- 807. the great
property of the Church of Christ is pure Unity in Spirit, 217. The Ground of
Division, Separation and Schism in the Church, 188. In the Primitive Church
Condescension was practiced in case of Weakness; though those weak ones were
not suffered to propagate their Scruples, 223, 224* In what Cases the Church of
Christ may pronounce a positive Sentence and Judgment, without the hazard of
Imposition upon either of the Parties Controverting, 216, 867. Circumcision, a
Seal of the Old Covenant, 490, 586. Clergy, 428, 430 -- 433, 436, 437, 507. The
Clergy the greatest Promoters of Wars, 708, 709. they are so Impudent as to
thank God for the Destruction of their Fellow Creatures, 709. upon the Charge
of a Prince or State they will pray for those, to whom before they wished Ruin
and Destruction, ibid. They cloud the Truth, that the Common People might
Maintain and Admire them, 731. they acted the Mad Pranks of John of Leyden in
the Civil Wars of England, 668. See Protestants. Clothes) That it is not Lawful
for Christians to use things superfluous in Clothes, 543 -- 545, 564, 565.
Comforter, for what end he was sent, 271, 272. Commission) The Commission of
the Disciples of Christ, before the Work was finished, was more Legal, than
Evangelical, 419. Communion) the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is a
Spiritual and inward thing, 148, 149. that Body, that Blood is a Spiritual
Thing, and that it is that heavenly Seed, whereby Life and Salvation was of
old, and is now Communicated, 593, 594. how any become partakers thereof, 496,
497, 498. it is not tied to the Ceremony of breaking Bread and drinking Wine,
which Christ used with his Disciples; this was only a Figure, 494, 497 to 503.
whether that Ceremony be a necessary part of the New Covenant, and whether it
is to be continued? 504 to 515. Spiritual Communion with God through Christ is
obtained, 311. they that Witness Christ come, need not Bread and Wine to put
them in Remembrance of him, 35 see Supper. Community of Goods is not brought in
by the Quakers, 516, 533, 534. Complements, see Titles. Conscience (see
Magistrate) Its Definition, what it is? it is distinguished from the saving
Light, 366, 337, 338, 515, 516. the good Conscience, and the hypocritical, 400.
he that acts contrary to his Conscience, sins; and concerning an Erring
Conscience, 516. what things appertain to Conscience, ibid, what sort of
Liberty of Conscience is defended, 517. it is the Throne of God, ibid. it is
free from the Power of all Men, 527. Conscience and Reason are distinguished
from the Saving Light of Christ in all Men, 603. Clem. Alex. his Testimony,
579. God alone can Inform and Inlighten the Conscience, 704. Conversion) what
is Man's therein, is rather a Passion, than an Action, 331. Augustin's Saying,
ibid. this is Cleared by two Examples, 339, 340. Conversion presupposes having
Light and Grace, 8. Controversy) Solid Controversies may be entertained for
Clearing and Maintaining the Truth, 730. Correction, how and against whom it
ought to be exercised, 517. Covenant) The Difference betwixt the New and Old
Covenant-Worship, 286, 287, 441, 442, 456 -- 458, 484. See also Gospel, Law.
Courts, see Princes. Cross) the Sign of the Cross, 492.
D.
Dancing, see Plays. Day, whether any be Holy? and concerning the Day commonly
called the Lord's Day, 442, 503. Whether the First Day of the Week has any more
Inherent Holiness, than any other Days, the Testimony of the First Protestants,
91, 92. the Lord's day is not the First Day of the Week, 39. nor is it limited
to a particular Day, 92. the First Day is not come instead of the Sabbath, 93.
superstitious observing of Days, is the Inventions of Men, 92, 146. and an
Inlet to all the Popish Holidays, 39* 92. the Priests make the First Day of the
Week their Market Day to sell and vend their Babylonish Commodities in, 40. It
is convenient and necessary, that a Day be set apart, to meet and Worship God
in, 146: the Divines Nonsensical Proofs, that the First Day of the Week is
instead of the Sabbath, 177, 178. no Man is to be judged in respect of an Holy
Day or the Sabbath Days, etc. 170. the observing of Days being a returning to
the beggarly Elements, 224. the first Dawning and breaking forth of the
heavenly Day of the Lord in this our Age, described, 689-691. Deacons, 508.
Deaf Persons, see Light. Death (see Adam, Redemption) it entered into the World
by Sin, 316, 317, In the Saints it is rather a passing from Death to Life, 316.
a Sleep, 41. and their Natural Death is not the Wages of Sin, 94. Devil) he
ears not at all, how much God be Acknowledged with the Mouth, provided he be
Worshipped in the Heart, 272, 355, 356. he can form an outward Sound of Words,
278. he haunts among the Wicked, 391. How he can be a Minister of the Gospel,
425 -- 427. when he can work nothing, 453, 454. he keeps Men in outward Signs,
Shadows and Forms, while they neglect the Substance, 489 -- 491, 507. The Rage
of the Devil against the Lord's Chosen, 713. Differences in the Church in
outward Matters, to be Composed, 207. as coming from the besetments of the
Enemy, 228. the Spirit of God giving Judgment in the Church of Christ, 240.
Dispute) The Dispute of a Shoo-maker with a certain Professor, 422, 423. of an
Heathen-Philosopher with a Bishop in the Council of Nice, and of the Vnletter'd
Clown, 423, 424. Divinity) School Divinity, 417. how pernicious it is, 423 to
427. Divisions, see Schism. Dreams, see Faith, Miracles. Doctrine) That
Doctrine, which is both contrary to Scripture and Experience, is not for the
Spirit; but against it, 601. the Fruits prove the Doctrine, 624. J. B. brings
his own Author in for Devilish Doctrines, 749. Duty) The hardened and blinded
see not their Duty, 242. Duties natural and spiritual differ, 636.
E.
Ear) There is a Spiritual and bodily Ear, 271, 278. whether the outward
Hearing is necessary to make a Man a Member of the Visible Church? 806. Easter
is Celebrated other ways in the Latin Church, than in the Eastern, 289. the
Celebration of it is grounded upon Tradition, 289. (...), into the Name, J. B's
false Gloss upon it, 859, 487. (see Baptism) Ejaculations proved from
Scripture, 852. Elders, 277, 430. How Christ in Revealing his Will, ordinarily
makes use of the Elders and Officers in his Church, 229. in Cases of
Differences and Controversies, 236. Election and Reprobation of Infants, 766,
767. J.B. makes the Word [ All] express of two Numbers the least to be Elected,
784, 804. by the whole World he falsely understands the Elect only, ibid.
Elector of Saxony, the Scandal given by him, 471. Eminency) Your Eminency, see
Titles. (...) the Greek preposition (...) is oftener translated [ in] than [
among] as in 1 Cor 2.2. p. 66. Endowments) the Author glories not in natural
Endowments, Enjoyments inward) former Feelings and Enjoyment are far exceeded
by the Feelings and Enjoyments of this day, 28, 29. Enoch walked with God, 394.
Enthusiasm, its proper signification, 658. Epistle, see James, John, Peter.
Esau and Jacob did strive in the Womb, 447. Ethics, or Books of Moral
Philosophy are not needful to Christians, 424. Evangelist, who he is? and
whether any now a days may be so called, 429, 430. Evidence, the best and most
principal is the Immediate Evidence of the Spirit; and the greatest outward
Evidence, that can be given, is the Scripture, 593, 594. the Spirit's Evidence
is, that it teaches to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, etc. 575, 576. an
Evidence, that no Hypocrite can have, 657. See Ministry, Spirit, Revelation.
Exaltation) self-Exaltation leads to Separation and Division, 192, 193.
Excellency) Tour Excellency, see Titles Excommunication, the evil thereof, 690,
691 Exorcism, (or Adjuration) in the use of Water Baptism denied, 492 Eye) The
Spiritual Eye sees and discerns the true Confessor from the false, 657, 837.
F.
Faith, its Definition, and what its Object is, 277, 278. how far, and how
Appearances, outward Voices and Dreams were the Object of the Saints Faith,
278. that Faith is one, and that the Object of Faith is one, 279. Its
foundation, 293, 294. see Revelation, Scripture. Little Faith is perfect in the
measure of it, 23, 80. what it is; its absolute necessity, 129. Accidental
Objects of Faith, 602. wherein the nature and Essence of Faith consists, 603.
J. B's halting Examples to prove true Faith, 759. Sadeel's Testimony concerning
Succession of Faith, 648. the material and formal Object of Faith
distinguished, 742, 744. whether Faith comes by the outward Hearing? 904.
falling away and departing from Faith, 42, 43. who they were, that fell from
Faith, 96. not holding it in a good Conscience, 137. thou that stand by
Faith, etc. ibid. see Grace. Fall of Man, see Man. Farellus, 506 Father, see
Knowledge, Revelation. Fathers, (so called) they did not Agree about some Books
of the Scripture, 296, 303. they affirm, that there are whole Verses taken out
of Mark and Luke, 288. concerning the Septuagint-Interpretation, and the Hebrew
Copy, 303. they preached Universal Redemption for the first four Centuries,
326. they frequently used the Word [ Merit] in their Doctrine, 387. concerning
the possibility of not Sinning, 397, 398. the possibility of falling from
Grace, 400. many of them did not only contradict one another, but themselves
also, 423, 424. concerning Baptism and the Sign of the Cross, 492. concerning
an Oath, 550. Feet) Concerning the Washing of one another Feet, 447, 498, 499.
Christ washed the Disciples Feet, 169, 170. the Washing of Feet, etc. 651. a
spiritual Washing of Feet pointed at by Christ, 652. Washing of Feet observed
by Christians in the Primitive Times, ibid. which though Commanded with so
great solemnity, yet Ceased, 863. Forbearance of God, see God. Franequer) all
things are set to sale at Rome, to Franequer applied, 433. Freedom from sin,
see Perfection. Freely) the Gospel ought to be preached freely, 403, 432 --
434. Nic. Arnoldus his Answer to Freely ye have received, etc. 433.
G
Games, see Plays. Gentiles) by what Nature the Gentiles did the things
contained in the Law, 313, 763. The Gentiles justified in doing the Law, 360 --
362. Jew and Gentile, Scythian and Barbarian partakers of the Salvation of
Christ, 363. see Heathens. Gifted Brethren, 416. Gifts, 204. diversities of
Gifts, Administrations and Operations from the same Spirit makes no division,
220. Gifts differing, according to the Grace given, 300. the confining of the
Gifts and Graces of God to certain External Forms and Ceremonies, is directly
opposite to Universal Love, 703. by the Gift of God all things are possible,
398. Gilpin (John) his Story answered, 74. God) How he has always manifested
himself, 269 unless he speak within, the Preacher makes a rustling to no
purpose, 271, 272. None can know him aright, unless he receive it of the Holy
Ghost, 270, 271, 272. God is to be sought within, 272. he is known by
Sensation, and not by mere Speculation, and Syllogistick Demonstrations, 271.
he is the Fountain, Root and Beginning of all good Works, and he has made all
things by his Eternal Word, 274. God speaking, is the Object of Faith, 278.
among all he has his own Chosen ones, 270. he delights not in the Death of the
Wicked, (see Redemption:) he has manifested his Love in sending his Son, 367,
368 (see Justification) he rewards the good Works of his Children, 386. whether
it be possible to keep his Commandments? 388. he is the Lord and the only Judge
of the Conscience, 515, 517* he will have a free Exercise, 522. his Forbearance
and Long-suffering, 343, 344, 223, 217. When God hardens, 344. what Man does
act without his Power, is not accepted, 453. by Manifestation he comes forth
into the Creatures, and yet is still in himself, 580. whom to know is Eternal
Life, 115. God's Voice is known by a Spiritual and Supernatural Sense, 898 God
is Light, 65, 115, 161. There is in all Men a Supernatural Idea of God, as of a
most perfect being, 900. his Glory and Beauty makes all the Glory of this World
as Dross and Dung, 902. his Condescension to the Weak, 35. of all things Sin is
most contrary to his Nature, 320. whose Riches and Bounty lead Men to
Repentance, 791. who speaks inwardly to the Mind of Man, 896. Godliness from a
tender Age, the Happiness of few, and why? 677. Good) that which is good for
one to do, may be sinful to another, 300. the Good in all ought to be
Commended, 682, and the Evil not to be encouraged, 683. Gospel (see Redemption)
the Truths of it are as Lies in the Mouths of Profane and Carnal Men, 276, 284,
285. the Nature of it is explained, 285, 286. It is distinguished from the Law,
and is more excellent than it, 386, 287, 298. (see Covenant, Law) whether any
ought to preach it in this or that Place, is not found in Scripture, 299, 416,
417. its Works are distinguished from the Works of the Law, 382. how it is to
be propagated, and of its Propagation, 517. The Worship of it is inward, 484.
it is an inward Power, 349, 350. Evil under the Gospel not to be resisted, 665.
its most excellent Dispensation is to be like Christ, 664 The Gospel of
Salvation is brought nigh unto all, 125. which is the Power of God, 126. a new
Revelation of the good old Gospel, and Doctrines, 308. this Gospel is made a
Mock and Illusion by the false Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, 319, 321, 322.
is preached to every Creature, 323. or in every Creature, 799. which Gospel is
hid in them that are lost, 632. a twofold Dispensation of it, 664. the
preaching of it perverted by our Adversaries, 782. the History of the Gospel is
necessary, 793. yet the Declaration is not the Power or Manifestation of God in
Man, 799. which Assertion is neither Heathenism nor Jesuttism, etc. ibid. and
Salvation is not impossible without the hearing of the Gospel, or outward
preaching, 805. Government (see Church, Magistrate) Order and Government
Asserted in the Church of Christ, 193. being appointed by Christ himself, and
the form thereof, 194. the Abuse makes not void the true use, ibid. the end
thereof, 195. being practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Christians, ibid.
199. the Apostles Doctrine concerning it, 196. dissenting Reasonings against
it, 197. It is no inconsistency or Contradiction, to be a Follower of the Grace
of God in ones self, and to be a Follower of Men, in whom the Spirit of God
has the Dominion, ibid. in what Cases, and how far this Government extends,
(i) as to Outward and Temporals, 206 -- 211. (ii) in Matters Spiritual and
purely Conscientious, 212 -- 224. It differs from the Oppressing and
persecuting principality of the Church of Rome, and other Antichristian
Assemblies, 230 -- 235. Grace) the Grace of God can be lost through
Disobedience, 398, etc. Saving Grace (see Redemption) which is required in the
calling and qualifying of a Minister (see Minister:) in some it works in a
special and prevalent manner, that they necessarily obtain Salvation, 340, 341.
Your Grace, see Titles. Grace is given in order to save, 63, 64. what it
teaches, 128. all have Grace sufficient for Salvation, 341, 578, 699. if not
resisted, works Salvation, 801. the Calvinists make Grace an Irresistible Power
falsely, 803, 827, 828, 834. God's Grace and Love is Universal, 164. its Work in
the Heart, 387, 802. concerning falling from Grace, 136 -- 138, 167. a
graceless Man is rendered unfit to receive the new Wine of the Gospel in his
unclean Vessel, 656. Greeks) the Wisdom of the Greeks appeared in their worldly
Affairs, 764.
H.
Hai Ebn Yokdan, 365 Hands) Laying on of Hands, 417, 511, 660, 833. Paul
wrought with his Hands, 652, 435 Head) Of uncovering the Head in Salutations,
531, 533, 540 -- 543, 564, 565, 874. to put off the Hat one to another, not
commanded by Christ, 3. is one of the Corrupt Customs of the World, ibid. not
warranted to Man by Scripture, but to God, 60. and Salutations commanded by
Christ are owned by the Quakers, 2, 3. who don't consist in taking off the Hat
and bowing of the Body, 874, [see Honor, Salutations.] Hearing) Inward and
outward Hearing distinguished, 603, 803, 804. Faith comes not by outward
Hearing, 904, 905. see Infants. Heart) the Heart is Deceitful and Wicked, 30,
312 -- 314. Obdurateness and Hardness of Heart when begotten? 789. Hardness of
Heart and blindness justly reprovable, and all the Enormities following
thereupon, 242. man cannot procure to himself tenderness of Heart in his own
will, 338 Heathens) Albeit they were Ignorant of the History, yet they were
sensible of the Loss by the Fall, 361. some Heathens would not Swear, 555.
Heathenish Ceremonies were brought into the Christian Religion, 492.
Heathen-Philosophers Divine Knowledge, 361, 362. they declared, that Inward
Concupiscence is sin, 604. the Gospel held forth to them, 327. and Christ was
given as a Light to inlighten the Gentiles, 358. Concerning the Heathens Book
of Nature, 630, 631. Salvation is possible to them in the most barbarous
places, 700, 803, 804. they having a Day of Visitation through the Gospel, 788.
Those that deny the Inward Principle of Grace and Light given to all Men, are
forged to urge the same against an Heathen, because he does not acknowledge any
Scripture or Tradition, 700, 701. See Gentiles, Pagans: Heathen-Persecution,
see Persecution. Hebrew) The various Lections of the Hebrew Character of the
Bible, 303. Henry IV. King of France, 524 Heresies) whence they proceeded, 449,
450. who cannot certainly judge of Heresy, ought not to punish for Heresy,,
663. Christ's Servants must not pull the Tares, but leave them with the Wheat,
519. Heresy may be mistaken for Truth, ibid. 521. the Name of Heresy may be
more or less restricted, 527. Heretic) 519. An Heretic has no just ground
from the Quakers Principle to abstain from Prayer, 645. Heretics pretenses to
the Spirit, 607, 610, 612 -- 614. Hicks) the Grosness of T. Hicks his dealing
with the people called Quakers discovered, and abhorred in print by others,
879. High Priest) see Priest. History of Christ) see Quakers, Redemption, ^
Knowledge. Holy of Holies) the High Priest entered into it once a Year, 277,
278. but now all of us at all times have access unto God, 287. Holiness) Your
Holiness, see Titles Honor (see Titles.) Concerning Civil-Honour, 873 880.
House of God) The House of God is no polluted Nest, 412 Hypocrisy, the worst of
Evils in Religious Matters, 521, 522 Hypocrites) 519, 522. Under what
Profession Hypocrites love to live, and what Principles they most affect, 47,
48. the Hypocrites works have no Savor of Life, 656. we cannot join with them
in Prayer, 470. he that has a Spiritual Discerning, can discern them, 519.
Hypocrites want Titles, 536. their Hope shall perish, 387. their Danger, 522.
I.
Jacob, 447. Jacob and the Jews their Practice (of bowing) as also Abraham's,
was by Permission, and not to be our Rule, 876. Abraham's and Jacob's practice
will not warrant our Imitation of it, 873. Worm Jacob is a Threshing
Instrument, 883. James the Apostle) There were of old diverse Opinions
concerning his Epistle, 297. whether his Epistle be Authentic, and how to know
it? 309. Japonians) The Japans knew by the teaching of Nature, that it is
unlawful to kill, steal, forswear, etc. as is evident by the Pricks of their
Consciences: Fra Xaviers, 701. Idea) There are supernatural Idea's of things
supernatural in the Souls of Men, 899. Men can. have no true Idea of things
Supernatural, but what is Supernatural, ibid. There is a Natural Idea, of God
in Men, common to the Wicked with the Godly, 900. the Idea's of all things are
divinely planted in the Souls of Men, ibid. All Idea's are of a Spiritual
Nature, 901. the Supernatural Idea's in Men infer Supernatural Senses, or
perceptive Faculties, 902. those Faculties in Wicked Men do, as it were, sleep,
ibid. Idolatry) 440, 450. whence it proceeded? 475. how with Idolatry we cannot
join in Prayer, 469. from whence Idolatries did spring? 475 Jerusalem) Christ's
Lamentation over Jerusalem, 344 Jesting) see Plays, Games. Jesuits) see Sect
Ignatian. Jesus) see Christ; what it is to be saved, and Assembled in his Name,
358, 359, 367, 455. See Name. Jews) Among them there may be Members of the
Church, 402, 403. their Error, etc. 410. their Worship is outward, 484.
Particular Commands given to the Jews, whether now obligatory upon us? 663.
they are no Rule for Christians, being Repealed by Christ, who gave a new
Command, 520. Jewish Doctors and Pharisees) resisted Christ, disdaining to be
Esteemed Ignorant, etc. 268 Jezebel) the not suffering the Woman Jezebel, in
what manner it was to be? 521 Ignorance) 514 Priests Darkness and Ignorance,
215 Illiterate) see Mechanics. Image of God) whether any Relicts of it
remained in Adam? 337. see Adam. Imposition) The Authority of the Church is no
Imposition, 199. Imposition is, what is contrary to true Liberty of Conscience,
236. a Testimony against Imposition and Dominion, 238 Independency) An
Independent Preacher embracing Truth, and upon what Occasion? 879. the
Constitution of the Independent Church, 416 Indians) The Defect of the
Scriptures and outward Knowledge of Christ in the Indians is providential, 692,
see Americans* (63.) Pagans. Indulgences) 365 Infants (see Sin.) Infants, that
die in their Infancy, in the Judgment of Charity may be supposed to be saved,
42. Infants and Deaf Persons are excepted from the Necessity of outwardly
hearing the Gospel, 805. some Infants and deaf Persons saved without external
Knowledge, 10. Infants are not guilty of Adam's Sin, 40, 41, 94. not Guilty
before the Act of Sin, ibid. Infants are under no Law, 868. Whether Childrens
Death argues guilt? 770. Infants saved without Christ, J. B's horrible Lie,
771. Infants saved by Christ, ibid. Sodom's Children, etc. Infants perishing in
the Flood, 772. Circumcision argues not Infants guilty, 773. Regeneration of
Infants, ibid. Infallibility) To say, that there is no Infallible Judgment now
to be expected from the Spirit of God in the Church, is to turn Christianity
into Skepticism, 235. the only proper Judge of Controversies in the Church is
the Spirit of God, and the Power of deciding solely lies in it, as having the
only, unerring, Infallible and certain Judgment belonging to it, 225. where
there is any gathering or Assembly, which truly and properly may be called the
Church of Christ, the Infallible Judgment will never be wanting in matters of
Controversy, 227. Influences) there are General and Special Influences, 582.
none can pray truly in Words, but by a particular Influence, 583,
Unfaithfulness wants Influences to Duties, 641 Iniquities) Spiritual Iniquities
or Wickedness, 450. Innovators) Pretenders and Innovators to be Judged by the
Power of God, 217. as coming from that, which being puffed up, affects
singularity and exaltedness, 218. Inquisition) 523. -- Inquisition lays not
hold on Folly and Vanity, neither at Rome, nor in Spain, 545 Inspiration) where
that does not Teach, Words without do make a Noise to no purpose, 271, 272.
some Christians and Gentiles have acknowledged the Evidence and certainty of
Divine Inspiration in all Men, as the surest Ground of Knowledge, 605.
Permissive Inspirations disowned, and owned again by the Quakers Adversaries,
673. Inspirations are necessary to Inward Duties 582. Christ's Illumination is
his Inspiration, 594. which is a greater Evidence, than the Scripture, 595.
even Heathens have a Knowledge of the self-evidence of Divine Inspiration, 605.
Inspirations mandatory and permissory, 637, 639. Inspirations of things either
to be done, or simply to be believed, 640. Inspirations general or particular
ibid. the same which was given to the Holy Men of Old, 658. Instruction) see
Teaching. Intellect) the supreme Intellect enjoyed in the Mind of Man, 363
Interpreters) 784, 60, 633, 794, 803 -- 805. John the Apostle) Concerning his
Second and Third Epistles, and the Revelation, there were sometime diverse
Opinions, 297. John the Baptist) did not Miracles, 416, 37. John Huss) is said
to have prophesied, 309. John Knox) in what respect he was called the Apostle
of Scotland, 430. Israelites) going to War, enquired first the Oracle of God,
560. Judas) fell from his Apostleship, 411. who was his Vicar? 420* his
Ministry was not purely Evangelical, 421. he was called Immediately by Christ;
and who are inferior to him, and plead for him as Patron of their Ministry?
420, 421. Judgment) see Church. Concerning the Power of Decision, 224 - 230,
(see Infallibility) any Members in Obedience to the Lord giving forth a
positive Judgment in the Church of Christ, is not to usurp Authority over their
Fellow Members, 229. decisive Judgment explained, 243. true and false Decision,
244. unsettled Men Judging, 683, 684. Charitable and uncharitable Judgment,
686. God the Judge of conscience, 516, 517. he that is Spiritual, Judges all
things, 795, see Church. Justification) the Doctrine thereof is and has been
greatly vitiated among the Papists, and wherein they place it? 364, 365, 380 --
382, Luther and the Protestants with good Reason opposed this Doctrine, though
many of them ran soon into another Extreme; and wherein they place it? and that
they agree in one, 366, 387, 370. it comes from the Love of God, 367* 379, 380.
to Justify signifies to to make really Just, not to repute Just; which many
Protestants are also forced to acknowledge, 370, 371, 374 -- 377. The
Revelation of Christ formed in the Heart, is the formal Cause of Justification,
not Works (to speak properly) which are only an Effect, and so also many
Protestants have said, 364 -- 380. we are Justified in Works, and how? 364,
370, 371, 380 -- 387. this is so far from being Popish Doctrine, that
Bellarmine and others opposed it, 365, 369, 385, 386. -- We are Justified by
Christ Jesus, both as he appeared at Jerusalem, and also as he was made
manifest and revealed in us, 19, 20. Justification by the indwelling of Christ
is denied by the Papists, 78. Primitive Protestants Belief concerning
Justification, 79. concerning Faith and Justification, 129, 166. a twofold
Justification, 25. it is the making a Man just by an Inward Righteousness, 77.
811. the Doers of the Law Justified, 806. Antinomians Imputative Justification
refuted,, 812. J. B's gross Opinion of it, 814. no Man is Justified, before he
be sanctified, 816, The real Justification falls under the inward sensation
of the Soul, 817.
K.
Keith) G. K. vindicated from our Adversaries malicious Insinuations against
him, 621. Kingdom of God) 459, 511, 517. Christ's Kingdom needs no outward
protection, 846. the Kingdom of God is within you, 803. the Kingdom of God is
in the Seed, in the Hearts of all Men, 354. Kirk) the Greedy Kirk, become a
Proverb, 437. Knowledge) the Height of Man's Happiness is placed in the true
Knowledge of God, 467. Error in the Entrance of this Knowledge is dangerous,
267, 268. Superstition, Idolatry, and thence Atheism has proceeded from the
False and Feigned Opinions concerning God and the Knowledge of him, 269. the
uncertain Knowledge of God is diverse ways attained, but the True and Certain
only by the inward and immediate Revelation of the Holy Spirit, 269 -- 271. it
has been brought out of use, and by what Devices, 272, 273. there is no
Knowledge of the Father, but by the Son, nor of the Son, but by the Spirit,
268, 274, 275. the Knowledge of Christ, which is not by the Revelation of his
Spirit in the Heart, is no more the Knowledge of Christ, than the prattling of a
Parret, which has been taught a few Words, may be said to be the Voice of a
Man, 276, 277. -- The Objection, [that the Apostle prefers the Knowledge of
Christ as outwardly Crucified, to all other Knowledge] answered, 9. his Inward
Knowledge preferred, 67. the true and saving Knowledge of God, 115, 161. the
Knowledge of the History saves none, 355. many by the Light may be saved, that
have not the outward Knowledge of christ, 356 of the true Ground of Knowledge,
728 -- 733. the Difference between Head-Knowledge, and the partaking of the
Divine Nature, 763, 764. Monopolizers of Knowledge, 889. 428 (see Clergy) The
Christian Religion consists not in the Historical Knowledge of Christ, 895. see
Indians, etc
L.
Labor) they wanted nothing, whom God sent, they labored with their Hands,
435. Laces and Ribbonds) 873. Laics) 429, 432, 433. Laity) 433, 507. Lake of
Bethesda) 338, 339. Lamb) see Paschal Lamb. Language) the plain Language used
in the Scriptures, 58. concerning our using Thee and Thou, which is the
Singular Number to one person, 61. to use the Plural instead of the Singular
Number to one Person, is no Indifferent thing, 3, 4. (see Number) the Singular
Number to one person used in the Latin, 539. how the Word [ You] came to be
used to a single person, ibid. the Word [ Thou] a greater Honor to one, than [
You] 540. Scripture-Dialect, the plain Language, 541. Law) the Law is
distinguished from the Gospel, 287, 384. the Difference thereof, 287, 493. (see
Gospel.) under the Law, the People were not in any Doubt, who should be Priests
and Ministers, 408. (see Minister of the Law, Worship) The Testimony, Law and
Word is inward in the Heart, 15, 71. the ending of the Law and beginning of the
Gospel, 187. wherein the Law and Gospel differ, 298, 393, 484. the outward and
inward Law, 286. the Law of Christ more perfect, than of Moses, 558. the Divine
Law was implanted in Man's Nature, before all Laws made by Man, 701. J. B's
Proof, for what is meant by Law and Testimony, 756. his Asserting the Law of
Nature against his former Reason, 793. Law of Moses, see Legal Rites. Lawyers)
by Tricks and Intricacies foment Controversies, 209 Laying on of Hands) 511.
see Hands. Learned) the Lord is angering the Wise and Learned, 885 Learning)
what true Learning is? 421, 422. Humane Learning is not the Qualification of a
Minister, 140, 305, 703, 730. see Literature, Schools of Learning. Leaven) J.
B's Objection against the Word Fermentum (Leaven) or Fermentation (a Leavening)
answered, 855. Legal Rites) had a Command, as well as John's Baptism, 857.
Leonisis a Sect; they have a great Show of Truth, 532. (in the Margent.)
Letter) The Letter kills, quickneth not, 393. like Pharisees the outward Law,
so now Professors plead the Letter, 15. How the Letter kills, 18, 76. Levi) a
Figure of Christ, 655 Leyden) John of Leyden and Ignatius Loyola their
Practices resembled by W. M. and his Brethren, 58 Liars) their Punishment, 557
Libertines) see Ranters. Liberty) the true Liberty in the Church, 222. breach
of Liberty begets Jars, ibid. a false Liberty, 224. a wrong Spirit of Liberty,
246. what Liberty we claim in things Religious, 516, 520, 524 Lies) 276. lying
Titles, 535. Christians not to speak a Lie, 875. J. B s refuge of Lies, 877.
Light) The innate Light is explained by Cicero, 361, 362. Light of Nature) the
Errors of the Socinians and Pelagians, who exalt this Light, are rejected, 310,
311. Saving Light (see Redemption) is universal, it is in all, 330, 331. It is
a Spiritual and Heavenly Principle, 333, 334. it is a Substance, not an
Accident, 334, 335. it is Supernatural and sufficient, 346, 348. It is the
Gospel preached in every Creature, 349, 350. It is the Word, nigh in the Mouth
and in the Heart, 350, 351. it is the Ingrafted Word, able to save the Soul,
353. Testimonies of Augustine and Buchanan concerning this Light, 363. it is not
any part of Nature, or Relics of the Light remaing in Adam after the fall,
337. it is distinguished from the Conscience, 337, 338. It is not a common
Gift, as the Heat of the Fire and outward Light of the Sun, as a certain
Preacher said, 357. it may be resisted, 331, 333, 338, 398, 399. by this Light,
or Seed, Grace and Word of God, he invites all, and calls them to Salvation,
352 -- 354 none of those, to whom the History of Christ is preached, are saved,
but by the inward Operation of this Light, 353 -- 355. it is small in the first
manifestation, but it grows, 353. it is slighted by the Calvinists, Papists,
Socinians and Arminians, and why? 354. none can put it to silence, 357. there
are and may be saved by the operation thereof, who are ignorant of the History
of Christ, 318, 319, 331, 336, 337, 352, 356 -- 362. an answer to the
Objection, That none can be saved, but in the Name of Jesus Christ, 358, 359,
367.

The Light within being believed in and obeyed, leads to the use of the
Scriptures, 11. where the Light is, there is Christ himself, ibid. 63. the
Light is not contradistinguished from the Gospel, but is the same, 64 some may
have saving Light and Grace, who after a certain manner may be said not to
have, the Spirit, 66, The Light of Jesus Christ in Men will discover the
Intents of the heart, and flatter none, 711. the Light is no Introduction to
paganism, 67. concerning the Light, 123. the Light is come into the World, etc.
126, 165. Light of Nature objected, 693. The Light, seed and Grace of God no
part of Man's Nature, 694. the Inward Principle of Life and Light described,
699. Deaf People, etc. the Light may Influence, which Writings, etc. cannot
759, 805, 302. Objections against the Universality of the Light, 797, 798. it is
sufficient and saving, ibid. it is not nature's Light, 829. the Testimony of
Cyrill. Alex. of the Light, 344

Life) The Principle of Divine Life is never Idle, 644. the Life of Words
witnessed, ibid. (see Christ) no Nourishment, no Life, 414. Lifeless Members,
what Church they make, ibid. Literature) Humane Literature is not at all
needful, 421, etc. see Minister, Sciences. Liturgy) 444, 455. Logic, 423, 424.
Aristotle's ^ogick by Papists and Protestants made the Handmaid of Divinity
(so called) 305 Lord) There is one Lord, 279, 280. -- No Man can call Jesus
Lord, etc. 276, 468. the Name of the Lord, how taken in Scripture, 487 Lot)
Abraham's and Lot's bowing, 874 Love) Of a Love-Feast, 509, 510, 679, -- 694,
704 Lucifer) Lucifer's Spirit affecting honor, 537, 538 Lukewarmness) of the
Church of Laodicea, 411. see Church, Religion. Luther) 526. Luther and Calvin
testifying against Persecution, persecute themselves, thereby encouraging
Papists, 526, 527. Lutherans) their Seditions against Reformed Teachers, and
Assault, etc. 292. their Principle of Persecution, etc. 690. they hold no
Salvation without the Knowledge of Christ, and the Scriptures, 692
M.
Macquare) R. M's most abusive Railing against the Quakers, and their Doctrine,
880. and his shameless Flatteries to J. B. ibid. Magistrate) Concerning his
Power in-things purely Religious, and that he has no Authority over the
Conscience, 515 530. nor ought he to punish according to Church-Censure, 517.
concerning the present Magistrates of the Christian Word, 563, 564. Magistracy,
and the Offices thereof, 157 -- 159, 171. is an Ordinance of God, 710. its
Lawfulness and Power, 865. he bears not the Sword in vain, 665. not to punish
for Religious Matters, but Evil in Civil Matters, ibid. Priests call for the
Magistrates Sword to defend their Doctrine against the Quakers, 76, they make
him their Executioner, 667. Christ's Kingdom needs not outward Power to protect
it, 846. the Nature of the Gospel is Extrinsick from the Rule and Government of
State, 517. if Magistrates have Power to punish Heretics, then Nero was no
Persecutor, 521. then forcing a Conformity, is not Compelling the Conscience,
as J. B. Asserts, 865. see Heresies. Mahomet) prohibited all Reason and
Discourse about Religion, 527. he was an Impostor, 338. Majesty) your Majesty,
see Titles excellent Majesty, 875 Maintenance) Minister's Maintenance, 142.
must be voluntary, not coercive, ibid. 143. the Gospel to be made without
Charge, 168, 434. his necessities to be answered, 432, 661. God sends no Man
away, faring upon his own Charges, 435. the Abuses Priests Maintenance brings,
436. in the Primitive Times no stinted Maintenance was sought by the Ministers,
ibid. who hire a Teacher, may pay his Stipend, 438. what kind of Maintenance is
denied, 661, 662.. what Maintenance allowed to Ministers in Scripture, 840.
Malchus) his Ear cut off, see Titles. Man, (see Knowledge) his Spirit knows
the things of a Man, and not the things of God, 275. the Carnal Man esteems
the Gospel Truths, as Lies, 276. and in that State he cannot please God, 282.
the New Man and the Old, 294, 593. the Natural Man cannot discern Spiritual
Things: As to the First Adam, he is Fallen and Degenerate, 294, 308, 310, 317,
318. his Thoughts of God and Divine Things in the Corrupt State are Evil and
Unprofitable, 310. nothing of Adam's Sin is Imputed to him, until by Evil-doing
he Commit his own, 311, 315, 316. in the Corrupt State he has no Will or Light
capable of it self to manifest Spiritual things, 311 -- 314, 367. he cannot
when he will, procure to himself Tenderness of Heart, 389. whatsoever he does,
while he does it not by, in and through the Power of God, he is not approved of
God, 452, 453. how the inward Man is nourished, 495 -- 497. how his
Understanding cannot be forced by Sufferings, and how his Understanding is
changed, 521, 522. the Heart of Man is deceitful, 301, 312. his Imaginations
evil, ibid. the Natural Man discerns not, etc. 313. the Fall of Man did affect
both Soul and Body, 762. how Man's Mind is changed, 522 Manifestation) see
Seed. Merchandise) what it is to make Merchandise with the Scriptures, 426
Marriages) the Care taken about them by the People called Quakers, 210, 211.
Martyrs) of Protestant Martyrs, 523 -- 528 J. B's condemning Primitive Martyrs
falsely, as led by a Spirit of Error, 736. Mass) 441, 448, 454, 474. the Popish
Mass and Vespers, 443. see Papists. Mathematician) 293, 294 Meats and Drinks)
the Law was Meats and Drinks, not so the Gospel, 512. the observing of Meats,
Drinks, Washings, to be considered in a threefold respect, 586. Mechanics)
431. they contributed much to the Reformation, 432 Mediator) see Christ.
Meditation) the Quakers are not against it, 452 Meetings) to have set Meetings
to the Glory of God, and the Good of the Church, in their proper Times and
Seasons, does not contradict the being led Immediately by the Spirit of God,
204, 235. Meetings to take Care for the Poor, Widows and Orphans, etc. 206. the
necessity of Meetings, set Times and Places, 442. Assemblies of Worship in
public described, 444. Silent Meetings, 445. a secret Travel in Silent
Meetings, 446. speaking to Edification in Meetings, 446. the mocker in
Meetings, ibid. our Work and Worship in our Meetings, 447. a sweet Sound of
Thanksgiving and Praise in our Meetings, 448. set Times and Places, and the Use
and Profitableness of our Public Meetings, 460. not to be neglected, 461.
silent waiting in Meetings proved from Scripture and Reason, ibid. private
Meetings in Time of Persecution not Justifiable, 530 J. M.) his Answer to a
Jesuit, 611 Merit) see Justification. the Merit and Reward of Works, 386, 387
Metaphysics) 424 Meum and Tuum) the Case of Meum and Tuum, 2^8 Minister of the
Gospel) It is not found in Scripture, if any be called, 299, 416, 417. Teachers
are not to go before the Teaching of the Spirit, 304. the Popish and Protestant
Errors concerning the Grace of a Minister are rejected, 310, 315. they are
given for the Perfection of the Saints, etc. 391. concerning their Call, and
wherein it is placed, 403, 407 -- 416. Qualities, 403, 416 -- 424. Orders and
Distinction of Laity and Clergy, 428, 430 -- 433. of separating Men for their
Ministry, 425, 426. Concerning the Sustentation and Maintenance of Ministers,
and their Abuse; of the Idleness, Riot and Cruelty of Ministers, 431 -- 437.
what kind of Ministry and Ministers the Quakers are for, and what sort their
Adversaries are for, 438, 439, 442, 443 the Properties of a true Call, 831,
832. what Evidence the first Publishers of Truth's Testimony in this Age gave
in their Ministry, 190. and with what Courage they preached, ibid. what
Opposition they met withal, 191. nothing now in this kind, but what has been
the Lot of God's Witnesses in Ancient Times, ibid. the Ministration of the
Gospel is a Ministration of Life and Grace, 656. False Ministers preach from
their Study and Books, 28. true Ministers Call is not of Man, 36, 90, 91, 658.
their Ministry its Tendency, 37, 91. Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
etc. 89. what kind of Men the Ministers ought to be, and their Duty, etc. 139
-- 144, 167, 168. the End of the Ministry, the Saints mutual Comfort, 304. what
renders the Work of the Ministry useless, 391, 392. the powerful Ministry of
Illiterate Men, 426. Ministers of the Gospel, and of the Law and Shadows
differ, 654. the Lame and Blind no legal Ministers, 655. the Students Graceless
Ministry, Judas its Patron, ibid. Holiness required in a Preacher, ibid. the
Work of the Ministry is not limited to outward Ordination and Literature, 703.
(see Priests) whether Natural Sciences are necessary to the Ministry, 834. the
forerunner of the Downfall of a Man-made Ministry, 885. Minister of the Law)
there was no doubtfulness concerning them under the Law, 409, 420, 421. their
Ministry was not purely Spiritual, and while they performed it, they behoved to
be purified from their outward Pollutions, as now those under the Gospel from
their Inward, 408, 409, 420, 421. [see Maintenance, Preaching.] Miracles)
whether they be needful to those, who place their Faith in Objective
Revelation, 278, 279, 416. J. Calvin asserts, there is no need of them, 37. or
to prove a True Call, 90. those of the Apostles were wrought by the Power of
Christ in them, 385. the Unbelieving Jews believed them not, ^24. the preaching
of sound Doctrine with an Holy Life, is a better Evidence of a true Prophet,
than all outward Miracles, ibid. we need no outward Miracles to believe the
Scriptures, 903. Monasteries) to be shut up in Cloisters and Monasteries, is
not the true Mortification and Abstraction from the Love and Cares of the
World, 535. Monks) and Friars demure Deportment, Haircloth and Vows, etc. 27.
Moses) 361, 456, 458, 475, 494. Moses's and Christ's Deliverance compared, 52.
Motions) wicked Men neglect the Motions of the Spirit to ^rayer, 472. Motions
to Worship are previous in order of Nature, 635. false Motions denied, 836. J.
B. is for praying without the Spirit's Motion, 843. he calls the Movings of the
Power of God upon the Quakers, Devilry, 844. J.B Instanceth unusual Motions of
his own party, 844, 845 Munster) see Anabaptists, their mischievous actings,
288 Murmurer) the Truth shuts him out, 198 Music) 473 Mystery) of Iniquity,
428, 492 Mysticks) a certain sort of Mysticks among the Papists 458, 459.
N
Name of the Lord) 486.488. To anoint in the Name of the Lord, 512. Nature) The
Book of Nature cannot discover all things neccessary to Salvation, 631. (see
Socinians) The Lamb's Nature not to be found in most Christians, but the
Doggish and Wolfish Nature does prevail, 709. The Corrupt Nature in the fall
distinguished from the Divine Nature, by which the Gentiles did the things
contained in the Law. 12. Naylor (James) 876. his Repentance, 84, 630. Nero)
521, 665. Noah's) faith had neither the Scripture, nor the Prophecy of those
going before him, 358. It is said of him, that he was a perfect Man, 394.
Number) of using the singular Number to one Person, 539.540. To Thee and Thou a
single Person (says I. B.) is blunt and rude, 874.875.
O.
Oath) That it is not lawful to swear, 533.551. to 556.565. concerning Oaths,
870, -- 873. Obedience) No Man's Obedience to any Command will avail him any
thing, unless upon inward belief and conviction, that the thing Commanded is of
God, 738. is better than Sacrifice, 300. Object) of Faith, see Faith. Office)
What is meant by an Office in the Church? 837. Officers) 836. see Elders.
Ordinances) sealing Ordinances, 476. Ordination) The best primitive Protestants
had no lawful Ordination at all, and therefore could not convey any to others
after them, whether Protestants, or others, 648.660. Original sin a term not
found in Scripture, 40. Original sin, a Popish Tradition, 93. Zwinglius
condemned in the Council of Trent for his notion of Original Sin, 93. Oil) To
anoint with Oil, 493, 511, 513.
P
Pagans) 64 Papists) the Rule of their Faith, 289. they are forced ultimately
to recur unto the immediate and inward Revelations of the Holy Spirit, 293.
What difference there is betwixt the cursed deeds of those at Munster, and
theirs, 288, 290. They have taken away the second Commandment in their
Catechism, 3O2. they make Philosophy the Handmaid of Divinity, 305. They exalt
too much the natural Power: and what they think of the saving Light, 354. Their
Doctrine concerning Justification is greatly vitiate, 366. Concerning their
manners and ceremonies 405.406. Their literature and studies, 422. Of the
modern Apostles and Evangelists, 430. Whom they exclude from the Ministry,
431.432. They must be sure of so much a year, before they preach, 433. They do
not labor, 437. The more moderate and sober of them exclaim against the
excessive Revenues of the Clergy, 435. Their worship can easily be stopped,
454.455. Albeit they say, None are saved without Water Baptism, yet they allow
an Exception, 289. Of Baptism, 492. Of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, 497, 498.
Of an Oath, 550. The Maxim among the Papists, Extra Ecclesiam nulla Salus, in
some sense true; but as it is understood by them generally, it destroys Love
and Charity, 688. Papists pretended charity, see Armenian. Parable) of the
Talents, 344.349. Of the Vineyard entrusted, 335. of the Sower, 348, 349, of
the Tares, 519 Paschal Lamb) the end thereof, 500. Patriarchs 496, 501. Peace)
The (worldly) Peace-Contrivers Rule is not Equity, but the power of Parties,
610, 711, 712 Pelagians) 311. how we differ from them, 339, -- 341, 492. see
Light of Nature. Pelagius) deemeth, That no Man gets an evil Seed from Adam;
and ascribes all to the Will and Nature of Men: He said, that Man could attain
unto a State of not sinning by his mere natural Strength, without the Grace of
God, 398 Perfection) Concerning Perfection or freedom from Sin, 91, 99, 132 --
136, 166, 167. Perfection evicted, 28, 37, 620. Persecution) upon the account
of Religion, 523 -- 529. see Magistrate. Violent Persecutions upon the account
of Religious Principles rather confirm, than drive the persecuted from the
Belief of those Principles, 687. The Lutherans and Calvinists united in the
Doctrine and Practice of Persecution, even practice the same against one
another, 690. Pressing after and seeking to establish a National Church, tends
to promote Persecution, 691. the Principle of Persecution preached up and
practiced by the Church of Rome, 689. Severity, see 865. Perseverance) The
Grace of God may be lost through Disobedience, 388 -- 401. yet such a stability
may in this Life be attained, from which there cannot be a total Apostasy, 380
-- 398, 400, 405, 406. Concerning Perseverance or falling from Grace, 136 --
138, 167 Peter) whether he was at Rome, 289. he was ignorant of Aristotle's
Logic, 305. there were of old diverse Opinions concerning his Second Epistle,
297. Pharaoh) 778 Pharisees) 475. Philosopher) an Heathen-Philosopher was
brought to the Christian Faith by an Illiterate Rustic, 424. a Philosopher
converted: his Testimony concerning the Old Man's Words, 644. a Philosopher
troubled, for being Commended by a Profligate Person, 672. Philosophers, whence
called, 362. Philosophy) 417, 424 Phisicks) ibid. Plays) whether it be lawful
to use them, 531, 533, 545* 548. 565 Polycarpus) the Disciple or John, 289
Power) The Power of God being Inwardly felt to give Victory over Sin in some
serious Inquirers, was the Cause of their Uniting and agreeing unanimously to
the universal Preaching up of this Power, which is the True Church's first and
chiefest Principle, and most agreeable to the universal Love of God, 697 Pray)
To pray for Remission of Sins, 397, 398. concerning the Lord's Prayer, 450. to
Pray without the Spirit, is to offend God, 453. concerning the Prayer of the
Will in Silence, 458, (see Worship) Prayer) The Prayers of the People were in
the Latin Tongue, 422. Prayers performed without the Assistance of the Spirit,
are not acceptable to God, 44, 45. Mental Prayer, the Cause and Spring of Vocal
Prayer, 643. is sometimes of more Force, than Vocal Prayer, 648, all that are
Faithful, who have no natural Defect, may Pray Vocally at Times, 645. Preacher)
(see Minister) Preaching) what it is termed? the Preaching of the Word, 426,
431. (see Worship) it is a permanent Institution, 485. it is learned as another
Trade, 431. no Preaching is profitable, but that which comes from the Immediate
Teachings of God's Spirit, 28, 861, -- 868, 871 Predestined) God has after a
special manner Predestined some to Salvation, of whom the places of
Scripture, which some abuse, be understood; their Objections are easily solved,
341. Presbyterians) Scots Presbyterians, the severest of that Sect; they derive
their Pedigree from Geneva, but surpass it in Zeal, 678. Presbyterians
Compliance, 758. a Presbyterian Preacher's Prayer to the Devil, 708. a twofold
Will in God vindicated by the Presbyterians, 777. see 861, 873 -- 878 Priest)
Under the Law God spoke immediately to the High Priest, 277, 286 Priests) see
Minister of the Law, 408, 409, 421, 442 Pride) 885 Princes) the Courts of
Princes, the Scenes of greatest Wickedness, 708, 564. Principles) Departing
(through Unbelief) from the Fundamental Principles of a Society, implies
self-ejection from being a Member of that Society, whether in Spiritual or
Temporal Matters, 214. proved by Scripture, ibid. that those, that abide
faithful in the firm Belief of those Principles and Doctrines, upon which their
Society was outwardly grounded, have Power to exclude those, that separate from
them, by asserting False and Contradictory Principles, 215. The Doctrines and
Principles, which are the outward Bonds and Terms of Society, are nothing else,
but the Product of Truth's Power and Virtue upon the Heart, 241. a good
Principle is a ready way to lead People into good Practices, 27 Profession) An
outward Profession is necessary,. that any be a Member of a particular
Christian Church, 404 Prophecy, and to Prophesy) what it signifies, 416, 417.
of the Liberty of Prophesying, 439. Prophecy, 277, 750 Prophets) Some Prophets
did not Miracles, 416, 417. Sam. Rutherford explains 1 Cor. 14.30. to be meant
of Pastors, and not extraordinary Prophets, 104. J. Calvin affirms, that in his
Day God raised up Prophets and Evangelists, 89. concerning Prophets, 604, 645,
667. Protestants the Rule of their Faith, 289. they are forced ultimately to
recur unto the immediate and inward Revelations of the Holy Spirit, 293. what
difference betwixt the execrable Deeds of those of Munster and theirs, 288 --
290. they make Philosophy the Handmaid of Divinity, 305. they affirm, John Huss
prophesied of the Reformation, that was to be, 309. whether they did not throw
themselves into many Errors, while they were expecting a greater Light? 380.
they opposed the Papists not without good Cause, in the Doctrine of
Justification, but they soon ran into another Extreme, 365, 366. they say, that
the best Works of the Saints are defiled, 370. whether there be any difference
betwixt them and the Papists in Superstitions and Manners, and what it is? 405,
406. what they think of the Call of a Minister? 409 -- 416. it is lamentable,
that they betake themselves to Judas for a Patron to their Ministers and
Ministry, 421. their Zeal and Endeavors are praised, 422. of their
School Divinity 425. of the Apostles and Evangelists of this Time, 430. whom
they exclude from the Ministry? 430, 431. that they preach to none; until they
be first sure of so much a Year, 433. the more moderate of them exclaim against
the excessive Revenues of the Clergy, 435. though they had forsaken the Bishop
of Rome, yet they would not part with old Benefices, 436. they will not labor,
437. whether they have made a perfect Reformation in Worship? 440, 441. their
Worship can easily be stopped, 455. they have given great Scandal to the
Reformation, 470, they deny Water Baptism to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation, 480. of Water Baptism 491, 392. of the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
407 -- 409. they use not Washing of Feet, 489. how they did vindicate Liberty
of Conscience, 524. some affirm, that wicked Kings and Magistrates ought to be
deposed, yea killed, 5.24. how they Meet, when they have not the Consent of the
Magistrate, 529, 530. of Oaths and Swearing, 550, 551. according to the
Episcopalian and Presbyterian Principles and Practices, no Man can be a Member
of the State, but first they must be a Member of the Church, 691. the
Protestants, to their Shame, have recourse to their old Abdicated Father the
Pope for a Title to their Call, 833. concerning Protestants, 611, 721. Psalms)
Singing of Psalms, 433. as commonly used is but a mock-worship, 30
Q.
Quakers) i. e. Tremblers, and why so called? 356, 698. they are not contemners
of the Scriptures, and what they think of them? 296, 301, 335. nor of Reason,
and what they think of it? 337, 338. they do not say, that all other Secondary
means of Knowledge are of no Service, 274. they do not compare themselves to
Jesus Christ, as they are falsely accused, 334. Nor do they deny those things,
that are written in the Holy Scriptures, concerning Christ his Conception,,
335. they were raised up of God to show forth the Truth, 330, 331, 355, 356
their Doctrine of Justification is not Popish, 365, 369, 381, 387. they are not
against Meditation, 452. their Worship cannot be interrupted, 454. and what
they have suffered? 453. how they vindicate Liberty of Conscience, 528, 529.
they do not persecute others, 530. their Adversaries confess, that they are
found for the most part free from the Abominations, which abound among others,
yet they account those things Vices in them, which in themselves they extol as
notable Virtues, and make more Noise about the Escape of one Quaker, than of an
hundred among themselves, 532, 533. they destroy not the mutual Relation, that
is betwixt Prince and People, Master and Servant, Father and Son; nor do they
introduce Community of Goods, 533, 534. nor say, that one Man may not use the
Creation more or less than another, 533. In the Doctrine concerning the
Ministry they defend themselves by the Arguments the Primitive Protestants used
against the Papists of those Times, 90. a Catalogue of Lies and Calumnies
falsely alleged to be the Quakers Assertions, 890, 891. the Quakers Adversaries
fasten Contradictions upon Christ himself, 666 J. B's Doubts concerning the
Time of the Author's joining with the People called Quakers, resolved, 869. the
Author's Education, 612, 678. his Burden, 707. Reflections cast upon him, 719,
880. the Liberty which the Quakers enjoy, is by mercy, not of their own
procuring, 530. see also 48, 150, 185. their General Assembly, 234, 235. their
Ministry, etc. 438, 448, 474, 6^8, 678. their Sufferings, 722. for not bearing
Arms, 562. their Adversaries Slanders and Accusations against them, 566 -- 568.
J. B's Calumnies, 760. ungodly Railings against them, 793. 819, 835, 842, 854,
829, 842, 844. and false Charges, 877, 878. the Lord their Honor and Reward,
698
R.
Ranters) The Blaspemy of the Ranters or Libertines, saying, That there is no
difference betwixt Good and Evil, 393 Reason) What need we set up corrupt
Reason, 284. concerning Reason, 290, 337 Rebekkah) 449, 450 Reconciliation) How
Reconciliation with God is made, 37O -- 373 Recreations) see Plays. Redemption)
is considered in a twofold respect; first, performed by Christ without us; and
secondly, wrought in us, 368, 369. it is universal. God gave his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ for a Light, that whosoever believes in him, may be saved,
317, 318, 345, 346. the benefit of his death is not less universal, than the
Seed of him, 317. there is scarce found any article of the Christian Religion,
that is so expressly confirmed in the Holy Scriptures, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325.
this Doctrine was preached by the Fathers (so called) of the first 600. years
and is proved by the sayings of some 326, 327. those that since the time of the
Reformation have affirmed it, have not given a clear Testimony, how that
Benefit is communicated to all, or have sufficiently taught the Truth, because
they have added the absolute Necessity of the outward knowledge of the History
of Christ; yea, they have thereby given the contrary party a stronger Argument
to defend their precise decree of Reprobation: among whom were the Remonstrants
of Holland, 318, 327 -- 330. God has now raised up a few Illiterate Men, to be
the dispensers of this Truth, 330, 331, 355, 356. this Doctrine shows forth
the mercy and Justice of God 330, 3341, 30, 341. it is the foundation of
Salvation, 331. it answers to the whole tenor of the Gospel-promises and
threats 331. it exalts above all the Grace of God, 331. it overturns the false
Doctrine of the Pelagians and Semi-pelagians and others, who exalt the light of
nature, and the freedom of Man's will, 331. it makes the Salvation of Man solely
to depend upon God, and his Condemnation wholly and in every respect to be of
himself, 331. it takes away all ground of Despair, and feeds none in security,
331. it commends the Christian Religion among Infidels, 332. it shows the
wisdom of God, 332. and it is established though not in words, yet by deeds
even by those Ministers, that oppose this Doctrine, 332. -- It derogates not
from the Atonement and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, but does magnify and exalt
it, 335. there is given to every one (none excepted) a certain day and time of
Visitation, in which it is possible for them to be saved, 330, 341, 345. The
Testimony of Cyril, concerning this thing, 344* 345. it is explained, what is
understood and not understood by this Day, 333. to some it may be longer, to
others, shorter; 333. many may outlive this Day of Visitation, after which
there is no possibility of Salvation to to them, 333. Some examples are
alleged, the Objection^ and those places of Scripture, which others abuse, to
prove, that God incites Men to sin, are easily solved, if they be applied to
these Men, after the Time of their Visitation is past, 333, 341, 342 there is
given to every one a measure of the Light, Seed, Grace and Word of God, whereby
they can be saved. 330, 341, 345 -- 352. which is also confirmed by the
Testimonies of Cyril and others, 347 -- 349, 351, 352. what that Light is? (see
Light) many though Ignorant of the outward History, yet have been sensible of
the Loss, that came by Adam; which is confirmed by the Testimonies of Plato and
others, 361, 362. many have known Christ within, as a Remedy to Redeem them,
though not under that denomination; witness Seneca, Cicero and others, 361,
362. yet all are obliged to believe the outward History of Christ, to whom God
brings the Knowledge of it, 335 Reformation) wherein it is not placed, 408,
409. mechanic men have contributed much to it, 431. what has been pernicious
to it, 499. Regeneration) those that have attained unto a perfect Regeneration,
cannot miss of Salvation, 42, 43. Regeneration is not wrought in an Instant,
821. Relation) see Quakers Religion) The Christian Religion (see Christianity)
how it is made odious to Jews, Turks and Heathens, 498. that any Religion is
established by a National Law, is no Argument, that it ought not to be called
in Question, and brought to the Test, 589. Indifferency and Lukewarmness in
Religious matters highly displeasing to the Lord, 681 Remonstrants of Holland)
see Arminians, Redemption) They deny absolute Reprobation, 290. how we differ
from them 339. they exalt too much the Natural Power and Free Will of Man, and
what they think of the Saving Light, 354, 355. their Worship can easily be
stopped, 455. the Practice of the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants of
Holland does show, how void they are of Christian Love and Charity, 691
Reprobation (see also Redemption) What absolute Reprobation is, described, 319.
its Doctrine is horrible, impious and Blasphemous, 319.323 -- 325. it is also
so called by Lucas Osiander 328. it is a new Doctrine, Augustine laid the first
foundation thereof, which Dominicus, Calvin, and the Synod of Do^t maintained,
320.328.329. also Luther, whom not-withstanding the Lutherans afterward
deserted, 328, 329. It is injurious to God, and makes him the Author of sin,
proved by the Sayings of Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Paraeus, Martin, Zuinglius and
Piscator, 320, 321. It makes the Preaching of the Gospel a mere Mock and
Illusion, 322. It makes the coming of Christ and his propitiatory Sacrifice to
have been a Testimony of God's Wrath, 322, 323. It is injurious to Mankind, and
makes his Condition worse than the Condition of Devils, Beasts, Jews under
Pharaoh, and the same which the Poets applied to Tantalus, 323, 324. Who
espouse the precise Decree of Reprobation, declare themselves Strangers to the
Universal Love of God, 694, 695. the precise Decree of Reprobation, is
inconsistent with the Universal Love of God, 694. the Presbyterian Doctrine of
Reprobation makes God the Author of Sin, 777. the same Doctrine makes the
Gospel a mere mock, 778. it is injurious to Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice,
ibid. it puts Devils in a better condition than Men, 779 Resurrection) 159,
160, 172. Revelation) God always manifested himself by the Revelations of the
Spirit, 268, 275, 376, 293. they are made several ways, 268. they have been
always the formal object of faith, and so remain, 269, 276, -- 284 and that not
only Subjectively, but also Objectively, 284 -- 287. they are simply necessary
unto true faith, 269, 288, 294. they are not uncertain, 294 -- 296. yea, it is
horrible Sacrilege, to accuse them of uncertainty, 283. The Examples of the
Anabaptists of Munster do not a whit weaken this Doctrine, 288, 291, 292, --
294. they can never contradict the Holy Scripture, nor sound Reason, 269, 292,
305, 306. they are evident and clear of them selves, nor need they another
Testimony, 269.293.294. they are the only, sure certain, and unmovable
foundation of all Christian faith, 294, 295. Carnal Christians Judge them
nothing necessary, yea, they are hissed out by the most part of Men, 269. of
old none were esteemed Christians, save those that had the Spirit of Christ;
but now a days he is termed an Heretic, who affirms, that he is led by it,
269, 270. The Testimony of some concerning the necessity of these Revelations,
270, -- 272, 283, 284. by whose and what desires they have been brought out of
use, 330. Divine Revelations, the privilege of all true Christians, 607. the
inward efficiency of the Spirit is that objective Revelation pleaded for, 632.
no true Revelation can contradict the Scripture, 743. how and after what manner
these Revelations were the object of the Saints faith of old, 744. of the
necessity of immediate Revelation to the building up of true faith, 623 -- 632.
the distinction of subjective and objective Revelation unnatural, 658. it is in
the Power of God to Reveal himself, when, how and so long as he pleases, 750.
what Revelations are contrary to the Scriptures, are to be rejected, 752. Here
Paets his Argument against immediate Revelations discussed, 894. Revelations
seem to carnal Christians nothing necessary, yea, some are apt to flout at
them, as Ridiculous, 269. immediate Revelations and Teaching of the Spirit
asserted, 28. Revenge (see War) 555, 556 Rogers) W. Rogers his Letter, showing
his Satisfaction with R. B's Sense and meaning in his Book of Government, 247
Rule) of Faith and Manners, see Scripture, Concerning the Rule and Guide of
Christians, 116, 161. whatever Difficulties happen in saying, the Spirit is the
Christian's Rule, whereby to be ordered in Life and Conversation; the same will
occur in saying, The Scripture is the Rule, 591, 592 Rustic) The poor
Rustick's Answer given to the proud Prelate, 414. he brought a Philosopher to
the Christian Faith, 423, 424.
S.
Sabbath) 443. the outward Sabbath abolished, together with the New Mons, and
other Feasts of the Jews, 38. Sabbath or Rest is not an outward Day, 38, 40
Sacraments) of their Number, Nature, etc. how much Contention there has been,
and that the Word Sacrament, is not found in Scripture, but borrowed from the
Heathens, 476, 492. its Definition will agree to many other things, 475.
whether they confer Grace, 513. the most Wicked may both minister and partake
of these outward, Elementary things called Sacraments, as the most holy and
sincere, 704, 855, 864 Salvation) Without the Church there is no Salvation,
404. Salvation not only supposed, but concluded possible to all men, 700. the
Lutherans, Calvinists and Arminians hold, that there can be no Salvation
without the explicit Knowledge of Christ, and Benefit of the Scriptures, 692.
those that hold this Opinion, cannot justly pretend to Universal Love, 693.
Salvation chiefly depends upon the Inward Work of Grace, 802. the want of
outward Preaching does not destroy the possibility of Salvation, 80
Salutations) 531, 874. see Titles Samaria) The Woman of Samaria, 501
Sanctification) see Justification Saxony) The Elector of Saxony, of the Scandal
he gave to the Reformation, by being present at the Mass, 471, Schism, 188,
222.188. Sceptick) 423, 471. School) Without the School of Christ nothing is
learned, but mere Talk and Shadow of Knowledge, 270 -- 272. Whether public
Schools be necessary, 423, Schools and Universities, 885. Sciences) 834, 838
Scriptures) of Truth, whence they proceeded, and what they contain, 295. they
are a Declaration of the Fountain, and not the Fountain it self, 296. they are
not to be esteemed the adequate, Primary Rule of Faith and Manners, but a
Secondary, and Subordinate to the Spirit, and why? 296 -- 309, 416. their
certainty is only known by the Spirit, 296, 297, 405. they testify, that the
Spirit is given to the Saints for a Guide, 296, 303, 304, 306 -- 308. their
Authority depends not upon the Church or Council, nor upon their intrinsic
Virtue, but upon the Spirit, nor is it subjected to the corrupt Reason of Men,
but to the Spirit, 296, 304. the Testimonies of Calvin, the French Churches the
Synod of Dort, and the Divines of Great Britain at Westminster concerning this
thing, 296, 297. the Contentions of those that seek the certainty of the
Scriptures from something else, than the Spirit, 296, 297. diverse Opinions of
the Fathers (so called) concerning some Books, 296 -- 298. concerning the
taking away, and the corruption of some places; the Translation, Transcription
and various Lections of the Hebrew Character, and of the Greek Books: The
Interpretation of the Septuagint, concerning the Hebrew Books, and of admitting
or rejecting some Books, 302 -- 304. of their difficulty in their Explanation,
305. Augustin's Judgment concerning the Authors of the Canonick Books, and
concerning the Transcription and Interpretation, 303. the use of them is very
profitable and comfortable 297, 304. there is no necessity of Believing the
Scripture to be a filled up Canon 308. many Canonick Books through the Injury
of Time lost, ibid. whether it can be proved by Scripture, that any Book is
Canonical, 208, 209. they were sometimes as a Sealed Book, 422. to understand
them, there is need of the Help and Revelation of the Holy Spirit, 271, 272. no
Man can make himself a Doctor of them, but the Holy Spirit, 271. Noah and Job
were Preachers of Righteousness, before the Scriptures were written, 703. the
Knowledge of the Scriptures to be of great Advantage, is owned, 7, 117, 162,
700. the Synod of Paris their Opinion concerning the Scripture's certainty,
viz. to be by the Inward Testimony, and Persuasion of the Holy Spirit, 72, see
116, 162. the Scriptures cannot beguile Men, but Men may beguile themselves by
a wrong use of them, 577. the Scriptures the best Outward Rule in the World,
ibid. Scriptures are a Clear and Perfect Copy, as to all Essentials of
Christian Religion, 603. that the Scriptures are a sufficient, objective
Revelation of all things necessary to Salvation, is denied, 631. the Scriptures
are the Words of God, 747. a Secondary Rule, 754. that Supposition is false,
which supposes, the Will of God can be only known by the Scriptures, 759. John
Calvin's Testimony concerning the Scriptures and the Spirit, 72. to understand
the Scriptures, we need the Help and Revelation of the Holy Spirit ( Hierom)
271. the Scriptures, though they do declare the Mind of God, are therefore not
his Word, which came from God immediately to the Prophets, by which the
Scriptures came; which Word is ceased, Professors say, 14. the Canon of the
Scripture not completed, 735, 750. they are not the means of knowing God in
Spirit, 887 -- 889, 903. see Gifts. Scriptures explained, Genesis 2.17. p. 762.
Isai. 8.20. p. 755, 756 Prove. 10.11. p. 644. John 1.9. p. 797. 1 Cor. 11.5. p.
839. 2 Timothy 3.16. p. 755. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. p. 743. Jam. 1.25. p. 757. 1 John
4.1. p. 658. Sect) The Ignatian Sect loves Literature, 423. they call those,
that are sent unto India, Apostles, 430. the Definition of a Sect, 696, 698.
those cannot pretend to Universal Love, who confine all Spiritual and Temporal
Blessings to their Sect, 691. one Mark of a Sect is, when People seek to
Advance and Propagate their Way in the Strength of their own Spirits, etc. 698.
those whose Unity arises from Notions and Opinions, do derive their Names and
Designations from the first Authors, Inventors and Fomenters of those Opinions,
698, 699. Security) among hypocritical Professors, 47. Seed) of Righteousness,
452. the Seed of Sin, see Sin, Redemption. The Seed a distinct Principle from
the Soul, 795, 579, 580. Self-denial) 451* Semi-pelagians) their Axiom,
Facienti quod in se est, Deus non (...) gratiam, 328. Sense) supernatural, 657,
897 (...) 904, 905. Servant) Whether it be lawfu^ (...) I am your humble
Servant, 538. Servetus) 527. Shoemaker) he disputes with the Professor, 423,
424. Silence) see Worship* Silence and an inward turning of the Mind, necessary
to the entering upon Worship, 845. Simon Magus) 431. Sin) see Adam,
Justification. It shall not have Dominion over the Saints, 298. the Seed of Sin
is transmitted from Adam unto all Men, but it is Imputed to none, no not to
Infants, except they actually join with it by Sinning, 310, 311, 315 -- 318.
Augustin's Testimony concerning Infants, 768. and this Seed is often called
Death, 318. Original Sin, of this Phrase the Scripture makes no mention, 318.
by virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ we have Remission of Sins, 335, 367.
forgiveness of Sin among the Papists, 365. a Freedom from actual Sin is
obtained both when, and how, and that many have attained unto it, 388 -- 398.
every Sin weakens a Man in his Spiritual Condition, but does not destroy him
altogether, 389. it is one thing not to sin, another thing not to have Sin,
395. whatsoever is not done through the Power of God, is Sin, 445. the fear of
God remaining upon the Heart, Sin is shut out, 28. continuance in Sin ecclipses
and takes away the Sense of God's Favor, ibid. 884. Singing) of Psalms, and
Music, 473. Society) see Religion, Principles. Socinians) see Natural Light)
their rashness is reproved, 281. they think, Reason is the chief Rule and Guide
of their Faith, ibid. 289. albeit many have abused Reason, yet they do not say,
that any ought not to use it, and how ill they argue against the Inward and
Immediate Revelations of the Holy Spirit, 288 -- 290. yet they are forced
ultimately to recur unto them, 394. they exalt too much their Natural Power,
and what they think of the saving Light, 354. their Worship can easily be
stopped, 337. they exalt Self or Nature, 699. their scanty Confession does not
reach to Universal Love, 693. Son) of God, see Christ, Knowledge, Revelation.
Soul) The Soul has its Senses, as well as the Body, 272. by what it is
strengthened and fed, 453, 499. Spirit) The Holy Spirit, see Knowledge,
Communion, Revelation, Scriptures) Unless the Spirit sit upon the Heart of the
Hearer, in vain is the Discourse of the Doctor, 271, 279. the Spirit of God
knows the things of God, 275. without the Spirit none can say, that Jesus is
the Lord, 272, 275. he rested upon the seventy Elders, and others, 277. he
abides with us for ever, 280. he teaches and brings all things to
remembrance, and leads into all Truth, 280, 281, 284 -- 286, 296. he differs
from the Scriptures, 280. He is God, 281. he dwells in the Saints, 281 --
284. without the Spi^^^ ^^ristianity is no Christianity, 282, 297. whatsoever
is to be desired in the Christian Faith, is ascribed to him, 28^, 281. by this
Spirit we are turned unto God, and we Triumph in the midst of persecutions,
282. he quickens, etc. 282.283. an observable Testimony of Calvin concerning
the Spirit, 282 -- 284, 296, 297. it is the Fountain and Origin of all Truth
and right Reason, 292, 293. it gives the Belief of the Scriptures, which may
satisfy our Consciences, 296. his Testimony is more excellent than all Reason,
ibid. he is the chief and principal Guide, 301. he reasons with and striveth
in Men, 342. those that are led by the Spirit, love the Scriptures, 304, 405.
he is, as it were the Soul of the Church, and what is done without him, is vain
and impious, 423. he is the Spirit of Order, and not of Disorder, 427. such as
the Spirit sets a part to the Ministry, are heard of their Brethren, 428. it is
the Earnest of our Inheritance, 444. to be led by the Spirit of God, is a
Privilege common to all Christians and members of the Church, if Obedience
thereunto be yielded, 703. all have the Spirit in a certain Day, some to
reprove, some bringing forth of Fruits, 8. the Spir^t calls, invites and draws,
but men resist his Drawings, 8. J. Calvin prefers the Testimony of the
Spirit before all other Evidences, 15, 16. what proceeds not from the Spirit of
God in Doctrine or Practice, to be refused and disowned, 218. its Operations,
etc. 601, -- 607. Spiritual Iniquities) 428, 429. Spiritual Discerning, 519
Stephen) spoke by the Spirit, 282 Study) the Priests Study and Premeditation to
Preach by the hourglass, 431, 454, 848 -- 850. Suffering) how Paul filled up
that which was behind of the Afflictions of Christ; how any is made partaker of
the Sufferings of Christ and conformeth to his Death, 394 Superstition) 440,
441. whence Superstition sprung 450, 475, 492 Supper) see Communion, Bread) it
was of old administered even to little Children and Infants, 512. Arguments
concerning the Supper answered, etc. 615 618, 160 -- 865
T.
Tables) 508. Talent) One Talent is not at all insufficient of it self: the
Parable of the Talents, 344, 345, 349. those that improved their Talents well,
are called Good and Faithful Servants, 382. he that improved well his two
Talents, was nothing less accepted, than he that improved his five, 388. Talk)
see Plays. Taulerus) was instructed by the poor Laick, 417 he tasted of the
Love of God, 444. Testimony) see Spirit. The Four Students Testimonies against
their Fellow Students, 674. Thee and Thou) see Number. Theseus) his Boat, 431.
Thomas a Kempis) 444. Tithes) were assigned to the Levites, but not to the
Ministers of this Day, 432, 433 Titles) It is not at all lawful for the
Christians to use those Titles of Honor, Majesty, etc. 533, 535 -- 540, 564,
565. Tongue) The knowledge of Tongues is laudable, 421, 422. Tradition) how
unsufficient it is to decide, 277. it is not a sufficient ground for Faith, 513
Trans^ations) see Bible, Interpreters. Truth) There is a Difference what one
says of the Truth, and that which the Truth it self, interpreting it self,
says, 271. Truth is not hard to be arrived at, but is most nigh, ibid. Turks)
among them there may be Members of the Church, 404, 405.
V.
Vespers) 443 Understanding) None understands, why? they turn not to the
Light, that gives an Understanding, 8. see Intellect. Voices) Outward Voices,
see Faith, Miracles.
W.
Waiting) in Silence, 13 War) That it is not lawful for Christians to Resist
Evil, nor wage War, 533. the National Preachers and Professors the chief
Promoters of War, 709 who account it lawful to Revenge every Injury, are no
favorers of Universal Love, nor true Followers of Patient Jesus, 704, 705. the
Devil the primary Cause of all the Confusion and Wars in Christendom, (so
called) 707. unless this be foreseen, and this evil Guest turned out, no
effectual Remedy can be applied, ibid. Worldly and Carnal Wisdom the Cause of
Wars, 711. Washing of Feet) 426, 427. Water) some Water so clean and pure, that
passing through an Unclean Pipe, cannot be defiled by it, 25. Westminster
Confession of Faith) says expressly, (chapter 3.) that God ordained such, as are
not Elected, for Dishonor and Wrath, to the Praise of his Glorious Justice,
775. the same Confession says; That nothing future, or what was to come, even
as foreseen by God, was the Cause of God's Decree, ibid. the Westminster
Confession of Faith has long lain under the Censure of an Examen, not yet
Answered, 726. the Confession weakly confirmed, and the Scriptures perverted to
make them serve for a Proof, 726, 727. the Scriptures are made to serve this
Confession of Faith, and not it to Answer the Scriptures, 727 William Barclay)
524. Woman) a Woman can preach, 427, 432. Luther affirmed, that a Woman might
be a Preacher, 410. Arguments against Women's Preaching answered, 621, 622 Word)
The Eternal Word is the Son, it was in the beginning with God, and was God; It
is Jesus Christ, by whom God created all things, 274, 334, 747. what Augustine
read in the Writings of the Platonists concerning this Word, 377. that more
sure Word of Prophecy is not the Scriptures, 17. the Life and virtue of Words
is a distinct thing from the Words, 644. The Word of God is ascribed to Christ,
747. Works) are either of the Law, or of the Gospel, 382. (see Justification)
Good Works the Instrumental Cause of Justification, 817. the Merit and Worth of
good Works is from Christ, 20. in what sense Good Works are reckoned
meritorious, 79. Worship) What the true and acceptable Worship of God is, and
how it is offered, and what the Superstitious and Abominable is, 440. the true
Worship was soon corrupted and lost, 440, 441. concerning the Worship done in
the time of the Apostasy, 443, 467. Of what Worship is here handled, and of the
difference of the Woship of the Old and new Covenant, 441, 242, 455 -- 457. the
true Worship is neither limited to Times, Places or Persons, and it is
Explained, how this is to be understood, 440 -- 442, 450, 451, 466, 467, 483,
484. Concerning the Lord's Day, and the Days upon which Worship is performed,
442, 443. of the Public and Silent Worship and its Excellency, 444 -- 452. of
Preaching, 452 -- 465. of Prayer, 465, 472. what sort of Worship the Quakers
are for, and what sort their Adversaries, 474. the Definition of Civil and
Religious Worship defended by a wrong Translation, 59, 60. concerning Worship,
745, 746, 169, 634 -- 603.
X.
Xaverius) his Testimony concerning the Inward, Innate Light in the Soul, 701,
702.
Z.
Zeal) having a right Bottom and Foundation, proceeding purely from the Love of
God, is a great virtue, and greatly to be commended and pressed after, 680.
false Zeal and the several kinds thereof, 681, 682.
ERRATA.
page li. Errors Corrected 3 45 say to say so 38 21 we keep ye keep 89 34 gave
gave some Apostles, 92 15 and 42 dele 92 33 and 65 dele 150 5 unto unto me 347
21 else dele 508 28 Act. 6.26. Act. 6.2* 6. 6^8 44 Arminian Armenian 704 49
such dele 766 37 should I I should 833 47 Af* After In the Margent
page li. Errors Corrected 122 2 Gal. 41.9. Gal. 4.19. 137 36 2 Timothy 17 2 Timothy
2. 367 16 English dele

In the Table, at the end of the Letter B. after the Words, Super-substantial
Bread, put 499.

FINIS

