THE AUTHORITY OF Church-Guides Asserted in a SERMON Preached before our Late
GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN King CHARLES II. At Whitehall, October. 17. 1675.

By Miles Barn, D. D. Fellow of St. Peter's College in Cambridge, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Late MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Green Bookseller in Cambridge. 1685.

The Preface to the Reader.
Reader,
THIS Sermon being the last which I had the Honor to preach before our late
Gracious Sovereign of blessed and immortal Memory; and having been so well
approved of by Him, that I received his Commands twice for the printing of it,
and his Defense of it after it was published, I now again present to public
View, yet not without some apprehension of danger; for if, notwithstanding the
Royal Command and Defense of that Sagacious Prince, I could not at that time
escape the severe strokes of some Potent Men, who from the very moment it was
first preached, by secret Arts endeavored my ruin, and became my Enemies for
no other reason, but because I told them the truth: I have little reason to
expect better usage now, being to my unspeakable grief destitute of that Royal
Patronage.

The Design of it is to vindicate that Church Authority, which our Lord, before
he went into his far Country, in a most solemn manner conferred upon his
Apostles, and which was to descend upon their Successors, and to be continued
in the Governors and Guides of the Church unto the end of the World; to lessen,
if not render useless this Sacred Authority, especially that part of it, which
consists in expounding the Scriptures, in teaching and guiding the Flock; some
modern Divine (for reasons best known to themselves) have advanced the
Perspicuity of Scripture to that degree, that not only the less difficult part
thereof, but even the (...) themselves are become easy and intelligible to
every Mechanic Reader. And it may seem strange, that this pretended Clearness
of Scripture, unknown to those Illustrious Fathers, who writ in the first and
succeeding Ages of Christianity, who with indefatigable Labor, painful
Watchings, and incessant Recourse to the Spirit of Truth, endeavored to
explain the deep Mysteries thereof, should never be discovered until these last
Centuries, and then made use of to usher in, and support those pestilent
Schisms which happened in the Western Churches, and is indeed set as a fatal
Bar to frustrate all the Methods of Reunion: and yet stranger, that these
Discoverers should be so wilfully blind, as not to discern, that nothing is
more clearly revealed, or more expressly set down in Holy Writ, than the
Authority here contended for, if the infallible and concurrent Testimony of the
Evangelists may be thought of any moment in the case.

God forbid the Bread of Life should be denied to the Children of the Gospel
Covenant; but whether the great Master of the Household has not appointed
Spiritual Fathers to be the Stewards and Dispensers of this Heavenly Food, or
left the Children to be their own Carvers, ought to have been more maturely
considered; for this Bread of Life, which is the Word of God, is by St. Paul
compared to a two-edged Sword, and if that be put into the hands of unskilful
Managers, it may prove both fatal to themselves, and destructive to others.

I shall not here trouble you with a review of those Complaints, occasioned by
the dire Heresies, which soon followed upon the first Translation of the Bible
into the English Tongue; since the Divine Writings cannot be translated into
too many Languages, and since after the Translation, the Supreme Authority
might have hindered the mischiefs which insued, by restraining the promiscuous
reading of them, and indulging that Privilege to those only who should be
licensed thereunto by the Governors of the Church.

But certainly those men had no very good Design, nor a due Honor for the
Divine Oracles, who first exposed their mysterious meaning to the Judgment of
every vulgar Capacity; and yet I would willingly entertain so much Charity for
them, as to believe the first Inventors did not foresee the dangerous
Consequences of their own Principle; for from hence it naturally follows, in
the First place, That there is no necessity of Church-Guides for directing
Christians in necessary Faith. Secondly, From hence follows a contempt of their
Function, at least as to this part of it, (for who will regard that Authority
which is made useless;) Thirdly, An Innundation of all those wild Opinions,
which either Malice or Ignorance can betray men into. Fourthly, The multiplying
of Sects and Heresies, without any due Means left for the suppressing them,
since every sincere Endeavourer may equally plead the Truth of Scripture in
justification of his Opinion.

This one Principle has turned our Jerusalem, which was once a City at Unity
within it self, into a Babel, not of Languages, (but what is worse) a Confusion
of the grossest Errors which ever infested the Church since the Foundation of
Christianity; and since Latitudinism in Principles, is evermore accompanied
with Libertinism in Practice, Schism in the Church begets Sedition in the
Monarchy, and an Erastian in the one, proves a Republican in the other. To this
one Principle may be chiefly ascribed all the Fatal mischiefs of the late
unnatural Wars, and the dreadful Confusions intended by the last Fanatic
Conspiracy, which we so narrowly escaped, that we can scarce yet think our
selves secure from the danger of it: for since the Translation of the Bible
into our Language, and the promiscuous Reading of it, what Schismatic ever
wanted a Text, of his own interpreting, to countenance his Schism? or Rebel, to
authorize his Rebellion?

The Peace and Unity of the Catholic Church, ought to be dearer to every good
Christian, than the greatest temporal Blessings, or even Life it self: How far
this has been obstructed by the envenomed Writings and Erastian Principles of
some modern Controvertists, I wish we had not too just cause to lament; and
that in their Transports of indiscreet Zeal, and even inhuman^ Passions, they
had not wounded the Catholic through the sides of the Roman Church; for not
contented t^ throw off an Universal Supremacy, unduly challenged by St. Peter's
Successors, as the Prerogative of the first Apostolical See, they have denied
that Primacy of Order, that Exordium Unitatis which is both consistent with St.
Cyprian's, Hoc erant utique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari
consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, etc. allowed by the most genuine
Sons of the Church of England, and which is necessary for the supporting the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and without which that Unity of the Church, which the
Holy Father so earnestly contends for, cannot so well be preserved; not
contented with this Degradation of his Holiness, they have proceeded further,
and made him the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition,
notwithstanding all the Phenomenon of the Apocalyptical false Prophet, do so
exactly agree to Mahomet; as the ingenious Oxford-Paraphrast has fully and
learnedly made out in his Annotations on the 2 Thessalonians. Chap. 2. not contented to
justify our Separation from the Church of Rome, upon the account of
Innovations, Corruptions, and imposing them as necessary Conditions of
Communion, and so becoming guilty of causal Schism, they have represented all
the Members of that Church, both Pastors and People, both in Doctrine and
Practice, guilty of Heathenish, and worse than the most sottish Heathenish
Idolatry; so foul a Charge, and so injurious to that Charity which the Church
of England has always been renowned for, that I hope the Authors of it may
have Grace to retract, and make satisfaction for that Scandal which is thereby
given even to our common Christianity. And I have always wondered, how it ever
could enter into the heart of any man to believe, and publicly maintain, that
so great a number of Christian Professors, eminent for Learning, and Austerity
of Life, could be guilty of so damnable an Apostasy: concerning the mischiefs
of this Charge, take the Judgment of the Learned Thorndike, in the last words
of the first Chapter of his just Weights and Measures: And as they who justify
the Reformation by charging the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists
Idolaters; so, on the other side, they who over-charge the Reformation to be
Heretics, make themselves thereby Schismatics before God.

We hope no ingenuous Person, though an Adversary, will think the worse of the
true Sons of the Church of England, for the uncharitable Opinions of some
particular Men, descended perhaps from dissenting Parents, educated in
dissenting Times, and who never yet sufficiently conquered the Prejudices of
their Education; if they had, they would not maintain such Erastian Positions
as these, (viz.) That Christ never appointed any particular Form of
Church Government, but left it arbitrary, and dependent on the Civil State.
That Christ Jesus is not to be preached, if the Magistrate and the Law of the
Country forbid it. That the King has a Power to execute all Pastoral Offices,
and devolve it on others, with many others of the like dangerous consequence,
which that valiant Champion of Church Power, Mr. Lowth, has charged upon them,
and learnedly made good the Charge; whereas concerning the last of these
Positions, neither his present M. nor any of his Predecessors, by virtue of
their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, ever thought themselves endowed with any other
Power, but that of Nursing Fathers; neither does the true sense of the Oath
invest the Civil Magistrate with any other power in Spiritual Matters, than
what is purely external and coercive, if Bishop Bramhal, and others, may be
thought of equal Authority with the Authors there taxed; let them consider in
this very juncture of time the consequence of their own Positions, and then lay
their hands upon their mouths, and be for ever after silent: or if they please
to look backward, let them consider what mischiefs the Fathers of the Church
had brought upon themselves, had they been of this Opinion, when Julian and
Constantius reigned; had they spent as much time in defending the Church of
England, as they have in opposing the Church of Rome, they would have proved
themselves as good Subjects to the Father of their Country, and as dutiful Sons
to their Mother the Church; had they given a true account of ancient
Church Government, instead of imbroyling us with Irenicum's and Weapon-salves,
they had purchased as much Renown to themselves, and more Benefit to Christ's
Catholic Church; then might we hope to see the Mischiefs of Separation
displayed, without a Preface of such Concessions as manifestly tend to the
destruction of Uniformity: and if it be a sign of a lukewarm and ungenerous
temper to desert a Friend in affliction, that cruel juncture of time in which
those Concessions were made, does no ways extenuate the Presumption, for it
deserves no milder a Name; for any private Doctor, let his Fame he never so
great, to assume to himself a more than Papal Power, to dictate ex Cathedra,
prescribe to the Church, and unfix what has been established by her venerable
Authority, generally received and approved by all her true Subjects; then might
we not despair to behold and admire the Beauty of the Church of England in all
her heights of Decency and Order; her Doctrins believed; her Liturgies daily
frequented; her Sacraments frequently celebrated; her Rubricks duly observed;
her neglected Discipline restored; her Censures dreaded; her Governors
religiously obeyed: then might we not despair to see our Controversies in
Religion managed with all due deference to the Authority of ancient Fathers and
Councils, general Tradition, and the consent of the Catholic Church, and
consequently with a design to maintain universal Truths, rather than our own
private Opinions; to confute men's Errors, rather than expose their Persons; and
a return of that Christian Spirit which enobled the Writings of Cassander,
Grotius, Forbes, and many other Illustrious Conciliators, the decay whereof
has widen'd our Breaches, and obstructed that Union which ought to be the
earnest desire, and endeavor of every good Christian.

If the Church of England does not flourish as much in our days, as ever it did
since the first Reformation, the fault must be in our selves, since His
Majesty, in his gracious Declaration, has past his Royal Word for the
preservation of the Government both of Church and State, as it is now by Law
established, and we cannot in Honor, or Duty require more, since his Word has
always been as Sacred and inviolable to him, as his Person and Prerogative
ought to be to us; wherefore instead of somenting needless Fears and Jalousies
concerning our Religion, which even in a Coffee-House is dangerous, but from
the Pulpit does naturally rise into Disorders and Tumults; the people are to be
taught the Duties of Submission, Humility, and Obedience to their Governors,
both Civil and Spiritual, that as Religion is not to be propagated by Force, so
neither is it lawful to take up Arms against lawful Authority in defense of it;
they are to be instructed in the Duties of Passive Obedience, and
non-resistance, from the Doctrines of the Scripture, the Principles of the
Church of England, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians, when under the
severest Persecutions.

In the same Declaration He is pleased further to add, That He knows the
Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it
have showed themselves good and loyal Subjects; therefore he will always take
care to defend and support it: so that out of his abundant Goodness and
Clemency, he has confirmed his Word by the surest Ties of Interest and Princely
Gratitude.

It pleased the Almighty (in whose hands are the Fate of the greatest of
Potentates) to call to Heaven his dearest Brother, and to leave him the deepest
Mourner in the Nation, in that very period of time, when they might have
promised themselves a secure enjoyment of earthly Blessings; for had not that
glorious Monarch, like Moses, by an invincible Patience and Magnanimity
withstood the murmurings and ingratitudes of a rebellious People, freed us from
the Slavery and Tyranny of our Egyptian Taskmasters, brought us out of a
Wilderness of Confusion, and placed us within the prospect of a Canaan of Peace
and Order; and yet to his lawful Successor, the mighty Joshua, Providence
decreed the full possession of those Blessings, which he, the lamented Moses,
only lived to have a sight of.

And what may we not promise to our selves under his most auspicious Reign, and
in nothing more auspicious, than in the peaceable devolution of the Crown upon
his Head; after so many bold and wicked Attempts to cut off his Succession,
this seems no less miraculous than his Predecessor's Restoration; may his
Subjects learn from hence, That Kings are of Divine Right, and dread the
Vengeance of that God by whom they reign; may they never forget the miseries
they have escaped, nor grow weary of the benefits they are sure to enjoy under
his wise and steady Conduct; may his Reign be long and prosperous; and to
complete his Happiness, may all his People give him the same dutiful Obedience
now he is King, which he so religiously paid to his Sovereign, when he was the
highest of Subjects; and to say no more, may he live to accomplish those
glorious things for this Nation, for which he seems to be designed, by that
special Providence which has attended him through the whole course of his life,
and has now placed him on the Imperial Throne.

2 Pet. Chap. 3. ver. 16. -- In which are some things hard to be Understood,
which they that are unlearned, and unstable, Wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own Destruction.


THE clearness of Scripture, in all points necessary to Salvation, to all such
as sincerely endeavor to believe, and find out the True Sense thereof: as it
is a Principle which suits very well with the nature and design of a Rule; with
the Justice and Goodness of God in propounding it as such; and has been urged
with some success against those, who plead a necessity of having One Supreme
infallible Judge, to decide and determine all Controversies, which shall happen
to arise concerning that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints: Whose
Decisions and Determinations, say they, ought to be Received, by all the Sons
of the Church [for as much as the Church is the same in all Ages] with equal
Assent and Veneration with those of the Apostles: And this to be the only sure
way, to keep the Unity of the Faith in the Bond of Peace.

Whereby on the other hand it is said, New Articles of Faith may be daily
imposed; the Doctrines of men pass for the Commandments of God, and humane
Inventions receive the stamp of Divine Authority; whereby men seem precluded
the genuine methods of coming to the Knowledge of the Truth, and those Precepts
of searching the Scriptures, seeking the Kingdom of Heaven, trying the Spirits,
are rendered Ineffectual; whereby men are so far from being able to give an
account of their Faith, that their Understandings are enslaved by a Principle
of blind Obedience; so far from being led into the ways of Religion, by the
cords of men, that they seem rather to be driven like Beasts, and acted like
Puppets, as it is phras'd by a late Author.

As this Doctrine of the Clearness of Scripture, has proved successful to the
beating down the pretenses to an absolute Infallibility, and uncontrollable
Sovereignty over the Consciences of men: so on the other hand has it mightily
emboldened the Patrons of Liberty, not only to despise their Ecclesiastical
Superiors, to throw off all obedience to Christ's Ministers; [Whom He,
notwithstanding, a little before his Return to his Fathers Court, for the
further negotiating, and advancing the affairs of His Church, Anointed and
Ordained to perform the Apostolical Offices, of Preaching the Gospel; Remitting
Sins; Inflicting Censures; Ministerially conferring the Holy Ghost; Deciding
Controversies, and Administering the Sacraments in his stead, here on earth till
his second coming] but likewise to invade their Function, usurp their Sacred
Calling; especially that part of it which consists in Preaching and Expounding
the Word.

For, say they, since it is confessed, the Scriptures are sufficiently clear to
all unprejudiced minds, such as are free from the clogs of Passion and
Interest; Why should these pretended Ministers of Christ take so much upon
them? Are not all the Congregation Holy, and Learned, as well as they? Are they
the only Temples of the Holy Ghost? And does the Spirit of Prophecy reside
solely in their Breasts?

During the Dispensation of Moses, it is confessed, there was a necessity of an
Aaron; all along under the Legal economy, the Priests Lips did preserve
Knowledge; and likewise during the Reign of the Prophets, there was an
appropriate Ministry. But the case is quite different under the Gospel, God
having made clearer discoveries of himself, and poured out more liberally of
his Spirit upon all Flesh. The sense of the Law that was Doubtful, Typical and
Mysterious; the Prophecies were industriously couched under dark Parables, and
delivered in obscure sayings. But then the light, the glorious light of the
Gospel, as 'twas universal, 'twas likewise so clear, that any one that runs may
read. Why then should we not assert that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free? and since we have a Command, to work out our own Salvation, Why should we
pin our Faith upon other men's sleeves?

Thus these men, under the goodly Pretenses of Christian Liberty, become
enslaved to spiritual pride and conceitedness; plead the Prerogative of the
Gospel, in prejudice of Christ's own Ambassadors; urge, for their own private
Conceptions, clearness of Scripture, to their own Confusion, and pry so long
into the Doctrines of Theology, till at length they light on those hidden
Mysteries, which they being Unlearned and Unstable, Wrest unto their own
Destruction. The way thus prepared, my Text yet leads me into these following
Considerations.

1. That the clearness of Scripture does no ways lessen the Authority, or take
away the Necessity of Spiritual Guides.

2. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet private men,
abandoning their Lawful Guides, and following their own Corrupt Fancies, may
deprave and distort them to their own Destruction.

3. That for preventing Mistakes from rising, and suppressing Errors when
risen, it is the duty of Private men to submit their Judgments in matters of
Religion, to the Determinations of those whom God has constituted to be their
Spiritual Guides and Governors; unless it manifestly appear, that such
Determinations are contrary to Gods Word.

I. I begin with the First, That the Clearness of Scripture, etc. For, if the
Scriptures be so Clear, and Self-evident, as is pretended, then may men with
greater security rely on the Directions of their Guides; and they have the less
Reason to suspect their Conduct in those things, wherein they themselves being
Judges, they cannot be mistaken, if they sincerely attend them; the clearness
of the Law is so far from lessening the Authority, that it rather conciliates
reverence to the Judge. The Profession of Physic does not therefore become
useless, because the Aphorisms of Hippocrates contain the necessary Rules for
Health; and may be understood by those who are capacitated, and will take the
pains to do it.

The Scriptures they do clearly contain the Doctrines of Salvation: And one
way, whereby Christ proved himself the true Messiah, was by answering that
Character the Prophets had given of Him, that the Poor should have the Gospel
Preached unto them, i. e. Men as of small Capacities, and less Estates, so of
humble and teachable Dispositions; men who are Poor in Spirit, as well as in
Fortune: And the perfection of the Christian Law consists in this, that therein
God has prescribed a reasonable service. The Rules of Life, which are therein
laid down, are not so much the product of absolute Power and Sovereignty; as
the Result of infinite Mercy and Goodness. And these His Attributes led Him to
consult the wants, and commiserate the Necessities of the meanest of Mankind:
And therefore, as when He took upon Him to deliver Man, He did not abhor the
Virgins Womb; and that He might become a Sacrifice for Sin, was content to be
disarray'd of His own Eternal Glory, to take upon Him the Form of a Servant,
and to humble Himself to the Death, the shameful Death of the Cross: so
likewise when He took upon Him the Office of a Teacher, by a wonderful
Condescent, He accommodated His Doctrines to the Reason and humane Affections
of His Auditors. His Laws obtained as much by their suitableness to our
Natures, as the Authority of the Speaker. When He preached His Divine Sermon to
the Multitude, He did not amuse them with Mystical Theology, or torture their
Understandings with profound Subtilties; but as He was the Brightness of his
Fathers Glory, and the express Image of His Person; so He declared the Law of
God in a most Plain and Perspicuous manner.

Mahomet indeed, that grand Impostor, was well Advised to pen his Alcoran in
swelling Words, and mystical Phrases; and as in some things to Restrain, so in
others to Indulge the sensual Appetite: For by this Stratagem, that sottish
People with whom he had to do, were content to part with their natural Right,
to gain an Unlawful Freedom, and to Admire what they were never like to
Understand.

But our new and perfect Lawgiver Christ Jesus, having no other design but the
Salvation of Souls, and being every way. Adorned for so noble a Purpose; though
He made the Gate Narrow, and the Path Strait; yet He has promised it shall be
Opened to all that Knock; and none, unless Wilfully, need mistake the Way which
leads to Eternal Life.

But then, because He knew, there was no Rule so plain, but it might be
Mistaken; no Precept so clear, but it might be Perverted; no Doctrine so pure,
but it might be Corrupted: Because He foresaw there would arise false Prophets,
and false Teachers, whose business it would be to Seduce the Ignorant, and
Debauch the Credulous: Because He foresaw a perpetual Succession of Gnostics,
who, in all Ages, would set up the Dagon of their own lascivious Fancies, in
opposition to the Ark of His Covenant; and be so audacious, as even to confront
Divine Revelations with carnal Reasoning; therefore to obviate, and prevent,
the mischiefs of such grievous Wolves; before He took His Journey into his far
Country, out of a tender care of that Flock, which He had purchased with his
Blood, He appointed Overseers, and Pastors of his Flock; committed to them, and
them only, the care of Feeding his Flock; amplified their Commission with the
like Authority, which he had received from his Father; promised to be with them
unto the End of the World; and to assist them with that Spirit, which should
guide them into all Truth.

If then the Scriptures be so clear, as to be understood even by the Multitude,
then much more by the Disciples in general: If by the Disciples in general,
much more by the College of the Apostles, who were His special Favorites, and
of his Cabinet-counsel: If the Nations, to whom these Ministers in Chief, and
Plenipotentiaries for Christ, made known the Will of God, were thoroughly
instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven; then much more both they, and their
Successors, upon whom they, in obedience to their Masters Command, conferred
the same Pastoral power which they had received from Him.

The Clearness then of Scripture cannot reasonably be urged, in Prejudice of
Christ's Ministers; for whatsoever is from hence alleged, in favor of the
People, the advantage will be still greater on their side. Thus has God
promised the Assistance of his Spirit to all private men, who sincerely
endeavor to find out the Truth; then much less will He be wanting to the
Governors of his Church, to whom He has committed the care of the Souls of
those private men, and given power even to confer the Holy Ghost. Are the
Scriptures clear to them, much more to those, whom the Son of God has
signalized, and set apart for the Lights of the World? Two Things are usually
brought to hinder this Procedure: Either that those Promises of Assistance were
made only to the Apostles; or else that they depend on the conditioned
Righteousness of Men. Where, by the way, it may be Observed, that by the First
of these, the Claim of the People is utterly cut off; and by the Second, they
have as small Advantage.

But they who argue this, might do well to consider, that this Objection may
strike at the very Foundation of the Faith. For, if those promises of
Assistance, which Christ made to his Church be Hypothetical; if they depend on
the Performance of Men, then may the Foundation totter, the Gates of Hell
prevail, Christianity decay, and the Gospel it self be lost out of the World,
before the End thereof, notwithstanding all Christ's fair promises to the
contrary. If they had been confined only to the Apostles, the Christian
Religion had not long survived its Author; every Martyrdom of an Apostle had
pulled down a Pillar of the Church, and by consequence, the whole Fabric must
have fallen to the ground in the very first Century of our Lord.

Happy indeed had it been for Christendom, that the Imperiousness of some
Modern Bishops of Rome had not brought an Odium, though unjustly, upon
Episcopacy in general, that their too much Lording it over the Flock, had not
given Advantage to the Enemies of Church Authority, and their challenging to
themselves at least an indirect Power in Temporals, had not alarmed the Kings
of the Earth, to stand up, and take Counsel how they might destroy so dangerous
an Usurpation of the pretended Vicegerent of the Lords Anointed.

Happy had it been, if for the Support of their Secular Greatness, they had not
wrested the Scriptures to countenance such Doctrines, as have no clear and
solid Foundation therein; and that under pretense of making the Church all
Glorious within, her Governors all Triumphant without, they had not defaced
Her Innocent Beauty, and made Her Militant in the worst of Senses.

However, they can no way be excused, who think they can never be secure from
Papal Supremacy, but by demolishing the Evangelical Hierarchy, and introducing
a Presbyterian Parity into the Catholic Church; and to avoid the Necessity of
having an Infallible Judge, leaving every private prepossessed Fancy to the
Perspicuity of Scripture, whereby men are often bewildred in a Labyrinth of
Errors, seduced into those bypath which lead to the Pit of Destruction: For,
notwithstanding that Beam of Divine Light, which shines so bright in the
Scriptures, it seems some men have Eyes either so weak, as to be dazzled at the
sight of it, or else so blind with Pride or Malice, as not to perceive it: For
St. Peter tells us, there are in the Scriptures some things hard to be
understood, which unlearned and unstable men wrest unto their own Destruction:
And therefore the Unlearned should do well to consult their Teachers; the
Unstable, those that are found in the Faith; which brings me to my second
general Consideration. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet
Private men, abandoning their Guides, and following their own corrupt Fancies,
may deprave and distort them to their own destruction.

Who those Wresters were, or what those (...) are, wherewith St. Peter charge
the Epistles of his beloved Brother Paul, I shall not strictly inquire; the
Apostle having passed them over in a profound silence, it will be difficult at
this distance of time exactly to define; yet it is not improbable, that either
the Gnostick, or Cerinthian Heretics, were here chiefly aimed at, who upon a
mistake of some Predictions, became the Founders of a Temporal Dominion of
Christ after His Resurrection; wherein His Followers in their New Jerusalem,
should wallow in sensual Lusts and Pleasures, spend the space of a Thousand
Years, as in a Nuptial Festivity, and enjoy the all that is in the World; the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, in as ample
and exquisite a manner, as the most Epicurean Soul could effect or covet: A
Fancy, in its first Original, merely Jewish; afterward entertained by some
Judaizing Christians; and finally, rather rectified than abandoned by some of
the Fathers in the Primitive times. And if those sublime Wits, who had all the
Learning which either Jerusalem, Athens, or Rome, could boast, were
nevertheless mistaken in their Expositions of some abstruse Texts of Scripture
[whilst they delivered their Opinions but as private Doctors] what wonder, if
the unlearned and unstable wrest them to their own Destruction?

That they have, de facto, done this, is manifest, since 'twill be hard to
instance in any one Century, which is not either chargeable with new Heresies,
or the reviving and improving of old. And the most extravagant Opinions, which
ever yet saw the light, have still shrouded themselves under the Patronage of
Holy Writ. What shall we say then, shall we condemn the Scriptures of Sin?
Shall we say, That the Scriptures are of themselves either productive of Error,
or not a sufficient Storehouse of Truth? God forbid. The Scriptures are Holy,
Just, and Good, but private men wrest them to their own Destruction. And this
they do, First, By their Ignorance; Secondly, By their Instability.

I. First, By their Ignorance: where it will be presently objected, that
Ignorance is so far from being a cause of Error, or Impiety, that, in a sober
sense, it is truly the Mother of Devotion. The Wisdom of this World is given in
by Tertullian, as the prime Cause of Heresy; None were greater Tormentors of
the Scriptures than the Philosophers; for which Reason they are branded by the
same Author with the Title of Arch-Hereticks: Particularly the Valentinian
Heresy, concerning the portentous production of the Gods, comes from the
Platonists; Marcion's Vnconcern'd, and Lazy God, was first set up by the
Stoics; the Mortality of the Soul was the Doctrine of the Epicureans; the
Impossibility of the Resurrection of the Flesh, of the whole stream of
Philosophers.

The Apostle tells us, Not many Mighty, not many Wise, not many Noble, were
chosen: cautions his Proselytes against Philosophy and vain Deceit, and
concludes the Wisdom of this World, Foolishness with God. Wherefore, by (...),
Unlearned, in this place, we are not to understand Idiots, and those who never
knew Letters; but we must understand those who will not be instructed by the
Masters of Divine Wisdom, the Nolentes discere, those who refuse to hear the
Church of the Living God, which alone is the Pillar and Foundation of Truth.
And so their Learning, like Julian's, only qualifies them to deride the
Doctrines of a Crucified God, and by their Wisdom they become the more
formidable Enemies of Christ's Kingdom.

Thus, if Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, fall from his Allegiance, whole
Legions of the Heavenly Host are involved in the Rebellion. That Heresy
spreads like the Contagion of a Leprosy, which has an Arrius for its Founder,
and a Constantius for its Promoter: And the Mahumetan* Religion owes as well
its monstrous Birth, as its fatal Increase to the Malice and Cunning of an
Apostate Jew, and a Renegado Christian. And to give but one instance more, but
of a far more Modern Date, and therefore of more dangerous consequence; That
unhappy man Socinus, a person otherwise of singular Wit and Learning; but being
in this sense unlearned, i. e. having entertained so slender a Notion of the
Church, as to date a general Defection from the very Deaths of the Apostles;
upon this Persuasion, thought it not Robbery to make himself equal to the most
Ecumenical Councils, to contradict the most received Doctrines of the Church;
and from this contempt of his Mother, to proceed to that daring pitch of
impiety, as to deny even the Lord that bought him: so dangerous is it for
private men to rely solely upon the perspicuity of Scripture, or to measure the
(...) of the Incarnation of the Godhead, his Consubstantiality with the Father,
by the scantling of Humane Reason. Cedat curiositas fidei, gloria saluti, was
the Advice of as great a Wit as any Age has bred. Our Curiosity must give
place to our Faith; the thirst of Temporal Glory, to the benefits of Eternal
Salvation.

It Is true, by our Reason, we are first disposed to be Christians; for no
Creature, beneath the Rational, is capable of Divine Revelation; but when once
we have given up our Names to Christ, it is by our Faith we are saved: but if we
assent to no Doctrines, but such as our Reason fully comprehends, this is no
longer Faith, but Science; and so we may continue Infidels, whilst we go under
the Notion of Christians.

And since we live in such a knowing Age, wherein all captivating the
Understanding, though it be to the Obedience of Faith, is made the subject of
Grievance and Complaint: And that we have to deal with men of such a skeptical
Genius, as that they do not only inquire into the Grounds and Reasons of our
Faith, but moreover deny our very Creed; with whom a Treatise of Humane Reason
is of more Force, than the Revelation of St. John the Divine. To the
Consideration of these Men I offer Two Things, which I judge most proper.

I. First, The Answer which Origin made to Celsus; when 'twas objected by that
Calumniator against the Christians, that their Religion was built on a very
sandy Foundation, which durst not undergo the Test of Reason, but commanded its
Converts not to Examine, but Believe, and their Faith should Save them. In part
he owns the Objection, but wisely retorts it upon his Adversary, by telling
him, that the Philosophers were the greatest Dictators in the World: Witness
the Ipse dixit of Pythagoras, that their Systems contained some such secret
Dogmata, which their Disciples swallowed solely upon the Credit of their
Masters. And if the Masters of the Wisdom of this World [which is either
Foolishness, or at best, but Science, falsely so called] required so great
submission from their Scholars, how much greater is to be given to those
Doctrines which are contained in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles,
who were Taught of God, and spoke as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost?

II. Secondly, I urge the Authority of my Lord Bacon, whose, if any, methinks
should be admitted by these Virtuosi in Religion; The Divine Prerogative, says
he, extends it self to the whole Man; and requires not only Obedience from our
Wills, but Submission from our Understandings. And therefore, as we are bound
to obey the Divine Law, though our Wills reluct never so much against it; so
are we obliged to believe whatsoever God has revealed, though never so
improbable to our Understandings: For if we believe no more than what we can
demonstrate to be true, we do not believe the Truth delivered for the Authors
sake, but the Author for the Truths sake; and so we pay no more Respect to the
Oracles of God, than we do to the Writings of Men, though never so much
suspected by us. The Faith which justified Abraham, was conversant in a matter
incredible to Reason: And therefore the higher the Mysteries of Religion are
above our Reason, the greater is the exercise and triumph of our Faith, and the
Honor done unto God in Believing. To conclude this Point, Great is the use of
Reason in Religion, both as to the manner of interpreting the Scriptures, and
the deducing true Consequences, and wholesome Conclusions from thence; and if it
be wholly suppressed, our Religion will degenerate into Superstition; we shall
be so far from paying God a Reasonable Service, that we shall offer Him the
Sacrifice of Fools. But then it must be kept to a due temper: for, if it be not
managed by prudent Guides, it is apt to grow wild and extravagant, to hurry us
on to a Belief of the Foulest Impostures, to a Practice of the Grossest
Impieties, which either the prevalency of the World, the domineering Enmity of
the Flesh, or the implacable Malice of Satan, can propound to be believed or
practiced.

II. The second Reason of private Men's falling into Error, is their Instability
in not adhering to their Guides; but forsaking them to go astray in the
intricate paths of Error and Deceit. Heresy being nothing else but an Excision
from, and Disobedience to the Church in points of Faith. And therefore the
Apostle pronounces an Heretic Self-condemned; one who has want only chosen
to himself those Opinions, for an obstinate Defense whereof, after full and
plain means of Conviction, he justly falls under the Censures of the Church, is
Excommunicated the Assembly of the Saints; and so without Repentance and
Reconciliation continues in a very dangerous estate, if that of Heathens and
Publicans be acknowledged such.

Not in vain then are those frequent Cautions against Falling away, those
repeated Admonitions to Perseverance, those earnest Exhortations to hold fast
the Profession, and contend for the Faith which was once delivered; those so
much inculcated Commands of obeying those who are set Over us in the Lord, Heb.
13.7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the
Word of God, whose Faith follow. Ver. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls. For in vain may
those men commit themselves to the immediate Assistance of God, who neglect to
hear his Guides; and violate His Commandments, in hopes to procure His help and
favor: For, from that very moment of time, they cease to be Members of the
Holy Catholic Church, they are become Out-lawries in a Gospel-sense, they have
lost the Protection of the Heavenly King, and they lay under the Deprivation of
the Benefits belonging to the Subjects of that Jerusalem which is above.

And what wonder, if being in this forlorn condition the Tempter take his
advantage, lead them into the Wilderness, and there present to their disturbed
Fancies false Schemes of Religion, suggest unworthy apprehensions of God; and
whatsoever is by him thus suggested, is by them mistaken for new Light and holy
Inspirations.

And because this Spirit of Delusion dares put forth, among Christians, no
Doctrines but such as pretend to be founded on the Scriptures: to this purpose
they are wrested and tortured, their Scope is mistaken, their Sense abused,
their Periods miserably mangled, their whole Design perverted to countenance
every Wild Opinion, which either a capricious Fancy can imagine, or a malicious
Wit invent. And from hence it comes to pass, that we have as many several sorts
of Christians as there are different Humors or Interests of men; and the Gospel
with St. Paul, though in a quite contrary sense, is become all things unto all
men.

And having made thus bold with the Scriptures, it cannot be expected that they
should deal more modestly with any Authority inferior to that; the most
ancient Traditions must now give place to new Discoveries. The Consent of the
Catholic Apostolic Church be born down by the Dictates of a private, I might
say, familiar Spirit. Whereas there is all the reason in the World to believe
that the Apostles best knew the mind of their Master, that they faithfully and
fully communicated their knowledge to their Successors, and so by certain steps
and degrees we may arrive at this fundamental Truth: That as the Church is the
most faithful Keeper, so the most authentic Expositor of Scripture. Which
fairly ushers in my third and last Consideration. That for the preventing
Mistakes from rising, and suppressing Errors when risen, It Is the duty of
Private Men to submit their Judgments, in matters of Religion, to the
Determinations of those whom God has Constituted to be their Spiritual Guides
and Governors; unless it manifestly appear, That such Determinations are
contrary to Gods Word. And this I shall assert very briefly both from the
Qualifications of the Persons who are appointed to Rule in the Church, and the
Reason of the thing.

I. And that which first entitles the Governors of the Church to a Superiority
over their Subjects, is that special Ordination and Commission, which they have
received from Christ, to instruct the World in all necessary Truths, and that
Charge which he has laid upon others to obey them. If any one lists to see
their Commission, he may find it recorded in any of the four Evangelists. I
shall exhibit it, as it is exemplified Matt. 28.18, 19, 20. And Jesus came and
spoke unto them, saying, All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth: Go ye
therefore, and Teach all Nations, Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have Commanded you: And lo, I am with You always unto the end of
the World. In which words there are these Three Things considerable: 1. That
Christ commissioned His Disciples immediately after He had proclaimed Himself
Omnipotent. 2. That this Commission implies it to be Christ's Will, that all
Nations of the World should obey them. 3. That He promised to be with Them and
their Successors, unto the end of the World. And there cannot be a fuller
instance, of the Perverseness of some Men, who, to evacuate and overthrow the
Authority of the present Church, will needs confine (...) to some period of
time, short of the final dissolution of all things, when time shall be
swallowed up of Eternity; if not contrary to the Grammatical sense of the Word,
yet at least to the design of the Promise, and the nature of the Thing.

Which of the Ambassadors of earthly Potentates ever received so ample a
Commission? the Person commissioning was Omnipotent. The Commission was
universal in respect of Persons, Time and Place; 'twas directed to all the
Nations, and to continue throughout all the Ages of the World, and for the
Execution of it they were empowr'd from above; wheresoever they came, they
constituted a Spiritual Government, and they had full Power to Enact such Laws
as they thought tended to the Advancement of their Masters Kingdom; and they
did with Authority, and not by way of Counsel only, as some would have,
determine such Controversies as arose, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to
Us.

All along their Spiritual progress, if any City refused to receive Them, or
their Doctrine, they shook off the dust off their Feet against it, as a direful
Presage of some ensuing Judgment, as the next words manifestly declare; Verily
I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
Judgment, than for that City. Wretched City! how has thy Disobedience
ascertained, and aggrandiz'd thy Ruin. The lewd Inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomorrha shall find more Favor in the day of Judgment, than thy Citizens. Most
true it is, their Power was purely Spiritual: Christ, the Prince of Peace, did
not commission Generals to destroy, but sent forth Apostles to convert the
Nations, by declaring His Laws, and denouncing His Judgments. But then they had
no coercive Power of the Sword, which God has given to Magistrates, to inflict
the Judgments which they denounced. But as they, because living under Heathen
Powers, left the Event of their Spiritual Censures solely to the Divine
Vengeance, [which they who escaped in this World, were sure to meet with in the
next]; so is it still, unless Kings are graciously pleased to show themselves
Nursing Fathers to the Church, to enforce Spiritual Censures by Corporal
Penalties, and adjudge those Unworthy the Protection of the Laws of the Realm,
who are justly deprived of the Benefits of the Church. By all which it appears,
that the Church is something else, than a Christian Commonwealth, since there
was a Church before the Commonwealth became Christian; and neither the
Leviathan, nor any of his Disciples, has yet been able to show, how, or when
the Church forfeited Her antecedent Right: And that though the Governors
thereof may challenge to themselves a Power distinct, yet no ways opposite to
the Civil; The Shield of Faith does not clash with the Sword of Justice. And
maugre the designs of those, who have Evil will at Sion, this is not to erect
Imperium in imperio, much less to set the Mitre above the Crown: Since
whatsoever Power, is here challenged as of Divine Right, is purely Spiritual,
exercised to Spiritual ends and purposes; so far from interfering with the
Civil, from Absolving men from that Obedience, which is indispensably due
thereunto; that wheresoever it takes place, it abates nothing of that natural
Right which the Magistrate had in the Affairs of Religion: Yet herein it will
appear, that the Wisdom of the despised King of the Jews, did far surmount all
the Policies of the World; in that he has so interwoven the Concerns of His
Church with the Interest of the State, that at the same time any man shall dare
to become an Enemy to his Kingdom, he must cease to be a Friend to Caesar's.

II. The reasonableness of this Submission will appear from those promises of
Assistance, which Christ has made to them, but not to others without them;
much less to others against them: And those are Illumination, Direction and
Power. Illumination, in things Obscure; Direction, in things Difficult; Power,
to encounter, and overcome all Opposition.

And this may be one Reason, why Christ did not Arm his Disciples with a
Temporal Sword; for certainly He, who had all Power given Him in Heaven, and on
Earth, might have done it, if He had pleased, because He furnished them with
such Extraordinary Virtues, as did abundantly supply the defect of that. Thus
they who could raise the Dead from the Grave, needed no other Argument to gain
the Living. They who could convince the Consciences, captivate the
Understandings, beat down the Imaginations, and conquer the Affections of their
Adversaries, needed no Sword, nor Spear, nor any of the Bloody Engines of War,
to make themselves Masters of the Field.

Now the same Spirit, though not in the same Measure, does still reside in the
Governors of the Church: though they do not equalize the Apostles in working of
Miracles, diversities of Languages, extent of Jurisdiction; though they have
not, as they had, the whole World for their Diocese; yet are they still Bishops
of Souls; Pastors, and Doctors for the Consummation of the Saints, for the
Edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Either then let Private men submit to their
Spiritual Governors; exercising their Commission according to God's Word; or
else let them warrant their Dissent with greater, at least equal Attestations
of the Divine Favor; and then there will be no great fear of any danger
arising from Dissenting Brethren.

III. The reasonableness of this Submission will appear from their Study and
Learning in Divine Matters, and from the far less Knowledge and ordinary
Capacity in others. The Apostles, they had their Knowledge of Divine things,
either from a constant and familiar converse with their Master, or else from
that plentiful Effusion of the Holy Ghost, which He vouchsafed them immediately
upon His Restoration to His Heavenly Kingdom.

That which was thus wonderfully bestowed upon them, their Successors are
forced to acquire, by hard Study, great Industry, frequent and fervent Address
to the Fountain of Wisdom. For, not only the Knowledge of Languages, a Calmness
of Mind, neither ruffled with the storms of Passion, nor distracted with the
Cares of the World; but likewise a piercing Judgment, to distinguish between
the Literal and Figurative sense, to weigh the scope and coherence of things,
to compare one place with another, to illustrate obscure Texts, by those which
are more plain, to consult, and find out the sense of Antiquity, is required to
a right understanding of the Scriptures: For they do not only contain things of
themselves hard to be understood; but moreover, those very things are rendered
more difficult, by the Malice of Satan, and the Cunning of his Agents. The
Enemy has sown such a prodigious quantity of Tares, that it is very hard
sometimes to find out the Wheat: What wonder then, if such a spawn of Monstrous
Opinions flow from the Scriptures falling either into profane hands, or being
interpreted by a private, self-conceited, and unruly Spirit? If St. Paul, who
was caught up into the third Heavens, and was even oppressed with Revelations;
nevertheless cries out, as well for the Difficulty, as the Dignity of his
Function, Who is sufficient for these things? Then certainly it can be no
Disparagement to the Laity, however quick-sighted they may be in other Affairs,
to suppose them not such competent Judges here, as those of the Clergy are. And
indeed, we hear of very few, though never such Despisers of the dull Clergy in
their lifetime, but are very willing to admit of their advice and assistance
when they come to Dye.

IV. Fourthly and lastly, The necessity of this Submission appears, as it is the
only means to restore Peace and Unity to the Church; Happiness and Tranquillity
to the State, how ineffectual the several Projects of Comprehension,
Toleration, unwarrantable Compliance have proved to effect the Work of
Coalition: I mean to Compose those Differences, and Unite those Divisions which
so furiously Rage among us; we either are, or it is to be feared, by sad
Experience, may be Taught.

These Projects can only lay claim to an imaginary Happiness, and however
plausible they may seem in the Notion, yet may they prove dangerous in the
Practice, at least, not attain the ends for which they were designed. For, in
truth, as well may we expect To gather Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from
Thistles, as that a Toleration of Disagreements, should produce the blessed
Fruits of Peace and Concord. These are Contraries, and destroy each other.

Now, what other Expedient have we left but the Restoring, and Asserting the
Discipline of the Church.: That so they, who will neither Hold the Faith, nor
keep a good Conscience, by being delivered up to Satan, may learn, at least,
not to blaspheme. Many and grievous are the Guilts, which are charged upon the
Church of Rome; yet such is the Exactness of Her Discipline, and the Obedience
of Her Sons and Daughters, consequent upon it, as has hitherto preserved Her
from Ruin. Now, if our Fears of the Increase of Popery, be as real, as they
are pretended, methinks it should be no ill Policy to learn Wisdom from our
Adversaries; for that which preserves a Corrupted Church from Falling, in all
likelihood will make a Pure One to Flourish.

However, we are little the better for being delivered from the Slaveries of an
Implicit Faith, and Foreign Superstition, if we run into Licentiousness,
Infidelity, and Irreligion at Home. For, who is so blind as not to see that
Irreverence and Disrespect for the Lord's Clergy, has been accompanied with a
manifest Decay of Piety, and a notorious Contempt of the most Essential Parts
of Religion? That want of Submission, to the Just and Piously Determinations of
the Church, no less Justly and Piously ratified and established by the King and
State, has given Birth to such monstrous Variety of Opinions, as has scarce
left any Fundamental of the Faith unquestioned, if not denied; Atheism creeping
in by insensible degrees, from indulging too great a Latitude in Matters of
Religion.

And now in the Close of All, Let every Man seriously consider with himself the
Hainousness and Danger of Schism; and the blessed Effects of Obedience.

The Danger of Schism, in that it breaks, the precious Unity of the Church,
alienates the Affections of the Members thereof. Who, as they have but one
Faith, so they should have but one Soul. And so instead of Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Forbearance, Meekness, Temperance, those lovely Fruits of the
Spirit, which adorn private Men, and secure the public Peace, there arise
Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Evil Surmising, Sedition, Heresies,
Murders; those ugly Works of the Flesh, which dissolve the Bonds of Society,
and exclude Men from the Kingdom of God. How that the Schismatic is arrested
with Fears and Jealousies from without, when he considers his Sin of
Disobedience against those whom the Lord has set over him, and the
Dreadfulness of the Churches Censures, when justly incurred for his
Disobedience. How that he is tormented with sad and uncomfortable Reflections
from within; being Unstable in all his Ways, ever learning, but never coming to
the Knowledge of the Truth; but being abandoned to the Delusions of a Private
Spirit, he is miserably tossed to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, till at
length he makes an Eternal Shipwreck of the Faith.

On the contrary, the blessed Effects of Obedience; how the Humble Christian,
by an happy Resignation of his Judgment, there where our Lord seems to demand
it, enjoys a perpetual Peace, and Freedom from Dispute, together with all his
Fellow Members of the same Mystical Body. As for those great Mysteries of
Godliness, which concern his Salvation, though they are above his Reason, yet
not above his Faith; and he had rather rely on the Churches Decisions of them,
when he finds no place of Scripture plainly contrary to such Decisions, than
either give way to his own Curiosity, or heed to the Disputers of this World,
left he should thereby wrest them to his own Destruction. And this he thinks he
may do with less trouble to himself, and greater assurance of the Truth, and so
he continues sound in the Faith, without being skilled in those unhappy
Controversies, in which the Disputers of this World have involved it.

And this Harmony of Faith and Doctrine is always accompanied with an entire
League, and Union of Charity, [that common Badge by which Christians were once
distinguished from the rest of the World] and a Blessed Uniformity of God's
Public Worship and Service, whereby the Members of the Church Militant, in
some sort, resemble the Saints of the Church Triumphant.

In a Word, in this Obedience, the Humble Christian goes on securely, and
cheerfully, in the Ways of God's Commandments; And instead of troubling his
Head with the (...) of Religion, practices those plain, but most important
Duties of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety; which will render his Life
happy here, and crown him with Eternal Felicity hereafter.

FINIS.

