A Just Lamentation FOR THE Irrecoverable Loss OF THE NATION, BY The Doleful
Death of the Late Queen Mary Of Blessed Memory: Delivered in a Sermon Preached
at Daventry March 5. 1694/5.

By Andrew Barnett Minister of the Gospel.

Lam. 2.1. How has the Lord covered the Daughter of Sion, with a Cloud in his
anger, and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the beauty of Israel, and
remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel 1695.

PSALM. ii 3, 4. If the Foundations be Destroyed, what can the Righteous do? The
Lord is in his Temple; The Lord's Throne is in Heaven.


WE are now before the Lord to Commemorate the Death of the Renowned Late
Queen, Queen Mary, by which the Glory of the Nation is Ecclipsed, and one great
ground of our Humane hopes Buried in the Dust.

Such a Character is given of her as few justly attain to in this censorious
World. So cordial in her conjugal Affections, so constant in prudent
Resolutions, so compassionate to needy Subjects, so concerned for the
Publick-Good, so considerate in weighty affairs, so confirmed in the Principles
of Religion, so accommodated with moral virtues, so conscientious in pious
practices, and so rarely qualified for her state of honor, that she became to
others an eminent example, and her Name will be both Titulary and truly of
blessed memory to all Posterity.

She was one of the Chief Corner Stones that supported the famous Structure of
this Commonwealth, and if the Foundation be destroyed, what can the Righteous
do? What God will do with us, we cannot certainly presage, but this we know,
that when God boxeth up his precious Jewels, and Inneth his Wheat, it tells us
that a Storm is at hand. And when sin grows rampant, and the Righteous are
taken away, it is a sign that Evil is a coming.

God has made England a Sanctuary for the Righteous, and hither poor Fugitive
Christians that suffer for righteousness sake fly and find refuge: But if the
Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Lament they may, and will,
but alas, alas, what can they do?

1. Note then the supposition contained in the Text (if the Foundations be
destroyed) and innocent Persons come thereby to have their outward security
taken away, and have nothing left them to build their humane hope upon. If this
come to be their Case,

2. Note then the sad conclusion (What can the Righteous do?) Alas they can do
just nothing in order to their own relief; their case is become forlorn and
deplorable, and they are left without any visible remedy. They must then (will
they, nill they) sit down under their oppressions, and endeavor to bear them
with Patience, for they have no way to help themselves. What can they do? Can
they raise up new Foundations? No, Can they dwell in safety in the building
that wants good foundations? No; What then can they do? All that they can do is
to lament the Case, and lay it open before the Lord, and support their sinking
hearts with this, That the Lord sits (still) in his Holy Temple, and his Throne
is in Heaven: Let us then here observe, 1. That the Loss of the Foundations
puts the righteous into a most forlorn condition, and is matter of just
lamentation. 2. That when the Righteous are lamenting the loss of the
Foundations, they ought to look up to God for refuge, and to call to
remembrance, that God sits in his Holy Temple, and that his Throne is in Heaven.


1. The loss of the Foundation is a lamentable loss, and puts the Righteous
into a most forlorn and deplorable condition. By Foundations we are to
understand all such things on which the welfare of the Nation does depend, and
on which the Inhabitants thereof do use to build their humane hope of their
safety and outward prosperity. The Metaphor includes all the things that do
support and uphold the Structures of the Church and Kingdom in which we live.
As, The fundamental constitution, the firm and righteous Laws, and the faithful
Governors thereof: and the last of these is particularly pointed at in the
Text: All these belong to the Foundation; but the supreme powers, and the
faithfulness of such as Govern the Nation, are the chief Corner-stones in the
Foundation: And are called the Foundation in Psalm. 82.5 All the Foundations of
the Earth are out of Course. It is spoken of Judges, and they are called Gods.
1. Because they stand in God's stead, and are to judge righteously, that the
Sentence may be God's Sentence, and not their own: And when Judges are corrupt
and partial, then the foundations are out of Course, and all goes to confusion,
fiat justitia, aut periat Mundus: But when the Foundations are destroyed, the
matter is much more deplorable: For the Foundations to be out of Course is sad,
but when the foundations are destroyed it is much worse; for Anarchy is worse
than Tyranny, and leads to utter ruin. So that the destruction of the
foundation is a lamentable loss to a Nation, especially to all the Righteous in
the Nation. And this I further prove thus:

1. The Destruction of the foundations, Hazards the Superstructure, and brings
down the whole building upon the heads of the Inhabitants, and such of them as
are righteous, are in great danger thereby of destruction, for in a common
calamity there is no particular safety. Destroying the foundations, is the same
with laying the Axe to the root of the Tree, spoken of in Mat. 3.10. which
threatens utter destruction both to the body and branches thereof, yea
irrecoverable destruction.

2. The destruction of the Foundations Heightens the enmity of the common Enemy
and promotes their designs against the Nation; They wait an opportunity to
revenge themselves upon the righteous in the Nation that have stuck close to
the interest of the Nation; and the destruction of the Foundations put such an
opportunity into their bloody hands, and lays the righteous open to their rage
and Malice. The Foundations are the security of the righteous from the violence
of these unreasonable men, and destroying the Foundations destroys this
security, and so exposes them to the Mercy of their Barbarous and Cruel
Enemies.

3. The destruction of the foundations, hinders the prosperity of the Church,
whereof the righteous are Members. There is a great dispute amongst the
Learned, whether the Commonweal be in the Church, or the Church be in the
Commonweal. I take it for granted that the Church is in the Commonweal, and if
so, then when the Foundations of the Commonweal are destroyed, the Church and
her Members are thereby wounded and bruised, and she lying in the bowels of the
Commonweal, must unavoidably be thereby infringed in her Liberties, disturbed
in her peace, and deprived of her faithful guides.

4. The destruction of the foundations, holds forth the displeasure of God
against the righteous themselves: That he is not only angry with the wicked of
the Nation, but also with the righteous therein, for swimming down the stream
of the Times, and partaking with the wicked in their wickedness, as, in their
pride of Apparel and Intemperance: And therefore destroys the foundations, that
as the righteous have been partakers with the wicked in their sins, so they may
partake with them in their punishments. Sin is more inexcusable in the
righteous than in the wicked, and therefore shall not pass unpunished, Amos 3.2.

The Inferences hence.
1. The Lamentation then of this day for the death of her Majesty Queen Mary is
a just and ought to be a sad and great Lamentation. By the death of her Royal
Person there is such a breach made in the foundation, that gives such a
terrible shake to the building, that makes all the inhabitants to tremble;
perhaps some may be so stupid or so intoxicated with folly as to be unsensible;
but it is no wonder to see the righteous so much concerned: If the Foundation be
destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Is not the life of their safety lost, and
the loss irrecoverable? Was it not her Majesty's just right to the Crown,
destroyed by a cheat, that gave life to the late happy revolution, and revived
a dying Nation? Was it not her presence in the King's necessary absence, that
quieted our homebred Enemies, and made the Government both safe and easy? And
what Englishman that has any Brains in his Head, or Sense in his Spirit, can
do less than lament so public a Loss, that makes all the Foundations to
tremble? Is not this the day in which the surviving Foundations are crying out,
A Cornerstone is taken from amongst us, and we tremble at the shake it gives
to the Building? Was she not a well polished Stone, as well as a chief
Cornerstone, and not only a Strength but also a Grace and Beauty to the
Building? And is not he now in Mourning, that was the great instrument under
God, that saved our Lives and Fortunes, our Laws and our Religion? Is not he
crying out, oh what shall I do! And are there not multitudes of righteous
persons crying out, A part of the Foundation is destroyed, and what shall we
do? And shall we here that are met before the Lord to Lament, be unconcerned?
No, no, let us take up that lamentation, Lam 5.15, 16. The Joy of our Hearts is
ceased, our Dance is turned into Mourning: The Crown is fallen from our Head,
Woe to us that we have sinned, and sinned away such a choice mercy.

2. The Lamentation then of this day, for the death of her Majesty, ought not
only to be a sad lamentation, but also a solemn, serious, and religious
lamentation. We must not only lament it as a National loss of a most dreadful
consequence, but as the bitter fruit of our own sins, and as a sad token of
God's great displeasure. It does argue (beloved) that God is angry even to
Indignation, and that if his anger be not appeased by a speedy and sincere
repentance, we have just cause to fear, that he will make an utter riddance of
us: See what is said in Jer. 45.4, 5. Behold that which I have Built, I will
pull down: God built up our Ruins with a high hand, but now he is pulling down
what he built up: He has pulled down many of the Pillars both of our Church
and State: He has taken away many of our Nobles, whose noble Hearts and Hands
had been happy Instruments in our late wonderful deliverance: And he has
extinguished many of our burning and shining lights, and now he is plucking up
the very foundation of the building, and oh how dreadful is this! Surely it
calls aloud upon all in General, to take to mind, and penitently to lament our
great unthankfulness for, and gross abuse of the great deliverance of these
Nations from Popery and Tyranny, lest God be provoked to go on in pulling down
the foundations, till the building fall upon our Heads. And it calls upon our
King and our Parliament, to consider what they have done for God that has done
so much for them, and has waited patiently several years for returns from
them, suitable to their receipts from him, and wherein they have fallen short
herein, to endeavor to make up, lest God still proceed in pulling down, and
they themselves perish in the downfall. Alas, who can stand before the Lord when
he is angry!

3. The Lamentation then of this day, for the death of her Majesty ought to be
seconded with double diligence, in securing the Foundations. A breach in the
foundations is not to be neglected, but speedily and carefully to be made up.
And it highly concerns our Master Builders that are entrusted with the Work, to
look well after the foundations, and to keep a vigilant Eye upon such as are no
well-wishers to the foundations, and to check their notorious insolences; and
to cherish and promote a firmer Union amongst our selves, and to exercise their
wisdom to the utmost in securing our foundations And each one in his place,
should put his helping hand to this great work of securing the foundations: How
cheerfully and willingly should we part with such Money as we pay toward the
defense and support of the foundations? And how earnestly should we pray for
the preservation of the foundations? That God that laid the foundations of the
Earth, has (blessed be his name) provided for us good foundations, and though
he has pulled away one of the Corner-stones, yet he has left us enough to
support the building; oh pray hard for the security of our foundations; their
security is much more desirable than our own personal security, for they are
National Foundations, and their security of universal concern to the three
Nations, yea to all Protestant Nations.

4. The Lamentation of this day for the Death of her Majesty, ought to be
supported with a serious remembrance, that God sits still in his Temple, and
his Throne is in Heaven: It tells us that the choicest of our outward blessings
are but fading comforts, and that Kings and Queens that are clothed with
Majesty, and admired for their Splendour and Grandeur; though adorned with the
Wisdom of Solomon, and the uprightness of David, yet are but men, and have
their Breath in their Nostrils; and are but fair Flowers that do flourish a
why and then wither, and hang down the head, and drop into the portion of the
Weeds: But that God is an everlasting portion to his People, and affords his
Subjects protection from generation to generation. And that when the foundation
fail, and the Thrones of the Earth are vacant, he still sits in his Temple, and
on his Throne in the Heaven; and therefore when the Righteous are mourning for
the loss of their foundations, they are not to mourn as without hope, but to
moderate their sorrows with this consideration, that God is still in his Holy
Temple. And this they must do, to stifle their fears, and to strengthen their
faith. 1. To stifle their fears: The destruction of the foundations is a
frightful dispensation, and raises grievous storms of great fears in the Souls
of the Righteous: Now think they, Alas! alas! What can the Righteous do: The
Church of God is upon the ruin, our Visions we fear will fail, our Teachers be
driven into Corners, our day of Salvation is like to be turned into a Night of
Darkness, and what shall we do? Now to suppress these fears, this they must do;
they must consider that God is still in Heaven, Eccles. 7.14. In the day of
Adversity Consider, that the cause is sin, and we must be humbled for it; and
that the end of the Adversity, is to try, prove, and purge us: and that the
hand from which the Adversity comes is God, who sits in his Holy Temple, and
orders all adversities, with regard to his own Glory, and the good of his
Church and People. 2. To strengthen Faith. When humane hope fails, hoping in
God is to be supported: When there is no help to be had on Earth, there is help
enough in Heaven: Means in sight, and means out of sight are all one with God:
And therefore when the righteous are thus cast down, then they must look up, as
the Psalmist here does: The fore-thoughts of the destruction of the foundations
daunted him; but under this discouragement he turns his Eyes upward, and his
confidence was thereby revived, and he concludes v. 7. That the Righteous God
loves Righteousness, and his Eyes behold the upright, viz. with a favorable
aspect, and smiling countenance, and with great regard; and Lam. 3.21, 22. This
I recall to mind (says the Church) therefore have I hope: I recall to mind that
God is still in Heaven, and his compassions fail not, and his faithfulness is
great, and therefore have I hope: This was the consequence of these
considerations, and they are the necessary consequence, and the natural fruit
that they produce: For the consideration of God sitting in his Holy Temple, and
having his Throne in the Heavens does demonstrate,

1. The readiness of God to help the righteous: He sits on his Throne in the
Temple of Heaven, to receive the complaints of the oppressed, and to relieve
them, Eccles. 5.8. If thou see the violent perverting of judgment in a
Province, marvel not at it, for he that is higher than the highest regards
it, and there be higher than they. The oppressed have a higher Court to appeal
to, than the highest Courts of men, where their grievances shall be heard
without costly attendance, and they shall certainly be righted by the great God
that is higher than the highest, and has those employed in his service, who
are higher than the Judges of the Earth, to wit, his Angels. Upon this
consideration it was that Job durst not turn his back upon the just cause of
one of his Servants, whom he might have trampled under his feet, Job 31.13, 14.
Did I despise the cause of my Manservant, what then shall I do when God rises
up? He is no respecter of persons: The Cause of the Servant shall be heard
before him, as well as the Cause of the Master: And the injuries that imperious
Masters do to their poor Servants, he will revenge, and rise up for that end
and purpose: And sits upon his Throne in his Holy Temple of Heaven in constant
readiness to hear the complaints of his oppressed Subjects; and this does
further demonstrate the righteousness of God in doing justice; his Throne is in
his holy Temple of Heaven, where no injustice can enter. There is a vast
difference betwixt the proceedings of that Court, and the proceedings of the
Courts on Earth: There is no bribing, no tilting of the Balance, no carrying
of unjust causes by forgery, false witness, or tricks in law. He lays
righteousness to the Plummet, Isa. 28.17. So exact in Justice, that he erreth
not a hairs breadth therein: And when transactions here came to be reviewed
there, and Causes called over-again in that Court, then the destroyers of our
good foundations, will be justly condemned for the worst of Traitors. This also
demonstrates, The irresistableness of his power in executing justice. He is in
Heaven out of the reach of his Enemies, and from Heaven he pours down his
judgments upon the heads of such as undermine the foundations: And a judgment
from Heaven is unavoidable, Romans 1.18. Wrath is revealed from Heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness: The endeavors of men to destroy the
foundation, are acts of unrighteousness, and very injurious to the righteous,
and the righteous God will not bear long with such ungodly and unrighteous
persons that seek to destroy the foundations; And when he falls upon such, and
reveals his wrath from Heaven against them, then woe unto them. Their policy
and power will nothing avail them, for their Wisdom, compared to his, is Folly,
and their Power compared to his, is Weakness: And they are no more to him than
a straw in the hand of a Giant, or a little Chaff before the Wind, Ps. 2.4. he
laughs them to scorn. Their great Armies to him are but like a bubble upon the
Water, that dance a little, and quickly burst and disappear and vanish away:
And lastly, this demonstrates the regard that he has to the righteous under
the saddest circumstances that befall them: When supter-refuges fail, and the
foundations are destroyed, he sits in his Holy Temple beholding and pitying
their case, and waiting for a meet opportunity to arise and save them And if he
delay their deliverance, it is but to time it so, as it may be more splendid and
glorious. Under our Lamentations for the destruction of the foundations, you
see it is our wisdom, to support our Spirits with the serious consideration of
our relation to God, and of his sitting on his Throne in Heaven. Yea if God
should go on in plucking up our foundations (which God forbid) yet we must not
sit down in despair, but in all such cases, bear up our Spirit and strengthen
our Faith, by minding that God's Throne is in Heaven, and God as high as ever,
and as ready to show mercy as ever: And when we are lamenting the loss of the
Foundations, and crying out, What shall the Righteous do? We must then imitate
upright David, and check our distrustful hearts, and look up to the Lord, who
sits in his Holy Temple, and whose Throne is in Heaven.

A Prayer for the Preservation of the Foundations.
O Most Merciful Father, who laidst the foundation of the Earth, and whose
Throne is in Heaven, and have founded these famous Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, upon most excellent foundations, be pleased for the sake
of the Righteous, and for the sake of thy beloved Son and our Advocate, to
glorify thy own name in the preservation of our foundations. Thou have made us
happy above others in our foundations; we have many righteous Laws, a Matchless
fundamental Constitution, and faithful Governors, and live at Ease and Peace
under them; and we thankfully acknowledge that herein thou have commended thy
love to us, and humbly beg thy pardon for our unthankfulness, and the dishonor
we have done to thy name under these mercies, whereby we have justly provoked
thee to pluck away a chief Cornerstone out of the foundation, and to cause us
to tremble and fear the effects of thy displeasure. Just art thou in thy
proceedings, and may justly proceed in pulling down the famous structure that
thou have built for us: But if the foundations be destroyed, Lord what shall
the righteous do? Oh be thou reconciled to us and take away our iniquities, and
receive us into favor, and secure for us our foundations; pluck up no more of
the Corner-stones thereof; but make our good foundations lasting foundations;
and help all the inhabitants of the land in the due discharge of their duty to
serve thee in fear, that we being true to thee, and to our own Interest, thou
may delight in us, and establish our foundations for us, and be glorified
both by us and in us, For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and Glory for ever
and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately published by the same Author: The Helmet of Hope,
distinguished from the Hope of Hypocrites. And published to prevent the danger
of False Hope, and to promote the Duty of Living in true Hope of Glory. With an
Appendix of the Grounds of Hope, Collected in a Caralogue of Promises and
Experiences.


