THE RELIEF OF THE POOR, and ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING: Proposed.

By HUMPHRY BARROW, (dureing the War) a Member of the Army.

Qui cito dat, bis dat. DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1656.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord HENRY CROMWELL, Commander in chief of the Forces of
IRELAND.
And the rest of the honorable Commanders, and inferior Officers, now, and late
of the Army.
THAT Glorious Success with which God has crowned your honorable Actions, in
the rescue of this precious Land out of those hands that without cause were
imbrued in the blood of our Country; is yet so fresh and warm in every ingenous
heart, that (I hope) a Proposal, tending to a sacrificious gratitude to the
Lord of Hoasts, (by whose mercy and mighty arm, we are what we are) will not
be unseasonably presented to any person concerned in this Address. Wherein I
have humbly assumed the confidence to mind You of the pious Customs of the
Soldiers and Servants of GOD in former Ages; nay of the laudable (though
blind) Devotions of Pagans and Infidels, as Sacred, and other History do
(amply) manifest: who no sooner could sound Victoria after a War, but up go the
Altars, and on go the Sacrifices, in retribution of thanks to that Deity each
held in veneration.

'T is true, we have (in the progress of this War) afforded GOD some Days of
Thanksgiving; and he (at last) having given us the issue of our hopes; the
Blessing and Harvest of our Blood and Sweat: those would all look like days of
hellish Hypocrisy, if we should not now present him with some Deeds of
Thanksgiving; and Sacrifices being ceased, we have an Opportunity to exercise
what he loves better, which is, Mercy.

Not then to hold You any longer in the Portch of Expectation, I here present
You in one hand, the Aged, the Infirm, the Orphan, to be provided for by way of
Hospital: and in the other hand, that yet-in-its-Morning (but hopeful) light of
this Land, the University of DUBLIN, for Addition of Revenue. To carry on both
which, I wish GOD would persuade each heart herein concerned, to allow one Acre
of Land out of each hundred due to him; which granted, there is little doubt
but the Adventurers, to whom GOD has given so fair (...) Return of their pious
Loans; and Purchasers of Debentures, who have least reason to oppose, will do
the like: And the same deducted from each man's Proportion, to be cast into a
single, or what several Parcels, the wisdom of the Government shall judge
convenient.

Perhaps some may object, That this Motion comes too late, much of the Land
being already disposed of, (and I grant, had it been thought of sooner, it had
been effected with less trouble, but) Volenti nil difficile, we should not in
the least pa^^e at the difficulty, were it to serve our own p^rticulars* and
indeed, considered in the best sense, it is so, if we expect a blessing upon
the rest of our Estates; or if there be any wisdom in laying up treasure in
Heaven: for this shall be surer to your houses, than the brains of all the
Lawyers that ever trod Westminster Hall met in one scull, can make the rest.

For who knows how soon, prodigal Heirs (ordinarily the Issue of penurious
Fathers) shall make havoc of those Estates, the hundredth part whereof, might,
though not merit, have brought a blessing upon you to all eternity. A fair
warning for the observance of that precious inch of Scripture, Whilst you have
time do good; least whilst you are rotting, your Heirs, be reveling; and they
damned for spending upon their lusts, what you were damned for denying the
Lazar.

And if there be any (though I hope better things) that shall strain at this
Gnat, I wonder how they would have be haved themselves toward that Camel, laid
before the Young man in the Gospel, Ali that thou have. Remember the widows
mite, and the superlative testimony our Savior gave of it. Poor woman! it was
all she had, and this a fleece out of a flock.

And I dare affirm Ananias and Sapphira (laying aside their lie) were Saints,
compared to such as shall say to this Proposal, I Will consider of it.

If we can pay the fourth part of our Rents to these Commonwealths, we may
blush before the Angels to deny the hundredth part to the Commonwealth of
CHRIST: For this is not to denude your walls of their hangings, to cover the
flesh of the poor; nor your Coaches of their leather, to make them shoes; your
supernecessarie pampered Steeds of their Horse-cloaths, to make them Shirts;
nor your Mangers of their Provender, to fill their Ovens; though all these
might well be abated to relieve the meanest Member of CHRIST. GOD has given to
many amongst us vast Estates, large possessions; he has given us the Land and
labors of our Enemies, beings that we neither built nor planted; nay he has
given us our lives for a prey, when thousands as valiant, as precious, as
worthy, as we, lie now rotting in contemptible ditches. And shall we not help
our Brethren to live with us? That Saying is as good as old. Non nobis sol^m
nati sumus, we are not born only for our selves; and I hope we did not
altogether fight for our selves; but shall be tried by this trifle, though what
is here urged as an act of Charity, and as yet carries no other face, may to
after ages be rendered an act of Polity; and that thus Sustenance and Science
being the subject matters here preast, who knows but that casting his bounty
and bread upon the waters now, he may after many days find them in the bellies
and brains of his needy posterity.

Perhaps there may be some who set a low rate upon that Beauty and Glory of
Humanity, Learning, which sanctified, restores us nearest to the Image of GOD:
but if there be, (as I hope few) they must give me leave to believe they are
such as would have the eyes both of Church and Commonwealth put out, that they
might have the leading of them.

It was highly in question which was the saddest Persecution, that under
Dioclesian, or that under Julian the Apostate; the first laboring the
destruction of all the bodies of the Saints, and the last of all books, that no
memory of GOD or Religon might remain: but the last was concluded infinitely
transcendent, as a device that would have thrown the world into a deeper than
Egyptian darkness.

It Is true, there are many who (I have charity to believe) mean well, and much
mind the enlargement of the bounds of the Church, and opening a way for the
light of the Gospel in its purity to shine upon the freckled face of the
erroneous World: But alas! that is hard to be done by a language that has no
acquaintance abroad; nor could ever travel farther than the verges of our own
shores, save amongst our own Colonies; and not communicable to other Nations by
any universal Rule. I must needs grant that CHRIST in the election of his
Apostles, made choice of poor ignorant laboring men; but I hope none will
deny, that though he found them such, yet after the sealing of their great
Commission to preach the Gospel by the Holy Ghost, in cloven tongues, they went
away the most sublimated Scholars that ever were or shall be upon the world.
That Great Schole-Master in a moment dispelling the mist of despicable
ignorance, and filling them with all Languages and requisite Knowledge. And 't
is observable, that when GOD had a purpose to stay the building of Babel, and
scatter mankind into fractions; he confounds their speech, and divides tongues
to the Nations: but when he resolves to build up his Church, he recollects them
^l^ into the Mouths of his Apostles. With some measure of which Qualification
(immediate gift of tongu^s being ceased) the most eminent Servants of CHRIST,
and faithful promoters of the purity of his truth, have from time to time,
indefatigably l^bo^ed by Nurseries of Learning to endow the Ministry.

It Is true, Exhortations, Reproofs, Consolations and Directions in plain and
patent matters, are highly commendable in those of meanest parts; for they that
feared the Lord spoke often one to another: but Preaching, Exposition, and the
unfolding of hidden Mysteries, do modestly call for sanctified Learning and
Authority. The mannagement of which Assertion, I humbly leave to those
Champions of the Truth, whose Shields I am not worthy to bear.

And now craving pardon to my prolivity, glance once again upon the poor; and
wish the most obdurate wretch to lay his hand upon his heart, and consider, how
his ears will one day tingle to hear that Soul-crushing charge of unkindness
from the mouth of the Son of GOD, I was hungry, and ye fed me not.

Adding only this, If there be any heart so much adamant, brow so much brass,
or mind so void of Mercy as to set himself in positive Opposition to what is
here suggested; or that his evil Example or Coldness, cause this great Business
to fall to the ground; he must give me leave to tell him, He runs the desperate
hazard of eternally sinking under the weight of all the Curses, that shall in
bitterness of Spirit fall from all the trembling Aged, Anxieted, Infirm
persons, and friendless Orphans, that shall ever languish upon the face of this
fruitful Land, from this day to the day of Judgment.

In regard the effecting of this great Work, may (to some dull Spirits) seem
difficult, the ensuing Suggestions are humbly offered to consideration.

I. That Commissioners of active Spirits, and unbyassed Principles, be
appointed to the mannagement and carrying on of this business.

II. That the Muster-Masters in the respective Provinces of this Dominion, be
ordered to offer it to the Subscription of every Officer relating to that part
of the Army, the next Muster-day after he receives it from hence.

III. That whereas some are in parcel possession of their Estates, and out of
employment: the High Sherif of every respective County, be ordered by himself
or his Substitutes to tender it to the voluntary Subscription of every such
person, as also to all personally possessed Adventurers and purchasers of
Debentures; for the deduction of the proportion out of the part remaining due
unto him.

IV. That whereas many are in possession of their full proportion of Lands, and
consequently no convenient way left for contributing their proportions in kind;
there are numerous precedents of persons so completed, that offer their return
in money, rateably as they received each Acre.

V. That whereas it may be objected, that many so in possession of their full
proportions, are not provided with ready money: the High Sherif of every County
be ordered, by himself or his Substitutes, to tender it to the voluntary
Subscription of every such person, for the sum and time wherein they cheerfully
consent to pay it.

VI. That what money shall so be received, be paid into a Treasury appointed
for that purpose in Dublin, and laid out in purchase of land for the uses
aforesaid.

VII. That the Sherifs of every respective County, be ordered yearly to give in
their account to their Successors before a full Bench of Justices.

VIII. That the Sherifs and Muster-Masters aforesaid, be ordered to return
hither the names of all the Dissenters, to the end that being here recorded
there may be no mistake in the deductions.

IX. That the Sherifs do within twenty days, return all the Subscriptions to
the Commissioners beforementioned.

X. That his Highness Council for the affairs of Ireland be moved for their
countenance to, and assistance in the promotion of it.

XI. That his Highness the Lord Protector be moved to recommend it to the
Adventurers in England, who are (ordinarily) cheerful contributers to works of
this nature.

XII. That the Chancellor of this University be moved to a speedy
rectification, and rescue of it from disorder.

FINIS.

