Membrorum Principalium Apostasia: OR, A SHORT VIEW OF Those many Diseases and
Infirmities which proceed from a Defection, or Falling away of the Principal
Members or parts of the Body, from the performance of their several Offices and
Functions; Together with Their CURES, By the Matchless Tinctura Caelestis: A
Medicine Exquisitely prepared and fitted to give Relief in such Extremes, and
of sufficient Virtue and Efficacy to reduce those vitiated parts to their
former state; and thereby Radically Cure (...) ^^st deplorable Diseases in Men,
Women and Children: With several Instances of some Eminent and Memorable Cures,
of late wrought by it.

By J. Barrow M. D.

(...)

Membrorum Principalium Apostasia: OR A SHORT VIEW of those many Diseases and
Infirmities, etc.
IT is the Office of Medicine; says Barthol. Peraulcis; Quod deest in humano
corpore sarcire, etc. to repair what is defective in man's Body, and withdraw
what is supflu us. This indeed is the main Scope and Design of Physic. This
point, i^ the Center of all the Studies and Labors of the most Learned
Physicians; and the utmost End and Perfection of this most renowned Art. Hence
it was that Medicine* justly prepared, and duly administered, were by Herophilus
called, Manus Deorum The Hands of the Gods; intimating a certain Beam of
Divinity, even in these mean^ parts of the Creation, the inferior Classes of
Natural Bodies, by reason of that Miraculous Efficacy, that admirable and
unaccountable power and virtue which was found i^ them to repair and make good,
the continual decay's of humane Bodies, and thereby support and prolong the
Health and Life of Man. For this reason I was moved (with ^ desire to do good
to all, but especially the poorer sort, who were not able on all occasions to
apply themselves to a Physician) to publish this most Generous Medicine m^
TINCTURA CAELESTIS.

A Medicine! which, from its preparation and operation, I can with good
assurance warrant, to answer those great Ends in Physic before mentioned and
by many signa Experiments, in several years late past demonstrate: Some of
which I shall here mention, but all I cannot in this narrow compass. I say,
those two qualifications of a goo^ Medicine, are Eminently visible in this; as
first, it does, det^^here superflua, draw a way all superfluity of humors,
which are the causes and matter of diverse Diseases: An^ next, it does Quod
deest sarcire, repair what is defective, by adding strength and vigor to the
sickly and enfeebled Body, and that with all possible ease and security For the
Composition of this excellent Tincture (as it is wrought with that Care an^
Skill (let me speak it without boasting) that becomes an Artist, so it is
manage with that caution and regard to all constitutions, that all persons from
the Cradle to the Crutch, may safely and familiarly use it. Yet it is a brisk
vigorous Medicine; word thoroughly and to the purpose gives plentiful Stools and
Urine; without any uneasine^ sickness, or griping, as is usual with most
purging Medicines: Yet (Note) one singular property (which it claims above
others) where it meets with a very foul stomac^ it throws up by one Vomit, or
two at most, a deal of filthy slime, and tenacious Fleg^ and Choler, working
off the rest downward, with much pleasure as well as p^ofit t^ the Patient.

Upon the first Reception into the stomach, it is carried forth throughout all
the ways and passages of the Chyle (that is, an extract of the first concoction
of the Food whereby it perfecteth the Concoctions, carries off all crude, or
raw u^digested matt^^ which disturbs or deprave them, restores lost Appetite
preserving the stomach, a^ parts subservient unto it in a due disposition, to
receive, retain, and properly dist^^bute a good and sound nourishment, to the
whole, and every part of the ^ody, with (...) ^t^ting it by hasty and ^^^^able
^lux of t^ ^^y: dispersing all Fumes, Vapors, unpleasant belchings, puffing
up, or stopping of the ^^omach: Proceeding farther and mixing with the Blood,
it is carried therewith in it inculate motion throughout the whole Body,
preserving the whole Mass, sweet, pure and untainted, comforting the Vitals, or
Spirit of Life; and being (...) high Cordial, helps against fainting, swooning,
cold sweats, and trembling of the Heart, and the like Effects, caused by loss
or disspation of the Spirits: It reaches Ventricles of the Brain and Nerves,
promoting the free passage of the animal Spirits and Nutricious Juice, ^uts off
the Fountain of Catarrhs, or Rheumatick Defluxions, which fall upon the Joints
and Muscles; and so turns off the Head-spring of Rheumatisms, Gout and
Arthritick ^ains, which according to Fernelius (who glories that he only sound
it out) fall from ^he Head upon all the parts so affected.

It opens the obstructed Liver and Spleen, cleanses those exile or narrow
passages of the Lacteal Veins, unloads the Mesentery, Pancreas and Gall; all
which are mutually con^erned in Sanguification, or forming the Blood; and thus
cures the Diseases of those ^arts so vitiated, as, Cachexie, or evil habit of
Body, Dropsies, Jaundies, Ch^lick, Inflammation, Obstructions, Vapors, of Wind,
shooting in^o the Sides and Back, and causing very sharp Pains there, it helps
those who are Hy^^^ ^^^ack, though to a degr^^ of Madn^s^, and many other
Diseases arising from the (...) ^ses, which cannot b^ treated of in this narrow
Limit of discourse; in the Cures of which this N^ble Tincture has wonderfully
signalized its machless Virtues, of which I could give many instances, which
daily occur, but must be contented to ^ive but (...), and omit many for Brevi^y
sake. One remarkable Cure was wrought upon

The Mother in Law to Mr. Joseph Pluckrose, Glas^^^er at Fleet-^ridge in
Fleetstreet a Gentlewoman very ancient, who had long suffered under an evil
habit of Body, with ^indy Fumes and Vapors, Obstructions of the bowels, inward
pains, etc. but espec^^ly the faculty of her stomach deprav^d, appetite and
digestion so weakened, that her food (...) he usual passage, but was daily
thrown up by vomiting, in which condition she had (...) a^uished, even to
despair of recovery, till she took of my Tinctura Caelestis, by w^^^, with Gods
assistance; she soon recovered her former health, which continues to this d^y
where^pon several of their Relations made use thereof, and sent quantities to
their F^^ends (...) ^he Country who all found the like effects, to their great
benefit and satisfaction.

Another great and memorable cure was done upon one -- Holsworth of Marlborough
^n Wiltshire, by Trade a Blacksmith (but a man Eminent in that Town, and all
the Coun^ry about for some famous passages in his Life.) He lay long sick of a
Dropsy, which was at^ended with great swellings all over, difficulty of
breathing, prostrate appetite, and the ex^remity of the usual symtoms of that
prodigious disease, all advices and means used for his ^ecovery proved
ineffectual and death only was expected to end the contest between the disease
and almost vanquished) Nature, till happily meeting with my Tinctura Caelestis,
in the ^ands of Mr. Robert Butcher a worthy person of that Town: He took of it,
ac^ording to the Direction of this Paper, and in a short time was restored to
perfect health and ^ontinues lusty and strong; since which he occasionlly
coming to London, came to visit me, and gave me an account of disease and cure,
which (next to Divine providence) he owned my Tincture only.

Furthermore, in Diseases of the Reins, Vreters and Bladder, as also the
Seminall Genital Parts Its virtues are so great, that, all that I am able to
say in my Praises of ^s incomparable Tincture, cannot come up to its deserved
Character. But this I must (...) (and modestly to) that (...) ^er and efficacy,
to cleanse and scour those parts, and deliver them from all mann^^ viscous
matter, which is apt to be generated there and cause many violent Diseases;
(...) Obstructions, Inflammations, Ulcers, Runnings and Wastings even to the
Consumption of the whole strength and substance of the body: But especially in
that most deplorable Disease, that can happen to miserable Man, the STONE; it
is of unparalleled Virtue and Use. And though I will not say, that upon the
present taking, this Tincture will forthwith break the Stone in pieces as with
a Hammer, nor will any Man who knows what he says, affirm it of any one or all
the Medicines in the World: But its great Operations are exerted by rectifying
the deprev'd quality of the Kidneys, abolishing that matter of which the Stone
is formed, laying open the passages of the Vreters that were obstructed, and
making them thereby more f^ee and opportune to the draining away and expelling
that lapidescent matter: Nature it self being thus releived and assisted, will
find it no hard matter to ease it self; And the Stone, for want of such matter
to supply its growth, will be apt to wast and moulder away, and by the powerful
impulse of this Noble Tincture, flow out in smaller particles with the Urine,
as has been proved by sufficient Experience, and may be confirmed by
substantial Testimonies; among many I will here incert one from Mr Robert
Butcher of Marlborough before mentioned, a Man of unquestionable Reputation and
Integrity; I give it you in the words of his Letter.

Your Tincture generally does good, and answers peoples Expectations: Here was
an Old Man of about 70 Years of age lay very bad with the Stone, he took one
Glass, and the next day brought away several stones of a great bigness, two of
which I have in my house.

I shall add one instance more upon this Subject. A Minister of a Town within 3
or 4 Miles from Southampton, coming to London, came to me, to take from mine
own hands a quantity of my Tincture to carry into the Country for his own use,
and that of his family and Friends; Discoursing with me about my Tinctura
Caelestis told me, how highly he esteem it, for that he had taken of it from
Mr. Powel, Bookseller in Southampton my Correspondent, and that he had been
long troubled with the Stone, and used ma^y Medicines in vain, bu^ taking of my
Tincture, the very first Glass brought from him ^^^^y Stones.

I lately also received a Letter from Mr. Alexander Kemp, Surgeon in Basing
Stoke in Hamp-shire, of an Eminent Cure he did with this my Tincture Caelestis,
upon man who had been severely afflicted with a swelling in his Privities,
large and very painful who continues sound and very well.

I could add many others but I am confined, and these must at present suffice,
to show, that by these powerful and effectual opperations, this Caelestial
TINCTVRE dot^ comfort, support, and preserve the Principal parts and Members of
the Body, as the Head Heart, Stomach Liver, Gall, Spleen, Mesentery, Reins and
Bladder, in the just measure o^ strength and Vigor, which is of the greatest
importance in the World, according t^ that of Paracelsus, Conserva membra
principalia and mors non facile eveniet, says he, Pr^serve the principal
Members of the Body, and death makes but slow approaches. But when the are out
of order, and cease to perform those Offices, for which God and Nature ordaine^
them, the Strength fades, Sickness prevails, and Death obtains the Conquest.

In that Universally lamented Disease the Scurvey, it is a certain and
Sovereign Remed^ for as the Scurvey, is a disease of the whole Body, known by a
dull, heavy, listless, f^^ and lazy indisposition to undertake and perform the
common actions of Life, that wea^ness and uneasiness in such as are
necessitated to follow business, so, it is also apparent^ sharp putrid humors
seizing the more remote and solid parts of the Body, causing (...) ^oose,
discolored, soul and unsavory Teeth and Brea^h ^lso red, or bluish Spots
like flea-bites, in the skin of the Breast, Arms, Thighs, and Legs, sickness
of the Stomach, weak digestions, loss of Appetite, Wind, Stretching and
Belching, also risings in the skin like the stinging of Nettles, and also
frequent moveable pains, in the Back, Sides, Head, Shoulders, Arms, Legs, and
Joints, as are sometimes suspected to be a worse Disease, and very often
passes for the Gout, and degenerateth oftentimes into the Dropsy, and has at
other times the Jaundies joined with it, with many other violent symptoms hard
to be described, being infinitely various, according to the different
constitutions of such as suffer under them. All which are caused by a general
defection and revolt of the principal Members before mentioned, from their
several offices and functions, whereby an abundance of evil humors are ^eaped
up, to the annoying and disordering the whole frame and complexion of the Body.
Now for the certain Cure, and total rooting out of this woeful Distemper, there
is not a more ready and exquisite Medicine than this Celestial Tincture, to be
^sed as hereafter mentioned. Moreover this GREAT TINCTVRE is incomparably
prevalent against the many Diseases of Women, which out of a respect to that
tender Sex I forbear to describe at large: Therefore in short, It is a present
h^lp in the many infirmities of the Womb, cleansing it, from those impure
humors which slow into it, causing Fits of the Mother, Vapors which disturb
the Head, Heart, Stomach and Vitals, causing great Stopping, Swelling,
Strangulation, Ulcers, Pains, and infinite other dismal effects, throughout the
whole Body; by reason of its affinity with all the, Noble parts. In all which
it gives a seasonable relief, and preserves Nature in her due Course. It
restores to the Pale Virgin, a fresh and pleasant Countenance; and to such as
want their Feminine sickness, it brings That, with all the case and
satisfaction that can be expected, and so prevents a multitude of Evils which
usually attend those defects.

It is exceeding available in Worms in Children and in the Rickets it affords
present help.

In times of Contagion it is an high preservative and keeps off all Infection,
which will be of great use to such as by full eating and drinking, and other
easy and luxuriant ways of living, are apt to get Surfeits and Fevers, and
will probably be more obnoxious to such Diseases in this ensuing year, which
according to the Perdictions of our Astronomers, (taken from those dreadful
Configurations of the Heaven, and Malevolent Aspects of the superior Planets)
is like to produce many Mortal Sicknesses; And happy are they who have such
Means at hand, and prudence to consider a threatening mischief and prevent it.

Lastly, In all these Sicknesses, Diseases, Distempers, Infirmities,
Indispositions o^ the whole, or any of the parts and Members of the Body herein
mentioned, this Generous Medicine, my TINCTVRA CAELISTIS is prepared to answer
all the indications and intentions, of their Cure, being of Virtue equivalent
to their Exigences accommodated to such their Extremes of weakness; and to
preserve and support Nature Vigorous, sound, strong, and in a lasting state of
Health.

Directions for the Use of the TINCTURA CAELESTIS.
It remains now, that I only give some Directions for the use of this
Caelestial Tin^^ure, in which I shall be very brief, for a Public Medicine
should in no wise adm^^ (...) difficulties, to perplex or puzzle the Senses or
Memory of ^he Reader with tedio^^ (...)


