CERTAIN PROPOSALS Humbly Offered, FOR THE PRESERVATION and CONTINUANCE Of the
truly Reformed PROTESTANT RELIGION, In these Three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

By a Professor of the said Truly Reformed Protestant-Religion, and greatly
solicitous for the preservation of it.

Printed in the Year 1674.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
When I seriously consider the present State of the truly Reformed Protestant
Religion, as abroad throughout the whole European world, so particularly here
at home in these three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; my heart is
sad within me, and my Spirit even fails to think what dark and dismal things
are coming upon us; and therefore for the better easing of my own mind, and the
declaring of a willingness at least, to do something (if possible) for the
preventing of what I fear, I have adventured to publish this ensuing Treatise;
which though there be not one word in it (that as I humbly conceive) can give
any just ground of offense to any true Protestant, of whatsoever Rank or
Quality, or of whatsoever Party, whether Conformist or Nonconformist; yet times
of Trading for Books, as well as for other Commodities, being very dead and
discouraging, I find none are willing to adventure upon the charge of printing
this small Copy, else it had come out long since. At last therefore rather than
it should lie stifled in the birth any longer, and my labor, and the end of it
should be wholly lost, I have made hard shift thus to obstetricate and bring it
forth at my own Charge. Money does not at all abound with me, but the quite
contrary; having diverse both unavoidable and expensive cares upon me; yet such
is the vehemence of my desire to use the utmost endeavor that lies in me, for
the service of Christ, even beyond my poor capacity, and for the good of my
Native Country, that I have devoted this Impression (so much of it as turns
not to any account toward my reimbursement) to be freely given to such as will
but vouchsafe to read it, and when they have done, propagate it into good
hands, though they should not be willing themselves to spare a small piece of
Silver to purchase it. Perhaps the Lord will be pleased to accept and bless my
Design therein, it may be he will smile upon it, and render it some way
profitable to the end for which it is intended; in the hope whereof I rest: and
however it succeds, shall quiet my self in this, that I have done my endeavor
in the sight of God and mine own Conscience, to serve the Generation wherein I
live. And so having thus far expressed my care and solicitude for the next Age,
and hereby made thee a witness of it, I subscribe my self what I truly am,

Thine and my Countries most affectionately earnest Well-wisher and Servant in
Christ, J. B.

Certain Proposals humbly offered for the Preservation and Continuance of the
truly Reformed Protestant Religion down to succeeding Ages.
HOw deplorable a case the truly Reformed Protestant Religion now is in, partly
from the power and prevalency of Popery, Arminianism, Socinianism, Quakerism
(an Hotch-potch of all the rest) and many other dangerous Errors and
Superstitions; partly by reason of the Death of great numbers of the most
Learned, Pious, Zealous, Faithful and Painful Ministers in these Kingdoms;
partly from the want of a due care to provide such as may succeed them in
after-Ages, by such a liberal Education of the Youth of the present Age, as
might fit them for that Service; and lastly, by the general and universal
Profaneness that every where spreads it self among us: I say, how deplorable a
case the said truly Reformed Protestant Religion is now in, by the means
aforesaid, and some others that might be added, would fill up a huge Volumn to
declare: a Work which I shall not here undertake; but shall rather apply my
self humbly to propound such ways and means, as by the Blessing of God may
revive and restore the said Protestant Religion out of that deplorable state in
which it seems now to lie bleeding, as it were, to death, and in some places
almost ready to give up the Ghost.

But among many Proposals which I had prepared, and intended to have offered, I
have singled out only these three, viz.

First, That an hearty Union, at least, in Love and Affection, between all
Dissenting Parties in matters of Church Government, that are otherwise sound
and orthodox in the Doctrinals and holy Practicks of the right Reformed
Protestant Religion, be heartily endeavored.

Now this will be found principally among four sorts of Protestant-Professors
in England; the Episcopal, Presbyterian, Congregational, and such of the
moderate and sober-minded Anabaptists (so called) as differ only in the point
of Infant Baptism. I name the Episcopal-Protestant-Professor with the other
three, because I know some of them to be men of eminent Learning and Piety, and
in all the main Points of Protestantism very sound. Thousands (I doubt not)
both Ministers and People of the Church of England (so called) are of the same
Judgment and Practice with our famously Holy and Learned Bishop Usher,
published in his excellent Book, entitled, The Sum and Substance of
Christian-Religion. And why should not both Presbyterians, Catapaedobaptists
and Congregational men (so I had rather style them, than by the odious Name of
Independents) have as real and hearty good will to these as to any other? Was
not the Blood of Christ shed for them? Was not Heaven founded as much for them
as for any? For such of them, I mean, as are under the same Spirit of True
Faith and Repentance, which the Gospel requires in all that shall be saved. As
for joining with them in Matters of Worship, where Conscience is not satisfied,
I by no means persuade any to it; I cannot do it my self: yet I truly love many
that do, because I am bound in Charity to think they follow their Light, whilst
I see them otherwise walking in an uniform Tenor of Holiness, both within
doors and without, throughout the whole course of their Lives.

The other three, namely, the Presbyterian, Antipedobaptists and
Congregational, if they do but keep close to their own declared Judgments on
each side, that is, That none be admitted into their Churches, that in a true
Gospel-sence are ignorant and scandalous (for by that, those that discern not
the Lord's Body, are ignorant, and those that live not holily, are scandalous)
I see no reason but (salvis utrinque principiis) they may allow each others to
be the true Churches of Christ. Both sides prove their Ministry to be from
Christ, and to have the Essentials of an Institution in it; one Party making
the Formality of his External Call to consist in the Election of the People
only, with a solemn Dedication to their Work by Fasting and Prayer; the other
Party granting this to be requisite, but withal requiring the addition of Hands
imposed by a Presbytery; which by the former is not esteemed necessary. And
then for Synods; both Parties approve of them as useful and needful for mutual
and common Advice, though they differ in the Point of Jurisdiction, and the
proper seat and extent of it.

Now why may not a Brotherly Amity well consist with these Differences, since
on neither side any essential thing is wanting to render them true Ministers
and Churches of Christ; and such as for the most part do otherwise agree in all
matters of Doctrine and Practice? Nay, why may they not so far mutually agree,
as to walk together in holy Fellowship one Church with another, as occasions
serve, the Members of one Church communicating with the Members of the other?
How sad is it, that where the way for a closure lies so fair and easy, good
men should stand at so great a distance, for so long a time, each from other?
What bitterness, what angry reflections, what unbrotherly exasperations are
still found between these differing Parties? Whence comes it? Is it not from
the Devil, the great Author and Fomenter of all Divisions? When shall the
Spirit of Meekness, Plain-heartedness and True Christian Love put an end to
these Wranglings? When shall it once be? Why should any, on one side or the
other, remain under their own Passions, Prejudices and inflexible Morosities?
Is there not great cause to suspect that Carnal Policy, Self-opiniativeness,
Pride of Heart, or something worse, lies at the bottom? Is it possible, that
where Sincerity, Humility, and such a Gracious Disposition as always is
accompanied more or less, with the Sweet Spirit of Christ, should dwell long in
any that are true Members of him? Who can be said truly to have learned of him,
that are not like him in the Grace of Meekness and Lowliness of heart? Sure if
any thing in the world be just matter of Wonder, this is, that no endeavors
hitherto used, no, nor no severe Providence from God himself, can reconcile
Brethren, that have cost Christ so dear, are so dear to Christ, and ought to be
so to each other! Do we not see how in Stormy Times, the poor Sheep and other
Cattle will run together; how they get into their Folds and Flocks; how they
herd themselves with a kind of united force; especially when the worrying Dogs
and Wolves are abroad; do they not all then hasten to their Shelters and their
Shepherds? And shall the very Instinct of Nature teach the Brute Beasts by this
their mutual Union to defend themselves against present mischiefs, or
approaching dangers, and shall not the most Noble Principle of Grace, called in
the Scripture, the Wisdom from on high, much more teach men (good men!) to do
the like? What is it would or could more disanimate the very worst and most
potent Enemies the truly Reformed Protestant Religion has, than to see the
several dissenting Parties of sound Protestants, firmly to unite together, and
by mutual Allowances in the few things wherein they differ, to strengthen each
other in the maintenance of the Faith which they have received from Christ and
his Apostles, and do on all hands think it their highest concernment to profess
and bear testimony unto? This therefore may well challenge the first place in
the Methods humbly offered for restoring the aforesaid Protestant Religion to a
flourishing state.

Secondly, An universal, constant and conscientious care and endeavor in all
Protestant Families throughout these Three Kingdoms, diligently to instruct
their Children and Servants in the sound Principles of the said truly Reformed
Protestant Religion: The like care to be used by all Schoolmasters, Tutors,
Guardians, and others that have any charge of Souls under them; but most of all
by Preaching Ministers, wherever opportunity for such Work can be had. For
the better accomplishment whereof, care is to be taken that such Catechisms may
be made use of, as have no mixtures of Error in them, or are in any thing
contrary to, or not agreeing with the Holy Scriptures; particularly in the
Doctrine of the Christian Sabbath; and the Morality thereof; in which Calvin
himself (though otherwise a very famous and sound Divine) was defective. The
Mistake of whose opinion therein, has had too much influence upon the
Protestant Churches abroad) most of all in France and the seven United
Provinces) as to the looseness of their Lives and whole Christian Profession.
And here without offense let it be enquired, whether the strict observation of
the Chrrstian Sabbath, as a Divine Institution of Christ, here in England, has
not rendered the sincere Professors of this Nation more eminent in all practical
holiness than others of Foreign Parts? A firm belief of the Morality of our
Lords-Day-Rest, and a due observation of it accordingly, contains no small part
of the very Power of Godliness in it, as well as the Form thereof. The truth
is, the careful and reverent regard unto this Day, as well in men's secret
Closets and private Families, as in Public Assemblies, has kept up a pure and
warm Religion more in England than in any part of the world besides. Even to
this day, who do we find to be the most savoury and spiritual in Discourse, the
most exemplary and worthy of imitation in their Lives, but those that are most
strict in an holy observation of this Day? That have turned away their feet
from the Sabbath (as the Lord speaks by the Prophet, Isa. 58.13.) from doing
their pleasure on his holy day, and have called the Sabbath a delight, the holy
of the Lord, honorable, and have honored him, not doing their own ways, nor
finding their own pleasure, nor speaking their own words: I say, who so much as
these does God himself delight in, and all good men?

But if any say, that this concerns the Jews only, and those that keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath;

I answer, If those that are of that mind will but take pains to read what
Bishop Usher, in his Sum and Substance of Christian-Religion, has written upon
the translation of the Sabbath or time of rest, from the Seventh day to the
First day of the Week, with the Reasons of it; as also what is published upon
this Subject, not only formerly by many Learned Writers, but also of late by
Mr. Hughes of Plymouth, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Wells, and others; but especially that
most excellent Treatise upon it lately Printed, with this Title, Exercitations
concerning the Name, Original, Nature, Use and Continuance of a day of Sacred
Rest; together with an Assertion of the Divine institution of the Lord's Day,
and Practical Directions for its due Observation. I say, whosoever will
procure, and take pains to read over these Books, will soon find sufficient
reason to believe, that the aforesaid words of the Prophet Isaiah, concerning
the Sabbath, are very aptly applicable to the due Observers of our Christian
Sabbath.

Now of all the spiritual employments of this Day, next to an attendance upon
Public Ordinances, in the Solemn Assemblies of the Saints; what has been ever
found to be more profitable, than when the Heads of Families, and others in
their respective capacities, have by Questions and Answers in a Catechetical
way, conveyed the sound knowledge of Christ and his great Gospel Truths into
the hearts of those committed to their care? Reading the Holy Scriptures also,
repeating Sermons, singing of Psalms, and calling upon God in fervent Prayer,
are all Sabbath Day Exercises in a Family: And blessed are those Families that
are always so employed. But the doing of this in an Interlocutory way, with
Children and Servants, so as to make them understand what they hear and read,
and be enriched with the well-grounded knowledge of it; O this is excellent!
and one of the best means imaginable to preserve the True Protestant Religion,
and to transmit it from Father to Son, even from one Generation to another. And
because a clear and distinct knowledge of Fundamental and Substantial Truths,
with such Texts of Scripture as do most contribute to the right understanding,
confirmation and defense of them against all opposers whatsoever, will be a
most precious Antidote, as well against all sorts of Er^^^^ as those of Popery
it self, I humbly propound to the pious Readers hereof these following
Considerations.

First, Let it be considered, whether it would not be time well spent, if some
persons of Wisdom and Ability, whether engaged in any Church-Society, or
otherwise, were appointed (or themselves did it by their own voluntary
undertakement) to go from house to house at fit times and seasons, there to
discourse the weighty things of Religion with their Friends and Neighbors, and
so to manage this Work, as still to leave the persons they thus converse with
something more knowing in the great things of Religion than formerly? Frequent
Visits to this purpose, with Line upon Line, here a little and there a little,
would turn to a much better account both with respect to God's Glory, the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom in the world, and the enlightening of many
precious souls with saving knowledge, than such vain Visits as are every where
now in use. In some places, the Pastors and other Officers of the Churches may
do something this way themselves, after the example of that holy Person, and
worthy Servant of Christ, Mr. Henry Jesse, lately deceased; but where the hands
of Church Officers are full of other work, perhaps some others in their
respective Congregations might be found and prevailed with, to do their utmost
in it; at least, so far as might consist with their necessary employments in
their respective trades and callings. This is brave work, and doubtless will be
well rewarded by the God of Heaven, to the faithful and sincere-hearted
Laborers in it. What does the gracious and industrious Parent know, but that
his continual dropping of heavenly words into his Children's ears; or the
religious and loving Friend or Neighbor that does the like with all that he
converseth with (where a fair opportunity is offered) may be a means to work
some blessed Conviction; yea, and a through Conversion too, in the hearts of
those they thus discourse with? Christ may be preached as much and as
effectually in personal and interlocutory discourses, as in set speeches, or
Sermons in a Pulpit; nay, I know many instances can be given, where Discourses
of this kind have done more this way, than all the Sermons that have been
attended, though preached by men of the greatest eminency, for many years; as
the Apostle says in another case, 1 Cor. 7.16 What know thou, O Wife,
whether thou shall save thy Husband? or how know thou, O man, whether thou
shall save thy Wife? So say I; What know thou, O Parent, whether thou shall
save thy Child? or what know thou, O Christian, whether thou shall save thy
Friend or Neighbor, thy Brother or Sister by such spiritual and well managed
Discourses as these? However, if it be but well designed and endeavored, God
takes it well, though the desired effect should not follow. Methinks that
Passage in Dan. 12.3 should greatly move to such an undertakement and earnest
endeavor therein; They that be wise (in the Margin, Teachers) shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as
the Stars for ever and ever.

Secondly, Let it be considered whether of all other, such as are Parents of
Children ought not to be frequent at such work as this. I mean, not only upon
Sabbath Days and other Set Seasons for Religious Exercises, but in their daily
and hourly converse among them; for is not this according to the Command of old
given to the People of Israel, as a work that their whole heart and soul should
be continually engaged in? What God required of them in this particular, is it
not recorded for our instruction, in Deuteronomy. 6. from v. 4, to 7? Hear, O Israel,
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with all thy might; and
these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently (Hebrew, thou shall whet or sharpen them) unto thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk in the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Now if this be a Command that is always obliging, and to all Parents
whatsoever (as doubtless it is) what then can we, in a well-grounded Charity,
think of those Parents and Professors of Religion too, that order their affairs
so, as very seldom, even almost next to never at all, are with their Children
either Morning or Evening, much less all the day long, to perform these, so
frequently to be repeated duties to them? Such hurries they are in, such
multitudes of business and employments they continually take upon them; yea, so
fill and crowd their heads and hearts therewith, that they neither have any
mind, nor can be at leisure for these serious matters. Pretenses indeed they
make, of being commanded to be diligent in their Callings, and of a necessity
lying on them with respect to providing for their Families, and such like
specious Arguments from abused Scriptures; but whether these Arguments will
quiet Conscience upon a dying Bed, I very much question; I know the care of
providing for the Household, lies mostly upon the man, who is the Husband to the
Wife, and the Father to the Children; and that it is the Mother's Duty, as well
as the Father's to instruct the Children, and to bring them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord; but will this excuse the Father from doing his part
too? or will it satisfy him in clogging himself with so much other employment,
and that in such an eager pursuit after the things of this world only, as
either hinders him in the performance of it, or renders him unfit for it? As
for his poor Children and Family thus neglected by him, is not the instructing
them in the One thing necessary, and the saving of their precious souls, of far
greater importance, than the getting of overmuch of this world for them?

But if this be not enough, especially in such times as these, when the true
Protestant Religion is so much in its wane, and Popery every where spreads so
fast as it does: I say, if this be not enough to convince and reform such
Fathers of Children, as to this part of their Duty, I shall leave them to, and
pity them for this their Sin and Folly; and in the mean while, will apply my
self to the Mothers of those poor neglected Children, earnestly advising and
persuading, that what is wanting on the Father's side, may be made up by them;
and indeed, the Mothers of Children for the most part, have every where more
opportunity for this work, as being more constantly at home and w^^^^^oors, and
to converse more with their Children than their Fathers can. They therefore, if
God gives wisdom and skill to educate the Children which they have brought
forth, or as Mothers-in-Law, are providentially entrusted with, may be much
employed this way, and with the blessing of God upon their faithful endeavors
herein, may become Mothers a second time unto them, in their spiritual Births:
I have known some women that have been much honored of God for their Holy
Labors and Divine Successes of this kind, among their Children and their
Childrens Children; and this, while their Husbands have been mere Sots; yea,
sometimes Opposers and Hinderers of it. Instances we have in Scripture also
that may greatly encourage unto this work. How came young Timothy to be so well
instructed as ((...)) from his Childhood or Infancy, as the Greek word imports,
to have known the Holy Scriptures? 2 Timothy 3.15. I say, how came this to pass,
but by the Godly and Religious care and endeavors of those two holy women, his
Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice? as is recorded, 2 Timothy 1.5.

What a pleasant Story does Solomon tell us of himself, concerning his own
education, when he was young? See what he says of the Instructions which he
received both from his Father and his Mother.

First, From his Father, whose words he repeats throughout the whole fourth
Chap. of Prove. some of which are these; Hear ye Children the instruction of a
Father, and attend to know understanding; for I give you good Doctrine; forsake
you not my Law; for I was my Father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight
of my Mother; he taught me also, and said unto me, let thine heart retain my
words, keep my Commandments and live; get wisdom, get understanding, forget it
not, neither decline from the words of my mouth; forsake her not, and she shall
preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee; wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get understanding; exalt
her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honor when thou do
embrace her: She shall give to thine head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of
Glory shall she deliver to thee. Hear, O my Son, and receive my Sayings, and
the years of thy Life shall be many. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom, I
have led thee in the right paths; when thou go, thy steps shall not be
straightened, and when thou runnest, thou shall not stumble; take fast hold of
Instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she is thy Life. These and many
other, were the most excellent counsels to the end of the whole Chapter, which
Solomon says his Father gave him: in all which, how earnest and affectionate
was David in pressing those things upon his Son Solomon; and how many Arguments
does he use to persuade him thereunto? But that which all Fathers of Children
should do well here chiefly to mind, is, the chief Matter of that Instruction
which David gives to his Son Solomon; namely, that he should get wisdom (that
is, Grace) for so the word must be understood; and that he should be sure to
get this above all things else, even above all other gettings whatsoever; and
he gives the reason of it; for this, says he, is the principal thing: as if he
had said, this, O my Son Solomon, is of far greater worth and value than the
Kingdom and Crown that thou art born unto; the Scepter that thou shall ere long
sway, and the Throne that thou shall fit upon; more excellent, far more, than
all the Kingly Dignity and Honor that thou art capable of, or can enjoy in
this world.

Hence it was, that Solomon himself, having learnt this Lesson from his Father,
sets it forth in that manner that he does, in Prove. 3. from v. 13. to 19. Happy
is the man (says he) that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding; for the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of
Silver, and the gain thereof than fine Gold; she is more precious than Rubies,
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. Thus he
goes on, saying much more concerning the inestimable value of that wisdom which
his Father taught him to search after, and which himself afterward so
earnestly prayed for at his first coming to his Kingdom; as is recorded in 1
Kings 3. from 6. to 13.

And as we have this pleasant Story from Solomon's own mouth, of his Father's
instructing him when he was young, let us see what he says of his Mother's
Instruction also, his Mother Bathshebah; as it is likewise recorded in Prove.
31. from 1, to 10. The words of King Lemuel (that is, Solomon) the Prophecy
that his Mother taught him, What, my Son! and what the Son of my womb! and what
the Son of my Vows! Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that
which destroys Kings: It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to
drink wine, nor for Princes strong Drink, lest they drink and forget the Law,
and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. Open thy mouth for the dumb,
in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction; open thy mouth to
judge righteously and plead the cause of the poor and needy. Behold here the
counsel of a Mother to her Son, of a Queen Mother to the King her Son: how
happy were it if all the Kings of the Earth were thus instructed and did act
accordingly?

3ly, Since the H. Ghost insisteth so much upon the instruction of young ones,
since he gives so strict commands to Parents concerning it, and to others that
are in the room of Parents; and since he commends and blesses those that
have been faithful in the discharge of this so necessary and great a Duty; as
he did Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Saying, Abraham shall surely become a great and a
mighty Nation, and all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him. Why
so? For I know (says he) that he will command his Children and his Household
after him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment.
I say, this also being duly considered, would it not be an excellent and
praiseworthy practice, if young persons of their own accord, Males with Males,
and Females with Females, would every where, all England over (as in some
places I know they do) meet together, and that not only to pray with each
other, and repeat Sermons (a practice very commendable and profitable) but also
to confer together upon the Fundamentals of Religion, which they have read and
learned out of some well-approved Catechism, with the Scriptures alleged for
the proofs of them. Many of these, especially, if under the age of sixteen
years, may meet together for such religious purposes, and be no Conventiclers.
What pity is it then that such Meetings of young ones are not every where in
use, for mutual edification and instructions, which that they might thrive the
better, would not some one grave person among them, to guide and assist them
therein, very much help them in such a pious work?

Were this and the like endeavors by Parents and others, as aforesaid, every
where in common practice, what blessed advantages would from thence arise as to
the propagating of the truly Reformed Protestant Religion? Among which, would
not this be one great one, above the rest, namely, the facilitating the work of
the public Ministry, both as to Conviction, Conversion and Edification too,
whilst the respective Auditories up and down the Kingdom would be, as it were,
all bespangled and richly enameled with well-instructed Families, and piously
affected Auditors? What tractable, attentive and understanding Hearers would
the Congregations be replenished withal? What flourishing effects, what
pleasant fruits would the Laborers in Christ's Vineyards find their faithful
Labors to be crowned withal? Sure, if any way can possibly be thought of not
only to preserve and restore the true Protestant Religion, but to put it into a
more prosperous estate than ever it was known to be in in this Kingdom before;
this is it.

But though what has been said hitherto, may through the blessing of God, if
put in practice, prove good and effectual means to raise and revive, as it
were, the truly Reformed Protestant Religion, from the present swooning and
almost dying state in which it seems every where to be; yet there is another
thing no less important, to be most intensely minded and laid to heart by all
considerate and sound Protestants, and that is, what is like to become of the
true Protestant Religion a few years hence, if no better course be taken for
the continuance and support of it, than is any where now on foot?

As for Popery, that is kept up and maintained, not only by the Powers and
Potentates of most Parts of Christendom, but by a continued numerous succession
of Learned (though miserably blinded) men; as Christ says in another case, the
men of that dark Antichristian Kingdom are wiser in their generation than the
Children of Light; they are careful, from Age to Age, to find out and set apart
the very Flower of their Youth, the most pregnant, fine-witted Lads that they
can any where meet with throughout their Popish Kingdoms; upon these they spare
no cost nor pains, to educate and bring them up in the profoundest Learning and
largest improvement of their Parts, according to their respective Genius's and
inclinations, to become serviceable in the propagation and defense of their
false Religion. But alas! how little of this (in comparison) is done by the
Protestant Party all Europe over? Insomuch that if God in his good providence
does not some way prevent it, and provide against it, the Protestant Religion
ere long is not like to have many men of Parts and Learning able to defend it
against its subtle and inveterate Adversary the Church of Rome: And how does
this glad the Romish Catholic at the very heart, and fill him with hopes, that
in the next generation he shall carry all before him, and that, how zealous and
successful soever some may now be, in preaching, writing and disputing against
them; yet that the Children of them that do so, will be otherwise minded, or at
least, through Ignorance and want of Learning, will not be able to maintain the
noble and righteous Cause, which their Forefathers did, and that irrefragably
and invincibly.

Now therefore since the case is thus, O all you zealous, true-hearted, and
sound Protestants throughout these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
let me humbly propound an Expedient to you, that has been upon my heart for
some years; an Expedient, which I conceive is as feasible as obvious, if God
give men hearts readily to comply with what I shall here suggest concerning it;
which if they shall every where unanimously and vigorously set then selves
about, I shall no way doubt, but that within the space of fifteen or twenty
years, the truly Reformed Protestant Religion shall have no want of such as in
due time, through the Blessing of God, shall become the learned and
unconquerable Defenders of it against the greatest Champions the Church of Rome
shall be able to produce.

Now that which in order hereunto I have to propound, will briefly fall under
two Propositions.

First, That as soon as may be, all the Children of such true-hearted and
Religious Protestants as are scattered up and down in the three Kingdoms and
the several Schools in them, whether public or private, and shall be found of
pregnant parts, and well-grounded in Grammar-learning, be speedily committed to
such Pious, Orthodox and Learned men as shall be found able and willing to
instruct and educate them in Vniversity-Studies, and especially in those
Languages, Arts and Sciences as may render them able Disputants and good
Divines. I confine my self to the Children only of true-hearted and Religious
Protestants, because I presume no others will make their Children so happy as
to be so bred up.

Secondly, That from time to time, all true- hearted and Religious Protestants,
as aforesaid (whether rich or poor) will set apart such of their Children as
they shall find most eminent and hopeful for natural Parts, Capacities and
Dispositions, unto this great service of the Gospel; and as they grow up, to
send them to the Grammar-Schools; and so to higher Studies. Several Objections,
perhaps, may here come in against these two Propositions; one from the rich
Protestants, the other from the poor. From the rich: We have Estates to give
our Children, say they, and thereupon intend some of them for the Inns of
Court, and from thence, for higher employments; others we intend for Merchants,
or such and such gainful Trades; for what encouragement is there to bring them
up to that sort of Learning which may fit them for Services in the Church, when
they are not like to get any preferment or employment without such sinful
Compliances and time-serving Conformities, both in Doctrines and Manners, as
may corrupt their Hearts, debauch their Consciences, and endanger their Souls
for ever?

To these I answer; First, To those that design their Children to high
employments, in case they bring them up to the aforesaid great Service of the
Gospel, and (as Hannah did her Son Samuel) consecrate them to the Lord, and to
his Temple-work, I conceive, they thereby advance them to no mean employment;
but rather to as noble an one as any that can be named; it is no despicable
work in the Apostles sense, to serve at the Altar, nor was it so in God's own
account, when he glorified his Son Jesus to be a Priest, Heb. 5.4, 5. Solomon
was the greatest and the wisest King that ever the world had, and yet was a
Preacher; so was David his Father, before him, a Preacher and a Prophet, Psalm.
40. 9, 10. So also were the Princes of Jehoshaphat; of whom it is said, that
they taught the People in the Cities of Judah.

And for those that say they have Estates to give to these their Children, by
which they may be able to live without other preferments, especially those
which come in by Ecclesiastical Employments; Well, admit it be so, will they
not show their love to Christ so much the more, in dedicating their Children
and their Estates too, unto his Service? especially in such an Age as this,
when the right sort of Protestants every where, for the most part, are so poor,
that they cannot give so liberal a maintenance to the painful Preachers of the
Gospel, as they desire and gladly would if they were able; and in case they
bring up their Children to Idleness, because they have Estates to leave to
them, and so put them into no Calling or Employment at all, what do they
thereby do, but render them in a manner wholly useless both to Church and
State? and which is worse, expose them to all manner of Temptations and Dangers
which are wont to accompany an idle course of Life: and what comfort can
Parents have in this, or their Children either? or what accounts will they both
give hereof at the last day?

For those that differ from both the former, that is, neither intend their
Children for high employments, nor yet to leave them Estates without Callings,
but design them for Merchandising and other gainful Trades, because they see no
hopes of Ecclesiastical preferments, but upon the ill terms before mentioned. I
shall only say thus much to them, if one great cause of the future decay of the
Protestant Religion should be the want of such able men to defend it, as their
Children in all probability might have proved to have been, had they been, in
pure love to Christ and his Truth, dedicated and brought up thereunto; and so
by that means, as much, if not more than any other, Popery should overrun this
Land, what good will their gainful Trades do them in such a dismal change? and
how little will God and their Country be beholding to them for this their
carnal policy and eager pursuit after worldly advantages, with the loss of the
Gospel and the True Religion which it holds forth?

To that which is said concerning the want of encouragement from Ecclesiastical
preferments; if Christ himself be worthy of credit, and may be believed in what
he says, such as go forth in his Name, to preach the everlasting Gospel, shall
not want subsistence nor encouragement in that work; but shall be sure where
they come, to find welcome as well for their Persons, as their Doctrine; and
shall not need to take care either for scrips for their journey, or for two
coats, or for shoes, or for staves, no, nor for Gold or Silver, or Brass in
their Purses, Matthew. 10.9, 10.

Let this then suffice for answer to the Objections of the rich Protestants.

Now for those of the Poor; they also do make two Objections; one is, that they
are totally unable to maintain their Children, or to bring them up in Learning,
either in Schools or Academies, they have not where withal to do it. The other
is, they are necessitated to train them up in some way even so soon as ever
capable to get their own living, if not to be helpful to them their poor
Parents also, and so cannot spare or allow them time for such education as
aforesaid: were we able, say they, we would do it most willingly; but we cannot.

Now for the removal of this difficulty, I would become an humble and earnest
petitioner to several sorts of Rich Protestants in these Kingdoms.

First, To all rich Protestants both Males and Females, that, though rich, yet
by the Providence of God, some way or other, are determined to a single life,
and have power to dispose of their Estates as seems good unto themselves.

Secondly, To all such rich Protestants in the married state, that have no
Issue or Kindred to provide for, or at least, such as have no need of them.

Thirdly, To all such rich Protestants, as, though blessed with Children, and
may have other Relations to take care of; yet have so plentiful an Estate, that
when all are well provided for, enough remains for other acts of Piety and
Charity.

Fourthly, To all such rich Protestants as have purposes in their own hearts to
dispose of the whole or any part of their Estates to some good use or other,
but are not yet determined which way to do it, but would be glad to be advised
how to improve what they have, so as God may be most glorified, and the public
good advanced in the Places and Countries where they live.

To these four sorts of rich Protestants I will now address my self, and among
other acts of Piety which they may have thoughts of, would earnestly persuade
to these which follow.

First, That such pregnant Youths as are above-described, who either have no
parents alive, but are poor distressed Orphans, and in a manner altogether
friendless, or are the Children of poor Widows, poor Nonconforming Ministers,
or other poor Protestants fearing God, may be adopted or taken care of by them,
in Grammar Schools and Academies, for the ends aforesaid; and that in order
hereunto, Feoffees in trust may be appointed (good and faithful men) to seek
out for such as those, and to place them in good Schools and Academies, under
such Masters and Tutors as shall be found most able and faithful in instructing
such as shall be so committed to their care, in Learning and Piety; with this
limitation, that in case any of the said Youths grow debauched, or within the
compass of the times prefixed for them to be provided for, do fall into any
erroneous Opinions or evil practices contrary or prejudicial to the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, they shall thenceforth be cashiered, and enjoy no
further benefit of the said Maintenance.

As for their Academical Studies after they leave the Grammar-Schools, I
propound ten or twelve years at least to be spent in them; for this main
reason, that they may have space sufficient, before they enter into the
Ministry, to lay a good foundation of solid Learning, and be the more ripened
in their Parts and Abilities both Natural and Acquired, for so great a work as
a right Preaching of the Gospel is; for if they be of pregnant Wits, and good
Sudents, they may within the space of the said ten or twelve years, be
competently well acquainted with the Learned Languages and all those Liberal
Sciences, the knowledge whereof is requisite to the study of Divinity; and in
all which by daily study and practice, they will still become more and more
expert, in which chief part of their studies, I mean Divinity, I conceive it
would not be amiss, if they were particularly obliged by their Benefactors, to
read such of the soundest and most ancient Fathers and best Schoolmen as comply
most with the Doctrine of true Reformed Protestantism; as also, that they be
further obliged to read such of the Modern Writers, both German and French, as
are likewise of the same Judgment, but especiallly, that they be much versed in
our English Divines not touched with Arminianism or other the like Errors; such
such as Jewel, both the Reynolds's, Perkins, Amesius, Usher, with the worthy
Labors of Preston, Sibs, Mr. Anthony Burges, Buroughs, Bridge, Mr. Isaac
Ambrose, Allen, Owen, Greenhill, Mr. Sydrach Sympson, Symonds, Spurstow,
Sedgwick, and many other of our Practical Divines that might be named; among
which, I would by no means have omitted the excellent Works of Dr. Thomas
Goodwin and Mr. Joseph Caryl; which Authors, and such like, when they have read
over, and well digested, they will undoubtedly, with the Blessing of God upon
their studies, become able men to preach the Gospel, and defend the true
Protestant Religion against all Gainsayers whatsoever; yea, and in all
probability, will attain unto such an Eloquence and fluency of Speech, such a
sweetness and excellency of knowledge in Gospel Truths, and such a melting and
moving way of preaching, as will render them blessed Instruments of much
spiritual good to their Hearers. O what a joyful sound all over the three
Kingdoms would such silver Trumpets as these make! and what golden Candlesticks
with burning and shining Lights in them would be set up where-ere they come!

This is the first most advantageous use (as I humbly conceive) and most of all
tending to the Glory of God and the true public Good, which such rich
Protestants, as aforesaid, might make of the Wealth and Abundance which the
Lord has given them. If any Design in the world be worthy to be accounted a
Noble Design, surely this is, thus to propagate the truly Reformed Protestant
Religion; and especially at such a time as this is, to revive it, as it were,
out of its own Ashes.

The founding of Hospitals for the relief of aged and needy people, is a good
Act; and the setting the poor on work, is another; so is the binding out of
poor Children to be Apprentices, and thereby be made able to live, and be
useful in the world; but this, methinks, is a work beyond them all; and indeed,
at this time, and in this Age, of greatest necessity and importance.

The consideration whereof, I suppose, was one of the chiefest Reasons that
stirred up those two most worthy Patriots, Erasmus Smith and Thomas Foley Esquire
(both yet alive) to erect their Famous Schools of Grammar-Learning, and devise
such Statutes and Orders for the good Government and Education of the numerous
Youth in them, as might most conduce unto this very end: three of which said
Schools were Founded by the said Erasmus Smith Esquire some few years since in
Ireland, with a Revenue amounting, in some short time, if well managed, to no
less than fourteen hundred pound per annum (as I am assuredly informed) given
for ever, for the maintenance and support of them. The other, very lately by
the said Thomas Foley Esquire in Worcestershire, with an ample Revenue likewise for
the upholding of it.

Rare Examples, and highly worthy of imitation, were there any to be found so
well minded! Perhaps some may be found; we will hope the best: and should this
little Treatise any way conduce thereunto, how should I think it a Mercy and
Honor, that ever God put it into my heart to write it, and thereby occasion
any to engage in so blessed a Work.

If it be objected, how can this be done, if men had never so good a mind to
it? For are not places of Public Education every where grown so corrupt, and
debauched, that such as fear God dare not adventure their Children in them; for
how hopeful soever they may be when they come thither; yet have not too many
found by sad experience, the power of the Temptations they have there met with,
even to their utter undoing?

I answer, That were it once resolved upon by the rich Protestants aforesaid,
as they live scattered up and down the Three Kingdoms, and care taken by them
to educate such Youths in every City, Great Town, and Country, and this known
to be so; no doubt is to be made, but as good Schoolmasters would be found, to
do their parts without the Universities; so good Tutors would seat themselves
within the Universities to receive Pupils from all parts, that should be sent
to them: Perhaps indeed they might not be admitted into the Colleges upon the
account of Nonconformity; but yet perhaps they might be admitted to inhabit
somewhere without the Colleges, as Students from all parts of the world do in
the Universities abroad; as at Leyden, Vtrecht, Padua, Paris, Heidelburg, and
many others; by means whereof, they may be present at all public Disputations,
Lectures, and other Vniversity-Exercises, and bear their share in them, and in
due time take their Degrees too (if not ensnared with Oaths, or otherwise
hindered) and be as eminent in all parts of Learning, as any others; but if our
Universities here at home, will not admit them to live among them, but
exterminate and cast them out, they might be sent by their Benefactors to the
best Universities abroad, particularly to Cambridg in New England, who are wont
to admit of Strangers, and that gladly too, from whatsoever parts they come. O
happy day would that be, could we once see it! if the several hundreds of such
rich Protestants, as aforesaid, which might be found in these Kingdoms, would
set apart some Annual Revenue to continue for ever, for so brave a Service; how
many thousands of pounds yearly might be raised with ease, and disposed of this
way? and how many hundreds of hopeful young Branches might thus continually
from time to time, spring up to succeed the old ones that decay so fast, and
die daily?

Methought it very much affected me many years since, when I saw at the
Jesuites-School at Antwerp, a great number of the Flower of the Youth of the
City and Country thereabout, to be trained up in a Religion so wicked and
Idolatrous as the Popish Religion is; shall these men of so false a Religion be
so sedulous and careful to raise up a succession of able instruments to
maintain their rotten Cause, and not think the most ripe-witted and very
best-Parted of their Children to be at all disparaged, but much honored
rather, to be so employed? And shall Protestants be otherwise minded concerning
their Children, and less careful for their Religion?

And though I judge this first means now named, viz. the education of Youths in
sound Religion and good Learning, to be the speediest and very best that can be
propounded for retriving and advancing of true Protestantism, yet I conceive
other methods added thereunto, will yet give some farther good help therein:
and therefore,

Secondly, I do farther humbly move that the aforesaid rich Protestants will
make another Annual Provision to continue for ever, for the teaching of poor
Children, both Males and Females, to read the Scriptures, and to learn some
good Catechismes, containing full and clear Instructions in all the principal
and necessary Points of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and this in
every place throughout these Kingdoms; especially in those Cities, Great Towns
and Villages, where the poor do most abound, and where is greatest Ignorance
and Profaneness; and that yearly Salaries may be settled to be constantly and
duly paid to Schoolmasters and Schoolmistresses to that end; and also that some
Reward be given to such of the said Children (suppose a Bible, or such like)
that are quickest in their Learning, and shall have first read over the Bible,
and can give the best account of their Catechism; this would much increase a
good emulation among them, and by an holy craft engraft the knowledge of Christ
in them.

Rewards likewise of this kind, or a certain sum of money allotted yearly to
such aged people and poor servants, whether Males or Females, as cannot read
but by their own industry, with such helps as they can get, do at last attain
unto it, and can make proof thereof; and farther, that having learned thus to
read, they do daily spend some time in reading the Bible and some good
Catechismes, would be money well given. Who knows what even such a measure of
knowledge as many an one may get this way, may do? Who knows how many a
precious soul may be saved by it? I am sure no better course can be taken to
spread abroad the light of truth, the rules of holiness, and to chase away
Ignorance and Profaneness, where it abounds most, nor where people are thus
instructed, would the busy Papists and their Emissaries be able to seduce so
many, as it is justly to be feared they now do, and will do, especially in the
dark and remote parts of these Kingdoms. And as in all places, thus to provide
and raise up choice Instruments, and to instruct poor ignorant Creatures,
whether old or young, in manner aforesaid, and for the ends aforesaid, would be
an excellent work; so to do it there most of all, where is most need, will be
most praiseworthy; as in Wales (especially in North Wales, and such of the
Northern-Countries, and other parts of England, as are most ignorant of God,
and are least able, without the helps aforesaid, to train up their Children,
either for public Service, or at least, so far as to be able in their own
Mother Tongue, whether Welsh or English, to read and know the Scriptures.

And because of all parts of His Majesty's Dominions, the poor Welsh Countries
seem to be most destitute of the saving Knowledge of God, and the means of it,
partly for want of Bibles, Catechisms and other good Books in the Welsh Tongue;
and partly for want of learned and good men, able to preach in that Language to
them, I therefore humbly propound on behalf of the said Welsh people, to all
considerate persons, whether it would not be another most excellent work of
Piety, Christian Charity and Pity to Souls, if the rich Protestants, living in
those Countries, or elsewhere, should set apart an Annual Revenue for ever, for
the maintaining of such good and able men to preach in the Welsh Tongue: to
such of them as understand no other; I mean, such peaceably-minded
Nonconforming Ministers, as by reason of their Nonconformity, how
peaceably-minded soever they be, cannot be capable of the public maintenance.
And as a farther help to the saving knowledge of Christ in those parts, I once
more humbly propound, whether it would not be a worthy work for the aforesaid
rich Protestants, to take care that every year, an Impression of Welsh Bibles,
and the worthy Labors of some of the chiefest of our soundest Practical
Divines be likewise turned into the Welsh Tongue, and printed, and given to
such as shall be found most desirous of them, but not able to purchase them;
and this course to continue from year to year, till there be a sufficient store
of Bibles, and other good Books in that Language, for the use of the said Welsh
Countries.

But methinks I hear some say, All the ways and means here propounded for the
restoring of the true Protestant Religion, and the farther advancement of it,
are very good; and no doubt is to be made, but blessed effects will come of it,
were they speedily and vigorously prosecuted and put in practice; but who can
persuade dissenting Brethren to such an amicable, sincere and hearty closure,
as is desired? Who can persuade the Parents of Children every where, and
others, that are the Governors of Families, or any way have the care of Souls,
to lay sound knowledge into the minds of such as are committed to their charge,
by Catechetical Instructions as has been suggested? Who can persuade old and
young to take pains in going from house to house, personally to converse each
with other, for mutual and further edification? Lastly, Who can persuade the
rich Protestants every where, to lay out the whole, or any part of their
Estates in the several ways, and for the pious ends propounded? Alas! these
are great things, and not to be hoped for in this Age, a much better Spirit
must be found among all sorts of men, before such Counsels as these will take
place.

I confess, it is true, the work is difficult, and not to be in the least
attempted (much less is it like to be accomplished) by any humane power; but as
difficult as it is, and seemingly, even impossible; yet methinks one way
remains that may render it not only feasible, but easily practicable also, and
expeditiously prosperous, and that is, the power of God put forth upon the
hearts of men; he is the Lord God Omnipotent, reigning and ruling in, and over
all his Creatures; he does whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and in Earth;
if he say the word, and give out his command, even to the most obstinate, and
invincibly inflexible to any thing that is good, they presently obey; he that
can cleave the Rocks asunder, melt the Mountains, and turn the whole Universe
upside down, what cannot he do upon the Spirit, the Mind and Soul of any one
whatsoever, to turn and incline it which way he pleases?

Well then, this I suppose will be granted, that how fierce and keen soever
dissenting Brethren have been, and still are, one toward another, how morose,
sharp, froward soever; yet he can take off that ferocity, that ferity and
fierceness, and put them into a meek and humble temper; he that can make Lions
to lie down with Lambs, and Leopards with Kids, sure can make the Lambs and the
Kids to agree among themselves; he that can give that wisdom (where it is
wanting) which is from above, and is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated; he can quickly, fastly, firmly, sweetly unite all his
people, and so in like manner he can persuade to all the rest of the Matters
now propounded.

If it be said, All this we know God can do; for who can hinder Omnipotence it
self from doing whatever it has a mind to? But what ground have we, or can we
have to believe that he will do it?

I Answer, could we see but one thing generally practiced by all true-hearted
sound Protestants, throughout these three Kingdoms, viz. a constant course of
earnest and fervent Prayer kept on foot. Could we see the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication poured forth upon the House of David, and the Inhabitants of our
Gospel-Jerusalem, for the obtaining of the Particulars aforementioned, by
setting the power of God on work to effect them; I think there would be good
ground to affirm, even without all peradventure, that he will do it, at least
so far, as shall make for his own Glory, and the accomplishment of whatsoever
good he intends for his people. And among other Arguments, I shall mention only
these three, to persuade to a Belief thereof.

First, That he is, and always will be willing to hear his Peoples prayers,
and that in any thing they shall call upon him for (provided they pray aright,
from right Principles, in a right manner, and to right ends) is evident from
his Nature; he is a God of a most merciful, sweet and gracious disposition; the
Scripture every where describes him so; a God full of Bowels; he has his
(...), his tenerrimos motus, his tender mercies, (...), Bowels of Mercy and
Commiserations. This Christ himself bears witness to, Luke 18.7, 8. Where,
after he had put forth a Parable from the unjust Judge to the poor oppressed
Widow, and did it to the end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint;
he adds these words, if the importunity of the poor widow with the unjust
Judge, prevailed for justice, though he otherwise had no mind to do her
Justice, shall not God (says he) avenge his own Elect, which cry night and day
unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them
speedily. He is so propense to Mercy, I, and to Justice too, that whenever his
people cry unto him, he will show them mercy in the very execution of his
Justice upon his Enemies: But mark here, when will he do this? when they cry
unto him, when they sigh and groan out their Complaints, as the poor Israelites
did under their Oppressions in Egypt, and as Daniel and the three Children did
in the fiery Furnace and the Lion's Den; The sighings of his Prisoners came up
before him, Psalm. 79.11.

Secondly, It is likewise evident that it is, and must needs be so; namely,
that God is, and always will be willing to hear his Peoples prayers (when for
matter and manner they pray aright, as was before hinted) from the Engagement
which he is under, and has freely laid upon himself, so to do; for has he not
promised, and that often, that whenever his people pray unto him, and seek him
with their whole heart, they shall be sure to find him? Nay, has he not
commanded, that they should call upon him in time of trouble? and then backed
that command with a special assurance given, that when they do so cry, he will
give a gracious Audience? Psalm. 50.15. compared with Jer. 29.12, 13, 14.
Multitudes of Passages in Holy Writ put this altogether out of question; among
which I cannot omit to mention that most emphatical place in Isa. 65.24. It
shall come to pass that before they call (the Prophet speaks it of the Lord's
people) I will answer before they call! Mark that; God will be more ready to
answer than they to call, mere ready to hear than they to speak; and this also,
does not our blessed Savior more than once bear witness to concerning his
Father; namely, That whatsoever we ask of the Father in his Name, he will give
it, John 15.16. and chap. 16.23.

Thirdly, For farther confirmation unto this great and blessed Truth, that God
is willing to hear his Peoples Prayers, has he not left store of Instances
upon record, that de facto he has done so, and that from age to age,
throughout all generations? Did he not hear the Groanings of the Children of
Israel under their cruel Taskmasters in Egypt? Did he not hear the Cries of the
poor captive Jews in Babylon, and at last bring them out from thence? Did not
the Supplications of Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, in the three ninth Chapters of
their several Books, come up to Heaven, and find acceptance, both for
themselves, and all the rest of their distressed Brethren? Did not the Prayers
of Mordecai and the perplexed Jews in Shushan, added to those of Queen Esther
and her Maidens, prevail against proud Haman? Did not the Cries of Jonah, even
out of the Belly of the Whale, find a passage through the surging waves? and
prove so quick, even with their watery wings, that they came in unto God, even
unto his holy Temple? as the expression is, Jonah 2.7. Time would fail to
relate the pleasant stories to this purpose, which stand upon record, not only
in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, but also in all other
Ecclesiastic Story.

Well then, the Premises considered what remains, but that I now call upon all
true-hearted Protestants throughout these three Kingdoms, that they would take
encouragement from hence, and set upon this praying-work with all possible
speed and vigor; especially two things more being farther considered.

First, That God is as willing to hear Prayers now as ever, as kind, as
merciful, and as much engaged to his People that truly fear him, and seek unto
him, as ever, and will be as faithful in performing with his People as ever he
was.

Secondly, That the state of the true Reformed Protestant Church and People of
God never had more need of Prayer; never was at a lower ebb than now, never had
more numerous and potent enemies to grapple with, since the times of
Reformation came in among us.

These arguments one would think should have force enough in them, with all
good and sound-hearted Christians, to put them upon this so needful,
seasonable, and (if well managed) successful Duty of Prayer; a Duty, which has
done such wonders in all ages; the prevalency of which has been attested by so
rich experience in them that have made trial of it; a Duty which God himself
calls us so much unto, takes so much delight in, and has encouraged by so many
Promises. It Is true, the Devil is a great enemy to it, and evil-minded men
oppose it what they can, because where this is much in use, it greatly fights
against and keeps down the Dominion of Sin and Satan, not only in the hearts of
particular men and women, but in whole States and Kingdoms.

If any say, it is indeed a Command, and so a necessary as well as a very
profitable Duty, and God forbid but it should every where be much in practice,
in every Closet, in every Family, in every public and solemn Congregation, at
the due times and seasons of it; but what do you mean when you call so
earnestly upon the Protestants to pray? do you mean to persuade them to break
the King's Laws by Conventicling and meeting together in great numbers for this
Duty? it is some extraordinary kind of praying sure, you intend by this your so
zealous exhortation to it. To which I answer.

It is indeed an extraordinary Spirit of Prayer which I long to see in all the
Lord's people, there being such extraordinary occasions for it; and therefore
besides the secret, private and public Prayers before mentioned, in Closets,
Families, and solemn Congregations in times of public Worship; it is the
vehement desire of my Soul, that they would once every week at least, set apart
some time, more or less, as may consist with their several Callings and
Employments, to call upon God by earnest Prayer, and this all over the Three
Kingdoms, wherever any true praying Saints can be found, that can
conveniently meet together: which to do, and that with mighty wrestlings, as
Jacob did, when in danger of his Brother Esau, I understand not how it is a
breach of any of the King's Laws, unless the late Law against Religious
Meetings be intended; but to grant such Meetings as these to be absolutely
unlawful in themselves, or to be intended by that Law, I understand not any
further, than that the number beyond four (besides the Housekeeper) in such
Meetings, may by that Law render them criminal: but where offense is taken at
the number exceeding what the Law directs, why may not the good people of
England make up their Meetings in that very number which is allowed, rather
than not to meet at all; or so meet as to give offense unto the Civil
Magistrate? Will not the number of forty persons, meeting in eight or ten
distinct companies, be as prevalent with God, as if they all made up but one
Meeting? and will not the Gifts and Graces of many more particular persons be
thus exercised, than can be, if all these eight or ten Meetings were united
together in one?

But now the next thing to be considered, is, what should be the principal
subject Matter of this special and extraordinary Meeting together in Prayer?
This indeed to be unanimously agreed upon, and every where, as it were, uno
tenore, with one consent, to be put up by all praying Saints, would be very
material, and much conducing to the ends for which it is here humbly moved; an
universal Harmony and Agreement in the things prayed for, must needs be
excellent, and, from the very agreement that is in it, be the more prevalent;
for does not Christ himself intimate so much unto his Disciples, Matthew. 18.19?
If two of you shall agree ((...)) on earth, as touching any thing that they
shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven. If a
right spiritual Prayer, wherein the Heart and the Mouth of any one that prays
alone, do agree together, be a Divine Melody, sweet and delicious Music in the
ears of God, as himself tells us it is, Cant. 2.14. Let me hear thy voice
(says he) that is, her voice in prayer) for sweet is thy voice; I say, if it
be true thus of one single person praying alone, must it not needs be so much
more when the hearts, minds and spirits of diverse agree together, when met
about that blessed work? Instances for this might be given; take one instead of
many: It is that of the Prophet Malachi, chap. 3.16. where we thus read, Then
they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another (and also one with another
in this Duty of Prayer) and the Lord hearkened and heard, observe the Passage;
he hearkened, as men do to some rare consort of Music; and so indeed the word
Symphony used by our Savior himself, in the place before-quoted, every one
knows, that knows any thing of the Greek Tongue, does properly signify an
Harmony of Voices, or of Instruments, or both together: Thus Novarinus in
locum; Verbo Graeco elegans subest Metaphora, (...), de Musico vocum concentu
harmonicoque sono dicitur, tanquam si diceretur, non minus gratam ess Deo
comordem plurium orationem quam Concentus Musicus hominum auribus sit gratus.

This then being a good reason for such an agreement in the matter of such
extraordinary Prayer, as I humby move may be every where set on foot, and
constantly kept up, in the practice of it, till the Scene of things be so
altered, that the Harmony of Prayer, may be put into a new Tune of Praises.
Among other Petitions which it shall please the Lord by his good Spirit to
frame in the hearts of all praying Saints, I conceive the Matters mentioned in
the foregoing Discourse, will be very pertinent and seasonable, as pursuant to
the ends designed by it; namely,

That all the Particulars before discoursed upon in this small Treatise, viz. a
sweet Harmony and Agreement between all dissenting Parties, a conscientious
performance of all the beforementioned Family Duties, may be every where set
on foot; with such other Methods as are propounded for the increase of
knowledge, and the establishing of the minds of people in the truly Reformed
Protestant Religion, now so much struck at; and especially, that God would
please to stir up the Rich Protestants to the forementioned works of Piety and
Charity, for the preservation of the said truly Reformed Protestant Religion,
and the delivering of it down to the Generations that are to come.

If earnest Prayer be put up for this, and that universally, by all that know
how to pray, throughout all these Three Kingdoms, namely, on behalf of these
Rich Protestants, as well as in the other particulars beforementioned, who can
tell, what a choice public Spirit God may put into them? He can make even the
Niggard bountiful, and the Churl liberal; he can open the Hearts, Hands,
Purses, and possess the minds of thousands with the excellent Service they may
do this way; not only to the present, but the Future Ages: He can tell them,
and set it home upon them, that they cannot possibly honor the Lord with their
substance more effectually in this world, than to set it a running in the
forementioned Channels, that by this means, that is, by propagating and
delivering down the true Protestant Religion to all posterity, by such an use
of their Estates, as aforesaid, will greatly turn unto their account both here
and hereafter.

First here; even in this life, and that many ways; for will they not hereby,
not only provide for many poor Childrens outward subsistence and livelihood in
this world? But which is a greater thing, give advantage to the improvement of
the Parts and Natural Gifts of many a Fine Wit for public Services, that
otherwise would be in a manner wholly lost, and become useless, both in Church
and State, for want of an ingenious education? And, which is yet more, will
they not keep up a learned and able Ministry; and thereby, in time, make up the
lamented loss of those many famous, burning and shining Lights, which of late
years have been extinguished, and still are more and more extinguished every
day? and will they not by this means likewise, have the Prayers of Multitudes
continually sent up to Heaven for them, that Blessings of all sorts may be
poured down upon them and theirs? Yea, and will not (as the Apostle says in
much the like case, 2. Cor. 9.11, 12, 13.) this very thing, namely, this
bountifulness and liberal distribution for so brave a Service unto the Saints
(as well those that are not yet born, as those that are) cause many
Thanksgivings unto God?

Hereafter, at the great Tribunal of God; how great a reward will it lay up for
them, and how high a place will it mount them to in heaven? all those thousands
of men and women that shall come to a true knowledge of God, and the saving of
their precious Souls; in afterages, as a consequence and effect of this their
so pious disposal of their wealth, will they not pass for such as they have
some way been instrumental in the saving of? The Conversions wrought by those
men, which they shall have brought up, and have given a liberal and holy
Education to, will they not, in part, be ascribed to them? The Rule in
Philosophy is true here, Causa causae est causa causati; in all noble acts, the
first and remote Cause is to be acknowledged the spring and fountain of the
next and more immediate causes and the good effects thereof.

When stout and valiant Champions which they instrumentally shall have thus
raised up, not only for the propagating of the truly Reformed Protestant
Religion, but for a strenuous defense of it also, against all Opposers
whatsoever; and when the minds of people, every where, shall thereby be so
fixed and established, as to be able to stand against all shocks and storms, so
that no Errors, no Powers, no Factions, Conspiracies, Subtilties, or combined
interest of a Popish Party; no Priests or Jesuits, or their Adherents shall be
ever able to hinder the growth of true Protestantism; much less exterminate it
out of these Kingdoms: what matter of Joy will this be to all such Rich
Protestants, as upon the consecrating of their Estates to the uses aforesaid,
shall see such blessed effects and fruits thereof; yea, and as was before said,
what high reward too shall they be sure to be enriched with in the other world
upon this account?

But now on the contrary, how much otherwise will it be with all such rich
Protestants, especially such of them as pretend to a profession of Religion
(and it may be, amongst the most zealous Protestants too) and yet have hearts
so eaten into, yea so eaten up, and even gangrened with Covetousness; that,

First, They are so far from doing good to others with the abundance of wealth
which they reckon themselves Masters of, that they live like slaves themselves
to it, so penuriously, so sparingly, so pinchingly, that every wise observer of
them cannot but wonder at their folly, and every good man pity it.

Secondly, When any opportunity is offered them for advancing any work of
public or private Charity, be the necessity and excellency thereof never so
visible and apparent; yet, they either find pitiful excuses, or frivolous
Arguments against it, and so plainly reject it; or, if (...) part with any
thing, it is in so small a pittance, and with so much pain and difficulty, as
if they were letting out so much of their Heart-blood.

I say concerning such miserably-minded rich men as these, how lamentable is
their condition here? and how much more lamentable is it like to be hereafter?
for the evincing of both which, it would be well for this sort of men
frequently and with all seriousness, to read and consider these following great
Scripture-Truths wherein they are deeply concerned, and for whose sake, after
an especial manner, they seem to be made a part of the Divine Oracle, and to be
left upon record.

First, The manifold mischiefs, hurts and dangers that this wretched spirit of
theirs inevitably hurries them into, as is expressed at large in Prove. 28.20,
22. and in Eccles. 5. from v. 10, to 18. compared with Mat. 13.22. 1 Timothy 6.9,
10. Jam. 4.4, 5. from v. 1, to 5.

Secondly, With as much seriousness and frequency to read and consider that
passage, 1 John 3.17. Whosoever has this world's good, and sees his Brother have
need, and shuts up his Bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love
of God in him? And what advantage will he have by his wealth, if God has no
love for him, nor he for God and his people, in a right use and improvement of
it?

Thirdly, and lastly, Let them seriously consider, that being but Stewards for
God, and must give an account of their Stewardship; as is fully set forth in
the Parable of the rich man's Steward, in Luke 16. Their account of all others,
is like to be the most dreadful, and thereupon have they not need to use this,
or the like Letany?

From an excessive love unto, insatiable desires after the world, with a
vehement and most eager pursuit thereof; from the sordid spirit of the vile
person, mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 32. from v. 5. to 8. from the
God-provoking, soul-damning and detestable sin of Covetousness, which is
Idolatry; from an exclusion out of Heaven, and the loss of eternal life; from
the Treasures of wrath heaped up against the day of wrath, and from the
everlasting burnings of unquenchable flames among the Devils in Hell, which are
the Miser's portion; Good Lord deliver us.

And now for a Close of all, I will end with this earnest request and desire,
that all such, especially such rich persons as would be further instructed and
invited to the practice of what in this small Treatise is here humbly offered,
would purchase to themselves, and carefully read over a Book of small price;
but as pithy a Book, and as argumentative though in a plain style) as any I
know. The Title of it is, The Surest and Safest Way of Thriving; Published by
Mr. Tho. Gouge, Minister of the Gospel: And Printed for W. Rawlins at the Hand
and Pen over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1673.

An Appendix.
THe consideration of two things, methinks, should very much affect all sound
and true-hearted Protestants.

First, The great and continual decay of the old Stock of our Learned, Able,
Orthodox, Faithful, Laborious, Protestant Divines. How fast do they drop away?
how do they die daily? And how are the Flocks and People they were Shepherds
unto, every where left destitute? To say nothing of those Famous Lights which
were extinguished in the foregoing Age, viz. the reverend Mr. Greenhams,
Hildershams, Reynolds, Dods, Clevers, Scudders, Twisses, Byfields, Batemans,
Rogerses, Capels, Boltons, Balls, Whartons, Wards, Bowleses, Perkinses,
Amesiusses, Straughtons, Harrisses, Pinks, Wheatleys, Whites, Wilsons, and
hundreds more. What sore blows in this kind have we received within this last
twenty or five and twenty years? How many Marshals, Burroughses, Wilsons,
Goodwins, Carters, Sympsons, Bonds, Jeanses, Sydenhams, Palmers, Symonses,
Whitakers, Arrowsmiths, Youngs, Vineses, Gatakers, Ashes, Penns, Hills,
Collinses, Beadles, Fullers, Cawdreys, etc? Yea, within this last fifteen
years, how many Noltons, Tailors, Strongs, Slaters, Sedgewicks, Ruttons,
Spurstows, Burgesses, Helmses, Hammonds? Yea, within one five years, how many
Tuckneys, Stauntons, Reyners, Calamies, Newcomens, Greenhils, Bridges,
Malories, Caryls, Nyes? And among others, how many young ones in the very Prime
and Flower of their age, and heat of their work in the Lord's Vineyard, have
been cropped off? How many Swinnocks, Sammses, Allens, Woods, Blakes, Pearses,
Steries, Loaders, Vennings, Janeways?

Secondly, The very few or almost none at all that have come up in the room of
them nor (as things now stand) are like to do for the last fifteen years
together, where have any been found (setting the Conformable Clergy aside) who
have filled up the places of the forementioned, either in Life or Doctrine, in
Studies or Preaching, or in such an elaborate care of Souls, as those deceased
Worthies underwent, even unto the death?

Now of all others, should not you the sincere-hearted Professors of the said
Reformed Protestant Religion, and the true lovers of it; you the Parents of
Children, and you the Friends to other young Relations (especially, (if
numerous, or any way committed to your care (...) solicitous for their souls
welfare now in this next following Age, and (...)down to succeeding times?
Would you not be willing that your Children and your Childrens Children should
be good Protestants? and in order thereunto, that sound, able and faithful
Protestant-Divines should from time to time be bred up, to make up the loss of
such as die daily? That young ones still should come up in the room of old
ones, and so the Faith, which, as the Apostle says ( Jude 3.) was once
delivered unto the Saints, should be maintained in all future Generations? I
suppose you would; and if so, what better way can you think of to provide such,
than what is suggested in this little Treatise? If you can find a better way,
take it, and do your utmost in it; but do not imagine that you are no way
concerned, and that the care of these matters lies upon God only, as if his
will were not, that in this, as in all things else, we should use all lawful
and good means to attain the mercies we need, as well in Soul-concerns, as in
those of the Body. I know God will have a Church in all ages, and a select
People unto himself, picked out and culled from the rest of the world; and I
know and believe further, that not one of his elect shall miscarry or come
short of heaven. The Scriptures of Truth are full for these things, and by one
means or another the all-wise and all-powerful God will effect them; and when
ordinary means fail, he can and will make use of extraordinary. But this does
not exempt us from our duty and utmost endeavor to do our part; for in such a
neglect shall we not be found rather Tempters of God, than Trusters in him?
It Is true, in former times, when deep Popery and the gross darkness of it had
thickened the Heavens over us, and even quite darkened all the European World,
God was pleased here and there to raise up Instruments in an extraordinary way
to own, maintain and propagate the Truth in several Ages and Kingdoms. Thus
about the thousandth year after Christ, he was pleased to raise up one
Leuthericus Archbishop of Senes in France, effectually to own and maintain the
Truth in the point of Transubstantiation, which he most stoutly opposed. And
some time after him Beringarius, born at Towers in France, and constituted
Archdeacon of Angeirs, defends the same Truth against Transubstantiation with
great boldness; and therein was followed by the French Protestants called
Hugonites. Then about 350 years after, he raised up our famous John Wi^kliff of
Merton-Colledge in Oxford, who in the days of our King Edward the Third, and
Richard the Second, so notably discovered the Pope to be Antichrist, and so
strenuously asserted and maintained the main Truths (which we Calvinists now
hold) that he was called the Lamp of England. Some time after rises up our
famous Bradwardine; and John Hus follows him in Bohemia; and Jerome of Prague
follows John Hus. Then Martin Luther about 100 years after, is fetched out of
the College of Augustine Monks at Erphord in Germany; him Desiderius Erasmus of
Rotterdam (that Prodigy of Wit and Learning) defends. Next Huldericus Zuinglius
of Tigurum among the Switzers. Oecolampadius of Weinsperge in Germany; Vrbanus
Regius in the Territories of Montfort; Carolostadius in France; Wolfgangus
Capito in Alsatia; Leo Judae in Helvetia, Fredericus Myconius in Franconia;
John Diazius, a Spanish Priest, and a great friend to Martin Bucer; Gasper
Cruciger of Lipseich in Misnia; Paulus Fagius, born in the Palatinate; Martin
Bucer aforesaid of Selestadt in Germany; Gasper Hedio of Etlin in the
Marquisate of Baden; George Prince of Anhalt; Justus Jonas of Wittenberg in
Germany; who having unwittingly eaten an Onion which his Father when sick of
the Plague, had applied to his Sore, was miraculously preserved for the Service
he was born unto; Peter Martyr of Florence in Italy; Conrade Pelican of Rubeac
in Swedeland; Bugenhagius of Julinum in Pomerania, Philip Melancton of Bretta
in the lower Palatinate; John Lasco of a Noble Family in Poland, Augustine
Marlorat, born in the Dukedom of Lorrain, an Augustine Friar; Nicholas
Amsdorsius, born of Noble Parents in Misnia; Wolfangus Musculus, born at Pusa,
a little Town in Litharingia, and a Benedictine Monk in the Palatinate,
Gerardus Hyperius at Iper in Flanders; John Calvin born at Noviodunum near the
Borders of Picardy; Paulus Vergerius, Pope Clement the seventh his Legate in
Germany; Victorinus Strigelius of Kausbira in Switzerland, John Brentius of
Wile in Sweveland; Peter Viretus, born in the Country of the Bernates; Stephen
Zegedine, born in the lower Panonia; Peter Ramus, born in France; Henry
Bullinger, born at Bremagarta in Switzerland; Flavius Illiricus, born at Albona
in Selavonia; Josias Simlerus, born in Helvetia; Peter Boquin, born in
Aquitane; Zacharias Vrsin, born in Silesia; Abraham Bucholtzer, born at
Scovanium; John Wigandus, born in Mansfield; Martin Chemnitius born at Britza
in old March; Rodolphus Gualter, born in Tigure; Gasper Olevian, born in
Trevir; George Stronius, born at Friburg in Wret^^law; James Andreas, born at
Waiblin in Wittenberg; Hieronimus Zanchius, of a Noble Family in Italy; Anthony
Sadel, born upon the Confines of Savoy, not far from Geneva; Lambertus Danaeus,
born at Aurelia in France; Nicholas Hemingius, born at Loland in Denmark;
Robert Rollock and John Knox, both born in Scotland; James Here brand, born at
Noricum in Swevia, for his early and late studies called Suevica Noctua, the
Swevian Night-crow; David Chytraeus, born at Ingelfing in Sweveland; Daniel
Tossanus, born at Moumbelgard in Wirtemberg; Franciscus Junius, and Theodora
Bezus, born in France; Amandus Polanus, born in Silesia; Andraeas Gerardus,
born at Hypeirs in Flanders; Aretius Benedictus, born at Berne in Switzerland;
John Drusius, born at Aldnard near the City of Gaunt; James Gerynaeus, born at
Berne in Helvetia.

All these famous men (as they are reckoned up by Melchior Adam, Fuller, and
others) as well those which are here named before Luther, as those that are
reckoned up after him, and were born some time within the Sixteenth Century,
were at first born in Popery, and in their younger times were trained up in it;
but being all of them men of admirable Natural Parts, great Students, and
singularly well learned, were touched with Divine Powers, enlightened and warmed
with Divine Beams of Truth, and the Love of it, and thereupon forsook their
Popish Principles, some in part only, some wholly and throughout, and were by
extraordinary calls from God, set up as glorious Lights in the dark times and
places when and where they lived; God himself plucking them, as it were, like
Firebrands out of the Fire, with a purpose to make an honorable use of their
Parts, Learning and Grace, against Popery and all manner of Popish Sects and
Orders, as Monks, Priests, Friars, Jesuits, and their detestable Doctrines. And
as he did this abroad, in the several Countries abovenamed, so here in our own
Native Country; did he not in the same times, I mean in the same 16th Century
raise up many worthy men, famous also for their both Parts and Learning; and
not only convert them after their popish education, but make eminent use of
them as valiant Champions, Confessors and Martyrs for the Truth, viz. John
Colet of London, John Frith of Westram in Kent, William Tyndal, Thomas Bilney,
John Rogers, the Proto-Martyr in Queen Mary's days; Laurence Sanders, John
Bradford, John Hooper, Hugh Latimer, Nicholas Ridley, Thomas Cranmer, Rowland
Tailor, John Philpot, John Jewel, John Reynolds, John Fox, and many more which
might be added. I say, though God did this, and can do the like again in an
extraordinary way; though he can open the eyes of those learned men in this our
present age, and turn their hearts from the Error of their ways, who are now
deeply dren head in the Doctrines of Pelagianism, Arminianism, Socinianism,
Popery, or whatsoever it is that borders upon any one of them; though he can
find out an Ambrose, by his preaching to convert an Austin, with the help of
the Prayers and Tears of his Mother Monica; though by one man's Books he can
convert another, as he did Martin Bucer, Paulus Vergerius, Carolostadius, Leo
Judae, Zuinglius his companion in Studies; Fredericus Myconius, John Diazius a
Spanish Priest; Vrbanus Rhegius, Wolfangus Musculus, and many other Famous men
in Germany, by reading of Luthers works. I say, though by these and many other
ways, he can raise up instruments even from men of the present age, and now in
the very Prime and Flower of their Parts and Learning, cause them to return to
sound Doctrine! whatever their present Errors may be) and strenuously to
maintain it against Popery and other prevailing corruptions in Doctrine or
otherwise: Yet no man in his right senses will deny but that it is every good
Protestants duty, in his place and calling, and as opportunity may be
providentially given to him, or taken by him, to do his utmost for providing a
standing and always succeeding Ministry in the usual and ordinary way of
Education of hopeful Youths in Schools of Learning, which is the thing that in
this small Treatise I principally press unto. And therefore to conclude all,
since the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament declare it to be a most
blessed thing to convert Souls, and to bring in sinners to Christ's Fold, as is
evident by comparing Dan. 12.3. with Luke 1.14, 18. Ephesians. 3.7, 8. with many
other pregnant Texts that might be added to the same purpose; I Query,

1. Whether the Work of the Ministry, where it is faithfully and sincerely
discharged by able, orthodox and painful Laborers in Christ's Vineyard, and is
accompanied with an answerable success, or at least finds a gracious acceptance
with Christ, be not a very honorable, and (to all considerate good men) a very
desirable employment? and whether those Parents and their Children that
undervalue, despise and scorn it as a mean and contemptible course of Life, may
not well expect to be scorned of God, and for ever to be rejected by him?

2. Although the Ministry and the work thereof be so honorable an employment,
as willingly to be undertaken and delighted in by such as the Lord inclines
unto it and qualifies for it; yet whether they ought not to be encouraged and
rewarded for their faithful and painful Labors therein, even to the utmost
power and ability of those that sit under them, and have the benefit thereof?
For does not Christ himself say, The Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7.
and the Workman of his Meat, Mat. 10.10. and this, though he be otherwise rich,
and has no need? And much more then must it not needs be true of all such
faithful and painful Ministers, as having Wives, Children and Families to
maintain, have nothing else to live upon but what comes in this way? Let all
that are concerned herein, read and consider well 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Do ye not
know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the
Temple? and they that wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? even so
has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. And that in 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor ((...), double reward) especially they who labor in
Word and Doctrine.

3. But when and where worthy and able men are found, that with the peace of
their own Consciences, cannot be capable of public maintenance through their
Nonconformity in matters Ecclesiastical; and the well-minded Protestant-Party
every where, by persecutions, are (for the most part) so far impoverished,
ruined and undone, that they are not able to give a livelihood to such as
preach unto them; would it not be a worthy work, and exceedingly well pleasing
unto God, if such rich ones among them, as are yet left able to do it, would
take care so far to minister to them, and allow them such a maintenance as
might encourage them in their work, in the midst of all that opposition which
they meet with from unreasonable and ill-minded men?

4. Whether all such rich Protestants as are mentioned in the foregoing
Treatise, that have Sons of their own, of pregnant Parts, apt to learn, and by
persuasions of them their Parents, would easily be inclined to the Service of
Christ in the aforesaid glorious work of the Ministry, or in case they have no
such Sons of their own, yet would please to adopt such as are in the said
Treatise already suggested, and not only bring them up to the said Service, in
manner as is propounded; but settle a liberal maintenance upon them during
their lives, at least, in case they continue sound in the Faith, painful in
their Work, and holy in their Conversations: I say, whether those that shall do
such a noble work as this, besides the giving proof of their Love to Christ,
they will not by this means render the Children which they thus bring up and
dedicate to the Lord's work, and settle Estates upon them in consideration of
it (whether they be their own Children or such as are adopetd by them) I say,
whether they will not render them doubly happy? First, in putting them into so
honorable and heavenly an employment? Secondly, In delivering them from the
Snares and Temptations they would otherwise be endangered by, if not thus
provided for, upon account of their faithfulness and constancy in their work,
whatsoever discouragements and troubles they may meet with for their works sake?

5. Whether it would not be one of the most Glorious works that some Ages have
produced, if certain rich Protestants, amongst others the aforementioned Acts
of Piety humbly moved to be promoted by them, here in Old England, should agree
together to set^le a perpetual liberal maintenance upon the University of
Cambridge in New England, and so to endow it; that it might be a standing and
lasting Nursery to all succeeding Ages, not only to train up such hopeful and
well educated Youths for the service of the Gospel there, as shall be born in
that Country; but such also as shall be sent from hence for the same purpose,
in due t^me to return hither richly furnished with sound Learning and abilities
to do the like service here? Methinks 50 or 60 (if not 100) persons might
easily be found in this Kingdom of Old-England, that might each of them give an
hundred pounds a year for ever to the said University in New Eng^and, for so
pious and renowned a work, and thereby not only perpetuate and embalm their
Names here, but prepare the more abundant entrance for themselves into the
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and so be he higher in happiness
hereafter. For though I am far from that Popish Opinion of Merit (whether of
condignity or congruity) and do not in the least think that any man whatsoev^^
^an deserve any thing at the hand of God for any good work or work that can be
done by him; yet that every one receives according to his w^^ks, is no false
Doctrine, if those Scriptures be true in 2 Cor. 5.10. (...) 14.13. and 20.12,
13.

6. Whether this small Treatise, if it shall be judged useful and seasonable,
will not be so most of all by being dispersed abroad into many hands, and into
those principally that it is more particularly intended for, as into the hands
of all dissenting (though sound in the main) true-hearted Professors; into the
hands of the Parents and Governors of numerous Families; into the hands of the
several sorts of the aforementioned rich Protestants; into the hands of all
religiously affected young persons, especially such as are under the age of
sixteen years? And whether it would not be Money well laid out to print so many
Impressions, and take care and pains to disperse them, as might replenish all
the aforesaid Parties in these Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland?
Perhaps some of the things humbly proposed in the Treatise, may take with some,
others with others; some may be prevailed with by it, to dedicate their own
Sons to the Service of the Sanctuary; some to adopt others; some that cannot,
or have no mind to do this, may settle Countrey-Schools, and give yearly
Stipends for teaching poor Children to read, in great and populous Towns, and
where is greatest Ignorance and least Means for Knowledge in the remote and
dark parts of the Kingdoms particularly in the Northern and Western Parts, and
all over Wales?

A Passage out of Mr. Increase Mather his Excellent Book, Entitled, The
Mystery of Israel's Salvation.
And shall I tell you (yea from the Lord I will tell you) that the Prayers of
the despicable ones, that know, and fear, and serve God, can do great things
with him that does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven, and in Earth, and in all
deep places. Oh consider of it! I remember Melancthon (that great and Learned
Divine) says, he was much encouraged to hope that God would carry on the work
of Reformation in Germany (and the Lord did carry it on with great success in
those days) because he understood that there were many poor Godly women that
were wont to meet together to pray, that the work of Reformation might go
forward. Even so, if the Lord stir up the hearts of his poor Saints to favor
the dust of Zion, and to show it by earnest Prayer before him at all times;
surely the day will not be long before the Lord appear in his Glory to build up
Zion; for he will have rgard unto the Prayer of the destitute, and will not
despise their Prayer. Thus far he at the very close of his Book. The same say I
here; Fervent Prayer all England over among such as truly fear the Lord, and
know how to pray aright, may possibly set hundreds on work to help on the ends
of this small Treatise, and the Matters propounded in it.

FINIS.

