A JUST DEFENSE OF THE Royal Martyr K. Charles I.

From the many false and malicious Aspersions in Ludlow's Memoirs, and some
other virulent Libels of that Kind.

Plal. 35. 11, 12.

False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not.

They rewarded me evil for good, to the great discomfort of my Soul.

Cicero ad Herenn. Lib. 4.

Been majores nostri hoc comparaverunt, ut neminem Regem, quem armis cepissent,
vita privarent.

Virgil. Georg. Lib. 4.

-- Rege incolumi, men's omnibus una est: Amisso, rupere fidem, etc.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper at the Black-Boy, and R Basset, both in
Fleet Street, and for W. Turner at Lincoln's End back Gate. 1699.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall presume to address the Reader in the Words of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 1.
To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous: but for you it
is safe; and doubt not but all such as are truly Candid will discharge me from
any thing of Levity or Profaneness in the Application, we being under the same
Circumstances as to Temporals, those he wrote to were in Spirituals, and upon
that Account stand in need of as frequent Admonitions, To beware of Dogs, and
such evil Workers, as come in on purpose to spy out the Liberty wherein we are
truly Free, that they might again entangle us with the Yoke of Bondage. For
what I intimated at first by way of Suspicion only, became abundantly confirmed
in my further Progress, that it is altogether a Design of the Commonwealth
Party, which of late have Perted up very much, and in order to the reviving
their former Mischiefs, fall on afresh to asperse the Memory of our Royal
Martyr, with the very same Lies and Defamations, their Predecessors did his
Person and Government; for this being, as it were a New Generation, not one in
a thousand, perhaps ten, who saw or felt the sad effects of our then divided
State, is withal so loose, easy, and unthinking, as to be carelessly driven
upon those very Rocks, which still bear the Marks of their Forefathers
Shipwreck.

And as the Design of these following Sheets is to awaken, indeed Allarm this
stupid Humor into a Sense of Danger, that the Folly will be as unaccountable,
as the Mischiefs insupportable, if that hotheaded Crew be once more suffered
to get the Steerage; So in the Prosecution thereof, they multiplied upon my
Hands to double the Number first intended, for the charge which these (...),
these false Accusers bring, being either of such things as never had being, no
not Intentionally, in the very Thoughts of their abused Sovereign; or otherwise
really designed by him, and highly advantageous to the Honor and Interest of
the Nation; yet withal so villanously perverted by their Maligning Spirits, as
the infatuated People suspected Poison in what their true, their best Physician
prescribed, and on the other side took it willingly down from the several State
Mountebanks, without any Sense of Danger, till absolutely past Redress or Cure:
I say, as all their Calumnies are raised from one of these two Topics; either
telling what was Wrong, or perverting what was Right, so are they delivered
down with a Commonwealth Confidence, where Positiveness supplies the place of
Truth, and is no otherwise to be refell'd, than by looking back, and
representing the whole History of that particular Matter of Fact, or Surmise,
(for many times they can go no further) which these Sons of Slander so basely
misrepresent; and this sets every thing in its true Light, equally represents
those just Grounds upon which a wise and good Prince proceeded, and those false
Glosses, which a most perverse sort of Men continually spread Abroad, to have
every good he designed evil spoken of; and therefore Time is very properly said
to be the Mother of Truth, which generally has a very hard Birth, with much
Difficulty breaks through those thick and dark Clouds of Obloquy, and
Detraction, whereby the Prince of the Air and his many Agents endeavor to
smother it; but having in the End forced a Passage, like the Sun, it shines
with a Meridian Luster, so fully Dissipates that main Body of Darkness, as for
the future it can only fly up and down in some scattered Vapors, but never
more Unite, gain so much Strength or Reputation, as to Act the like Mischiefs,
or be credited in their Untruths.

And some such Scatterings as these, I take to be the within mentioned Attacks
of Roger Coke, Ludlow, etc. upon our Royal Martyr, with an impartial Account of
whatever particular Charge they bring against him, blows quite off, as I hope
the Reader will find to his Satisfaction.

And this, I doubt not but that bold Writer of Milton's Life will likewise
find, though he blusters mightily at present, and perhaps may think by that
means to get off, yet the World is come to a very odd pass if he can so escape,
who dares to recommend an Author, that once occasioned several hours Debate in
the House of Commons, whether he should not be Hanged, and had some of his now
admired Books ordered, and actually Burnt by the Hands of the Common Hangman. I
say it must be a blessed Turn of Times we are now got into, that this Fellow's
Works should be all Reprinted, and for fear of too little Mischief that way,
have an Abridgment of the most poisonous Passages put all together in an
Account of his Life, with many high Elogiums of his Personal Qualities, which
so far as true, might as well have been said of the Devil, for so they equally
abused, according to their several Capacities, Great Parts, Extraordinary
Endowments, to the Dishonor of that God which gave them, and the Destruction of
Mankind.

Herein however the Author of this Life acts like a Plain-dealer, confirms what
we but suspected before, and expressly declares there must be a thorough Reform
of the whole Government, which I presume this new Club is to undertake,
according to some old Draughts of Milton, and his Fellow Projectors in 59. For
though somewhat of the Dutch way is recommended, yet the main Composition of
this new Eutopia is Harrington's Oceana. I have within observed, that when the
Rump, and Committee of Safty, that is, the Army, were tearing one another, and
the whole Nation in pieces; amongst other Projects, that Maggot of the Rota was
set up, and a great Pudder it made, till with many others it was silenced by
the Restoration; when the Author Harrington, as a dangerous Person, was for
some time secured in the Tower, and elsewhere; at length he obtained his
Liberty to Travel, and being in Italy talked so much of Models, Commonwealths,
and Governments, as that sober Nation reputed him no better than a Whimsical
crack-braind Person; and that he was so in the end, this is an abundant
Confirmation, for returning home, and at Liberty to enjoy both his Friends and
Notions at Pleasure; Ath Oxon. vol. 2. p. 439.
more than a Twelvemonth before his Death, he was possessed with a continued
Fancy, that all his Perspiration turned into Flies, and sometimes Bees, or
Flies as big; and it is very probable several of these Insects after many
Rambles have fixed in, and Fly-blown this young Author's Head, whence the whole
Nation must be incessantly buss'd with his revived Impertinences. Some likewise
are prone to suspect there may be a little Discontent in the Case, (and nothing
sooner breeds Maggots in the Brain) that having failed of his Advance in the
Irish Chancery, he designs the Revenge of promoting an English Commonwealth,
where Milton's Place must certainly be his Lot, and doubtless with as many
uncertain Revolutions, and as much danger of an Halter in the End.

But whencesoever it proceeds, this is certain, that amongst the several kinds
of Pestilent People, our Nation from time to time has been plagued with all,
there are none more Troublesome and Pernicious than our Government Menders, who
will have it continually upon the Anvil, and be always Hammering without the
least Prospect of finishing their Work, or giving it over to more Skillful
Hands, whereby every Man of Temper and Prudence cannot but observe, that this
Itch of Alteration proceeds more from a hot Head, than sober Judgment, and if
such Pragmatical Intermedlers should be gratified in every Whim, their pregnant
Brains abound with, the whole Body-politick will by degrees become so Monstrous
as to have an Hanc populus affixed. It would therefore argue much more
Consideration to reflect, that as there are not two Governments in all Europe,
nor any where else, exactly the same, but generally very different from each
other; so we may justly presume such long continued Customs as they have always
lived under, were originally adapted to the Temper of the People, with other
Circumstances of Situation, Converse, Traffic, etc. and whatever is
superinduced de novo must have some affinity to those original Establishments,
or will sit very uneasy, and give occasion both of continued Complaints, and
frequent Alterations. All good Patriots amongst us, who truly Study the
Interest of the Nation, and make an impartial Judgment of things, do heartily
wish the Choice of our Representatives might be regulated, as well in regard to
the Many which make it, as the Management of that Many in order thereto; they
think likewise that the Disproportion of Beggarly Buroughs in the several
Parts of the Kingdom, is not a little hard in the Disproportion of Taxes, with
not a few other Inconveniences, which, as wise Men, they rather think of, than
attempt to alter, lest it should prove Tinkers Work, as the Proverb speaks,
Essaying to mend one, cause more and worse Defects; for though the Dutch very
cunningly got rid of all Tumultuary Elections, and perhaps thereto, more
especially on their easy Administration ever since, yet I fancy our Grough
English Tempers would not be so easily wheedled, and which is worse, scarce
find enough that will be Faithful in so great a Trust: To be sure when the Rump
took upon them somewhat like that way of Managment, what Rogues did they prove?
and how like Rogues did the People use them in the End?

Here therefore I would turn the Tables with this bold Assumer, and be gladly
satisfied how such vigorous Asserters of the People's Liberty, as he and his
Republican Fraternity are earnest to be thought, come so highly to recommend
the Dutch Model? For that is a perfect Oligarchy, where the People pay as many
Taxes as either in France or Turkey, and have as little to do in raising them,
or Enacting any other Laws for their mutual Defense, and Welfare; And really I
could wish this Rota Club were adjourned for some Months into those Provinces,
that we might see whether they would be so hardy as to Attack that Government
with as much Boldness as they do this, abuse the Liberty of the Press, by
telling the People they are Bubled in thinking themselves a Free Commonwealth,
whereas there is no such thing amongst them, both their Lives and Fortunes are
at the disposal of a few Men, who Cabal together, Elect one another, and do
what they please; I say should any of them dare to Prate or Print at this rate,
as those in Power would soon hear thereof, so instead of sending them a pair of
Shoes to trot out of their Territories, (which Report says is done in some
Cases) care would be forthwith taken to have them die in their own, a modest
Expression some use for a Man's being Hanged; and this, would we take notice of
what is Solid and Useful, is the most Remarkable thing amongst them, that they
are exact Justiciaries, will not permit their Laws to be violated, and
Magistracy arraigned by every Pragmatical Pretender, without such due
Resentments as are absolutely requisite to support the Sovereign Power, and
preserve the Public Peace.

But as amongst some other English Follies, that of admiring Foreign Fashions,
in their Vanities, rather than Virtues, has been too justly charged upon us;
so the Dutch Fashion for Government, has had the Vogue more than 60 Years,
with our many Republican Innovators, when not one in 60 thousand of them
understand any thing more of it, than to take Patterns from thence, for most
Exorbitant Taxes, which our Madness alone, their Necessities, when once
engaged, made absolutely Requisite. Yes, the Licentiousness of the Press is
another Branch of Dutch Liberty, for Knaves and Fools to abuse all Honest Men,
at Pleasure: I say in these two things alone we are become their sordid
Imitators, without any thing of that Caution, and Terror, their vigorous
Execution of Laws enforce; whereas the same just Severity would secure our Old
Constitutions, at a much cheaper Rate than any Foreign Freaks, which the more
we attempt, the more we shall fail in, for to me it seems impossible; yet if we
could be supposed to make so Extravagant an Experiment, it would sit no better
than a Boor's Suit, on a Courtiers Back, and be as disagreeing to the Temper,
the genius of the Nation, as their Stockfish to our Stomachs.

But to prove by some other Authority than my own, that these assuming
Republicans, are not the Men they would be thought, have neither Bottom, nor
Ballast proportionable to the Sail they bear; see no further into the Millstone
than others, perhaps as Superficially as any; I shall produce a Person who knew
them thoroughly, had the most to do with them, and confirmed to Matter of Fact
the Account already given. Our Author Ludlow relates several Discourses between
Cromwell and himself, with some brisk Repartees which passed, wherein as he
tells his own Story the other seems constantly to have brought him by the Lee,
that is, gained his Point: What I shall at present relate to, is in Page 241,
where Cromwell whilst he was cajoling, and betraying the King, gave great
Enjealousments to his Fellow Rebels, that he would make his own Peace, and
leave them to their just Fate; but having accomplished that Hellish Treachery,
got his Majesty into their Isle of Wight Toils; then as Ludlow tells us, he
began to Complement the Commonwealth-Party, inviting some of them to confer
with him at his Chamber; with which acquainting me the next time he came to the
House, I took the Freedom to tell him, that he knew how to cajole and give them
good Words when he had occasion to make use of them; whereat breaking out into
a Rage, he said, they were a proud sort of People, and only considerable in
their own Conceits: Whether he spoke this in a Rage is of little Concern, to be
sure, as seldom as he spoke Truth, this was a certain Truth he spoke, and
effectually confirmed, in the many Contrasts he had with them, and Baffles he
gave them; and Ludlow's Reply is very faint, for that he only hoped it was not
yet their Case, whereas all others knew it actually to be so, since they lay
under a total defection from Honesty, Generosity, and all true Virtue: However
therefore they may wheedle others into better Thoughts; I shall stick to
Cromwell's Character, which is a strong Confirmation of my former Opinion, that
they are a proud sort of People, only valuable in their own Conceits.

In Confirmation whereof, I shall add but this one Instance farther, in
Relation to the sundry fanciful Hypotheses they every Day start, to support
their Politic Novels; wherein a strange Force is put upon all those Natural
Obligations, and Regular Dependencies, which were formerly thought the main
Support of all Humane Societies; such uncooth States of War, and Nature, such
Origins of Political Societies, and Subordination of Commonwealth-Powers, as
make Parents their Childrens Servants, and Magistrates their Peoples Slaves;
and all this with very little regard to the Doctrine of the Creation, which
being set aside, or brought in only to serve at a hard Push, a Man may as well
write a Romance, and swear it a true History, as resolve how Mankind came upon
the Earth, and what Measures they took upon their first meeting there.

Neither is their Deference to the Creation, less than to the Creator, not that
they disown the Existence of an Infinite Being, or can imagine this admired
Fabric of the Universe should be any other way than from an Almighty Power,
(for most of the Atheists have lately thought of a retreat to Deism, as a more
tenable Fort) but then they allow this Almighty Power very little share in the
Governing Part; Man being some how or other placed here, is supposed solely to
act upon a Principle of Interest and Self-preservation, without any regard to
those Divine Impresses of Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, which many old
Pedants, even amongst the Ancient Philosophers, conceived as natural to the
Soul of Man as Thought, and of so strong an Obligation, that the Guilt of
violating, ipso facto inflicted Punishment, in a just dread of the great
Avenger: Thus as Preservation was truly styled a continued Creation; was
Providence by the same Reason presumed to interpose in all humane Transactions;
to speak upon a Philosophical, not Scripture Account, disappoint the Devices of
the Crafty, turn all their Wisdom into Madness and Folly; and how can any Man
imagine a more rational Supposition? than that he who made should Govern the
World, continue Absolute Monarch, Sovereign over all; and whenever any of our
Undertakings clash with, or otherwise thwart the Eternal Purposes of his Will,
how troublesome do they prove in the Management? and fatal in the End? So that
however plausible their Speculations may seem, and whatever Success attends
their first Attempts; I dare Conclude with this as an infallible Truth, There
can be no lasting and happy Establishments, without some moral Assurance of the
Almighty's Approbation and Blessing.

April 6. 99.
UNDIX CAPITUM.
CHAP. I. The Commonwealth-Party could never agree upon any one Model, page 15.
Chap. II. Monarchy has ever had the preference, p. 30. Chap. III. King James,
and Charles I. designed nothing of Arbitrary Power, p. 38. Chap. IV. Not any
just Ground for complaint of Grievances, p. 58. Chap. V. No reason to complain
of Favorites, and Evil Counselors, p. 72. Chap. VI. Innovasions in Religion,
never designed, p. 87. Chap. VII. No design of introducing Popery, p. 109.
Chap. VIII. Of the Lent Ships, Rochel, and French War, p. 132. Chap. IX. Of the
Palatinate, Bohemia, and that Queen, p. 149. Chap. X. Of the Book of Sports, p.
159. Chap. XI. Of Ship Money, p. 175. Chap. XII. Of King James's Death, p. 185.
Chap. XIII. His Government before the Rebellion, p. 1^^.
Part II.
Chap. I. Of the Scotch Rebellion, p. 1. Chap. II. Of the Irish Rebellion, p.
59. Chap. III. Of the English Rebellion, p. 81. Chap. IV. Of the King in
Custody, etc. p. 148. Chap. V. Of the King's Murder, p. 181.
THE INTRODUCTION.
IT IS not full forty Years, since this unhappy Nation, for about half that time
immediately precedent, groaned under the miserable Distractions of an unnatural
Civil War; had her Ancient Monarchy and whole Frame of Government, exposed and
trampled upon by the Arbitrary impositions, of Presbyterian Rage, Independent
Licentiousness, Protectorian Usurpation, and Fanatic Fury, all which as they
took their Turns, and made their several Insults, upon each other, so the poor
Kingdom continued under every of them, one dismal Scene of Slavery and
Confusion; till the Provocation arose to so high a Ferment, as all Orders and
Degrees of Men whatsoever, unanimously resolved to free themselves from such
Intolerable Oppressions. And whoever saw the Turn of our Captivity, in the year
Sixty; how sensible we were of our own Madnesses and Follies, and taught by
that dear-bought experience, resolutely bent upon our Old Establishment, that
well tempered Polity, in Church and State, which alone could fix us upon a
sure Bottom, and prevent our utter Ruin; I say, whosoever saw this, as likewise
what a fright the several Delinquent Factions were in, what Acknowledgments and
Submissions they made, what Pardons they su'd for, and how Graciously, how
Generally they were misbestow'd, could ever have imagined that either they, or
any descended from them, should presume in this Age at least, to open their
Mouths by way of Apology, or Extenuation, for such fatal Mischiefs, much less
endeavor to have them Trump'd up, and Reacted.

The few designed for Exemplary punishment, were those Execrable Regicides, who
dared to embrew their Hands in the Blood of their Sacred Sovereign, (yet this
with a reserve of Favor to such as sat, but did not sign that cursed Bill, or
afterward came in upon a Proclamation of Surrender) and if one of that
Villainous Crew, escaping the Hangman's clutches, by a Foreign flight, had the
Impudence to leave a Narrative of what part himself and some of his Accomplices
bore in that dismal Tragedy, it is no more than what might be expected from such
Reprobate Minds, to which how far that Blood-thirsty pack were given over, too
sadly appeared, as well from their Deportment at the Gallows, as all the former
transactions of their Lives.

But that the Monarchy still continuing, and a Monarch on the Throne, these
Remains of his should be Printed, and Publicly Sold, cried up by the whole
Party for an extraordinary Piece, and swallowed as such by our many superficial
Readers, (who take what comes fresh from the Press, and every New Author, are
brought over to his Opinion) looks very daring, as if they were not without
great hopes of having their Good Old Cause new Bottomed, and the Rump once more
set uppermost: All which the Prefacer does more than intimate by giving so
great a Deference to his Author, and the Cause he engaged in, as if such alone
made the Service of their Country the principal care of their Lives, and all
Government Arbritrary but in their Hands, page 4. And to excite your
Commiseration, he adds, that when Charles the 2d was permitted to Act his part,
this Gentleman who had gone through innumerable Hazards for the Liberty of
England, was stripped of his Estate, and under the Odious Name of Traitor
forced to Abandon his Native Country, p. 6. Such Language as this we were
forced to bear with, when they had got the Power into their own Hands; but sure
we are not yet come to 48 or 59. when a company of profligate Villains, the
Scum and Scorn of Mankind, with an Army of Ianisaries to their Assistance, took
such Care of England's Liberty, as to make all Honest Men Slaves, and Loyal Men
Traitors; and whoever is so easy as to believe there is one Syllable of Truth
in this Prefaoer's Harangues and flourishes, I wish, (so that others might not
suffer with them,) they were some time under that sort of Free-Government for
their better Information.

That this his Commonwealth-Champion was sent for to recover Ireland out of the
Hands of those Papists, is a Secret not known before; and I fancy they that did
it, had rather it should have continued so, or be quite forgotten, than the
Reception he found here. To be sure, the Business was done without him; and if
this his Admirer would have been so ingenuous as to tell what those Worthy
Gentlemen in the House of Commons said, when they expressed their Indignation
at his Return, 'twould have been as well worth transmitting to Posterity as any
Remarks upon that Conjuncture, p. 7. Neither is it at all for his Reputation,
that his Family was Ancient, and had an Estate which placed him in the first
Rank of Gentlemen, p. 4. The English Gentry were the main support of the Royal
Cause, and stood by their oppressed Prince with an Unparalleled Bravery,
considering the Necessities they both labored under: Some indeed were drawn to
the contrary Party by mistake, or misinformation, and left them in due time;
others persever'd too long, but when it came to the Arraignmemt, and Murder of
the King, it was their utmost, and universal Detestation; this well descended
Gentleman had few other Associates in that Horrid Act, than Draymen, Cobblers,
Tinkers, etc. the very Refuse of Mechanics as well as Mankind, especially as
to the Army Officers, who were the chief promoters thereof, whilst our doughty
Members, whatever they thought of themselves, served no otherwise, than as
their Tools and Properties; and so indeed were they Cromwell's, though much
regretted by them, when he laid aside his Vizard, and assumed all to himself.
Since therefore this Author of theirs, so basely degenerated from most others
of his Quality, as to become not only Rebel, but Regicide, I shall have so
little regard for his Descent, as to give him the bare Name of Ludlow.

Whether he writ all these Memoirs, or more than these, is not of moment to
enquire: The Vindicator of Oliver Cromwell tells us when Blood went to him at
Geneva, in order to engage him in New Disturbances, he found him writing of a
History, and thought he might be much more proper for that, than the Command of
General, which his Admirers here designed him; the other's quick and
penetrating Judgment, soon discovering his blind side, and that only his being
of the Party, gave him the Reputation of Parts: And accordingly that Vindicator
has as mean an Opinion of his History as the other of his Generalship. And so
must every one else who regards either Sense or Truth. Although it is likewise
said these two Volumes are but the Abridgment of many more Reams, foul'd upon
this Subject, which his Party, and Printer, thought fit to lick into something
of Form, contract, and perhaps alter too, as might best serve the present
Design of promoting the Good Old Cause.

As to my particular undertaking the Vindication of our Royal Martyr, I doubt
not but to satisfy every impartial Reader, that he writes not one Syllable of
Truth, yet withal is such a Commonplace Recorder of Falsehoods, as to mention
nothing but those Old Calumnies and Slanders, which indeed served the Faction's
turn when first started, and misled the Credulous Rabble; but have been long
since detected and evinced by the Clearest Demonstration any matter of Fact is
capable of; for the same Cheat never last's long; Truth certainly prevails in
the End: Upon which account all such as take these indirect Courses, must
necessarily be qualified with a quick Invention, be sure to have a New Trick at
hand, as soon as the Old is discovered; that the Parties imposed upon, may have
no leisure to reflect, or otherwise discover the Iuggle: And by this Artifice,
more especially were our 41 Confusions commenced, and carried on, about which
time a Spirit of Calumny and detraction, of Evil Speaking, Lying and
Slandering, seemed to be let loose, as Satan in the Revelations, to deceive the
Nation, and persecute all therein, who would not worship that Gog and Magog,
they were going to set up; with this Spirit, I say, our many Pulpit Beautifews
and Lay Demagogues, were so cursedly possessed, as nothing Sacred, or Civil,
could escape their Obloquy, or restrain the Madness of the People, from
believing their forged Reports, or prosecuting their Rebellious Designs; it is
inconceivable the Delusions they imposed upon them, the Contradictions they
made them swallow, till it became so habitual to the whole Party, as every
little Mechanic, and Blew Apron'd Brother would as naturally tell a Lie for
the good of the Cause, as the Sale of their Wares; and if discovered, be as far
from Shame, as the Devil from a Blush. Afterward indeed the Evil Spirit was
for some time conjured down, confined to the Dark Cell of its own Melancholy
thoughts, and sad regret, for disappointed Mischiefs; but of late it is broke
forth again, and rages most violently, prevails to astonishment upon a
Reinfatuated Age; for from thence more especially it must proceed, that Men
should have so soon forgot, not only God's Mercies, but their own Miseries too.

Among the many other Allays which an impartial Judgment will find to abate
much the envied Happiness of Princes, it is none of the least, that during their
full Gales of Prosperity they are beset with Flatterers instead of Friends,
their Impunity is their danger, and Superiority to Laws leaves their Spirits
unguarded, spoiled of any other restraint than that All-Seeing Eye which has
too little influence upon the rest of Mankind. On the other side their
declining Fortune constantly runs into extremes, or if they go to the Grave in
Peace, their Ashes are certainly Arraigned for whatever the Importunity of
Dependents, Distraction of Counsels, Exigency of Affairs, or Iniquity of the
Times, forced them upon. And herein no History affords a more deplorable
Instance than that of our Royal and Blessed Martyr, who having run a Course of
the most inhuman Treatments ever offered to Crowned Head, since that of Thorns
was worn; and then universally acquitted, not only by the Grand Inquest of the
Nation, but by all others, who had the least Sense of Honor, Truth, or Virtue,
in their Souls; has now of late been Murdered afresh, his Memory so
despitefully Assaulted, and the many Old Calumnies, and Reproaches so
maliciously Revived, as if there had been nothing done or said in his
Vindication. Could they allege any thing de Novo, it might give a fresh Gloss
to their Bafled Cause; but their Malice did so fully disgorge it self at first,
as they can only New Chew the same Coleworts, take down and Vomit up again
those Villainous Defamations, which have been as often answered as urged; and
perhaps had not been urged again, did they not hope the Licentiousness of the
Age, which God forbid, would bear them out, and enable them to crush any one,
who should dare to reply.

He who, to the best of my Observation, first brake the Ice upon this unworthy
Subject, was one Roger Coke Esquire in Two Volumes, which he calls Detections of
the four last Reigns, a Title of great sound, and cannot but raise an
Expectation in every inquisitive Reader, of some great Discoveries, some deep
Mysteries of State, or Mischievous Intrigues, the World has not hitherto been
acquainted with: Whereas I defy any of his Abettors (for he is gone to his
proper Place) to produce one single Passage, which has not been alleged, and
replied to, before, and as often replied to, as alleged: An Abridgment of all
the Libels, and all the Lies, since the coming in of King James the first, had
been a more agreeable Title; for though Rushworth's Collections, and the Life
of Lord Keeper Williams are mostly cited by him (Authors too too partial) yet
there is not one Roguy Pamphlet from Sr. A. W.'s Court of King James, to
Milton's (...), I speak in reference to the first Volume only) which has not
afforded Materials for this ill-natured Malicious Work; neither could any one
expect otherwise who knew the Man, and his Conversation, being of an haughty,
positive Humor, with all the other ill Qualities of his Grandfather, the great
Lord Chief Justice Coke, (and perhaps too by Natural descent) without any of
the good: Indeed he seemed to be the Caput Mortuum of that high Spirit, so dull
and insipid, as Spite it self could not raise him; for it is thought he wrote
those bitter Invectives against the Royal Family, to be revenged on King James
the first, for deposing his Grandfather; although it is well known his
Arbitrary, and Insolent deportment in that great Trust, made it absolutely
necessary; but engaging in the popular Cause afterward, that expiated for all.
In short, the Whole of all what he calls a History is of as loose a Contexture
as our Capitation Stuff, and of as Course a Composition, scare giving a good
Word to any Person, or any Party: He declares a suspicion of offending the
Commonwealth's Men, and yet obliges them with one continued Libel against
Monarchy, whereunto he was too well qualified by the predominancy of a Swelling
Spleen, and Overflowing Gall, with other unhappy Circumstances both as to
Temper and Condition, so that had they not been thus Vented, it is to be feared
he might with Judas have burst asunder: Yet this Uncouth Piece, because False,
and foul Mouthed, took to Admiration among the several Factions, insomuch as in
two Years time no less than three Impressions were wrought off; indeed they had
not been gratified with any thing of that kind for several Years before, and
such perverse Dispositions (like Men in Fevers) will greedily swallow whatever
allays the present Drought of their Minds, though it promotes the Distemper, and
hastens their Ruin. And upon this account is there such Care taken of a fresh
supply, so that an Undesigning Integrity cannot but be concerned for the next
Age (which generally gives the best account of that which preceded) how it will
be able to Cull out the Truth from those Numberless Volumes of Lies and
Forgeries, which every Commonwealth Bigot, and Mercenary Pen is free to impose
upon the World.

According to what I mentioned of a fresh Supply; some Months since these
Memoirs of Ludlow came forth, and are altogether as much in Vogue as the
Detections were at first; though as to the Libelling part upon our Royal Martyr,
it discovers nothing but the same inveterate Spite, and repeated Untruths set
forth in another Method, and different Appearance, wherein that Spirit of
Calumny, and Delusion, which possesses every Individual throughout their
several Tribes, knowing how much they delight in variety, does most readily
gratify them, finding it the readiest means to secure their compliance in the
grossest Impositions, and falsest Slanders.

Whilst I am Writing this, there are two Pamphlets more come to my Hand, in
comparison whereof, the Two former may pass for Candid Modest Writers, Their
Titles are, A Defense of the Parliament of 1640. and the People of England
against King Charles I. And, King Charles I. no such Saint or Martyr as
commonly Reputed; both which without doubt were designed for the last Effort of
Fanatic Effrontie; and thought to give as fatal a stroke to the Royal Martyr's
Reputation, as the Ax did to his Life; and if the rudest Language that ever was
Penned, and the impudentest Lies, that ever were Told, could be any ways
Effectual thereunto, their work is thoroughly done; for there is not one
Sentence in both these Libels but must come under both those Characters: Milton
had Wit and Style, to flourish off his malicious Reproaches; but here is such
Billinsgate stuff as never burdened the Press till our Salamanca Graduate led
the Van; and if he wrote, as is commonly reported, by a Club, these doubtless
came from the same Fraternity; Their Style, their Sense, and Good Manners,
exactly accord, and so do their Temper, and Complexion, all of the same Metal,
true Monumental Brass, and it is great pity they are not every one severally
Erected, without any Pedestals to support them. However I will not so
positively place it here, as to exclude their Counterpart, that Club of
Calves-Heads at the other end of Town.

It Is in the mean while an unhappy Consideration, and never thought consistent
with any well ordered Government, that every impudent profligate Wretch, should
assume a Liberty of Arraigning at Pleasure all Orders and Degrees of Men, both
Living and Dead, even to the Sacred Ashes of the best Man, and most abused
Prince that ever sat upon a Throne May not the Great God who Judges right
(upon defect of all Earthly Powers in doing Justice to injured Innocence, and
oppressed Virtue) be hereby provoked to Arise and Defend his own Cause,
Remember the Rebukes his Servants have, whereby their Enemies take occasion to
blaspheme his Name, and slander the Footsteps of his Anointed.

A JUST DEFENSE OF THE Royal Martyr, CHARLES I. PART I.
CHAP. I. The Commonwealth Party could never agree upon any one Model.
OUR Author begins his Memoirs with the Ruin of his Cause, the Roasting of the
Rump, which doubtless was a great disappointment, very much to his prejudice,
and therefore in reference to his own dear Self, we will grant he had Reason to
complain, That having seen our Cause betrayed, and the most solemn Promises
that could be made to the Asserters of it, openly Violated, I departed from my
Native Country, etc. Now because this Cause of his is so much magnified
throughout both his Volumes, as the only Means of securing the Liberty, Safety,
and public Interest of the People, whereas the Office of a King was Burdensome
and Dangerous, the House of Peers useless; upon which account both ought to be
Abolished, and the Government settled in the way of a Commonwealth, the two
first Votes they made after their Execrable Parricide, it will I hope be
thought no improper digression, to examine the Rise of this excellent Model, how
it came first in Power? How it behaved it self whilst so, and what became of it
in the end? In order whereunto we must know, that the Violent and Numerous
Faction in that fatal long Parliament of Forty, were all of one piece so long
as the King was able to bear up; and most implacable against all such Loyal
Faithful Members as adhered unto him, some of which they turned out of the
House, and forced many others to withdraw, as well for the security of their
Persons, as in Obedience to their Consciences; which obliged them to stand by
their injured Prince so that in January 43, the King assembled at Oxon a
greater Number of Lords and Commons then sat at Westminster, although the
latter supplied themselves with a sort of Cattle called Recruiters, from such
Corporations and Buroughs, as were within their Quarters, where they might be
sure of confiding Men, who would not fail to carry on the Work as they had
begun.

But divine Vengeance designing further to scourge us with our own Rod, though
it gave Success to their rebellious Arms, yet withal, so divided them amongst
themselves, as they that expected most, had least of the Spoil; whilst the Bear
and the Wolf, the Presbyterian and Independent contended, one cunning Fox ran
off with the Prey; for as soon as the Royal Cause was vanquished, those two
Iunto's fell into implacable Enmities in the House; and because the Independent
was smallest in Number, they supplied that Defect by the Army which had been so
modeled by Cromwell, as to be all of their own Leven, and undertook their
Quarrel so effectually, as to bring a Charge against eleven of the most leading
Members on the other Side, who thereupon were forced to absent themselves, some
of them, for their better Security, beyond the Seas. But this Purge would not
do, there must be a stronger Dose to remove the tough Presbyterian Humor,
which was accordingly prescribed; for the other Iunto finding themselves still
out-voted, ran away to the Army, and carried their Speaker with them, making a
sad Complaint, that their elder Brethren of the other Faction were obstinate
and refractory, and would not let them have their Wills in going
thorough-stitch to the Ruin of King and Kingdom, at leastwise would not let it
go their own Way, and therefore begged their Assistance in the Accomplishment
of so good a Work; whereupon they strait-way marched up to Westminster, filled
both the Palace Yards with Soldiers, and set double Files through the Hall, up
to the Doors of both Houses, looking scornfully upon the Members which had sat
in the Absence of their Speaker, and threatened to pull them forth by the Ears
if they did not give speedy Satisfaction; so that at present they carried all
before them. However the Army, or rather, their Managers Cromwell and Ireton,
seemed herein to mis-time their Design; the whole Nation was alarmed at these
extravagant Proceedings, that the King should be so barbarously confined, the
Parliament forced, now they seemed somewhat disposed to an Accommodation, and
all things controlled by the Arbitrary Licentiousness of a Military Rabble,
even to a Vote, of no more Addresses to the King: Which first proceeded from
their Motion without Doors, to their Creatures within; this made several
Counties petition, and then rise in Arms; some who had been Commanders for the
Parliament in Wales, endeavored to retrieve their Country from those Mischiefs
their Mistakes had brought upon it: And Scotland actually declaring against
their English Brethren's Abuse of the King, provided an Army to invade them.

This made our Men of the Sword postpone for the present, their
State-Reformation, and fall to their proper Calling: Fairfax undertook such
loyal Gentlemen and Parties in Kent and Essex, as had engaged to free their
Country from an Army of Mamaluks, and shut them up in Colchester, whilst
Cromwell's veterane Forces found a ready Conquest of the Welsh; and the Scotch
under such ill Conduct, as if they came on purpose to acquaint him, how easy
it was for a Man of Resolution and good Management, to subdue and enslave their
Nation. In the mean time, whilst this kind of second War was on foot, the whole
Kingdom, besides those concerned in the forementioned Engagements, began to
reflect what a miserable Condition they had brought themselves into: The City
petition the Parliament for a personal Treaty with the King; they accordingly
vote in their secluded Members, repeal that of no Addresses, and agree to a
Treaty at the Isle of Wight; which nevertheless met with so many Obstacles and
Delays from the adverse Iunto, as the Army had finished their Business before
the Treaty could be brought to a Conclusion; and were so incensed thereat, as
they came up in a Rage to London, took Quarters at and about Whitehall, fell
the second Time to reform the House, whereof they actually seized and committed
41 Members, Hist. of Indepen. part 2. page 31.
denied Entrance to above 160 more, besides about 40 or 50 who voluntarily
withdrew to avoid their Violence, so that the whole was now reduced to between
40 or 50, such profligate Wretches, both as to Life and Principle, that they
would stick at no Villainy the Bashaws their Masters thought fit to put upon
them. And this is the true Origin of what is commonly called the Rump of the
long Parliament, the End whereof is so much condol'd by our Author, although it
might as properly have been called the Excrement; to be sure their Actions will
make our Nation stink in the Nostrils of all good Men to the End of the World.

We are next to enquire how this Fag End of a Parliament behaved it self,
having got the Power into their Hands, or rather were the Substitutes, the
Properties of the Army; for that is their truest Character: And here to let the
Nation see their Business should not be done by Halves, they began with these
Resolves.

1. That the People under God are the Original of all just Power. 2. That the
Commons of England assembled in Parliament, being chosen by, and representing
the People, have the supreme Authority of this Nation. 3. That whatsoever is
enacted and declared for Law by the Commons, has the Force of a Law. 4. That
all the People of this Nation are included thereby, although the Consent of the
King and House of Peers be not had thereto. 5. That to raise Arms against the
People's Representatives, is high Treason. 6. That the King himself took Arms
against the Parliament, and upon that account is guilty of the Blood shed
through the Civil War, and that he ought to expiate the Crime with his own
Blood. Whose Trial they fell to immediately, and with an unparallel Impudence,
founded their Dominion in the Blood of the Lord's Anointed, and their Liege
Sovereign; whereas granting their Position of the People's Right to be true, as
it is abominably false, there was not the tenth Part of the Commons at the
making that cursed Ordinance, nor would one in a thousand of the People have
assented thereunto, and this the Lady Fairfax told them at the Trial, from an
adjoining Scaffold: Had that Tool her Husband shown the like Courage, it might
have turned to Account; but Men that have a long time habituated themselves in
Mischief, God seldom permits to be Instruments of any Good. To be sure, as this
cursed Fact rendered the Rump most infamous to all Degrees thoroughout the
Nation, so the Grandees of the Army, after they had traitorously served their
turn, paid them as little Respect, and thought they were too contemptible a
Body to manage so great a Trust; to which purpose the Agitators, as soon as
they had first purged the House, declared it was requisite to have a more equal
Representative, and accordingly printed a Model, which they called The
Agreement of the People, and so continued frequently harping upon the same
String, and pressing to have it taken into Consideration, which forced them
upon what our Author declares, Page 313. And now the Parliament being desirous
to let the People see that they designed not to perpetuate themselves, after
they should be able to make a complete Settlement of Affairs, and provide for
the Security of the Nation, etc. Resolved, that the House would, upon every
Wednesday Morning, turn themselves into a grand Committee, to debate concerning
the Manner of assembling, and Power of future successive Parliaments, the
Number of Persons to serve for each County, that the Nation might be more
equally represented, etc. And thus they continued two or three Years, and would
have till Doomsday according to their own Vote, since they resolved not to
rise, till a complete Settlement of Affairs, and the Nation's Security provided
for. But Cromwell was resolved they should not stay till then; yet having a
different Design from all his Fellow Rebels, kept them in till that was ripe;
in Order whereunto Ireland must be first brought into perfect Subjection: And
then the Scotch gave him an Opportunity of retaliating their many Outrages,
Invasions, and such like Covenant Kindnesses, which he did to purpose: And
having gained the Crowning Victory, as he termed it, at Worcester thought it
then a fit Time to pull off his Vizard, and send that Pack of Rascals, as he
called them at a Nobleman's Table, a Grazing; the Account whereof, as our
Author gives it from the 447th Page forward, is very pleasant; and shows, that
though they were every one profoundly practiced in those Hellish Arts of
Treachery and Dissimulation, yet Cromwell infinitely outdid them all: They were
but petty Devils in Comparison with him, that true Lucifer incarnate.
But what our Author says of their being supported by the Affections of the
People, Page.459. because acting for their Interest, is so gross, so palpable a
Lie, as sure he could not believe his Memoirs should be printed till every Man
then living was dead: Next the Restoration, I never knew any thing more
grateful, the whole Kingdom thorough, than their Dismission; it was the only
popular Act wherein Cromwell obliged all Parties, and made his Usurpation more
tolerable, by ridding us of the most contemptible Set of Men that ever sat at
the Helm of any Government. But it is the common Cant of our Commonwealth
Coxcombs, (and it is used as much by our Author as any of them) to give that
Handful of Fools and Knaves which adhered to them, the Title of the Godly
Party, and all the good People of England.

Well, now they are gone, and had six Years time to fret and bite their Nails;
for we may guess at their Regret, by the Spite and Revenge they were guilty of
when got again in play, which they could never do as long as Cromwell trod the
Stage; but when he was carried off, the Army resolved to revenge his tricking
them, upon Richard who succeeded him, and could think of no better Tools to
effect that Work, than by setting their old Iournymen the Rump about it; in
order whereunto they placed them in the Workhouse, and set them to the
Business, which they soon dispatched, although they had much ado to find a
Number sufficient; for however our Author pretends, he gave Dr. Owen a List of
160 which had sat since the Year 48, they were forced to send for Munson and
Harry Martyn out of the Goal, to make up a Quorum of 40. from which time
forward, to their final Expiration, there can be nothing more comical in any
History, Romance, or Play, than the several Transactions, Caballings, and
Intrigues amongst them, as related all along by our Author; what Iealousies and
Distrusts they had of one another; what Plots and Counterplots, Turnings out
and in, Quarrels, Treaties, and Patchings up, wherein our Author tells us what
pains he took, and with what Moderation he proceeded, to little purpose, God be
praised. One thing more especially they could never get over, and that was a
settled well fixed Form of Government: The Army were resolved upon a standing
Senate of their own Body, I presume, to overawe the civil Representatives: The
Rump, on the other hand, thought themselves so much their Masters, as to vote
the Speaker General, and order that all, even the most supreme Officers, should
have no Commissions but from him; whereupon what passed between Sir Arthur
Haslerig and Lambert, page 677, may be thought worth relating. Lambert
complained how that Act left them at Mercy; only said Sir Arthur, at the Mercy
of the Parliament, who are your good Friends. I know not, replied the other,
why they should not be at our Mercy, as well as we at their's; which made Sir
Arthur shake his Head, as our Author owns: And really it is hard to resolve
whether they were more stupid or insolent, to imagine, that a Company of rusty,
sturdy Iades, who had all along got the Bitt between their Teeth, should suffer
such a Pack of Fools to ride them at Pleasure. Neither was the Dispute less
amongst themselves in the House upon the same Subject; some were for choosing
Representatives, according to the old Constitution; others would have them
proportioned in every County, according to their Share in the Payment of Taxes:
Henry Nevill, and half a Score of such Mercurial Heads, with more Sail than
Ballast, strong Fancies and weak Judgments, were for a Rotation, according to
their Friend Harrington's Oceana, and much Pudder there was about it at a Club
set up for that purpose, with several such like maggotty Conceits, as we find
Page 674. To be brief, Into such a desperate Frenzy were they fallen, as our
Author owns, Page 855, and being ripe for the Correction of Heaven, nothing
could prevent it, our Enemies succeeding in all their Attempts, and all our
Endeavors proving abortive: An ingenuous Confession this: When Men begin to
suffer they begin likewise to reflect, and if ever, speak Truth; for General
Monk having well observed his Friend Cromwell's Arts of Dissimulation, and how
much it was in Vogue with all the several Parties, proved so good a Proficient
therein, as to foil them at their own Weapon; made as many Protestations to the
Rump, that he would act altogether for their Interest and Welfare, as the long
Parliament did at first to the King, and kept them as well, so that the Kingdom
was restored by the same Course it was ruined, which whether he designed or not
at his first setting out (for that remains still in the dark, how positive
soever our Author is to the contrary) yet finding all the other Factions and
Interest so slippery and false, and the Nation withal so importunate for a free
Parliament, which they knew would introduce their old Establishments, there was
no other way left to secure and advance himself, and quocunque modo Rem, since
it was done, the more unlikely the Means, the greater the Mercy, and an
overruling Power the more clearly visible therein; and therefore Cromwell's
Cant upon his Scotch Victory (which our Author so much applauds, page 329) may
with much more reason come in here, since the Lord, upon this solemn Appeal,
has so signally given Judgment on Monarchy's Side, when all Hopes of
Deliverance seemed to be cut off: Methinks our Commonwealths Men should give
over all Thoughts of placing that in the Saddle, which having been so often
there already, could not keep its Seat. It Is likewise a pretty Passage our
Author relates, that when some of the Rump and Cromwell's Mirmidons had a
Conference about the former's Dismission, Saloway desired, that before they
took away the present Authority; they would declare what they would have
established in its Room, page 455. To which it was replied, That it was
necessary to pull down this Government, and it would be time enough then to
consider what should be placed in the Room of it. And here indeed they were
sure enough; for Cromwell designed himself, though it was not then proper for
his Creature to declare so much; but the other Side could never yet resolve,
and would be as far off as ever, if trump'd up again: So that in this
Particular I dare be a little positive, which yet must be acknowledged a very
reasonable Proposal, that if the Dissenters would forbear undermining the
Church till they could agree amongst themselves (which it is said they are now
hot upon, and are doubtless all too hot to do any thing to purpose) as to
Matters of Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship; and the Republicans do the same
by the Monarchy, as to the Management of civil Affairs; I make no doubt but
Church and State might last as long as any one Government in Europe, or the
whole World.

CHAP. II. Monarchy has ever had the Preference.
BUT though they never could, nor never will agree what to set up, yet at the
Negative they are the Devil and all: Monarchy of Necessity must down, for all
Kings affect to be Tyrants, to insult over, and enslave their People; neither
do they care to be bound up by Laws, but are uneasy under such Restraints, and
take the first Opportunity to break thorough and make themselves absolute. This
is the never failing Sugar-Plumb, wherewith popular factious Spirits are sure
to take with the Rabble; carry them out of God's Blessing into the warm Sun,
give them good Words at present, and Repentance in Reversion: For as never any
Age abounded more with State Empyricks, than the present, so it is generally
concluded by them, that the Distemper has all along lain in the Head, without
ever considering that the Head is the Seat of Knowledge, the Residence of the
Soul, not otherwise to be indisposed than by the Malignity of such Humors as
the Body sends up, Fumes of the Spleen or Stomach, and too violent Ascent of
Blood or Spirits, from whence alone that is disturbed, and all irregular
Affections there produced; and this equally holds in the politic as natural
Body: Neither are they less mistaken in their way of Cure, whether it be
Ignorance, Rashness, or both; for the Head cannot ache, but they conclude it an
Apoplexy, and bleed the whole to Death, and go so uncouthly about a cut Finger,
every slight and trivial Hurt, as to make it gangreen: God deliver us from such
Physicians as these, wherewith, notwithstanding as we have much abounded, so
are there still too many.

To come therefore more calmly to the Question: As it must be granted on the
one Side, there can be no such thing as a perfect State to be found in this
World, so must it be acknowledged on the other, optimus ille qui minimis
urgetur, even in this Sense, that is best which has fewest Inconveniences; for
as Grotius applies that of the old Comedian: Aut haec cum illis sunt habenda,
aut illa cum his mittenda sunt, the bad must be born with, in Consideration of
the greater good we should otherwise go without; and proceeding according to
this Method, whether we consider them in Thesi or Hypothesi, the Balance will
certainly turn on Monarchy's Side: For first, in Thesi, that has ever had the
Preference with all Men of sober Sense and quiet Principles; and
notwithstanding the many Harangues, and few Instances, the contrary Party are
forward to bring, no Monarch can be looked upon, but as obliged not only in
Honor and Duty, but Interest likewise, to consult the Welfare of his Subjects
as much as a Father of a Family that of his Children, and has the same
Inducement to keep and leave it in good Order to his Heir or Successor, as a
Husbandman to improve that Farm which he is sure shall descend to his
Posterity. And thus it has generally been all the World over, and in all Ages,
where a Kingdom was looked upon no otherwise than a larger Family (from whence
at first they all came) and the Master thereof, as the Pater Patriae, the
common Father of the Country; and when otherwise, the Children have been oftener
to blame than the Parent, though when the Breach was once made, nothing could
be more natural than for both Sides to run into Extremes. Farther yet, we
should consider, all earthly Powers, and every Individual under them, are
subordinate to the Almighty Sovereign of the Universe, who in a secret and
wonderful manner, arbitrates and controuls all humane Undertakings, according
to the infinite Wisdom of his own unsearchable Will; and when provoked to high
Displeasure by some enormous National Crimes, has been then observed more
especially to interpose, and give a People over to such cursed Infatuations as
to violate all Rules of common Discretion, as well as Duty, and precipitate
their own Ruin; whereof farther on, we may have too sad Occasion to make
Application. And however, toward the End of the last Century, and Beginning of
this, several Parts of Europe were mad upon this Republican Humor, and many
amongst us are so foolish as still to continue the Freak; yet I have sometimes
thought with my self, from the few Instances we have in History of this kind of
Government; and them them that were, mostly founded upon the Ruin of
Monarchies; continued all the Time of their being in perpetual Disorders and
Convulsions of State, till at last they resolved into a Monarchy again. This I
say, has made me think, that they all took their Beginning from the
forementioned Displeasure of the Almighty; for inverting that Economy wherein
he had placed the World, and maugre all their Conceits and Oppositions, would
have it so continue: For the Great King of Heaven is jealous, both of his
Honor and Prerogative; and when a few fancyful Novellists will dare to set up
the Right of their Sovereign Lords the People, in Opposition to his Ordinances
and eternal Establishments, the Decision may be easily foreseen, if with
Reverence duly attended; his infinite Wisdom and Patience so wonderfully
operating, and in so secret a manner upon their hard and impenitent Hearts, as
to make themselves the Instruments of his Wrath and Vengeance. And from the
same Power and secret Will it is, that the Parties themselves are so little
sensible of the Judgment, as to maintain their Opinion with more Earnestness
than ever, and so may continue without Control; for, having, withal the
Command of Legions, no wise Philosopher will dare to dispute his best against
them. However, God is not mocked, and so they will find at last.

But then, secondly, If we consider this in Hypothesi, and bring it home to our
own Case, we shall find a very black Account; for after all their Noise and
Clamors, the little Finger of this Upstart Commonwealth, proved heavier to the
whole Nation, than the Loins of the most rigid Monarch that ever sat upon the
Throne: Nay, it is farther certain, by most dear bought Experience, that there
was more Arbitrary Power, and illegal Commitments exorbitant Taxes, Rapine and
Plunder; Sequestrations and Sacrilege, with whatever else could be most Unjust
and Tyrannical; voted, and put in practice during the twenty Years Usurpation
of the several Iunto's, than by all the Crowned Heads; ay, and their Favorites
too (to take off all Allegations of that kind) since the Conquest; I might add,
since the Creation; did our Histories reach so far. It Is modestly expressed by
our Author, that notwithstanding their other Helps, the Charge at Sea and Land
was so great, as they were forced to lay a Land Tax of 120000 l. per Mensem:
Which, notwithstanding, if we may believe him, the People paid very freely.
Now let us examine a little what these other Helps were: They had seized, not
only upon all the Crown, but Church Lands; and disposed of them at Pleasure:
They had the free Contributions of the City Dames, and all others well
affected, as far as their Quarters extended, even to the poor Country Wenches
Bodkins and Thymbles. They had the Sequestration of all the Loyal Nobility and
Gentry; whose Estates they disposed of amongst themselves, to several 1000 l.
per Annum. They had raised the Customs much higher than ever they were in the
King's Time: And in humble Imitation of their Brethren the Dutch, retrenched
the Excesses of Good Fellowship, by an Excise; which the Nation was never
acquainted withal before, and now must never be without.

Besides 25 th Parts, Decimations; with numberless other Ways of squeezing the
People, who notwithstanding must think all too little for that happy Liberty
this Free State had brought them into. One thing farther I must observe, in
Reference to the Land Tax; that as it was collected according to the Lunary, or
as the Term then went, Military Months; so they would not rest there, but were
so good at Multiplication, as to repeat that Monthly Assessment sixteen or
seventeen times in a Year: Whereas the Sum, which two or three of these Months
amounted to, was as much as was ever given to, or expected by any King before,
and would have made Charles I. the happyest Prince, and continued us the
easiest People under Heaven. Can we be pityed to have it brought to more
Millions than that made 100000 ls. and a Necessity of continuing the same? So
fatal a thing it is, not to take the Wise Man's Advice; but instead of that
Fear to God, and Honor to the King, which he recommends, be meddling with such
as are given to change, the most troublesome Generation of Men any Nation was
ever plagued withal; for whatever Improvements our Royal Societies may make as
to Natural Knowledge; Oso's in Politics, or Religion, are most intolerable;
their Chemical Heads will never forbear trying Experiments, till both evaporate
in Smoke and Confusion. Had Sir W. T.'s Alphonso the Wise lived in these
mutable Times, to those four Old Things he gave so great a Preference, there
doubtless had been added a fifth, and that is, Old Government.

CHAP. III. King James, and Charles I. designed nothing of Arbitrary Power.
IN Confirmation of what I said, That Arbitrary Power is the Grand Topic of
the Faction: Our Author Ludlow begins his spiteful Charge there: Those who make
any Enquiry into King James's Reign, will find, that tho his Inclinations were
strongly bent to render himself Absolute, yet he chose rather to carry on that
Design by Fraud than Violence: But King Charles having taken a nearer View of
Despotick Government, in his Iourny to France and Spain; tempted with the
glittering Show, and imaginary Pleasures of that empty Pageantry; Immediately
after his Ascent to the Throne, pulled off the Mask, and openly discovered his
Intentions to make the Crown absolute and Independent, page 1, 2. Audacter
Calumniari goes a great way in any bad Cause: To be sure this Calumny has been
so frequently urged, so constantly inculcated, as several worthy Gentlemen,
otherwise well affected to Monarchy in general, as well as the Memory of those
two Princes, are yet prone to suspect they might have some Inclinations that
way; and for their Satisfaction more especially it is I give them and my self
this Trouble. To show therefore how little Ground there was or is for this
Suspicion: King James called Parliaments as often as any Prince ever did, and
courted them as much, perhaps more than was requisite, considering the Temper
they were of: And so did his Son at first, as Ludlow owns. It Is true, he called
some in the first Years of his Reign: But then makes this malicious Reflection;
The People soon perceived he did it rather to empty their Purses, than redress
their Grievances. The Truth of it is, there was such a Spirit of Innovation and
Faction got abroad, such groundless Suspicions and Distrusts every where, not
only whispered, but openly proclaimed throughout the Nation; as it is equally
unaccountable how Men should have the Confidence to forge such gross Untruths,
and the People suffer themselves to be so absurdly imposed upon: Although, as to
this latter, nothing can seem incredible to such as observed, what a Fright the
whole Nation was abused into the other Day, as if between two and three
thousand Irish (for that was their utmost Number, could fire all their
Habitations, and cut all their Throats. Yet by such Artifices as these,
altogether as groundless and improbable, the People were kept up in a continual
Ferment, so foolishly prejudiced, and so freakishly peevish, as no Reason could
be heard, nor Truth prevail upon them; whereunto both the forementioned Kings
were too forward to appeal, and too condescending in giving an Account of
themselves and Actions, by frequent Proclamations, Declarations, etc.
considering they had to do with the most petulant, malicious Generation ever
any Age or Climate produced.

As to the present Charge of affecting Arbitrary Power, I cannot but remark in
the first place, the different Method these two Kings are supposed to propound,
in order to bring about the same, King James by Fraud, King Charles by Force.
As to the former, whatever King-Craft he pretended to, every discerning Eye
has all along discovered him to be the most open easy Prince this Nation ever
had; studied nothing but his People's Peace, and therein his own Quiet, the
Enjoyment of himself. Such a bold, I may say, desperate Undertaking, must have
a Prince that is active, daring, and resolute; of a subtle Head, and hollow
Heart; understanding all the Arts of Dissimulation and Wheedle, so as to fool
the People out of their Money, and therewith maintain an Army to support his
Usurpation; with many such like bad Qualities; as opposite to King James's
Temper and Genius, as one Pole to the other: For to speak freely, he labored
under the contrary Extreme, wanted Courage to exert his just Rights, stooped
Majesty too low, would expostulate and reason where he ought to have commanded;
which blind Side, the Faction, in his several Parliaments, once finding out,
grew wresty thereupon, would neither lead nor drive but their own Pace and Way.

What I remark in the second Place, is the Inducement our Author assigns of
King Charles's attempting the same by Violence; the nearer View of a Despotick
Power in his Iourny to France and Spain. What will not a Republican's Rebel
Spite catch hold of? His Iourny was not in, but thorough France, which he
consummated in ten or twelve Days, and riding Post, had great Opportunities of
being taken with Glittering Shows, and Imaginary Pleasures, etc. And his
Business in Spain was of another Nature, and took up so much Time, as he had
little Leisure to make Observations, and less Reason to be enamored with any
thing there observed; to be sure, upon Enquiry, he could not but find, that the
several Courts, or Councils there, have as great a Restraint upon the Crown, as
our Parliaments have here; though they are a sober wise Nation, and seldom or
never found to extend their Privileges beyond Right and Reason. I shall not
reflect upon the Prudence and Policy of that Design; only observe it was hard
for a young Amorous Prince to attend the tedious Delays of old Statesmen,
wherewith having been so long kept in Suspense, this Adventure was thought the
only Expedient for a final Issue: Desperate enough, which notwithstanding he
managed so dexterously, as to weather all Difficulties, and come off with
Honor and Safety, contrary to the Expectation of the whole World. I cannot
forbear to mention the Account Rushworth gives of his Deportment there: Rush.
Coll. p. 103.
The Prince, for his part, had gained an universal Love, and was reported by
all, to be a truly noble, discreet, well deserving Prince. His grave
Comportment suited with the very Genius of that Nation, and he carried it, from
the first to the last, with the greatest Affability, Gravity, Constancy, and,
at his Farewell, with unparalleled Bounty. Yet this excellent Prince we
murdered, and forced his Sons to travel for Security of their Lives; and if,
during that Royal Exile, they depended chiefly upon Papists for their
Subsistence, and observed how a Neighbor Prince, weathering the like Storm
from his three Estates, as their Father met with (for all Rebellions do not
prosper as in England) took the Government solely into his own Hand; I say, if
upon these Obligations and Observations, they returned home less affected to
the Protestant Religion, and our Old Establishments of civil Government, than
could be wished; Who can we blame but our selves?

Upon the Prince's Return home, and making a Report to his Father, what
slippery Statesmen the Spaniards were, especially as to his Sister's Concerns;
King James, at the earnest Request of the Parliament, brake off that Match, who
engaging him in a War for Recovery of the Palatinate, promised all the
Assistance could be desired; which was soon after, by his Father's Death,
devolved upon King Charles, and a Parliament thereupon summoned de novo, whom
he bespake with all Affection and Tenderness imaginable; acquainting them how
The Eyes of all Europe were upon that his first Attempt, and what a Blemish it
would be to sustain a Foyl. Hereupon a Supply was voted, which served the
present turn, and that was all: For in the next Session, which was at Oxon,
that unquiet Spirit, which had been so troublesome most part of his Father's
Reign, began to let him see what little Hope there was of better Terms from
them: Immediately those old Cavils of Grievances, evil Counselors, and what
not, were brought upon the Carpet; and of these, the first insisted upon, was
the Increase of Recusants, the Growth of Popery, which was presented in a
Petition, showing the principal Causes of their Increase, and properest
Remedies to suppress them; whereunto his Majesty gave an Answer, so full and
satisfactory, that all undesigning Members were abundantly satisfied therewith,
and resolved to acquiesce therein, and fell immediately upon a Supply, which
the adverse Party, unable to oppose, seemingly complied likewise, but with a
Back Blow; would undertake the Fleet might be much better managed, both as to
Conduct and Charge; and thereupon fell most rudely upon the Duke, not sparing
his Majesty in some By-reflections; who perceiving their Heats to rise every
Day higher than other, and that no Supply was to be had, unless he yielded to
their unreasonable Cavils, which no body could foresee how far they would
extend, or where end, He sent a Commission to some of the House of Lords, and
dissolved them.

That he was not without great Regret forced upon this, it is easy to imagine,
considering the Posture of his Affairs, and that Want of timely Supply detained
his Fleet from going out, till it should have been returned into Harbor: And
indeed the Delays he met with, where there was least Reason to expect them, had
they considered the Honor and Interest of the Kingdom, not to say of the King,
tho they pretended much to both, was the chief, if not sole Cause of several
Miscarriages; which, according to the Genius of that Age, were otherwise very
well designed. However, giving some strict Orders about Recusants, and whatever
else there was any Shadow of an Exception against, as likewise hoping on the
other side, those fiery Spirits might be somewhat cooled, and brought to a
sober Consideration of their own, and the Nation's Reputation; Another
Parliament was called within the same Year, which proved no Changlings,
beginning where they left off; with Miscarriages, Misgovernment, Misimployment;
in short, they would have all amiss, whereas there was nothing so but
themselves. Neither could his Majesty's Letter to the Speaker, have any
Influence upon them, Rush. Col. page 215.
though most passionately representing his pressing Occasions, and how unfit it
was to depend any longer upon Uncertainties, whereby the whole Weight of the
Affairs of Christendom was like to break in upon us on the sudden, to the
Dishonor and Shame of the Nation; assuring them moreover, that having satisfied
his reasonable Demands, he would continue them together at this Time as long as
the Season will permit, and call them shortly again, to apply fit and
seasonable Remedies to such just Grievances as they shall present unto him, in
a dutiful and mannerly way, without throwing an ill Odor upon our present
Government, or upon the Government of our late blessed Father; and if there be
yet who desire to find fault, we shall think him the wisest Reprehender of
Errors past, who without reflecting backward, can give us Counsel how to settle
the present Estate of things, and provide for the future Safety and Honor of
the Kingdom. This was very much to the purpose, but withal too home and true to
meet with that Reception it ought to have had. Neither had the Lords better
Success in a Message they sent, desiring them to take into Consideration, the
Safety of the Kingdom; receiving this grough Answer, That they desire to have a
good Understanding with their Lordships, and will be ever careful of the Safety
and Defense of the Kingdom, and maintain their own Privileges as is fitting.
And having sent this, they immediately fell upon the Duke of Buckingham; in
order whereunto, we find one Turner, a Doctor of Physic, and Member of the
House, made the Factions Tool, or rather Log to break the Ice, by starting six
Quaeres against the Duke, grounded only upon common Fame; and this produced
another Quaere, indeed a very requisite one; Whether an Accusation upon common
Fame, be a Parliamentary Way? And thereupon it was resolved, That common Fame
is a good way of proceeding for this House: from whence alone that great Body
of Articles was ushered up to the Lords, with as much Pomp and Rhetoric as
(give them their Due) that House ever was, or will be Masters of: Yet no more
than requisite to supply the Place of Argument; for whoever considers
impartially the Duke's Answer, will find it so clear and apposite to every
Particular alleged; so consistent with the Reason of Things, and Series of
Affairs there mentioned, as'tis more than probable their Impeachment was
designed only as a Ducquoy to get him into the Tower; and then, instead of
proving their Articles, would have proceeded by Bill of Attainder, and voted it
accumulative Treason, as we know it was afterward most barbarously done in the
Earl of Strafford's Case. In the mean while commend me to any Man, or Body of
Men, who can have the Confidence to declaim against Arbitrary Power, and yet
proceed upon common Fame (which was ever thought hard, and therefore
discontinued both in Civil and Canon Law, where for some time it took place)
especially in an Age, where Calumny and Slander were so scandalously rise, as
no honest Man could escape the devouring Words of their false Tongues. Methinks
such a Proceedure as this, has some Affinity with that old Land Story of the
Cook serving his Dog, who said he would not hang him, only give him an ill
Name; and thereupon threw him into the Street, and cried, a Mad Dog; which made
all the Rabble of two, as well as four legged Curs, fall upon, and worry him to
Death. Yet how far this way of Prosecution might have been brought into
Practice, had these Gentlemen continued Rex, no one can tell, to be sure, in
the next Parliament, when Neal, Bishop of Winton, and Laud of London were
inveighed against by Sir John Eliot and others, an honest Gentleman stood up
and said, Now we have named these Persons, let us think of some Causes why we
did it; whereunto Sir Edward Coke replied, Arch Bishop Laud's Diary, p. 43.
Have we not named my Lord of Buckingham, without showing Cause, and may we not
be as bold with them? Common Fame would do the Business thoroughly. But to
return to the Duke, they thought it enough to show their Teeth; for surely, if
they could have bit, they would not have postpon'd the making good their
Articles against him, when he pressed them so earnestly thereto, which
notwithstanding they did, as well as the King's Supply, and fell to hammering a
new Remonstrance, which his Majesty having notice of, anticipated by their
Dissolution.

We shall have Occasion hereafter to observe what passed between this and the
next Parliament, which was March 17 th 1627. when his Majesty, at their first
assembling, plainly told them, That if his present calling them together did
not answer the Quality of his Occasions, they did not their Duties, and he must
rest content in the Conscience of doing his, and take other Courses for which
God had empowered him, to save that which the Folly of particular Men might
hazard to lose: Hereupon they fell into long and tedious Debates, whether a
Supply or Grievances should first take place: At length the former had the
Preference out of Complement, though last consummated; for that Vote was no
sooner passed, but the People's Liberty must immediately be considered, which
produced the so much celebrated Petition of Right, wherein the King humored
them to every Punctilio (though nothing but a Spirit of Opposition could have
excepted against his first Answer) and passed it with a Droit fait come il est
desire; and this with Bells and Bonfires, one would think, should have silenced
all former Disgusts, and they gone on with a ready Supply, and mutual Confidence
on either Side; whereas the next News we hear, is a Remonstrance of all the
common-Fame Stories Malice or Mischief could suggest; and as herein the Duke of
Buks led the Van, so the whole contained only such old Cavils as were easily
weathered, being very trivial or very false. But when the King found there was
a second Remonstrance on the Anvil, as to Tunnage and Poundage, that he had
superseded all Right thereto, by granting their Petition of Right; this struck
him in so sensible a Part, as he resolved to break thorough that Royal Patience
which had been so long provoked, and put an End to that Session, sometime
sooner than he intended, with this Declaration, That since he was truly
informed a second Remonstrance was preparing to take away Tunnage and Poundage,
one of the chief Supports of his Crown; alleging, he had given away his Right
thereto, by his Answer to their Petition; which, as it was very prejudicial to
him, so it discovered that the House of Commons began already to make false
Constructions of what he had granted already in that Petition; which, lest it
should be worse interpreted in the Country, he made this Declaration concerning
the true Intent thereof. That the Profession of both Houses, in the Time of
hammering that Petition, was no way to trench upon his Prerogative; saying,
they had neither Intention nor Power to hurt it; wherefore it must needs be
conceived that he granted no New, but confirmed the Ancient Liberties of his
Subjects; concluding with this Command, that they should all take notice of
what he had there said, to be the true Intent and Meaning of what he had
granted in their Petition; but more particularly the Judges; for to you only,
says he, under me belongs the Interpretation of Laws; for none of the Houses
of Parliament, either Joint or Separate, (what new Doctrine soever may be
raised) have any Power either to make or declare a Law without my Consent. Thus
did his Majesty freely Remonstrate unto them, with Ten Thousand times more
Sense and Truth than all their Harangues and Popular Allegations. For at this
distance of time, when we may more Calmly judge of such Hot Debates, it cannot
but be thought more Gentile and Reasonable for the House to have confirmed by
Bill, the Tunnage and Poundage in return for the Petition of Right, than from a
cross-grained Pretense to further the Breach, making it the chief Subject of
Debate next Session, and cause of a Fatal, a Final Separation.

During the Recess, the Duke of Bucks was taken off by a wretched Hand, in a
most Babarous manner; which 'twas thought would have abated the Edge of their
furious Prosecution: As likewise Two or Three of the best parted Men amongst
those Fiery Tempers began to Cool, sensible, as in Charity we are obliged to
think, what Confusions the Heats they had maintained must produce in the End,
and in due time came over to his Majesty's Service; but as the former had
little effect, so the other was thought to exasperate their great Spirits, that
some few should run away with the Game, which they had jointly assisted in
Hunting down; whereas it is probable they designed a proportionable Division
amongst them all, as it afterward happened, though then they fell out most
cursedly about their several Shares.

We are now come to the last Session of this last Parliament, who fell
immediately to their wonted Work, Grievances, whereof Tunnage and Poundage was
the Capital; in the Prosecution of which they were resolved to Trounce all such
Persons as had been employed to Manage or Collect the same; whereupon the King
sent for them to the Banqueting House, and declared that as he never looked
upon those Duties as Appertaining to his Hereditary Prerogative, so he expected
they should pass the Bill, as had been always Customary in the time of his
Ancestors, which his Necessities had obliged him to Collect as They always did
before the Bill was passed; and this very Parliament had professed they wanted
only Time, not Will to grant them; yet neither this nor a Message afterward
could prevail with them to take the Matter into Consideration; nay, says Mr.
Rushworth, the House was troubled to have the Bill imposed upon them, which
ought naturally to arise from themselves; a mighty Punctilio that: But in short
they would have the King own all the Right to be in them; and then refused the
Grant. Whereas it had been all along rather Matter of Form than any thing else;
and for four Successions immediately Precedent, passed without the least
Dispute. But when Men are resolved to Quarrel, they will take occasion at the
wagging of every Straw. To be sure whoever stood by the King in defense of his
Prerogative and just Right, must expect the Extremity of their Rage and Fury;
to which purpose they began with Weston the New Lord Treasurer, who was ten
times worse than Buckingham, Neal Bishop of Winton, Laud of London, and so
doubtless would have gone the whole Court thorough, but that the King
perceiving they would neither Act with Temper, nor attend to Reason, stopped the
Violence of their Curreer by a Dissolution.

How they behaved themselves thereupon our Author Ludlow mentions, Locking up
the Door of the House of Commons, and compelling the Speaker to keep the Chair,
till such Protestations were Voted as they thought fit; and by this he would
have it observed how highly the Pulse of the Nation beat for Liberty, he might
have more properly said Rebellion; for that they were venturing at Pell-Mell,
and had not the King prevented it, would have Acted 40. in 28. But let it be
called what they please; doubtless never any Assembly of grave and great Men as
these ought to be supposed, (to be sure ought to have been) carried themselves
in such a Riotous, Disobliging, and Disobedient manner, with such high
Provocations and Indignities to that Sovereign Power by which they sat, and
whose undoubted Right it was not only to Dissolve, but punish them too; so that
notwithstanding our Author seems much displeased, whoever reads the manner of
proceeding against them, both in Star Chamber, and King's Bench, as Recorded by
Rushworth (though scandalously partial on that side) must acknowledge it a
Regular Course; and that never any Men had fairer Play, or came off more
easily, considering the Nature of their Crimes, and Obstinacy of their
Deportment: But with him that Text of despising Dominions, and speaking Evil of
Dignities is not Canonical; they could not have been good Patriots in his
Sense, had they not aspersed his Majesty's Person and Government, fomented
Iealousies amongst his People, with false and scandalous Reproaches upon all
his faithful Subjects and Servants. Neither was this Proceedure of the Kings,
however severely censured without a Precedent, even in the happy times of Queen
Elizabeth, who though she indulged Liberty of Speech to her Members; yet if any
dared to open, or so much as quetch against her Prerogative, or fall upon any
Debates which did not properly come within their Sphere, she never spared to
express the height of her Resentment; whereof take this single Instance, One
Morris, a Member of Parliament, and Chancellor of the Duchy, offered a Bill
ready drawn, for Retrenching the Ecclesiastical Courts into much narrower
Bounds, with several such like Alterations wherewith his busy Head was
pregnant: Of this the Queen having present Notice, sends for Coke, then Speaker
of the House of Commons, (afterward Lord Chief Justice, and a violent
Beautifeu in these three Parliaments of King Charles) by whom she ordered this
Message to the House, viz. That it was wholly in her Power to Call, to
Determine, to Assent or Dissent to any thing done in Parliament; that the
calling of this was only that the Majesty of God might be the more Religiously
observed, by compelling with some sharp Laws, such as neglect that Service,
and that the Safety of her Majesty's Person, and the Realm might be provided
for; that it was not meant they should meddle with Matters of State, or Causes
Ecclesiastical; that she wondered any should attempt a thing so contrary to her
Commandment, and that she was highly offended at it. And finally that it was
her pleasure, no Bill touching any Matters of State, or for Reformation of
Matters Ecclesiastical should be there Exhibited. On the delivery of which,
Morris is said to have been seized on, in the House, by a Sergeant at Arms;
however seized upon he was, and committed Prisoner; kept for some Years in
Tutbury Castle, discharged from his Office in the Duchy, and disabled from any
Practice in his Prosession as a Common Lawyer: What would Ludlow have done, had
he been a Member in those happy Times? Here at home, either Tutbury or Tyburn
would have been his Fate; and if got abroad, it is a question whether
Swisserland it self could have secured him from the long Arm of that great
Virago.

CHAP. IV. Not any just Ground for Complaint of Grievances.
NEither had they better Authority for the several Grievances they made such a
Noise about, hunting after them with all the Earnestness imaginable, receiving
none so kindly as those who brought them Information of fresh Game, though
generally it proved a Brake-bush instead of a Hare.

That Disparity printed in Sir Henry Wotton's Remains, between the Earl of
Essex in Queen Elizabeth's time, and the Duke of Buckingham, was sometime after
discovered to be the first Essay of a Younger, but much abler Pen; the Person
who writ it, making as great a Figure during all the Troubles of Charles the I.
and II. as any whatsoever, and upon the Restoration was advanced according to
his great Merits and Sufferings. This Ingenious little Piece, to make good the
Disparity undertaken, observes how great an Advantage the Earl had from the
Temper of the Age, and easy Good Natured disposition all People were then in:
'Twas, says he, an ingenious uninquisitive Time, when all the Passions and
Affections of the People were lapp'd up in such an innocent and humble
Obedience, that there was never the least Contestations, nor Capitulations,
with the Queen, nor (though she frequently consulted with her Subjects) any
further Reasons urged of her Actions, than her own Will.

When there were any Grievances, they but Reverendly conveyed them to her
Notice, and left the Time, and Order of the rest to her Princely Discretion.
Once they were more importunate, and formal in pursuing the Complaints of the
Purveyors for Provision; which without doubt was a crying, and an heavy
Oppression: The Queen sent them Word, they all thought themselves wise enough
to reform the Misdemeanors of their own Families, and whisht they had so good
an Opinion of her, as to trust her with her Servants too. I do not find that
the Secretary who delivered this Message received any Reproach or Check, or
that they proceeded any further in the Inquisition. On the other side, that of
the Duke of Buckingham's Favor with King James and Charles the I. He tells us,
was a busy, querulous, froward Time; so much degenerated from the Purity of the
former, that the People under pretenses of Reformation, with some Petulant
Discourses of Liberty (which their great Impostors scattered amongst them, like
false Glasses to multiply their Fears) began Abditos Principis Sensus, and quid
occultius parat exquirere, extended their enquiries even to the Chamber, and
private Actions of the King himself; forgetting that Truth of the Poet, Nusquam
libertas gratior extat, quam sub Rege pio. 'Twas strange to see how Men
afflicted themselves to find out Calamities and Mischiefs, whilst they borrowed
the Name of some great Persons to scandalize the State they lived in. A general
disorder throughout the whole Body of the Commonwealth; nay, the Vital Parts
perishing, the Laws violated by the Judges, Religion profaned by the Prelates,
Heresies crept into the Church, and countenanced: All which they themselves
must rectify, without being beholden to the King, or consulting the Clergy: And
give me leave to add, proving there was any Truth in those Allegations they
made such a Noise about.

Thus far that Great Man, who hints likewise at the most probable Causes which
might produce that Frenzy, this World of ours was then got into: As 1 st. The
heat of young Heads, who are ever more forward to reform others, than
themselves. 2 dly, The Disappointments some of longer standings met with in
reference to their own Advancement. But more especially in the 3 d. place, The
Revolution of Time, which had made them unconcerned in the Loyal Fears that
governed sixty Years since, and the Nation too happy in that Spirit, and
Condition; Unless more sensible of it, and thankful for it: From which stupid
Humor it was, that such as cried Fire most, with the same Breath blew the
Coals, and would never give over till they had set all in a Flame.

One of these Grievous Cries was Tunnage and Poundage, about which we have
already mentioned his Majesty's just Resentments, but withal his too great
Condescension, in hopes to give them Satisfaction; So far beneath our self, to
use his own Words, Append. p. 7.
As we are confident never any of our Predecessors did the like; nor was the
like ever required or expected from them. Notwithstanding which they continued
their Proceedings, and as the King goes on, We endured long with much patience,
both these and sundry other strange and exorbitant Encroachments and
Usurpations, such as were never before attempted in that House. Roger Coke is
also very hot upon this Scent, Detect. p. 334.
and gives a History thereof out of his Grandfather's Institutes, so far as to
serve his turn; yet withal is forced to own, that they had been continued to
all the Kings and Queens since Edward the 4 th. so that passing an Act was only
Matter of Form; for if Prescription, long continued Custom, be Common Law for
the People, and make the best Tenures, why not for the Prince? Nay, it is
farther apparent, that in most of those Reigns, there were several Alterations,
and Additions too, as Circumstances of Trade varied, or Reason of State
required: Queen Elizabeth more especially took her Liberty therein at pleasure,
without Regret, or Complaint, from Merchant or Member; particularly the
Venetians having Taxed a Charge upon our English Cloth; She, to be even with
them, raised that upon Corinth's, which continued all her Life without dispute;
and when a Pragmatical Fellow stood it out with King James, it was adjudg'd due
by the Barons of the Exchequer. But the debate here was perfect Spite, and
Contradiction; otherwise no Man of Sense of Honor would have made a Breach
between Prince and People, in refusing to confirm what his Predecessors had
enjoyed some hundred Years before.

Especially considering the Charge and Care the King was then at, above any of
his Ancestors, in reference to Naval Preparations, whereto the Customs were all
along assigned. I have seen an Account of the Navy Royal as it stood in Queen
Elizabeth's Time, presented by Sir Walter Rawleigh, to Prince Henry; consisting
of Twenty four Sail, the best of which did not reach one of our Fourth or Fifth
Rates, as now built: It Is true, he tells him it might be advanced to what
Number she pleased, by pressing Merchants Ships of equal or greater Force. And
so it continued without any considerable Improvement all King James's Time,
till the Earl of Nottingham, Lord Admiral, overgrown with Age, importuned the
King for a Discharge, as he owned both to Lords and Commons, wherein he was
complied with, and succeeded by the Duke of Buckingham, who applied himself
thereto with so much Diligence and Circumspection, as at the same time his
neglect was so severely complained of in the House of Commons; we had an
Hundred Sail in one Fleet gone against the Spaniard; with another Squadron
joined the Dutch to block up Dunkirk; and a third to guard the Channel; which
was likewise continually improved, so far as the King's Purse could reach,
under the many Exigenties he then lay; and would the Parliament have performed
their Parts might have then cleared the Ocean of all Opposition whatsoever;
which they were so far from, as to make an attempt of withdrawing the Customs,
the only support he had to this great Defense and Undertaking: Yet
notwithstanding their perverse Disposition, it is a Question whether we had not
the Balance upon our Neighbors more then, than now? and as able to maintain
the Sovereignty of the Seas? Though it shall be acknowledged, our Strength at
present may be five, perhaps ten times greater, with a proportionable Charge,
and Opposition too, which is worst of all. In the mean while we may from hence
perceive what a creditable Evidence Common-fame is; for as the Clamor then
ran, which our several Sets of Pamphletteers, and Libellers would have us still
believe, one would have imagined we had not been able to fight a Fleet of Dutch
Fisher-Busses, or that our Admiral knew or cared whether there had been two
such places as Chatham, or Portsmouth; such strong Prejudices can Men of ill
design Fool the People into. Neither was the Conduct of other Affairs so much
to be run down as their Pettishness did Suggest, when amongst other things they
would enquire how the Reputation and Interest of our Nation came to decline so
much from what it was in Ages past; Coll. 208.
which if they had considered the Wise Man's Caution, they would have omitted
for their own Reputation sake: Eccl. 7. 10.
Say not thou, what is the Cause, that the former Days were better than these?
For thou do not enquire wisely concerning this. And I am confident every
ordinary Reader will judge there was more Malice than Wisdom in the Matter
before us, when told; their Charge was chiefly Levelled at those Storms which
Dissipated our Fleets, both upon the Spanish and Flemish Coasts: On the
contrary could there be a more Sober or Christian Answer than what the King
replied? That 'twas God's Pleasure to send stormy Weather, and his Will must be
done: Though it is confessed they might have gone out at a more Seasonable time
of the Year, had they furnished him with a seasonable Supply; but it became now
their usual Practice, to charge him with their own Defects.

Yet notwithstanding that, and the Miscarriage at the Isle of The, where
nevertheless a great deal of English Bravery was shown, (so little were they
degenerated from their Ancestors) the French were so much Alarmed at our
entering into a War, and Assisting the Rochellers, as they proffered the Duke of
Rohan, and the Protestant Party, any Terms to join with them against the
English; and it was their ill Conduct, and Positiveness, (not to excuse
something of Treachery amongst them,) which made the first Attempts for their
Relief, miscarry, as shall be made appear in due Time, and Place; as likewise
how glad the French were of a Peace, on Honorable Terms on our Side, tho they
knew too well the Perverseness of our great Senate. But to look back upon
former Times, even those so happy Days of Queen Elizabeth, they were not
attended with constant Success; the great Sir Francis Drake did not always
answer Expectation in his Returns out of the West Indies, and as great a Sea
Captain as he, was Frozen to Death in Search of the North-East-Passage, with
several such like Instances which might be given as to those Affairs. So
likewise for Land-Service, Leicester's Conduct in the Low Countries, was
neither to his Mistresses, nor their Satisfaction; and that popular Favorite
Essex miscarried most Scandalously in his Second Expedition against Spain; and
how fatal his Irish Management was, is known to all. At some of these indeed
the Queen was concerned; but had any of her Parliaments meddled therewith, they
would have soon discovered how much she had of Henry the VIII's Spirit. Neither
ought it to seem strange, if after that continued Peace God and King James had
so long blessed us withal, we should be somewhat at a Loss, entering afresh
into War; since that we have gained more Experience, and paid sufficiently for
our Learning, both in Blood and Treasure, and which is worse still, cannot give
over when we would.

And whilst we are upon this Head of Grievances, there is a Commission to
several Lords of the Privy Counsel must by no means be past by: For though it
was only in general Terms, Coll. 615.
To enter into Consultation of all the best and speediest Ways and Means ye
can, for raising of Monys for the most important Occasion aforesaid, which
without extremest hazard to us, our Dominions and People, and to our Friends
and Allies, can admit of no long delay, etc. Yet Rushworth, and from him Roger
Coke, and from them both the Defense, etc. will have it to raise Monys by way
of Excise, in which Sense likewise this present Parliament would have it go,
and made a Bussle accordingly, sending Sir Edward Coke to Harangue the Lords
upon the same Subject; whose first and chief Exception was, that 'twas ordered
after their Summons, (a sufficient Proof there could be no ill Design by it)
although it might likewise be considered, that the Parliament was not so free
to grant the King Supplies, as he to Summons them; and further yet, that there
were several Projects propounded to the King, which he would never rashly close
with, but refer to the Consideration of his Counsel, (no mean Instance of his
Prudence and Goodness too, above what we deserved) to recommend such as their
Wisdoms and best Judgments, should find to be most convenient in a Case of this
inevitable Necessity: For those be the express Words in the Commission. And
hereto agrees what the Lord Keeper reported to the House of Lords: Col. 628.
That their Lordships had reason to be satisfied, with what was truly and
rightly told them by the Lords of the Council, that this Commission was no more
but a Warrant of Advice, which his Majesty knew to be agreeable to the Time,
and the manifold Occasions then in Hand; but now having a Supply from the Loves
of his People, he esteems the Commission useless; and therefore, though he
knows no Cause why any Iealousies should have risen thereby, yet at their
Desires, he is content it be cancelled, and has commanded me, etc.

Yet I know this Reply will not pass, tho upon his Majesty's Royal Word; unless
we can take off that potent Allegation of 30000 l. remitted over to Sir William
Balfour, and Dalbeir in Holland, to raise a Thousand German Horse, to enforce
the Payment of this Excise, and aw the Parliament soon to be Assembled, as most
of the Libellers expressly declare. That such a Sum was remitted to raise Horse
is certainly true, but to be employed here at home to the Ends aformention'd,
as certainly false; to the making good whereof I must observe, that the
Low Countries were at that time not only the School but Shop of War, which
furnished all the rest of Europe (even the Spaniards themselves, for a good
Market) with Arms, Ammunition, and whatever else was requisite to that Bloody
Trade: Neither was any thing more usual in Queen Elizabeth's Time, than to take
such English Forces as had been exercised, and fleshed in their Service, when
upon any great Expedition against Spain or elsewhere, and supply them with new
raised Men to maintain their Garrisons: According to this Method the Lord
Wimbleton was supplied about two Years before in his Expedition against Spain:
And these 1000 Horse were doubtless designed upon some Enterprise in defense of
Rochel, or otherwise to Annoy the French; which upon new Councils, and perhaps
a Prospect of Peace, (for about that time it began to be secretly Agitated) was
laid aside. To be sure had his Majesty designed any thing of force upon this
Nation, he made choice of very improper Instruments, in those two Commanders,
who notwithstanding their great Obligations to the King, when the War brake out
in 41. took Employments under the Parliament (because they had most Money I
presume) and did them cursed Service. The Defense says Dalbeir was a Papist to
reflect upon the King, doubtless; without considering what he did afterward
for his Parliament of 40. He was a German and had served under Count Mansfield,
so that 'twas more likely he was Lutheran or Calvinist: But of what concern is
that Man's Religion, who Acts without a Principle of Gratitude, or Common
Honesty? And therefore to attend the Fate of this unworthy Person a little
farther, when he had wrought Iourny-Work for the Parliament as long as the War
lasted, he was laid aside; which regretting, as a Soldier of Fortune ought to
do, engaged upon the King's Account, with the Duke of Bucks, Lord Holland, etc.
in that Design at Kingston, which miscarrying, they were persued to St. Neots
in Huntingtonshire, where some escaped, some were taken; but Dalbeir was cut in
pieces by his Brethren, the Parliamentarians, because he had been of their
Side. If Balfour did not come to the same End 'twas pity; for he was a true
Covenanting Scot, betrayed the King in the great Trust of the Tower committed
to him, and from thenceforward sided with the Parliament. I had not been so
Prolix in my Account of these two Men; but to show, that had there been any
such Design as an Excise and these German Horse to enforce the same, it is
impossible but the two chief Commanders must have been privy thereto, and would
have consequently divulged it to their Patrons the Parliament, indearing
themselves more thereby, than all their other Bloody Services. I must beg leave
to make this one Observation farther, That it had been altogether as impossible
for one Thousand Horse to enforce a General Excise, as double the Number of the
forementioned Irish to Massacre the whole Nation. Yet they had a more
impertinent Maggot in 41, that there were Forces kept in Grots and Caves under
Ground, that should in the Night break out into the City, and cut all their
Throats: And what was more prodigious, and though ridiculous, yet says my
Author, had not a few Believers in London, That there were Designs by
Gunpowder to blow up the Thames, and choke them with the Water in their Beds.
May it not be here a necessary Quere, Whether the Invention, or Credulity be
more Astonishing?

CHAP. V. No reason to complain of Favorites and evil Counselors.
Dr. ^eren. L. of King Charles I. p. 75.
Favorites and evil Counselors were another of their Commonplace Complaints,
with how little Reason, or Truth, is next to be made appear. The Lord Bacon in
his Essay of Friendship, observes, as a strange thing, The high rate, great
Kings and Monarchs have set thereon; and that not only the Weak and Passionate,
but the Wisest and most Politic that ever Reigned, whereof he gives several
Instances. To be sure at this time most Courts in Christendom had particular
Favorites, who notwithstanding the great Figure they made, were really
Participes Curarum (as the forementioned Lord judiciously terms them) Drudges
of State, Screens of popular Odium and Discontent, as in most, if not in all
Places, they were made to find.

And hereunto amongst the rest King James seemed very much disposed, as
appeared by one or two in Scotland. And in process of time his Inclination
continued the same Bend here, whereof one Car a Scotchman, his Page, was the
first Instance, who having a comely well built Outside, the King hoped he might
be as well furnished within, and accordingly took much pains in the Improvement
of his Mind, directed him in his Studies, and all other things requisite to the
Accomplishments of such a Person as he wished, and hoped he might prove: All
which is an extraordinary Instance of a good Master and a good Nature too: And
yet to make him appear a better Prince, when he found all he had done was in
vain; that this new Creature of his was a Blockhead, Insolent, Ill-natured,
wretchedly Penurious, and intollerably Covetous, he withdrew his Favor by
degrees, as any Wise Man would have done, unwilling to expose himself for an
ill-plac'd Affection: But when the Business of Overbury was discovered, he
detested it with the utmost Indignation of a good Christian a just Prince, and
ordered a Prosecution according to the Baseness of the Fact, though after
several Partisans had suffered, the importunity of Relations, and Countrymen,
first got a Repreive, and at length a Pardon for him and his Eve the Temptress,
though it was many Years before the last was obtained, and not many Months
before the King's Death, which it is pity he did at all, considering the solemn
Protestations he had made, that all concerned in that Matter should suffer; but
what will not Importunity do, especially coming from his own Countrymen?

This Court-Meteor being thus sunk down, and disappearing, the English Nobility
about the King, began to reflect upon the ill Influences it had, and what worse
its longer abode in that Horison might have produced. Hereupon they thought it
their concern to take more care for the future, and not suffer a second Foreign
Page of as little Wit, Good Nature, or Manners to be Topt upon, or rather over
them; in order whereunto they resolved to manage Matters so as an English Man
might be Topt upon the King; about which they had several Consults, and several
young Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, and other Places, in their Eye; but
amongst all the rest George Villyers both for Person and Parts seemed most
promising; him therefore having fixed upon, such Court intrigues were carried
on, as the King made choice of the Person they designed. And this is the true
Origin of that great Man's Rise, whatever impertinent Relations Roger Coke
makes of his Mother decking him up, and setting of him in the King's Eye when
Ignoramus was Acted at Cambridge, with many other as groundless and false
Conjectures. To be sure he no sooner appeared upon the Public Stage of
Business and Address, but the Expectation of all concerned in his Advancement,
was not only answered, but exceeded; neither could they any where have made a
better Choice; among the Nobility there were scarce any to be found, who would
undertake such a Fatigue of Business, or had Parts to go thorough with it; and
though there were some in a lower Sphere of more Reading and greater
Experience, yet few that equaled him in Strength of Natural Parts, daily
improved by consulting the most Knowing and Judicious in all the several
Affairs which came before him, whereby he brought things to a better Issue,
than could be expected from the most cried up Wisdom, accompanied with a
self-sufficient peremptoriness. So that whatever Odiums he lay under, as no Man
ever lay under greater, (and indeed who could bear up against Common-Fame, and
a House of Commons?) yet more impartial Judgments, which considered things as
they really were, became surprised at so young a Man's falling to Business with
so great Application, his judicious Choice of fit Persons to every concern he
engaged them in, and as Honorable Rewards upon their well Performance. I have
already mentioned his manage and improvement of the Navy, as likewise how
express his Replies were to their several Articles, without any thing of a
Rejoinder on the other side, though he provoked them thereto; for it is absolutely
false that the King dissolved the Parliament on that Account, as shall
hereafter appear. Neither was there more of Truth in that other Charge, his
enriching himself by the Crown, (which of all Imputations says the Disparity
was the most unskilful, and worst laid) some few of those Lands, Engrossed by
Somerset before, were assigned him by his first Master, and that was all: Yet
Roger Coke opens most violently upon this Account, and with an odd kind of
Arithmetic, will consider what he received by his many great Places, without
taking notice it was all Expended in the same Service: Hamond Lestrange.
To be sure one of our Historians says he died 60000 l. in Debt; and whoever
Audited his Estate then, considering he married an Heir General of the House of
Rutland, who was a very great Fortune, will find that Sir Edward Coke, and
several of that Robe since, have left greater Revenues than this Duke did of
his own Acquiring.

The forementioned Roger Coke tells another idle Story, Detect. p. 419.
which I shall mention here, tho it reflects chiefly upon the Good King, which
was that Spiteful Fellow's greatest Satisfaction, viz. How he designed first a
Sumptuous Funeral for this Duke, his Favorite, from which the Lord Treasurer
Weston put him off, by saying a Monument would be more lasting, and less cost:
And when the King afterward pressed for the Monument; the Wary Treasurer
diverted him from that, by representing how ill it would hear in the World,
should the Duke's be Erected, before there was one for his Father. This
Faithful Roger relates as a great Secret, which he had from a Learned Gentleman
well acquainted with the Transactions of those Times; whereas it was a
Common-fame Story every where whispered by the Faction, and so secret, that Mr.
Hamond Le Strange was imposed upon, to put it into his History, and is replied
to be Sir William Saunderson, for that mistake, who must know better, being all
that time the Duke's Domestic, Sand. Hist. p. 123.
and assures us he was Sumptuously entombed at Westminster, which his Executors
paid for, and it cost not the King a Penny, nor the stately Monument Erected
over his Grave. This Passage, tho somewhat out of Course, I could not but here
insert, as an exact Specimen of Fanatic Sincerity what Secrets they Detect and
Truths relate.

Well now we have done with Favorites; for Buckingham being fatally cut off,
the King made no one Person his Confident; but equally consulted the Ablest,
and best Principled Men he could find thoroughout the Kingdom, who were equally
Maligned, and Persecuted to Death by a Virulent Party, because they studied the
peace and welfare of the Nation; were for every thing to run in its proper
Channel, the Laws duly Administered to the People, and the King's Occasions
Honorably supplied, without Suggesting Fears, and Hunting after Grievances,
the Mormo's of disaffected and designing Spirits. For sometime in King Iame's
Reign there was a cursed Distinction started, of a Court and Country Party,
which kept the House divided most implacably in that and this following Reign
of Charles the I. (for I shall descend no further) and several honest,
well-meaning Gentlemen, like so many Barnabas's, were led away by the
Dissimulation of such as promoted it; whereas in all well-settled Times, the
King was looked upon as the Common Father of the Country, and had constantly a
select Number of Understanding Men, knowing the World, and well practiced in
Business, to sit in Council and assist him, in keeping things Right, or
bringing them so, when wrong: But then, Enacting of Laws, Raising of Money, and
several other Ardua Regni, are to be consulted of, and consented to in
Parliament, where the forementioned Privy Council were generally Members in one
House or other, and as well able to acquaint them with the true State and
Interest of the whole Nation, as any particular Member of that private Borough
he Represented, and were credited accordingly, which produced an exact Concord
and Harmony between every Part of the Constitution. On the contrary, when the
Members divide and jar one with another; when all the King advise with must be
suspected for Enemies to the Public, (tho no such thing can be proved) and he
upbraided for consulting, or employing them, and that by such as affect their
Places, or design to abridge his just Power; what an Ocean of Mischiefs must
this toss us in? What but a Shipwreck can be expected at last? As indeed it
happened. It Is a pretty Remark and Simile of Sir W. T. who tells us he had
observed, Of Trade in Ireland. 146.
All set Quarrels with the Age, and pretenses to Reform it by their own Models,
to end commonly like the pains of a Man in a little Boat, who tuggs at a Rope
that is fast to a Ship; it looks as if he resolved to draw the Ship to him, but
the Truth, and his meaning is, to draw himself to the Ship, where he gets in
when he can, and does like the rest of the Crew when he is there. But this
would not do in King Charle's Time, there was not Room enough to hold all that
pulled to come in, at leastwise Provision to support them when there: For
however Ludlow upbraids the poor King with the Profuseness of his Court, the
standing Revenue of the Crown was about 400000 l. per Annum, too little by far
to supply his great and urgent Occasions: Would they have given him Money
plentifully, some new Places might have been made, or other Ways and Means
found, to gratify their Kindness; but as they knew the King's Honor and
Integrity would not Stoop to such indirect Courses, so it is probable 'twas
considered on the other side, this would put them upon a worse extreme, instead
of giving nothing, they must give more than all. Nevertheless some were taken
in. Sir Thomas Wentworth, Mr. Noy, and a while after Sir Dudly Diggs; who had
their several Posts assigned them, and behaved themselves with great Honor and
Resolution there; which so incenc'd the rest, as they became more implacable
than ever, plotted all Ways imaginable to seize upon the Vessel, which at
length having obtained, they first threw the King and his whole Crew overboard,
and then sunk it.

All which the Good Man was advised of long before, for in the heat of their
Prosecution against the Duke, there was a Letter put into his Hands ab Ignoto
(whereof Mr. Rushworth gives only a sneaking Abridgment, like a partial
Somewhat as he is; for the whole deserved to have been Transmitted as well as
any one thing in all his Volumes; however it is at large in the Cabala) giving
him an Account of their several Parties, Cab. 255.
and dangerous Designs, that King James had given too much way to their popular
Speeches and Parliamentary Harangues, which since the time of Henry the VI.
were never suffered, as being the certain Symptoms of subsequent Rebellions,
Civil Wars, and Dethroning of our Kings. Amongst others, he tells him, the
Lawyers in general fomented these Heats, for that (as Sir Edward Coke could not
but often express) our Kings have upholden the Power of their Prerogatives, and
the Rights of the Clergy, whereby their comings in have been abated. And
therefore the Lawyers are fit ever, in Parliaments, to second any Complaints
against both Church and King, and all his Servants, with their Cases,
Antiquities, Records, Statutes, Presidents and Stories: But they cannot or will
not call to Mind, that never any Noble Man in Favor with his Sovereign, was
questioned in Parliament, except by the King's leave, in Case of Treason, or
unless it were in the Nonage, and Tumultuous Times, of Richard II. Henry VI. or
Edward the VI. which happened both to the Destruction of King and Kingdom. And
that not to exceed our own and Fathers memories, in King Henry VIII's Time,
Wolsie's exorbitant Power and Pride, and Cromwell's Contempt of the Nobility,
and Laws, were not yet permitted to be discus'd in Parliament though they were
most odious and grievous to all the Kingdom. And that Leicester's undeserved
Favor and Faults; Hatton's Insufficiency, and Rawleigh's Insolence, far
exceeded what yet has been (tho most falsely) objected against the Duke. Yet no
Lawyer durst abet, nor any else begin any Invectives against them in Parliament.

This is clear Matter of Fact, an impartial Account both of the Distemper, and
its true Original Cause; I wish he could as easily have prescribed the Cure;
but it was now too late to remove what was so deeply rooted, and become
habitual. King James might easily have prevented its rising to so high a
Crisis; had he observed that one Maxim of the Precedent Reign, kept up his
Prerogative and those other Arcana Imperij, which were his Peculiar, with as
much Majesty and Resolution as Queen Elizabeth did, who found this Pragmatical
Spirit at work in her Time; But so observed and kept it down, as had the same
Course been continued no Danger could have accrew'd thereby.

To ascribe any thing of Divinity to Princes above other Mortals, will I am
sure at this time of Day be censured for a gross piece of Pedantry; yet really
there are several Inducements would go a great way to persuade, that this happy
Queen was so far inspired, as to see further into the Thoughts and Designs of
Men, than any, or all about her; especially that these busy Reformers affected
a Parity in the State, as well as Church; designed not only the Mytre, but the
Crown to be under their Check and Control, which made her on all Occasions
exert so briskly in defense of her Prerogative, and other just Rights. Detect.
p. 38.
Insomuch as Roger Coke owns there were three things she was impatient of
having debated in Parliament. The Succession of the Crown after her Death; Her
Marriage, and attempting any Alterations in the Church, from its Establishment
in the first Year of her Reign. For the last of these I have had occasion
already to mention how Morris burnt his Fingers, by meddling therewith; and the
Iournal gives the like Account about the former, how one Wentworth and some
others were sent to the Tower, for concerning themselves with the Succession;
but whereas Roger Coke says they were soon discharged, is one of his own
Maggots, and a shameful, perhaps willful Blunder, since the Iournal would have
informed him, that the House becoming humble Suitors to her Majesty, for the
release of such Members as were under restraint, It was answered by the
Privy-Counsellors then Members of the House, That her Majesty had committed
them for Causes best known to her self, and that to press her Highness with
this Suit, would but hinder those whose Good it sought. That the House must not
call the Queen to an Account, for what she did of her Royal Authority; that the
Causes for which they were restrained might be high and Dangerous; that her
Majesty liked not such Questions, neither did it become the House to deal in
such Matters. Upon which, says my Author, the House desisted from interposing
any farther in their behalf, but left them wholly to the Queen, by whom
Wentworth was continued Prisoner some Years after: It Is probable indeed the
others, viz. Bromly, Welsh, Stephens might be discharged sooner. Thus did this
Wise Princess hold the Reins of Government with so straight a Hand, as whenever
she found it biting the Bit, and attempting to take head, a sudden Check put a
stop to the designed Curreere: Whereas King James was no sooner mounted, but he
left them strangely Loose, and in effect gave them up his first Parliament,
where Roger Coke tells us, the Commons, in their Apology to him, took notice of
the Queen's Restraining their Debates as to several Matters, and prayed it
might be no precedent for the future, but that their Debates in Parliament
might be free; which the King, (however charged by the forementioned Roger with
Rehoboam's Stiffness) so far complied with or was negligent in, as that
designing Faction got ground upon him every Day, to his own, and all his
Ministers great Uneasiness, with his Son's and Kingdoms ruin. And this the
forementioned Letter too prophetically foretold, that prevailing in one thing,
would but encourage them to attempt another, till they had pulled out all the
Feathers of his Royalty, and from impeaching his Ministers, call him to an
account for any thing he undertakes, which does not prosperously succeed: For
thus at last he himself was the Evil Counselor, and charged with all those
Villainies and Mischiefs, these Sons of Violence had brought upon the Nation.

CHAP. VI. Innovations in Religion never designed.
BUt our pretended Patriots could not thoroughly have expressed their care,
unless they had made it the concern of God as well as the King, for which
Reason Religion must be taken in, and every thing called an Innovation, which
tended to support the Church or conduced in any respect to Decency and Order in
the Externals of Divine Worship: And this Clamor of Redressing Religious
Grievances, although by degrees it threw all open, and brought in upon us an
universal Deluge of Licentiousness, Profaneness, Enthusiasm, Atheism, and what
not, yet the Factions are so impudent as to continue the Charge, and with that
false Mother, care not how the Church be torn, or cut in pieces, so they may
have their spiteful Wills. Thus Ludlow will have it, that the Clergy's
influence upon the King, was always greater than could consist with the peace
and happiness of England, p. 2 d. whereas it was never happier than then, and
nothing but a regular Establishment in the Church could continue it so, as the
King knew very well, which made him so earnest to Support it; and the other
Party knew it too, which made them so earnest to pull it down. Roger Coke
likewise inveighs as much against the Arminian Bishops and Clergy of this
King's Reign as his Grandfather, when Attorney General, did against Sir Walter
Rawleigh: Who, is said by Osborn, and the Trial speaks as much, to have Bawled
him out of his Life. And so in the same Manner the little Pamphletteers, like
Country Curs bark for Company. Ye take too much upon you, was that General, and
grand Charge, Corah and his Accomplices brought against Moses and Aaron, the
Prince of the People, and Priest of God: And notwithstanding the Almighty's
Vengeance so signally appeared in that Quarrel, as to send them all quick into
Hell, yet the Terror thereof has not been able to affright such Children of
Disobedience from Repeating their Provocations: The Gates of Hell are
continually Opening upon the Church, and though never able to prevail against
the whole, may have sometimes Permission to chastise a part, and do whatever
else God in his Secret purposes has resolved upon; to which Unsearchable Will
alone it must be referred, That the Anointed of the Lord, the great Defender of
our Faith, (who best understood, and best practiced the Christian Religion, of
any Prince since the Prince of Peace) was taken in their Nets, and as the other
Crucified, so this by such like wicked Hands most barbarously slain. And if the
same Sovereign Disposer in this his great Displeasure proceeds farther, to
remove our Candlestick, declare he has no pleasure in us, Malach. 1. 10.
neither will accept an offering at our Hands, we must notwithstanding
acknowledge, he is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all his Works: For
unto very nigh these Circumstances, the many Sub and Super-Reformers have
reduced, what under the Auspicious care of its Royal Defender was the Glory of
the whole Earth. That therefore it may be known there was such a thing as the
Church of England, and as I said, in a most flourishing Condition, till these
(...) many Physicians, or Quacks rather would be showing their Skill; I shall
take leave to make a Retrospect, and represent upon what bottom she was first
fixed at the Reformation; what false Brethren they were, who interrupted and
disturbed this Establishment, and likewise by what Arts and Degrees they
engaged, I may say bewitched the People, to assist them in such Confusions, as
were at length brought upon her. Though the Reformation of our English Church
was founded, and carried on, upon those infallible Truths the Primitive Times,
and Ancient Fathers had practiced from Scripture, without any regard to Foreign
Proceedings; or if any, rather Luther, and Melancthon, than Calvin, and Beza,
had the Preference; yet the two latter would be frequently putting their Sickle
into our Harvest, and partly by Corresponding, but more especially by
conversing with several Exiles, both Clergy and Lay retired into those Parts
during Queen Mary's Persecution, gained too many Admirers, who returning home
upon Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, cried up the Geneva Model, as the
very Pattern which the Lord had shown from that Mount, and according to which
the whole Reformation must be carried on, or no Blessing from him would attend
it. It would be here too tedious to relate what Arts they used, and what
Interests they made in Country, City and Court: As they began to think of
setting up their darling Discipline, and that in so insolent a manner as to
declare, Mr. Hooker's Pref.
That if the Government would not assist therein, they must do it whether the
Queen and State will or no; insinuating how many Thousands their Party
consisted of, and threatened if not complied with, such Courses, as should make
all their Hearts to ache.

Queen Elizabeth had too great a Value for her own well weighed Estalishments,
to have them Superseded by every Factious Caprice, and thereupon resolved
firmly against them. And nothing but that steady Resolution of hers, could
preserve both Church and State from being, even then, ruined. For these
pretended Children of Light, had so much of this World; were so wise in their
Generation, as besides their many Abettors amongst the Common People, were not
unprovided of some in the House of Commons, which Mr. Cambden tells us the
Queen took Notice of and much disliked their unquiet Humor, Camb. Eli. An. 73.
greedy of Novelty, and forward to root up things well Established; to prevent
which for the future, she commanded the Severity of the Laws to be every where
put in Execution: And sometime after procured two New Acts, one against the
Papists, and another against the Puritans, on purpose to restrain the insolency
of both Factions, and by which several of them were afterward adjudg'd to
Death.

But such Turbulent Spirits are not so easily quelled, the same Historian
continues the Complaint in a following Parliament 85. Eliz An. 85 and 88.
But nothing so much irritated her great Mind, as their Villainous Deportment in
88. for thinking they had the Queen at an Advantage upon the Rumor of a Foreign
Invasion, beset her with greater Importunities than ever, and played their
Affairs with so much Confidence, as if of Confederacy with the Spaniard; never
(as Cambden goes on with the Complaint) did contumacious Impudency, and
contumelious Malepertness advance it self more insolently, giving an account
what Scandalous Books they writ, Belching forth such Calumnies and Reproaches
therein, as the Authors seemed rather to be Scullions in a Kitchen, than
followers of Piety: The present Course she thought fit to take with such
unnatural Beautifeus, was only to secure some of the most busy, and chief
amongst them in Wisbich Castle, where many of the leading Papists were likewise
secured: But as soon as that Storm was over, she resolved upon a more effectual
Course, to keep a constant Calm at home; for in Feb. 92. a Parliament was
called, amongst other things, to Enact such Laws as might restrain those
Insolences, wherewith the Patience of the State had been so long exercised.
Wherein the Lord Keeper Puckering's Speech to both Houses of Parliament, is
very Remarkable, which amongst other things lets them know, that they were
Especially commanded by her Majesty to take heed, that no ear be given, nor
time afforded to the wearysom Solicitations of those that commonly be called
Puritans, wherewithal the last Parliaments have been exceedingly importuned;
which sort of Men, whilst in the Giddyness of their Spirit, they labor, and
strive to advance a new Eldership, they do nothing else but disturb the good
repose of the Church, and Commonwealth: And as the Case stands, it may be
doubted, whether they, or the Jesuit do offer more danger, or be more speedily
to be redressed; with much more to the same purpose, even Prophetical of the
Mischiefs they have since produced. Hereupon followed that formidable Act,
Tricesimo Quinto Elizabethae, which was so closely hooked into the Nostrils of
this Spiritual Leviathan, as though frequently endeavored, they were never
able to get it out, till they had at one desperate Plunge, freed themselves
from all Regal Power, as well as Ecclesiastical Discipline. To be sure the
remaining ten Years of this great Queen's Reign, the swelling Humor of that
haughty Faction, was so taken down, as they never made the least effort toward
those Innovations either in Church, or State, which had been so uneasy to the
Government before, and so Fatal since.

In this Excellent Posture, and Regular Subordination, did this Prudent
Princess leave an exact and practicable Model of the English Monarchy, that her
Successor, as I observed before, did not tread in the same steps, take the same
care, and show the like Courage; Hinc Illae Lachrymae. For coming to the Crown
with a General Applause on every Side, it was never considered that the
brightest Sunrise is soonest intercepted by a Cloud; that Hosanna's from the
Vulgar, as well Great as Small, naturally run into the contrary extreme, unless
that Mercury of theirs be fixed by such a well weighed Politic as knows how to
temper them in both. It was likewise no small Prejudice to our English Church,
that the King came accompanied with so great a Retinue of his own Country,
whose Kirk-Leven put our Puritans into a fresh Ferment, made them Swell and
Domineer, with their usual insolence upon the least Countenance of Connivance
from such as are in Power, or have an Interest in the Government. Upon this
account I cannot but take Notice of a Passage in Bishop Hacket's Life printed
before his Sermons; He was born of Scotch Parents dwelling in London, during
the Queen's Time. They were both true Protestants, great Lovers of the Church
of England, constantly repairing to the Divine Prayers and Service thereof, and
would often bewail to their young Son, after the coming in of their Countrymen
with King James, the seed of Fanaticism then laid in the Scandalous neglect of
the Public Liturgy, which all the Queen's time was exceedingly frequented, the
People then resorting as Devoutly to Prayers, as they would afterward to hear
any famous Preacher about Town. And his Aged Parents often observed to him,
that Religion toward God, Justice and Love amongst Neighbors, gradually
declined, with the disuse of our Public Prayers. This Observation was made at
first, which we have since seen Fatally verified and cursedly Improved.

It was likewise no small prejudice to the Interest of our English Church, that
a Scotch Peer Top'd an Archbishop upon her, no ways qualified with parts or
principles for so great a Trust: The Story stands thus; Upon Archbishop
Bancroft's Death, such as wished well to the Church, Bishops, and other great
Men about Court, recommended Bishop Andrews, a Person every way
unexceptionable, to the King, who approved so well of him, as they thought
their Business fixed, and neglected to press it further; when the Earl of
Dunbar, a powerful Minister with the King, says my Author, put in for his
quondam Chaplain Abbot, and got the King's Hand for passing the Instrument
before the Matter was discovered; and then too late to prevent: God grant
Scotch Peers may never more recommend English Prelates! Indeed the less any of
them have to do with our Church, the better, although in this great Time of
Trial amongst them, (where all Religious Order is run into Enthusiasm and
Madness) there are several have signalis'd themselves with a Zeal truly
Primitive, not only to the spoiling their Goods, but the loss of all their
Fortunes, and of some of their Lives. For our New Metropolitan, when in Place,
he fell very much short of what his own Admirers expected; to be sure his
Remiss Government, and unexcusable Partiality toward the Puritans, neglecting
all those worthy Methods his two Predecessors, Whitgift and Bancroft had
prosecuted, introduced those many Desolations, Fractions and Schisms, which the
Church has not yet, and it is a Question whether will be ever able to weather;
for whilst several worthy Prelates in his Time, and his Successor who next came
in Place, endeavored to continue or revive such Articles, Injunctions, and
Canons, as had been framed in Q. Elizabeth's Time, and to reduce the Church to
the same Order and Regimen in which Abbot found it: These forsooth must be all
exclaimed against for Innovations, and a Moulding of her to a nearer compliance
with the Sea of Rome, as Ludlow suggests, which I shall farther take notice of
in the next Paragraph, and for the present only mention what Archbishop Laud
told a Friend of mine, when in the Tower, That he endeavored the Repair of an
Old House, but it had been so much neglected, and run to ruin, as to fall about
his Ears in the Attempt.

However, for the former part of King James's Reign, things went smoothly on,
in an easy careless course, without any considerable rub or disturbance, the
first Grumblings of Discontent arose from the Spanish Match, which the King had
set his Heart upon, and People as much against; the truth of it is, our Crown
had generally Married there, or in France, but as there had been no Occasion
for such an Alliance since the Reformation, so the different Persuasions now on
foot, as to Religion, made it very difficult to accomodate that Matter: The
English Papists were extremely Zealous therein, beyond the bounds of Common
Discretion, which made the rest of the Nation suspect there could come no good
from what they were so forward to promote; and herein the Puritan would be sure
to Lead the Van, who clamoured and made a noise as if the Pope had been as nigh
our Gates, as Hannibal was sometime those of Rome, and ran down all as that way
disposed, who would not be as Mad, and violent as themselves, believe
Impossibilities, or fly in the face of Royal Authority. And about this time it
was they began that popular charge of Innovations, which had the same Malicious
effect upon all Orthodox, Eminent Divines, as that of Grievances upon Ministers
of State, the proof whereof must likewise depend upon Common-fame, or which is
worse, a Common Appellation of their own fixing, as to some particular School,
or rather Philosophical points, most innocent and harmless in themselves, yet
so managed by a well-contriv'd spite, as the People became possessed that an
Arminian was as dangerous as a Papist, and as nigh an Affinity between them, as
there proved afterward to be between Puritan and Rebel.

Upon this account, one Mr. Mountague was first had Coram Nobis in K. James's
last Parliament, as Learned a Man, and Solid a Divine, as our, or perhaps any
other Church had, but having severely Gagged the Predestinarian Brotherhood,
and conduced very much to the bringing K. James off from those Rigours, they
could find no better way to be revenged than by setting their Party in the
House of Commons about his Ears, Detect. 237.
which Roger Coke after so long a time, revives with a fresh prosecution, not
considering how much both the Temper and Opinions of Men are since altered,
that the heats about those points have been very much cooled, or diverted, so
that he might have as well inveighed, that Ruffs and Farthingals were not still
worn, for they and Calvenism went out of Fashion together; none at this time of
Day, but a few of the more Hare-brain'd Dissenters can dream of being Engin'd
up to Heaven, by a Chain of Predestination, whereof the Elect are so well
Secured, as the grossest Crimes cannot deprive them.

However, their proceedings then were with something of deference to the
Church, remitting the whole matter to the Archbishop, whom they knew more than
enough prejudiced for the Puritan and their Reprobation Doctrine; and perhaps
were assured aforehand, that he resolved upon an Admonition, which was
accordingly done: But then the King was his Ordinary, to whom with the
Convocation an Appeal lay, and there the Derniere Resort rested, and thither he
Addressed himself in a fresh piece, called Appello Caesarem, which made fresh
work in K. Charles's first Parliament, the second Session whereof, being
removed to Oxon, by reason of the Sickness in London, the Commons sat in the
Divinity Schools, and their Speaker in or nigh the Professor's Chair, whereby,
whether they thought themselver inspired, or were rather possessed, as my Author
would have it, I shall not concern my self; to be sure from that time forward
we never find them without a Committee for Religion, and no such Committee, but
would undertake to determine the deepest Controversies, and Reform whatever
they were pleased to call Abuses, till by degrees they fell upon the Divines,
Sequestring, and Imprisoning them by whole Centuries; and so having exposed and
trampled under-foot the Doctrine, Discipline, and Governors of the Church,
they introduced the most Extravagant Licentiousness that ever was known in any
part of the World called Christian. These indeed were Innovations to purpose,
But who introduced them? And what would Queen Elizabeth have said thereto?

Coll. 209.
Mr. Rushworth gives us at large the Articles, Professor Pym Exhibited against
Richard Mountague, Clerk, which upon some search he could not find Answered; as
indeed, What wise Man would reply to the Ipse Dixit of so many hundreds? Or
what Influence could a Reply have, when the Conclusion was resolved upon,
without any Consideration of the Premises? However, the Letter he mentions
before, which upon this Occasion Three Bishops writ to the Duke, gives a true
State of the whole matter, and Iudiciously distinguish between such Opinions as
are expressly the resolved Doctrines of the Church, and such as are fit only for
the Schools, and left at liberty for Learned Men to abound in their own Sense,
so they keep themselves peaceable; and distract not the Church: This Letter Mr.
Rushworth might have given at large, as well as the Articles, but for a bad
reason, best known to himself, omitted it; nevertheless we have it in the
Cabala; Page 105.
to be sure the few forementioned words carry great Soundness, and Judgment in
them, and must be acknowledged the only expedient could be fixed upon, either
to Silence the Controversy, or let them Brawl it out in its proper place. It Is
a pleasant conceit of Mr. Osborn, who tells his Son, Advice to a Son, page 104.
The Clergy have work enough cut out till Doomesday to resolve which is least
suitable to the Divine Essence, to have bound the hands of Men, or left them at
liberty; yet hereby a constraint must needs be put upon us, or our Maker: Now
this Gordian Knot, which all our Clergy never could, nor ever will be able to
Untie, our many Alexanders in the House, resolve to Cut asunder by one Simple
Vote; yet this Weapon of theirs, however very Keen, had but a thin Edge, and
was turned before it got thorough, so that it remains still indissoluble,
whether we drive, or whether we are driven, as I find the Question stated by
one of our Comoedians, so well, that few of the Schools come up to it: An
unseen hand may determine our freest Actions, and the deepest laid designs move
Retrogade, when we think the quite contrary: But that the Almighty Sovereign,
the Author and Disposer of All things, should Damn Men, before he makes them,
Create many Millions of Beings, with design to Reprobate them into Eternal
Misery, and found one main part of his Glory therein, is too gross a conception
for any considering man to entertain, who according to the perfection of the
Divine Attributes, must apprehend God to be infinite in Goodness and Mercy, as
well as Justice and Power. On the contrary, such harsh and severe Notions of
the Sacred Majesty of Heaven, as if he delighted in nothing more, than to
Tyrannize over, and Trample upon the Slaves of his Creation, cannot but debase
men's Spirits to the like proceedings, make them in the Apostle's phrase,
without Natural Affection, void of any thing that is Generous, Great, or Good,
and consequently Mete unto others, what they falsely suppose, to be the
Almighty's Measures unto all Mankind. To be sure it was at this time the manner
of their proceedings with all true Sons of our Church, whom they never let
alone till Reprobated as to this life, God be praised their Malice could not
reach any thing which concerned the next. But setting aside these rigid
Determinations, which The Examination of Tilenus before the Tryers, pleasantly,
yet withal solidly exposes, under the borrowed names of Dr. Dubitan's,
Frybabe, Irresistible, etc. the other Branches of that Controversy about Fate,
Freewill, etc. in all the ordnary concerns of humane life, began long since
amongst the Philosophers, the Stoics on the one hand, the Epicureans, and
Libertines on the other, wherein likewise most of the rest were concerned, though
with more Temper, Deliberation, and Judgment. It was likewise an old Humorist
amongst them, who first started that Notion of All things being Necessitated
from the concurrence of precedent Causes, much improved by as great an Humorist
amongst us, and to much worse purpose, since the former understood nothing of
the Revealed Knowledge this other designed thereby to Subvert. Christian
Religion, in the mean while was kept free from these Debates, for several
Centuries, till the Manachees turned Stoics, and the Pelagians, Libertines,
wherein St. Austin became engaged, and had them taken up by his Followers, though
they spread no farther than the Melancholy Cells of Monks and Schoolmen, for
the next Thousand years, and were rather a Diversion for the few Brisk Wits of
those ignorant dull Times, than looked upon as any ways relating to the
Articles of Christian Doctrine. That Imposition was first brought upon the
Church by the Council of Trent, and however their many Innovations of that kind
were declaimed against by most Protestants, yet the Synod of Dort was no less
Dogmatical in Imposing their Five Articles, which their humble Imitators our
Lay Assembly now, and our Mixed Assembly of Clergy Lay afterward, would have
enforced with as much Earnestness, as the Being of a God, or necessity of a
Redeemer. Give me leave farther to observe, that in the calm, and more
deliberate Times of Q. Elizabeth, when Archbishop Whitgift had Assembled a few
Bishops and other Divines, and framed those commonly called the Nine Articles
at Lambeth, (of too nigh Affinity with the forementioned points) in order to
Silence some Disputes at Cambridge, which had gone out too far thereupon, Her
Majesty was so concerned at it, as had it not been for the Reverend Esteem she
had of that Excellent Prelate, they would have been all Attainted of a
Praemunire; Notwithstanding she commanded him speedily to recall, and suppress
those Articles, which was performed with so much Care and Diligence, that a
Copy of them was not to be found a long time after; and this the Three Bishops
in their forementioned Letter urged as a precedent, and with great reason, but
then was then, and now was now, when the Humor ran as much for pulling down,
as before to support, and advance, whatever tended to God's Glory, or the
Public Good.

I must here likewise beg my Reader's pardon if he thinks me too prolix, and
hope upon second thoughts it may be acknowledged requisite to represent what
little No-things they would catch at, what Sound Doctrines they would pervert,
and misrepresent, to Defame and bring an Odium upon such persons, as otherwise
might pull off their Vizard, and Detect the Mischiefs they had in design, for
all the Law and all the Reason was on the King's side, which they could not
otherwise stifle, than by such groundless Cavils against every Faithful and
Loyal Subject, who had Sense and Courage to stand up for him, and the Laws, in
Opposition to their dangerous Innovations and Seditious practices.

But all the Fat would be in the Fire, should I pass by Sibthorpe and
Manwaring, whose Indiscretions all good men pitied, none justified: Although
Archbishop Abbot's pettishness stretched the former Sense, further than was
consistent with the Charity of a Metropolitan, or Candor of a Privy
Counselor. For the other, nothing could be greater than what the King declared
thereupon, He that will preach other than he can prove, let him suffer; I give
them no thanks to give me my due. And really, it is to my Admiration,
considering how good a Man the King was, and how Kind a Father to the Church,
with the Violent Heats on the other side, there were only these Two ran into
the contrary Extreme; had Time-serving been as much in fashion then, as I have
known it since, there had been several hundreds to each of them. It was
likewise thought then, and since, that the Commons having done the King no
Right as to their own Members, Clem. Coke, and Dr. Turner, they should have
been less severe against Dr. Manwaring, at leastwise upon his Humble Submission
and Acknowledgment, have moved the Lords to remit the rest of his Sentence,
which defect the King supplied sometime after, and let them know by that Tacit
Intimation, how Mercy rejoices against Judgment, Jam. 2. 13.
and what they may expect that do the contrary: But what the Defense says,
that soon after the Parliament was dissolved, he was punished with a Fat
Bishopric, is far from Truth, unless he can bring seven years into that narrow
compass, which on other accounts passes for the Life of a Man. To be sure, upon
his Advance to that Dignity, he approved himself every way worthy of it. Three
things more especially I find he was much resolved upon. First, The Redemption
of Captives; Secondly, The Conversion of Recusants; Thirdly, The Undeceiving of
Seduced Sectaries. Which shows him to be of a Public, as well as Loyal Spirit.
And one would think might atone for two or three Expressions, which as they
were out of his Profession, so ought to have been more cautiously considered;
but I have found this their constant course all along, every little slip upon
the King's account, shall be Aggravated to the Extremest Degree, whilst the
most violent Libels, against him, his Ministers, and Government, must have so
many Grains of Allowance, as the Authors may be brought off with Reputation and
Rewards; As it happened afterward in the Case of Pryn, Burton, Bastwick,
Leighton, Lilburne, and who not? That dared to fly in the face of Majesty, and
Abuse all that Adhered to Church and Crown, although to my certain information,
Pryn did in the Sequel acknowledge, that when he lost his Ears, they might in
Law and Justice have taken away his life. In the mean while what a Vexation
must it be to a Good, and Wise King, that when he had called a Parliament to
Assist him, according to the National Constitution, in a War undertaken by
their inducement, they diverted themselves in debating such School Points as
belonged properly to our Universities Exercise: as afterward they fell upon
some Innocent Ceremonies, which had been all along practiced in the Catholic
Church, and enjoined by ours; ever since the Reformation; Dangerous Innovations
these: Was ever so great a Cry made about so little Wool!

CHAP. VII. No Design of Introducing Popery.
THE Growth of Popery, and Countenance shown to Papists, was another pestilent
Allegation, and did never the less Mischief, though false and groundless; for
First it is not true, that the little Favor now shown them, was solely upon
account of the Matches in Treaty with Spain and France; nor Secondly, had it
been Unusual with Q. Elizabeth to discharge Priests after some short time of
Confinement: For those violent Bigots were as numerous, and busy in her Reign,
Compassed Sea and Land to gain Proselytes, and prevailed upon too many weak,
and unstable Minds to become so: However, 'twas a known Maxim of hers, That no
Man's Conscience should be forced or punished, unless it did overflow into
Overt, and express Acts, and become matter of Faction, in which Causes the
Sovereign Prince ought to punish the Practice, though colored with the
pretense of Conscience and Religion. A larger account whereof may be seen in
that Eminent Letter of Secretary Walsingham, Cabala, 392.
to Monsieur Critoy, and what distinction there was ever made between such as
were Papists in Conscience, and those in Faction and Singularity, who set their
Wits continually a-work to disturb the Public Peace and undermine the
Government.

Besides there was at this time, and had been several years before, most
violent Oppositions and Quarrels, between the Regulars and Seculars here in
England, more especially the Jesuits, whom the forementioned Secretary, calls
Seditious Priests of a New Erection, whereas many of the former had taken the
Oath of Allegiance, and some written to Justify it, desiring only to live
according to the Rites of the Roman Church, without any regard to the Court,
that so magnified Idol of the Popes Universal Supremacy, and All-disposing
Usurpation: Now by fomenting these Differences, and showing some kindness to
the more Moderate Party, Archbishop Bancroft more especially, (however branded
by the Faction for a Papist) and some other Ministers of State, got so clear an
insight into all their Iesuitical Intriegues, as to outdo them at their own
Weapon, and render their many designs Abortive; And his Successor Abbot herein
was forced to take the same Measures, ('it is pity he did not so in every thing
else) for when in King Charles's second Parliament, some busy Overdoes gave
Information to the House, and upon search discovered, Rush. Coll. page 243.
that there were several Priests in the Prison called the Clink, who lived with
great Ease and Liberty, had the Free Exercise of their Religion, with Altars,
Pictures, and other Trinkets, the forementioned Archbishop writ to the
Attorney General on their behalf, and told him, Upon more curious enquiry that
Information would be found to come Originally from the Jesuits, for they do
nothing but put Tricks upon those poor Men, who do live more miserable lives
than if they were in the Inquisition. By taking the Oath of Allegiance, and
writing in defense of it, they have so displeased the Pope, that if by any
cunning they could catch them, they are sure to be burnt or strangled for it;
and once there was a Plot to have taken Preston as he passed the Thames, and to
have Shipped him into a bigger Vessel, and so have transported him to Flanders,
there to have made a Martyr of him. In respect of these things, K. James always
gave his protection to Preston and Warrington, as may be easily showed; Canon
is an old man, well affected to the Cause, but medleth not with any Factions or
Seditions, etc. So vast a difference there is between taking things at a
general View, upon the first rebound of vulgar report, and enquiring more
narrowly into the secret Transactions, the Reasons of State, upon which the
Welfare of all Governments, and consequently of every private Individual
depends.

And since we are upon Reason of State, that will come in here upon a more
unhappy consideration as to this Affair, the Protestant Interest, especially in
France, was at a much lower Ebb than formerly; they had engaged (we are not
here to resolve how justly) in those several pretenses the Princes of the Blood
set up; and so upheld a mutual Interest, whereas now the former being worn out,
or reconciled, it was an Impar Congressus on the Hugonot's side to maintain by
the Sword those Concessions it had formerly procured them; or otherwise prevent
those many Artifices, both the Court of France and Rome were daily improving to
their Ruin, insomuch, as the then K. Lewis XIII. was known publicly to
declare, That as his two Predecessors Henry III. Feared them, Henry IV. Loved
them; so he did neither. And though the Spanist Match made the Cry, yet upon
this consideration more especially it was, that in K. James's time, upon mature
deliberation in Council, the Execution of some Penal Statutes which had already
passed in Sentence upon several Popish Recusants was suspended, for that the
Protestants in France, Germany, and elsewhere, lay under very bad
Circumstances, and had no other Intercessor for their Liberty, etc. but the
King of England, who was importuned on the other side to show the like favor
to those of the Romish Persuasion in his Dominions: Nay, some English Jesuits
at Paris, printed a Book representing how hardly their party were used here,
instigating that King to the utmost Severity by way of Retaliation; so that had
they, and the Parliament been complied with, what a havoc would have been made
all Europe over, of Papists here, and Protestants every where alse? There is a
Letter in the Cabala from Lord Keeper Williams, Cabal. 269.
to the Viscount Anan, a Scotch Peer I presume, upon this Subject, which fully
clears the King, and justifies the proceedure by true Reason of State. The
Malice of the Faction, gave out indeed, that the Favor looked forward, and
amounted even to a Tolleration, which the Keeper styles a dull, but withal, a
Devilish Misconstruction:

Yet the same prejudices were not only continued, but improved against K.
Charles, by reason he Married a Daughter of France, who was not wanting, says
Ludlow, on her part to press him, upon all occasions, to pursue the design of
enlarging his Power, not omitting to solicit him also, to mould the Church of
England to a nearer compliance with the Sea of Rome, Page 2. For the former, as
he had no such design before, so it is as little probable, she should press him
now, or that he should any wise give the least Ear to Insinuations of that
kind. And a nearer Compliance with the Church of Rome is Nonsense; for as they
will not set the least Step, give up one title in order to an accommodation, so
will they admit none into their Communion without swallowing the whole Digest
of their Trent Determinations, which the Judicious Author of that History
expressly declares, History of the Council of Trent, Page 2.
and most passionately complains of, That what was desired and procured by
Godly Men, to reunite the Church, which began to be divided, has so
established the Schism, and made the Parties so obstinate, that the Discords
are become irreconcilable. And whatever his Ignorance or Malice suggests, the
Church of England is a greater Eyesore to those of Rome than any other in the
World; and not to mention, our King (of whom there was no hopes, whatever some
tatled, and so they knew) would have ventured, aye, and promoted the Ruin of
the Queen, however of their Communion, and all her Posterity, rather than it
should have been continued in that Uniform Splendor, Decency, and Order, his
pious Care had so thoroughly Established.

The Spaniards having the Prince in their hands, imposed very severe Articles
on behalf of the English Recusants, which amongst other things might be
considered in breaking off that Match, when we came to Treat with France upon
the same Subject, though Rushworth tells us, the Articles were not much short
of those with Spain; Coll. 169.
yet what he mentions (and he is constantly found to mention the worst on the
best side) are very much short of the former, requiring no more, than that such
Recusants as had been committed since the breach with Spain, should be set at
liberty; and that there should not be so strict an Inquisition after them for
the future. All which, considering the Circumstances of Protestancy in Foreign
Parts, was neither an Unreasonable Demand on their side, nor an Unpolitick
Concession on ours, and what the Violent Party both within doors and without,
quarreled at, only for quarrelling sake. Had indeed the Popish Party no other
Abettor but the Pope, his Bruta Fulmina might have been easily repelled; but
when the greatest Princes in Christendom call themselves Catholics, and will
be zealously engaged in the concerns of his Emissaries, the mutual
Correspondence between these Potentates, Popish and Protestant, does frequently
introduce a petimusque damusque vicissim, mutual returns of Kindnesses, and
equal Indulgence of Pardons; insomuch, as Cromwell no sooner entered into
Foreign Alliances, but he was forced to comply therein; and the World to this
day cannot tell what was transacted between Sir Kenelm Digby and himself upon
that account. So likewise at present they are the only Party amongst us backed
with Foreign Friends, and it would cause very severe Solicitations, perhaps
Remonstrances too, should the Laws in that Case provided, be put in vigorous
Execution: Although the Scale on the Protestants side is now so drawn up, as
there is very little prospect, things standing as they do, they should ever be
brought even; but on the contrary, no little danger, that the Disjointed
Interest among them abroad, and Unreasonable Separations amongst us at home,
may once more Enslave us to that Universal Supremacy, which otherwise all their
Arts and Emissaries could never have brought about. Nevertheless, this little
favor, then obtained, was not free from Abuse, by the too forward Zeal of
their Priests, and some other Priest-ridden Persons, who having got an Inch
would take an Ell, drive on in a strange kind of Unthinking Bigottry, without
the least regard to their Friends, Foes, or indeed themselves. A fault which
Dissenters on every side could never forbear running into; as appeared not long
since, by that furious Cureer both of Papists and Fanatics, when the Reins
were thrown Loose upon their Necks, by a Dispensing Power.

Neither does it appear that they made any considerable progress in gaining
Converts more than before, some they always prevailed upon, amongst which there
might be a few well-meaning Persons, who had a real Regard for Piety and
Religion, and seeing such Disputes about it, wished for some Infallible Guide
to determine them in the Right; in which Melancholy Humor, they were easily
Wheadled into a Belief, that an Old Man in a Chair at Rome, was placed there
for that purpose. Although the generality of their Proselytes were such loose
vicious Livers, as brought little Reputation to whatever Profession they joined
in Communion with; and it is to be feared, went over on purpose for too easy an
Absolution: As I know a Lady, who having Sacrificed her Reputation, took the
forementioned Course, and ever after expressed a great deal of Contempt for the
Church of England, because there was no Admission of Venial Sins. Archbishop
Laud, when at that Barbarous Trial of his by an Ordinance of Parliament, he was
charged with an Endeavor to Advance and bring in Popery, made it appear, that
the two or three Priests he had Corresponded withal, was for the good of the
Church, as Bancroft, and others his Predecessors had done before; and then gave
an account of what Persons, by Name, he had brought over to, or retained in the
Church of England; who, for Quality, and perhaps Number, might Vye with all,
the contrary Party had prevailed upon during that time he Sat at the Helm of
Church Affairs. Afterward, indeed, when the War broke out, several Persons who
had been imposed upon by their fair Pretenses, discovering when too late, that
their Faith was Faction, and Religion Rebellion, would have no more to do with
such Protestants, and so ran over to the Roman Extreme, which had a more
plentiful Harvest during those Confusions than ever before in this Nation. And
really it has cost me many a Melancholy Reflection, what, after all their
Railing, that truly great Man Archbishop Laud too Prophetically Boded on the
Scaffold; that however he was Charged, as the Pharisaical Jews did our Savior,
with a Venient Romani, the many Rents and Divisions, Sects and Factions, they
caused and promoted, was as likely to bring them upon us, as the Crucifying our
Savior did upon the others. The Defense likewise opens very loud upon the
French Match, and Articles thereof, Page 3. yet at present charges no more than
what I have already mentioned out of Rushworth; He directs indeed to them at
large farther on in his Book, but none to be found; it is probable, upon exacter
View, they fell short of the Mischief designed, and were omitted upon that
account. One thing I admire, since they delight so much in Falsehoods, none of
these Libellers have hit upon what is reported in several French Historians,
that there was an Article, for all the Children, both Male and Female, to be at
the Queen's Disposal, as well to the Religious as Civil part of their
Education, till they were Twelve or Thirteen years old: There is seldom any
Bargain driven between private Persons, but more is demanded than they knew
would be granted; and without doubt, the Agents, De Propaganda Fide, would take
care, enough should be insisted upon; but that any such thing was complied
with, or hearkened to, as there is nothing extant to make it appear, (which
would have been highly acceptable, and most pestilently advantageous to the
Faction's Calumnies) so matter of Fact speaks quite the contrary; For as soon
as they came to be capable of Instruction, their Education was wholly at the
King's Direction, and performed with extraordinary Care, Piety, and Judgment;
And whatever Clamours or Conjectures may be made to the contrary, I have been
informed by very judicious Observers, that the Queen was very Passive therein,
and carried her self with a great deal of Deference to what the King Ordered:
If any of them Warped afterward, it was upon our compelling them into Exile,
and for that, as I said before, our selves must bear the Blame; to force
Princes abroad can never turn to Account for this Nation.

That other Libel too, King Charles no Saint, etc. makes a mighty Pudder about
the Match, and gives us the precise Sums allowed to the several Ecclesiastics
of her Train, amounting so high in the Total, as I fancy it is nigh as much as
the King could allow for the Expense of her whole Court, which indeed ought to
be somewhat Splendid, in respect to both her Qualities, Daughter of France, and
Queen of England; yet was it withal very Regular, and confined to such a
Proportion, as the King's great Exigencies, and small Revenue would admit. He
owns likewise, upon the insolent Deportment of her French Domestics, the King
dismissed them, a sufficient Argument she had not that Ascendent over him these
Foul-mouthed Blockheads prate of: But that they returned again to their former
Post is absolutely false, her Retinue for the future were mostly English, and
of that Communion too: Neither from that time forward (for the French did some
ill Offices of that kind) was there ever known a more agreeable Understanding
between King and Queen, or indeed any other Man and Wife, than them two; all
the Obligations of Conjugal Love, Respect and Duty, so inviolably observed on
either side, as they were an Example to many, and a Reproach to others in the
Court, and ought to have been so to the whole Kingdom thorough. The Exposing
his intercepted Letters shall be hereafter considered, as the Unworthiest Act
the basest Men could be guilty of.

One thing farther I shall propound to these Negative Make-bates, who so
violently opposed his Matching either with Spain or France, Where would they
have had him Matched? 'Twas high time as to his Age, and more highly requisite,
in that he was the only Male of the Royal Line, that he should be disposed of
somewhere; and to what purpose was it for People to cry a Protestant Princess
had been better, when they could find none such, agreeable to his Quality, nor
that mutual intercourse which such Alliances generally produce? For though it is
true, Kingdoms never Marry, and we find a War broke out soon after, and partly
hereupon, yet it might be also the sooner Accommodated upon the same account:
To be sure, if there be few private Families, of any Degree, but have some
Consideration of this Nature, when they dispose of their Children, we must
allow the same to Crowned Heads, both in respect to one another, and their
several Neighbor Potentates, who are never without Caballing Interests, and
other Intriegues of State. Neither could that liberty of the Romish Rites
indulged her, and those of that persuasion in her Family, have been any ways
prejudicial, had they who made such a Noise, so violently complained against
it, jointly concurred in the Confinement thereof to its proper Bounds, or
Modestly Addressed his Majesty whenever exceeded; but the Froppishness of that
Crooked Generation was for perverting every thing that Good Man did to the
utmost extremity, as he complains in the Declaration, when his third Parliament
was Dissolved, Rush. Appen. Page 5.
Seu been, seu male facta premunt, with Mischievous Men once Ill-Affected,
whatsoever seemed Amiss, is ever Remembered, but good Endeavors never Regarded.

So likewise for the Nobility and Gentry of that Persuasion, if they had any
favor more than usual, it was not so much from the Queen's Solicitation,
(though that was commonly objected) as for that they frankly proffered to Advance
Money toward the King's Necessities, and thereby exasperated the Parliament,
as well in crossing their Designs, as upbraiding their Refractory Humor;
although 'twas rather their Iealousy, than any real Effects the Loyal Gentlemen
found of Kindness. It Is true, there was a Commission issued out, and
Commissioners appointed, to Treat with them about Arrears of Forfeitures, and
an Advance upon the same account for some years to come; but it is false what
Rushworth says, Coll. 414.
That in pursuance of this Commission, the Recusants did make their Composition
upon very easy Terms, as was afterward complained of in Parliament; for this
Project never took effect. Sir John Savile, to whom the Management thereof was
chiefly entrusted, thought it more Advantageous, and therefore Advisable, to
Collect the Arrears of Thirds due to the King by Law, which they the more
willingly paid, in Consideration of the Exigencies he then lay under, and being
generally as well bred and Understanding Gentlemen, as most in the Kingdom,
must not be blamed, if they had some prospect of Advantage, as well as Duty.
Yet whatever respect the King showed their Persons, we see it would not excuse
their Purses, nor procure any Countenance to their Persuasions; for whenever
the Management of any young Heirs in such Families, came under his hands,
either as Wards or otherwise, there was effectual care taken of their
Education; amongst which, that every way most Eminent, the late Duke of Ormond
was one. But Popery was the Main Spoak in that Wheel of Revolution these
pretended Government Menders were so bent to bring about; and therefore, though
they made many a Faint, yet would never close effectually with the King in
suppression thereof: Thus when both Houses Petitioned the King against
Recusants, propounding a provisional Law, that their Children might be brought
up in our Religion, his Majesty most readily complied therewith, Coll. 517.
and earnestly recommended the preparation of a fitting Law to that effect,
which notwithstanding, the Debate fell asleep, and was never after reassumed.
And after the first heat, as little Notice was taken of that Letter found
amongst the Clerkenwell Jesuits, whereby nevertheless it appeared, they equally
studied the King's Ruin, with the Naetions Confusions, as Secretary Cook
informed them from him; and withal, Coll. 505.
how the French Ambassador told his Master at home, what he had wrought here
last Parliament, namely, Divisions between King and People, and he was rewarded
for it: A full discovery whose Tools they were, whose Game they played, which
nevertheless they continued on, so that one would think there was a design to
accept the Jesuits Challenge, and venture all upon a Trial of Skill, whether
were the best Artists in Mischief, the Disciples of Loyaela, or Calvinists, who
indeed set up both about the same time: Although I hope they have since wished
the Prize had been fought upon any other Stage than our Island.

The last thing I shall insist upon under this Topic, is his Majesty's Answer
to the Pope's Letter, whilst Prince of Wales, and in Spain, penned with so much
Judgment, Discretion, and true Sense of Religion, as nothing could be more
properly Adapted to that Critical Conjuncture, and hazardous Circumstances he
was then under, so inoffensively turning those Haughty Assumptions of that
pretended Sovereign High Priest, as he Terms himself, to a Zealous regard for
the truly Catholic Church, and a sincere endeavor to Cement those Divisions
and Schisms, tacitly supposed to arise from him; and because this most clearly
appears to be the express Intent of the Letter, those Sons of Perversion, the
two Pamphlet Libellers, are not content to alter Rushworth's Translation, to a
Sense the Latin will by no means bear, but add whole Sentences, whereof there
is not one Syllable in either: I shall give an instance or two of both kinds.
The little Spiteful piece, which would have him neither Saint nor Martyr, Page
11.
affirms, That he tells the Pope I shall never be so affected to any thing in
the World, as to endeavor An Alliance with a Prince that has the same
apprehension of the true Religion with my self: And then, as if the Devil ought
him a shame, immediately adds Mr. Rushworth has it in these Words, Your
Holiness's Conjecture of our Desire to Contract a Marriage, and Alliance, with
a Catholic Family and Princess, is agreeable both to your Wisdom and Charity;
for we should never desire so vehemently to be joined in a strict and
indissoluble Bond with any Mortal whatsoever, whose Religion we hated: which
last Words, where the Falsification lies, runs thus in Latin, Cujus Odio
Religionem prosequeremur; and if there be not a vast difference between Hating
a Religion, and being of the same Apprehension with him who professes that
Religion; nay, which is more, owning it for a true Religion because I do not
hate it, let the World judge; Hatred is altogether inconsistent with Christian
Principles, which whosoever will Live up to, must Hate nothing but Sin and the
Author of it; (although I can scarce forbear it to this Author too) and since
our Savior enjoins us to do good to them that hate us, to speak them Civilly
when they do the same to us, and let them see we can really Act, what perhaps
they but Hypocritically pretend, is so agreeable to all the Rules of Religion,
Reason, and Good Manners, as they must lay claim to none of them who cavil
thereat. With the like Ingenuity he proceeds on to the next Sentence, but
forbears Rushworth's Translation, where the King declaring his great
Moderation, continues the same Term, and assures him how far he should be, Ab
omni Opere quod odium testari possit ullum adversus Religionem Catholicam
Romanam, which is rendered; I have been always very far from encouraging
Novelties, or to be a Partisan of any Faction against the Catholic, Apostolic
Roman Religion. How comes Odium to include Novelties and Factions, at
leastwise, that the King should declare he would not encourage them against the
Roman Church? When his next Words gives a secret intimation how they came
Originally from thence, and therefore, setting all such Sinister Suspicions
aside, he earnestly desires, That as we all Confess one Individual Trinity, and
one Christ Crucified, ('it is Mr. Rushworth's Translation) we may unanimously
grow up in one Faith; and in Order to the Accomplishment of so good a Work, he
Piously adds, Labores omnes, atque vigilias, Regnorum etiam, atque vitae
pericula, parvi pendimus, which this base Fellow thus renders; We will expose
Life and Estate in the Exaltation of the Roman Chair. The other Pamphlet, which
I take to be Alter idem, at leastwise from the same Club of Calves Heads, gives
the same perverse Translation, and forced Sense thoroughout the whole Letter,
and to Crown the Villainy, Page 21.
adds a whole Sentence at the end, which was never known before, nor could with
any Coherence be brought in now; for after those Commonplace Compliments, which
come in Course at the end of such Epistles, Omnia prospera, and felicitatem
aeternam comprecamur; This Fanatic Forger continues, After so many Labors and
Fatigues, which your Holiness has undergone for the Propagation and
Preservation of the Holy True Church. We have had Volumes writ of Roman
Forgeries, and very tart Reflections upon Iesuitical Equivocations, with too
much Truth indeed, more than is consistent with Religion or Humanity it self;
yet it must be acknowledged, these our Pseudo-Protestants have out-thrown them
several Bars length, without the Wit of an Equivocation, or any thing else
which the most Frontless impudence can allege to Palliate or Excuse the
matter. I presume these furious Zealots would have the Prince returned in
Answer to the Pope, That he was Antichrist, Whore of Babylon, Man of Sin, etc.
and for that reason he defied him and all his works: I will not resolve,
whether this is proper or not in the Common Cant of that Brotherhood, but wish
with all my Heart all that use or approve it were forced into Spain, and
obliged to Preach the same Doctrine there, doubtless it might conduce much to
the Peace of our Nation, and perhaps somewhat to bringing down the price of
Corn.

And to show how Natural it is for the Malicious Diabolical Spirit of all this
Party, to blast our Kings, and their Memories, with too great a Respect to the
Pope and his Interest. I shall give here an account of their great Oracle,
Rushworth's unworthy dealing with King James, who in the close of his
Collections relating to that Reign, sets down the Transcript of a Letter
written from him to Pope Clement, with the Instructions given to Mr. Drummond,
who was sent with the same to Rome: Now Mr. Rushworth cannot but be so well
acquainted with the History and Transactions of those times, Coll. 16^
especially Archbishop Spotswood, as to know, that Cardinal Bellarmine having
published an Answer to King James's Apology, charged him therein with
Inconstancy, Objecting a Letter he had sent to Clement VIII. whilst in
Scotland, in which he had recommended to his Holiness, the Bishop of Vaison for
obtaining the Dignity of a Cardinal, that so he might be the more able to
advance his Affairs in the Court of Rome. This Treatise coming to the King's
Hand, he presently conceived he had been abused by his Secretary, which he
remembered had moved on a time for such a Letter; in short, (for I shall refer
the Reader to the passage at large in Archbishop Spotswood) the Secretary was
seized, (...) of Scotland, Page 507.
examined, and confessed, 'twas all a Forgery of his own and Cousin Drummond's
designing, that his Majesty was most falsely and wrongfully charged therewith,
and that he could never move him to consent thereto: Whereupon the Secretary
was Sentenced, not only to lose all his Offices and Estate, but his Life; which
last, at the Queen's Intercession, was spared, though he Died soon after, as
thought of Grief and Sorrow. Can any thing on this side Hell be more base and
spiteful than such a procedure as this? Who can give Credit to whatever he
Relates or Collects? Upon discovery of so vile a Studium Partium, which seems
brought in on purpose to Contradict, or Detract from, what had been immediately
before Recorded, in the Bishop of Lincoln's high and just Elogium of K. James;
more especially those last Words to his Son in order to his future Marriage,
whom he advised, To Marry like himself, and Marry where he would: But if he did
Marry the Daughter of that King, he should Marry her Person, but not her
Religion.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Lent Ships, Rochel, and the French War.
THe Iealousies between the French King, and Hugonots, were so great on either
side, that all their Accords seemed rather as a Cessation to take Breath, till
a convenient opportunity might serve for a fresh Breach, than any real design
of a lasting Peace: King James frequently labored herein, and did many good
Offices for the Protestant Interest; and King Charles, whilst the Match was in
Agitation, by his Ministers there, patched up a Treaty between them, that
thereby the French might be at more leisure to divert the Spaniard, then our
Enemy, both in Italy and the Mediterranean: In order whereunto they agreed with
us for the Loan of Seven Ships, on Man of War and six Merchants, as they had
with the Dutch for twenty, which joining their Fleet there, might block up
Genoa, and all other ways annoy them, as occasion should serve. But whilst this
Design was carried on, and the Army marched toward Italy; Sobiez, the most
considerable Chief of the Hugonots, next his Brother the Duke of Rohan,
alleging, a certain Fortress was not demolished, according to Agreement, got
together some small Ships, Seized upon the Isles Rhee and Oleron, with what
Vessels they found there, and so set up for a Piratical War, having Rochel and
those Isles or their Retreat. This made the French Court alter their Measures,
ordering their Land-Army back upon these New Revolters; and Memorancy the
French Admiral, having got together what Ships they could of their own, after a
great deal of Wheedle, and many Protestations, had ours consigned him, the
Dutch making no demur; nay, as some say, had, by a New Treaty, agreed
thereunto; with all which, he went directly against Sobiez, and disabled him
for ever appearing at Sea again, recovering both Isles and Ships, but a few
which got under Rochel: And in the same manner they prosecuted their Attacks at
Land so vigorously, as though it cost them longer time, yet in the end they
carried all, for which the Rochellers, and other Hugonots, could justly blame
none so much as themselves, not only in that they broke the Treaty as soon as
made; but afterward, when our King appeared in their Defense, they refused to
comply with such Resolutions, as in the Judgment of Sobiez, and their other
best Officers, were most proper thereunto. However, this Misemployment of our
Ships was highly resented by his Majesty, and many severe Expostulations arose
thereupon, that our Ships should be diverted from their intended expedition
against Spain, which was solely designed and promised; whereto the French King
replied, That he had no Enemies then but the Spaniard, and his intent no other,
witness the like Contract with the Dutch Ships; but his Rebellious Subjects,
the Rochellers, starting this necessity upon him, he was enforced to suppress
the dangerous Consequence, with the advantage of those Ships, against
Rebellion, which he conceives, and he hoped all Christian Princes conclude,
such Subjects the greatest Enemies to all Sovereignty. With this, and the
return of our Ships, fully satisfied for their Hire, these Heats for the
present were allayed, though with other Discontents, and Provocations, the next
year, they broke out into an open War. Which Ludlow, with his Commonwealth
Charity, tells us, The King engaged in, not upon the account of those of the
Reformed Religion, as was pretended, but grounded upon personal Discontents, to
gratify the Revenge and Lust of his Favorite, Page 3.

There is nothing more advantageous in any Relation, whether true or false,
than in hanging things well together; Malum ex qualibet particulari, a Lie is
quite spoiled if taken triping in any one particular; and it is the most
Judicious part of the best Historians, to have a clear Consistency in whatever
account they give, with an easy Transition from one matter to another. Let us
then, according to this Rule, examine the Judgment, Candor, and Integrity of
this great Dictator: He tells us in the precedent Paragraph, of several Steps
he would have the King set, in order to the Establishing an Arbitrary Power,
(which we have already taken notice of) more especially the Committing of
several Members, as he says, For complaining of the Grievances of the Nation;
as others, for their Riotous Deportment in the House, Locking up the Door,
holding the Speaker in the Chair, till they had passed what Votes they thought
fit, with many such like Heats, upon an intimation of their Dissolution: Now
what we are here to take notice of, is his Transition from this Relation to the
next; The King having thus assumed this extraordinary Power, resolved to make a
War with France; whereas the French War was begun before that Parliament was
called, and in a fair prospect of being ended, when those Gentlemen were so
unhappily committed. He had likewise intimated, in the precedent Page, that the
French Match was in order to their Assistance, as to an Arbitrary Power, which
his next Breath Blasts with a War, and when there was so much done toward the
Relief of Rochel, and such Regret in the King, that he could not be Assisted to
do more, with several other just Resentments for which the War was entered upon,
that he should assign it to the Revenge and Lust of a Favorite; to say no
more, is like the Man, his good Nature, and Loyal Principles, and agreeable to
the Party, for whose Satisfaction he writ it, who will Swallow any thing that
tends to Defame the Monarchy, though it hangs together like a Rope of Sand.

But to come to the War, the King had too just Grounds to engage therein, though
too mean a Fund to go through therewith; and the one in all probability had not
been given, but that they saw how unlikely it was, he should ever be supplied
as to the other. The not suffering Count Mansfield's Army to land in France,
and joining with them according to promise, was the Ruin thereof, and highly
prejudicial to the Protestant Interest in Germany: And which was worse, gave
occasion to the Malcontents here at home, to complain of Mismanagement, and
the No-Fruits of their Subsidies given to recover the Palatinate, when it all
proceeded from the little Faith, and less Honor, of our Allies. And there was
no more consistency in that mighty Huff, of the French King, and Court, upon
the dismission of our Queen's Domestics, since he had been guilty of the like
practice, upon the Spanish Retinue of his own Queen, not long before, and for
ought appears, upon far less Provocation. The Politico's, I know, then, and
since, have censured the Duke for some Personal grudges against Richlieu, and
that he did not act the part of a true Statesman, in countenancing such of his
Enemies here, as he had made France too hot for; whereas, if they will allow
him to look further, he could not but discover, that as Richlieu was a Minister
of the Deepest reach that Crown ever had, so was he likewise the greatest Enemy
to ours; and his Station being at that time very ticklish, to assist in getting
him down, had been one of the best Offices he could have performed for this
Kingdom; since it is now no further doubted, but that he was the Grand Promoter,
Underhand, of all our Northern Commotions, and consequently, of all our
Confusions hitherto, and without end to come.

Yet, amongst many other Provocations, that doubtless which chiefly influenced
the Duke, was the Relief of Rochel, the effecting whereof might as much have
reinstated him in Popular favor, as his breaking off the Spanish Match, and
for as long a time, in all probability not much longer: To be sure, had his
Measures been taken, there were all the Moral Assurances imaginable of an
accomplishment; but coming before the Town with a Fleet, the French were not
able to look on the Face, and such Additional Landforces, as joined with their
own, and the 4000 Foot, 200 Horse, the Duke of Rohan had engaged to send,
besides a constant supply from England, as occasion should require, they within
might not only have been secured, but such a New life given to the Protestant
Interest, as to have gone into the Heart, and thorough all France; and this
their whole Court, and Council, were so sensible of, as to make very
advantageous Overtures to the Duke of Rohan, and all his Party, provided they
would join with them against the English. I say, when, with all this Provision
and Supply, the Duke came before Rochel, so great was their Infatuation there,
( quos vult perdere, etc.) that though they knew they could not depend upon
what the French proffered, yet were they afraid to offend them by admitting the
English. To gain the greater Credit with the Party, this whole Transaction
shall be related out of their Friend Mr. Rushworth, Coll. 426.
who tell us, When the Duke with his Fleet appeared before Rochel, they who
once much longed for his coming, now shut their Gates against him: Hereupon,
the Duke of Sobiez went ashore with Sir William Beecher, from the Duke of
Buckingham, (Sir Will. Beecher being also accompanied with a Letter of Credence
from his Majesty of Great Britain) they were at last admitted into the Town;
and the Magistrates called an Assembly, and there Sir William Beecher declared
unto them, That the Duke of Buckingham was come with a great Fleet and Army to
their Assistance, which his Master had sent, out of fellow-feeling of their
Sufferings; and to require from the King of France a performance of the
Articles of Peace, made by the King of England's Mediation, on behalf of the
Protestants in France. And further declared unto them, that if they do now
refuse to give their Assistance, by joining Forces with the English, he said he
would, and did protest before God and Man, in the Name of the King his Master,
That his said Master was fully acquit of his Engagement of Honor, and
Conscience for their Relief.

But notwithstanding this Declaration, and Sobiez his Earnest Solicitation and
Endeavor, the Magistrates and Wealthier sort of People in the Town, (being
possessed with the fear of the King of France his Army, then upon a March against
them, and there being a Court-Party also prevalent in the Town) could be drawn
to give no other Answer at that time, but this, That they did render all humble
and hearty Thanks to his Majesty of Great Britain, for the care he had of them;
and to the Duke, for his forwardness and readiness to do his best Service for
their good: But said, They were bound by Oath of Union, to do nothing but by
Common and Unanimous Consent of all the rest of the Protestant Party in France:
And therefore prayed the King of Great Britain to excuse them, in that they did
suspend the Conjunction of Forces till they had sent to the rest of the
Protestant Towns, who were of the Union with them; And in the mean time, their
Prayers and Vows should be for the happy progress of such Actions, as the Fleet
and Army should undertake.

Thus far Mr. Rushworth, whose Authority the strongest prejudice must submit
to, for had it been possible to represent things to the disadvantage, where the
King and Duke were concerned, he would have exerted his utmost Talent that way.
And whatever others may be assigned, this false Step of the Rochellers in not
permitting the Duke to fix upon the Terra Firma of France, was the Chief, if
not the Sole Cause, of their Ruin, and never after to be retrieved; for the
Duke Squandring away his time, and Men, upon the Isle of Rhee, and no Supplies
coming as designed, was forced home for want of Provisions; which opportunity
the French failing not to take hold of, Invested Rochel both by Seae and Land,
with so much Force and Art, as 'twas easy for them to Calculate the length of
their Days. Hereupon, Sobiez with some other Deputies, were sent to implore his
Majesty's Commiseration and Assistance, in the most Melting Language they could
express, which theirs is very capable of; and were as graciously answered, That
he would take them into his especial Care and utmost Endeavors for their
Relief, and set about it with all Sincerity and Application imaginable; although
indeed it was something retarded by that unhappy suprize upon the Duke's life,
neither were his Coffers or Credit able to make the Expedition so quick as
desired; (which occasioned that Remonstrance of the Sieur Vincent, the Defense
so rudely descants upon, though I fancy the Original had not so rough a Title;
Nevertheless, a Gallant Fleet was at length set out under the Earl of Lindsey;
who with much Bravery and Resolution, set upon their Booms and Barracadoes, and
brake thorough many of them; but sometimes the Tide failing, and at others, the
Wind coming cross, the Defendants likewise repairing whatever Breaches were
made, and rendering every fresh Assault more difficult than the former, the
Rochellers beheld with their own Eyes, the Impossibility of any Relief, and
thereupon made that Unwilling Submission, their Fate, Folly, or both, had
brought them unto. The French, though considerable Gainers by suppressing these
unquiet Spirits at home, yet had so much work upon their hands from the House
of Austria at Land, as they did not in the least care, to have England upon
their Backs at Sea; and thereupon agreed very readily to a Peace, which set all
things in Statu Quo, with this Advantage on our side, that they became more
Complaisant and Obliging in their outward carriage; did not think fit to look
Big and Insult upon every private Disgust, though their underhand Practices were
much to be Suspected, as has been already Observed.

This is a true and impartial Account, how far our King was engaged in the
preservation of those Unhappy People in Rochel; how sincerely he undertook it,
and how they themselves, more especially rendered his most likely Attempts
Abortive. We are next to observe, with how much Villainy and Falsehood, all those
his Good Deeds are Evil spoke of, and perverted by the whole Fraternity of
Libellers; Ludlow confounds the Story so abominably, as to tell it without Head
or Tail, or rather with that witty Fellow's pretended Monster, sets the Head
and Tail Transversim; for so he makes Sir John Pennington's, and the other Six
Ships to be lent the French, after the Duke of Bucks had been at the Isle of
Rhee, whereas it was two years before, and they had been returned home above a
year. I must beg the Reader's pardon to trouble him with the whole Hodge Podge
of this Lewd, Uncouth Story.

The Rochellers, who once before, upon Encouragement from England, had
endeavored to defend their Just Rights against the Encroachments of the French
King, till being deserted by the King of England, they were necessitated to
accept terms from their King very disadvantageous to their Affairs, were again
by frequent Importunities, and fair Promises, prevailed with, (though very
unwillingly) to assist the English with Provisions, and such other things as
they wanted, in their Expedition against the Isle of Rhee; from whence our
Forces being repulsed, the French King sent his Army against the Protestants at
Rochel, whose Provisions being before exhausted by the English, they applied to
the King of England for Succors, according to his promise: Who, as if he
intended to Assist them effectually, caused a certain number of Ships to be
fitted out under the Conduct of Sir John Pennington; but private Differences
being soon after composed, Sir John received a Letter from the King, Signed
Charles Rex, which was afterward found by the Parliament amongst his Papers,
requiring him to dispose of those Ships as he should afterward be directed by
the French King; and if any should refuse to Obey those Orders, he should Sink
or Fire them; the King's Command was put in Execution accordingly, and by the
help of those Ships, the French became Masters of the Sea, and thereby enabled
to raise a Work, composed of Earth, Stones, and Piles, with which they shut up
the Mouth of the Harbor, and so prevented them from any Relief that way. Being
straightened from all Sides they were forced to yield to the Pleasure of their
King; and that strong Town of Rochel, wherein the Security of the Protestants
of France chiefly consisted, by this horrible Treachery, was delivered up to
the Papists, etc. Page 3, 4, 5.

To reduce this Chaos into any thing of Order, or Consistency, requires more
than Mortal Power; Nay, the fabulous Poets would have thought it beyond that of
their Deities, there being no Pre-existent Matter to work upon; most of what he
says is not, was never so in being, as to be done, or thought upon: I would
gladly know when that once before was, that the English encouraged the
Rochellers to defend their Just Rights: First, No honest Man can tell what just
Rights they had; It was a kind of Forty One business their Original Revolt, and
prosper'd accordingly in the end. Though Secondly, in Reason of State, Queen
Elizabeth assisted them considerably: Especially Henry IV. so long as he
continued Protestant: And King James frequently interceeded, composed the
Breaches themselves had made, but never encouraged them in any; so that they
could not be necessitated to accept disadvantageous Terms upon the English
deserting, who never engaged, nor joined with them: Although his jumbling all
this together, in one Sentence, may some way or other, no Man can tell how,
relate to the Duke's Expedition when at the Isle of Rhee, whither they
compelled him to Retreat; and I cannot find any considerable quantity of
Provisions they supplied him with; to be sure he was forced home for want
thereof, not any repulse of the French, for had his Supplies come, as designed,
he had kept his Ground, and carried on the Enterprise in hand. From this
incoherent Relation, he proceeds to that Abominable Forgery of our Seven Ships
enabling the French to be Masters of the Sea, and Block up Rochel; What did the
Twenty from the Dutch, those true Commonwealth Protestants? Did not they,
according to their number contribute Two Thirds more than we? The Truth of it
is neither we, nor they, were ever before Rochel, all that was done, the little
while they had our Ships, was to clear the Seas of Sobiez's Piracies, at which
time, most of the French Fleet was abroad in the Streights, part against the
Spaniard, the rest with the Duke of Nevers against the Turks, the Algerines;
whereas being now returned into these Seas, though not strong enough to engage
our Fleet, yet keeping within their Fastnesses and Shallows, they so blocked up
the Town, as we could not, but at our great Peril approach them; which
nevertheless was attempted, and that bravely too, but without Success: However,
this rendered not the Care and Kindness of our King the less, whatever this base
Fellow would hold the World in hand.

And having been thus tedious in prosecuting the Malicious Vagaries of our
Out-lawed Regicide, I shall relate thereto, Detec. 344
for a Reply, to whatever the rest have Suggested; As that the King caused the
Rochellers to Revolt in order to his Assistance, and then Deserted them, as
Roger Coke impudently affirms; whereas their Revolt was begun two years before
he thought of War, and ended, though not to Satisfaction, before he would make a
Peace. And the Defense, Page 45. etc.
upon whose Sleeve, that other Libeller, if he be another, Pins his Faith,
relates the Addresses on the Hugonot's side, and the Promises on the King's,
whose Exigencies made his Delays seem tedious, though they saw he could not
help it, which that base Fellow aggravates with the Spite and Ignorance of a
Fanatic: And then not able to deny, that a Royal Fleet was set out, well worth
so long a stay, would have the World believe it was on purpose to carry over
the Lord Mountague, who should betray them to the French; whereas to be sure
there was no such Lord went, and in all probability no such Person, although
there was one Mr. Walter Mountague, younger Son to the old Earl of Manchester,
who about seven years after, left our Church, and became a busy Body in Romish
Intrigues, and might be at this time peeping up in the Queen's Court; but that
he was sent, at leastwise upon any such unworthy design, is as true, as the
Earl of Lindsey never attempted to break their Diques, open the Passage, and
put in Relief; All which, this vile Wretch affirms in one Breath, though every
Historian even to their Authentic Rushworth, Coll. 635.
positively affirm it. The continued course of impudent Untruths, wherewith
these Weeders, nay Forgers of History, have so long wearied my Patience, makes
me at last resolve upon this, I hope innocent Revenge; whenever for the time to
come, I meet any Person relating a most improbable Malicious Falsehood, from me
he shall not have that common Opprobrium of a Liar, but of a Fanatic
Commonwealth Historian.

CHAP. IX. Of the Palatinate, Bohemia, and that Queen.
AND here before I leave the Defense, (by which term I all along mean that
Libel which Undertakes to Justify the Parliament of Forty and all their
Adherents) there is one Stretch must be taken Notice of, which as Physicians
term it, is a Nostrum of his Own, never urged by any of his Brother Libellers;
viz. That the Eight Ships, (for so he will have it, though really but Seven) lent
the French, were Equipped with the Subsidies given for the Relief of his
distressed Protestant Sister, the Electress Palatine, and the poor oppressed
Protestants in the Palatinate, Page 3. It Is in a Parenthesis, and so might have
been left out, as likewise for another Reason, because not true, which
nevertheless must not pass here, lest it should set aside the whole Pamphlet:
But I would gladly know what Subsidies he relates to, those granted King James
were more than expended upon raising the 10000 Men for Count Mansfield; and
those of King Charles's first Parliament, were only Voted, not Raised, when the
Ships Lent; which to clear the Matter, the French Equipped at their own
Expense, and paid moreover for the use of Hull and Rigging: It Is Odd in the
mean while to observe what a Compass these Fellows will fetch, to gain one
Point of Calumny, which too, after all they fail to Make.

But because Roger Coke likewise Throws a great deal of Dirt upon the Memory of
these two Kings, James and Charles the First, in Reference to that Unhappy
Enterprise; and thereby that Unhappy Family, I shall here take care to wipe it
off, in making it appear, they both did what possibly could be done, to
Retrieve so desperate an Affair. Mr. Coke, very desirous to make the Prince
Elector a good Title to the Kingdom of Bohemia, rambles into Hungary, Poland,
and whither not? And runs into more Mistakes than he pretends to Correct, and
quarrels at his Friend Rushworth, whom he never fails to follow but when in the
Right: To be sure he stumbles at the very Threshold, Detec. 101
in saying, before Ferdinand Brother to Charles the Fifth, That Kingdom was
Elective; whereas Uratislaus their first King was made so from Duke, by the
Emperor Henry the Fourth, who always after had a right of Nomination; but his
Power, in those troublesome Times throughout Germany, being very Precarious,
and his Avocations elsewhere not Suffering him to attend the Transactions of so
many several Districts, the People, or States, oftentimes assumed that Power to
themselves; where notwithstanding they generally had regard to the Royal
Family, though not immediate Successor; some other more prevalent with the Mob,
and their Leaders, carried his own Business, by promising to carry theirs
better. Nay, to show further, that the greatest Sticklers for the People's
Right, had regard to the Royal Line, when they chose this Unfortunate Frederick
Elector Palatine, a Descent was framed for him from Sophia, Sister to Ladislaus
the Second. It Is likewise a gross Mistake, that the German Emperors were not
Chosen till the Turks became great in Europe; Charles the Fourth was chosen
1346. at which time the Turks had not set one foot there; and so in the same
manner his Three immediate Successors; Wencislaus, Sigismund, and Albert, when
he was not come nigh, nor any ways feared by the Western Empire, though very
formidable to the Eastern; yet these Four are produced as Instances thereof: At
which rate he runs on without any regard to Truth or History, and let them that
will, follow him, I shall not; but only observe, at this very time, when the
Elector was made the Peoples Property, there had been four Kings successively
of the House of Austria, Ferdinand, Maximilian, Rodolphus, and Matthias.
Ferdinand the Second, Adopted Son of Matthias, doubting the Mob's Majority, got
himself Nominated without them, according to the Original Institution; and
having both Prescription and Possession, two strong Titles, when those others
put in their Claim, it was Baffled at the Swords Point, and the Kingdom has
been the quieter ever since. But not to think with our Enthusiasts, that
Success is always an Argument of Right, I shall refer it to what King James
told Archbishop Abbot: 'Twas a Faction in Religion set up his Son there, and
God would never Prosper them. And so likewise, the Duke of Saxony sent
Frederick word, That he had often represented, what Ruin was like to attend
him, by taking another Crown, and for his own part he was bound to chastize the
Rebels; so that it seems he looked upon them as such, and it is probable refused
the Crown upon that Account, for it was profer'd both him, and the Duke of
Lorrain, which tend little to the Reputation of a Calvinist Prince, that he
should accept what a Lutheran, and Papist, whether out of Conscience, Policy,
or both; thought not fit to venture upon.

If this new King took that Crown, Detec. 108
in hopes of Assistance from his Father in Law here, he was much mistaken, for
whatever Mr. Coke thinks, he thought better, and had asserted the Right of
Crowned Heads so far, as he could upon no account give way to have them
transferred upon every Mob Caprice. Nay supposing a just Title, I cannot
imagine what Supply could been have given him, Money must have come from the
Parliament; who had been very backward upon other Occasions, and would have
been soon weary here; and for Men there was no way of conveying them, unless
some Dutch Conjurer would have undertaken it in a Cloud through the Air; no
Neighbor Princes care to have such Cattle march through their Country, and
half a Score at least, must have been treated with in Order to this Expedition;
most if not all of which, might have served us, as the French, and Dutch did
the Ten Thousand sent under Count Mansfield, give fair Words, but permit them
not to come on Shore, till more than half were perished on Shipboard.

So that to spend no more Words, nor time upon Suppositions, as matters really
stood, without Good Cause, Good Courage, or Good Conduct; what could King James
do more than he did, treat with the House of Austria, for an Accommodation, of
the most Rash, Indiscreet, ay and Unjustifyable enterprise ever any Prince
engaged in, whatever the Zealous party did then, or has ever since said to
defend it, amongst which is Archbishop Abbot's Letter, so carefully recorded
by Mr. Rushworth, which after all shows him more a Puritan than Politician,
with very little Regard for what the truly Catholic Church has ever held in
that Point. Yet this is further remarkable, that deciding Battle at Prague was
fought on a Sunday the Twenty Third after Trinity, where the Gospel holds
forth: Reddite Caesariquae sunt Caesaris.

But when King James saw the Palatinate invaded, and that all the Spanish
Protestations were Trick and Wheedle, he then as averse as he was to War,
engaged in good Earnest, to the utmost of his Abilities, by supplying the
Princes of the Union in Germany, forwarding the King of Denmark to concern
himself in that Quarrel, and furnishing Count Mansfield with an Army (the
Miscarriage whereof he could not help) and several other considerable Supplies,
both of Men, and Money; far beyond those few Subsidies his last Parliament gave
to that end; and would they have been more open-fisted, he might have done a
great deal more, but we have since seen how hisficult it is for the strongest
Confederacy, to bear up against the United force of one Potent Prince; the
Dutch slowness, Coll. 15.
says my Author, was not excusable; nor the Marquis of Ansback, General of the
Union so forward to seek, or take Advantages as he might: Nay, another affirms,
That he carried himself neither so Faithfully, nor so Valiantly as he should
have done, being much condemned, for suffering Spinola with his Army to pass by
unfought with, when he had all Advantages that could be wished for to impede
his March: the greatest part of the Palatinate being lost upon that neglect,
and by degrees the rest of the united Princes, either taken off from their
Engagement, or ruined for adhering to it with too great constancy. Yet still
the Clamor must be continued, especially amongst our Factious Mend-all's; the
King of Great Britain did not take care to preserve his Childrens Patrimony.
Coll. ib.


And for King Charles he was not much better served by that great Gustavus
Adolphus, when he made such an Inroad into Germany, whom he furnished both with
Men and Money very considerably, in hopes the Palatinate might be one Acquest of
his many Successes, and so it was, but when he came there, the Right owner was
so little regarded, as he ravaged and carried off, whatever Spinola and his
Forces had left; the constant practice of those Necessitous Northern Princes,
who will take your Money, and do their own Business if they can, but mind no
other Obligations. Neither was the King's Kindness the less, for 'twas mostly
at his expense; if that other Expedition in the Year Thirty Eight miscarried,
as they Marched through Westphalia toward the Palatinate; only it had been
well for him, Good man, if some guilty of that ill conduct, had fallen upon the
Place, and never come to be guilty of the same with other Mistakes, or
something worse here. All which I have mentioned; and could a great deal more,
to Obviate that false and malicious Slander of Roger Coke, who says, They,
that is the Prince Elector, King of Bohemia, if you will have him so; his
Queen, and Family, were more relieved by the Dutch States, Prince of Orange,
Detect. 202.
with some Bishops and Noblemen of England, than both the King's Father and
Son. For whether Relief relates to those Public Transactions abroad, or the
Subsistence of the Queen and her Court at the Hague, it is in both Senses a
gross untruth; the Dutch States were always concerned in their Confederacies as
a considerable branch of the Union, but I never heard they contributed any
thing to their Subsistence, till all help from England was gone.

The benefit rather accrew'd to their people from the continued expense of such
a Court, Retinue, and Resort; for the Princes of Orange indeed they were all
Nobly kind to the Queen, and paid her a profound Deference, there being three
of them successively in the Supreme Command during her Residence at the Hague:
Neither will I detract any thing from what the Nobility here did, both
Spiritual and Temporal; yet still the King's did more than all these, in every
respect whatsoever, whether there was a settled Allowance during the few Years
of her Fathers Life, after dispossessed of the Palatinate; I cannot Resolve, but
am sureher Good Brother, as she ever termed him, gave the utmost Expressions of
a Tender and Indear'd Affection; in that he not only was continually making
Presents to her and her Children, took great care of them, and Advanced
whomsoever they recommended, or belonged to them, but allowed moreover eight
Thousand Pound per Annum for her Table, which was punctually returned every
Month out of the Exchequer, at the same time, Money was carried thence, for like
purpose to Whitehall; which when the Rebel Parliament had seized all the Crown
Revenue was continued during the Presbyterian Iunto's, Usurpation, the more
readily because most of the English in her Family were of that Leven, who when
the Cash failed, as basely deserted her, and sought Employment from her
Brothers Murderers. And I presume upon her being thus destitute of Supply from
hence, it was that the States General allowed her One Thousand Guilders per
Mensem, which sounds big in the Number, but reduced to our Account, amounts not
fully to a Hundred Pound Sterling. Her Son likewise about that time was
restored to the Lower Palatinate, and therein her Ioynture, who promised fair,
but performed little. To be sure there was one Noble Man of ours, the late Earl
of Craven (though for most part of that time his plentiful Estate here was
Sequestered) contributed more to her, and her whole Family's Subsistence, than
both the forementioned with all the World beside; and that not out of any
Sinister unworthy respect, as some idle People would have it thought, but a
pure Principle of Honor and Religion, a Munificent, Charitable Soul.

CHAP. XI. Of the Book of Sports.
BUt the loudest Cry, (and that wherein all the several Packs, however of
different Mouths and Games, joined together in Hunting down) was against the
Book of Sports, as they must have it Termed; which is to be considered here,
though not set out till some Years after, because Ludlow, according to his no
Method, and Chronology, brings it in immediately after the Surrender of Rochel,
and that with several spiteful and false Prefacings. About this time, says he,
the most profitable Preferments in the English Church, were given to those of
the Clergy, who were most forward to promote the Imposition of New Ceremonies
and Superstitions. p. 5. Never was there more care taken in preferring the
Clergy, according to their several deserts, and qualifications than by this
excellent Prince, nor a greater Set of worthy deserving Men; but the promoting
New Ceremonies and Superstitions, was one of their Old Commonplace Calumnies
upon his Pious care in consulting some other Bishops, and taking their
Assistance toward keeping up Decency and Order in the Externals of God's
public Worship; the then Archbishop being so Remiss and Negligent therein.
What he adds of an Oath being enjoined with an etc. was several Years after,
that is in Forty; and shall then be considered as a full Testimony, what little
Nothings they would catch at to Augment the Quarrel. And I likewise defy him,
and all his Party, to make appear, where one single Holy Day, tho he says, many
was Introduced and required to be observed with all possible Solemnity; but
this however False, was a necessary Antithesis to that grand Charge which
follows. At the same time that they were encouraged to profane the Lords Day,
by a Book commonly called, The Book of Sports, Printed and Published by the
King's especial Command. This Book of Sports is a large Volum, which the
Defense by the help of a Big Character, makes Four Pages in Quarto, being Two
Declarations one of this King, the other of his Father; and whoever look into
them, (which not one of Ten thousand, that rail at them, has ever done)
consider the Liberty there given, the Restraints laid down, and reasons of
both, must acknowledge all contained therein, to proceed from a truly Christian
dispotion, and absolutely necessary in reference to that Superstitious
Iudaising Humor, the Puritan Party were then running the whole Nation into,
and there was no way to stop, but by examining what Premises they had for such
Conclusions? what Authority for turning back to those Weak and Beggarly
Elements? Be again in Bondage to Moses; Observe Days, etc. which all Expositors
relate to the Jewish Sabbath, and not rather Stand fast in that Liberty
wherewith, Gal. 4. 9.
Christ has made us Free. Here therefore, whether with their leave or without,
I shall presume to enquire, First, how this Iudaising Spirit came to possess so
many of the Brotherhood amongst us. Secondly, Represent how inconsistent it is
with the Nature of Christian Religion, and Universal Practice of the truly
Christian Church; so that, Thirdly, what both the Kings enjoined was Agreeable
to their Title, of Defending that Truly Catholic, Apostolic Doctrine.

For what is First to be considered, it was for some time to my surprise, that
the Puritan party who in all other Things so violently opposed John Calvin's
Reformation to that of our Church, should notwithstanding wholly recede from
him in the Doctrine and Observation of the Lord's Day: for when our Author was
at Geneva, (and that they say, was his first City of Refuge) he could not but
observe, how the Elder Men Bowl'd, the Younger exercised their Arms, or used
some other Innocent Recreations, after the Public Duties of the Day were over,
with as much freedom as our Kings allow in their Declarations, for all which
Calvin gives very good Reasons in his Institutes; and most severely reflects
upon all those Sabbatarian Zealots, we are now discoursing of, as three times
worse than Jews, Inst. l.2.c.8.
Qui crassa carnalique Iudaismi Superstitione ter Iudaeos Superant. But upon
second Thoughts 'twas easy to resolve that their respect to Calvin must always
give way, when an opportunity serves of prejudicing our Church, which they set
themselves in all things to contradict, and herein had a Vile prospect of
prevailing upon the People for a wide Breach, so that however the Calvinist
quatenus Calvinist, has no more regard for the Fourth Commandment than the
Fifth, or the Romanists for the Second, yet by starting this Notion of a Divine
Ordinance founded solely upon the Morality thereof, as strictly Obliging us, as
the Jews, they got an Occasion from thence to cavil at, and run down all the
other Fasts and Festivals of the Church, as mere Human Inventions, though most
of them Apostolical, and the rest in the Ages immediately succeeding, and that
without ever considering, that by the same Authority, our Christian Sabbath was
Translated from the Last to the First Day of the Week, and therefore, by
keeping so strictly to their Mosaical Mumpsimus, they ought all to comply with
what their Disciple Brabourne propounded, and go back to the Saturday Sabbath,
to the Observance whereof he gained a Party, and writ a Book in its
Justification; and tho the High Commission brought him to a Retractation,
wherein it is said he persever'd, yet many of his Followers continued their
Fopperies a long time after, and perhaps to this very Day; I am sure in the
Year 65, there was a small English Congregation of them at Roterdam, where a
Physician of some Eminency, especially in Female concerns, was Master of the
Synagogue, and under no little Perplexity at that time, for as much as there
came in, or started up amongst them, some New Lights, who declared, besides
their Observation of the Jewish Sabbath, there was one thing farther wanting to
Perfection, and that was Circumcision, whereunto some of the young strong
body'd Fellows submitted, but the Old Members would be no such Abraham's, and
moreover by their Interest in the Magistrates, prevailed to have those others
sent a further Pilgrimage. This I have cursorily mentioned to show how easy it
is, from some plausible Pretenses, and Superstitious pervertings of Holy
Scripture, for Men to glide gently on, and sink into the Abyss of Judaism,
recommend their Sanctity by no other Performances than the Superficial rigours
of Pharisaical Ostentation; for none but Men under such Arrogant Infatuations,
could presume to affirm and that Publicly in the Pulpit, Pref. parg 22, etc.
as my Author declares it was at a Market Town in Oxfordshire, That to do any
servile Work or Business on the Lord's day, was as great a Sin as to kill a
Man, or commit Adultery. Another in Somersetshire, That to throw a Bowl on the
Lord's day, was as great a Sin as to kill a Man. A third in Norfolk, That to
make a Feast, or dress a Wedding Dinner on the Lord's Day, was as great a Sin,
as for a Father to take a Knife, and cut his Child's Throat. A fourth in
Suffolk, That to Ring more Bells than one on the Lord's Day, was as great a Sin
as to commit Murder; of all which Particulars Mr. Rogers in the Preface to his
Treatise upon the Thirty Nine Articles, assures us from certain Informations,
and Knowledge, being present when the last was convened before his Ordnary for
the same: And moreover with great Satisfaction declares, that by his means
these Sabbatarian Errors and Impieties were first brought to Light, and
discovered to the State, and this Good ensued thereupon, That all Books, which
contained the abovementioned, and many more such fearful and heretical
Assertions, were called in, and forbidden any more to be Printed and made
Common; Archbishop Whitgift by his Letters, and Visitation did the one, Anno
1599. and Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice did the other, Anno 1600. at Bury
in Suffolk. Yet neither could this, nor several other prudent Courses, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, either satisfy the Scruples or restrain the Follies
of those Men, who had embraced these New Sabbath Doctrines, but that they still
went forward to advance that Business, and made it part of the Common-Cause, no
Book being published by them, either as to Moral Piety, or Systematical
Divinity, wherein the Sabbath was not pressed upon the Consciences of God's
People, with as much Violence, as formerly with Authority upon the Jews, and
from the same Obligations: To give one Instance of many, how Prevalent this
Humor was, Mr. Breerwood a very learned and judicious Person, Professor of
Astronomy at Gresham, College, had the Charge of an Orphan, his Brother's Son,
whom he placed Apprentice in London, where he continued two Years with much
Satisfaction, both to himself, and Master, but then grew very uneasy, and
earnest to be discharged, the Reason whereof, after some fained Excuses, his
Uncle discovered to be, for that his Master on the Lord's Day, had sent him
forth sometimes on Arrands, as to bid Guests, fetch Wine, give his Horse
Provender, or such like light Business; all which one Mr. Byfield a popular
Preacher at Chester, when lately there, had informed him to be a Sin, a
Trangression of God's Commandment touching the Sabbath, and that he was not
bound to yield, nay that he sinned against God, in yielding Obedience to his
Master's Commands; this produced a learned Letter, from the Uncle to Mr.
Byfield, which is since Printed, with an Answer and Reply, wherein the whole
Question is exactly Stated, upon what different Obligations the Jews and
Christians, observed their different Days, that theirs amongst other Rites, as
St. Paul terms it, Col. 2. 17. Page 38.
Was but a Shadow of things to come, whereof the Body was in Christ; or as he
expressed himself farther on, Only a Tenure for term of Life, namely that of
the Ceremonial Law, Page 45.
which Life ended in the death of our Savior, and the Lord's day succeeded
thereupon; As it was not known or practiced before Moses, so it ceased to
oblige after Christ, being one of the Shadows which the Evangelical Light
dispelled, one of the Burdens which this Law of Liberty takes off. From whence
it follows, according to what I propounded, 2 dly, That these Sabbatarian
Speculations are inconsistent with the Nature and Practice of Christian
Religion, for the Priesthood being changed, there is made also of necessity a
change of the Law, as the Apostle tells us, different ends of Institution, and
different ways of Observation; the Jews were more especially enjoined a
Corporal Rest, in Commemoration of their Temporal Deliverance, the Christians
main regard must be Spiritual after the Power of an endless Life, and therefore
what the Evangelical Prophet, Isaiah, declares as to the Sabbath, Isa. 56. 2.
Blessed is the Man that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his
Hand from doing any evil, has by all the Fathers, and from them most of the
Moderns, been understood by way of Prediction, as to Gospel Times; what at
leastwise they ought to be, St. Ierom is most express, Alioquin si haec tantum
prohibentur in Sabbato, ergo in aliis sex diebus tribuitur nobis libert as
delinquendi; for otherwise if those things therein remembered, are prohibited
only on the Sabbaths, then were it Lawful for us on the other Days, to follow
our own Sinful Courses, speak our own idle Words, and pursue our own Voluptuous
Pleasures; which were most Foolish to imagine. And St. Augustine makes the 4th.
Commandment so far as it concerns us Christians to be no more than Requies
cordis and tranquilitas mentis quam facit bona Conscientia, the quiet of the
Heart and peace of Mind proceeding from a good Conscience, and therefore it
has been well resolved by some, that a Christian's Life should be one
continued Sabbath; he that lives every day as he ought, has little or no
Obligation to observe one Day more than another, but what between Idleness and
Business Mankind was never Ingenious enough to be left at his own Freedom. As
for the Idle part God forgive them their many Extravagancies, and more
especially neglect of Holy Duties on the Six Days, and let the severest Penalty
attend their Violation of the Seventh. And it were well if our Men of Business
would consider how much that might be forwarded, by sparing some little of
their busy Time, to implore God's Blessing upon their Business: But to run into
so gross a mistake as to think a strict Attendance upon Ordinances on the
Sabbath Day, may expiate for the Frauds, Extortions, and other Violations of
the precedent Week, is intolerable, yet some are prone to suspect, such a
Delusion is not without Entertainment amongst many of the most seemingly
Precise; however it is God alone, and their own Consciences must judge herein;
it were well, on the other side, they would be less severe in Censuring others,
especially those we here plead for, who are only the Drudging part of Mankind,
such Laborers, Apprentices, and other Servants, as have let their other six
Days time to Hire, and are all that while at other Men's disposal; that these
after all due performance of Religious Offices, should be allowed such innocent
Diversions both of Body and Mind, as their Inclinations tend most unto, cannot
but be thought reasonable, and accordingly the Christian Church never
interposed any Command to the contrary.

Here then come in their Majesty's Declarations, and more especially relate to
the forementioned Circumstances; upon a prudent Consideration, as King Charles
says of his Father, That if these Times were taken from them, the meaner sort,
who labor hard all the Week, should have no Recreations at all to refresh
their Spirits; neither was there less of Prudence and Consideration, in the
several Limitations of this Innocent Freedom, as First that no lawful
Recreations be used as the Laws of the Kingdom, and Canons of the Church
prohibit, for some such it seems there were, as particularly Bowling to meaner
sort of People. 2dly. That this Liberty be not taken till after Divine Service;
nor 3dly. That any enjoy it, but such as are present at the Performance
thereof. We may here likewise add, the reasons given, why the Declarations came
out at those particular Times, which if well weighed cannot be excepted
against; As first the Advantage the Papists took thereby, to discourage People
from coming into, or continuing in our Church, by persuading them that no
honest Mirth, or Recreations were tolerated in our Religion: And this indeed
gave the first occasion to King James, who in his Progress through Lancashire
received several Complaints thereof, and having informed himself how justly,
gave a Check to the precise Humor of such Justice over-does, as stretched the
Laws beyond their proper Intent, and true Reason of the thing; whereto likewise
agrees what the judicious Sanderson tells us, that in Lancashire, more
especially, the Rigid, froward Disposition of the Puritans, obliged many of the
Common People to continue, if not turn Papists, between which two Parties, that
County was mostly divided.

Another Reason given, is for that this Prohibition barreth the common and
meaner sort of People from using such Exercise, as may make their Bodies more
able for War, when we, or our Successors shall have occasion; for, as it goes
on, When shall the Common People have leave to Exercise, if not upon the
Sundays, and Holy Days, seeing they must apply their Labor, and win their
Living in all working Days? All which in no more than their Common Practice at
Geneva, as has been already mentioned; and it ought further to be considered,
so strict a Confinement from all Diversions of Body and Mind, cannot but by
degrees oppress and darstardise Men's Spirits, of English Mastiffs, make them
in the end become Setting-Dogs to some Foreign Power: To these King Charles
adds, a 3d. The rather because of late in some Counties of the Kingdom, we
find, that under pretense of taking away abuses, there has been a general
Forbidding, not only of ordinary Meetings, but of the Feasts of the Dedication
of the Churches, etc. which besides preserving the Memorial thereof, as he was
certainly informed, tended very much to Civilizing the People, composing of
Differences by the Mediation of Friends, increasing Love and Unity, by those
Feasts of Charity; with Relief and Comfort to the Poor, the Richer part in a
manner keeping open House. Although what is mentioned just before in this
Corroborating part of King Charles, might probably prevail more with him, than
all the rest, viz. Out of a Pious Care for the Service of God, and for
suppressing any Humors that oppose Truth, being too sensible how those
judaising Dogmatists by inculcating to the People a strict and sole Observance
of this Legal Institution, designed thereby to exclude all those Christian
Feasts and Festivals, which have been constantly Commemorated ever since the
Gospel was Preached to Mankind, as the Birth, Passion, Resurrection and
Ascension of Christ, with the Descent. of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, by
which Miraculous Gifts, Almighty God empowered them to Preach the Gospel to the
whole World, bringing Life and Immortality to Light; and the Church accordingly
has ever paid a thankful Acknowledgment of those their indefatigable Labors,
Exemplary Lives, and Cruel Deaths; till these Enemies to all Antiquity as well
as Order, and Gratitude, must have them superseded by such Jewish Observances
as neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear. And it was much to my
Surprise, that when some late Acts passed for the more strict observing the
Lord's Day, the Fathers of our Church, when it came into their House, did not
endeavor, at least, that some little regard might be had to the forementioned
Fasts and Festivals: Canon 13.
(the Canon took care to join them all together) for due Celebration of Sundays
and Holy Days, and God forgive those who connived at a Separation, such an
Omission could not have passed in Charles the 1 st. Time; and one would think
their proceedings then should be Matter of greater Caution now, for having
dared to lift up their Hands against that true Defender, they stuck at nothing
which might hinder a thorough Reformation, began indeed at the Holy Days, but
Liturgy and Bishops soon followed: To give one Instance of many, how cursedly
they affected to run Counter, against whatever our Church did practice; when in
the Heat of the Rebellion Christmas Day fell on a Sunday, as it must in Course
every four or five Years, that Coryphaeus of the Faction old Calamy, lest he
should be thought to regard the Festival of our Savior's Nativity, preached
upon a Passion Text. Eli Eli Lamasabachthani. How violent a Current we have
been dared to Stem, is neither our Ignorance, nor our Fear, Truth is a Rock
which repels the Force, at the same time it causes their Noise and Foamings:
Yet not to be mistaken herein, (which is very Natural for them to do) I shall
most readily comply in the strictest Observation of the Lord's Day they can
think fit to prescribe, provided it be upon a Christian, not Jewish Bottom, and
with a due Deference to what the Wise and Good have in the best Ages of the
Church resolved therein: Otherwise to make Exclamations, and enveigh against
every one, who will not walk by their killing Letter of the Law, has too great
Affinity to those Pharisaical Rigours, which were continually carping at, and
Censuring our Savior for the many Miracles he wrought on the Sabbath Day,
whilst their hard and impenitent Hearts, could not understand what that meant,
I will have Mercy not Sacrifice, as likewise that the Sabbath was made for Man,
not Man for the Sabbath: And that the many Reproaches raised against the two
forementioned Princes, upon their sincere Endeavors for a right Information
herein, as well as their other good Deeds, for the House of God, and Offices
thereof, proceeded from the like perverse Disposition of Spirit, can be little
doubted, by any one who reflects, how exactly they paralleled the Jews in
Murdering the one, and continue still most implacable against the Memories of
both.

CHAP. XI. Of Ship Money.
WHen a Man has a Subject will bear an Argument, and is sure of an easy and
ready Attention, to run out into bitter Invectives, and false Suggestions;
argues as great a defect of Judgment, as good Nature; to be sure nothing has
raised a stronger Suspicion of this Prince's sincere Intentions, amongst the
soberest, and best disposed People in the Nation, than his Levying Ship Money,
which therefore Ludlow might have kept close to, without continuing his
Excursions against the Clergy; but they must answer for all, to which end he
tells, That diverse of them entered the List as Champions of the Prerogative,
asserting that the Possessions and Estates of the Subjects did of Right belong
to the King, and that he might dispose of them at Pleasure; thereby Vacating
and Annulling, as much as in them lay, All the Laws of England, that secure a
Propriety to the People, p. 5. Now to prove or make appear, one Syllable of
this Virulent Charge, is beneath the Authority of his Memoirs; 'twill pass with
the Party upon his Word, and whoever affirms, nay proves the contrary; shall be
no more credited by them, than they will be at the Last Day. The Jesuits, where
they have Power, are not more severe in their Inquisitions, than our
well-scented Demagogues upon all Transactions of the Loyal Clergy; yet
excepting those few indiscreet Expressions of Sibthorp and Manwaring, (which
has been already spoke to) they could find nothing else worth catching hold of,
otherwise we should not have been so often hit in the Teeth with them two: It Is
true the Clergy all along stood firm to the Prerogative, and thought themselves
bound both in Duty and Interest to support it is just Rights, against the many
Invasions every Day attempted to that, and the Kingdoms Ruin; which Steadiness
and Resolution of theirs, was the pretended Crime, and grand Motive, for those
little Crorespondents with the Prince of the Air to raise and procure so many
Storms against them. But that they had any Thoughts of stretching the
Prerogative beyond its due Bounds, much less of Annulling all, nay any of the
Laws of England, none but a Republican Confidence could affirm, and has no
more of Truth, than that Ludlow was an honest Man, and Loyal Subject: He goes
on, Arbitrary Courts were erected; it had been well to have mentioned one that
was so, all this King's Reign, which since he is gone I desire his Admirers to
give me Satisfaction on his behalf, or otherwise him no more credit than he
deserves. The like Challenge I make, as to the Power of those other being
enlarged, such were the High Commission Court, the Star Chamber, the Court of
Honor, the Court of Wards, the Court of Requests, etc. There was a mighty
Clamor indeed against some of these Courts, not so much for any real default in
them, as that they were thought too great a support to the Prerogative, and
Church, without considering, how the whole Frame of Government, was so closely
joined and fixed together therewith, as a Dissolution in such essential Parts,
would reduce all the rest to Rubbish, and Confusion: And accordingly it fell
out, at those Breaches then made, the several Herds of Schismatics,
Libertines, Atheists, etc. found so free an Entrance, so uncontrolable a
Ravage, as it is hard now to tell either, where or what we are. To show in one
Instance, how little Ground there was for all that Noise and Fury, even against
the High Commission, which lay under the greatest Odium, Archbishop Laud caused
the Acts of that Court to be searched, Troub. and Try, p. 164.
(which can deceive no Man) and found There had been fewer Suspensions,
Deprivations, and other Punishments, by Three, during the Seven Years of his
Time, than in any Seven Years of his Predecessor Abbot, who was notwithstanding
in great Esteem with the House of Commons, whilst this other was cried out upon
for Sharpness and Severity; whereupon the Good Man makes this sad but just
Complaint, So safe a thing it is for a Man to embark himself in a Potent
Faction, and so hard for any other Man, be he never so entire, to withstand its
Violence. And therefore we may presume it was not the Quantity but the Quality
of the Persons proceeded against, which thus highly exasperated them; To have
such Instruments, such Engines of Sedition as Leighton, and Lilbourn, Pryn,
Burton, Bastwick, etc. confined from doing farther Mischief, was to stifle the
whole design; Rebellion could never so much as take Root, if those Seeds-men
were kept from planting the Crop. Yet we will suppose there might be some less
justifiable Proceedings, some perhaps too harsh and severe Decrees; must every
Corruption or Abuse destroy the being of a Court? cannot the Numbers, and
Trickings of our Attornys be redressed; and yet some of the Honester continued
to follow Business? Or must that Honorable Profession of the Law be laid
aside, because the present Tendency of Practice, seems more to regard their own
Support than the Peoples ease, and speedy Relief? Such another Set of Thorough
Reformers would much endanger the shutting up of Westminster Hall: And indeed
that they were going about, Ludlow tells you what a quick Dispatch they had
brought things to in Ireland, and they were not without the like Attempts
several Times here. Which had it been put into the Hands of Wise and Honest
Men, to check and regulate what was amiss, we might have said Amen to, but such
Root and Branch Fellows were intolerable, and as they had already destroyed the
Church, so were bidding fair at those Laws and Properties, our Author so
falsely charge upon the Clergy: I have somewhere read that a negligent Latin
Transcriber of that Parable where the Woman swept her House to find the lost
Groat, writ Evertit, for Everrit; very applicable to all our violent
Undertakers, who are for throwing the House out at the Windows, and all
Government out of the Kingdom.

But the Total Abolition of these Courts was not till our Grandees of 40.
entered their Province, and played Rex to purpose; which is the last Preliminary
Charge our Author makes, (for next he falls at large upon the Scotch Rebellion,
and so on to that in England) and according to his Brutish Courage in other
Undertakings, is the most impudent Push he has hitherto ventured at; And that
our Liberties might be extirpated at once, and we become Tenants at Will to the
King, that rare Invention of Ship Money was found out by Finch, etc. It Is one
thing to write a Libel, another an History, where what is said or done on each
side, ought impartially to be related, and had not the former been here chiefly
designed, we must have been told, the King studied nothing more than the Honor
of the Nation, and Interest of his People, wherein, not being seconded by his
Parliaments, as they ought; he was forced to enquire what other Legal Courses
his Predecessors had taken, when under like Exigencies with himself; and herein
the Learned Seldom gave no little Light, by a Book about that Time written,
called Mare Clausum: But the Person of the greatest Authority and Abilities
too, to resolve any thing of Ancient Customs was Attorney General Noy, not
Finch, as Ludlow blunders, who all along in the House of Commons passed for an
Oracle, whatever he declared to be Law, was no farther disputed amongst them;
and can it be imagined he should recede so far from the Character ever given
him, of an indefatigable Search, and morose Sincerity, as to Trifle at last,
impose upon the King and Kingdom, in so weighty a Concern, without being able
to make out, and justify it, in every Point which it is affirmed he did by
several Presidents, in some of which it appeared, That the Ship Tax had been
Levied by such Kings, as in the same Year had Subsidies granted from their
Parliaments for other Occasions. Sir R. Baker. An. 1631.
The King therefore having so good an Authority, for a Matter which in it self
appeared highly reasonable, must have violated all the Rules of Discretion, as
well as Policy in not closing therewith; nay could not have answered the
Discharge of that Trust reposed in him, either to God or Good Men: For 1 st.
His Coasts were not only infested with Pickeroons, Turks, and Dunkirk Pirates,
to the great Damage of Traffic: But his Dominon in the Narrow Seas, actually
usurped by the Holland Fishers; and the Right it self in good earnest disputed
by the Learned Grotius, in a Tract called Mare Liberum; these were craving
Occasions and Concernments, not of Honor only, but Safety and Interest; 2 dly.
He had found his Parliaments so Resty, and Peevish, as there was no prospect of
a Supply, that, otherwise, best way, without exposing himself, and all his most
faithful Adherents: 3 dly. It supposes a mighty Defect in any Government, that
when some inferior Parts will not act with any thing of Sense of Temper, the
Supreme Sovereign Power should not take the next best Way, to secure it self,
and all other Concerns thereof. 4 thly. As the Learned in the Law, who are the
best, and perhaps only competent Judges in such Cases, approved thereof: So
when questioned the Harangues made against them, savored more of Passion and
Spite, than Argument and solid Reason. 5 thly. What he Levied was so
effectually employed, to the Reputation and Interest of the Kingdom, as they
that found fault therewith, must needs, whilst doing it, blush at their own
Perverseness: Especially for that. 6 thly. These pretended Redressers brake
thorough all the Laws of God and Man, and for every Pound he Levied, and so
honorably expended in the Nation's Defense and Security; as impudently, as
unjustly extorted Thousands from the People, to promote a most cursed and
unnatural Rebellion, Nec dum sinitur, we are since come to Millions, and justly
deserve no better, who made such a Muttering and Stir, when he did not raise
above Six Pence in the Pound, and to so good Purposes, as the Dominion of the
Sea, was never so well secured, and Traffic so considerably advanced, above
what was ever known in the Nation before. Had they who pretended greater Right
to raise Money, taken a greater or equal Care in disposing thereof to the
Kingdoms and Peoples Good, all must have gone well; but to act like the Dog in
the Manger, resolve to do nothing themselves, yet keep away, barkat, and
Quarrel all others, to whom it more properly belonged, was the Extremity of
Baseness, Mischief for Mischiefs sake. And which is still worse, that
mischievous Humor, it is to be feared we shall never get quit of, there being
several Curs, nay whole Packs of that Old Breed, which continue on the Cry, and
are so wholly bent upon their Commonwealth Confusions, as to prefer them
before any thing of a Monarchy, not excepting the Kingdom of Heaven, whereof
having but small Hopes, they may think to oblige the Devil, by bringing Hell
upon Earth.

CHAP. XII. Of King James's Death.
I Have had some little Dispute with my self; whether it was requisite to take
Notice of King James's Death, especially as relating to this Excellent Prince
his Son; but finding the Calumny impudently improved, as well from the former
Age, to this, as by the several Libellers now, every one striving to outdo the
other in this Villainous Forgery, till the last has brought it to such an
Impossibility, as every Child may discover, and see thorough: I must trouble
both the Reader and my self, with the Examination of this Abominable Nothing.
King James had an ill Habit of Body, very unwiel'dy, and full of gross Humors,
which improved the more upon him, for that he was so uneasy, as to the Regiment
of his Health, either from his Own, or Physicians Observation; whereupon
falling into a Tertian Fever at Theobalds, 'twas thought by most Men, amongst
the rest him himself, that Crasy Constitution of his would not be able to
withstand its frequent Assaults; and it happened accordingly. Soon after his
Death it was whispered about Court, that the Duke had recommended something of
a Cure for his Ague, without the Physicians advice, which doing no good, must
be presumed to do hurt; this coming to the Duke's Ear, he concerned himself so
far, as to have the Matter examined by the Physicians, where the Lady appeared
and disclosed that great secret of an Ague-Cure, (few of that Quality, amongst
their Country Neighbors, (for she was a Country, an Essex Lady) being without
something of that kind,) which was only a Plaster of Methrydate, with a Posset
Drink of Hartshorn, and Marygold Flowers. This for that time put an end to the
Rumor, but about two Years after, in the Second Parliament, it was Revived
again, and made an Article against the Duke, which they that please may
Consult, with his Reply, and perhaps be satisfied therewith; if not I shall
only add further, Lord Keeper Williams performed the last Offices of a Divine
to King James, continued with him several Days and Nights before his Death, so
that had he observed or suspected any such foul Play, there is no doubt but it
would have made a sufficient Noise both in Parliament and elsewhere, when the
Duke caused the Seal to be taken from him; and the Author of his Life who
relates the one, would not have been sparing to discover the other.

And now to show how Artificially the Master was brought in, as concerned, with
what the Servant never did; when the Articles were Exhibited against the Duke:
Sir Dudly Diggs who as Foreman managed the Prologue, and gave a Summary of the
whole Charge; was reported to have said these Words, That he was commanded by
the House, concerning the Plaster applied to the King, that he did forbear to
speak farther in regard to the King's Honor, or Words to that Effect,
whereupon the King ordered him to be Committed, and Sir Dudly Carlton
Remonstrated the same to the Commons, but upon his own and the Two Houses
Compurgation, that no such, nor such like Words were spoken, he was again
discharged, yet whoever Consults that Eloquent Harangue, as Recorded by
Rushworth, Coll 305.
will find it very scurvily tending that Way, and thus for 20 Years following
it was wholly laid asleep, no one harboring so groundless a Thought: But when
God cursed this Nation with a Successful Rebellion, whereby the Army got the
King into their Clutches, and so purged the House, as consisting only of their
own Properties, they passed, that Preludium to his Murder, their Votes of no
more Addresses, wherein amongst many other Villainous, Forged Accusations,
(indeed whatever the Devil, or Devils of Men, could assist them withal) this of
King Iame's Death was one; and it is very remarkable what a doughty Topic they
have to make it out, delivered down by our as doughty Authors, He Dissolved the
Second Parliament to prevent their Enquiry into his Father's Death, says
Ludlow, p. 2. And Roger Coke to the same purpose, King Charles rather than this
Charge should come to an Issue, dissolved the Parliament. Detect. 196.
The Defense to out-lye all that went before him, tells you Diverse Parliaments
were dissolved upon that Account, whereas there was but one more, and this
Business never mentioned therein. In Answer to all which false and groundless
Presumptions, I shall only Request them to Consult their Friend Rushworth,
where they will find that Parliaments Dissolution did not in the least proceed
from this, or any other Articles Exhibited against the Duke, who had given in
his Reply, and pressed for a Rejoinder, that they would come to the Proof of
their Common-Fame Charge, wherein there appeared not much forwardness. The King
on the other hand was in great Expectation of those Subsidies they had Voted,
and indeed only Voted; for though that was done the 27 th. of March, yet had
not the Bill been once read the 9 th. of June, by which delays, his Majesty's
Designs with his Allies abroad were Frustrated, and Honor exposed, for want of
supplying them according to Treaty, whereof giving Notice in a Letter, they had
so little regard, as to fall to preparing a Remonstrance, in reference to
Tonage and Poundage, and other such like unseasonable and unreasonable Cavils;
which the King understanding, and esteeming (as he had Cause) to be a denial of
the promised Supply, and finding that no Admonition could move, no Reasons or
Persuasions prevail, when the Time was so far spent, that they had put an
impossibility upon themselves, to perform their Promise, whereof they esteemed
all Gracious Messages to them, to be but Interruptions, His Majesty upon mature
Advisement dissolved them. Col. 410.
This is the Account the King himself gives in his Declaration, of their unkind
Dealing, and his too just Provocation for that Act; otherways would they have
complied with him in those his urgent Necessities, there should have been no
Obstruction upon the Duke's Account, they might have gone on with their
Articles, and been certainly Baffled as to that of King James's Death; and
perhaps most of the rest.

But I must not break off here, without my promised Remark upon the Defense,
who by adding another most Impossible Story, renders that aforementioned yet
more Improbable. There are few will believe, because he brings none, That for
many Reasons it was concluded, King Charles had no small share in that
abominable Act of Poisoning his own Father King James I. Page 44.
But to add, and that Good Man Prince Henry his Son, is such a Stretch, as
nothing but one by a Halter can keep pace with, and they deserve to go
together. That Prince Henry was thought to have something of foul Play, Sir A.
W's. Libel does insinuate, but no Man of Sense or History ever believed a
Syllable thereof, and that Answer Entitled, Aulicus Coquinariae, clearly makes
appear it was right down Libel, that is, absolutely false; and as there was no
ground to place it where Sir A's. Baseness designed, so for this unthinking
Blockhead to transfer it upon that poor innocent Child his Brother, let the
most prejudiced Fanatic judge, when told, that at Prince Henry's Death, this
his younger Brother was not Twelve Years Old, having been all along of a weak
unhealthy Constitution, lived a Studious retired Life, with very little
Conversation but that of Books and Tutors, which was indeed of great Advantage
to his future Accomplishments, but kept him then from making any Figure at
Court, or entering upon any Intrigue there, which the most Active Princes of
that Age, have seldom been known to engage in, much less to carry on such an
Unnatural Enterprise. Yet doubtless this is as true as the other, and whoever
for the Time to come, relate either, may the same Fate attend them as did
Horace's Planus, a Lying Cheat; not to be believed when they speak Truth, tho
their Lives depend thereupon.

Nulla fides damnis, verisque doloribus adsit.
Roger Coke has another, the prettyest Maggotty Reason, to prove King James
could not dye a Natural Death, because all the five James 's his Predecessors
in Scotland were carried off otherwise. I will not concern my self with what
was done in Scotland, but dare be the Courts Compurgator for all of that Family
which have died since it came into England, (although none have gone off without
some such ill-natured, and ill-grounded Suggestion) I wish I could say as much
for the Parliament, or rather a Rump of it, which out-did whatever has been
done in Scotland, or any where else upon the Face of the whole Earth: And
further to provoke Divine Vengeance, we have got a Generation of Villains,
which at this Hour dare to justify it, and no Notice taken thereof. Nay these
eager Bloodhounds are so delighted with that sort of Game, as when they cannot
come at it themselves, will needs have it done by others, for so it was
confidently muttered of the last, which went off by Death, and if God curse us
with continuing this Set of Men, will pass for an Authentic Story 50 or 60
Years hence; it was enough at present to found it in a Whisper, especially
since the Physicians, and amongst them Dr. L -- a great Confident of theirs
declared, that upon inspecting the Brain, there was so clear Evidence of an
Apoplexy, as 'twas impossible to think of any other Cause. However there is
nothing Extraordinary in all this, besides the grosseness of the Fiction, there
are few Historians relate the Death of Princes, without something of a real or
imaginary Force. But to bury them alive by Supposititious Births is altogether
Modern, an Advance of this present Age, with how much Interest or Honor the
next may Judge.

CHAP. XIII. His Government before the Rebellion.
THese be the most, though not all, (for all it is impossible to Enumerate) and
therefore, let it be, all the most considerable Exceptions, false Clamors, and
frontless Cavils, wherewith the wide-mouthed Factions, blackned the King, and
Trumpetted up Rebellion; into which dismal and bloody Scene before we enter,
Let us take a general View of his Government, during the Twelve Years
Interstitium, or if you will Interregnum of Parliaments, (for they were never
quiet till Supreme, and then least of all) where we shall find this true Father
of his Country, so tenderly Provident for a crooked and perverse Generation,
Nurtured them up in so much Peace, and Plenty, such a continued Affluence of
all Things requisite to Humane Welfare, as never any Nation enjoyed a greater,
and very few have equaled them therein.

That he Hated, or had any Prejudice against Parliaments, is so far from being
True, as if there were any Mistake, it appeared rather, at First, on the other
Side, he Caressed them a little too much. To be sure it was by his Inducement,
the Duke of Bucks made that Narrative, relating to the Spanish Match, and
Treaty; to both Houses of Parliament, in King James's Last, whereto, as
occasion served he gave his Attestation; which so pleased their Popular,
aspiring Humor, as the Duke was then the Whitest Boy, and his Master the
Hopefullest Prince in the World. And he doubtless intended to have gone on, in
that Sincere plain-dealing Way, represented Things as they really were, and
expected they should have met him half Way, in all reasonable Returns. But his
more Experienced Father understood better, told them both how short-lived such
Caresses would be, as they should find too soon: Which immediately upon his
coming to the Crown, most Prophetically fell out, in his first Parliament;
where making a small Complement of Two Subsidies, they returned to their Old
Vomit, Evil Counselors, Grievances and the like, must be the only Subject of
Debate, after which they made so strict a Search, as such another Set of Busy
Men; according to the Latin Adage, Nodum in Scyrpo quaerere.
would for a Knot in a Bulrush; yet hereupon the Breach so gradually widned,
Three several Parliaments, as to part at last in a final Separation: Whereunto
after all is said, never Prince had greater or juster Provocation.
Nevertheless I cannot find, in his Proclamation set out upon the last
Dissolution, or any where else, that it was declared Criminal for the People to
speak any more of Parliaments, as Ludlow, with his usual Impudence, affirms, p.
2.

The King, as I said, finding the Factions so prevalent in all Elections, as
it was impossible to get a Parliament, would either hearken to Reason, or Act
with Temper, resolved to do as well as he could without them: Having therefore
made an Honorable Peace with France, and Spain; he looked into and so managed
his small Revenue, as to keep out of those Necessities, whereof there was small
Hopes of a Supply, when run into. By which means he kept a very Splendid Court,
yet withal as Regular, no ways Profuse, whatever our Libellers Cant, and wholly
free from such open Immoralities as have since not a little tended to
Dabauching the whole Nation, without any present Prospect of Reformation. As
God blessed him with a fruitful Offspring, so the Charge of several Royal
Nurseries was considerable. Neither was there any Prince in Europe made a
better Figure, by his Ministers, in all Foreign Courts, which must add to the
Expense: Yet these might be easily weathered, and every Thing else which came
under Consideration, but that of a Royal Navy, which notwithstanding was
absolutely Necessary, both in respect of Trade and Reputation, and his Revenue
not being able to go thorough therewith, put him upon that Expedient of
Ship Money, which we have already spoke to, and therefore shall only add, that
by the help of this most easy and reasonable Supply, he kept a constant Guard
in the English Channel, cleared the Seas of all Enemies and Encroaching
Friends, and Built the best Ships, which to that Day ever Floated upon the
Main, and have been scarce outdone since. I have heard some very knowing
Persons in that way, affirm, that two of his First Rates, the Royal Sovereign
and the Prince, might be a Pattern to the best Builders, and the most sensible
paid a Deference to them. His Majesty was wont to say, most Men had their
Vanities, and his was Building, more especially Ships, wherein, as he might, at
Pleasure, be pleasant with himself, so he could not be Ignorant in how high a
Measure it conduced, both to his own Grandeur, and the Public Good; for by his
means clearing the Coasts of all Little Enemies, and having no great Ones
abroad, (whilst most part of Europe, besides were up to the Ears in Blood,) we
continued the only Free-Traders in the World. The Spaniard at War with Holland,
was glad to secure his Bullion in our Bottoms, which being Coined here, was of
some Benefit to the Mint, more to the Merchant, who exchanged it into Flanders,
either by Goods or Bills, which made the greatest plenty of Coin was ever known
in this Nation, and upon the easiest most advantageous Terms, (without buying
Gold too dear, which may now be) all other Trades keeping an equal Balance
therewith, which made very constant and considerable Returns; and a Return of
Customs proportionable, and they were the main Support of the many
forementioned Expenses, with several others not mentioned, and all too little,
had there not been an exact Managment; for this whole Revenue oftener fell short
of Five Hundred Thousand per Annum than rose to Six, when the Ship-Tax, was
most strictly Collected, it could not reach Seven: Yet herewith he lived like
the King of Great Britain at home, both by Land and Sea, was very Bountiful to
his Sister, and her Family abroad; and seldom without some chargable Intrigue
upon their Account in Germany; and moreover when the Scotch Rebellion brake
out, had a Fund to raise an Army, it is pity it was not Greater, to pay them
quite on, and the others off.

Neither was there less exactness in the Management of all other Affairs;
Justice, was most impartially Administered, every Man's Liberty and Property,
secured to the utmost, where they did not assume a Freedom of Speaking Treason,
and Acting Sedition; upon which Account the Ministers of Justice were stout
enough to discharge their Duties, and the honester Men for it, however clamor'd
against: In all other things, where a Legal Pretense could be made, the
People's Right had as great a Regard as the Prince's Prerogative; both they and
their Master abhorred any thing of Trick, or Iuggle. His Ministers of State too,
were every one in their Way as able as these, Men of Honor and Integrity, as
well as Knowledge, who being so ill Treated, for their good Endeavors to
preserve the Government, upon its Ancient Constitution, we deserve no more such
Public Spirits, and perhaps God in Displeasure will forbear to send them.

The Universities never received more Gracious Encouragements, than from this
Good Prince, and returned his Favors, with a proportionable Industry and
Gratitude; whereby the Church became Replenished with a Set of Men, of such
solid Parts, sound Doctrine, and steady Principles, as when the Storm, came
upon that, and the Crown together, they adhered to both, with the most
abstracted Considerations of Loyalty and Conscience, any Age can Parallel; they
have found the Expedient of a greater Latitude since, God grant it do not prove
the Broad-Way. In a Word, never was there a better Prince, nor happier People,
till the Devil of Sedition, Privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, so Hellishly
possessed all Three Kingdoms at once. The sad Subject of our Second Part.

A JUST DEFENSE OF THE Royal Martyr, CHARLES I.

PART II.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black-Boy over against St. Dunston's
Church in Fleet Street, 1699.

A JUST DEFENSE OF THE Royal Martyr CHARLES I. PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the Scotch Rebellion.
THat Observation of Tully is altogether like himself, De not. Deorum. l. 2.
agreeable to his peircing Judgment, both as to the nature of the Men, and
Things; Nemo vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu Divino unquam fuit, the sedate and
upright temper of long experienced Soul's, fail not to be blessed with a kind
of natural Inspiration, an infallible guess in whatever prospect they make of
Future Events, or other considerable Undertakings, especially as to great
Revolutions of State, and overturning of Governments; which we find him most
fatally intimating from the several contending Factions in their own
Commonwealth. And to bring no farther instances from abroad, there were many
Good Men amongst us, who most Prophetically boded this dismal Storm we were now
entering into, long before it came. I have heard from his Son, that the Pious
and Learned Sir Henry Spelman, did frequently say with a sigh, the Puritan
would have his day, and bring all to Confusion. And the truly Apostolical
Bishop Andrew's, in a private conversation, and consult, amongst some of his
Brethren, not long before his death, did, with an unusual Transport of Spirit,
not unlike the Prophets of Old, foretell the miseries shortly to come upon the
Church, and particularly declare to Laud, that his life would be Sacrificed in
her quarrel, as likewise to another, that he should suffer much, but live to
see her restored. I shall add but one instance more of this kind, which yet
must be acknowledged most considerable; the truly Judicious Hooker's Divining
Spirit, foretold to a year, more than 40 before they came: The sad desolations
Schism and Sacrilege would bring upon us. For after a general view, and
sorrowful complaint thereof, he adds, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 79.
By this means they have brought to pass that as David does say of man, so it
is in hazard to be verified, concerning the whole Religion, and service of
God. The time thereof may peradventure fall out to Threescore and Ten years, or
if strength do serve unto Fourscore, what follows is like to be small joy,
for them whosoever they be that behold the same. Now whoever makes the
Computation, will find it exactly 80 years, from that Regular Establishment of
our Church in the first of Queen Elizabeth, to the setting up their Dagon the
Covenant in Thirty Eight.

Which Caledonian Paw, as Rushworth terms it, or Northern Storm (attended even
to Observation, with bad weather, and worse designs) sending forth its
pestilent vapors, and Blasting the whole Island with the thick Mists, and dark
Foggs of Sedition and Disobedience, to the first disturbance of our Royal
Martyr's happy Reign, and the Nation's as happy Peace, it will be requisite to
begin with those Commotions, show how groundless and unreasonable they were,
when that unhappy people suffered themselves to be so cursedly possessed with the
witchcraft of Rebellion then; and how the same Spirit seems still to engage our
several Setts of Commonwealth Libellers, in reviving the like confusions: and
to state the whole proceedure in as true a light, as such Dark designs will
admit, take it in these following Particulars.

1. The Scotch Nation by King James's pacifick deportment whilst there, and too
obliging bounty whilst her, had enjoyed, with great plenty, a continued peace
for above forty years, which none of their Records can give an account of for
so long a time before, though they pretend to go as far back, as most other
Nations now in being, except China; and who ever observes how frequent their
Feuds have been amongst themselves, and Factious oppositions against their
Kings and Faithful Adherents, may rather admire they should remain so long
quiet, than now break out into open Rebellion, especially having their old
Allye of France to Back and Bribe them. 2. Pretense of Religion had been the
Common Theme of Contention amongst them ever since the Reformation, whereas in
too many other places, the sincere endeavors of such as designed a Regular and
Orthodox Establishment, met with too many obstructions from the Sacrilegious on
the one hand, and the Factious on the other. However the Sober Party prevailed
so far, as when in the Minority of King James a Consultation was held for
settling the Polity of the Church, Arch-Bp. Spotsw. 260.
there was great regard had to Primitive Episcopacy, and several Articles
agreed upon for authorizing the same, all which Roger Coke is forced to own.
Detect 365.
The Hierarchy of the Church of Scotland, as they were esteemed one of the
States in Parliament, was not then, nor after taken away, he should rather have
said was continued, as Arch Bishop Spotswood tells, according to a former
draught, where the term Superintendent was used for Bishop: in imitation of
some Lutheran Churches, though their Office was during Life, and Power
Episcopal. And here to show our Friend Roger's great consistency with himself,
I must cursorily observe, that in the same Page, where he owns the
forementioned Hierarchy, he tells us Their Reformation was purely after the
mode of Calvin, and Church of Geneva. Indeed there was a Mob Reformation always
on foot amongst them, and so will be unto the end of the world, unless better
care be taken, and the Abetting Great ones made sensible of their infatuations,
not to call them worse: yet this very attempt, according to the Reverend
Spotswood was some years after, Spots. 275.
viz. 1575. In the Church, says he, this year, began the Innovations to break
forth, that to this day have kept it in continual unquietness: Andrew Melvin,
who was lately come from Geneva, hot and eager upon any thing, he went about,
labored with a burning desire, to bring into the Church the Presbyterian
Discipline of Geneva, etc. So that it seems in this judicious Historians
opinion, the Geneva model was an Innovation in the Kirk of Scotland, and
doubtless is no less in the Church of Christ. John Knox indeed had attempted
something of the same kind several years before, Spots. 174.
framed a policy partly in imitation of the Reformed Churches in Germany,
partly of that he had seen at Geneva, which a Temporal Lord called a Devout
imagination, altogether unpracticable, and a Spiritual gave a severer charge;
but this was in their first recess from Rome, when no settled Establishment was
fixed upon; insomuch as the year before upon condition Queen Elizabeth would
assist them in expelling the French, they engaged to recieve our English
Liturgy, all which Buchanan owns, Scoti ex servitute Gallica, Anglorum auxiliis
liberati, eisdem Ritibus cum Anglis communibus subscripserunt, Lib. 19. And as
it appears from John Knox's History, this was really put in practice, and a
Constitution ordered thereupon; but their turn was no sooner served, both their
Enemies and Friends departed, but they immediately fell off, from what it is
probable very few intended ever to observe. Neither could it be expected they
should long accord to any thing from us, who had so little amongst themselves,
what with Deposing their Prince, and Opposing one another, the many Contests
amongst the Nobility, and Factions amongst the Clergy, it was several years ere
they could fix upon that little Settlement aforementioned, which, when agreed
to, the Rapine of Sacrilege, and Rage of Sectaries, abetting each other, little
good effect came thereof, the sincere endeavors, and serious admonitions of
those few who designed well, were no more heard amongst the many intriguing
clamors, than a whisper in the Cyclops's Den; perhaps no Nation but themselves,
can parallel such continued Distractions, both in Church and State; as they
then abounded with, and upon every occasion are still ready to fly into. 3.
These confusions continued all the Minority of King James, with such other
insolences, and affronts to his Royal Person Crown and Dignity, as no
Crown'd-head ever met with but there, some of their Neighbors indeed have been
their sordid Imitators since, however as he got years, he got ground too,
brought them to something of temper before he left that Kingdom, and when fixed
here in England, established the Hierarchy by Primitive Ordination, and
retreiv'd some of it is Revenue, from those greedy Harpies which opposed it for
that very reason; procured those commonly called the Five Articles of Perth, to
pass the General Assembly, and afterward the Parliament, being very well
pleased in so nigh an approach to the Church of England, which he despaired not
to carry on further, as to Liturgy and Canons, the only thing wanting to the
perfecting the Ecclesiastical Union, his heart was very much set upon for. 4.
At the forementioned Assembly of Perth, there was an order to have a Liturgy
framed, and Canons made for the Church of Scotland, as appears by the
proceedings of that Assembly page 40. and 68. so that it was a great mistake in
Bishop Hackett or something worse in his Patron Williams, who must be his
informer, to say King James was very angry with Laud upon that account, whereas
there was no one thing he was more desirous to see accomplished; but the
Parliament, Palatinate, and Spanish match, with some other uneasinesses to his
declining Age, made the prosecution thereof to be laid aside, the remaining
part of his Reign. 5. King Charles likewise had the same uneasiness upon him
the first four years of his Reign, which having weathered, as well as
Circumstances would admit, fell to prosecute his Fathers pious intentions of a
Liturgy in Scotland, and therefore it is abominably false, like himself, and
Party, in Roger Coke, to say Laud had not been two months Archbishop, Detect.
352.
but he advised the King to make a Reformation in the Church of Scotland,
whereas the Prelates of that Kingdom had been at work upon it seral years
before, it is probable ever since King James's encouragement at the Assembly of
Perth: This is certain 1629, four years before Laud's advance to Canterbury, he
was visited by a Scotch Bishop and told him it was his Majest'ys Pleasure, that
he should receive Instructions from some Bishops in Scotland concering a
Liturgy for that Church, Troubl. and Try. pa. 168.
etc. Laud, replied if his Majesty would have a Liturgy, it were best to have
the English; but the Scotch Prelates were of a contrary opinion, that their
Countrymen would be better satisfied with one drawn up by their own Clergy, and
that resolution after some debates pro and con prevailing, His Majesty
commanded Laud to give them his best assistance, who thereupon set himself
seriously to the work, having the King's Warrant for all he did. And herein
appears his Majesty's great Judgment in the choice, as well as the Prudence of
the Scotch Bishop's in procuring his assistance, who as he was a most profound
Divine, so without doubt the exactest Ritualist, these or any other Protestant
Church ever had: And this likewise resolves friend Roger's doubly Detection of
the King's telling Marquess Hamilton the Archbishop was the only Englishman he
entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Affairs of Scotland: I wish there had been no
other Brotherly assistance between the two Nations, than that of these good
Prelates, the Covenant was carried on in another manner. 6. It Is likewise
abominably false that the High Commission was erected by his procurement, or in
his time, although to render things the more invidious, it is generally
reported so by all the spiteful Crew, whereas would they have consulted a
Brother Libeller, he could have given them better information, the Libel is
termed Altar Damascenum, Alt. Dam. p. 28.
Printed 1623, who tells us Ad Anglicani Tribunalis exemplar formatum est aliud
in Scotia Anno 1616, etc. whether then Established or only revived by King
James, I will not dispute, but that such a Court there was all their Histories
agree, so that it is a gross mistake in Roger Coke, and no man of common sense
would be guilty of it, to say, in this year 1635 there was a great contrivance
between Archbishop Laud, and the Bishops in Scotland, how to erect an High
Commission Court by the Kings Authority. There are few men so bold and dareing,
as though they have no Regard for truth, yet nevertheless will keep a Reserve
upon Reputation, who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name, etc. and realy it
will be hard to find so many impudent brazenfac'd Falsehoods and Forgeries,
packed together upon any one subject whatsoever, as my several pretended
Authors have against this excellent Prince and his Ministers, had they kept
themselves to the Politics, the duty of every Historian, they might have found
too much matter for spiteful Wits to Carp at, want of Resolution in prosecuting
what was prudently designed, too much kindness to such as did not deserve it,
and consequently too much confidence in trusting and employing them, although
as to what we are now discoursing of, the Liturgy, there was no defect of this
kind, especially on the English side, for Archbishop Laud writ to his Brother
of St. Andrew's, that whether the English, or any other was resolved upon, they
should proceed circumspectly, because his Majesty had no intendment to do any
thing, but what was according to Honor and Justice, and the Laws of that
Kingdom; Trou. and Trial p. 168.
all which doubtless there was great regrad to; the only question is as to the
unseasonableness of the enterprise, whether such as were continually upon the
Spot, might not have better discovered the temper of the People, what strong
prejudices they were possessed withal, with the several Interests and Humor's
then on foot: as likewise seen further into the double dealing of such Great
ones, who flattered his Majesty, in his pious intentions, yet at the same time,
underhand, fomented the Religious Rebellion, and, when time served headed
them.
I thought my self obliged to give this brief account of Church Affairs in
Scotland, together with the Rise, and Progress of that Liturgy, the Causa
Patens of their Rebellion, (and a very laudable one doubtless) that it might
the more clearly appear, how basely partial, false, and malicious Ludlow is, as
to whatever he relates on that Subject; for after his constant introduction of
what great design's were in hand for advancing Prerogative and Popery, he adds,
Before any further progress should be made therein here, it was thought
expedient that the pulse of Scotland should be felt, and they persuaded or
compelled to the like conformity. To this end a form of Public Prayer was sent
to Scotland more nearly approaching the Roman Office, than that used in
England, p. 6; 7. To Prerogative and Popery we have already spoken, which is
only brought in here by way of flourish and aggravation, as the main end to
which all the rest were to be subservient, whereas that being false, what a
crazy Structure are these fellows like to raise. That it must certainly fall is
infallible; the mischief of it is, 'twill fall about other men's ears, besides
their own. The charge now on foot is that they designed to persuade or compel
Uniformity; a dangerous design this, if it were so at the first Establishment
of our Church by Queen Elizabeth and her Parliament, for there we find the
Liturgy was revived according to that of Ed. the VI. with Articles,
Constitutions and Canons, ay and a High Commission erected de Novo, with an Act
of Uniformity too, to compel such as would not be persuaded; and under these
excellent Constitutions our Church and State continued; for more than fourscore
years the Glory, and Envy of the Good and Bad, all Christendom thorough. But
then our dear Neighbors the Scots, giving a helping-hand to their weak
Brethren here, did not design to relieve, but alter this compulsion; instead of
Liturgy and Canons, would have the Covenant and Directory, the little finger
whereof, is heavier not only than the Loins, but whole Body of our Church.
However they could only succeed negatively, pull down what had been
Established; the Nation were grown too much Libertines to admit of any
restraint, much less exchange a Service which was perfect Freedom, for the more
than Egyption Bondage of Scotch Impositions: by which means we continued nigh
twenty years in a perfect state of Anarchy both Temporal and Spiritual, every
one doing what seemed Right in his own Eyes; and had some affinity with what
that Judicious Historian observed of the Romans when under the like
circumstances. It was better to live where nothing than where all things were
Lawful. To be sure the sense and dismal sufferings which accrew'd thereby, made
us resolve upon our Old Establishments, to have our Kings as at first, and our
Church as at the beginning, which the Parliament likewise thought fit to
confirm by another Act of Uniformity; but what with that perverseness of spirit
inseparable to such Children of Disobedience, and the kind assistance of their
good Friends the Papists, all Ecclesiastical Discipline has passed for a
mighty Grievance ever since, neither can there be a greater invasion upon the
Subject's Librety, than to persuade or compel men to Heaven against their
Wills, and thus by Tolerating all Religions, we are in a very forward tendency
to have none; nay, I cannot but further observe our Politics seem to be at as
low an Ebb as our Piety, and it may be shortly looked upon as an entrenchment
upon the Liberty of a Free People, to persuade or compel Commutative Justice
and Moral Honesty. That the Form of Public Prayer sent to Scotland more nearly
approached the Roman Office than that of England, is another instance of our
Author's integrity, whereas the most considerable difference between them, was
an alteration of such passages in ours, as the Puritan Party had all along
cavill'd at: for Example, the name of Priest, (so odious to that captious
Brotherhood) was changed to that of Presbyter, no fewer than sixty Chapters, or
thereabouts, taken out of the Apocrypha, were reduced to two, and those two to
be read only on the Feast of All Staints the New Translation Authorized by King
James, being used in the Psalms, Epistles, Gospels, Hymns, and Sentences,
instead of the Old Translation, so much complained of in their Books and
Conferences, these were the most considerable Alterations, besides somewhat in
the Communion Office, according to the first Liturgy of Edward VI's, so far
from Popery as it expressly declares against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
only retains one or two Rites, which the Primitive Church did practice before
that usurpation had got any footing in the World; and therefore I admire to
find in another Volume of Memoirs, That the Alterations made from the English,
rendered it more invidious and less satisfactory; but as the humor then went,
and ever will among that infatuated people, had an Angel from Heaven brought
one down, and by express command of Jesus Christ enjoined an Establishment, the
Covenant nevertheless would have had the preference. Nay, farther to
corroborate the Violence of their prejudices, they had got one Abernethy, who
from a Jesuit Priest turned a zealous Presbyterian, to forge a Story, that the
Liturgy had been sent to Rome, and revised by some Cardinals there, which he
had from Seignior Con, who showed it to himself. Upon this Report the Marquess
Hamilton, then Commissioner, wrote to Con, returned from Rome to London, who
protested he never so much as heard of a Liturgy, till he came last to England,
and had never seen that Abernethy, but once at Rome, and finding him
Lightheaded, never again took notice of him; yet says my Author, who shall be
nameless, The story had a ready belief and welcome hearing, though the Lightness
and Weakness of the man became afterward so visible, that small account was
made either of him, or his story; yet at this time it took wonderfully. And
this is the foundation of what the Defense, or his fellow Pamphleteer relates
of that worthy Dominican Convert, Gage, who might agree with the Jesuit when
both about to turn Presbyterians, and join together in some forgery which might
merit their reception, although their Orders are irreconcilable, and will
believe one another no more than an honest man of sense and understanding will
believe either of them. In the mean while that any Office in a Vulgar Tongue
should be sent to Rome for Approbation, is so inconsistent with the Policy and
Cunning of that Church, as none but Fanatics and Fools could swallow, and it is
said, when told the Pope he laughed heartily at it. To be sure they would not
admit their Missall upon such terms; especially we giving them so fair an
opportunity of bringing it in upon their own. To give one instance further how
Artificially they Ape'd the Jesuit in all Tricks of Imposture, they got a
Covenanting Sister troubled either with Fits of the Mother, or the Devil, who
in such disorderly Convulsions would foam out Raptures in defiance of the
Bishop's, service Book, and Canons, with the bitterest invectives against all
such as opposed the Covenanting Jesus, which their Juggling Preachers so
dexterously improved, as to make it a ratification from Heaven, of whatever
Villainies they had imposed upon the People. He goes on to tell us that the
reading of the New service Book at Edinburgh, was first interrupted by a poor
Woman, but withal so well seconded by the generallity, as they who Officiated
hardly escaped with their Lives. This produced diverse meetings of many of the
Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, who entered into an agreement or covenant, to root
out Episcopacy, Heresy, and Superstition. A very justifiable undertaking this,
I hope they made the Goodwife Chairwoman of the Assembly when they debated
these weighty points; she had as much right to do it as they, besides that of
Precedence, and perhaps understood them as well, to be sure never any Mob
Convention, whether of the Great Vulgar, or the small presumed to determine
what is Heresy, prescribe modes of Worship, or rules of Discipline, till John
Calvin's Popular Ordinences came abroad in the World, which too has been
wretchedly improved by his admirers, to the scandal of all true Religion, and
the Disturbance of whatever Civil Government it gets into. It Is a known Fable,
that when the Lion prohibited all Horned Beasts, the Fox would not come nigh
the Den, for fear his Ears should be brought under that Denomination; if these
Infallible Assertors of their own Wills shall think fit to term sound Doctrine,
Heresy, Episcopacy a Rag of Satan, and the most Innocent Decencies,
Superstition, who dare withstand, or contradict them, as all Orthodox Divines
the whole Kingdom thorough then found to their utter ruin; and something of the
like Inhumane treatment, has been lately on foot amongst them -- can the Pope
be more Imposing or Inquisition more cruel? At the same rate he continues, The
Clergy of England, who had been the chief Advisers and Promoters of this
violence, prevailed with the King, to cause all such as should persist in their
Opposition, after a certain time to be proclaimed Traitors, p. 7. Still the
Clergy do all, which puts me in mind of what Plutarch relates concerning the
peoples Prejudice against Metiochus, Metiochus is Captain, Metiochus is
Surveyor, Metiochus bakes the Bread, etc. evil day to Metiochus. So cries
Ludlow, the Clergy advise the King, the Clergy raise the Forces, the Clergy pay
the Army, etc. evil day to the Clergy: whereas the only Clergyman of our Nation
whom the King consulted, was Bishop Laud, and they that write most in
vindication of Hamilton give him a very honorable Character, as to whatsoever
he advised in those unhappy affairs; although neither he, nor any of his
Majesty's Faithful Loyal Subjects of either Kingdom, were satisfied with those
unreasonable condescentions, he was wheedled into, for that it was most visibly
apparent, the more he yielded, the more insolently they persisted in further
demands, being so far from setting one step forward, as to stand back with the
greater Obstinacy, and consider what was further to be insisted upon, in
defiance of all Honor, Right, and Law; for, as Ludlow relates, The King by
Commission empowered the Marquess of Hamilton, to treat them into a Submission,
consenting to the suppression of the Liturgy, High Commission Court, and
Articles of Perth, but the Scots insisting upon the Abolition of Episcopacy,
and the King refusing his consent to it, they did it themselves in an Assembly
held at Glasco. This is a general account, and which is very much, and rare.
True, but there were several Circumstances in the management thereof very
considerable: As first, they that understood and wished best to the King and
Kingdoms interest, thought Hamilton a very improper person to be employed in
that affair, for that several of his nighest Relations, were chief of the
Covenant party, his Mother more especially, so great a Heroine as to ride with
Pistols at her saddle Bow, and defy both God and the King, in defense of so
good a cause. Secondly, there were several other prejudices against him, which
whether true or false, made many honest men move with the less vigor, because
they expected no good Event from whatsoever he engaged in; and this was most
unhappily confirmed by the Concessions he cajoled the King into as to the
Liturgy, High Commission, etc. For after a long and fruitless Treaty with the
Covenanters at Edinburgh, attended with three several journeys to the English
Court, instead of Treating them into a Submission as Ludlow words it, they
Treated the King, obtaining all to that time their most insolent demands. What
is alleged in his defense, That he knew the Kings condition, how unable he
was, or hard it would be to bring an Army into the Field, is no ways valid, for
he was then as able as afterward, and delays were rather to their advantage,
than his, and since all men of observation concluded the Scots would never give
off without blows, the Punctilio of first Aggressor was nonsense, they never
stood upon it, when it would serve their turn, and that their so grossly abused
Sovereign should not take the best opportunity of chastising them is against
all Rules of Reason and Policy whatsosoever; but to speak freely the King's
great tenderness, and regard to those his natural and Native Subjects, as he
termed them, was so unfortunately misplaced, upon the most ungrateful set of
people that ever trod upon God's Earth, to his and their own ruin, as well as
all others concerned with them. But if Hamilton imposed upon the King by
cajoling him into the most groundless concessions ever any Prince yielded to,
so doubtless the Covenanters imposed altogether as much upon him, for whether
there was any correspondence between them or not as to this particular, (which
for ought I can find remains still in the dark) he could not but rationally
presume it would be an eternal obligation, to procure in one single Declaration
a full grant, of whatever all their Supplications, Remonstrances,
Protestations, etc. had hitherto demanded; and so indeed the Lords of the
Council took it, subscribing a Letter of acknowledgment to his Majesty, in one
of the most Rhetorical Flights I have generally met with, owning that such acts
of Clemency, could not proceed from any Prince, saving him who is the lively
image of the great God, Author of all Goodness. See large Declaration.
Which how the most, and most considerable of them kept afterward, would be
unhappy to observe. The Covenanters, on the other side, resolved to act without
a vizard, which they had some time before, thrown quite away; and for fear the
People should cool, and forbear assisting in the designed Rebellion, repaired
to the Cross at Edinburgh, erected a Scaffold under it, where a great number of
Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, and others mounted, with Swords in their hands, and
Hats on their Heads, having that worthy wight Archibald Johnson, (who never
failed in any villainy, tho as property to Oliver Cromwell, and a member in the
Committee of safety,) to read the most Impudent, Ignorant, Treasonable, ay and
Blasphemous Protestation that ever was penned, to make good which last charge,
it is there expressly affirmed, that their Covenant was sealed from Heaven, and
approved thence by rare and undeniable Evidences, whereas it looks more like a
Combination from Hell, Large Declaration.
the undoubted forge of all Faction, Sedition, and Schism.

Nevertheless they did not think fit to break out into open Rebellion, till
they had got the Blessing of their Assembly, to the meeting whereof the King
had likewise condescended; It has somewhat of affinity with our Convocation,
only in imitation of Geneva, was divided into several Classes, and from a
Provincial choice, sent up to a General. These at the beginning of the
Reformation played Rex, and Pope, all in one, would control and Overruled
whatever Civil Determinations they disliked, command the King to discharge such
a Minister of State, otherways they would proceed to Excommunication, and when
once upon a time he had engaged the Magistrates of Edinburgh to entertain the
French Ambassadors, with which Crown he designed to enter into Ancient Amity,
the little Class of that City Preachers, Spotsw. 324.
proclaimed a Fast to be kept the same day, on which three of them severaly
preached one after another, without intermisson, Thundering out Curses against
the Magistrates, and other Noble men, who attended the Ambassadors. Neither
stayed there Folly here, says my Author, but pursuel the Magistrates with the
censures of the Church, and with much difficulty were kept from
Excommunication. These insolences by degrees King James put a Check to, and
for 60 years last past, such assemblies were regularly summoned, in
Subordination to their Bishop, but now they were resolved to have all thrown
open again, and to be the surer of a Party, brought the lay Elders, to Vote in
the Choice of their Commissioners, that the sober and honest part of the
Clergy, which were numerous, might not over Balance them, in short never was
any Election carried on with so much partiallity and confusion, which continued
all the time of their Session, till the Commissioners patience was so highly
irritated, as to Dissolve them, whereat they were so far from being concerned,
as to stand in defiance thereof; and indeed it seemed to put them into their
proper Post, now it was right down opposition, Treason all over; and having
none to curb them, could the more confidently proceed to condemn all the
Assemblies had been for 40 years before, as prelimited, and not Free,
Episcopacy to be sure must be declared unlawful, with the like fate to the
Service Book, Canons, High Commission, and Articles of Perth. They appointed
the Covenant to be taken by all under Excommunication, and then proceeded to
the Process of the Bishop's notwithstanding their Declinator, wherein being
both Judges and Parties, they could not fail to carry all according to their
Arbitrary Factious Wills. Thus with three or four peremptory Votes, they
totally Abolished (so far as power without Right can go) whatever the Wisdom,
Prudence, and Piety, of Two Kings, with all the sensible good men of the
Nation, had been for Fifty or Threescore years Establishing.

From this motly Assembly Ludlow proceeds, and tells us That being informed the
King was preparing an Army to compel them to obedience, they agreed upon the
raising some Forces to defend themselves. And could they expect otherwise after
such an ungrateful as well as undutifull procedure? yet notwithstanding they
were always aforehand with the King, conscious of what they deserved, provided
accordingly, Levied Forces, imposed Taxes, blocked up his Majesty's Castles,
raised Fortifications, etc. whilst with specious pretenses and Protestations
they kept him in suspense, though at last he could not but see into, and
thorough such Villainous Hypocrisies, and betake himself to the Ratio Ultima
Regum; for which, however Ludlow would have it a Bellum Episcopale, the
Clergy's War, he had the greatest provocation upon the Civil the Temporal
account, that ever any Prince met withal, indeed they were both intermixed,
and both superlatively Base, take some of them as follows.

Large Declaration.
1. He could not endure that the Usurpations of an Ecclesiastical Assembly
should abolish Acts of Parliament, which strikes at the Foundation of Monarchy,
and indeed all other Government. 2. To secure the three Estates of Parliament,
that one of them might not be destroyed without his and the Parliaments
consent. 3. To punish such as have imposed Taxes, raised Forts, Levied men and
Arms, etc. all which by the Laws of the Kingdom, are Acts of High- Treason and
Rebellion. 4. To repress the Insolent Protestations of his Subjects against
himself, his Council, Judges, Laws, the constant practice of the Covenanters.
5. To punish the ringleaders of Rebellion, who have abused his Subjects, by
imposing upon them a Covenant, and mutual Bond of Defense, against his
Majesty's Person, and without his consent, contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom.
6. To punish such as under the name of Tables, or a Committee of the General
Assembly, shall presume to sit without his consent, to order Affairs of Church,
and State, refusing when questioned the Authority of his Majesty, Council, or
Judges, and appealing to a General Assembly, Blasphemously calling it Christ's
own immediate Council, and claiming a Sovereign Independency, from King,
Council, Judges, and Parliament. These are some of the Reasons his Majesty
himself gives for that unwilling War these furious Zealots forced him upon.
That the Clergy of England were not wanting to promote the New-Levies, as
Ludlow says, is true, but That they were the principal Authors, and Fomentors
of the Troubles, is absolutely False, as likewise, That what the Nobility, and
Gentry did, was rather out of complement, than affection to the design: there
was a party indeed whom the Scotch had Bit, and made as Mad as themselves, but
all men of sound Prinples, and sober judgments, foresaw that the neighbor
Kingdom being on Fire, if good care were not taken to quench it, ours might
shortly catch the Flame, and both be consumed together, contributed with all
the alacrity and satisfaction imaginable, neither had there ever appeared upon
those Borders a braver Army, or more resolutely bent to beat the Scotch into
better manners, whatever Arts were used to affright, and intimidate them, for
those of that Nation in his own Family, did him more mischief than the whole
Covenanters Army, by betraying his Counsels, misrepresenting their strength,
and more especially letting him know how averse his Majesty was to come to the
extremity, otherwise his Army wanted neither power nor will, at one single blow
to have decided that dispute, which afterward cost so many, and to very little
purpose; it is said that when the old Archbishop of St. Andrews (who knew his
Countrymen, as well, perhaps better than most others) came to take his leave of
his King at his setting forward to the North, desired leave to give his Majesty
three Advertisments, before his going. First, that he would suffer none of the
Scotch Nation to remain in his Army, assuring him that they would never fight
against their Countrymen; but rather hazard the whole by their Tergiversation.
The Second was, That he should make a Catalogue of all his Counselors,
Officers of Household, and Domestic Servants, expunging every one of the
Scotch Nation, beginning with the Bishop himself, by which means he could not
be accused of Partiality, when a person who had served him and his Father above
Sixty Years so Faithfully, appeared in the Front. A third was, that be must not
think to win upon them by condescentions, the sweetness of his disposition, or
Acts of Grace, but resolve to reduce them to their duty, by such ways of Power
as God had put into his hands. Thus far that wise experienced Person, and his
Majesty not following such wholesome advice, I take to be the Origin of all his
following Troubles, and Ruin: for the Scotch taking him now to be in good
earnest, and knowing how ill provided they were to make opposition, having not
above 3000 complete Arms amongst them, (whatever flourishes those false Lowns
their Countrymen made both in Court and Camp) thought it requisite to divert
that approaching danger, they had so justly drawn upon themselves; and hereupon
addressed themselves to the Earl of Essex, whom the King had sent before from
York, to take possession of Berwick, to him they complained of some of their
own Countrymen, who had provoked the King against them, protesting still their
own Innocence, Loyalty to the King, and Affection to the English, requesting
him to procure a Pacification, by any means whatsoever, which should be thought
expedient on both sides: the like Address they made to the Earl of Arundel,
General, etc. Earl of Holland Lieftenant General of the Horse, in whom they had
a more than ordinary confidence (as knowing how well that whole Family was
affected to their Covenant cause) and therefore not only justified themselves
in their former proceedings, but requested his assistance to promote their
desires, in a Petition tendered to his Majesty's hands. By these and suchlike
sly Addresses, his Majesty's good nature was too easily wrought upon to comply,
and agree to a Pacification, which being once signed, he fell immediately to
the Execution of every Article on his side, forthwith disbanding a brave Army,
Governed by Colonels and other Officers of approved Valor and Experience,
mingled with the choicest of the English Gentry, who stood as much upon his
Honor, as upon their own: and were not a little concerned, that having with
great charge engaged themselves in this Expedition, they should be suddenly
dismissed, not only without the Honor they aimed at, but without any
acknowledgement of their Love and Loyalty. Whereas had he retired only to a
farther distance, he had done as much as the Capitulation required, and in all
reasonable probability, secured himself from the further stratagems of that
Perfidious People, and crushed those practices at home, which afterward
undermined his Peace, and distroyed his Glories. On the other-side the Ink was
scarce dry, which had written and signed the Articles of Accommodation, before
the Scotch had broken them almost in every particular, for the Covenanters not
only entered a Protestation against the Declaration agreed to, but kept most of
their Forces on foot in several Bodies, and all their Officers in pay. The
Fortification of Leith was not demolished. Their meetings, Treatings, and
Consultations, upon matters of State, Ecclesiastical and Civil, were continued
contrary to all Law, and Acts of Parliament; Subscriptions to their Assembly at
Glasco were enforced upon all the King's Subjects, contrary to his
Proclamation, whilst all such persons as took Arms for the King, are branded
with the aspersion of Incendiaries, and Traitors to God and their Country. So
likewise when their Assembly came to sit at Edinburgh they acted with more
heats and Arbitrary insults than at Glasco, and the Parliament which followed
them, stroke at all the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, were resolved to
casheer one of the Three, and that formerly the first Estate of the Kingdom,
together with that of the Lords of the Articles. See large Declaration.
A constitution of above 300 years standing, and many other such intolerable
insolences, and indignities as were never before put upon Crowned heads, and
none but Covenanters could have done it now: more especially considering those
unparalelled condescentions, which the King with too great kindness and
confidence in his own Countrymen so distructively yielded to.
What Ludlow adds further, besides the falseness of the relation, is so
impudent a piece of villainy, as one would think he desired to out do, if
possible, those his Dear Brethren he is so forward to Excuse, in order
whereunto, by a pretty turn of Commonwealth artifice, he transferrs one of the
basest of those many Tricks the Covenanters so perfidiously put upon his
Majesty, and lays it at his Door, the Story as he makes it stands thus, Upon
his (the Kings return to London, under color that many false Copies of the
said Articles were published, and dispersed, by the Scotts to the great
dishonor of the King, the said Agreement was disowned, and ordered to be burnt
by the hands of the Hangman. p. 8. Now the design of this is to insinuate,
especially amongst those of the Factious, who not only believe, but put their
trust in Lies, that they were the really true Articles, burnt under color of
being False, as likewise that the King intended thereby to disown the
Agreement, whereas the Articles of Pacification were not any ways concerned
herein, as the Title which the Scotts gave that Pamphlet expressly declare, viz.
Some conditions of his Majesty's Treaty with the Subjects of Scotland before
the Nobility of England, are here set down for a remembrance. This paper
consisted of Eight points, pretended to be drawn out of Notes taken upon
several Discourses with the King about the manner of his Declaration, and was
dispersed not only in Scotland, but England, to confirm their own Party, and
draw off more from their Loyalty and Allegiance. One of these were put into the
Earl of Pembrooke's hands, who delivered it to the K. and upon a full
Examination of the matter before the Council, the English Lords who were privy
to the whole transaction being present, it was judged very highly scandalous to
his Majesty's Person, Honor, and Government, full of Gross mistakes,
perverting His Majesty's Declaration, and of pernicious consequence to the
Peace of the Kingdom for which the Proclamation was published. All which
several of the Lords Commissioners at the Treaty of Pacification, particularly
the Earl of Holland, too much their friend then, afterward avowed, at Berwick,
to the faces of those Scotch Lords who were believed the divulgers, the Lords
of the Council of Scotland being there likewise present: upon the full
consideration of which premises, the whole Board unanimously petitioned his
Majesty, that this false and scandalous Paper might be publicly burnt by the
Hangman: And here I appeal to any Reader, who has not totally abdicated all
integrity, whether these two relations are not as irreconcilable as Light and
Darkness? as likewise whether any but one of that infernal brood could so
vilainously transfer an express matter of fact, which when detected the
Covenanters themselves blushed at, for when the King charged their
Commissioners at London with so base a forgery, Lowdon and the rest of them
replied, They had no Instructions to answer for that, and those at home had
better have said nothing, than make so lame an excuse, as that verbal grants
made by the King might be supposed to contract the signed Articles; Large
Declar.
Nay those grants too were of their own forging or perverting.

Ludlow having thus expressed his base endeavors to bring them off here; it is
much he did not go forward and give his helping hand in justifying that Letter
several of the Covenant Grandees did send to the King of France, the Original
whereof coming to his Majesty's own hands, subscribed amongst others, by Lowdon
then Commissioner at London, he was committed to the Tower, which made the
whole Covenanting pack open louder than ever, both as to a general
justification of the thing, considering they were threatened to be punished for
their Rebellion; and for Lowdon in particular, he ought to have been returned,
they said, and uncloathed of his Commission, ere his Majesty could question
him; as if the Law of Nations, which indeed secures the Ministers of Foreign
Princes, and requires an appeal to their own Masters upon any affront or other
misdemeanor, should oblige a Sovereign Prince not to question and commit his
own Subjects, upon fresh discovery of more palpable Treasons, though in
Commission from his fellow Rebels; yet nothing would satisfy them, but setting
him at perfect liberty, and so sent home to be tried in a legal way, by the
ordinary Iudicatures of the Land; where the King might expect just such an
Issue as of a Thief at the Old Baily, from the Award of a Jury out of Newgate:
however in this also his Majesty humor'd their Insolences, and discharged
Lowdon, not without some private assurance of Secret Service, which was
performed vpse Covenanter. But this was the last Act of compliance his Majesty
conceded to, for now his eyes were thoroughly opened (oh that they had been
sooner!) and clearly discovered how they were resolved not only upon the
lessening of his Prerogative, but to overruled and absolutely destroy every
branch of his Sovereign Power; whereto things were not ripe at first, till
having by the cunning of their Protestations, Treaties, and Pacification
imposed upon his Clemency, and got time to strengthen themselves at home, and
improve their interest herein England, they now resolved not to let slip so
fair an opportunity, but without farther hesitation fall directly to work, and
give his Majesty a full conviction, that as the Satyrist afterward expressed it,
'twas neither Gold, nor Grace, but steel must tame the stubborn Scot: and that
this only remedy was not made use of when the King had so advantageous an
opportunity, I find passionately complained of by that great Clergyman Ludlow
is so inveterately piquant against. His Majesty, says he, Trou. and Try. p. 75.
would not believe, though often told, the Northern Commotions had their root
in England, and were carried on by a powerful Faction in both Nations, till
after much intercourse, and mediation cast away, he was betrayed by his own
Agents; and when the second volume of his Troubles comes forth, which has been
some years printed off, we shall find something like a Detection of those
unhappy times, for I am told it contains a great intercourse of Letters, about
the Liturgy, and other Scotch Affairs, and then these our Scriblers, these
Retailers of Libels, if possible will be more contemptible amongst all men of
truth, and goodness, than they are at present, although now it must be owned
how justly they all deserve that Character, which Roger Cook fixes upon the
Scotch Covenanters in general, of an insolent, faithless, railing sort of men.
And here Ludlow begins to triumph at the King's disappointments, telling as how
he hoped a Parliament would espouse his quarrel, and furnish him with money for
carrying on his disign, but they fell upon Greivances, etc. and so were
disolved: p. 9. Truly the King had just reason to expect the Parliament should
have joined with him in a due resentment of those many insolences that violent
people put upon him, particularly the Letter they were sending to the King of
France, and assisted him in reducing them to their due Allegiance; and some
were very prone to think, had not the King been betrayed by his own Minister,
his Secretary, things might have been carried with much more temper than
before, or to be sure in that which followed; for it consisted of many worthy
Gentlemen, and doubtless must be somewhat the better that never a Ludlow was
there, nor Father, nor Son; and had there been none of the Vanes, so related,
all things might have gone well, but old Sir Henry demanding twelve Subsidies
for the Kings present Exigencies, stood so peremptorily thereupon, without
falling down to six, as ordered (a cursed piece of Treachery in that unworthy
man as afterward appeared from the rest of his, and his Sons actions) the House
fell into so violent a heat, as they could never after be brought to temper
again, but on the contrary were resolved the morning of their Dissolution, to
Vote against the War with Scotland, which forced an unwilling precipitation
thereof: and this had been as well for Ludlow's turn, as to say it was because
they first fell upon Grievances, whereas both Houses had superseded them to a
Supply, and the King in return promised to acquit his claim of Shipmoney, but
when men have habituated themselves to untruths, it may be a curse upon them,
not to relate what is right, though it would better serve the turn and salve
their Reputation.

The Parliament thus standing out we are told how the Earl of Strafford, and
the rest of his Council advised the King to make use of other means for a
supply, as appeared by the Minutes of the Secretary of State, taken at the
Cabal, and produced at the Trial of the said Earl: the Sum of whose Advice, as
Ludlow relates, shall be considered hereafter, and justified: in the mean while
we may observe how just that Secretary Sir H. V. was to his Oath of Secrecy as
a Privy Councellor, and faithful to his Prince, who advanced him, although the
discovery tended only to his own Shame, and eternal Infamy of himself and Son.
All the imaginable ways used to raise Supplys, as Ludlow most invidiously
reckons them up, were no more than what several Kings and Queens have done
before, upon like Exigencies, yet his then Majesty found great difficulties
therein, by reason of those strange prejudices and prepossessions wherewith the
Scotch Leven had sowred too many of all Qualities and Degrees. And hence it was
the Covenanters got the start of his Majesty's Army and were come to Newcastle
before that was strong enough to oppose them. For whatever Ludlow relates of a
considerable Party of English and Scotch encountering, and that the former,
contrary to their wonted custom, retired in disorder not without Shame and some
Loss. And then makes his reflection, Of such force and consequence is a belief
and full persuasion of the Justice of an undertaking, though managed by an Enemy
in other respects, inconsiderable, p. 10. How inconsiderable the Enemy were in
this Rencounter, will appear from this, that there was the whole Scotch Army
above 20000 against 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, for no more did that little Body
of English there consist of, who, notwithstanding the Common Soldiers were new
raised men, kept their Posts till the Sconces were beaten down by the Canon,
and when thereupon the Foot retired in some disorder, the Horse brought up the
Rear with great Gallantry and Resolution against the whole Scottish force, till
oppressed with number and environed round, they submitted to the Destiny of the
day, some Officers being slain, and others taken Prisoners; and as there is no
doubt but these worthy Gentlemen had a full persuasion of the Justice of their
Undertaking, so had our Author had the least regard to the Justice of an
Historian, he must have ascribed the last, to the disproportion of force:
neither can he take it ill if I assume the same liberty, and upon much juster
grounds affirm, That this first attempt was the last good success they ever met
with; in all their other Enterprises they were shamefully bafled, as when they
came to assist their Brother Rebels in 44, that Body of theirs quitted the
Field the first of any, for, being placed in the Rear, took that opportunity of
getting away, though not running fast enough, were miserably trodden down by
their own Parties. And afterward, when Duke Hamilton came with a much more
plausible pretense, Their Rout in Cheshire was most notorious, without the
least show either of Courage or Conduct: and so likewise when the English were
Aggressors, from the first Action at Dunbar to the total Subjection of the
whole Nation; which then I believe Ludlow may attribute to a Belief and full
Persuasion of the Justice of the Undertaking, whereas I cry, Careat
successibus, opto, and.

Nevertheless it shall be acknowledged that this little Success turned
infinitely to their advantage, for, having got possession of Newcastle, where
the King had a Magazine, they extended their Quarters as far as Durham, with a
corner of Yorkshire, after miserably harassing all places where they came,
those four Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, and Durham,
with the forementioned corner of Yorkshire, far from the largest or richest in
England, were Sess'd at a Contribution of 850 l. per Diem, which, I fancy, was
more than Cromwell could make of their whole Kingdom, when he by the Just
Judgment of Heaven had brought them into the same circumstances, nay, which is
more, made an absolute Conquest. And this, I presume is the foundation of
Ludlow's blunder, which has something of approach to truth, but he abhors to
come close up to it, that upon the King's calling his great Council at York,
they advised a Cessation of Arms, and to Summon a Parliament, which, to the
great trouble of the Clergy, and other Incendiaries (for they must be flung at)
he promised to do, assuring the Scots of the payment of twenty thousand pounds
a month to maintain their Army, till the pleasure of the Parliament should be
known, p. 11. How careful is this Good man of the Parliaments pleasure, and
free of the Kings condescension? whereas impartially speaking, they had carved
themselves the forementioned Contribution, and moreover seized the total of all
Estates belonging to Papists, Prelates, Incendiaries, etc. in brief, of all the
Loyal, honest Gentlemen throughout that District of their new Usurpation.
Afterward indeed when the Treaty was at Rippon, the English Commissioners
required their demands as to the Subsistence of their Army, whereto they
modestly returned answer 40000 l. per. mensem should content them for the
present, and for their losses they would afterward give a particular estimate.
This so much alarmed the Commissioners and other Lords, when the demand was
sent to the King at York, that one noble Peer made a motion to Fortify that
City, and employ that 40000 l. to maintain his Majesty's Army rather than an
Enemy's, hereupon the Scotch came down to 30000 l. Dr. Nals. Coll. Vol. p. 455.
which they owned to be less than the 850 l. per. diem. considering they had
the time past the benefit of Custom, a Provision of Coals, and Proportion of
Forage. In the end, it was agreed, That with a Provision of Coals and Forage,
they should be satisfied and take no more than the 850 l. per diem, of the four
forementioned Counties, under which abominable slavery those poor people
continued a whole twelvemonth, for the King having by unwearied importunity
been forced upon a Parliament, and remitted the whole management of these their
Dear Brethrens concerns to them, they so dexterously improved the advantage as
to keep them here at the Nations expense till they had got the same
unreasonable concessions from him as the others had done, made him Sacrifice
his Friends, debase his Prerogative, and by Enacting an indissoluable Session,
gave them an opportunity of playing the like game, without any thing more of
their assistance.

Now then 'twas thought high time to dismiss them, but the greatest matter was
to bring that about, turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur, etc. they paid
themselves at coming in, but we must pay even for that again, before they would
set one step back, and withal at so unreasonable arate, according to their
demands, as all the Gold in England, though never more plenty, would not make a
Bridge to carry them over Tweed. To give a short Specimen, there being several
Demands agreed to by Treaty at Rippon, wherein the Scotch were to have
satisfaction, the Sixth was, That they desire from the Justice and kindness of
England, Reparation, concerning the losses which the Kingdom of Scotland has
sustained, and the vast charges they have been put unto by reason of the late
troubles: According to which Article, they were required, now upon departure,
to bring in a full Account of their Charges, which they enlarged to the full
Sum of Five hundred and Fourteen thousand One hundred and Twenty Eight pound,
nine shillings, etc. abating the odd pence out of kindness, whereto was added
for what losses their Nation, the Nobility, and Gentry had sustained Two
hundred and Twenty One thousand pounds, and the neglect of their Fortunes, Two
hundred and twenty thousand pounds, besides the 850 l. per. diem, exhausted
from the Northern Counties, with other the most inexpressible Insolences and
Exactions ever any people groaned under. A surprising Sum! but cunning Chapmen
know that a high demand at first, will oblige any Purchaser for shame to bid
somewhat like a Gentleman, and accordingly it happened here, the whole matter
being adjusted for that lusty Sum of 300000 l. part whereof was paid down, and
the rest secured by the Public Faith of the two Houses, and more punctually
discharged, than any here borrowed upon that Credit. If any be farther
Inquisitive as to the Total of the whole Expense, I find a Report made in the
House of Lords, that amounted to one Million, one hundred Thousand pounds, the
most chargeable remedy this Nation to that day was ever acquainted with, Dr.
Nals. Coll. 2 Vol. p. 426.
and proved much worse than any Disease we then labored under, besides that
itch of Rebellion we from them contracted, which has cost a hundred times more
than they carried off, and for ought I see may be doubled before we attain a
perfect cure.

Well, now they are gone, and the King followed them, which Ludlow tells us the
Parliament endeavored to dissuade him from, or at least to defer to a fitter
opportunity, he refused to hearken to them, under pretense that the Affairs of
that Kingdom necessarily required his presence, but in truth his great business
was, to leave no means unattempted, to take off that Nation from their
Adherence to the parliament of England, p. 17. It Is probable he might hope so;
to be sure the Parliament feared it, and had reason so to do, if it had been
possible to oblige such a Generation of men, for he gratified them in every
demand, confirmed all their Rebellious Innovations into Legal Constitutions,
advanced the leading Covenanters into the highest Places of Honor and Profit,
amongst whom their General Lesly was made an Earl, whereupon with Hands lift up
to Heaven, he wished they might rot, if ever he acted more against so good a
King: Yet this very man within two years after, led a Scotch Army to the
Parliaments assistance, and by the reputation of their name and number, rather
than any considerable Action, gave such a diversion to that good Kings Forces
as nothing conduced more to his ruin. And when no longer able to keep the
Field, he betook himself to those his Native Subjects for Protection. How
barbarously they use, and how basely they sold him, need not be here related.

And hitherto according to the course of all other Tragedies, their two or
three first Acts have been very plausible and advantageous, what remains looks
every Scene darker than other, and is at last Consummated in a fatal
Catastrophe; for whether that attempt of Duke Hamilton to rescue K. Charles,
his Master, from the hands of his murderers, were sincere, or with hopes of
farther advantage, and as large sums as they formerly carried back, it met with
an unhappy come off, and gave a shock to the reputation of their Arms for ever
after. So likewise when they got King Charles II. and placed him upon their
Throne, the furious Zeal of their Covenanters excluding all men of sense and
courage, from having any share in the Common safety, gave Cromwell the
advantage of his first Victory, which they were never able to retrieve there,
and then lost all by coming into to England: so that what remained was an easy
acquest to a well blooded Army, which immediately finished the most absolute
Conquest any Nation was ever brought under.

And now by way of Epilogue to the forementioned Tragedy, it may not be
improper to take notice, how grossly the Scotch mistook their Politics in
stirring up and promoting those hellish broils and confusions throughout the
two Kingdoms, it could be nothing but a cursed spite the Devil owed them, to
act so contrary to that cunning and overreaching foresight, wherein at other
times few Nations in Europe can bear up with them. It Is as considerable an
observation as any occurs in all Osborn's Memoirs, that our Parliament did not
exact from King James at his first coming, and confine him to such a number of
his own Country Retinue, as that other did from Philip of Spain, in Queen Mary
's days, especially, since the one Nation is no less distant from the English
in Nature and Affection, than the other; by reason of which defect he tells us,
A beggarly Rabble not only attended his Majesty at his first coming, but
through his whole Reign, were found continually crossing the River Tweed, and
suffered here like Locusts to devour the good of the Land: which he further
adds, King James lived to be sensible of, and repent, they becoming so rich and
insolent, as nothing with any moderation could either be given or denied them.
The result of an omission, Osb. Mem. p. 470.
as he continues, no blood could expiate, but that of the greatest victim ever
sacrificed since Christ in so ignoble a way. To speak freely, there are no
people under Heaven adore every rising Sun at a more unthinking rate than we;
nor more uneasy under our own mistakes, when sensible of them: for it is
unnatural to imagine a Foreign Prince should come, and not make his Old Friends
his Favorites, receive Addresses by them, and accumulate Fortunes upon them;
if there were at first no caution to the contrary, and to think of a redress
afterward, may prove a Remedy worse than the Disease. Now although King Charles
looked more narrowly into his Revenue, and would not suffer them to be their
own carvers of what he had more urgent occasions for, yet as to Places of
profit in Court and elsewhere, the Scotch carried all before them, to so vast a
disproportion, as 'twas generally concluded, there were three to one
Englishman. Cypric. Anglic. p. 355.
Dr. Heylin observes, that once at a full Table of waiters in White Hall, each
of them a Servant or two to attend him, he and his man, were the only English
in the Company. And in the Church so many of that Nation Beneficed and preferred
in all parts of the Country, that their Ecclesiastical Revenues could not but
amount to more than all the Rents of the Kyrk of Scotland. And as the whole
Revenue of that Crown was spent amongst themselves at home, so did several of
their Grandees live in more State here, than any of their former Kings; to
support which, they had not only the best places, as Master of the Horse,
Captain of the Guards, Privy-Purse, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Lieutenant of
the Tower, etc. But there was scarce any of those Monopolies complained of too,
perhaps, more than they ought, wherein they were not concerned, for when the
King at York, in his first Expedition against them set forth his Proclamation
touching Sundry Grants, Licenses; and Commissions obtained upon undue surmise,
it was observed there was scarce any of them but Hamilton and his Scotch
dependants, were concerned in. From all which it may appear, that by stating
their accounts aright', the Lucrum cessans, and Damnum emergens according to
the Civil Law computation, never any people deprived themselves of such a Court
Harvest since the Creation; and this to establish that Dagon of a Covenant,
which was as likely to deprive them of their advance in the Court of Heaven
too; I have been told, a Melancholy Sequestered Gentleman in the time of those
Unnatural Wars, gave himself the trouble of telling over the number of Words,
the Covenant consisted of, and found them exactly to agree with that of the
Beast 666. Whoever has as much time to spare, may experiment the Truth
thereof: however, this is certain, Revel. 13. 16.
with that in the Revelations, It caused all both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, to receive that mark upon them, and brought such
Desolations on our Earth, as none but that old Dragon could vomit forth. verse.
5.
Neither was there much difference between the times of their rage and
blasphemies which the Text says, was to continue Forty and Two Months, for
according to such a proportion its power began to decline; but its deadly
wounds are not yet healed, neither they nor we are ever likely to recover the
dismal Effects of those vials the just Wrath of God suffered them to pour
forth. Such applications as these may, I fear, be thought to have too much
affinity with those Enthusiasms and Cants, which they so vilely make use of in
perverting Scripture to their own base ends, and therefore I shall prosecute
them no farther, nor the History neither of those Ringleaders to Rebellion,
only hope for the time to come, whatever Overtures may be made by others, or
golden Mountains promised by themselves, from an English Invasion, they will
make a stop at Tweed, and before they pass it, seriously reflect what Cromwell
and Monk brought them to in the end, for that Rubicon had no Caesar's.

CHAP. II. Of the Irish Rebellion.
HAving thus charged the Scotch-van, before the main body of English come up,
we are Rencountred with the whole Irish Nation in so execrable a Rebellion, as
no History of any Nation can parallel the abominable murders without number, or
mercy upon the English Inhabitants, of what Sex, Age or Quality soever they
were; and all this upon pretense of Religion too, a kind of Popish Covenant,
Declaring in the sight of God and the World, That they would endeavor the
advancement and preservation of his Majesty's Service and Interest, having no
other design and intent, but only the free exercise of their Religion, and the
abolition of such Laws as render the Catholics incapable of any Office, Place,
Commodity or Profit, to the extraordinary decay of their Estates, Education and
Learning. From whence it is clear, That though the design was laid before, yet as
to the Conduct and Management thereof they exactly copyed their Neighbors the
Scots, and the Devil could not furnish them with any other Precedent more
proper for their Design. The King likewise was proportionably abused in his
Concessions, and Favors; for the leading men in this Rebellion having appeared
against the great Earl of Strafford, and been countenanced by our violent
Factions here, in their Complaints of Grievance and Heavy Impositions; the
Lords Justices, who were then in the Supreme Power, must be ordered to caress
the Gentlemen, and comply in whatever insolent demands they should insist upon;
by which means some of the Popish Lawyers, Members of that House of Commons,
the better to carry on that Rebellion they had in design, were so impudent as
to lay down these Maxims, and vouch them for Law, 1. That any one being killed
in Rebellion, though found by matter of Record, would give the King no forfeiture
of Estate. 2. That though many thousands stood up in Arms, working all manner of
Destruction, yet if they profess not to rise against the King, that it was no
Rebellion. 3. That if a man were Outlawed for Treason, and his Land rested in
the Crown, or given away by the King, his Heir might come afterward, be
admitted to reverse the Outlawry, and recover his Ancestor's Estate. These and
many such like Rebel Tenants were published that Session, after the Murder of
the Earl of Strafford, an abundant confirmation, how requisite his strict Hand
was for such a loose People, which to astonishment, the Government did not see,
or would not take notice of, till the Knife was at their Throats, and many
thousands of them cut: although they must have all a-long observed how uneasy
the Irish had been under their Conquest, (though better governed perhaps than had
it been in their own hands) how strangely influenced by their Priests, and
bigoted upon that account; so that they might allege the same pretense of
Religion and Property with their Neighbors, and have just the same reason to
Rebel, that is none at all. But that which surpriseth me most is, that these
People should have liberty to sit in Parliament, Comptrol, and Vote against
whatever Sanctions had been, or were farther to be enacted, in order to keep
them the better in subjection; the freedom of their Consciences might surely
have been thought enough, but the Freedom of Governing too, must bring all to
confusion, as it here happened to a horrid degree. But it is not my Province to
take notice of this, or any of their other Rebellions farther than the
Reputation, and Memory of our Royal Sufferer is concerned, whose treatment, as
to these Irish Affairs, was more barbarous and inhumane than all the rest, as
well from the Forgeries on their side, to inveigle and abuse the People, as the
villainous spreading of them here, where it required some time to procure a
right Information.

We must know therefore, That when the Faction here had actually drawn their
Sword against their Sovereign, amongst many other Calumnies and Detractions
laid to his charge in the several Declarations and Answers they sent abroad,
there were few without some secret Reflections, as if the Rebellion in Ireland
began by his Knowledge, and Connivance; from which intimations their impudent
Agents and Emissaries, the allowed Scriblers and News Prints, the Pest of that
and all other Ages, where permitted, would have those many Massacres, and
Murders laid at his Door, which the Good Man's Heart more unfeignedly lamented
than all the Members of both Houses. Nevertheless as His Majesty himself
foretold concerning the many Iealousies raised, and Scandals cast upon him by
his Enemies, his Reputation like the Sun (after Owls and Batts have had their
Freedom in the Night, and darker times) brake forth and recovered it self to
such a degree of Splendour, as those Feral Birds grieved to behold and were
unable to bear; (...)
for as no good man believed any of those Calumnies at first, so the next
return or two of Post or Ship, they were blown away with the same Wind which
brought them hither, and the Faction forced to rack their Wits for a fresh
reproach, wherewith the Devil never failed to supply them. But that after
several years of happy Sunshine, another Set of those nasty Birds should
appear again, hooping and howling, the same notorious falsehoods to a
Generation which was not then born, and too little considering the mischiefs
then wrought looks very ominous, and God grant it does not bode a greater
darkness than any we then lay under.

The first reproach which this false and feather Bird Ludlow howls forth
against the King, is, That whilst in Scotland he had News of the Irish
Rebellion, how the Papists throughout the Kingdom were in Arms, etc. and then
closes the Relation with this Villainous hearsay, The News of this Rebellion
(as I have heard from persons of undoubted Credit) was not displeasing to the
King, though it was attended with the Massacre of many thousands of the
Protestants there, p. 17. Though we are not to take his word for the Credit of
the persons who related this, yet we may take our measures from his relation,
that they were equally to be credited with himself, that is not all; for all
this is gratis dictum, without the least Authority, any thing of a reason, or
so much as probable conjecture for so hellish an Aspersion. Whereas there is
express matter of Fact even to demonstration, that never any thing more
sensibly affected him, in that upon the first notice thereof, he sent Sir James
Stewart to the Lords of the Privy Council at Dublin with Instructions what he
thought most proper to be done, and furnished them with all that Money his
present stores could supply. He moved also the Parliament in Scotland to a
speedy help, but they desired to be excused till the States of England were
consulted; who, if they thought fit to use any of their men, propositions
should be made in order thereunto, designing to make a Market to themselves, of
their Neighbor Nations miseries; wherein notwithstanding many of their own
Countrymen were concerned. At the same time likewise he sent Post to the
Parliament of England, where several Resolves were taken, and Votes made, but
little effectually done till the King's Return. To speak truly, had Ludlow's
reflection been made upon them, there had been much more Credit for it, since
they laid hold of all advantages thereby, not only to slander and abuse his
Majesty, but to help themselves forward in that Rebellion they were just ripe
for acting, as will by and by be made appear.

With the same Owl-light Credit, he proceeds and tells us, About this time
great numbers of English Protestants flying from the Bloody hands of the Irish
Rebels, arrived in England, filling all places with the sad complaints of their
Cruelties: whereupon the Parliament earnestly pressed the King to proclaim them
Rebels, but could not obtain it to be done till many weeks, and then but forty
of those Proclamations were Printed, and not above half of them Published,
which was the more observed, and resented, by reason of the different treatment
the Scotch had met with, who no sooner appeared in a much better cause, but
they were forthwith declared Rebels in every Parish Church within the Kingdom,
p. 19. A very plausible story, but for want of one thing, and that is Truth,
whereof it has not the least Syllable: For first the Parliament never pressed
the King for a Proclamation; Secondly, the Forty Proclamations printed, were
not for this Kingdom, but Ireland; So that Thirdly, there could be no ground of
resentment upon the Scotch account, but by such pick-thank fellows as Ludlow
and his Party. In short, the matter of Fact stands exactly thus: The
Parliament, as they were very inquisitive to catch at every thing which might
give them an advantage against the Court, having underhand information that a
Warrant was sent to the Printer for the forementioned Proclamations to be
forthwith provided, opened very loud upon it, Why so few? Why no sooner, etc.
The Printer was summoned, the Warrant produced, and a mighty bustle made, as
generally the cry is greatest where the least Wool: In the midst of which
heats, the Secretary of State gave this account of the matter, that the
Proclamations were printed at the Request of the Lords Justices and
Privy Council in Ireland, who desired to have twenty signed by his Majesty's
own hand, and no more, Dr, Nals. Coll. Vol. 2. p. 529.
who nevertheless ordered forty, and sent them accordingly; I do not remember
the cause was given to the Parliament why so signed: But it is probable to
invalidate that forged Commission whereto they had fixed the Kings Broad-Seal
granted to a private person upon a Title of Land. Otherwise there had been
Proclamations several from the first day the Rebellion broke out in Ireland,
the only place where requisite. But why not in England as well as against the
Scotch? as our Author insinuates: whereto I reply, First, the Scotch had seized
upon, at leastwise assumed the Administration of the whole Civil Power, so that
no Proclamation could come out against them there. Secondly, they had too many
abettors in England who encouraged them to begin, and were resolved to follow
the first opportunity. So that thirdly the Proclamation must come from hence or
not at all, and was equally requisite against both. What he adds farther of the
Scotch being the much better Cause, is only the private opinion of a fellow
Rebel; they were both so bad as upon an impartial scanning it would puzzle
their Infernal Patron to tell which was worst.

Having had the confidence to averr two such impudent falsehoods as
aforementioned, it is strange how he comes to mince the matter so much as to the
third, and tell us the Rebels in Ireland, pretended a Commission from the K.
for what they did; and his Abstract, the Defense, gives indeed a Copy
therefore, but withal goes no farther than that it was said to be given by the
King to his Catholic Subjects in Ireland, p. 14. Whereas there was no one
Slander more confidently thrown abroad than that, and continued longer; nay, I
have met with several Fanatics within these few years, who still take it for
an undoubted truth, and what they have so long entertained, nothing but the
final Judgment can make them renounce. Once for all therefore, to silence this
Infamous Calumny, we must know the Commonalty of the Native Irish, having lived
a long time in Peace and Amity with the English, were not without some
Reverence to that Government, and so could not in plain and direct terms be
easily led into an avowed Rebellion against their King, whereupon their leaders
Phelim Oneil, etc. were forced to persuade them, that they took up Arms for the
King and the Defense of his Lawful Prerogative against the Puritanical
Parliament in England, who had invaded it in many parts, and that what they did
was by his Majesty's Approbation and Authority. And to gain the greater Credit
to that Fiction, they produced a Commission, whereto the Broad-Seal, taken from
a private grant, was affixed, as aforesaid, which made it no difficult matter
to persuade rude and unexperienced people to believe it real; all which in a
short time was clearly detected, as well by several Irish Rebels taken
Prisoners, as English Protestants, who escaped their fury; particularly Dr.
Maxwell, a Reverend Scotch Divine, (against which Nation they were not so
Savagely cruel as the English) in his Examination and Deposition upon Oath, at
Dublin, (which was sent too into England) declared, That he, whilst their
Prisoner, expostulated with them for abusing the King in so gross a manner; Dr.
Burl. Append. 129.
To whom they replied, That in all Wars, Rumors and Lies served many times to
as good purpose as Arms, and that they would not disclaim any advantage.

But to silence for ever that horrid Scandal of his Majesty's Commission, we
have an unexceptionable Evidence and Proof, which will not only clear him, but
render our Author Ludlow, (were there nothing else against him) a much worse
Man than the bloody'st Wretch in the whole Irish Rebellion. In the Year 52 our
English Regicides (having very nigh completed their Conquest) Erected, what
they termed, an High-Court of Justice in Ireland, to hear and determine all
Murders and Massacres, of any Protestant, English or other Person or Persons
whatsoever, within that Nation; where, amongst many others the Justice and
Mercy of Heaven had reserved Sir Phelim Oneil to receive his deserved Doom, at
whose Arraignment, Sentence, and Execution, another Reverend Divine, one Dr.
Ker, since Dean of Ardagh, by God's great good Providence was present, and
makes a full Deposition thereof; Dr. Nals. Coll. Vol. 11. p. 529.
As where the Court was kept, what Judges sat, what Witnesses sworn, the many
Murders and Robberies proved, etc. After which, he comes to this material
Evidence as to the present matter; That one of the Judges, whose name he had
forgot, Examined Sir Phelim about a Commission, he should have had from Charles
Stewart, as the Judge thought fit to term late King, for levying the said War
he was charged with; Sir Phelim made Answer, he never had any such Commission;
whereupon it was proved in Court, by the Testimony of one Joseph Traverse and
others, that Sir Phelim had such a Commission, and did in the beginning of the
Rebellion, show the same unto the said Joseph, and several others then in
Court. Upon which, Sir Phelim confessed, that when he surpised the Castle of
Charlemont, and the Lord Caulfield, that he ordered one Mr. Harrison, a Witness
there, and another Gentleman to cut off the Kings Broad-Seal from a Patent of
the said Lords they then found in Charlemont, and affixt it to a Commission,
Sir Phelim had ordered to be drawn up. And Mr. Harrison did in the face of the
Court confess, that by Sir Phelim's order, he stitched the Silk Cord or Label
of the Seal with Silk of the color of the said Label, and so fixed the said
Label and Seal to the Commission; whereupon Sir Edward Bolton, and Judge
Donelan, urging Sir Phelim, why he would so deceive the people; he answered,
that no man could blame him, to use all means whatsoever which might promote
the Cause he had so far engaged in. It Is farther deposed by the said Dr. that
on the second day of his Trial, some of the Judges told him, that if he could
produce any material proof, that he had such a Commission from Charles Stewart,
to declare and prove it before Sentence should pass upon him, and he should be
restored to his Estate and Liberty. But Sir Phelim Answered that he could prove
no such thing; Nevertheless they gave him time to consider of it till the next
day, which was the third and last day of his Trial, upon which day Sir Phelim
being brought into the Court, and urged again, he declared he never could prove
any such thing as a Commission from the King: And added, there were several
Outrages committed, by Officers and others his aiders and abettors in the
management of that War, contrary to his intentions, and which now pressed his
Conscience very much, and that he could not in Conscience add to them, the
unjust Calumny of the King, though he had been frequently solicited thereunto,
by fair promises, and great rewards while in Prison. And proceeding further in
this discourse, he was stopped and had Sentence of Death pronounced against him.
The Dr. farther declares, that he was present, and very near Sir Phelim when he
was upon the Ladder at his Execution, and that one Marshall Peake, and another
Marshall, before Sir Phelim was cast, came riding toward the Place in great
haste, and called aloud Stop a little, and having passed through the throng of
Spectators and Guards, one of them whispered a pretty while with Sir Phelim,
whereto he answered in the hearing of several hundreds of People, of whom my
self was one, I thank the Lieutenant General for his intended mercy, but I
declare, Good People, before God and his Holy Angels, and all of you that hear
me, that I never had any Commission from the King for what I have done, in
Levying, or Prosecution of this War, and do heartily beg your Prayers, all good
Catholics and Christians, that God may be merciful unto me, and forgive me my
Sins. More of his Speech I could not hear, which continued not long, the Guards
beating off those that stood near the Place of Execution.

Thus far this worthy Gentleman, who ought I know may be yet alive, for the
Deposition was made in 81. And the party declared himself upon all occasions
ready to justify it, and had it been then thought, such Books as Ludlow's
Memoirs, should have ever dared to peep forth, much less be publicly sold,
there would have been more care taken to anticipate those antiquated Cavils,
they have now the impudence to revive: Upon which account it was, that I
declared Ludlow a worse Man than Sir Phelim, the Bloodiest Wretch in that whole
Pack, because first, it is demonstratively clear, he was the Person who sent the
Marshall to Sir Phelim upon the Ladder ready to be thrown off, with proffer of
Mercy, if he would fix the Commission on the King, there being no other
Lieutenant General then in Ireland but himself, and therefore highly probable
in the Second place, that 'twas by his inducement the Judges were so earnest
upon the same account, and Thirdly, that the fair promises and great Rewards in
Prison were shot out of the same Bow, and levelled by the same Lieutenant
General's rancorous spite at the Royal Martyr's Reputation. But then having so
full a Conviction, as neither Liberty, nor Life, could prevail upon the
Unfortunate Man to add that to the too many other Guilts already upon his
Conscience; for Ludlow, to continue the Calumny, and, as far as his Credit will
pass, leaves it upon Record to Posterity, is such an Argument of an Impenitent
Heart, and Reprobate Mind, as I look upon Sir Phelim's condition to be much
more Justifiable. He lay under a sad remorse for the Innocent Blood spilt, with
several other Acts of Injustice and Cruelty, begged God's Pardon, and Good Men's
Prayers; whereas our Lieutenant General seemed to die as he lived; By those
Remains his Admirers have cursed the World withal, may be presumed to leave
it, with like Regret, as the Apostate Angels did their Regions of Bliss,
amongst whom, (without the least breach of Charity) I cannot but suppose him,
Belching out his Blasphemies against God, as he did here on Earth against his
Anointed.

Yet it is to be feared these concessions of his Majesty turned no less to his
own prejudice; for the Parliament having raised the Crisis to its full height,
and resolving, very immethodically, as well as unjustly, to open the vein of
War, employed both the Men and Money raised for Ireland against the King, nay
the very Benevolence, begged for the relief of those poor distressed
Protestants, was borrowed to pay their Soldiers, and a Question whether ever
repaid; though the Kings Soldiers having seized upon some Provisions sent by
the Parliament toward Chester, as but designed for Ireland, they were
presently, upon complaint, restored.

Ludlow continues, That the King acquainted the Parliament, that when an Army
was raised, he would go in Person to reduce them, p. 19. which they would not
consent to, for other reasons than what he assigns, though that of putting him at
the head of an Army might be one: he would certainly have put a speedy end to
the War, which had spoiled all their Villainous designs at home; and therefore
they would not so much as trust any of those Officers which had served him in
the two Scotch Expeditions, though known the best in the Kingdom. The Scotch on
the other side were caressed to the highest degree, and had whatever money, or
other terms they demanded, though to serve the Ulster Plantation of their own
Countrymen, several strongholds, Towns and Castles were put into their hands,
with unusual Circumstances of Power, even to an Independency upon the Lord
Lieutenant, and whole English Government; and when his Majesty did but desire
them to reconsider their own Proposition, and reflect how much it might trench
upon the English Interest, they furiously voted, that whosoever advised his
Majesty to that delay, was an Enemy to the Kingdom, and a Promoter of the
Rebellion in Ireland. Whatever Ludlow farther urges, how the Parliament
neglected no opportunity to carry on that necessary Work, and besides the
Forces of Scotland, dispatched several Regiments from England thither, who were
blessed with wonderful success against the Rebels, p. 20. It Is true, some
Regiments were sent, and brave men they were, and great things they did, but
not so many as designed, or requisite, and so little care taken of them, as
it is beyond expression, to relate how miserably they suffered for want of
Victuals, Stores, Clothes, Pay, indeed whatever was requisite to their
subsistence as Men, or accommodation as Soldiers. The Parliament being so
wholly intent upon their English Rebellion, could spare no time, nor charge to
prosecute that just War; upon which scandalous neglect, all Parties concerned,
more especially the Commanders and Soldiers, earnestly begged leave of the
King, that they might be removed and engaged against any Enemy whatsoever, but
Hunger.

And this amongst other inducements was the chief of that Cessation, Ludlow
inveighs so bitterly against p. 65. as likewise that the Earl of Leicester
staid so long and did not go at last, for he was always hastened by the K. and
every thing restored, more than he had occasion for, or was really designed,
thither. But he meeting with many complaints from thence, and observing how
difficult it was to get a Supply by his Solicitation here, and how much worse
when gone thither, upon that account did not stir. What Ludlow further says,
as to the Cessation, that the King agreed to it, contrary to his Engagement
with both Houses not to treat with the Rebels, unless they concurred, p. 65. is
of no validity, that agreement was before the English were in actual Rebellion,
and his Majesty thought such compliance might prevent it; but falling out
otherwise, it is a pretty Supposition that when a Prince has two Nations in
Rebellion, he must ask the one, whether he shall treat with the other? It Is
also absolutely false that this Cessation in Ireland induced the Parliament to
treat with their Friends in Scotland to march to their assistance into England;
'twas the Prospect thereof induced the King to the Cessation, which he was
always advised of, that notwithstanding the Condescentions he had yielded to,
and Protestations made by them, they designed only to take breath, and would be
ready at the first clinking of the English Money; and if they had pretended no
more, there might have been something said, as they were men of Fortune, by way
of Apology, that having not repented their Rebellion, the Lucre thereof might
oblige their continuance, but to continue the making Religion their property,
to Rebel against their King for imposing the English Liturgy, or somewhat like
it, and now invade his Kingdom to impose their cursed Covenant, is such a
procedure as none but their own Country can give an instance of.

At Uxbridge Treaty the Irish concern was one main head, wherein the
Parliament, as indeed in all other matters, were so refractory and haughty, as
to exclude the King from being any ways concerned either in the management of
War or Peace; he must not so much as nominate his Deputy, or one single
Officer; which therefore coming to an end without effect, his Majesty had all
the reason in the world to press that Cessation into a Peace, wherein the Duke
of Ormond and several of his Friends there were employed; as likewise
Commissioners from them, treating at Oxon, but what with the Nuncio's
Insolence, and Bigottry of the Ecclesiastics, all came to nothing: whereas
would that Priest-ridden Nation have understood their own Interest, and acted
for their safety, they might have expiated somewhat for their former bloodshed,
(whereof many of their own Party were very much ashamed) obtained a reasonable
Liberty of Conscience, with other immunities, and prevented that utter
desolation they were afterward so justly brought into: On the contrary they
shuffled at such an idle rate, played the Bogtrotters in Politics too,
imposing upon every necessity, they saw his Majesty, really, or likely to be
under, and so shuffled off and on, till they lost him, and in him, themselves,
to a most deplorable condition, as bloody Savages as they were.

And if there yet wants a farther confirmation of this our Royal Martyr's
Integrity and Detestation as to the premises, take this farther account, Dr.
Nalson in the Preface to his Collections mentions a Letter, still to be seen in
the Paper Office, intercepted by a Party of the Parliament Army very much a
propo: it was from the Lord Digby, by the Kings order, to the Irish Catholics
as they must be termed, or no treating with them; wherein he lets them know how
prejudicial their standing off had been to his Affairs and most prophetically
foretells that Destruction, the prosperous Rebels here would bring home to
their own doors: Declaring withal, that were the condition of his Affairs much
more desperate than it is, he would never redeem them by any concessions of so
much wrong to his Honor and Conscience, and yet his Affairs were now at a very
low Ebb, this being written soon after the Fatal blow at Naseby. The Dr.
relates farther, that he found this Letter had been before the Committee, which
perused such as might most expose the King, by being Printed and Indors'd with
Rushworth's own hand (that faithful Collector of whatever tends to Treason and
Mischief) Quere as to the Printing this Letter, and a little after, needless to
be Printed. It Is much they did not order it to the Fire, since it is an
irrefragable Testimony of the most unbyassed Sincerity, any but the King of
Kings could propound to walk by, and this will stifle the last Effort of our
Author's rancorous spite, in reference to the Irish Affairs, who tells us the
Earl of Glamorgan was empowered by private Instructions to promise the Liberty
of the Romish Religion, with diverse other advantages to the Irish Rebels, etc.
P. 163. the Earl of Glamorgan was a zealous Romanist, and had put himself very
forward to be tampering in that Affair, but still the Marquess of Ormond was
Supreme in that Government, and finding him to exceed his Commission, confined
him as Guilty of High Treason, and whatever he writ to his Lady, had not all
things gone to confusion, would never have been able to justify his
proceedings, nor Ludlow that vile suggestion, that the Officers and Soldiers in
Dublin obliged the Marquess of Ormond to treat with the Parliament
Commissioners for putting that City into their hands, P. 164. I know not what
flam stories Sir Francis Willoughby might think to gratify Ludlow withal, when
he was Paramount in Ireland, but cannot believe it was in his power to deliver
that Castle without the Marquess's consent. To be sure the whole matter was
adjusted between the King and him, some time before things came to the
Extremity, for we find in Doctor Burlace, this intimation of his Majesty's
pleasure, That if it were possible for the Marquess to keep Dublin, and the
other Garrisons, under the same entire Obedience to his Majesty, they were then
in, it would be acceptable to his Majesty; But if there were, or should be a
necessity of giving them up to any other Power, he should rather put them into
the hands of the English than the Irish, which was accordingly done: An
Evidence even to Demonstration, that though the King treated with the Irish,
and might have reaped great Advantages thereby, would they have acted with
reason, or consulted his Honor with the Common Interest of all the Three
Kingdoms together, which, Good man, was his grand aim. But to have any design
of Promoting their Superstition, or otherwise give them the least advantage
upon the true Establishments in Church and State, was as far from him, as from
the Commonwealth Party, not to abuse and belie him upon that account, and
indeed all others whatsoever.

And thus ended all Transactions between the King and that unhappy People; but
the next year when things came to extremity, and directly tended to his Murder,
the Marquess of Ormond was invited over by them, to assume the Lieutenancy, and
a strict Union entered into between him and the Catholic Commissioners, as they
termed themselves, and all Partys seemed abundantly satisfied in the choice of
a Person who had shown himself Superior to all those Calumnies they had
formerly aspersed him with. However, so many different Humors, Passions, and
Interests could not long stick together; the Provisions for next Campaign were
not answerable to promise, and when they came to Action the Ecclesiastics, and
their Bigoted Party returned to their Old vomit, would neither lead nor drive,
but at the same Priest-ridden trot as formerly, so that quarrelling at those
disappointments themselves were the Cause of, and fomenting the Divisions they
ought to have cemented; Cromwell in the mean while coming over with an Army of
Veteran well Disciplined Rebels, their whole Island became the most dismal
Scene of War, Pestilence, and Famine, as we find any where Recorded, the
numbers being unaccountable which perished by those three Arrows of Divine
Vengeance; others either by Stealth or Composition, got into Foreign parts,
whilst the remainder were shut up in one Corner of the Kingdom, and had all
their Estates divided amongst the Conquerors. And thus ended this Popish
Rebellion, which as it was begun in imitation of the Scotch Covenant, so was it
prosecuted with the like Insolent and Unreasonable Demands, and with somewhat a
severer draught of the Almighty's Displeasure, although nothing but an
Impenitent Heart could make either of them forbear to acknowledge, how
Righteous God is in all his ways.

CHAP. III. Of the English Rebellion.
THE two former Prospects have been dismal enough, and could not but move both
Indignation and Pity, as to the Aggressors, and Suffering Parties, had the
Scene lain at the farthest Distance; but being either in our Neighborhood, or
on our Borders, and we at the sole Charge of buying the Scotch home, and
buoying up the Protestant Interest against the Irish; one would think should
have cautioned us to keep together amongst our selves, and take Care to prevent
any further Annoyance from such troublesome Neighbors: But to continue, nay
aggravate the Freak, fall together by the Ears one with another, when they were
both fallen upon us, was so abominably Stupid, as the whole observing Part of
the World became amas'd, and Posterity it is probable would have given no Credit
thereto were we not like to confirm it, by continuing in the same Mixture of
Fools and Madmen, to the Consummation of all things. For Confirmation whereof
I cannot but observe that the Scots acted like themselves, and having so solemn
an Invitation from us, could not forbear, according to the Common Policy of the
World, to set forward from their own Wilderness to our Canaan. The Irish
likewise had strong Prejudices, both as a conquered Nation, and from the
unhappy Influence of their Romish Emissaries, upon whose Sleeves they had not
only pinned their Faith but Obedience to the Civil Power; so that had their
Defection been confined within any Bounds of Humanity, some Grains of Allowance
might have been given them. After all, therefore, the most Astonishing surprise
lies on our Side, in that we were not only forward to foment them, but so
barbarously Stupid as to Sheath the Sword in one another Bowels, without any
imaginable Cause, but what the Historian assigns in all such Cases Nimis
Felicitas.

The Scene then hence forward must be at home, where will appear several Acts
full of nothing but Misery and Confusion; a sad Completion both of the Prophets
Charge and Curse, Hos. 4. 2.
there being no Truth, nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land, but by
Swearing, and Lying, and Killing and Stealing, Blood touched Blood, to the
Effusion of that Royal Blood, which I fear will be never expiated till the last
Conflagration; to be sure some others, though very considerable, have done
little toward it. That Observation of Amm. Marcellin. could never be more
Applicable than here, Manum injicientibus fatis, hebetantur sensus hominum, and
obtunduntur. Fate so strongly overrul'd all our Deliberations, dazzled the Sight
of our Judgments and Counsels so such a Degree, there was no Thought left for
the most Natural Principle to all Mankind, Self-Preservation; and that whether
we consider his Majesty's too many, and great Compliances on the one hand, or
the Faction's Impudence on the other, whose Demands continually improved with
his Concessions, crying as the Wise Man tells the Horsleeches two Daughters
incessantly do, Give, Give, nec missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris, without
giving over, till the Nation fainted and they burst asunder with it is Blood.
And this Ludlow owns, that the King not willing to languish in Expectation,
sent to the House, that they would at once make their full Demands, and prepare
a Bill, etc. But they perceiving the Design, (for he must never be without one,
though they good Creatures were as undesigning as the Devil) returned for
Answer, That they could not suddenly resolve upon so weighty a Work, but would
do it with all possible speed, pa. 16. which time never came, nor was thought
of after. Indeed their Thoughts were quite otherwise employed, to widen the
Wound, and render it incurable; in order whereunto their first Attempt was to
Stab the King through the Sides of his Ministers; not only remove from him, but
Sacrifice all such worthy Patriots, as had Courage and Abilities, to detect and
oppose their pernicious Enterprises. Thus Ludlow tells us, they impeached the
Lord Keeper Finch, Earl of Starfford, and Archbishop of Canterbury of High
Treason, in endeavoring to subvert the Laws, and erect an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Power, p. 12. the former very prudently made his escape, the only
means of avoiding that impertuous Hurricane, which Innocence it self could not
otherwise have stem'd. The other two fell the Objects of their implacable Rage;
and being the Persons against whom, next the King himself, our Author revives
his Calumnies with the greatest Obloquy, I shall presume to give a short
Account of the Procedure against them, so Arbitrary and Illegal, as it seemed
to be carried on, not only without any regard to Justice, but even Humanity it
self.

The Earl whom they first fell upon, as he could not have a greater, so
deserved no less Character than what his Majesty gave him, of a Person, whose
great Abilities might make a Prince rather afraid than ashamed to employ him in
the greatest Affairs of State: which he first discovered in the House of
Commons, was very happily brought into Court, where through several Stages of
eminent Trusts and Council he arrived at the highest Command our Crown has to
dispose of, that in Ireland, which he managed and improved in so prodigious a
manner, as all Men of Sense and Business, were astonished in their
Acknowledgments thereof: And this sufficiently appeared at his Trial; for
though it is true there were several Articles of a very high Nature brought
against him, yet none proved: And herein Ludlow discovers his Commonwealth
Ingenuity, to tell us he was accused of Governing Ireland in an Arbitrary
Manner, of retaining the Revenue of the Crown, without giving an Account, of
promoting and encouraging the Romish Religion, etc. p. 14. whereunto though
English and Irish, Puritans and Papists, his open Enemies and false Friends
were encouraged to give Evidence, they could make nothing of it; nor of that
High Charge, which our Author mentioning more than once, would have instar
omnium, how he advised the King, That since the Parliament had denied him such
Supplies as he demanded, he was at Liberty to raise them by such means as he
thought fit, and that he had an Irish Army should assist, him to that end. All
which had but one single Witness to prove it, Sir H. Vane, who hesitated very
much, and though at last would have had the Irish Army employed in England, all
Circumstances speak otherwise, the very Council sitting upon the Scotch
Affairs, and every Member thereof averring the contrary; the Earl of
Northumberland more especially, that he had heard the Earl of Strafford often
say, that that Power was to be used Candide et Cast, and that the Kingdom
could not be Happy, but by a good Agreement between the King and his People in
Parliament. So that after a great deal of Art and Eloquence by the best parted
bad Men Westminster Hall ever sent into the House of Commons, with Father Pym,
etc. this Great Person so clearly bafled all their Allegations and Evidences,
as they were forced to turn the Tables, pursue another Method, and Vote him
guilty by Bill of Attainder, which not only precluded all further Arguments
according to the Regular Course of Justice; but made themselves Accusers,
Parties, and Judges, throughout the whole Procedure, both as to Matter of Fact
and Law; an odd and unusual Course; for, they say, it had been discontinu'd
from Henry VIII's Time, whose grough Humor too often made use of this, when he
could not otherwise gain his Point, that is, his Will: But when laid in his
Cold Tomb, that Men might freely speak their Minds; next the Barbarous
Treatment of his Queens, this is the foulest Blot upon his Memory: And as he
then made his Parliament the Properties in this ungrateful, ay and unjust
Procedure, so the Parliament here were as hot and violent in forcing it upon
the King; and that with so great Precipitancy, as the Bill was read thrice in
one Day, and consequently passed; with an earnest Request, when carried up to
the Lords of the like quick Dispatch. But they were more Deliberate, as well
upon his as their own Account, which made the Commons fall to their then a la
mode Course of Rabble and Tumults, 5 or 6000 whereof assembled at Westminster,
crying for Justice and Execution, with many other intolerable Insolences as
shall be by and by related; upon which Account many of the Lords dared not to
appear at the House, and of those few that did, being 45, it was carried but by
7 Votes, 19 giving their not Content, to the 26 that gave their Content to the
passing this Fatal Bill. And this brought the King into that inextricable
Perplexity, being to use his own incomparable Words, persuaded by those that
wished him well, to choose rather what seemed safe, than just, preferring the
outward Peace of my Kingdom with Men, before that inward exactness of
Conscience before God; and this made a continued Remorse in his Soul for ever
after, (...)
incessantly complaining of that bad exchange to wound a Man's own Conscience
thereby to salve State-Sores, to calm the Storms of popular Discontents, by
stirring up a Tempest in a Man's own Bosom; whereas in all likelihood I could
never have suffered, with my People, greater Calamities (yet with greater
Comfort) had I vindicated Strafford's Innocence -- and not gratified some Men's
unthankful importuning so cruel a Favor. In fine, the whole Chapter is so
great in its self, as we find nothing so sincerely to express the true Remorse
of a Penitent Soul, since David penned the 51 Psalm; and withal gives so high
and just a Character of this great Man, as no People which used them both so
Barbarously, ought ever to be blessed with such a Prince or Minister. Yet one
thing I must further observe from his Majesty, how that after-Act vacating the
Authority of the Precedent for future Imitation, sufficiently tells the World,
that some Remorse touched even his most implacable Enemies, as knowing he had
very hard Measure, and such as they would be very loath should be repeated to
themselves. The return likewise that virulent Faction made to his Majesty when
he had obliged them with so much Regret to himself, is worth taking Notice,
which was only this, has he given us Strafford, then he can deny us nothing:
And accordingly at the same time this cursed Bill was past, there past another
to make that cursed Parliament perpetual; whereupon I find this Remark, that as
the one was for the Earl's present Execution, so the other proved in the Event
for the Kings. One thing more and I have done; when the Nation came to its Wits
again in the Year 60, An Act was passed for reversing the Attainder of this
great Worthy, wherein are enumerated the several unjust and irregular Practiecs
for obtaining that Bill as well from Lords as King, together with the
Illegality and untruth of the Charge it self. It Is pity there had not been a
Clause likewise, that whosoever should dare to Libel, and belie his, but more
especially his Master's Sacred Memory, or indeed any others who unjustly
Suffered in that just Cause, should forfeit their Ears at last, if not have
their Breath stopped at Tyburn, what a company of Spill-Paper Rascals would this
have freed the Press or the World of? But since it is thought fit to permit
them, we must be Content with discovering thereby their sordid Temper, and base
Principles, and accordingly discriminate them from such virtuous Understanding
Souls as will not be afraid of any evil Tidings, but have the Righteous in
everlasting Remembrance.

Archbishop Laud shall be here likewise considered; for tho they did not take
away his Life till about three Years after, yet was he forced to Linger it out
all that time in an unjust Confinement, kept on purpose, as one would think, to
serve another turn with the Scots: For as they would not stir out of the
Kingdom in 41, till gratified with Strafford's Blood, so they would not return
in 43, without an assurance of Laud's; A blessed Religion must those
Covenanters be of, in thirsting as much after Blood as Wolves and Tigers; could
I believe a Metempsychosis, I should very much incline likewise to think that
the Souls of those Pharisees and other Jews which persecuted our Savior and
his Apostles, were now at length got so far as our Northern Clyme, and taken up
their Habitation in the several Members of our Scotch and English Sanhedrims.
The first particular Charge, (as to the English Church and Nation) Ludlow
brings against this great Man, is the Clergy sitting in Convocation, after the
short Parliament in 40. was dissolved, took upon them to frame Canons and
Oaths, and impose four Shillings in the Pound, upon Ecclesiastical Benefices
throughout the Kingdom, p. 10. Roger Coke likewise Harps upon this String; so
does the Defense; and it was one of the most considerable Branches of his
Charge at his Trial, whereto he replied, Troub. and Try. p. 282.
that he did nothing but by the King's express Order, had the Judgment of the
Council learned in Law, and exactly followed a Precedent of Archbishop
Whitgift's in the Happy Days of Queen Elizabeth; the Original whereof the House
of Commons commanded away, that the poor Man might be the less able to make his
Defense, although therein they were disappointed too, discovering only their
own mean Spirits and his great Parts. And for the Oath, etc. or rather, etc. in
the Oath which made such a ridiculous Noise, it is pity but Posterity should be
acquainted with their Impertinency, and Prejudices therein, the Words which
the, etc. included were after Deans Archdeacons, where the etc. cuts off, And
other Persons having peculiar and exempt Jurisdiction, which was mentioned at
large in the Precedent Canons, and here contracted by the Clerk, though designed
as the others when Engrossed; however through haste forgotten, and that nothing
more could be intended by it, clearly appears from the Restraint of the
following Words, viz. as it stands now established: But if People are resolved
to strain Knats and swallow Camels, it is impossible to persuade them otherwise,
till they have nigh Choked themselves.

Detect, 386.
Roger Coke is very witty upon the forementioned Tax, and says, the Clergy who
now Taxed their fellow Subjects without Consent of the Commons, shall ever
after be taxed by the Commons without Consent of the Clergy; where in the mean
while is Magna Charta, whose first Article speaks Ecclesia Anglicana debet
habere suas Libertates, and Privilegia illaesa? And they taxed none but
themselves, and none else by Law can do it. It Is likewise false that they never
Taxed themselves since, there was a Convocation in 61. which did it: But upon
the Dutch War in 65 the old Way of Tenths and Fifteenths arose so high upon the
Bishops and Dignified Clergy, as it was thought easier to be thrown in common
with the Laity; amongst whom likewise the new Rebel improvement of a Land Tax,
and Monthly Assesments, were substituted in room of Subsidies, to their very
great Edification. What I most admire herein is, that when this Course was
agreed upon, to throw them both together there should be no care taken, then,
nor since, by the Fathers of our Church (the only Representative she has in
that Body,) to have some of the Clergy in Commission throughout each County;
Arch Bishop Laud's Public Spirit and Fatherly Care, would not have been guilty
of such an Omission, for want of which, they are as much enhanc'd in their
Taxes, as defrauded in their Tithes; whereupon I know a Person who when he
would express the Summum jus of any rigorous proceeding, does it in this
Phrase, was as kindly dealt with, as the Country-Commissioners deal with the
Clergy.

I do not find Ludlow bringing any other particular Charge against this Great
Man; the Defense mentions the Heads of 20, he should have added four more,
which would have equaled those Articles from the Commons, and done a great
Kindness in telling us how well they had been proved; for after seventeen Days
Prosecution by Three as Virulent Tongues as ever spoke in Westminster Hall, he
made so full and vigorous a Defense, so effectually refell'd all their Cavils,
and Evidences, that they were forced as in the Earl of Strafford's Case, to
have recourse to that dead striking Bill of Attainder, by Accumulating, those
many Charges they had not proved altogether; to make that Treason in the
Conclusion, which could not be gathered from the Premises. This was very uneasy
to the Lords, though none of them his Frinds, as not knowing how soon it might
be their own Case, till frighted by the several Threats from the Lower House,
now become Paramount, Six Mean-Spirited Peers passed the Ordinance; all the
rest though they had not Courage to appear against it, yet were ashamed to give
their Votes in so illegal and inhumane an Act. I cannot omit one Instance of
their Barbarity. He having obtained leave at his first Commitment, to repair to
his Study at Lambeth, and take thence such Papers and Memomorials as might
conduce to his Defense, that Miscreant Pryn obtained an Order of the House, to
seize upon and ravish them from him; neither were they so satisfied, but came
again and robbed his Pockets of his Diary, and carried away the very Manual of
his Devotions, to see what they could discover, which was only their own Shame.
That Account likewise of his Troubles, and Trial fell into the same base Hands,
although by a signal Providence, retrieved to be an Everlasting Record of their
infamous proceedings.

This brief Relation I thought proper to give of these two great Ministers, for
that they were the main Prop of all Royal Dignity, and chief promoters of
whatever true Policy fell under debate in Order to the King and Kingdom's
safety. And had their Advice been followed, the Scots had never entered England,
but received the due Reward of their Rebellion at their own Doors: nor Irish
thought, at leastwise attempted theirs, so long as Strafford held the Rains,
without which Abettors, and Advantages, the English Confederates could have
carried on none of their Designs: But what with the King's Good Nature, Natural
Kindness, and strange Irresolution, his only Fault, together with the Factions
Solemn Professions of Duty and Loyalty, that they would make him the most
Glorious and Potent Prince in Europe he lost so much ground at first, as
afterward it was impossible to retrieve it, they still pressing for one
Concession after another; till in the end they gained enough to ruin him, as
well as his Ministers; for whatever popular Clamors were made, none stood up so
much for the true English Constitution as they, never denying that Parliaments
were the best Expedient to settle Affairs in all great Emergencies, if they
would go regularly about it; but they Both thought what the One has declared,
Troub. and Try. p. 172.
that Corruption optimi est pessima: If Parliaments should at any time be
misguided by the Practice of a malignant Party, nothing can be so dangerous,
because the highest Remedy being corrupted, there is no sure Redress left. And
their knowing this, and acting so vigorously to prevent those Miseries designed
thereby, was the Causa latens, that their Blood was so much thirsted after, and
when spilt sadly accomplished what the Poet declared in one of their Elegies,
The State in Strafford died, the Church in Laud.

For they being gone, all the rest of the Kings Ministers thought it time to
beg a Discharge, 2 d. Vol. 206.
and provide for themselves, since the most unspotted Integrity could not be
Proof against the Stat pro ratione of an Ordinance, much less a Bill of
Attainder; Dr. Nalson in his Collections gives us a piece of a Manuscript left
by the late Earl of Manchester, the sometimes fatal Kimbolton, which tells us
what tricks and juglings were used amongst them, to excuse such as had been
exclaimed against as most Obnoxious, by resigning their Places to some leading
Men of the Faction, as Cottington Master of the Wards to Say and Seal. etc. So
likewise for Monopolies, which Ludlow tells us they declared against, and
expelled the Authors out of the House, p. 11. they were generally transferred
by Bill to more deserving on their side, as the Letter Office to the Earl of
Warwik for three Lives, and Sir Henry Mildmay was continued in the House,
though a notorious Promoter of the Monopoly of Gold and Silver Thread; as also
Mr. Laurence Whitaker, and other Commissioners in Matters of like Nature or
worse; for to encourage those already come amongst them, and bring in others,
they laid down this Politic Maxim, That what disservice any one had done
formerly, his present Actions bringing Benefit to their Commonwealth, he ought
not now to be questioned.

He goes on to tell you how they proceeded to take away the Star Chamber,
High Commission Court, Court of Honor, with some others, p. 13. The former of
these was the antientest Court in England, but being a support of the
Prerogative must down, and the other because of the Church: I have already
mentioned how much better it had been to have corrected the Abuses; and for the
present shall only observe, that had they been ten times greater than they
were, it was no redress to take them away and substitute an ordinance of the
House in room thereof, yet that it was come to, at so impudent an Arbitrary
rate; as no King of England, or indeed in Europe ever assumed half that Power;
he that is most exclaimed at now, upon that account does nothing like it; the
Grand Seignior was the only precedent they could propound. As to the High
Commission, I shall only add, that Mr. Hobbs in a little Pamphlet he writ,
since the Restoration, of Heresy, endeavors to vindicate his Leviathan from
that Charge by Reason the High Commission at the restless Clamours of the
Presbyterians, was then abolished, the only Court wherein such Points could be
considered; he did not think of a Convocation, neither is it much thought of by
others; but doubtless all the Heresies, Factions, Schisms which have so
miserably torn both Church and State, arose from the suppressing that Court:
For that other, the Court of Honor, Gentlemen formerly had as much regard for
their Bearing, as any other property, and would be as much concerned if
invaded; but going about to Dethrone the sole Fountain of Honor, their King,
'twas their Curse, rather than Choice, to lay all things in Common, the Lord
and Lacquey, Gentleman and Groom upon the same Level, which soon after they
found more experimentally true than ever was expected, and might have justly
taken up the Prophet's Lamentation, Servants have got the Dominion over us, and
there is none to deliver us out of their Hand. Lamen. 5. 8.
What I most condole is; that we lost the Thing as well as the Court; true
Honor fell to so low an Ebb, as it has very seldom stowd since; should I say
as much of Truth, Justice, and Common Honesty, 'twere easier to inveigh
against, than disprove me.

Upon a summary View of these through-paic'd Reformers whole Proceedings, who
our Author tells us, were resolved to correct the Abuses introduced the
preoedent Years, I cannot but reflect upon a Simile which occurred the other Day
in a Republican Pamphlet, (to the best of my Memory, one of those about A
Standing Army) where that Truth could not pass, without the Alloy of several
Falsehoods in reference to this and some other- Reigns; however the Metaphor is
very proper, comparing Government to a Watch, or any such like piece of
Clockwork, where a disorder in any one Wheel, obstructs the regular Course, if
not the whole Motion: But then what can we say, when not only several Wheels
are taken out, but the Spring it is self is set aside, every conceited
Commonwealth Man, and Clumsy-fisted Clown, having liberty to tamper with, and
thumb it at Pleasure; yet this, impartially speaking, has been our Condition
most an end ever since These rude Artists fell to work. For what Hudebrass
says of Religion, is altogether as true of Government, One would think it was
intended,
For nothing else butto be mended.
Were it not for shame of the Quibble, I would add, they designed perhaps to
make a Pendulum of it, by which means it has hung tottering ever since.

What he next entertains us withal is a Protestation agreed upon by the Lords
and Commons, to maintain the Power and Privileges of Parliaments, the Right
and Liberty of the People, etc. p. 13. taking no notice of the precedent part,
to Defend the Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, etc. and according to the Duty of Allegiance, Maintain, and Defend his
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; all which Ludlow omits; and it was
very ingenuously done, for he knew it never intended. In the mean while they
acted above board as to the Discipline of the Church, whereof they took no
notice, designing forthwith to set it aside: for this Protestation was but a
Prologue to the Scotch Covenant; notwithstanding several Good Men both Clergy
and Lay, were driven by the Strength of that Popular Current to Subscribe it at
a most unthinking rate.

What comes next is one of the best improved Lies in the whole Libel, of a
treacherous Design set on foot not without the King's Participation, as
appeared under the King's own Hand, to bring up the English Army, and by Force
to Dissolve the Parliament; the Plunder of London being promised to the
Officers and Soldiers as a reward for that Service; this was confessed by the
Lord Goring, Mr. Percy, and others. The Scots Army was also tried, etc. p. 15.
This is his Story, Let us now see Truth. The chief Officers in the English Army
were a Set of Worthy Loyal Gentlemen, both of Sense and Honor, and
consequently could not but take notice how partial the Commons were to the
Scots Army in prejudice to theirs which caused Commissary Wilmot (who with some
others was a Member of the House) to tell them, upon a Paper the Scots had
presented to get Money designed for our Army, that if Papers could procure Money
he doubted not but the English Officers would soon do the same; Neither were
their Resentments less upon the King's than their own account, that after so
many complyances and too great condescension they should still press forward,
to the overturning of all; whereupon they entered into a confederacy, obliging
themselves by an Oath of secrecy, to Petition the King and Parliament upon
these Four Heads, For Money for the Army; not to Disband before the Scots; To
preserve Bishops Votes and Functions; To settle the King's Revenue. Which being
shown to, and approved by the King, he signed; all which appears both from Mr.
Percy's letter to the Earl of Northumberland his Brother, that they resolved to
act nothing which should infringe the Subjects Liberty, or be prejudicial to
the Laws. Nals. mem. 2 d. Vol. 272.
As likewise from the forementioned Manuscript of the Earl of Manchester which
gives the same account. And could Ludlow, or any of his Partisans imagine there
should be no Men of Courage and Resolution left in the Nation, or that having
Swords by their Sides, they should keep their Hands in their Pockets, and see
Votes and Ordinances do more mischief than all the Gunpowder of a seven Years
Campain; and since the Parliament were resolved upon a War, it is Pity these
Gentlemen parted with their Forces: Had they come up, and cut Ten, or Twenty
the lowdest Throats in the House, it might have saved the effusion of a great
deal more, and much better Blood, and preserved both King and Kingdom from Ruin.

To show farther that the Parliament was always in danger the King continually
plotting against them, they never against him, our Author tells us, how a great
number of loose debauched Fellows repaired to Whitehall, where a constant Table
was provided, and many Gentlemen of the Inns of Court tampered with to assist
him in his Design; and how briskly he took up one for speaking against the
Fellows at Westminster, who upon this fright desired leave to provide
themselves a Guard, and that the Militia might be at their disposing, p. 21. To
turn a Story, or frame a Lie so as to make it serve their own turns has been
all along observed the peculiar Talent of our Commonwealth Men, and of the
whole Party, Ludlow had most right to the Whetstone. That the Fellow should be
so impudent to charge the King with raising Tumults, or threatening Force, when
all the World knows it was the chief Engine the Parliament had to carry on all
their mischievous Enterprises, and when any thing stuck with him or the Lords,
a Rabble of 5 or 6000 were immediately summoned out of the City to affright and
threaten all that would not comply according to their Desire, and in their
passage by Whitehall did the same to the King, till their Insolences grew so
intolerable, as he was forced to leave that and Parliament at once, for which
they had the confidence to charge him, and yet would take no care he might be
secure with them; and this occasioned what Ludlow relates, Several Gentlemen
about Town, more especially at the Inns of Court, were ashamed to see Majesty
so scandalously affronted, proffered their service for the security of
Whitehall, his Majesty and Family, which was kindly accepted, and some little
Entertainment made for them, from whence this vile Fellow raised his great
Story. And since he has given me this just provocation, it will be here very
proper to give some small account of those many violences from the insults and
tumults of the Rabble, how necessary the Faction found them, and thereupon what
Encouragement they had.

The Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford went on very slowly in the
House of Lords, and it is probable but for the Menaces of the Mob had never
passed, whereof 5 or 6000 came up to Westminster, filled the Palace-Yard,
posted themselves at all the Entrances to the Parliament House, and stopped
every Coach crying Justice and Execution, which upon a Sign given was repeated
with such an hideous Noise as to create Amazement in the greatest Constancy.
Such Lords as they knew were averse to Humor them, they threatened most
severely, and had the Impudence to add, if they had not the Leiutenant's Life,
they would have the King's; whereof his Majesty complained by Message to the
Lords, they to the Commons, and there it stuck: For sometime after when they
trudged away to cry no Bishops, as Hudibras has it, and the Lords complained
in a Conference with the Commons, of their horrible Insolency, Mr. Pim their
chief Setter cried God forbid we should proceed to dishearten People from
obtaining their just Rights; and the rest of that cursed Cabal secretly
whispered, they must not discourage their Friends, this being a time to make
use of them; which vile Abettings made them so Impudent as to threaten
White Hall too, and declare as they passed by, there should be no Porters Lodge,
but they would come to speak to the King without Control, and at their own
discretion: And when presently after there was another descent of the same
Rout, and some Opposition made upon their Attempt upon White Hall Gate, till
the Sheriffs of London and Middelsex with what Guard they could draw together,
seized, and committed some of them, the Commons immediately posted up Mr.
Hollis to the Lords, complaining 'twas a Violation of the Liberty of the
Subject, and an affront to the Parliament, and so the Good Boys must be
discharged. 'Twere too tedious to relate the several Insults of this kind, both
King and Lords were forced to put up, the Commons underhand giving them all
Encouragement imaginable, and had their Setters in the City to be ready on the
first Intimation, whereof Dr. Cornelius Burges, a Lecturing Beautifeu, was
chief, seconded by a Lay Brother one Ven, the Captain Tom of those Times; the
Dr. as he led up these Doughty Champions, was wont to look back and cry, Athen.
Oxon. Vol II. p. 236.
These are my Ban-dogs, I can set them on, and I can take them off again; by
which means, says my Author, four parts in five of the Lords, and two parts in
three of the Commons, were frighted out of the House, to leave the Faction
absolute Masters thereof. All these before unheard of Affronts to Majesty and
Government, our faithful Recorder of Memoirs takes no Notice of, but a few
honest Loyal Gentlemen, ashamed to see such abominable Insults, and therefore
coming to defend, if occasion served, their abused, ay and threatened Prince,
must pass for a Plot upon the Parliament, and they forsooth must have a Guard.
With like veracity he relates the Kingston Plot too, where the Lord Digby with
Colonel Lunsford, in a Coach and Six, and three or four Footmen attending,
passed for a Body of 500 Horse; with many such like extravagant Rumors, raised
on purpose, that their Worships might be thought to stand in need of a Guard,
whereas if such a thing was wanting it must be to Guard the King and Government
from them.

In that Divine Pourtraicture of his Majesty's Solitudes and Sufferings, there
are two Chapters, one upon the many Iealousies raised, and Scandals cast upon
the King, to stir up the People against him. The other upon the Insolences of
the Tumults, in both which he does so passionately set forth how abominably he
and his Subjects were abused by their Lies and Slanders, as would Convince, ay
and Convert too any Reprobate whatsoever, but a Republican: As to the Tumults,
how just and reasonable is that Resentment of his; I confess, says he, when I
found such a Deafness, that no Declaration from the Bishops, who were first
foully insolenc'd and assaulted; nor yet from Lords and Gentlemen of Honor,
nor yet from my self, could take Place for the due Repression of these Tumults,
and securing not only our Freedom in Parliament, but our very Persons in the
Streets; I thought my self not bound by my Presence to provoke them to higher
Boldness and Contempts; I hoped also by my withdrawing to give time both to the
Ebbing of their tumultuous Fury, and others regaining some degrees of modesty
and sober Sense. But his hopes were altogether frustrated, they persever'd at
the same Rebel rate, till, as he foretold, the Just Avenger of all Disorders,
made those Men, and that City, see their Sin, in the Glass of their Punishment,
which soon after happened in the same way they had offended.

But never was this Meteor Mob so high in Meridian Altitude, as when the five
Members were accused; it was indeed the sole Support of that cursed Cause,
without which the King had cursed them all to the Scaffold, and so sent them to
their proper Place, where all Rebellions are first laid, and in the end
Punished. Here then let us see how Ludlow palliates this Business, which being
clear Matter of Fact he had no way to flourish off but with his continued
Impudence in reflecting upon the King, whose violent Ways not succeeding, he
fell upon other Measures in appearance more moderate, etc. p. 20. and to color
his Proceedings with a Form of Law, sent Sir Edward Herbert his Attorney
General, to accuse of High Treason in the name of his Majesty, Mr. William
Stroud, etc. and Lord Kimbolton, accquainting them, that he intended to proceed
against them according to Law; and then gives us the Articles which are foul
enough, yet not exact to the Original, no where calling them Traitors, as that
justly does: But whatever he further says as to the House of Commons is
altogether a Chymera of his own, there were no Footsteps of it, in all the
Procedure. His Words are these, Upon this the House made answer to the Attorney
General, that they were the proper Judges of their own Members: That upon his
producing the Articles, if they found Cause, they would leave them to be
Proceeded against according to Law; but commanded him at his Peril not to
proceed further against them or any other Member, without their Consent. After
which they published a Declaration to the same purpose, etc. p. 24. upon which
Relation of our Author, give me leave to make these few Remarks, as first. This
Charge of the Attorney General's was given in to the House of Lords as a Court
of Judicature, whereupon they fell to Debate. 1 st, Whether this Accusation of
the Attorney General's be a regular Proceeding. 2dly, Whether there were any
such Proceedings ever before in this House. 3dly, Whether an Accusation of High
Treason may be brought against a Peer of Parliament. With some others; and yet
this blundering Fellow supposes all this to be done in the House of Commons,
and frames an Answer accordingly; but any thing will pass with the Fanatics
from a confiding Brother, who, perhaps too, will like it the better for being
Preposterous and False. 2 dly, Supposing that to be their Answer, as it was
indeed the Sense of all their Votes, Speeches, and Declarations, what Law made
them Judges of their own Members? From the beginning it was not so. Nor 3 dly,
That a Member could not be proceeded against without their leave, we have been
told, that formerly no Privileges could secure any Member from Justice for
Murder, Felony, and Treason; but now, having made Prerogative a Cipher, they
might add as many as they pleased, to Multiply what they thought fit to call
their Rights; although in order thereunto methinks they should have repealed
that scurvy Proverb, of Asking ones Fellow whether he be a Thief. 4 thly, Had
the Gentlemen accused been really Innocent, they need not have made such a
Noise and Pudder, nothing could have been a greater Baffle to his Majesty than
such an unjust Charge; the contrary is therefore to me Demonstration. 5 thly,
The Commons indeed, when the King was gone, fell upon the Attorney General, and
had him Interrogated at the Lord's Bar by a Commit of theirs, whereto his
Answer not being Satisfactory, they made some angry Resolves, but I cannot any
where find he was sent to Prison, for his Proceedings in that Matter, as Ludlow
says.

Well, the King finding the Lords afraid to burn their Fingers, by questioning
these Idols the Rabble so adored, took another Course, sent one Mr. Francis a
Sergeant at Arms to the House of Commons, to demand of them, and Arrest of High
Treason the five Members, which was done as ordered, and their Names declared;
whereupon four Members were ordered to attend his Majesty, and acquaint him,
that the Message was a matter of great Consequence, and the House would take it
into Consideration, with as much speed, as the greatness of the Business will
permit: But notwithstanding their fair Words, instead of complying herein, Sir
William Fleming and another Gentleman, who by Warrant from the King had sealed
up the Studies and Trunks of the five Members, were apprehended by Mr.
Speaker's Warrant, as Delinquents, and Ordered to remain in the Serjeant's
Custody till further Order; so that it seems they could Commit though the King
must not.

Neither of these Courses taking effect, his Majesty resolved upon a Third,
which was to go to the House, and demand them himself; which he did with all
the Tenderness and Regard imaginable; for whatever Ludlow says of 3 or 4
Hundred, and amongst them several Desperados entertained at White Hall, the
whole number did not consist of above one, the Gentlemen Pensioners in Course,
with other Lords and Gentlemen then in Attendance, or about Court, who were
commanded to move no further than the Stairs, nor offer any Violence, though
provoked; himself with the Elector Palatine only, entering in; where he found
the Birds flown, and the whole House, as soon as he was withdrawn, flew after
them into the City, with a grievous Complaint to their Protectors the Rabble,
that they could not speak and act Treason at Pleasure without being questioned
by his Majesty; in short what a prodigious Advantage the Faction made of this
just and reasonable Demand, what Outcries and Revilings followed there upon,
is altogether unimaginable, by such as were not Witnesses thereof, so that
having fixed their Party in the City, by tarrying there some Days, they
returned to Westminster, accompanied with an hideous cry of Rabble-Guards both
by Land and Water.

His Majesty seeing it was absolutely impossible to have any Justice done
against these accused Persons, who were so surely Entrenched in the Rabble's
Favor that they were out of the reach of Law; and finding also, that he was in
perpetual Danger of having his Person as well as Authority, exposed to the
daring Affronts of the deluded People, who ran up and down in Multitudes, as if
they had lost their Wits as well as Loyalty; resolved (notwithstanding several
Gallant faithful Gentlemen proffered their Service, to curb any Insolences
should be Attempted on him) to withdraw himself, and Family, Queen and
Children; hoping that Time having allayed their first Fury, they might be
brought to Reason and Temper: And whosoever reads his Majesty's Paper upon this
his going to the House of Commons, must own there was never Prince so grossly
abused, had his Actions so abominably perverted, with a total Subversion of all
Law, Justice and Reason whatsoever: Hereupon his Majesty retired to
Hampton Court, from thence to Windsor, whither none of those entertained at
White Hall repaired, except his own Family, as Ludlow basely Suggests: And
since he owns likewise the Houses, though I believe 'twas only the House of
Commons, were about to accuse the Queen of High Treason, can she be blamed to
withdraw into Holland? And if she carried the Jewels of the Crown with her,
'twas much better than to have them seized upon by the Parliament, as they did
whatever else belonged to the King, to carry on their Rebellion against him.

Ludlow tells us, That during his absence, many Papers passed between him and
the Parliament, the chief aim of those of the latter was to persuade the King
to return to London, and settle the Militia in such hands as they should
advise. Those from the King, that he could not part with the Militia, esteeming
it the best Jewel of the Crown, nor return to London with safety to his Person,
p. 27. all which is true, and that is much; as likewise that the Declarations
on both Sides proved ineffectual, wherein notwithstanding it was observed that
the King's had all the force of Law, Reason and Argument; theirs nothing but
Cant, popular Wheadles, and false Suggestions: He goes on to tell, that the
King's Designs both at home and abroad being grown Ripe, he expressed his
Dissatisfactions more openly, and withdrew to York: Had he said the Parliaments
Designs, there had been a great deal of Truth in it, for so indeed it was;
they, under pretense of a Guard, had raised a considerable Force, settled the
Militia of London and Middlesex in confiding Hands; sent down several Members
to do the like in most Counties throughout the Kingdom, could dispose of the
Money and Men raised for Ireland, to what purpose they please, and employed them
most shamefully to promote their Rebellion, seized upon his Majesty's Revenue,
Fleet, Forts, Magazins, etc. even to Hull its self, where Hotham denied him
entrance, in the Name of his Brethren, and was well rewarded by them. The King
on the other Hand was left destitute of all Things but the Hearts of Loyal
worthy Gentlemen, whereof he found more than his Enemies ever imagined; and
were not a little surprised at; with which Stock alone, and hopes of God's
Blessing upon his just Cause, he laid aside all Thoughts of Treating with
those unreasonable Men, for that he evidently saw, they resolved to seize upou
the Militia by Force, since they could not obtain it by Persuasion; and their
many fine Pretenses to Loyalty and Duty, had been only to gain Time for
ripening their Rebellion, of all which he now resolved to let the World know
how sensible he was, by Publishing his Grand Declaration from York; wherein he
says very truly, 'twas more than Time after so many Indignities to his Person,
Affronts to his Kingly Office, and traitorous Pamphlets against his Government,
to Vindicate himself from those damnable Combinations, and Conspiracies
contrived against him; giving a full Account of his own sincerity as to his
many and too gracious Concessions, since they, on the other Side perverted all
to Sedition and Treason: Amongst other Charges he brings one against an
Impudent Fellow called Sir Henry Ludlow, who said Publikly, That the King was
not worthy to be King of England, that he has no Negative Voice, that he is
fairly dealt with that he is not deposed, that if they did that, there would be
neither want of Modesty or Duty in them; upon which I shall only observe that
our Author could be no Bastard: The King there tells them further, how they
Committed his great Officers for doing their Duty: Raised an Army, and chose
Essex General, with Commission to destroy all that adhered to him. Converted
the Money given to discharge the Kingdom's Debts, and for Relief of Ireland to
carry on their Rebel-War; whilst his Levying a few Gentlemen for his Guard,
must be Voted waging War against the Parliament. Now this Declaration was too
much to the Purpose for Ludlow to take Notice of, or indeed any thing else
which gives an impartial Relation, how the Rage and Fury of those Men, engaged
the whole Nation to Lanch into a Sea of Blood. Neither does he mention how the
King went into Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, etc. to assure the Gentry of his
upright Intentions, and confirm them in their Loyalty: Only his going into
Leicestershire must be remembered, because he had a Brother there, one of the
first in Rebellion against his King, and first taken Prisoner, and better used
than he deserved.

But though Ludlow takes no Notice of the King's Declaration, he would be sure
not to omit the 19 Propositions sent by the Parliament, which it is strange he
should say were intended that they might leave no means unattempted to persuade
the King to return to them, p. 30. whereas he immediately adds, and more truly,
much of the Parliaments Intentions appeared in them, and they were in effect
the principal Foundation of the ensuing War; for which Reason he thinks it not
amiss to recite them at large; it had been more Candid, and Historian like, to
have recited the King's Answer too, so full and express, as they never thought
of any other Reply but by Essex's Army, and therefore no wonder if omitted
here. Amongst other things the King tells them, some of their Demands are in
the Style not only of Equals, but Conquerors, and tend so far to the Subversion
of this equal, well-pois'd Government as to make him from King of England, a
Duke of Venice; and this of a Kingdom a Republic: And in that which we may
call another Answer, those Divine Meditations of his, he declares, How in all
those Propositions little or nothing could be observed, of any Laws
dis-joynted, which ought to be restored; of any Right invaded, of any Justice
obstructed, of any Compensations to be made, of any impartial Reformation to be
granted; to all or any of which, Reason, Religion, and true Policy, or any
other Humane Motives might induce him: But the main Matters propounded, in
which is either great Novelty, or Difficulty, relate to what were formerly
looked upon as Factions in the State, or Schisms in the Church, and so
punishable by the Laws; though now they have the Confidence, by vulgar Clamors
and Assistance, to demand not only Toleration of themselves, in their Vanity,
Novelty, and Confusion; but also Abolition of the Laws against them; and a
total Extirpation of that Government, whose Rights they have a mind to invade.
Thus solidly did his Majesty refel the little Rebel Flourishes of the
Westminster Iunto, and therefore no wonder they were delivered to the King
without Success, they knew beforehand he had more Honor and Conscience, than
to grant them; otherwise would not have caused them, to be presented; and if he
thought as Ludlow would persuade us he did, as good terms as these might be
obtained, if reduced to the last Extremity, he had great Reason so to do, for
doubtless no one breathing did then so much as dream of, or imagine that
execrable Act, their continued draughts of Blood did in the end prompt them
unto.

In which unnatural Broils of State Parricide, and Domestic Fury as I shall
concern my self no further than this base Fellow, and his Comrades, reflect
upon the Memory of our Royal Martyr; So I cannot but observe his Design has
been all along hitherto to manage his Lies with so much Art and Cunning, as to
make the King according to the Procedure of their horrid High Court of Justice,
the first Agressor and Promoter of the War: The Parliament were as Innocent as
an Assembly of so many Devils, and desired only to do with him and his
Kingdoms, his Queeu, Children, and his Friends as they pleased, which his
Stubbornness refusing, the Charge their Insolences had assumed to themselves,
resolved to force him, as they really did, which yet he ( Ludlow) would have
turned upon them: What I shall first mention, though there are several such like
Hints before is p. 16. The King having laid his Designs in Ireland, as will
afterward appear, was not without great Difficulty, prevailed upon by the
Parliament, to consent to the Disbanding those eight Thousand Irish Papist,
that had been raised there by the Earl of Strafford: How far that Army was from
being Irish Papists will appear from this, that all the Irish Grandees of that
Persuasion, agreed with the Faction in our two Houses here to promote the
Disbanding that Army, which had it been kept on Foot, the Rebellion could not
have Succeeded there, nor consequently here. The next Instance I shall give is
p. 22. The King's violent Ways not succeeding, he fell upon other Measures in
appearance more moderate, etc. What violent Ways were these? Why those few Inns
of Court, and other Gentlemen, who proffered their Attendance to secure him
from the Insolency of the Tumults, (which this bad Man, for whom no bad Name is
bad enough) takes no Notice of, though got up to that prodigious hight as the
King could not think those, and all his other Friends able to secure him at
White Hall. In like manner upon his Majesty's demanding the Five Members, p.
25. The Parliament-sensible of this Violation of their Privileges, and fearing
they might be further entrenched upon, etc. a strong Violation that, to demand
Traitors to Justice, but 'twas their Interest to oppose it, otherwise they
might have all followed: For having related, after their many other
Usurpations, how well the Parliament approved Sir John Hotham's Conduct,
declaring he had done well in denying the King admittance into Hull, it is added
next Paragraph, p. 29. The Parliament began now to provide for the securing of
all Places; whereas there was not a Place of any Importance, they had not
secured before; even to York it self, in which, by his Majesty's too great
Passiveness, they had a Committee to observe and beard all his Undertakings.

And this brings me to the last Instance of this modest Man's Veracity, p. 38.
The King having set up his Standard at Nottingham the 24th of August, 1642, for
he tells us to a Day, and it is well he does, The Parliament thought themselves
obliged to make some Preparations to defend themselves; whereas in the
Paragraph immediately precedent, he declared how the Fire began to break out in
the West, what success the Earl of Bedford had there upon the Parliament
Account, and how the Governor of Portsmouth declaring for the King, that was
besieged and reduced by their Forces. And for a fuller Testimony of this, let
us compute the time of raising these Forces; Essex under pretense of a Guard to
the Parliament had been levying Men all that Spring; on the tenth of June the
Order past both Houses for the Citizens to bring in their Plate, to carry on
the War, which they did most zealously; on the 9th of September, Essex marched
out of London, in a great deal of Pomp, having all his Masters attending him,
16000 strong; very little more than a Fortnight after the King set up his
Standard, where there did not appear the fourth part of the forementioned
Number. But the Parliament had got that common artifice of all bad Men, to cry
Whore first, as the Proverb expresses it, inflame the Peoples Minds with
Dangers and Designs, that the King intended to levy War against them; whereas
'twas designed against the King, who most solemnly declared from York how far
his Desires, and Thoughts were from it; and had this attested by more than
forty Lords then with him, how they saw not any color of Preparations or
Counsels that might reasonably beget the Belief of any such Design; and were
fully persuaded his Majesty had no such intention: But when he understood what
preparations they were making at London, and indeed every where else, that
Hotham had denied him, Hull, and Essex was coming to take him from his Evil
Counselors, then he thought himself obliged, to make some preparations for
himself; that I may turn Ludlow's impudent Falsehood into Truth.

But suppose the King had begun sooner as it is great pity he did not, exerted
the just right of his Prerogative, and sovereign Power, against the many
encroachments they daily made, and unknown Privileges they constantly assumed,
all the Laws of God and Man would have born him out therein. For most Men of
Sense long before the Sword was drawn, clearly discovered, nothing would
satisfy them but a total Subversion of the whole Government. An honest
Gentleman expostulating with Mr. Hambden, upon the King's many Concessions what
they could expect further, he replied, they expected he should commit himself,
and all that was his to their care; an exact Moral of what the Wolves
propounded, that if the Sheep would put away their Dogs, they would be very
careful of their Preservation; and though the Proposal did not take, yet the
Design was carried on, and the Nation, most abominably worryed, the just
Judgment of Heaven giving way to the cursed credulity of an infatuated People
who could take none but Wolves for their Protectors.

As I have already declared to be no further concerned in this dismal Scene of
Blood and Slaughter than the Memory and Honor of our Royal Martyr is
concerned; so I must further add, that whatever Relations our Author makes, as
to any particular Battle, or other considerable warlike Action, is so Lame,
Partial, and False, as the Diurnals of those times (which nevertheless ly'd
most abominably on each side) may pass for Authentic History, in comparison
with him. But then for his own dear Self, as to the Defense of Warder Castle,
and other little Achievements in Willshire, and elsewhere, (in which too,
generally, his rashness brought him by the Lee) the account he gives is so vain
and fulsome, trivial and tedious, that it is hard to resolve whether he makes
the greater Discovery of his Pride, or Folly, to be sure they are both very
transcendent. The Vindicator of Ol. Cr. exposes him very briskly for those many
impertinent Panigyricks upon himself, and will have it a plain Demonstration,
of the Narrowness of his Soul and the Lowness of his Genius; and I fancy, he
might have added, the Insolency of his Temper. To confirm what I said of a lame
and partial Account of Things, his Relation of that first Battle at Edgehill
is a full Testimony, where this Man of Iron owns himself at a loss from his
Troop, at the beginning, and tells little but his own wanderings up and down to
find them: Yet by all means the Victory must be theirs, and there was a great
Defect somewhere, the Fight was not renewed next Day, whereas such as were in
it had enough the Day before; and he intimates as much by saying, that Prince
Rupert, taking advantage of the Disorder our own Horse had put the Foot into,
pressed upon them with such Fury, that he put them to Flight. And then adds, If
the time which he spent in pursuing them too far, and plundering the Wagons,
had been employed in taking such Advantages as offered themselves in the Place
where the Fight was, it might have proved more serviceable to the carrying on
the Enemies Designs, p. 50. Which is very modestly expressed because to the
King's prejudice, otherwise he might have said, had not the Prince been guilty
of that gross oversight, Neglect, or Rashness, for 'twas all in one, that Day
had in great Probability, put an end to the Dispute; the Army had never
returned to their Masters at Westminster, nor our Author any occasion to
trouble the World with the impertinency of his Memoirs: for to speak-freely,
yet nothing but Truth, the Princes indescretions of that Kind, his great
Courage, and little Conduct, in whatsoever Battles he engaged in, conduced more
to the discomfiture of the King's just Cause, than all the Rebel Forces, or
whatever other Arm of Flesh appeared against him, as may be further on observed.

However that their Advantage was not considerable, appears from what he
further adds, that the Army returned to London, not like Men that had obtained
a Victory, but as if they had been beaten, p. 52. which is a shrewd
Circumstance that they were so, and to that he joins another every way as
considerable; upon the King's advance with part of his Army to Maydenhead, or
there abouts (for it was really Colebrook, and those seven Miles were a
considerable Addition to his approach) the Parliament sent to him, to assure
him their earnest Desire to prevent the effusion of more Blood, and to procure
a right understanding between his Majesty and them. A certain Omen they were
not much transporteed with the Victory, this being the first last time, they
began a Motion for Peace: He goes on, The King professed in his Answer to
desire nothing more, upon which they thought themselves secure; whereas the
next Day he took the Advantage of a Mist, and Marched within half a Mile of
Brandford before discovered, etc. p. 53. and beat off what Forces were there;
though he tells us they made a brave Defense. This coming by way of surprise,
he calls Treachery, and all the Roundheads about Town made a loud Clamor upon
the King's forfeiture of his Royal Word; whereas upon enquiry all the Trick and
Treachery was on their side; for as they propounded no Cessation of Arms in
their Petition, so the King had News brought, that Essex was drawing his
Forces, and Ordinance out of London toward him, so that without seizing
Brandford, their Forces at Windsor, Kingston, and Acton, might have hemmed him
in, and his Army deprived both of Moveing, or Subsisting: So that after a
tedious Paper Scuffle upon the Matter, the Parliament were forced to own, That
they gave direction to the Earl of Essex to draw the Army out of London, and
that part of it was at Brandford whilst the Committee was with the King; and
conscious to themselves of a just exception cautiously add, That they sent a
Messenger to know whether his Majesty intended forbearance of Hostility, but he
found them in fight, and could not pass Brandford. So that having kept up the
Ferment among their City Gulls by the forementioned Slander, which our impudent
Author calls the treacherous Design of the late Expedition, they again sent
Propositions to Oxford, being the same in effect with those delivered at York,
but they found no better Reception than the others had done, p. 56. Neither did
they expect otherwise, or indeed desire, considering the insolency of their
Demands, which the King tells them in his Answer, Had he not given up all the
Faculties of his Soul to an earnest endeavor of Peace and Reconciliation etc.
he could not but resent their heavy Charges, and not suffer the Reproaches cast
upon him: The whole procedure of that Treaty may be seen in Whitlock's Memoirs,
who treats the King like a Gentleman, and speaks Truth where himself was
concerned, for neither of which this our Brute has the least Regard, nay seems
wilfully to defy both. I must not here omit what that scribbling Fellow, K. Chapter
No Saint, nor Martyr, alleges; That he took a most Bloody and Treacherous
Advantage of the Parliament's Army near Colebrook, whilst he was under Treaty
at Uxbridge with them, p. 4. whereas the Treaty at Uxbridge was more than Two
Years after. Would the present Age be content with such licentious Impudence to
Characterise, and expose them in the next?

In this Year 43 our Governor of Warder Castle before he falls upon his great
Charge, and weighty Achievements there, gives a cursory Relation of what
passed in other Parts. In the Spring, he says, our Army was Master of the
Field; The King making it his Business to be on the defensive, till the Queen
should arrive with an Army to his assistance, p. 58. and when her Army was come
with other Necssaries of War, the King was in the hopefullest Condition of the
whole Four Years, for so long the contest was in dispute; and had there not
been Neglect, Treachery, or both, amongst his Councils, either of State or War,
he had unnestled the Rebels at London, and put a final End to any further
Bloodshed, but what in due course of Law such Villainies deser'vd. In relating
how the Earl of Essex took Reading, it must not be omitted that Sir Arthur
Ashton a Papist was Governor thereof, to which I shall add that Sir Arthur had
been brought up a Soldier in Foreign Wars, a Person of good Experience, who as
soon as he found we were running into his Bloody Profession, proffered his
Service to the King, more than once, who as often replied, that the Faction had
brought such a Slander upon him in reference to those of his Persuasion, it
would much prejudice his Cause to employ him: at length he came to the King and
showed him a Letter, wherein Essex profferd him a Command in the Parliament
Army, and told his Majesty plainly that he was a Soldier of Fortune, and that
if he could not be entertained on the one side, he would betake himself to the
other; and by this Means he became Governor of Reading: for the Parliament, as
they had several Papists in their Service, so 'twas nothing but a vile Interest
made them reject the rest, force them into the King's Quarters, that they might
have the benefit of their Estates, and the King the Odium of their Company. In
the mean while I would gladly know whether a Loyal Papist be not a better Man,
ay and Christian too, than a Rebel Protestant; to be sure Ludlow and his Gang
agreed with them in the most exploded, and pernicious Doctrine, was ever laid
to their Charge, and what but few of them, and that very clandestinely have
maintained, viz. that of Deposing, and Murdering Kings; for which Reason I look
upon him, as a baser Man than Friar Jacob, or Ravillac, and the whole set of
Regicides, the most abominable Assembly that ever met, since the Scribes and
Pharisees preferred Barabbas; to be sure they brought upon the Reformation the
greatest Reproach Hell its self could suggest, and yet for ought I see not only
the Reproach but the Practice is like to continue.

Though Essex was Master of the Field in Spring, the King had the Command all
Summer, his Forces making so great a Progress in the West as to take Exeter,
Bristol, and many other considerable places, give a total defeat to Sir Will.
Waller at Devizes, and so cleared all those Parts from any Enemy in a Body, as
indeed they had none at London; hereupon it was debated in several Councils, of
War and private Cabals, whether was best, to march directly thither or to stay
and take Gloucester first, the only place of any considerable Strength, which
remained to the Enemy in those Parts; the general Vogue went for the March, and
very considerable Reasons urged for it, both Essex's, and Waller's Armies, were
crumbled away, the City of London in Mutiny, an Insurrection in Kent for the
King, the Lords voting a Treaty, and the Commons in dismal Frights. On the
other side it was urged how ill it would look to leave such a place behind
them, that 'twas ill situated, and not well fortified, or provided with Men, so
that a few Days would certainly make the King Master thereof, long before the
Enemy could get a Recruit, much less March so far to relieve it: Of this
Persuasion was Prince Rupert, and most of the Swordmen, which made some
suspect they feared the War would be done too soon, and were the more confirmed
therein, for that the Siege was carried on at such a slow rate; so that after a
whole Month of precious time lost, and Essex appearing unexpectedly with a
considerable Army, they were forced to raise the Siege. I have been told a
Passage much credited by honest Gentlemen in those times; that a little before
the King made that fatal halt, a certain Peer finding Essex very pensive in the
Lords Lobby, asked him how Affairs went? He replied, very ill, and they must be
all ruined, unless the King could be induced to lie down before Gloucester,
which he hoped by one Engine to bring about; what or who that Engine was the
World is yet to learn; but that there were too many such about his Majesty,
appeared in most undertakings he engaged in. Neither was the Battle upon their
Retreat, at Newberry, so advantagiously managed as it might have been, for the
Royal Army having happily got Possession of the Town, and consequently stood in
their way to London, should have been wholly upon the Defensive, so placed
their Artillery, and lined the Hedges, that the difficulty should have been on
the Enemy's side to force their Passage, which they must either have done or
starved, for to my certain information, in the Village where they were obliged
to stop two Miles West of the Town they had neither Bread, nor Drink, not
so much as Water, it having been a dry Season, the Ponds were little else than
Puddle, the Springs low, and the few Wells so soon drained, as several Officers
did proffer a handful of Money for a Pint of clear Water; so that it must be
right down Grinning Honor, as Hudibras terms it, which put the Cavaliers upon
attacquing them in their thick Hedges, or otherwise coming within reach of
their Cannon, which let alone, they must have tried to Eat; yet at this rate
Things were carried till having lost a great many Noble and Brave Gentlemen,
and their Ammunition almost Spent, they withdrew into the Town, and set the
Enemy a free return, more than they expected, or to be sure deserved.

Our Author ends this Year with bringing in the Scots, and relates how prettily
Sir Henry Vane tricked them, In removing the last and greatest difficulty,
about some doubtful Words in the Covenant which was to be taken by both
Nations, concerning the Preservation of the King's Person, and reducing the
Doctrine and Discipline of both Churches to the Pattern of the best Reformed;
For which Sir H. found an expedient, by adding to the first Clause, In
preservation of the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject: And to the
second, According to the Word of God, p. 79. and by this Evasion looked upon
themselves as obliged by neither, but left free to Murder their King, and use
the Covenant as it deserved. He says likewise that for their, the Scots
Encouragement, the Lords and Commons sentenced, and caused Execution upon
William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, their Capital Enemy. Which
nevertheless was not till that time Twelvemonth; however done it was, and
perhaps thought a very Christian act, by such as had nothing thereof. And here
to put his Murders together, we are also told Sir John Hotham and his Son,
were condemned to lose their Heads, for they could make Treason in reference to
themselves at pleasure, though the King was not to be heard upon the justest
Accusation; yet this is certain, had not they acted that Treason against the
King, there could have been no occasion for the Parliaments pretenses. Sir
Alexander Carew was also beheaded for endeavoring to betray Plymouth;
whereupon I must relate this passage, that Worthy Brave Gentleman Sir Bevill
Greenvil, was Knight of the Shire for Cornwall, with this Sir Alexander, and
upon the Earl of Strafford's Business, came to him with this request; I pray
Sir Alexander let it not be said the Representatives of our County, had any
thing to do in the Blood of this Great Man; Whereto he replied with much
earnestness, I will vote for the Bill, though sure my Head were to be Cut off
on the same Block, which accordingly fell out. Could the Fanatics meet with
any thing like such Instances of Divine Vengeance on the other side, what a
Noise would they make? what an Annus Mirabilis should we be plagued withal?

In this following Year 44. Ludlow scarce finds occasion to make one Invective
against his Majesty; the Misfortune, or as he would have it Mismanagement of
their own Affairs, took up all the Gall he had to vent, though very well stored
therewith: For now I perceive the Independent, Commonwealth Party both in
House and Army, began to pique at Essex; indeed all the Nobility, in Command,
and most of the Presbyterians, as Linsy-woolsy Brothers, which did their
Business by halfs. His greatest Disgust is that Essex and Waller divided their
Army, yet owns that Waller had the more Forces when routed at Cropredy-Bridge;
and the King's Forces were very prevalent in the West, so that the Design was
laid well enough, only the forementioned Rout gave the King an Opportunity of
following Essex, to his total Defeat in Cornwall; where his Majesty was put upon
another most destructive Halt, in lying down before Plymouth, and not marching
up to London, by which Delay the two shattered Armies had time to recruit, and
the Foot which the King had seized in Cornwall, being discharged upon Condition,
never to take Arms against him more, were absolved by Calamy, and the other
Presbyterian Jesuits, and so took up Arms again, which ( Ludlow commends for an
Heroic Act,) and fought like perjured Villains, who knew they ought to be
hanged if taken. But the greatest Prejudice to his Majesty's Affairs this Year,
was Prince Rupert's rash Conduct, and consequent Defeat at Marston Moor, which
lost most of the North, and gave part of the Rebel Army leisure to return, and
obstruct his Majesty's further Progress in the West: The two Armies meeting, a
second time about Newberry, where the King relieved Denington Castle, and
proffered Battle: But the Rebel Generals disagreeing amongst themselves, it was
not accepted; whereupon he Marched to Oxford; and they, dispersing their Army
to London. His Majesty upon both his Successes, at Cropredy Bridge, and in
Cornwall, sent Overtures of Peace to the Men at Westminster, which were coldly
received; yet being further pressed by him from Oxford, they could not but
comply, to have a Treaty at Uxbridge, but to little Purpose; for though the
King's Commissioners consented to many Particulars, and Alterations of great
Importance, the others would not abate one tittle, but insisted peremtorily
upon the Parliaments first Propositions, which were an Absolute, Dissolution of
all Old Establishments, indeed the whole Frame of Government, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil: So that all Ludlow's Flourish upon this Occasion is
false, and mentioned only to express his continued Spite at the Church, as if
the Treaty came to nothing upon that sole Account, that the Proposition
concerning Episcopacy was rejected; p. 150. whereas they were as positive, in
reference to the Militia, Ireland, and whatever else came under Debate. It had
likewise been a great Omission in such a foul-mouthed Fellow as himself, to
have passed by, what that Lecturing Beautifeu Love preached in the Town whilst
the Treaty was on Foot, although every Word he says of the Matter is as false,
as what the other preached; for first he was not Chaplain attending the
Parliament's Commissioners; for when the King's Commissioners complained of his
Treasonable Insolence, they answered he was not of their Train; neither in the
Second Place is it probable the Preachment was before the Commissioners, for it
was a Lecture, on the Market Day, and they had something else to attend. Nor
Thirdly, were the Words spoken as he relates, that the King was a Man of Blood,
etc. they were not come to that height of Impudence, till the Independents were
Trump, and the King in their Hands, and therefore as it was related, when
complained of, the Words run thus, That the Commissioners came with Hearts full
of Blood, and there was as great distance between this Treaty, and Peace, as
Heaven and Hell. I shall only add further, that when Ludlow and his Accomplices
had murdered the King, and assumed the Power, they cut off Love's Head, though
upon another Account; yet not without the just Reflections of many, as a
retaliating Vengeance, for his Seditions, and Bloody Disposition, with so much
Untruth and Impudence, vented here.

We are come now to that unhappy Year 45. wherein Ludlow according to his no
Divinity, would have Judgment given against the King, by that Power to which
both Parties had made their solemn Appeal; for though indeed it put an End to
the Fighting Part between King and Parliament, yet thereby the Nation did but
Triumph over its self, and perish, as Rome of Old, suis and ipsa viribus; the
two forementioned Factions being the more at leisure, to foment their Feuds,
and multiply those Distractions, which the People now saw, and were sorry for,
but could not prevent. The first Onset the Independents gave the other Iunto,
was the Self-denying Ordinance, which our Author handles very Tenderly, yet
cannot forbear to let us know. By this means the Earl of Essex, Manchester, and
Sir William Waller, were laid aside, the latter rather to show their
Impartiality, than from any distrust of him, he having never discovered to that
Time, any Inclination to favor the King's Cause, p. 146. The Truth of it is,
the two former were sensible, with several of their Confederates, to how
deplorable a Condition they had brought Affairs, sed revocare gradum; but to
set them right, heal the Wounds, repair the Breaches they had made, 'twas as
much beyond their Power, as to get to Heaven.

Neither is it without something of malicious Satisfaction that he mentions,
about the same time the Parliament made Sir Thomas Fairfax General, the King
made Prince Rupert so of his Forces, notwithstanding his late ill Success at
Marston Moor, Short Life of K. Chapter by P. H.
p. 148. whereto I find a much honester Man adding, his apparent want of Age,
Experience and Conduct for so great a Trust. I say this was probably mentioned
with no little Satisfaction, because that Prince's Rashness, and Indiscretion,
contributed more than any one Thing, to their cursed Success at the fatal
Naseby, which he gives an Account of with great Insult; but what he adds, that
it was the more astonishing, because obtained by Men of little Experience in
Affairs of that Nature, and upon that Account despised by their Enemies, is
false; besides several Old Soldiers, there were few or none but had had the
Experience of three Years War, and if that will not inform any Man of Sense, I
would advise him to follow some more innocent Employment: Neither were they
despised by their Enemy, but looked upon as the best Body of Men the Parliament
ever had together; notwithstanding which, had not Prince Rupert given Cromwell
the same Advantage here, as before at Marston-Moor, it might have proved the
Deciding Battle to the King.

But what Completed the Triumph to their unworthy, mean-spirited Souls, was
the taking his Majesty's Cabinet, with several Letters in it, most of them to
the Queen, which they Published to their eternal Reproach, and this Fellow with
like Baseness revives here again. The Grecians in their Wars with Philip of
Macedon, a Foreign Prince, and most unjust Usurper upon his Neighbors, having
intercepted a Packet of his Letters, of the rest indeed they made what use
they could, but those to his Queen, they never offered to open, but sent them
back with all Respect, and Tenderest regard imaginable; how much those Heathen
Greeks out-did our Christian Barbarians is very unhappy to reflect: Yet not at
all strange that Ludlow should continue the same inhumane way of Procedure,
it is as Natural to him as Poison to a Toad, although he is much put to it, to
find any thing there which may feed that base Humor; what he urges of the Lord
Digby's Letter, that the Design of making War upon the Parliament, was therein
discovered to be early, is absolutely false, p. 154. for it was after the
Tumults had forced the King from White Hall; the Parliament had fixed their
Guards, and were securing the Militia, etc. and then `twas time for his Majesty
to consult his Friends, and look to himself. But I find our Author very forward
to catch at every thing which may tend in the least to make the King first
Aggressor, wherein his many Fetches have as ill Success, as that of the
Commission with Sir Phelim Oneal. He adds, besides the many Printed, others of
no less Consequence were suppressed, as I have been informed, by some of those
that were entrusted with them, who since the King's return have been rewarded
for it, p. 156. The little Truth herein stands thus: A Person employed by the
Parliament to uncypher those Letters, found several Figures he could not
compass, and so was forced to let them stand; and to save his Bacon upon the
Restaration, alleged it a designed Omission in regard to his Majesty's Honor
and Reputaution, which nevertheless few or none believed, he being then as
zealous and forward in the Faction as any, though to so little Purpose, as he
has, since run into the contrary Extreme of as great Indifferency; neither do
I believe he had any other reward, than what the General Indemnity obliged him
with; which was too much to a great many, unless they had made more grateful
Returns.

But whatever was really writ, or their venomous Rancor think fit to Comment
thereupon, all Men of Honor and Virtue must acknowledge, what his Majesty writ
to Secretary Nicholas, and published in a Declaration upon that Account, that
the Papers contain nothing an honest Man, or good Protestant may blush at, yet
would fain know that Person, who would be willing the Freedom of his private
Letters should be publicly seen, as mine have been, however (so that one
Clause be rightly understood) I care not so the rest take their Fortune; it is
concerning the Mongrel Parliament. The Truth is, the Earl of Sussex his
Factiousness at that time, put me somewhat out of Patience, which made me
freely vent my Displeasure against those of his Party, to my Wife, etc. This
Expression I find Ludlow and his Fellow Libellers more than once carping at,
which yet cannot be stretched further than that some cross-grained Dispositions
might be among them, who having some Ferment of the Westminster Leven, halted
between both Parties, for whom no Epithet could be more proper than that of
Mongrel, and with too many such the King was plagued: Upon the whole there was
no one thing exposed the Factions more to Obloquy and Scorn than this unworthy
Act, all their own Party, who had any regard for Modesty and good Manners were
ashamed of it; and such as more narrowly looked into things, observed there
such a Royal Mixture of Good Nature, and Great Judgment, as considering him in
those several Respects of Husband, Father, Master, or King, it would be hard to
find his Parallel: Afterward when at too much leisure, in his Confinement, he
penned that Excellent Meditation of his, upon this their inhumane Usage, which I
fancy few of them ever dared to read, for fear Remorse and Guilt should oblige
themselves to supply the Place both of Judge and Executioner.

Upon these two great Victories over his Majesty's Army, and Honor, as this
worst natured Fellow of the whole Rebellion, would have it thought, he goes on
to relate, the great Successes their Forces daily met with, and having
mentioned as many as he could call to Mind, adds by way of Insult, with diverse
others of less Importance, and therefore unnecessary to be mentioned here. The
Truth of it is, the King was never able to weather that dismal Storm which
scattered him so at Naseby; though he himself made several Noble Efforts, for
having the remains of his broken Horse recruited out of several Garrisons, he
marched up and down to encourage such Loyal Souls as changed not their Faith
with his Condition; which alas were too few; for the Parliament having made
Propositions in order to a Composition for Delinquents Estates; it is incredible
what a Number flocked in, and how deservedly they were Cheated, every Days new
Success producing new Qualifications, whereby some were to forfeit a Third
Part, others a Moyity of their Estates, and all upon this Condition, that they
should cordially submit, and take the National Covenant appointed by Ordinance
of Parliament; and therefore it was observed that such as stood out and yielded
not but by force upon their Garrisons, obtained much better Terms from the
Commanders and Generals, than others found from those Sneaking Fellows at
Westminster, who indeed would be sometimes angry at it, especially the Oxford
Articles; but the Army beginning to grow Masterless, they must begin to let
them have their Humor. Things standing thus, and his Majesty failing in the
Relief of Chester, and hearing the Lord Digby was defeated in his March with a
Body of Horse to the Noble Montross, who did Wonders in Scotland: Finding
likewise great Disorders amongst his Officers at Newark, where his two Nephews
failed much of their Duty and Respect; and his Council at Oxford, either gone to
make their Peace, or in such Confusion as not able to advise him; the Rebel
Army being just ready to Besiege that his chief Garrison, he was forced to make
a Virtue of Necessity, and once more try the Sincerity of his Ancient and
Native Subjects the Scots.

CHAP. IV. Of the King in Custody of the Scots and English.
THE King's being withdrawn from Oxon, and not known whither gone, made a mighty
Disturbance amongst the Grandees at Westminster; Ludlow tells us, they
suspected he might design to come to London, to raise a Party against them,
publishing an Ordinance, that whosoever should harbor or conceal the King's
Person, should be Proceeded against as a Traitor to the Commonwealth; p. 176.
By what Law this I beseech you? The truth of it is, the Expenses and other
Mischiefs by the War, had made the City so sensible of their former
Infatuations; that 'twas generally believed had the King appeared amongst them,
the Rabble as well as more sensible Part of Men, would have endeavored their
utmost to set him upon his Throne; but it is easier to pull down, than build up,
to make, than retrieve, Alterations, as appeared afterward when the Army so
tamely rid them. But in few Days they were freed from that Suspicion, though
not more surprised at his Loss, than to find him in the Scotch Hands, who would
be sure to make the best of so good a Prise. There had been no small Contrasts
between them and their English Brethren before, who finding the fighting Work
nigh over, were desirous to be quit of some of their own Forces, much more of
such troublesome, and chargable Hirelings: The Scots on the other Side, as
Ludlow tells us, repeated their Instances, for a Consideration of the Articles
of Religion contained in the Covenant, to give a speedy Peace to his Majesty,
to pay them near two hundred thousand Pounds, which they pretended to be due
for their Arrears, and make a just Estimate of the Losses they had sustained by
Land and Sea, etc. which they computed at more than the former Sum, p. 174. He
goes on to relate, how the Parliament thought it not convenient to comply with
the King's Propositions; demanded an exact Account of what was due to them, and
required that they would withdraw their Garrisons from such Places as they
possessed in England. Some differences he says likewise there were with the
Scotch Commissioners, about the King's Concern in the Militia; their
intermedling with the Government of England, the Education of the King's
Children, the disbanding the Army, and an Act of Oblivion; in which Matters the
Parliament would not have the Scots to interpose; and by degrees the Debates
grew so warm, as there being found in those Demands of the Scots some
Expressions very much reflecting upon the Parliament, the two Houses declared
them to be Injurious and Scandalous, and ordered them to be Burnt by the Hands
of the Common Hangman, p. 175. During these Controversies the Scotch Army
continued in the Northern Parts upon free Quarter, at an abominable rate
harressing the Poor People to the utmost Extremity; till after some Month's
Time, Matters being accommodated a little for the present, upon the Advance of
30000. l. with Shoes, Stockings and other Necessaries; they were prevailed
upon to Besiege Newark, at which Leaguer the King came to them, just as
Articles of Surrender were agreed upon, and so the more at leisure to march off
with him to Newcastle, for it is false what Ludlow affirms, that the King soon
after his Arrival in the Scots Quarters, gave Order for the Delivery of Newark
into their Hands; the Articles were agreed upon before the King came thither,
or his Friends in the Garrison dreamt thereof; however it happened very
Opportunely for the Scots to march off with their Royal Purchase, and prevent
the Clamors from their Brethren at Westminster, who as Ludlow tells us,
forthwith sent an Order to their Commissioners in the Scots Army to demand the
Person of the King, judging it unreasonable that the Scots being in their Pay,
should dispose of him otherwise than by their Order; resolving further that he
should be Conducted to Warwick Castle, and the next Day commanded their Army to
advance, in Order to hinder the Conjunction of the King's Forces with the
Scots, p. 176. Whereof doubtless they were sore afraid, it is pity they were
not hurt, the Scots by that one Act might have expiated all their former
Perfidy, but to expect that, had been to wash a Blackamore, so Blessed a good
was not to, be thought of from those accustomed so much to the worst of Evils,
Rebellion and Sacrilege; and therefore it is probable it gave them some ease to
hear, that though Levens the Scotch General, had marched with the King to
New Castle, he had by Proclamation forbidden his Forces to have any
Communication with the King's Party; and thereupon only ordered that the Scots
should keep him for the English Parliament, and so they did, but must pay a
round Sum of Money, before they should have him.

We are next to see what Entertainment the King had among the Scots, who though
they pretended to be much surprised, as Ludlow tells us, yet afterward it
appeared that this Resolution had been Communicated to them before, p. 116. The
Truth of it is, Montrevil a French Ambassador or Agent in the Scotch Camp, had
adjusted the Matter with Levens, and other General Officers, who engaged to
secure him, and as many of his Party as should seek for Shelter with them, and
to stand to him with their Lives and Fortunes: Yet in that excellent Meditation
his Majesty, penned upon this Occasion, it is owned a forced Push, where
Necessity was his Counselor, in an Adventure upon their Loyalty, who first
began his Troubles, for which Reason he studied to fortify his Mind, so as not
to offer up his Soul's Liberty, or make his Conscience their Captive; but no
less conform his Words to his inward Dictates now, than if they had been, as
the Words of a King ought to be amongst Loyal Subjects full of Power: And Good
Prince he was soon put to his Trial, for though the Committee of Estates at
Edingburgh, upon the first Notice of his being in their Hands, sent
Commissioners, with great Expressions of their Duty, and good Intentions,
protesting how dear the Preservation of his Sacred Person, and his just Power
and Greatness should ever be to them, yet their Actions immediately spoke the
contrary, as if all were intended with the tacit Condition of a Covenant Clog,
and such harsh Usage as might bring, or force him thereto, for within few Days
the King called both the chief Officers of the Army, and the Commissioners sent
out of Scotland, and in presence of Monsieur de Montrevil did Expostulate; That
whereas he did come to their Army upon the Assurances Monsieur Montrevil had
given him, that he should be safe in his Person, Honor and Conscience, the two
last were not kept; for he was pressed to settle Religion as they desired,
wherewith his Conscience was not satisfied: Next his Subjects had not free
access to him, but Proclamations were issued out, forbidding them to come to
him; neither was the Ceremony due to him as King, suffered to be paid him at
his entry to New Castle: And lastly his Servants were not suffered to wait on
him. And his Majesty attested Montrevil, if those Conditions were not made to
him, who confidently affirmed it in all their Presence, and that he had the
Authentic Assurances in French. The Commissioners retired to think of an
Answer; but when they returned they desired his Majesty would put Montrevil to
it, to declare what those Assurances were, and who gave them; but this was not
done. Next they said, they would not treat with the King in his Presence, nor
admit the Interposition of any Foreign Agent, between them and their Native
Prince. And the Commissioners of the Army resolved, that no suspected Person
should be suffered to wait on the King, with which his Majesty was highly
displeased, and for some Days would not eat in Public, but only in his Chamber.

This last Passage I have from an unexceptionable Authority, whose Affection to
his Native Country could give Place to nothing but Truth, and therefore he
seems to palliate the Matter a little on their behalf; that Montrevil did not
declare what the Assurances were, nor who gave them, which yet seems not to be
his Fault, for that they fully resolved against his Presence and Interposition
for the future in any such like Affairs. And upon the same account, he declares
further on, it did not appear what Grounds Montrevil had for giving the King
those Assurances, and must be very slight, and only from single Persons, not
any Iunto or Iudicatory, Such a secret Transaction could not be done with all
the Formalities of a Solemn Treaty, yet doubtless Montrevil had his Assurances
from Levens with most of the other General Officers, and Scotch Commissioners
then before Newark, which was a considerable Iunto; and I humbly conceive
Iudicatories have little to do in concerns of that Nature. But it had been all
one though never so exactly drawn up, and would have been as little observed,
as the first Pacification, or last promise, of never drawing Sword against him
more.

But my particular Business is to trace Ludlow, who tells us, The Commissioners
of Parliament joining with those who were before with the King, endeavored to
persuade him to agree to the Propositions of the Parliament; but he disliking
several Things in them, and most of all the abolition of Episcopacy, to which
Interest he continued obstinately steadfast, refused his consent, upon private
Encouragement from some of the Scots and English, to expect more easy Terms, or
to be received without any at all, p. 183. The Encouragement he mentions is
only a Flam of his own, the Scots kept too strict a Guard upon him, to have any
but his Enemies to converse with; nay, which is worse, they obliged him to
discharge all his Friends then in Arms, not only here in England, but Montross
in Scotland, and Ormond in Ireland. Neither was the Abolition of Episcopacy the
main Obstacle although it was hard, when he alone by himself had so shamefully
bafled their great Champion Henderson upon that Subject, to be so violently
pressed from a Truth they could so little disprove. But setting aside this
Fellow's Spite, who would needs make this the chief obstacle, the King in his
brisk Answer to the whole body of their Propositions from Newcastle August. 1.
46. tells them, They were such as did import the greatest Alterations in
Government both in Church and Kingdom; yet these were positively sent for his
Majesty's Concurrence, without allowing the Commissioners to give Reasons for
their Demands, or the hearing the King's Reasons against them, which occasioned
his smart Reply upon their saying, They had no Power to treat that, saving the
Honor of the Business, an honest Trumpeter might have done as much. To these
Propositions, Ludlow tells us, the Scots Commissioners, especially Lord Lowdon,
pressed the King very earnestly to comply; telling him that though they were
higher in some Particulars than they could wish, yet if he continued to reject
them, he must not expect to be received in Scotland, whither they must return,
and deliver him up to the Parliament in England. But whatever they or the
English said made no impression, etc. p. 184. The Truth of it is after all the
Scotch Rodomantades, Lowdon's in particular, how much it was against the Laws
of Nature, Nations and Hospitality, to Deliver, and betray those that had fled
to any for Succor; their Brethren at Westminster knew how much there was of
Judas amongst them, and having reduced their demand of a Million, to 400000 l.
agreed upon the Payment of one Moiety, and the Public Faith for the other, to
have the King Delivered to them, Upon the Scots Delivery the K.
who good Man laments that his Price should be so much above his Saviors. And
to clear himself from the base Reflections they made upon his Steady, well
grounded Resolves, he declares what they call Obstinacy, I know God accounts
honest Constancy, from which, Reason and Religion, as well as Honor forbid me
to recede. For you must know the Scots, whilst in their Hands, not only
permitted, but encouraged the most Rigid of their Kirkmen, to bait him at an
impudent Rate, as well from the Pulpit as otherwise, as positively denouncing
him damned for refusing the Covenant, as it is to be feared, might fall to their
lot, for forcing it.

In the next Paragraph, p. 186. Ludlow Commenceth a Quarrel with all the World
both at Home and abroad; for upon the French Embassador's coming over to
endeavor a Reconciliation between King and Parliament, he tells you how it was
rejected, they resolving to determine it themselves without the interposition of
any (an infallible sign of a just Cause, where no body but themselves must
Judge) having experienced that most of the Neighboring States, especially the
Monarchical, were at the bottom their Enemies. That they were not their Friends
was certain, but that they should be so little their Enemies, was a great
Shame, that so many Crowned Heads should stand by and see a Brother Monarch,
Dethroned and Murdered at so barbarous a rate, was a Sign that which is called
Ancient Honor was at a very low Ebb, and the Sacro-Sancta Mrjestas left
destitute of all Appeal but to the King of Kings, who for ought we know may be
still making Inquisition for that Blood, this Son of Belial so much thirsted
after, and never at rest till poured forth: and therefore henceforward it is his
sole Business to enveigh against all that would not go along with him, and his
Crew, in that horrid Perpetration; first he falls upon the Parliament, for
their frequent Overtures of Peace made to the King, though he had not a Sword
left wherewith to oppose them, p. 187. The Overtures were not frequent, or if
so, always the same, and totally destructive of all old Establishments without
condescending to debate or alter any thing. And for his not having a Sword
left, denotes our Author to be of the same Principle with that Atheist, Virgil
so judiciously exposes for his Dextra mihi Deus; because they depended upon the
Sword, must it follow the King had no other Right? To be sure they found it a
very precarious Title, for the same Sword which set them up, more than once
pulled them down, and after all, Right took place of the several Usurping
Powers, and it will be never found so in the end. But what makes him the more
out of Humor, is the Peoples expectation of the King's return to the
Parliament, being informed the Presbyterian Heads had promised the Scots, that
as soon as they had disbanded the Army they would bring him to London in Honor
and Safety: The People might expect, and certainly did desire this, but whoever
observed the Presbyterians deportment both in Scotland, and here, how
obstinately they adhered to their Covenant Rigours; and how conscientiously
positive the King was to the contrary, could see little hopes of an Accord.
These Things, he says, made the People ready to conclude, that though his
Designs had been wonderfully defeated, his Armies beaten out of the Field, and
himself delivered into the Hands of the Parliament, against whom he had made a
long and Bloody War; yet certainly he must be in the Right; and that though he
was guilty of the Blood of many Thousands, yet was still unaccountable, in a
Condition to give Pardon, and not in need to receive any: which made them flock
from all Parts to see him as he was brought from Newcastle to Holmby, falling
down before him, bringing their Sick to be touched by him, and courting him as
only able to restore to them their Peace and Settlement. This really was the
Temper of the People at that time, who now fully discovered those Mists, and
Misrepresentations, wherewith the Factions had so long amused them; and were
very earnest to have the King reestablish'd, that they might be once more so,
in that abundance of all things, they even wantonis'd in, when under his sole
Government. 'Twas likewise well known to them that a violent Party in
Parliament forced the King to stand upon his own Defense; and when to make an
Invasion upon all his just Rights and Prerogatives, they had opened an Issue of
Blood, how incessantly did he endeavor to stop it, by Messages and Overtures
of Treaty, and Peace? which like so many deaf Adders, he could never Charm them
into: and as at the time he is now upon, there was not one in many Thousands
had the impudence to charge the King with beginning the War, and the Effusion
of Blood thereupon, so those few that did, knew or believed the contrary,
(amongst whom our Ludlow is chief) but could not otherwise carry on that
execrable Design, the Devil had so thoroughly engaged them in; and this makes
our Author so forward to inveigh against all the rest of his Partisans, whom
either Shame, Guilt, or Sense of their Countries Desolation, had caused to
desist, or desire an Accommodation, as Men of a neutral Spirit, who would not,
Cataline like, add to their former Evils, the total Ruin of the Nation, for
that was it is, then real Condition, the King their Prisoner, and the whole
Kingdom their Slaves; and that decisive Judgment from Heaven, by which alone
they claimed their Power, was no other than what a Gang of Highway Robbers may
pretend to, which in several Sets, the just Vengeance of Heaven, suffered to
harress this proud and foolish People, till in the end they were broke quite in
Pieces, some of them Hanged, though not enough, by our Author at least, unless
his long and lingering Exile, had brought him to something of Remorse; and this
I take to be the decisive Judgment, as to this Life, and as to the next shall
only say, that if every one whose Conscience does not accuse him were thereby
justified, final Imponitency would be an happy End.

Ludlow takes little Notice of the King whilst at Holmby, being I presume well
satisfied with the ill Treatment he received from the Commissioners there,
which could not in that Conjuncture have been more rude and insolent, had he
been one of them; for they denied him his Chaplains, Discharged all his Ancient
Servants, and would not permit any one of acceptable Conversation, to come into
his Presence; which Restraint was devoutly improved in more constant Addresses
to Almighty God, as we find from those Meditations and Vows in his Solitude at
Holmby. Neither were their Impositions less Vexatious, those two Pulpit
Beautifeus, Marshal, and Caryl, having attended, as Chaplains upon the English
Commissioners at New Castle, returned with them to Holmby, and were recommended
to Preach before the King, and say Grace at Meals; but were denied as to both,
the King always saying Grace himself, with an audible Voice, standing under the
State: Though it is said, that Marshal did on a Time put himself more forward
than was meet to say Grace, and while he was long in forming his Chaps, as the
Manner was among the Saints, and making ugly Faces, His Majesty said Grace
himself, and had eaten up some part of his Dinner, before Marshal had ended his
Cant. But this Scene lasted not long, Cornet Joyce gave these Commissioners,
and their Chaplains, an unwilling Discharge, carrying the King to the Army;
it is unaccountable to what a height the Feuds between those two Factions,
Presbyterian and Independents were now grown, how cursedly that Hell was
divided within it is self, what Plots, and Counter-plots, were continually
carrying on, each Party conceiving the King's Person, and Presence, of great
Advantage to their Designs, though both of them no less against him, than each
other: For his Majesty's Thoughts hereof, take from his own Excellent Words;
Upon the Army's surprisal of the King.
What Part God will have me now to Act, or suffer in this new and strange Scene
of Affairs, I am not much Solicitous; some little Practice will serve that Man
who only seeks to represent a part of Honesty and Honor. In this my Surprise I
tell the World, That a King cannot be so low but he is considerable, adding
weight to that Party where he appears: And so goes on, most judiciously
observing the Hand of Divine Justice, how they that by Tumults, first
occasioned the raising of Armies, are now chastned by their own Army for new
Tumults; The Members of both Houses who at first withdrew, (as my self was
forced to do) from the rudeness of the Tumults, were counted Deserters, and
outed their Places in Parliament; such as staid and enjoyed the Benefit of the
Tumults, were asserted for the only Patriots: Now on the contrary the Deserters
are abetted by the Army, and such as remained, and kept their Stations, are
charged for Tumultuary Insolences, and betrayers of the Freedom and Honor of
Parliaments; and doubtless amidst those many Distractions and Perplexities this
Excellent Prince labored under, it could not but be some Satisfaction to see
such visible Retaliations, since there was not a Member of the Covenant Class,
but might take up Adonibezek's Acknowledgment, As we have done, so the Lord
has requited us.

The manner of Ioyce's carrying off the King has not one Syllable of Truth as
to the Circumstances thereof, in Ludlow's Relation. He says, Joyce had an
Order in writing to take the King out of the Hands of the Commissioners of
Parliament, p. 191. whereas upon the King's demanding a sight of his
Instructions, that, says the impudent Fellow, you shall see presently, and
drawing up the best part of his Party into the inner Court as near as he could
to the King, said, these Sir are my Instructions; whereto his Majesty
Smilingly replied, Your Instructions are in fair Characters, and Legible
without Spelling: Neither is it true, that the King would have retracted his
Promise to Joyce upon the Commissioner's Persuasion; it was by his Inducement
the Guards were taken off their Lodgings; and when Joyce pressed the King to go
along with him, no Prejudice being intended, but rather his Satisfaction, upon
the King's saying he would not stir unless the Commissioners went with him; the
other replied, that for his Part he was indifferent. Neither did the King take
Horse, but went in a Coach, with the Earls, Pembrook, Denbeigh, and Lord
Mountague, who as the rest of their Fellows were very Shagreen upon this Force,
his Majesty being observed the Merryest in the Company: And when Colonel Brown,
and Mr. Crew returned to the Parliament is not certain, to be sure they did not
go from Holmby, but attended the King to Hinchingbrook, tho an Express was sent
from the first Notice of Ioyce's Approach. The whole Passage of this Force,
(with several others very considerable from hence forward, to his Majesty's
Murder) is most faithfully related in the Athenae Oxon. as the Author had them
from Sir Thomas Herbert, a constant, and sometimes sole Attendant upon the
King, in all those his Solitudes and Sufferings.

In all probability, it was with no little regret to our Author, before he saw
whether it tended, that the Army paid so great a Deference to the King,
suffered his Officers to continue, and publicly owned the Design. Colonel
Francis Russel, and others attending the King, became soon converted by the
Splendour of his Majesty, etc. p. 193. And some Pages before, 177. he inveighs
bitterly against Colonel Brown the Wood-monger, for that having been as great a
Rebel as himself, (indeed much more Considerable and Mischievous) he no sooner
came into the King's Conversation, but became a Convert, which Ludlow would
have the effect of a low and abject Original and Education, whereas there
cannot be a greater Instance of a generous Temper, to acknowledge his Mistakes,
and beg his Majesty's Pardon when there was nothing but Obloquy and Persecution
from the prevailing Power, which he met withal sufficiently, and was as forward
to return when occasion served, being one of the Bloodyest Butchers of the
Parliament's Friends, p. 178. Indeed upon the Restoration he was very forward
in apprehending, and condemning the Regicides, and it was by an unlucky Chance
this Fellow escaped his Hands. The Devils knowing themselves under Sentence of
Eternal Reprobation, are never better pleased, than to have engaged a Man so
far, as to lay aside all Thoughts of Pardon, of Reconciliation with God; and
really I never met with a Person more truly Proselyted to Hell, upon that, and
indeed all other Concerns, than our Author, as having not only abandoned all
Thoughts of Peace and Mercy in himself, but an implacable Spite against such as
were any ways inclined thereto; on the contrary wherever his Majesty met any of
such ingenuous Christian Dispositions, he certainly Convinced them of their
Mistakes, and brought them over to his Party: There are too many Instances of
this Kind, and too well known to be here set down; Page 244.
That of Mr. Vines, in Dr. Perenchief's Life, is very Considerable, because as
rigid a Presbyterian as the rest, who declared he had been deluded into
unworthy Thoughts of the King, but was now convinced to an exceeding Reverence
of him, and hoped so of others, etc. There was one Dell an Army Chaplain,
counterpart to Hugh Peter's, and tho less a Buffoon, yet as much a Rogue, they
jointly giving out, when their Villainies were ripe, that the King was but as a
dead Dog: This unworthy Wretch said once in my hearing, that whilst in the
Army, it was told him the King expressed a desire to see Dell; but said the
Fellow, I would not come at him, because we found he had a cunning way of
getting into Men, and making them think well of him, and his Cause: This indeed
I find from several Particulars, that the Prejudices of such Ulcerous Minds
kept them off upon a false Surmise, that the King could Pardon and Forgive no
more than they; upon which String I observe Ludlow often harping, especially
upon his Observation of the Army's respect in this Juncture, whom he seems to
laugh at for not considering how easy it would be for him to break through all
his Promises and Engagements, upon pretense of being under a Force, p. 193.
It Is true, they had violated the solemnest Oaths and Ties imaginable in putting
a Force upon him; whereas he, good Man, was so Religious to his bare Promises,
as in the end it cost him his Life.

What he further relates of Transactions between the King and Army, is, as we
are told from a Manuscript, written by Sir John Barkly, and left in the Hands
of a Merchant at Geneva: That Sir John, since Lord John Barkly, was attending
upon the King at this Time, is certain, and we will grant it is his Manuscript,
to be sure none of our Authors, being of a more polite Style, penned like a Man
of Sense and Business, so that wherever brought in, it looks like a piece of
New Cloth, to make bold with the Parable, put to an Old Garment, and renders
his threadbare Stuff, an abominably patched Business. From these Papers he
would have us believe that the Grandees of the Army, Cromwell, Ireton, etc. were
once in so good a Mood as to design the Restoration of his Majesty, whose ill
Conduct in not following Sir John's Directions, and caressing them as expected,
spoiled all. And this ought to be taken into Consideration, because I have met
some honest Gentlemen too forward in giving Credit thereto; and the
Commonwealth's Men run away with it as infallible, notwithstanding the quite
contrary appears from Ludlow's own Relation; who perhaps too has perverted
several of Sir John's Expressions to the King's Prejudice, (for there is
nothing so base and false he would not be guilty of upon that Account) as when
he is reported to break away from them, and say, Well, I shall see them glad
e're long to accept of more equal Terms, p. 203. and that p. 205. you cannot be
without me; you will; fall to ruin if I do not sustain you; which manner of
Carriage he says was observed with Amasement, and so it might well, for he was
never observed to do so by any other Author, or Person: And when a little
further on, it is said Dr. Hammond was the Governor's own Kinsman, it must
certainly be Ludlow, for Sir John certainly knew him to be his Brother. From
these and several such like Instances, it may be inferred, that though such
Papers were left by Sir John, yet might they be altered, or added to by Ludlow,
to Blacken, as their Term was, his Majesty's Discretion and Policy, though they
could not his Virtue. It may be further observed there was no good
Understanding between Sir John, and Mr. Asburnham, though both of them
doubtless very Faithful and Loyal; Sir John really believed the Army was in
good Earnest, the other very much suspected, and who of the two had most Reason
therein, the Event declared, the King in the mean while might hesitate between
both, and rather incline to Mr. Asburnham's Opinion. To pass by therefore,
those Difficulties and Distractions the several contending Parties lay under;
and how impossible it was for his Majesty to come to any thing of a fixed
Resolution amidst so many Confusions; we will come to this one Enquiry, whether
Cromwell, and Ireton ever really intended to establish the King upon his Throne?
For I look upon them two as the gand Intriguers, driving on a distinct Design
of their own, which none of their Comrades then so much as dreamt of, but were
implicitly carried on to promote what at first they could not see, nor at last
prevent: For that Cromwell was the exactest Piece of Dissimulation Hell ever
inspired, must be owned on all Hands; so that he and his Confederates, sending
Sir Allen Appesly to Sir John Barkly, and desiring them both to assure the
Queen, and Prince of their good Intentions, was but a Blind to fortify their
Interest against the Presbyterians, who as Ludlow, or the Paper tells us,
though much weakened by the Absence of the Eleven Members, passed a Vote, that
the King should be brought to Richmond, whereto he inclined, so that the Army
were obliged to cause the Parliament to recall their Vote: Neither were
Cromwell's Protestations to Sir John the least to be regarded, Of that tenderest
Sight his Eyes ever beheld, the Interview between the King and his Children;
and that never Man was so abused as he, in his sinister Opinion of the King,
who he thought was the most Upright, and Conscientious of the Kingdom, etc.
concluding with this Wish, That God would be pleased to look upon him according
to the Sincerity of his Heart toward the King, page 199. Such Tricks as these
were as natural to him as his Meat and Drink; and no less requisite to support
the Life of his cursed Designs: Did he not at the same time assure the
Parliament, That the Army should at their first Command, cast their Arms at
their Feet; and solemnly Swear, that he had rather himself, with his whole
Family should be consumed, than the Army break out into Sedition? Yet at the
same time did he by his Creatures, administer new Fuel to those Flames; and
posting down to the Head Quarters, set the whole Synagogue of Agitators on
Work, and directed them in carrying on the Conspiracy; and therefore however
Sir John's Sanguin Temper, and good-natured Disposition might be imposed upon
by Cromwell's Arts, the King was not without considerable Cautions from others,
of the no Trust which was to be put in any thing he said, that amongst his
Confidents he did frequently boast of his fine Arts in imposing upon the King,
and that thereby he intended nothing less than his Destruction: It must indeed
be acknowledged that some of the General Officers were Sincere to his Majesty,
really his Converts, one of which seeing Cromwell hold the King's Hand between
his own during a solemn Protestation of unfeigned Assurances, and even washing
it with Tears; when he came out, asked the Officer who stood by, whether he had
not acted his Part very well? Who replied, Why were you not in good Earnest?
Not in the least replied he, for which he ever after Abominated him, and
acquainted the King with what a Devil incarnate he had to deal withal.

And here I must observe no small Piece of Perfidy in our Author, that he will
not let us know what Part Sir John, what himself bears in relating these
Affairs; for what I questioned as to some harsh Expressions he would have the
King use toward the Army, seems much confirmed from an absolute Falsehood he
relates, as the effect thereof, which runs thus, page 205. The King having thus
bid Defiance to the Army, thought it necessary to bend all his Force against
them, and especially to strengthen their Enemies in the Parliament. To this end
a Petition was framed to press them to speedy Agreement with the King, and
presented in a Tumultuous manner, by a great Number of Apprentices and Rabble,
backed by many Dismissed and Disaffected Officers, etc. This indeed was the
last Effort of the Presbyterian Iunto to preserve themselves from the Army's
Lash; but as it took no Effect, so the King was not at all concerned therein,
but continued with the Army, and upon very good Terms; for it was not time to
throw off the Vizard, till as Cromwell whispered Ludlow, they had pulled the
Parliament out by the Ears, page 189. In the mean while, to show how Ludlow
contradicts himself; the King who just now was said to bid defiance to the
Army, upon showing his Answer to the Officers before it was sent, they seemed
much satisfied with it, and promised to use their endeavors for a Personal
Treaty; Cromwell and Ireton and many of their Party in the House, pressing the
King's desires with great earnestness; wherein contrary to their expectation,
they found a vigorous opposition, etc. page 213. This Fellow Ludlow, cannot be
so ignorant of those Intrigues as he would seem: That Cromwell and his
Confidents ran with the Hare, and hunted with the Hound; set on their
Properties in the House, and Agitators in the Army, to complain of that free
Access all the Cavaliers had to the King at Hampton Court: Of Sir John Barkly
's, and Mr. Ashburnham 's Intimacy with the Chief Officers of the Army; that
Cromwell 's and Ireton 's Doors were open to them, when shut to those of the
Army; whereat, says our Author, Cromwell was much offended, telling Mr.
Ashburnham and Sir John, that if he were an honest Man, he had said enough of
the sincerity of his intentions; and if he were not, nothing was enough, etc.
page 212. So likewise he tells us, Cromwell wheadled with the King, acquainting
him with his danger, and protesting it was not in his power to undertake for
his security in the place where he was, viz. Hampton Court; assuring him of his
real service, and desiring God to deal, etc. as before; all which was
abominable Trick to affright the King into those Nets and Toyls, he had so
craftily set for him, till a fit opportunity of proceeding to his Murder: And
that all the Caresses, wherewith most of the Army, more especially those two
Nonparells of Treachery, the Father and Son in Law courted the King, tended
thereto, is clear from every Circumstance of their Proceedings; as likewise
from that Assurance Ireton gave Ludlow at first, who tells us, he went down to
Mayden-head, their Headquarters, where Ireton suspecting these Things (their
caressing his Majesty) might occasion Jealousies in me, and others of their
Friends in Parliament, desired me to be assured of their steadfast Adherence to
the public Interest, and that they intended only to dispense with such Things
as were not material, till they could put themselves into a Condition of
serving the People effectually, page 194. And when the Army drew up that bloody
Remonstrance November, 48. in order to taking away the King's Life, the same
Ireton sent him Word, that now he hoped he should please him, which he owns
they did, by the way they were taking, etc. page 266. Now had Ludlow been a Man
of any Thought, any Reflection upon himself, he must needs have considered,
what a contemptible Fellow they took him to be, as not vouchsafing to trust him
in a Design, his wicked Soul most earnestly desired to have Accomplished.

As for Cromwell's ambitious Enthusiastical Spirit, that he had some thoughts by
removal of the King, to ascend the height he at last attained unto; there are
several inducements to persuade. Ludlow tells us of many Passages and Actions
which when the Riddle was unfolded, discovered what he aimed at. Particularly
about this Time, when the King was in the Isle of Wight, there were frequent
Consults and Conferences amongst them, about reconciling Parties, and fixing a
Government; wherein Cromwell kept himself in the Clouds, and would declare
neither for Monarchical, Aristocratical, nor Democratical, maintaining that any
of them might be good in themselves, or for us according as Providence should
direct, page 238. And when Providence suffered this glaring Meteor, with all
it is Evil Influences, to rest so long upon our Horizon, and his vain Mind
affected to add the Regal Title to that Power, he had so unjustly assumed, one
main Inducement of his attempting it, was thought to be a Dream he had of being
King, whilst a young Rake in Sidny College, Cambridge, (for so he really was)
which he frequently declared to his Companions, and was not a little proud of;
and that it made a deeper Impression upon his Mind, than any Learning he got
there, give me leave to add this odd Passage, when he was Protector, I knew an
Old Man, who in his younger Days had been Serving-Man to his Uncle Sir Thomas
Stewart, was the Fac totum in the Family, and had more especially charge of the
Cellar, where he told me, Cromwell and he tossed the Pot many a Time, and when
his natural Enthusiasm, was assisted by a good Dose of strong Liquor, would
thus vent himself; Well, James, notwithstanding my Uncle's and Aunt's
Unkindnesses, I may yet be a great Man before I die; I had a lucky Dream at the
College, and I have a young Daughter, a shrewd Girl she is, who will be often
telling me, Father you will be a Great Man Father, I cannot sleep soundly a
Nights for Dreaming of your being a Great Man; indeed Father you will be as
Great as the King; and then he would go on; I don't know James, nor can I see
any thing of likelihood yet; but God often times brings strange things about,
and if he should call me to any thing extraordinary, sure I should understand
to prosecute my own advantage. This the Old Man told me, he would be often
repeating over his Cups, several years before the Wars broke out; which as he
laughed at then, so he had thought upon it a thousand times with astonishment,
since he came to be Protector. I hope this Story will not be thought altogether
impertinent upon this consideration; that it shows how much his Mind was puffed
up with hopes, even when there was no ground for them; but when he saw all
sorts of Mischiefs and Rebellions, begin to work with such Hellish success, and
himself got into the Second Command of the whole Army, under such a Cipher of a
General, as he managed him no less than he did the Inferior Officers, most of
whom he engaged to oppose all Superiors, as well their Masters the Parliament,
as their Sovereign; This doubtless made him dream of a Crown every Night, and
think a Year an Age, till possessed of the sole Power. For having Modeled the
Parliament according to his Will, made them as tractable as Setting-Dogs, to
whatsoever he and his Mirmidons thought fit to put them upon; and wheadled the
King into a Prison, under a Property of his own; for whatever Ludlow or Sir
John relates of Hammond's Surprise and Consternation at the News, page 218. the
History of Independency assures us, he had been with Cromwell, who sent him down
fully Instructed, as to his Deportment in that Critical Affair: And from hence
forward we hear no more of his Caresses and Protestations: May the Lord deal
with him according to the Sincerity of his Heart toward the King, etc. But a
tendency on all hands to the Destruction both of his Person and Government.

CHAP. V. Of the King's Murder.
WE are now come to the last Act; so full of Horror and Amasement, as nothing
but the doing it could make the Attempt credible; and seems to transverse that
Old Conceit of the Lycanthropi, Wolves and Tigers appearing not only in humane
Shape, but humane Societies; for of some such Composition must those several
Scenes of Regicides be, which made up those Conferences our Author mentions, p.
238. and forward; in the first of which he tells us, the Commonwealth's-men
declared, Monarchy was neither good in it is self, nor for us. That it was not
desirable in it is self they urged from the 8 th Chapter of the first Book of
Samuel, the 8 th. Verse, where the rejecting of the Judges, and the choice of a
King, was charged upon the Israelites by God himself as to rejecting him.
Scripture is so much out of these Peoples way, as they never blunder more, than
when they think to support their Cause from thence, as will appear from this
short Account of the whole Story: Where first, it was not the Israelites
rejecting the Judges, but the Theocracy which gave the Provocation, for so
Almighty God himself declares in the precedent Verse 7. upon Samuel's
Complaint, they have not rejected thee, but me they have rejected that I should
not reign over them. Samuel was not only as a Viceroy to see those Laws
observed, which the Supreme Sovereign had already Enacted, but as a Prophet,
and so the Mouth of God, further to declare whatever Divine Will thought fit to
Prescribe. And if in the second Place, if he believed or would have it thought
there was any thing of Democracy in the Judges Regency, it is a gross Mistake;
indeed when the Monarchy was interrupted upon the Death of Joshua, we find no
Successor appointed by him, as Moses had done, nor fixed upon by the People;
and it is probable every Tribe became a State Provincial in their several
Allotments, for the Text says, The People served the Lord all the days of
Joshua, and of the Elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great
Works the Lord did for Israel, Judge. 2. 7, 8. But when all that Generation were
gathered to their Fathers, there arose another Generation which knew not the
Lord, nor the Works he had done, but followed other Gods of the People that
were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the Lord to
Anger; and here indeed I take them to be a true Commonwealth, a Free State,
with a General Toleration, every one doing what was right in his own Eyes. But
this admired Liberty pleased none but themselves, nor themselves long neither,
for the Text further adds, the Anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he
delivered them into the Hands of the Spoilers, that spoiled them, etc. verse.
14. till sensible of their Folly, and Ingratitude, upon their humble Address
unto the Lord, he raised up Judges, and was with the Judges, and dilivered them
out of the Hand of the Enemy all the days of the Judges, verse. 18. Yet to see
how steady all popular Resolves are, the next Verse declares, when the Judge
was dead, they returned and corrupted themselves more than their Forefathers,
in following other Gods, etc. they ceased not from their own doings, and their
stubborn ways, verse. 19. Whereupon I shall take leave to make this general
Observation, That when God designs to curse a People into Misery and Ruin, he
leaves them to their own evil and foolish Ways, which will never be redressed,
without true Repentance, and a return to such Establishments as are agreeable
to his Will. And therefore, Thirdly, it is an abominable Mistake to urge that
Text in Samuel as an Argument against all Monarchy, in general, whereas the
Charge God brings against them, the People of Israel, was their rude and
undutiful Deportment, their Mutinous manner of demanding a King, and the reason
they gave for it, that they might be like other Nations, which he had taken all
possible care they should not be, and most strictly enjoined them not to
imitate any of their Practices; and this is clear; for that as their Government
had been always Monarchical when under God's Hand; so he foresaw, and
consequently cautioned them against such popular tumultuary Heats, Deuteronomy. 17.
14, etc. when thou art come unto the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee,
etc. and shall say, I will set a King over me, like as all the Nations which
are about me: Thou shall in any wise set him a King over thee, whom the Lord
thy God shall Choose. God was well content that they should have a King, but
reserved the Election to himself; he would have no transferring of Rights, no
mutual Contracts, but choose his own Representative.

He proceeds to his other Topic, That it was no ways conducing to the Interest
of the Nation, (viz. Monarchy) was endeavored to be proved by the infinite
Mischiefs and Oppressions we have suffered under it. It Is the modestest
Expression in his whole Book to say it was endeavored to be proved, since it
has been already made appear, that the little Finger of these
Commonwealth-Iobbers proved heavier to the whole Nation than all the Monarchs
which ever sat upon the Throne. So likewise further on he tells us, The
Question in dispute between the King's Party, and us, being as I apprehend it,
whether the King should Govern like a God by his own Will? etc. or the People
be governed by Laws made by themselves? etc. p. 267. If he will apprehend
things wrong it cannot be helped, for neither the King nor his Party ever
intended the People should be otherwise Governed than by their own Laws; 'twas
what they stood up for, and endeavored to preserve according to all ancient
Establishments; but God thought not fit to give them a present Success, that
the People might experimentally find the Madness and Folly of their
Innovations. Mr. Thomas Farnaby, who had been the famous Schoolmaster of those
Times, was committed by an Order of the House in 41. for saying, he believed we
should find it better to live under one King than 500; how Legal that
Commitment was is easily resolved, yet went they on in the same Arbitrary
Course for five or six Years together, Committing whomsoever they disliked, or
so much as suspected to dislike them. Did not these Men govern by their own
Wills? Yes surely, though more like Devils, than God. Neither yet did it rest
here, the 500 were reduced to a Rump of less than 50. and they overaw'd by a
Military Rabble of more than twice 15 Thousand; Were not the Good People of
England excellently represented now? Their Laws and Liberty in a hopeful
Condition? And their Purses free, when the Soldiers commanded them?

And this is the next Diabolical Intrigue our Author very frankly declares they
designed to enterprise; for however the several Iuntos had hitherto jointly
concurred, nay even contended who should make the greatest Invasions not only
upon the Peoples, but there Prince's Liberty; yet now has become divided
within its self, a major part of the House being not willing to concur with
the Army in Murdering that Person whom they had nevertheless both agreed to
Un-King; and this, as Ludlow tells us, occasioned another Meeting between some
Members and Officers of the Army, wherein it was resolved to purge the House
once more of all such Members as should attempt to frustrate what these Sons of
Belial were resolved to go through with, p. 266. and to justify himself herein
he brings another Text of Scripture, whether with more Impudence or Folly let
the Reader judge, that Blood defiles the Land, and cannot be cleansed but by
the Blood of him that shed it, Numb. 35. 33. I have already observed if the
Wolf may be Judge, no Sheep shall be Innocent, and as these Beasts of Prey,
began the Chase, and worried all that would not go with, or dared to oppose
them, till their Blood was shed like Water round about the Land, so that Royal
Effusion in the end, must doubtless have brought such a Stain upon it as we may
justly fear will never be washed out; whereof several worthy Loyal Patriots in
the Parliament 60. were so Religiously sensible, as they propounded, that not
only the rest of the Regicides should have received their due Reward, but that
for every one of the King's Party who suffered by their pretended Forms of
Justice, there should have been a Retaliation upon the same Number of such as
had been most forward, in those base and unjust Prosecutions; this might have
done something toward an Expiation, and put away the Guilt of Innocent Blood
amongst us, by neglect whereof to return the Text upon Ludlow and his Party,
it is to be feared the Land still continues defiled therewith.

And next to this of Blood-guiltiness, give me leave to add my Suspicion, that
we have another deep Arrear, for their gross Abuse and Profanation of
Scripture, whereof our Author has given an exact Specimen in the two
forementioned Texts, although he is very sparing in comparison with his
Fellow-Rebels, especially the violent Pulpit-Drivers, who studied nothing so
much as to pervert it, and that not only to their own, but the whole Nations
destruction: Curse ye Meroz, etc. did more Mischief than all the Trumpets in
the Army, and made as loud a Noise; and their numberless Fast-Sermons, were but
a wresting so many Texts to Sedition and Treason. In the same manner likewise
they managed Controversies: All Church Government must be framed according to
the newfangled Conceits of their Geneva Rabbis, though the continued Sense
and Practice of Antiquity, speak the quite contrary: And because the Doctrine
of Obedience is so expressly laid down in 13th. to the Romans, and elsewhere,
they hammered out this Impudent Evasion, that the Apostles delivered what the
Circumstances they lay under forced them unto, not having Strength to make
Opposition, otherwise might have been as very Rebels as themselves. In the mean
while the AEquivocal Sense of our English word Power, was thought to give them
so great a Latitude, as they might submit to whatever came uppermost, and if
you urged them with the different Acceptations of (...) and (...) in the
Original, 'twas Heathen Greek to them, the Language of the Beast, and ought not
to restrain the Liberty of their perverse Spirits; neither are such Prejudices
altogether laid aside, but seem rather to be assumed afresh, too many of our
present Divines being very backward to consider those two Words themselves, or
attend to the Information of others, and yet a very nice Case depends
thereupon. But commend me to our Modern Commonwealth's Men, who finding with
how ill Success their Predecessors made use of Scripture, have taken a much
shorter Cut, set up for Theists, or Atheists, and thereby supersede all
Authority from thence.

What he relates as to the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, is a barefaced
discovery of their Design, that having got the King there, with the Parliament,
and City under their Lash, they were now resolved to kill and take Possession;
his Majesty therefore is no more caressed by the Army, Sir John Barkly's cold
Entertainment from the Officers at Windsor, was a full discovery of what they
all along had in purpose. Yet since he takes no Notice of the King's Deportment
in that grand Affair, but represents their Jealousies of him, according to the
Guilt of their own just Deservings; I shall take leave to observe, that never
any Prince strugled with so many different and violent Interests, as this good
Man at that Treaty, nor deported himself with greater Honor, Judgment, and
Discretion. The Presbyterian Iunto in the House, tho sensible of that
deplorable Condition they had brought both King and Kingdom into, yet stood so
stiffly upon their first Propositions, as their Commissioners were not allowed
to recede one Ace from them. The Scotch likewise stood by rather to serve
themselves than him, and observe how they should next play their Game, for now
every Eye could discover whatever Protestations they made, Money and Covenant
was the only Diana they contended for. The Independent Party in the House, tho
out-Voted as to the Treaty, yet were able to start so many Scruples,
Restrictions, and Delays, as might baffle much sincerer Intentions than
appeared in their Opponents. Yet contrary to all their Expectations, the King
in his own Person managed the whole Debate with such incredible Prudence, found
out such Temperaments for their harshest Demands, and made such Concessions,
with a reserve both of Honor, and Conscience, as astonished them all, and
wrought a full Conviction in such as had any Reserve even of Humanity left in
their Breasts. One Passage I must needs relate from our Author, whereby we may
guess at his, and all his Accomplices Ingenuity; he says when some Commissioners
who had been with the King pleaded in the House for a Concurrence with him,
etc. p. 268. Sir Henry Vane opposed it, and inveighed against the King in his
Reasons against it; concluding, that if they should accept of these Terms
without consent of the Army, it would prove but a Feather in their Caps: And
yet this base Fellow, Vane, persuaded the King at the Isle of Wight not to be
too prodigal of his Concessions; that he had already yielded more than 'twas
fit for him to give, or them to ask, and undertook to make it evident to the
whole World: How could any Prince, or indeed other Person, of a steady Virtue,
and undesigning Integrity, deal with such Proteus's as these? Quo teneam nodo?
What Hold can be laid on them? What escape from so damned a Perfidy? All which
his Majesty at that time fully discovered, that though some were of a sensible
Compliance, yet those of most Power were most obstinate, intended nothing less
than Peace, nor could they more than his Destruction.

The breaking off that Treaty by the Army, their Force upon his Majesty there,
bringing him from thence to London, with the Hellish Pageantry of his Trial,
was insult enough for our Author's bloody Mind, to relate Matter of Fact in
Common with others, and is too Melancholy a Subject for me to repeat: Only what
he says as to Bishop Iuxton, must be all his own, and probably invented to be
revenged on him and the King, because his Majesty he says, and I believe
truly, refused such Ministers as their Court of Injustice had appointed to
attend him, amongst whom that unhallowed Buffoon, Peter's was one, and the rest
had been all most violent Firebrarnds of Rebellion, and therein of his Murder:
At last therefore, though with some Reluctance, (and I doubt not but with
Ludlow's Negative) it was granted that Bishop Iuxton should be permitted to
attend his King, and Master in this his Translation from a Temporal to an
Eternal Crown; and though doubtless it was with unexpressable Regret, as to the
manner of his Departure, that he was put upon these holy Offices, yet that he
should declare himself altogether unprepared, or complain for want of warning,
as having nothing ready, is a true Piece of Fanatic Wit, that is, a snarling
Reflection, without any Truth at the Bottom, or Ingenuity in the Expression; as
no Man approved himself more Eminent both for Parts and Integrity, than this
worthy Prelate, in those several Public Trusts, Ecclesiastical and Civil
committed to his Care; so his Piety, and exact Understanding in all Religious
Rites, qualified him for the most devout Performance of all holy Duties: With
like Rudeness and Impertinency he continues; But recollecting himself a little,
he put on his Scarf, and other Furniture, and went to the King, where having
read the Common Prayer, and one of his old Sermons, he Administered the
Sacrament to him, etc. page 282. Could any thing like a Christian, or indeed a
Man, play the Buffoon at so silly a rate, upon so solemn and sad an Occasion?
Whether the Sermon was old or not, is more than he knows, to be sure it was
very much to the Purpose, that is, of the final Judgment, when God shall judge
the Secrets of all Men by Jesus Christ; whereat had Ludlow, or any of his
Confederates been, there is no doubt but their guilty Souls would have
Trembled, as much as Felix did; but withal too, persever'd as little in their
Recognitions: With like impious. Contempt he reflects upon the Holy Sacrament,
most ignorantly cavils at, and as profanely Ridicules it; a true Saint of the
new Edition; above Ordinances in their Lives, and without them at their Deaths;
according to that great Author in the Book of Wisdom, Wisd. Ca. 2 v. 22.
As for the Mysteries of God, they knew them not, neither hoped they for the
Wages of Righteousness, nor discerned a Reward for blameless Souls: It Is
represented likewise, according to his no Understanding of such Religious
Preparations, as if all these Holy Offices were hudled together on that fatal
last Day, whereas the Bishop was with the King on Saturday, had the Sermon and
Sacrament on Sunday, where Mr. Herbert, the only Person they permitted to
attend his Majesty, was another Communicant with them, however the foolish
Fellow flouts, and considers not what Dispensations are allowed upon such sad
Necessities.

But since he is for relating Circumstances, as to this worthy Prelate's holy
Performances, there is one, which tho all good Men must be well acquainted
with, ought never to be omitted when upon this Subject, viz. That the last
Lesson his Majesty heard read, in that Morning Office of his Suffering, was the
History of our Savior's Passion, in the 27 th. of Matthew. which he supposed the
Bishop had made Choice of, as most applicable to his present Condition, till he
otherwise informed him, that it was the proper Lesson for the Day, as appeared
by the Calendar, wherewith says Mr. Herbert, then present, his Majesty was
much Affected, and doubtless received great Consolation thereby. Others have
gone further and made several Parallels between their Sufferings, which I shall
only mention in general; that as there was never a more barbarous Act, since
that Lord of Life was Crucified; so neither a more Innocent Soul through his
Merits and Satisfaction, assumed into the Regions of Bliss: So that a certain
Lord upon the Seaffold, the Noble Capel I think it was, had great Reason to
say, that if he were to wish his Soul in any ones stead, it should be in his;
and Sit anima mea cum Carolo; Heaven cannot be so, if he be not there: And
therefore to take my leave of this worst of Men Ludlow, it shall be in the
Words of the forementioned Author of the Book of Wisdom, where declaring that
the Souls of the Righteous are in the Hands of God, however in the Sight of the
unwise and wicked they seemed to die; he adds, For though they be punished in
the sight of Man; yet is their hope full of Immortality. And having been a
little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded; for God proved them, and
found them worthy for himself. Cap. 3. v. 4, 5.


This strange, and never before heard of Procedure, against the Sacred Person
of their Monarch, being thus accomplished, and in him the Ancient Monarchy of
England totally Subverted, our Author is too intent upon their new Project of
Liberty-Keeping, to pursue his Calumnies any further, and therefore relating
how his Body was Interred at Windsor, by some Good Men, Noble and Worthy
Persons, who attended it thither (he might have added the Lamentation made over
it, not only by them, but the whole Kingdom thorough, for doubtless never was
there greater for any Prince in the World) whether, as I said, from the many
Designs his projecting Head was carrying on, or to show that Humanity had not
totally Abdicated his Breast, he lets it rest there, without farther
Disturbance.

But that pitiful Fellow Roger Coke was so Spiteful as to rake into those
Sacred Ashes, and not permit so much as the Grave to give them rest. Can any
thing be more base than to reflect, that the Office of our Church was not
suffered to be read at his Enterment? A Man of Sense, of Virtue, and Loyalty
might have been justly severe upon the Governor, who refused so innocent a
Request; but his Majesty's very Memory must be thereby the more Eminent, in
that their Baseness persued him so far, as not to permit his dead Corpse, the
External Rites of Religion.

And as he was buried without an Office; so his next Insult is, that he lies
without a Monument; and thereupon relates how the Commons had Voted, 50. (he
says) but 'twas really 70000 l. for the Charge of taking up the King's Body,
with making a Solemn Funeral, and Monument, which yet came to nothing: Whereto
he Maliciously adds, that 'twas said his Son forbid it; which indeed was likely
to be said; for Lying, with Whiggism, began about that Time to be much in
Vogue, and several Plots there were on Foot to serve the Son, as they had done
the Father; but the People were not then mad enough to follow their Lure, and
it was the Old Loyal Party, and Principle, which preserved the King at that
Time. But for the 70000 l. in order to a Monument, the true Account stands
thus: That Session in which it was Voted, rose in some Heat without passing any
Bills, whereby this amongst the rest was Obstructed: And at their next Meeting,
their continued Heats cooled this worthy Design, the rather for that a certain
busy Female assumed the Honor of having it first moved. Although it is likewise
probable, that the Old Faction, which with their young Spawn, began about this
Time to be very busy in the House, might not be wanting to put by so ungrateful
a Memorial of their Villainy: And thus the Court was too justly repaid, for the
Care they took at the Restoration, to Sweeten the Sowr-humor'd Fanatic, and
amongst other things, that their Consciences should not be over-jogg'd, by too
many Remembrances of this Eternal Reproach, which though an Indemnity
pardoned, no Oblivion will ever be able to deface; and this occasioned a worthy
Divine (in this Critical Juncture most eminently deserving of the English
Church) preaching at White Hall upon that cursed Day, to tell them freely, They
had added to his Ignominy, by Burying his Funeral: To be sure had the least
motion for a Monument been made in those early Days, it would have passed
without Control, but in that Juncture we were mighty fearful of offending those
who could never be obliged. Dr. Done in that odd Poem of his, The Progress of
the Soul, when he had placed it in the Whale, and declared, how without any
Provocation the Thresher, and Sword-fish, plotted together, and destroyed him,
the next Stanza turns off with this Apostrophe, Who will revenge his Death? Or
who will call?
Those to Account that sought, and wraught his Fall?
Stanz. 37.
The Heirs of slain Kings, we see are often so
Transported with the Joy of what they get,
That they Revenge, and Obsequies forget, etc.


For what remains is as Applicable to that unhappy Neglect, when the whole
Kingdom thought nothing too much for expiating the Guilt, and honoring the
Memory of so excellent a Prince, so barbarously Treated.

But though the Bill did not pass for the Monument, yet the same Parliament had
done another Thing before, which may out-last all of that Kind, in Westminster,
or elsewhere in the whole Nation, viz. Enacted that the Day of that horrid
Parricide, be observed as a Solemn Fast throughout the Kingdom for ever; and
doubtless could they have foreseen any Person would have taken the Confidence
to Asperse his Sacred Person, or Memory, at that impudent Rate, our Libellers,
and too many (...) do, it had been Voted no less Treason than his Murder; yet
however there be Enemies still which speak Evil of him, and some that hate him
wrongfully are Mighty; with all that are Wise and Good, his Name will be
Blessed, and his Righteousness had in Everlasting Remembrance. To which purpose
I shall here add a little Passage of a Reverend Divine lately deceased in
Buckinghamshire, who amongst other Ingenious Legacies out of the Common Road,
gave 40 s. per Annum for ever to New College, whereof I presume he had been
formerly Member, for a Speech on this dismal Day. And it is to be hoped the
continual Provocations, of such bold Profligates, as dare to open their Mouths
against, and Blaspheme whatever is Superior to them, either in Heaven or Earth,
may in due time rouse up some generous, Public Spirits, which shall at
leastwise put to Silence, if not punish the Ignorance and Impudence of those
foolish Men; for it is not an easy thing to stem a strong Tide of Virtue, or
hold out long against the Truth; and therefore as my forementioned Author
denounces, Wisd. 3. v. 17. 18, 19.
Though they live long, yet shall be nothing regarded, and their last Age shall
be without honor; or if they die quickly they have no hope, nor comfort in the
Day of Trial; for horrible is the end of an unrighteous Generation.

And this brings me to one further Consideration, of greatest Consequence,
though I fear least regarded; that however defective Men have been as to the
deserved Obsequies of this our Royal Martyr; the Justice of Heaven failed not
to do him Right; and kindled such a Pile to his Memory, as the Romans most
pompous Magnificence of that Kind, could never reach in the least Degree;
indeed it never was, nor ever will be paralelled, till the last Conflagration;
I mean the dismal Fire of London, which to my Observation when that Judgment
was immediately upon them, there was scarce a Fanatic so hardened, as not to
think it a return from Heaven for that impious, and abominable Fact, though
since they have learnt to Palliate the Matter, or shuffle it off with Plots and
Popery, whereas could they prove, nay granting, that it no ways hinders, but
the Almighty Avenger might make use of them as well as any other secondary
Causes, to kindle the Flames of his most high Displeasure; to speak really, and
the Truth, a groundless Suspicion thereof, did so far infatuate them into a
stupid, careless Neglect, as even that seemed to be part of their Curse,
although it was impossible for the utmost of Humane Industry to stop so violent
and rapid a Current, which was driven on by one continued Breath from Heaven,
flying over all with an irresistible Force, agreeable to the Severity of that
upright, and omnipotent Power which made the Inquisition.

I shall not here omit a Passage, which however now it may seem Ridiculous,
made no little Impression upon most Men, even of Sense, at that Time, that
Nostredamus a French Man in a Ramble of Prophesies, Printed above an Hundred
Years before, expressly foretold this Fire, and for this Cause: The Original
indeed is somewhat obscure, as nothing of that Nature was ever supposed to be
positively declared; yet was it then thought so clear, as it occasioned an
Impression of the whole Book in French and English, with Annotations upon every
Stanza, according to which, take it thus rendered by a Friend of mine, with the
Original.

Le sang du Just a Londres fera fault,
Brusser par feu, de vingt and trois, les six
La Dame antique cherra de place haute,
De mesme sect plusieurs seront ouis.
A Righteous Monarch's Blood shall London spill
(Which to avenge, not expiate the Ill)
Her lofty Piles to Ruins shall be turned,
At least three parts in four to Ashes burned.
Her Ancient Temple too shall be consumed,
And many more to the like Fate be doomed.
We are told likewise that the Numbers seem to imitate the very Year in which
it should happen 1666, and really they look very much that way. That this
Account will meet a different Reception now, from what it had at first when
that Judgment was abroad amongst us, Isa. 26. 9.
I am fully sensible, yet the same Text declares that to be the time for the
Inhabitants of the Earth to learn Righteousness; and could wish our Modern Wits
had some better Argument to refel what they are so forward to run down, than an
affected ridiculous Contempt. That Reply the Soothsaier made Julius Caesar, The
Ides of March were not past, proved almost as sharp as the Daggers which soon
followed: If all Predictions of this Kind must be Exploded, because we cannot
tell from whence they come, History will have but little Faith, and Men by
degrees must dis-believe their Senses. However this is only en Passant, we
depend upon a more sure Word of Prophecy, that the true and Righteous Judge
will avenge the Blood of his Servants, and more especially upon such, as
stretch forth their Hands against his Anointed.

It was a Saying amongst the Jews, that whatever Judgments they lay under, though
upon other Accounts, there was always some Grains of the Golden Calf mixed with
them: and I have found the Application several times made, in Discourses upon
that Day, that whatever Calamities this Nation has hitherto or shall for the
future lie under, there are some Drops of this Royal Blood in the Composition;
and therefore could I prevail, one of the largest Chapels in this New St.
Paul's, should be finished all with Black Marble, and the Corpse of our Royal
Martyr removed thither, to which the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council,
should repair every 30 th of January, and with a particular Office for that sad
Occasion, Deprecate those Remains of Divine Vengeance, which may yet hang over
that City, as well as the whole Kingdom. But let this pass for a Conceit, a
Wish of mine; yet there is something of a Memento in the Monument, which no
good Man can behold, without reflecting upon the Premises, and let them alter
the Inscriptions as often as they please, they cannot alter the Decrees of
Heaven.

I shall here further add, that two other large Towns, N -- n, and W -- k, have
since met with the same Fate, in the same irresistible manner, without the
least surmise either of French, or Fireballs; and I desire it may be inquired,
whether next the forementioned Metropolis of Rebellion, as well as otherwise,
any two Corporations in England were more zealous for the Factions, and
consequently more violent against our Royal Martyr's Cause and Person. And that
the Sovereign Judge of the Universe, still continues his Inquest upon this
Righteous Prince's Sufferings, with those Generous Loyal Spirits, which
Sacrificed themselves, or were otherwise cut off upon his Account, is no more
to be doubted, from the Economy of Divine Providence, than that Jerusalem was
destroyed, for Crucifying our Savior, and Persecuting his Church; which
nevertheless, our Republican Whiggs, and Fanatics, will no more believe now,
than the Jews did then, and God grant it be not for the same Reason, hid from
their Eyes.

The last thing to be considered in this Just Defense, are those Sacred Remains
of our Royal Martyr, his (...), which for height of Matter, elegancy of Style,
and most Devout Addresses of an afflicted Soul, equally express the Resignation
of Job, and Inspiration of David. But it is not for me to recommend, what all
Men great, and good, have ever had in the profoundest Veneration: My Province
is to reflect upon those railing Shime's, who have so impudently traduced these
Glorious Relics of his extraordinary Parts, and exemplary Piety; for that
Bradshaw himself was forced to acknowledge, asking, in his Examination of
Roiston, who Printed it, how so bad a Man could write so good a Book? No better
Character of his Person, could be expected from the Monster which passed
Sentence upon his Life; and therefore it is abominable Stuff in the Defense, as
ridiculous, as impudent, though he voucheth a Peer for his Author, who says,
Let that Book be written by the King, or any body else, there is little in it
deserves Esteem, page 14. There was nothing shocked the several Sets of Rebels
more, nor made a deeper Impression upon the Minds of all such, as had any thing
left of an ingenious Recognition: Upon which, and many such like Accounts, I
always looked upon that Pamphlet, as coming from one of their Grubstreet
Scriblers, who write for Bread, and so must resolve to Sacrifice both Truth and
Reputation, in gratifying their Party, with groundless Stories, and malicious
Lies: Neither was I much beside the Mark if it came, as by a late View, I have
Reason to Conjecture, from the Author of Milton's Life, where I find this
excellent Piece, treated in the like rude, and foul-mouthed Manner, in many
Places, even to the same Expressions. That the Person wants no Assurance, his
other Treaties speak, both as to Matter and Management; but that he should
repeat all those vile Calumnies to render it Spurious, which either Dr.
Walker's Ignorance, or from him, the Faction's Impudence, have so lamely urged,
and take no notice of the Vindication which so clearly, so fully refels every
Particular as groundless and false; argues a very broad Forehead, and most
profligate disregard of whatever tends to Reputation, good Manners, or civil
Esteem: But this is not the first Time by many, that Person has discovered how
naturally he abounds with such bad Qualities: And therefore, as a worthy Divine
lately observed, Mr. Black. Sermon. Jan. 30. p. 16.
We may cease to wonder that he should have the Boldness, without Proof, and
against Proof to deny this Book's Authority; since for several Years last past,
he has endeavored to do the same with Holy Writ, whereas were it for no other
Reason, than that it is the Established National Religion, even Heathen Rome,
would have before this given him a toss into Tyber: And surely those to whom it
belongs, will sometime or other awake, and call him to Account for both. When
his Majesty we are now discoursing of, had so far baffled Henderson in that
grand Point of Episcopacy, as the peevish old Fellow in the end would not
vouchsafe him a Reply, He pleasantly tells him, you may have something of that
which Chaucer says belongs to the People of England, What they not like they
never Understand; the common Practice of Fools and Knaves; Prejudice of
Judgment upon Conviction becomes Perverseness of Will; the Conclusion they are
resolved to stick to, though convinced their Premises, prove nothing: And hence
it is that these abominable Fellows have the Confidence still to insist upon
Pamelia's Prayer, though the Vindicator has made it fully appear, that many
Impressions were wrought off, and Sold, before that appeared; as likewise how
Bradshaw and Milton imposed upon Dugard, to put it at the end of his Edition. I
remember, when a Boy, to have heard some Relations of mine say that Dugard had
lost them, and all his honest old Acquaintance, by that vile Compliance; as
likewise, that besides the King's Book, He in his Private Press had Printed Dr.
Bates's Elenchus Motuum, etc. which gave a due, that is, severe Character of
many Rebels, more especially the Regicides, upon Detection whereof they had got
the Schoolmaster under their Lash, and would not take the Rod from over him,
till gratified in this abominable Foregery.

So likewise for the Author they would assign, of that incomparable Book,
Bishop Gauden, to repeat the several Testimonies of Dr. Walker, Madam Gauden,
etc. and take no notice with how irrefragable an Evidence the Vindicator has
replied to every, the least Particular urged by them, is a Modern way of
managing Controversies, the World was never before acquainted with, and has
some Affinity with what I have heard related of a no very wise Judge in those
Times of, Rebellion, who having heard the Council on one side thought it very
clear, and took up such as spoke on the other for perplexing so good a Cause.
Nevertheless according to Civil Law, Testes Domestici are adjudg'd invalid,
which will wholly exclude the two aforementioned, who relate nothing but what
they had from the Bishop himself; a Person so Ambitious, Popular, and vainly
Affected, as because his Lady a rich Widow, and of some Quality, fell in Love
with him, fondly conceited all others must have the like Admiration; whereas
indeed his Composition was of such an unhappy Eantre deux as to fix him no
where; he had too much of a Gentile, Good-natured Humor to be a Presbyterian,
and too little of a Solid Divine for the Church of England; however being
patronized by, and matched into Puritanical Families, he ran with that Stream,
and took it very ill Thomas Goodwin was tricked into the Assembly of Divines,
when he was designed for the same Place, and County: Although about the same
time he fell into better Company, that is, Archbishop Laud's, whose Convert he
became, and that upon this Occasion: The Archbishop though kept in the Tower by
the two Houses, yet neither of them would dispose of any of his Preferment when
fallen void, but only recommended such as could make best Friends amongst them,
whereupon the Deanery of Bocking (for so that Rectory is termed) being vacant,
Dr. Gauden, by the Earl of Warwick's Interest, was recommended by the Lords,
and the Archbishop liking him the best of those many, wherewith he was every
Day Solicited, gave him his Nomination, and withal set him right as to the
several Prejudices, his Puritanical Conversation had possessed him, both against
the Archbishop in particular, and the whole Church in general, all which he
owns in his Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria, and from thence forward set himself
more impartially to consider both the Truth and Necessity of our Church
Constitutions, in order to our Nation's Peace and Happiness. But when it
appeared they designed the King's Life, then his old Party, and that he was
come over to, joined Issue, and his Interest in the former, rendered him the
better qualified to do Service, amongst the several Iuntos; and it must be
owned he used the best of his endeavors, to prevent that fatal Blow; and as
the Vindicator observes, the Protestation he writ upon that Occasion, might
occasion the Thanks and Acknowledgments he received from the Loyal Party.

But to return to the King's Book, I shall here likewise venture to give a
little Account of my own Private Knowledge; for going to School with a Reverend
Sequestered Divine, (during those times of Anarchy, and Commonwealthism) I
remember to have heard him frequently mention, with much Respect, and tender
Affection, his Brother Symonds; that they were Comrades together in the King's
Quarters, all that War; from whence they accompanied one another beyond Seas;
and that upon their return to London, Dr. Gauden very kindly treated, and
relieved them both, (they having been old Acquaintance, and all Puritans, till
they saw what Madnesses that desperate Party ran into) furnished my Master with
Money to go to his Family in Suffolk, and as he would say, was very liberal to
Brother Symonds, whilst he attended upon Printing the King's Book; and this
agrees with what the worthy Vindicator relates from William Allen, sometimes
Servant to the Doctor, that the Copy was borrowed of Mr. Symonds, p. 32. which
his Charitable Obligations in those Necessitous Times, might easily command.
And upon this doubtless was the Doctor's Claim founded; Mr. Symonds dying soon
after at Graves-End, stealing over to the Young King, then at the Hague, there
was no other Copy left, nor indeed need of any, the Book being Printed, but to
serve a false Pretense. Nevertheless it was very cunningly done of the Doctor
to continue it a Secret at the Restoration; for had it been then as publicly
pretended to as now, more than enough would have appeared to divest him of his
borrowed Plumes, and sufficiently expose both his Folly and Presumption; as
another was, though not in a pretense of so high a Nature, which it may not be
amiss here to relate; when at that time the two Bishops, Sheldon, and Morley
were more especially entrusted to recommend such Suffering Divines, as deserved
Preferment, upon the Church's Re-establishment; a certain Person came to the
latter, Bishop Morley, desiring to be considered upon that Account; he having
moreover written several Things very beneficial to the King's Interest; the
Bishop desired to know what they were, that he would name some one Piece;
whereto he replied, Killing no Murder; nay said the Bishop, herein you must
excuse me, that was written by a Lay Man, and beyond Seas, I saw every Page as
it was Penned before dry upon the Paper: And there is no doubt had Dr. Gauden
made his Declaration then, before the same Bishop, he would have made the like
Reply, or something of that Nature, which should as easily disprove him; and
that might have hindered his first Advance, and next Remove; as likewise, saved
the Expense of Clapham-house, which if it were built upon an Expectation of
Winchester, was such a Vanity as none but the two Brothers could be guilty of;
for had the Thing been really done, the pretended Secret a Truth, there were
several others who had done, and suffered to a much higher degree, and every
way infinitely more deserving both of Church and Crown.

What the Vindicator further urges as to their different Styles, must likewise
be absolutely convincing, to every unprejudiced Mind; no two Things as to
Speech and Writing, can bear a greater Disproportion, than that Strength of
Reason, and Majesty of Expression, which flows through every Line of the one;
compared with those Frothy, Metaphorical Flourishes, the sole-set off to
whatever the other said or writ. It well became his Eminence and Gravity to
write an Apology for Women's Painting, yet that Discourse of Artificial Beauty
was certainly his, and the Language has great Affinity with the Subject, a
daub a fucus of Words, without any thing underneath, either Solid or
Satisfactory. And I would desire the Author of the forementioned Life, (who as
he abounds in Words, so pretends to Sense,) that he, and his Fraternity, would
for a little while divert their Thoughts and Discourse, otherwise continually
employed in undermining Religion and Government, in considering the
forementioned Difference both as to Words and Matter, and then resolve whether
there is not the same Disproportion, as between the abominable Rhymes, and
Prose, of Withers, Prynn, and Vicars, compared with that Masculine way of
Expression their admired Milton has in both those Kinds, the abused
Excellencies of a very bad Man. In the mean while it looks not well, and can
bode no good to the Nation, that upon a little Turn of the Monarchy, no
Dissolution, the most injured Prince which ever Reigned, and the best Defense
injured Innocence ever made, and so allowed by all Men of Judgment and
Integrity for half a Century together, should on a sudden be run down, and
exploded, not disproved, by a Pragmatical Set of young Upstarts, who think
themselves wise enough to control all Ancient Constitutions, both Sacred and
Civil, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities: But not to nauseate the
foul Stomachs, or Minds rather, of their Deistships with fulsom Scripture, I
shall remit them to the just Censure of unexceptionable Tully, Pro Ba^^^
Estenim Saeculi hujus labes quaedam and macula, virtuti invidere, vel ipsum
florem Dignitatis infringere.

The CONCLUSION.
IT was an Observation I made at the Beginning, that whatever Distempers happen
to the Head, they arise from such Malignant Vapors, or too violent Concourse
of Spirits, which the Body sends up; and this whole Book, as big as it is, has
been little else than an Enlargement upon, and Proof of, that sad Truth, making
it appear, that our many State-Empyricks have proceeded in so odd a Course, as
to heigthen the Crisis, and so habituate the Indisposition, as it seems gone
beyond, not only their own, but all abler Men's Cure: For as the Learneder
Physicians further declare, when that Sovereign Part comes to be once jog'd,
either with Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Frenzies, etc. though for the present it
may be recovered from that Fit, yet they seldom find it brought to that
Strength of Sense or Health, as formerly, and under continual Apprehensions of
a more dangerous Relapse. How many returns we have had of this Kind, is a very
Melancholy Reflection; to be sure we seem so much weakened thereby, in our
Intellectual Part, as to admit none but the same, or such like Quacks as first
brought us into this unhappy Condition, and have all along discovered, that
they design more the Trial of their own foolish Experiments, than to Reestate
us in that perfect Vigor of Health and Strength, which before their tampering,
we abundantly enjoyed: And hereupon some have further taken notice that a
Gubernandi Pruritus seems to have superseded that other of Disputandi; an
Epidemical Itch of being all Governors, sets not only our Fingers, but our
Heads on Work; has more than once already brought us from Scratching to right
down Blows, and in the end must certainly ruin all Government. And therefore to
step out of these cloudy Allegories, I shall presume here in the Close, frankly
to declare, that as our Indisposition first began, from rejecting that
Excellent Regimen, wherewith this Royal Martyr and his Predecessors, for so
long a Time perserv'd us in perfect Health and Happiness: So perhaps after
another half Century of Experiments, we may be brought to full Conviction, that
nothing but that old Course, can Work an effectual Cure.

And from hence doubtless more especially it is, that our Commonwealth
Impostors, (who cannot live without Opposition, even amongst themselves, when
they have gained their Point upon others) continue to asperse the Memory of
this Excellent Prince, with a Spite inveterate as Hell, and false as their own
Souls, and with an Impudence, none but themselves can reach. To take no Notice
of whatever is said in his Vindication, though clear even to Demonstration, or
as the Noonday Sun; I say were not these Prejudices perpetually kept up
against his Person and Government, wherein they first began their Freaks, and
set the whole Nation a madding, most of the People, as the Spanish Proverb
propounds, might chance to rise Sober and Wise some few Mornings together, and
then not only their Projects, but the Projectors would soon meet with such an
End as they deserve.

Could I think these Provocations might have any Influence upon them, so as to
reply, or own a Conviction, I should then add this further Request, To
consider, and from thence try what they can object against that great, yet
withal just Account, Dr. Perencheif gives both as to the Active and Passive
Part of his most Religious Deportment, when their Mouths, and their Canon
roared with equal Force, and Noise against him; for that is no Hyperbole or
strain of Rhetoric from the Doctor's Loyal and Affectionate Pen, but a
Collection of such Observations, as several Noble and Worthy Persons made
during their Attendance upon him, especially under his Confinement, and was
obliged alone to Combat those many Brutish Adversaries, who had nothing but
the Shape of Men, which many Conflicts rather than Disputes, he managed with so
much Judgment, Temper, and truly Conscientious Care, both of his own Soul, and
People's Safty, as astonished those hardened Reprobates, which would not be
convinced, and fully assured all others, that Almighty God never fails to
furnish great and good Men with Assistances answerable to the Afflictions he
brings them under; whereto he was likewise adapted from that nat^^ral
Steadiness of Mind his very Infant Studies applied themselves unto; for I find
when Prince of Wales, at an Entertainment in Oxon, he Matriculated himself, as
their Custom is, a Member of that University, by writing this Sentence, Si vis
omnia Subjicere, Subjice te rationi; according to which the whole Course of his
Life was most exactly steered, both in Prosperity and Adversity. Though Plato may
be thought a little partial to his own Profession, yet was it a pretty Conceit,
That nothing conduced more to the Happiness of any State, than to have their
Kings Philosophers, or Philosophers Kings: To be sure the forementioned Golden
Rule spoke so much of both, as had his Parliaments in any degree endeavored
the same, the fabulous Golden Age, might have found here, something of Reality;
but they were for Subjecting their King rather than themselves, and by that
means subjected all to Slavery and Confusion.

There is but one Mistake I shall further take Notice of, wherewith this
Petulant, Licentious Humor, of Libelling and Lying, has prejudiced and
prepossest many a good Man, who are thereupon prone to think of a vast
difference between Queen Elizabeth, and the two following Reigns; whereas
paying all the profoundest Defference to that Wise and Happy Princess, there
was a continual Advance, in every thing but the Humor and good Disposition of
the People, for nigh 40 Years after: To be sure during King Charles's first
Fifeteen, the Wealth, and Trade of the Nation was Trebled to what it had been
at any time in her Days, and every thing else Proportionable; and though the
Trade is, or at leastwise was till of late, upon the Improve; yet take all
things together, and I am afraid the Child is still unborn who may see them so
again; their sole Defects were in reference to themselves, studying more the
Peoples Satisfaction, than their own Security, all which I hope has been made
out in the Premises.

And here I must take leave of our Royal Martyr, without venturing to
Characterise those Divine, Superlative Perfections, the ablest Pens could never
yet fully reach. As Man, what they have borrowed from Vell. Paterc. is highly
applicable, Homo virtuti simillimus, and per omnia Ingenio, Diis quam Hominibus
proprior, etc. and as Christian none ever came nigher that Man of Sorrows than
He; So that however some foul-mouth Hell Hounds still continue to Bark at, and
Blaspheme his Memory, there is no doubt but less Partial Posterity, will
unanimously agree with all good Men now, and Seat him in the uppermost Room
amongst those Sacred Sufferers, OF WHOM THE WORLD WAS NOT WORTHY.

FINIS.

