Demetrius and the Crafts-men: A SERMON Preached at the Berkshire Assizes HELD
IN ABINGDON August the 7 th. 1683.

By William Baron Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Rector of
Hampstead-Marshal and Enborne in the County of Berks.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the Pope's Head in the New-Exchange in
the Strand, MDCLXXXIII.

To the Right Worshipful JOHN WHITWICK Esquire High-Seriff of BERKS. With all the
Loyal Addressors at the last Assizes, whether of the Grand Jury, or other
Deputy-Leivtenants, Justices of the Peace, etc.
Gentlemen,
I Must beg your justification of this pedant and Commonplace Apology,
wherewith I am obliged to Preface my self to the Reader, viz. that you not only
earnestly requested, but even forced a promise from me of putting this
discourse in Print, which I mention not so much in acknowledgment of that
undeserved respect you were pleased to show me, (although I should be the worst
of men not to own so great an obligation) nor to beg your protection against
the malice and calumnies of the many inveterate Factions, (for I know it is more
than you can do for your selves.) But to declare the aversion I have ever had
to appear in this kind, with the loss of that freedom I have formerly taken in
censuring other men's too great forwardness herein? for I ever commiserated the
poor burdened Press, and amongst Friends, frequently reflected upon our many
self-admiring Authors, with those little tricks and Artifices, which of my
knowledge are used to get abroad by public order, or especial command;
Besides, as I was engaged to serve Mr. High Sheriff in this way of my
profession (as you Sir can testify) before this last Hellish Conspiracy was
discovered, so would I not be thought to have the more freely express^d my self
upon the Discovery, for I bless God, I never believ^d better of the Party, than
they have now approved themselves, and therefore left to my own choice, should
think it too late to express my resentments, when by the infinite mercy of
Heaven they are as despicable as they were sometimes dangerous: But since I am
thus put upon unbosoming my thoughts, give me leave further to declare a
suspicion, that our prudential Politicians with their Trimming Moderation (who
now indeed cry peccavi with a non putaram, truly, I could not have thought that
any English Spirit had been of such a temper) are Hypocrites rather than Fools,
and I am still afraid that many who now kiss the hand, wished well to the
enterprise in their hearts, and despair not of a better opportunity to cut the
throat, whilst that malicious monkish wit upon the great Erasmus hanging
between Heaven and Hell, may be applied to many of our Wise Discreet Men, who
take care to keep themselves equally poised between Monarchy and Commonwealth;
Had the Design indeed newly dropped out of the Clouds, from the Prince of the
Air, or been some antiquated project of Machiavel or Borgia, a sober well
meaning intention might have been imposed upon by those many fair Glosses which
are never wanting upon such occasions, but when it is one continued Scene of
villainy carried on for Forty (I may say for Fourscore) years together, and now
begun to be acted over again by many of the same persons, all upon the same
principles; nay, so dull is their invention, by the same method too, by the
same improbable Stories, false suggestions, and most scandalous reproaches upon
all men that stand up for Peace and Truth, Religion or Loyalty; How can any man
of sense debauch his Reason or Charity so far, as to believe that such Vipers
have all on a sudden lost their Stings, or that they will not naturally
produce a Generation of the same kind? especially when we find them equally
impenitent for the mischiefs they have formerly done, and partial in their
present Judgment and representation of things; Thus the 5th. of November was a
Hellish Bloody Plot, but the 30th. of January's Parricide must not be called to
remembrance; the Court must be arraigned of Arbitrary Designs, but not one
single Member suspected of Commonwealthism; and therefore whilst our Demagogues
were in being to defend the established Church was nothing less than Popery;
and to compare Eighty with Forty One, the direct way into T -- ms Inquisition,
as if no man living could remember the Arbitrary arrogance of a Republican
Junto with our twenty years Captivity under a Rebel Sword: or to speak of our
Religious concerns, as if Ignatius Loyola and John Calvin had not both set up
about the same time, or our poor Church and Nation suffered as much from the
Presbyterians as Jesuits.

But in this Gentlemen, as well as in the following discourse, I present you
with nothing but your own thoughts, which as they are much better expressed in
your Loyal Address to His Majesty, so do you still more effectually declare
them in a continued steady vigor for His Service and Preservation. E. of
Craven.
And as there is one Great GoodMan to whose Bounty and Favor, I must, (under
God) solely attribute whatever relates to my well being in this life, so I
esteem it no mean part of my happiness that He and Providence has fixed me
amongst a company of worthy Persons, who will set a value upon a man, though be
has nothing more to recommend him than an unfeigned Zeal for the Church and
State, King and Government, but so good a Principle will buoy up any ordinary
parts, and alone enable its votaries to laugh at, and defy, the froppishness
and falsehood of a gainsaying disobedient People, whom I should not despair
shortly to see of another temper; had you Gentlemen the same influence upon our
little Commonwealth Corporations, as you have upon the out-lying Factions: But
since it is the will of Heaven that these Canaanites should be continued in the
Land, doubtless it will now on all hands be thought requisite to have such an
eye upon them, that it may not be in their power to quench the light of our
Israel, or disturb the Peace of Sion.

And if by this means we can at last be thoroughly awakened into a sense of
danger, it will be such light out of darkness, such an unexpected good from so
Hellish an intended Evil, as those malevolent Spirits whom the disappointments
cannot convert, the envy must necessarily confound, whilst our repeated
deliverances having wearied the malice of their attempts, we may by Gods
blessing, arrive in the end at that happy settlement, which you, and all good
men endeavor, and that your endeavors may fully take effect, (amongst many
thousand others, more worthy to prevail) shall never want the incessant Prayers
of

Honored Sirs, Your most Unfeigned Faithful Servant WILL. BARON.

Acts 19.38. Wherefore if Demetrius and the Crafts-men which are with him, have
a matter against any man, the Law is open, and there are Deputies, let them
implead one another.


THere is such a mutual correspondence between our public and private
welfare, every man's particular interest so unavoidably depends upon the common
good, that our first thoughts may probably suggest, that Universal principle of
Self-Preservation should equally concern us for both: But upon more exact
consideration, we shall find Man in his single capacity is centered only upon
himself without any different Parties, any contrary Votes to Retard or Oppose
him; and will naturally make that the ultimate end of all his undertakings,
whatever other obligations may lie upon him from the dictates of right reason,
or the compacts of humane society engage him unto: whereas the Body Politic is
so artificial a piece, made up of so many different Tempers and Constitutions,
Humors, Interests, and Designs, that, like other curious Compositions, every
unhappy jog, every rough hand, or foul breath, is liable to disorder, if not
quite destroy it. And next to the all-disposing Providence of Heaven, I cannot
assign any other cause but this, of those many Revolutions which have so
frequently happened in the World, that the whole Earth should ever since the
Creation, have been as it were an Akeldama; and the Histories of all Ages, and
Places too, contain little else than so many Records of Blood and Slaughter,
Desolation and Ruin: whilst Government becomes more mortal than the Members
whereof it consists; not an Age does pass without many signal Revolutions, and
fatal Catastrophes. Nay, that the same Mischiefs do not happen every day, is
not for want of evil Spirits to foment and raise them up; but from the prudent
management of some more Peaceable dispositions, who by the assistance of that
Divine Power Psalm. 65 7.
which stilleth the raging of the Seas, are sometimes able to quell the noise
of these Seditious Waves, and Madness of such People.

A remarkable instance of this kind, we have in the whole precedent passage
unto which my Text relates, where a few Factious Mechanics, under pretense of
decay of Trade, and Innovation in Religion, had put the whole City of Epesus
into an uproar; and so far engaged the Rabble to their Party, that St. Paul
(could they have found him) and all others whom they had a pique against, must
be exposed to wild Beasts, just as Bloody and Merciless as themselves. Thus for
some hours the hubbub continued, and though ver. 32.
few of them knew why they were come together, yet still great was Diana of the
Ephesians, Religion and Property their only clamor. But as their Throats grew
hoarse, their Passions began to cool, and so gave way for this discourse of the
Town Clerk, as we translate it; but he was indeed the (...) the Register who
Recorded the Names of all such as gained any prizes in the several Games at
this solemn Festival of their so much admired Deity; by reason of which Office
he had the greater influence upon them, and might the more freely expostulate
about the Illegality of their proceedings: Having therefore harangu'd them with
the acknowledged greatness of that Diana, they were so Zealous for ver. 35. and
given a touch at the rashness of this Tumultuous Assembly, for which in all
probability they would be called in question, ver. 36. He declares in the 37 th
the inoffensive deportment of those persons they clamoured so much against:
Nevertheless if they thought themselves agriev'd, He tells them in my Text of a
more regular course which they ought to have taken, and according to which, if
the action will bear it, they may still proceed. Wherefore if Demetrius, etc.

The words then seem to be an Abridgement of the whole precedent disturbance,
wherein with very little assistance from the context, we may consider these
five several parts, or observable passages.

1. First, here are the Parties concerned, their Quality and Profession,
Demetrius and the Craftsmen, etc. 2. Secondly, here is an action supposed, a
complaint or grievance pretended, for so the word (...) does some times
signify an Action, Process, or Indictment; and then (...) denotes a matter of
accusation. 3. Thirdly, Here is their way of redress tacitly reflected upon
both as unjust and dangerous. 4. Fourthly, Here is the regular course they
ought to have taken, let them implead one another. 5. Fifthly, Here are all
pretenses cut off for their not proceeding according to this regular course, in
that first there was no denial of Justice, the Law was open, nor secondly was
there any delay of Justice, there are Deputies.
Of which several parts, together with some few Inferences by way of
Application, with as much brevity as you can expect, or your many other weighty
Affairs require.

1. First, Here are the Parties concerned, their Quality, and Profession,
Demetrius and the Craftsmen; what these Shrines were which caused all this
stir, would be too tedious a digression critically to relate: In general, it is
concluded they were little Cabinets or Chaplets of Silver, with the Image of
Diana in them; which every man was at liberty to purchase for the use of his
private Superstition, Devotion I cannot call it; so that the business of these
Artificers was much like that of the Agnus Dei, and other such like
Trinket-makers in the Church of Rome; had therefore St. Paul's Doctrine been
agreeable to that of St. Peter's prerended Successor now there, in all
probability these Craftsmen would have been as Zealous for the change, as they
were violent against any alteration, since for every Shrine, they might have
been employed to make ten times as many Saints. But our Apostles Commission was
quite otherwise, to call upon, Acts 17.30. 1 Cor. 12.2.
and exhort all men every where to repent, and particularly to turn from those
dumb Idols unto the living God; And this the Devil knew very well, which made
him take occasion from these men's avarice, to suppress (if possible) the
further progress of those glorious Truths, which would totally subvert his
Kingdom of Darkness, and some probability there was of an expected success; for
when that evil Spirit enters into a multitude, its name is Legion to purpose,
when Faction comes once to be incorporated, and the several malcontents dare
to enter into Associations; when every rude Mechanic will presume to censure
Affairs of State, and admire none but a smooth Tongued Demetrius, who will be
sure to represent things at the greatest disadvantage: Let the Cedars of
Lebanon look to it, or these Brambles will burn them down; all things, both
Sacred and Civil, will soon be trampled under foot by their Rage and Fury.

2. Secondly, We are to consider the matter of complaint, the pretended
grievance, or accusation, which is here supposed by the Town Clerk; but fully
enlarged upon in Demetrius's Seditious Rethorick at the 27 th. Verse, By St.
Paul's Preaching that they be no Gods which are made with hands, not only their
Craft was in danger to be set at naught, but their Temple and great Godess
despised; The Schools tell us of a causa latens and causa patens, one thing
pretended, when another occasioned the pretense; and here we find a doubie
Inducement urged by our Appron'd Orator, Great was Diana, but greater were her
Shrines. Religion might have some influence, but Interest much more; had they
not by this Craft got their wealth, so cold would have been their Zeal, that
her Altars might have frozen. Innovations in Religion, were indeed by the
Gentiles themselves, looked upon as dangerous, and the great Augustus his
Favorite told him, There were no persons he ought to be so severe upon, as they
that introduced a Worship contrary to the established Laws; which was the
reason doubtless, that Christianity met with so much opposition, and
notwithstanding its manifold superlative excellencies, was so long before the
Civil Power gave it countenance: but whatsoever is done, either upon this, or
any other account, supposes a due procedure, a regular course of Justice,
without committing so Sacred a matter to the Arbitrage of the Rabble, the Pious
Whimsies, not to say Religious Cheats, of self designing men; yet, make the
Observatton where you please, even amongst the demurest Professors of our most
holy Religion, and all pretenses of this kind will be found no better, when it
comes once under a popular Reformation, it is made a stalking horse to the
vilest enterprises, where every man wears the Pharisees Vizzard, proportions
his Devotion to the Intreague he has on foot: So far as it answers their
Ambition, satisfies their Avarice, gratifies their Revenge, promotes a Party,
or carries on a Design, with Jehu none shall be more ready to express their
Zeal, although in so preposterous a mannar, as half an eye may discover, they
that bawl lowdest on its behalf, resolve to stifle it in the noise; Fight for
its defense till it is smothered in the Blood they spill. Thus I say it has been
always found, but more especially of late; he that is of a Godly Party, shall
in spite of the deepest guilt, be a Godlyman, so meritorious a thing with some
it is to be Factious, that it assumes the place of Charity, and covers a
multitude of Sins; in the mean while, can we imagine any thing should more
highly provoke the Majesty of Heaven, then to see such Pearls trodden underfoot
by Swine, that Prayer, which was designed to open the Gates of Heaven, should
devour Widows Houses, and all other his most Sacred Ordinances, instead of
purchasing an Eternal Inheritance, be prostituted to the Lusts, the Humors,
and Interests of Hypocrites, Atheists, and such like unreasonable men?

3. Thirdly, We are to consider their manner of redress, which is here tacitly
reflected upon, both as unjust, and dangerous. 1 st. Unjust, That they who were
a Party, should presume to Judge, give Sentence, and be Executioners too
themselves; an Infallible sign of a bad Cause, and worse intention, by not
appealing to the Law for right, it was abundantly evident they designed others
no little wrong. But then 2 dly. this way of proceeding was not more unjust,
than dangerous; for so it is declared at the 40 verse, We are in danger to be
called in question for this days uproar, the Romans were a Wise and Generous,
but withal a Jealous Nation, as they indulged their conquests with more
liberty than could be many times expected; so when it appeared that people
would not be contained within those just and reasonable bounds they knew well
enough how to take up the Rains, to tame the exorbitancy of such unmanageable
Spirits. And indeed not only they, but any other Civilis'd Nation must look
upon such proceedings as of dangerous consequence, to strike at the very
Foundation of Government, and as far as in them lies, bring all things back to a
state of Nature, or rather a Chaos of confusion. Yet this principle, so
generally exploded by all sober Heathens, we have found not only put in
practice, but also justified, by some Christian Libertines of our present Age,
who will assume to themselves a power of controlling any Government, either in
Church, or State, upon a twofold account, the one Temporal, the other
Spiritual; The Right of the People, and the Jurisdiction of Conscience; two
worthy Topics, as impertinent; and false, as they are popular; But because of
their Popularity, it will be requisite to take notice of their impertinency.
And,

1. First, For the Right of the People, it is a mere Chymaera, without
existence either in Reason or Policy, any further than it is included in those
Laws and Constitutions which are accomodated to the welfare of the whole; for
when a Government is once fixed, and the many advantages thereby accrewing,
evidently appear; it is nonsense to think any one single, or supposed
inconvenience should un-hinge all again; for as Grotius very well applies that
of the De Ju Bell. and Pa.
Comedian, Aut haec cum illis sunt habenda, aut illa cum his mittenda sunt,
there is nothing perfect in this life, and more especially in this case, they
that pretend to make things better, have constantly altered them much for the
worse; whilst this very cheat of asserting the Peoples right, has been often
experienced the most compendious way to make them Slaves; and the deluded Asses
found themselves in the end, hardest ridden by these new Masters which
flattered them with the best usage, and greatest Freedom.

Tacit Ann. lib. 4.
Thus the Judicious Historian observed, Vt imperium evertant, libertatem
proferunt si perverterint, libertatem ipsam aggredientur. What dismal
convulsions of state happened in the Roman Commonwealth, when the people were
engaged in the several Factions of the great ones; and how was there more Blood
spilt in those unnatural Quarrels, than in the Conquest of the whole known
World. And how much Treasure, Strength, and Freedom have not we lost since, by
the like Seditious infatuations, and are not yet secure from putting on the
same or a heavier Yoke, for as in great Tempests, the Sea does not presently
calm, though the wind be down which raised the Storm: So those Debaucheries
upon the Spirits of men, those unquiet and Factious Principles which our late
times of Anarchy and Confusion introduced, are still upon the Fret, and were
very lately bidding fair for so much popular breath as might raise a second
Storm. And till I can find one instance wherein the Peoples Right has not been
thus made use of, to betray both them and the Government at once, I must crave
leave to rank all such pretended Patriots amongst that race of men whom Solomon
forbids us Prove. 24.21.
to meddle with, because so much given to change. But granting this, that the
Body, the outward man (as they term it) may be restrained by the power of Laws,
and prudence of Magistrates; yet still the Soul ought to be free, Conscience
must have no restraint, which is our Christian Libertines.

2. Second Plea, the Jurisdiction of Conscience: We find here at the 31 st.
verse, amongst this Rabble of Ryoters, some cried one thing, some another, (for
the Assembly was confused) without knowing wherefore they came together, or
what they would be at; and just such a Stale is Conscience made to all the
humoursom Capricio's of Faction and Folly; every perverse Will; every private
Fancy, and particular Opinion; every causeless Scruple, slight Persuasion, or
groundless Fear, is cried up for the Great Diana of Conscience; and they that
dare to contradict or oppose it, must expect St. Paul's Fate here at Ephesus,
and provide to fight with Beasts in the shape of men. Neither will time permit,
nor the subject oblige me exactly to state the case; and therefore I shall only
observe in general, That Conscience in Spiritual, in Religious Concerns, is the
same with Judgment in Temporal Affairs, and consists in a sound and well
grounded apprehension of things; which too many persons having not patience to
attend to, or discretion to enquire after, take up with every pious whimsey,
every strong delusion, or prejudiciate opinion, and obtrude them upon the world
under this specious title of Conscience; whereas, alas! they are but so many
Distempers of the mind, and those dangerous enough; a kind of spiritual Spleen,
which as it seldom kills, so is it rarely cured but continually renders the
parties which it affects uneasy to themselves, and all they converse with. And
therefore some have not improperly styled Conscience, the Phanaticks Pope,
whilst the King and Triple Crown are contending for Supremacy; That puts in
against both, and will be Supreme in all Causes, Ecclesiastical and Civil: But
the contrary is evident in that, the same God, who we grant erected a Tribunal
in every man's breast, and there set Conscience to be Judge; has erected other
Tribunals of Justice, to which Conscience it self is subjected, Romans 13.5. Ye
must needs be subject not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake; And if we
cannot reconcile our obedience to our Parents, to our Prince, and Governors,
with what that dictates we sin against God, whilst we obey our Conscience. For
the more clear deciding which controversy, there is a third Tribunal in Heaven,
to which all Judges, (Conscience and all,) must give an account one day, where
those partial Decrees we have passed here in our own favor will be far from
Authentic Records; and when we think our Consciences should answer for us, we
must answer for our Consciences, which it is to be feared (upon Trial) will
prove the greatest offenders.

4. Fourthly, we considered here the regular course they ought to have taken,
which is by way of accusation or Indictment, Let them implead one another,
(...) says the Platonist, God made the World not with hands, but by Reason,
Council, and Order; having from all Eternity, (as the Schools very well
conjecture) prescribed himself a rule by which he would proceed in the Creation
and Government of the Universe, where every particular Being should have
likewise a rule fixed, and be obliged to act according to the emanations of his
Divine will. Now all Goverments here below, are, or at leastwise ought to be,
so many transcripts of this original which is set us from above; neither is it
possible there should be any Communities of men, or intercourse of Societies,
without a mutual obligation to observe such Rules of right and wrong, good and
evil, as natural Conscience shall dictate, or humane Reason judge to be
expedient; the Wisdom of all Nations having been measured by nothing so much as
the excellency of their Laws, and prudence of Administration; where every
Member of this great Body is considered according to the Circumstances it lies
under, the Office it performs; and so far encouraged therein, as to prosecute
its Province, its Duty, with industry and satisfaction: But when we are Partial
on the One side, or Mutinous on the Other; 1 Cor. 12.
When the eye shall say to the hand, I have no need of thee, or the Feet to the
Head, I want not your direction; as St. Paul very elegantly applies it to the
Spiritual, so would it make such a Schism, such a disorder in any Body
politic, as those wholesome preservatives, those Laws I mean, which were
designed for the continuance of its health, are the first things thrown out of
doors; whilst so many buisy Empericks will be applying their new prescriptions,
that it is ten times worse than death to fall under such hands; yet that too is
certain in the end, although without the least assurance of a quiet Grave. That
the Balance therefore may be kept even, Justice holds the Scales; all
Controversies of meum and tuum, right and wrong, are to be determined by
persons, not only unconcerned in the Affair, but of Parts, of Abilities, both
Intellectual and Moral, answerable to so great a Trust; a clear understanding,
with an unbias'd integrity. Thus the great Orator at Athens (...), Demos^h. in
Core.
(...), the Plaintiff is to seek for redress from the Laws, not his own
Passions, or Power; which, as it is one of the first Articles agreed upon in
all humane Polity; so, duly observed, neither God nor Caesar, Prince nor
People, could be imposed upon. If therefore Demetrius and his Faction, or any
other such froward dispositions, will stand out against that which is the
Universal security of all mankind, it is but sit they should quit civil
converse, and voluntarily betake themselves to Nebuchadnezzar's fate, although
(without doubt) many Beasts there are which care not for such tempers herding
amongst them, especial if we consider,

5. The fifth and last Observable from the Text, where all pretenses are cut
off for their not proceeding according to this regular course; in that, 1 st.
there was no denial of Justice, the Law was open; neither, 2 dly. was there any
delay of Justice, there were Deputies ready.

1. First, there was no denial of Justice, the Law was open; as necessity is
many times alleged without any just cause, so when there is just cause indeed,
all other obligations cease: To be sure it could not take place here, for the
Law was open; that is, 1. free and easy to all parties, and all conditions,
every one might have access to the Courts of Judicature, and expect redress
according as the matter impleaded should require; or, 2 dly. the Law was open;
that is, clear and plain, -- Haud ambagibus
Implicita, sed quae, regulisaequi and boni
Suffulta, rudibus pariter and doctis patent.
without those obscure ambiguities, and subtle niceties, which make even the
Laws themselves a share, advance the interest of a profession to the more
certain ruin of the injured Party, whilst the whole current of Justice is
perverted by the crafty evasions and endless cavils of covetous and contentious
Spirits. It is a severe reflection which Livy makes upon the Age he lived in,
in comparison with the primitive simplicity of their so-much-renowned
Commonwealth; Nondum haec negligentia Deum ve^erat, nec interpretando sibi
quisque jus jurandum and leges aptas spciebat, sed suos potius mores ad ea
accommodabat: When men had a true sense of a Deity, and regarded the solemnity
of an Oath, they would not forswear themselves out of any partial respect
either to Friend or Interest; neither was it looked upon as an useful study to
find out flaws in an Act of State, or gratify the Lusts and Humors of men in
opposition to the express letter of the Law, as well as intention of the
Legislator. But however such corruptions as these might have crept into other
places, it seems they had not yet reached Ephesus, the Law was open there;
Justice had its free and clear current, without any denial; Neither,

2. Secondly, was there any delay of Justice, there were Deputies: Absalon's
insinuation to the people was founded upon a defect in this case, 2 Samuel 15.3.
See, thy matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed from the King
to hear thee; O that I were made Judge in the Land, etc. And although without
doubt it was as ill grounded as some pretended Grievances we have found since
nigher home, yet the cheat prevailed so far in the end, as the Text says, by
this stratagem he stole the hearts of the men of Israel. So infectious is the
breath of Faction, that a David, a Prince of Gods immediate choice, could not
be free from their calumnies; nay, which is worse, must see his own Child made
the property of their Designs. Nevertheless, from hence it appears how uneasy
delays are, which have been since (to a Proverb) thought worse than denials:
neither indeed is there any thing puts a greater damp upon men's spirits, than
to live in continual expectation of that Right, which by daily procrastinations
they find themselves never likely to enjoy. Here again at Ephesus things went
better; for the Deputies, or rather the Pro-consuls, as the word (...)
signifies, (who were the chief Ministers of Justice, sent every year from Rome
into their several Provinces) were now present there, and held their Courts of
Judicatute: So that a Tumult which is not at any time to be endured, in this
Juncture speaks a more than ordinary insolence, especially since all sober men
must be satisfied with so prudent a management as the Town Clerk, the Register,
seems here to intimate, where Justice was truly blind, every thing carried with
an even and impartial hand, neither denial nor delay in the Case, no cunning
evasions could impose upon the Court, nor clandestine combinations of the
little Law-managers squeese the Pockets of their Clyents; A misplaced word did
not put back a good Cause, nor any personal Reflection from a foul mouthed
Advocate promote a bad one; there was no tossing of Causes from one Court to
another, nor twenty years attendance without Equity at the last: but all things
going off with a just Sentence, and quick dispatch, we cannot but pronounce
Psalm. 14.4.15.
the people happy which were in such a case; what St. Paul endeavored, being
the only thing left to make them happier, in having the Lord for their God.

Thus with promised brevity have I run over the several parts of my Text. There
remains now the Applicateon, which, should I bring it wholly to the occasion of
your present Assembling, would be found both apposite and natural; for as the
business is more especially matters of impleading, so is the Law open, and here
are the Reverend Deputies, of whose Candor and Integrity you have already had,
and will now find the most satisfactory experience. But to avoid the
nauceousness of personal addresses, or commendations, and all pragmatical
intermedlings with what belongs to a distinct profession; my application shall
relate to our more Universal concern, as we are men, and as we are Christians,
as we are subject to Laws, and as our well-being depends upon the due execution
of those Laws unto which we are Subject; To this purpose I shall crave leave to
raise two or three Inferences from what has been already discoursed, and so
put an end to any further exercise of your Patience.

1. First, Then the 1 st. thing I infer, is the great difference between the
temper of primitive Christanity, and that of our Religious pretenders in these
later Ages: For doubtless could Demetrius have promised himself any advantage
from the Law, he would never have taken so illegal a course; Nay the
Town Clerk, in the precedent verse, wholly acquits St. Paul and his Companions,
from Blaspheming their Goddess (although we may well believe they sufficiently
abhorred that Hellish Idolatry) or any other rude deportment, which might give
occasion of offense to men of sense and civility. A commission indeed they had
received from the King of Heaven, and it concerned them to be exact in the
execution thereof; But then his instructions as to the manner were as carefully
to be observed, which confined them to strength of Argument, and allegations of
Scripture; with Modesty of Behavior, Meekness, and Charity, to represent those
errors under which the World then lay, assert the Truth, convert misbelievers,
and, in a word, bring them all to the knowledge of the only true God: This was
the method they took; These were the weapons which subdued Kingdoms, made the
Cross of Christ the Romans Standard, and his Gospel the joy of the whole Earth:
There was no opposing Magistracy, no fighting the Lord's Battle against Carnal
Powers, no Holy Leagues, no Covenants, nor Associations; These are the spurious
Doctrines and Practices of our modern Pretenders, who have fought for Religion
till it is almost banished Christendom, and made their many zealous undertakings
but one continued Mystery of Iniquity.

2. Secondly. The second thing I infer, is, the opinion which all sober
Heathens had of Tumultuous Assemblies, and Riotous Reformations; common
observation informed them, that if it comes to a hanc populus, if the people
may alter the Government, as the Painter once for a trial let them do his
Picture, it will prove such a Monster at last, as every wise man with reason
may be afrighted at. Affairs were some time at this pass in the Jewish State,
Judges 17.6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes, Yet, as the consequent thereof, the Spirit of
God records a number of such heinous Enormities, and gross Violations, as are
scarce to be paralleled in any History, Sacred or Profane. And a wise Roman
reflecting upon the like Practices in his own time, lays down this as an
experienced Truth, It was better to live where Nothing, than where All things
were lawful. And, as was partly observed before, what have not we seen, nay
felt, from the extravagant heats of such popular delusions! and how are we
daily threatened with Arrows from the same Quiver, the continued Alarms of an
unquiet Generation, whom as too sad experience testifies, no kindness could
ever oblige, nor any condescension satisfy. It seems so strange a fatality
hangs over some men's heads, or rather about their Necks, that having more than
once escaped their due reward, by a too much abused Indemnity; they still
continue to run wilfully into the same noose, and even force Authority to do
them reason at last.

Nay, further our condition was for so^^ time the more desperate, because our
very Representatives, as they made themselves, which should have quenched the
fire, blew the coals, by a strange Hysteron proteron of Policy, would preserve
the Government, by countenancing none but those that acted against the
established Laws, suppress Popery by setting up an Inquisition of their own,
and prevent Arbitrary Proceedings by making all honest men their Slaves. Now,
what is this, but for our Physicians to become our Disease? they that should
preserve the just rights of a well ordered State, understood so little to hold
the Rains, that had they continued much longer in the Seat, Jove himself could
not have repaired the ruins so dreadful a conflagration would have made. Inter
utrumque tene was part of Apollo's advice to the rash Youth; and whoever thinks
to preserve peace, by letting every man have his humor, or suppress the growth
of a superstitious Worship by a licentious freedom, will find each Family in a
State of War, and to prevent a bad Religion, have none at all.

Thirdly, My third and last Inference is, That nothing preserves the Peace and
welfare of mankind, so much as a regular obedience unto Laws, and a due
execution of them, upon such as will not yield obedience: Which St. Peter makes
the two main branches of every Magistrates Duty, and for the greater
encouragement, assures them of a Divine Commission, being sent from God for the
punishment of evildoers on the one side, and praise of them that do well on
the other, 1 Pet. 2.14. Will thou then not be afraid of the power, To. 13.3.
do that which is good, otherwise it bears not the Sword in vain: And it is not
only a great, but dangerous mistake of some men, to think that Laws and Liberty
are inconsistent. Fallitur, egregio quisquis sub Principe credit
Servitium, nunquam libertas gratior extat, etc.
True freedom never appears so graceful as when it understands its duty,
regularly moves in its proper sphere as providence and Authority has ordered.
But for some to dispute whether they shall obey or not, and others dispute
whether they shall not let them alone, is to suffer the Ship both of Church and
State to drive at the mercy of wind and Tide, whilst neither Pilot nor Mariners
attend their business. It Is what the Spirit of God severely reflects upon in a
Heathen Magistrate, and therefore strange if we have any Gallios under the
Christian Economy, who can see the grossest violations before their eyes,and
yet Act. 18.17.
care for none of these things: Whereas, to resume our former metaphor, of this
we must needs be convinced, that it is more reasonable to expect our safety from
an unanimous endeavor to keep the Vessel above water, then the fond hopes of
an escape when ever she comes to sink: And withal, there is this great
inducement to quicken us, for if they who once had us under Hatches, (whether
Papist or Puritan,) get us the second time into their power, we can expect
nothing less then the utmost extremity, their little Finger (were it possible,)
should prove heavier than their Loins before; To be sure instead of Rods, they
would be all Scorpion: And yet how soon this may be, God of his infinite wisdom
only knows; But doubtless it cannot be too much our endeavor under his Blessing
to prevent; which for the close of all, I am sure there are none here present,
but one way or other are qualified to do, some by their Power, others by their
persuasion, but all by their Prayers, unfeignedly imploring that great and good
God, who is a God of Order, to discountenance confusion, to set bounds to men's
Passions by Reason, to Error by Truth, to Sedition by Laws, to Schism by
Charity; and so fix us upon those lasting Pillars of Purity and Truth, that
being all of one heart, and one mind, we may make it our joint endeavor to
propagate the Gospel of his Son, and serve him in the Ephesians. 4.3.
unity of the Spirit, and the bond of Peace.

FINIS.

