REGICIDES No Saints nor Martyrs: Freely Expostulated With the Publishers of
LUDLOW'S Third Volume, as to the Truth of Things and Characters.

WITH A Touch at AMYNTOR'S Cavils against Our KING's Curing the Evil, and the
Thirtieth of January Fast.

A SUPPLEMENT to the Just Defense of the Royal Martyr; By the same AUTHOR.

Virg. Aeneid. 6o. Vendidit hic auro Patriam, Dominumque potentem
Imposuit; fixit Leges pretio, atque refixit.
PROVE. xxviij. 2. For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof.

LONDON, Printed for W. Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

Regicides NO SAINTS nor MARTYRS.
THAT this has been all along, and still continues, an Age of Paradoxes, as to
the most considerable Subjects men's Minds are conversant about, is too manifest
to be disowned: Our Philosophy is so altogether new, that it bids defiance to
whatever helps the Ancients might be supposed to assist us withal; scorns to
stand upon their Shoulders, to take the better Prospect of the Natural World,
which our Forefathers prudently did, and gratefully acknowledged; but, on the
contrary, if we now stand so in any sense, it is to trample upon, and contemn
them. And in some part it may be from hence, that our Divinity is more than
ever tinged with the opposition of Sciences falsely so called, whether of new
Lights on the one hand, which have so much dark'ned the right understanding of
all true Religion; or new Notions on the other, which would submit the
Mysteries of God to the Reason of Man, bring back all Revealed, to Natural
Knowledge; and that, which is sadder still, without the least regard to Moral
Practice. But nothing has been so Paradoxical as our Politics, about which we
have tried as many Experiments, as the Chemists for the Philosophers Stone, and
to much worse purpose; since they, though failing in their grand aim, every day
improved their Discoveries to the health, and benefit of Mankind; whereas our
State Empericks are so desperate, as to force upon us their Poison, without the
least provision of an Antidote; will needs be altering the whole Constitution
of that Body, nay, its very frame and posture, even to setting the Feet
uppermost, as if we had quite forgot the Mischiefs which attended their former
attempts of that kind, what a Vertigo it made in our Brains, such a swiming,
and giddiness, that many will not own it for a disease, that every thing should
still turn round: neither indeed can it be upon any other Presumption but this,
a belief of the generalities not being thoroughly recovered, so far in their
right Wits, as to have attained that old, and true apprehension of things they
mostly had before those many fatal Joggs, and National Convulsions, that these
bold Undertakers have the confidence of thinking to set up their Stage again,
make a Cant, and a Noise, with those many Old Compositions, which from our
former experience have proved most destructive both to Health and Life: And
it is of most unhappy consideration, that in this particular alone they should
have reason, take us in such a careless indifferency as to those former
Disorders, and Confusions so long groaned under, that we seem to have forgot,
according to our aforementioned charge, not only God's Mercies, but our own
Miseries too.

And from hence alone it must be, that the Prefacers to Ludlow's Third Volume,
boast so much of that reception the two former had met with. Men's Palates are
vitiated, and Stomachs foul, which makes solid Truths of too hard digestion;
sound Principles, and sincere Advice, will no more down with them, than a
Potion of Physic with a sickly pettish Child, or Water with a man in an
Hydrophoby: Something they must have which is not to be had, or will certainly
do them Mischief if they can get it; and yet having gratified their humor, and
experienced the nauseousness of what was so earnestly desired, how loathsome
and pernicious it proved, they will not be thereby cautioned from fansying
something else altogether as prejudicial: would any Physician of Reputation
comply with a Patient in such froppish Extravagancies; or wise, good man oblige
a Friend, a Relation in the like unkind Concessions? And this is what I desire
to expostulate with the Publishers of the forementioned Memoirs, with what
design they are so forward to impose upon the World such a Farrago, such an
Hodgpodg, of Calumnies, and Falsehoods; and presume it may be the more freely
done, from certain information, that though their assigned Author provided the
Ingredients, yet they composed the dish, from a confused heap of Alltogethers,
according to his little regard either of method or truth, culled out what they
thought most proper for this notable Swiss Entertainment: Now from so great an
abundance, such as it was, one would think they should have presented us with
nothing, but what had been sound, and wholesome, and thereby obliged every
judicious Palate, though the Service had been the less, (and indeed it is probable
one Volume would have comprehended all really worth information;) whereas to
throw in the many superannuated Stories, and Commonwealth Fictions, which
served their several turns from 41. forward, as if Time, the Mother of Truth,
had not yet brought forth any thing of clearer discovery, made a real Detection
of their many, however well*contriv'd Villainies, is too imposing, and what no
common Imposter would be guilty of.

And really when I first undertook to defend our Royal Martyr, wipe off that
dirt, and obloquy, wherewith this Author, and his Friends designed afresh to
bedaub the Sacred Memory of that excellent Prince, it could not enter into my
thoughts, that they would venture further, at leastwise so far, as to write a
Panegyric upon his Murderers, presume or imagine it possible to set them in a
true Light, who thorough all their actions, and enterprises whatsoever, were as
black and dark as Hell; a Generation of such profligate wretches, both in
Morals, and Principles, as no Age, or Government can parallel; so insolently
base, as neither Law, nor Reason could limit their Arbitrary Wills; and yet
withal so despicably vile, as their own Creatures had them in equal contempt
with all good men, and kicked them down with an answerable Scorn. There was
indeed an old Humorist last Century, who writ an Encomion Neronis; and De
Quevedo brings in Judas making an ingenious Apology for himself in Hell; but
there was Wit and Fancy in those Conceits, without any thing of Intrigue, or
mischievous Design; whereas here we are imposed upon with one continued
relation of right down Forgeries, and pernicious Innovations, on purpose to
possess the People that Knaves and Fools are their best Friends, to ruin the
Nation, in subverting all fundamental Establishments, will conduce most to its
interest, and that such Devils as have already, or shall hereafter do it, ought
to pass for Angels of Light, A just indignation hereat, has caused me to
continue my Reflections upon this Third Volume; wherein, nevertheless I design
to be very brief, and shall only take notice of such Passages as either
directly or indirectly strike at the Memory of our Royal Martyr; or otherwise
tend to the Subversion of the Monarchy in general, its Foundation, and Being.
To which purpose I shall,

1. Crave leave to Expostulate a little with the Author's Friends, (as they
term themselves) who set forth his Memoirs, the last Volume more especially,
whether they have not a Commonwealth design in publishing them, and do not give
more than secret intimation thereof in their Preface? as likewise whether they
can plead ignorance of several Passages, and Characters therein, being
notoriously False and Scandalous?

2. I shall presume to give the true Character of those Execrable Regicides,
whom with so much Art and Daubing, they endeavor otherwise to represent.

3. Show with how little reason, and much malice, this last Volume is swelled
up, to pretty nigh one half, with a Collection of Letters, and other Papers,
which had been frequently Printed before, and every thing therein cavill'd at
by them, as frequently, and fully replied to.

SECT. I.
MY first Business then must be to Expostulate with those worthy Friends and
Admirers of the Author, whether they have not a Commonwealth design in
Publishing these venerable Remains of his, and do not give more than secret
intimation thereof in their Preface, etc. yet I cannot believe they are any
otherwise his Friends, than agreeing in the same Notions of Commonwealthism,
whereof they esteemed him a doughty Patron; for it is generally presumed the
last of his Acquaintance and Confidents was S -- by B -- el, with whom those
many Reams of Paper, he had, whilst grumbling in Swisserland, emptied his gall
into, were entrusted: and report speaks that he was tricked of them by a
Republican confident who best understood to make the best of them, as well for
the Good Old Cause, as his own Advantage; which it is further said the churlish
Nabal was very angry at, and would have resented accordingly, had not Death
interposed, and put an end to that Dispute. The Usurper of the Copy, having now
got quiet, and sole Possession, consulted, more than once, the whole
Calves-head Fraternity, not without some Representatives, as to the most
creditable way of Publishing; where in conclusion, it was resolved to cut off
the superfluities of that slovenly Swiss dress 'twas left in, and
notwithstanding the Books, and their many Prejudices against France, send it
forth in that Allamode way of Memoirs. For what reason they affected so much
Vmbrage as to date their Preface from Bern, and suppose the Impression at
Vevay, I shall not concern my self; had they said at Darby it had been nigher
home, and nigher truth too; nay certainly so, by a little quibling transition
from Place to Person.

To come to their Preface, which good Books as little want, as good Wine a
Bush, they begin with a stale Commonplace flourish of the Reception the other
Volumes have found in most Parts of Europe, and the incessant Inquiries of
diverse Persons of Worth and Honor concerning these Remains, etc. What
reception they met Abroad I have not heard, to be sure they are not yet
translated into any Foreign Language, and dare engage they never will: But that
the Publisher has had a very good Market at home shall be readily granted, as
well for what was formerly observed, that this Age's vitiated Palate relish
nothing more than such crude unhealthy stuff, as feed the Disease, rather than
nourish the Body; as likewise all Men of sense, and sober understanding were
obliged to look into them, the better to refell those many Cavills and Conceits
wherewith every superficial Reader is not more easily imposed upon, than
forward to impose upon others. And really the only good I can possibly hope
for, from the many forward Abettors of such desperate all-destroying
Innovations, is that by degrees it may awaken such as apprehend much better,
would they exert their Parts, into a due consideration of the Insolence and
Arbitrariness of this Faction when in Power, and that the same Evil Spirit
possessing us once again, it would be more than seven times worse than at first.

One thing I must take notice of by way of Preliminary, as very artfully
managed, by all the Modern Writers upon this Subject, they bend their whole
force against Sir Robert Filmer, who writing at the beginning, or besore the
Wars, for so his Patriarcha was, proceeded upon one grand Postulatum, which the
innocence and simplicity of those quiet times assented to for undoubted truth,
and upon the acknowledgment of Revealed Religion, with the History of the
Creation, only from thence discovered may indeed be cavill'd at, but not
disproved; the Postulatum is this, That as God is Sovereign Lord of the
V;niverse, so here upon our little Spot, (this Ant-hill, as Lucian terms it,
where Men creep up and down, and quarrel each other for every despicable clod)
he delegated to Mankind a Superiority over all descended from him; by which
means as they are not free to choose whatever Governors, or Forms of Government
they please, so is there not the least danger of thraldom, or ill usage, under
so natural, and indulgent an Economy; for the treatment of Children is quite
different from that of Servants or Slaves; which our Republicans would most
illogically infer, and make much clamor about, vet nevertheless if the former
the Children be untractable, defective in their duty, and bounden respect; it is
most incongruous to suppose, even from the dictates of common reason, they that
gave them Being, should be without a Power of Restraint, and Control. This Sir
Robert lays down as the Basis, the Foundation of all Regiment, from whence, as
Mankind multiplied, it grew up from Paternal, to Monarchical, where the People
too much resembling Children, of a froppish, unmanageable disposition, it is
equally reasonable their Common Parent should here likewise have a judgment of
discretion, to countenance, or chastise according to their different
deportments: Now as this is the Origin from whence that worthy Gentleman
deduceth all Government, so is it less liable to Exception, Oppression, etc.
than any of those popular Models this uneasy Age is so fruitful of, and
troublesome with; but how readily any one may pervert another meaning, the
common course of Controversy unhappily discovers, where each one dresses up
his Adversary, as the Heathens did the Primitive Christians, in the Skins of
Wild Beasts, or some such like terrible shape, and then loo the Reader to fall
upon, and devour them: whereas the forementioned Hypothesis, taken in a candid
and true sense, as it gives no more Power to the Prince, than a Father has
over his Children, so is it most forward to grant all those Rights and
Privileges, these busy Men make such a noise and clamor about; only designs to
give them a true Notion of the thing according to its Original, its Divine
Institution; that so they might thankfully, and respectively enjoy them,
without offending God, and disturbing, or subverting the Peace, and Welfare, of
that Community wherein they live. Yet at the forementioned severe rate is Sir
Robert treated, in the former of those Two Treatises of Government; as if he
designed nothing but Slavery, and Oppression, to all Mankind, and that nothing
less could be deduced from the Principles upon which he proceeds. And that
Folio of Discourses written upon the same Subject, By the Honorable Ambassador
of the Commonwealth of England, (a commendable Character for a Person of an
Ancient, and Noble Family, to be Minister to such a pack of R --) uses him in
the like mistaken, ill-bred manner.

And here I cannot but propound one thing which must be acknowledged
reasonable, that since there are a new Set of Men so earnest to revive that old
Controversy of Commonwealthism, they would act so squarely, be so ingenuous,
as to make an Universal Search into the matter, consider those many
Enlargements others have made upon the forementioned Premises; for Sir Robert
Filmer only brake the ice, was indeed the first who dared to Remonstrate the
cursed Consequences, and horrid Impieties of that Rebellion they were run into;
but, as already mentioned, writ only in general, according to the universally
received Maxims of precedent Times, till the Jesuit, and Calvinist, set up, the
one for the Pope, the other for the People; and so turned all things topsy
turvy. I say therefore, it were more generous, and to the purpose, would they
take notice, and reply to what has been further on, with greater
particularity, and exactness written upon this occasion: for the Penquarrel
went on with that of the Sword, and was much more successful in every
Engagement; it would be therefore no little satisfaction to all impartial
Enquirers, could these bold Undertakers be prevailed upon, in a full reply, to
answer what that Prodigy of all Reading, the most Reverend and Learned Usher,
writ, during the Rebellion, though since Printed; Of the Power communicated by
God to the Prince, and the Obedience required of the Subject. And his worthy
Successor the great Bramhall, did in the heat of the War write the Serpent
Salve, in Answer to a Virulent Libel, which contained all those popular
Delusions, the Rebels then made use of to impose upon, and betray the Nation.
An ingenious young Gentleman, Mr. Dudly Diggs, did likewise at the same time
write of The Unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms against their King: with
many other unanswerable Pieces of that Nature, which these great Sticklers, for
their Sovereign Lords the People, or rather their own Maggots, and wild
Projects, never did, nor never will take notice of. What Dr. Tailor has
likewise written of the Supreme Power in his Cases of Conscience, is too
clearly stated for them ever to meddle with. And to come to what has passed
since the Restoration in 60; when Charles the Second's unaccountable
Remissness gave their Demagogueships an opportunity of fermenting the People,
to very nigh their 41 infatuations; among others, a very learned, and most
accomplished Gentleman, Sir George Mackenzie, writ a little Tract, called, Jus
Regium, or the Just and Solid Foundations of Monarchy in General, etc. which
though calculated more immediately for the Meridian of his own Country, yet may
it indifferently serve for the whole Island, with any other Part of the
Civilized World; this Piece more especially is what I would provoke the whole
Set of our revived Rota Club to take notice of, and reply to, if they can; for
it is writ both like a Divine, and a Lawyer, so concise, and yet withal so full
upon each account, as nothing can be more exactly or clearly expressed: He
there makes it appear how impossible it is, that all the People in any Nation
should be brought to Consult of their Public concerns; yet every private Man
and Woman, according to these pretended Laws of Nature, this Popular
Birth*right, have an equal claim with the most Pragmatical Pretender, and
potior est conditio negantis: Observing further, that such plausible Intrigues
have been the common wheedle of insolent, factious Spirits, to delude, and
engage the Rabbles assistance in subverting the present Establishment, and if
the attempt succeed, become P. 64.
really those Grievances to the People, falsely suggested in the former, yet the
ball being once set a running, the breach made, it can end in nothing but
confusion; for they that have subverted one Government may justly expect a
Retaliation, and so the freak continued, or pursued, by one Bautefeu after
another, without the least prospect of redress. All which must be an undoubted
consequence of what Mr. Sidney so positively lays down in those Rhapsodies of
his, Sect. 4. Part 3. That the People for whom the Magistrate is created, can
only judge whether he rightly perform his Office, or not; excellent Judges
without doubt, and very steady in their Resolves: Although Tacitus who has
hitherto passed for a judicious Historian, was of a quite different Persuasion,
in that he says, Plebi non judicium, non veritas: And Tully, thought no mean
Statesman in the Roman Republic, Pro Planc.
passes the same censure, Non est Consilium in vulgo, non Ratio, non Discrimen,
non Diligentia, -- Ex opinione plurima, ex veritate pauca judicat: But our
Modern Politico's understand better, or rather design otherwise, to be the
Gracchi, the Marij of our times, nothing more satisfactory to their turbulent
Spirits, and bloody Minds, than Proscription, and Slaughter.

But to urge this a little further, how shall the People judge or determine
when these their admired Patriots or Ringleaders fall in pieces? what a
nonplus were they put to upon the Conservators of their Liberties, as they were
held in hand, the Presbyterians and Independents being divided, whilst the Army
interposed to make the lesser part the whole; the Peoples judgment was then
much regarded and their Rights maintained, their Purse, and Persons altogether
free, that was to be disposed of by their mercenary Mamalucks not themselves;
till thus by incessant, and unsufferable Impositions, that oppression, which
according to Solomon, makes wise men mad, made these fools sober, in which
sensible Mood, as the discreet Athenian foresaw in the like case, they were for
tearing in pieces all that occasioned their mistakes and mischiefs. I had not
mentioned the precedent pernicious Maxim of the Peoples being the venerable
Judges of their Superiors actions, but for that it exactly agrees with what
Ludlow more than once inveighs against, in the then Lord Chief Baron Sir
Orlando Bridgman, because, sitting Chief Commissioner at the Trial of the
Regicides, he had the assurance to tell the Jury, That no Authority, no single
Person, nor Community of persons, not the people Collectively or
Representative, have any coercive Power over the King of England: great
assurance this, yet is it much greater in the Publisher, since all the Books in
his Shop, and Warehouse too, will scarce be able to fee any one Lawyer of Sense
and Reputation throughout the several Inns of Court, to averr the contrary,
deny under his hand, that it is not one main Fundamental of our Ancient
Monarchy, and upon which the whole Government depends: is not then the Printing
thereof, to be aiding and assisting in something, which has in former days
been termed Treason, and would not have passed without a due resentment, of
what kind soever the Monarchy were? Yet however forward they are to abridge
others, Mr. Sidney lays it down as essentially necessary in his Model, that the
Legislative Power should be always Arbitrary, and so it has been, and ever
will in such hands as theirs; for what he adds, not to be trusted in the hands
of any, who are not bound to obey the Laws they make, is trifling, and depends
solely upon their own choice; neither will a partial respect to each other,
ever suffer it to take place: whereupon it is grown to a Proverb in the Low
Countries, He that goes to Law with any in the Government is either Fool, or
Madman; and here at home we may have observed, such as most vigorously opposed
Prerogative, have stood as earnestly upon, and been very forward to stretch
their own Privileges; and yet we must not say, Quis tulerit Gracchos? or think
the People little Redressed, if both those Buckets be not equally poised. This
to be sure is a well known Passage, that though the Law took hold of Munson, and
Harry Marten, during Cromwell's Usurpation, for their just Debts, yet when sent
for out of Gaol to make a Quorum of Rumpers, it is scarce a Question whether
they paid so much as their Fees, and would not have had a revenge upon their
Creditors for committing them, had their Tyranny continued, for so it really
was, and has ever been, since Athens tried the Experiment of 30 for one.

However in this we will join Issue with them, that the Supreme Power in what
hand soever it is, must be Arbitrary, and Uncontrollable; and this has been
with great reason brought an Argument for Monarchy, as better in one, than many
hands, especially according to our Establishment, where, though the Prince is
Free, his Ministers are liable, and have been frequently called to an account
for whatever infractions, or violations they made upon the Laws; an excellent
Temperament this, could it have been prosecuted with temper; but that being a
main Desideratum among us, especially in the present case, has too often
turned the Remedy into a Disease, to say no more in so nice a Point.

But to return to our Editors of this Third Volume, it will be requisite to
take notice of those particular Instructions in their Preface, which they
think, if not mistaken, may prove serviceable to the World. The first whereof
is, That though the most violent Animosity and Desire of Revenge had so possessed
the English Court against those who had any part in the Death of Charles I.
etc. Whereto I reply, that *it is scarce possible to suppose there should be any
Extreme in the Prosecution of those who had any part in the Death of Charles I.
It was so Horrid so Execrable a Fact as deserves all those Curses of the 109
Psalm, for though literally Penned upon that unnatural Rebellion of Absalom, and
Achitophel, with their Accomplices; yet was it prophetically fulfilled in Judas,
and the Jewish Sanhedrim, who betrayed and Crucified the Son of God: and may
from thence be transferred to our Sanhedrim at Westminster, who seemed
studiously to Copy that Hellish Original, and would have done the same by
Christ had he stood as much in their way. Neither yet was the English Court so
violent as here represented, but quite on the contrary gave frequent checks, by
Messages, and otherwise, to those just Resentments both Lords and Commons were
often about, who looked upon themselves as obliged both in Honor and
Conscience, to make some expiation for that innocent Blood, these Sons of
Wickedness had shed like water on every side: and this Ludlow owns, the Lords
were inclined to revenge their own Order on the Persons of some in the High
Court of Justice, and to except one of the Judges for every Lord they had put
to Death, p. 34. and if true, as he relates, that a certain Lord diverted it by
naming one already dead, it cannot seem strange, considering how far himself
was engaged in the Rebellion: Nevertheless such little temporary Evasions had
taken no effect, but that the Court in^erest constantly thwarted whatever
looked like Severity, though never so just. From whence likewise the Act of
Indemnity was most earnestly pressed, and at length passed in so free a
manner, as most men of thought foresaw, and foretold, it would have little
other effect, than to encourage the like Villainies for the time to come, since
after Twenty Years unparalled Violations of all things Sacred and Civil, of
God and his Church, the King, and his People, their Laws and Liberties, with
whatever else tended to the Peace, and Happiness of a Nation, all should be
passed by and pardoned, without any exemplary Punishment, more than a Dozen, or
Fourteen such hardened Wretches as would not own their Regicidie to be a Crime,
or that the Rebellion was not justifiable in the whole course thereof: all the
rest of what Sect or Faction soever, by the Magic of the forementioned Act
were transformed into as honest, faithful, Loyal Subjects as ever wore Sword,
none so fit for business, or worthy to be trusted as they, nay, 'twas made
actionable to say they had been Rebels; although with Aesop's Cat there were
daily discoveries, how much was retained of their pristine Nature, and
consequently how little they would act to the reputation, or interest of those,
so earnest for, and affected with the Metamorphosis.

A late Minister of State, in a Neighbor Kingdom, perhaps as great that way as
this, or any other age has produced, when dead, left by way of Testament, or
Legacy to his Royal Master, several Discourses equally relating to the past and
future management of Affairs: Among others, there is one of Rewards and
Punishments, upon which Topic he makes it appear, that next God's Blessing,
they are the main support of a Monarch, or any other Government whatsoever; and
if so, it need not be further enquired, how, and by what defects, we have
continued all along in so tottering a condition. I shall not much insist upon
Henry VIII's. procedure against the Northern Rebels in his time, because it may
be, not without something of truth, termed Cruelty; but must observe that his
Daughter Queen Elizabeth, who is owned on most hands, for Wise, and Good, and
advised by those that were so, upon that little Insurrection of the two Earls,
Northumberland and Westmorland, with their Accomplices, had no less than Seventy
Executed, and some Hundreds beside punished in Estate, and Family; by which
means she never met the least Disturbance of that kind, the long remaining part
of her Reign. But in the present case, it was usual with them to object, and
take hold of the King's Declaration from Breda, which as it cleared him from
all designs of Revenge, so they should have further considered, that he left
all Matters of Punishment, for a free Parliament to resolve what might be most
proper in that way; and was better than his word, to that ungrateful Party,
earnestly pressing both Houses, to hasten that too general Amnesty, who
otherwise, had not the Royal importunity interposed, were very much inclined,
as aforesaid, to make full expiation for that Rebellion and Bloodshed, for
which, upon their default, it is to be feared, Almighty God continues to take
his own Satisfaction. In short, as the King of Heaven must be owned on all
hands the best Precedent for any earthly Potentate to imitate, so more
especially in acts of Justice, and Mercy, who though he abounds in the latter,
yet forgives no otherwise than upon Repentance, and Amendment, with some signal
instances thereof; which had it been observed in the case before us, might have
conduced very much, to securing the Nations Peace, and saving the Rebels Souls.

But perhaps these Friends of the Author will restrain this desire of Revenge
in the English Court, to a design of Assassinating such of the Regicides as had
escaped Abroad, about which they make a very false and insolent Harangue, that
they thought the most base, and treacherous ways of compassing their Ends not
to be rejected, whereas from his own relation the many attempts designed upon
his precious Life, might in a great measure proceed from the fears of his
guilty Mind, for doubtless Cain's curse was upon him to an high degree,
otherwise he might have supposed Swisserland to be a Receptacle for other
Outlaws, beside him and his Party, and not have suspected, that Du Pre, and
Rouz had a design to add their Murder, to what they had already committed, but
get a Protection in the same manner with those Royal Murderers, from their
Swiss Excellencies; and as they were all Foreigners, which he mentions to be
at, or hover about Vevay, so he does not make it appear, in the least, that
they had any thing of correspondence with the English Court, much less supplied
with Treasure from thence; though that and the infamy is most impudently charged
in the Preface. In like manner the countenance they pretended to from the
Duchess of Orleans might be forged by them, or him, for they are equally
creditable, and it is not likely, were such a thing designed, they would employ
instruments, who dared not show their heads in France. Neither, till Lisle was
cut off, do I find they suspected any thing of that kind, but to be seized
upon, and carried over the Lake into Savoy, and so conveyed for Justice into
England, as their friends Okey, and the rest were; for which he inveighs most
bitterly against the Dutch, as fearing it might be a leading case to himself.

As for that one, the only person, they say, who fell the object of the English
Courts fury, neither Ludlow nor his friends do make it any way appear they had
encouragement from thence, but did it rather to gain an interest there, wherein
too their expectations were much disappointed. To give the true matter of fact
it stands thus; three or four Irish who had been in the French Service, whether
Discharged, or otherwise desirous to get home, thought to signalize themselves
by this bloody Attempt, and find the more welcome reception, which was
accordingly accomplished, and variously discoursed of here in England when
done; where the most, though they detested Lisle, and all his Works, were not
satisfied with the way of taking him off; nor cared to converse with the
Persons who did it; some of their own Country*men seemed indeed to think
otherwise, cried it up for an Heroic Act, and never wanting assurance at Court
Solicitations, pressed earnestly to have them considered, whereby somewhat was
done for them, mostly in Military Commands, during the Dutch War, and
afterward as occasion served; to be sure as they were not put upon their first
attempt, so never more employed in any thing of that kind, whatever Ludlow
prates of that pitiful Stocking mender Car: One of those Irish may be yet, I am
sure was very lately, Living upon his paternal Estate, by virtue of the
Limerick Articles, in his own Country.

In the mean while commend me to these Prefacers, who can insult so boldly that
their Hero lived to see that Tyranny brought to the last degree of contempt,
which had taken such pains to destroy him; his Life doubtless according to his
own relation must be very uneasy, from the many, whether real, or imaginary
fears he continually lay under; but then it must be the extremity of Vexation,
that they who altered the Tyranny (as their Worships are pleased to phrase it)
would not let this Monster of a Regicide continue among them, but forced him
back with as great remorse as the bad Angels fell from on high; and in all
probability hastened his descent unto them. And I fancy it is with no little
regret to these his surviving Friends, that there is any thing of that Tyranny
still continued among us, for the extirpation whereof they so much applaud
their Author.

2. For the next thing they think not unserviceable to the World, is That the
Tragical end of the King's Judges, may instruct those who shall in future time
appear in Defense of Liberty, etc, where first it is a bold stroke to call them
Judges, Murderers had been properer, but not so agreeable to the concern they
seem all along to express for their miscarriage, and the hopes they have of its
being undertaken again with wiser management, and consequently better success.
Whereas I dare confidently averr, that as the Nation may be so far infatuated
to let such Pretenders to Liberty once more act their Parts, so in conclusion
they will undoubtedly bring them to the like Tragical end.

3. A further Lesson we are to learn of these Commonwealth Sages, is from the
Cromwellian Tyranny, (which nevertheless carries with it an underhand stroke at
Monarchy in general) that Liberty, and a mercenary Standing Army are
incompatible, and really I think so too, and yet withal am very much afraid,
as their Wisdoms have managed Matters, no Liberty can be preserved without one:
For Pol. lib. 4. c. 13.
as Aristotle observes in reference to his precedent times, That the first
Commonwealth among the Greeks was made by the Soldiers after the failing of
Monarchy: So upon an impartial Retrospection into the Transactions of the
Northern Parts of Europe these two last Centuries, it will appear that
Commonwealthism, and Standing Armies began together, and occasioned one the
other; for when the People were put upon Rebelling for Religion, pretended
Liberty of Conscience to Control the Magistrates just Rights, carrying
allthings by a Mob Reformation; that Christian Simplicity, and Reverential
Obedience, by which our forefathers had been taught submit not only for Wrath,
but Conscience sake, was altogether Superseded, and the Civil Power obliged to
arm its self against this Spiritual V;surpation, which made every Consistory a
Conclave, a Commonwealth of Popes, who persuaded their Votaries, that to rebel
against their Prince, was to fight the Lord's Battle, and that the appointed
time was now come for bringing into Subjection all the Kingdoms of Darkness;
the Sword being now drawn, upon this contradictory account to promote the
Gospel of Peace, according to the usual event of War, met with different
Success, in some places the People prevailed, and thereupon Voted themselves a
Free State: in others the Prince, and made the People sensible he bears not
the Sword in vain: though it often happened that growing weary on either side,
they breathed in a Truce or Peace, till the one or other found a more
convenient opportunity to revive the Quarrel. Thus it was in France; thus in
the Netherlands, and several Parts of Germany; and thus at last it came to be
in England: Now of all these different Successes, I find each of them center in
this one fatal Event; they that became a Free State are forced to keep a
Standing Army, to maintain their imaginary Liberty, and the People, taxed and
poll'd, ten times more than before, in order thereunto, and where the Prince
prevailed, he is likewise forced upon a Guard to prevent his Libertine Subjects
from running into their former Lunacies, and cannot be blamed for making them
bear the Charge. And where there was Cessations, or Treaties, the Sovereign
Power, what with art, and force, is become more Absolute than ever, and repays,
with denying all Liberty, their at first unreasonable demands of too much. And
now, to come home to our selves, as this Spiritual freak began last among us,
so cannot the wisest of men foresee, where, or when it will end, a good one
none can expect; which too must render us the more stupidly senseless, for that
we ran wilfully upon the same Rock, many of our Neighbors had Shipwrack'd on
before our eyes; made the like noise about Religion, Liberty, Conscience, etc.
till the Mob was raised to force away the King, and then an Army raised to
bring him back, which Army having after a bloody Contest, ruined the King, and
all his Loyal Adherents, fell upon their Masters, turned out the Presbyterian
to gratify the Independent, and turned out the Independent, to gratify their
General; by which means that cunning toty-nos'd fellow set up his Tyranny
indeed, and made them all sneak to it most Submissively. Now from these
Premises it clearly appears, that as our Commonwealth Reformers raised the
Army, so the Army rid the Commonwealth, which they have never failed to do at
all times, and will continue the like course for the future, let them take what
care they can. For these our Prefacers discover themselves to be but Owl-ey'd
Judges of Light, to say, It Is as clear as the Sun at Noon day that the
Parliament by neglecting to put a Period to the exorbitant Greatness of Oliver
Cromwell immediately after the Battle at Worcester, drew Destruction upon
themselves and the whole Commonwealth, etc. Cromwell* and his Creatures,
wherewith he had filled the Army, was long before to them as the Tartar to the
Scotchman, would neither go as they would have him, nor let them go but as he
pleased, although that last was a finishing stroke. But suppose the Army had been
Disbanded, that little Nest of Cockatrices, would have been as much in danger
from several other hands; the Cavalier Party, though kept desperately down, was
not in any manner dis-spirited; and the main Body of the Nation was so
exasperated at their insolent carriage, and abominable Exactions, besides the
contempt they had of their Number, Persons, and Manners, that not one single
Order of theirs would have been obeyed, without a Company of Janissaries to
enforce it; nor they permitted to sit three days, or walk the Streets with
respect and security, as at last it happened; for the Nation, no longer able to
bear their Insolences and Tyranny, dispatched them and then the Army; and a
happy Riddance it was of both.

After all therefore, upon a Prospect of the whole, these unweildy Projectors
have brought the Nation into so many odd Dilemma's as a Standing Army among us,
is like to be as the Mathematici, Astrologers, or Figure-flingers with the
Romans, Genus hominum quod semper vetabitur, and semper retinebitur; if we have
a Commonwealth they must have an Army to support them, ruin the Church, crush
the Nobility, keep down the Gentry, with what else they please when they once
get the Power: and if we have a Monarchy there must be somewhat of an Army, by
way of Security from the continued Underminings of such unquiet Spirits as
understand nothing of true Government, yet think it cannot be well unless in
their hands, according to their maggotty fancies, and humorsome Capricio's;
this, I say, is the condition their Wisdoms have brought us into; an Army we
can hardly be without, and yet how faithful that Army will be to any but
themselves, that is their continuance, and perpetuity, we have more than once
seen, on each side, and are in a likely way to see more than once again.

This Monstrous Tyranny of Cromwell's Usurpation is represented with one
further aggravation of his Basha's under the name of Majors General, which were
indeed sufficiently Grievous, though a just return upon such as had groul'd and
clamoured at the mildest administration of their Rightful Prince's undoubted
Prerogative; yet after all it is a Clodius Moechos for the Commonwealth Party to
charge Cromwell with that, or any other such barbarous Impositions, since he
did but transcribe the Copy they had set him; particularly his Majors General
were but a single Person to their Committees, and nothing nigh so insolent as
that underhand Commonwealth of Basha's, placed by them in all Counties
throughout the Kingdom, to Sequester every man's Estate, and Imprison his
Person, whom they suspected to dislike their Proceedings, or uneasy to pay
their most intolerable Exactions. Take one Specimen thereof from that
Hogon-Mogon Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, from this following Order,

THese are to give you notice, That by virtue of an Ordinance of the 27th. of
October last, you are Assessed to lend the Sum of Fifty Pounds of lawful
English Money, to be Paid for our Brethren of Scotland, for their assisting of
us in this War; and that you are forthwith to pay the same, to Mr. Waring, and
Mr. Herring, Treasurers at Goldsmiths-Hall, according to the said Ordinance;
and that if you shall fail to pay the same, within 8 days after the Date of
this Ticket, you shall forfeit for every day, after the 8 days, the Twentieth
Part of the Sum so Sessed, and shall likewise pay 2 s. in every Pound over and
above to the Collectors that are appointed to Levy the same, if you shall
suffer your self to be distrain'd.

Dated this 7th. day of May, 1644. John Prat, Clerk to the Committee.
To Mr. John Sadler, of the Parish of Stephen Walbrook.

Was there ever any thing so Arbitrary and imposing upon a Free People, and too
by a Set of Men who had the Impudence with the same Breath, to hold the People
in hand they stood up for their Freedom? yet of such Committees, as there were
several in London, so did they proceed to Establish them in the Associated
Counties, and with the cursed prevalence of their Power the whole Kingdom
thorough, where every honest, loyal Gentleman was forced to appear a
Delinquent, and be used at pleasure, as you see in the forementioned Order. And
this I cannot but further Observe as an unreasonable and most wilful
Partiality, in our Prefacers, and indeed all their Adherents, that every thing
from a Single Person, is right down Tyranny, and what all people who regard
their Liberty may stand up against, and justly defend themselves from; but
these Commonwealth Scorpions must not be complained of, though their little
fingers were all along thicker than the others Loins, every Ordinance from them
as Absolve, and as severely Executed as the Grand Seignior's Bow-string.

What they further add, that Cromwell's, and his Basha's Tyranny compelled the
People to suffer the return of Charles II. is altogether false, for though they
were not pleased in the least with his many perfidious Enterprises, which were
all unmasked in assuming the Supreme Power; yet was it thought easier, than the
fordid Impositions of the fag end, the worst part of a Parliament, which had
done so much Mischief to the Nation, and from whose many Corruptions that
glaring Meteor arose, with so fatal an Aspect in our Horizon. Besides, he
managed his Usurpation with so much Art, and Treachery, as there was little
hopes of the King's return during his Life, though frequent Plots about it, and
some worthy Loyal Gentlemen cut off upon that account; indeed the Plots were
thought most of his making, the Common Stratagem of all usurped Powers. But
when he was gone to his proper place, and his Sons half-witted management, made
way for the Rump's once more treading the Stage; the Southern Sun's approach is
not more certainly expected in the Spring, than every one seemed to be of our
Old Establishments, that Legal Monarchy, and Rightful Succession, which with so
much Madness, and Folly, such a prodigious expense of Blood, and Treasure, had
by several violent Factions been 20 Years opposed, and it happened accordingly,
notwithstanding the divided Parties endeavored a Coalition, and otherwise most
indefatigably applied their last efforts to save themselves from the Gallows,
which their own Consciences could inform them how justly deserved, and it is a
thousand pities, they were more afraid, than hurt.

The last Inference these Friends of the Author thought fit to raise, is as
groundless, and false, as any of the former, charging Charles II. of
Ingratitude to the Presbyterians, who had so well deserved of him, by betraying
all into his hands, etc. whereas they never deserved well of him; nor did him
any good they could prevent.

1. They never deserved well from him, but on the contrary, were the original
Promoters, and chief Managers, for the Six first Years, of all our National
Miseries and Confusions: 'twas from their inducement the Scots began to disturb
the happy Quiet and Repose both Kingdoms were in; laid the Groundwork of our
Rebellion by theirs, paid them for it in a most profuse manner, and thereby
engaged them to assist at a dead lift; which wholly unking'd their Sovereign,
and made him become a prey to the Avarice of the one, and Arrogance of the
other, which too shamefully appeared by their insolent Rudeness, and scandalous
Restraint at Holmby; and how far further they would have proceeded, had not the
Army taken him out of their hands, may be well supposed from the continued
course of that stubborn Crew; for though (their Janissaries having given them an
Essay what they must expect, by Excluding the most leading Members, and
threatening the rest) a Treaty, was condescended to in the Isle of Wight, yet
were the Preliminaries so Innovating, and Dethroning, so destructive to all
Fundamentals in Church, and State; and therein so grating upon His Majesty's
Honor, and Conscience, that he thought Death more eligible than such
unreasonable Concessions; which too their Dilatory Proceedings, till the Army
had suppressed the last Efforts of Loyalty, to rescue their Sovereign, very
much conduced to, and might by a just, and Honorable compliance, have
otherwise prevented. This no man can deny to be a true, though brief account of
the Old King's treatment from that haughty, selfwill'd Set of Men.

And that they would have been as imposing upon his Son, could they have
carried matters according to their own Minds, is as little to be doubted,
whatever these men prate of betraying all into his hands. The Comedian
representing the Beggars at the choice of their King, (for it seems that
Kingdom is Elective, and such are always beggarly, or thereby made so) when
voted, brings in one of his ragged retinue, haranguing him, among others, with
this Expression, Now thou art King, who would not have thee so; which was
constantly applied by the old Cavalier Party, to those empty Shows of Respect,
and hollow Acclamations of Praise, wherewith they who forced, and kept him out,
were most clamorous at his Restoration; would have none thought so loyal,
faithful, and true as themselves: Among the rest, the Presbyterian, indeed was
most assuming, for having the twelve years last past been kept, with very great
regret, from doing any considerable Mischief, by those viperous Sects which
crawled forth of their own Bowels; and upon this account, out of Revenge rather
than any good Principle, held a correspondence with the King, and his Adherents
in Exile; at the Restoration stepped before all the Loyal Sufferers which had
constantly adhered to the true interest of Church and Crown, highly advanced in
Honor, Place, and Profit; so that quite contrary to these Prefacers
impertinent Suggestions, instead of the Presbyterians betraying all into the
King's hands, he betrayed himself and his Cause into theirs, and as soon as
opportunity served, they made several attempts to use him accordingly, but the
People were grown too much Libertines for their Rigours, and the Monarchy was
not so soon to have their Covenant Shackels forced upon it, although they
endeavored most earnestly at the Restoration to have it upon the Isle of
Wight Articles, which their Cloakmen incessantly bellowed for, and their chiefs
underhand strenuously endeavored the same; among others, this Passage is a
clear Proof; the hot Lord Hollis, from the beginning a most violent Biggot in
that Cause, would, to his dying day, among his Confidents, with great
earnestness of Passion, call Monk that Rogue, because giving him and his Party
a meeting at the Earl of Northumberland's, he promised to bring in the King
upon the Isle of Wight terms, and basely failed them: Now as I believe on the
one hand he never intended to gratify them, if such a Promise was made, so
could he not, though really intended, have brought it about; for whatever his
design was at first, and his close deportment conduced not a little to what he
accomplished, the incessant Petitions he met with from every corner of the
Kingdom for a Free Parliament gave him full information, how the Nations Pulse
beat, and what alone would satisfy them, that is without regarding Parties,
and Factions, to be as we were before fallen in pieces; and therefore to set
the Saddle upon the right Horse, the pretended Severity these Men charge the
King withal, was really in the Parliament, the Majority whereof were a Set of
as worthy understanding Gentlemen as ever assembled upon that account, who
resolved to go upon the old Principle, to re-establish the Nation upon those
well-pois'd, long experienced Constitutions which faction and folly had so
fatally perverted: 'twas they were uneasy at so general an Indemnity, thinking
such as had been accustomed so long in Mischief, could not leave off playing
the old game, without some further Security; 'twas they pressed, and brought on
the Act of Uniformity, how little to the Satisfaction of a too prevalent Party
at Court, appeared in that the Winter following an attempt was made to
Supersede it by a Toleration: In fine, whatever the Good old King would have
had from a Parliament, during his Reign to make us the happiest People upon
Earth, this would have most readily established; but the Papist, and
Presbyterian rendered all Abortive.

Thus have I run over and made some Remarks upon such Instructions as our
Prefacers thought fit to observe from this third Volume; not but they grant it
does afford many other more useful Reflections, which is the truest word has
come from them, and therefore having their leave, or at least acknowledgment, I
shall presume to cull out two or three, perhaps as serviceable to this World of
ours, as any we have had from them.

1. The Fanatic, the Commonwealth Party, were never without some Plot or
other, both at home and abroad against the Ancient Established Government, this
Monarchy, this Tyranny of ours, as upon all occasions they term it, since the
Restoration. And this I fancy has discovered a very blind side in the
Author's Friends to make so Public a Declaration, of what hitherto was kept a
Secret: for till now all Plots were laid at the Papists door, they alone must
be thought the continued Underminers of our Peace and Welfare, and accordingly
we have had several Prosecutions against them, ay, and Executions too, upon the
Evidence and Oaths of such profligate Wretches, as ought not to have passed for
the hanging a Dog: but such a thing as a Protestant Plot, was not to be thought
of among the holy Brotherhood, and Godly Party; they Diffented indeed as to
Forms of Religious Worship, and though a King in our Israel, must have Liberty to
do what seems right in their own eyes, and this is the utmost of their
demand, a little Schism they must have, but for Sedition, being dissatisfied
with the Government, giving any disturbance to the Civil Power, was never
admitted into their thoughts, they were as innocent, as free from that, as so
many two year old Devils: and though the* Assassination at the Rye was owned by
the very Partisans engaged, and their many Consults in order to other
Disturbances fully made appear, yet not taking effect, must not be believed,
such good People cannot be suspected of any mischievous Design, unless
accomplished, and then it is God's cause and their glory: whereas this Author is
very frank, and deals plainly in the matter; for though he had not fixed his
correspondence in Sixty One, and will scarce credit that for which Overton,
Desborough, etc. were secured, because his Excellency was not consulted in the
Matter. Neither does he mention what Blood told him was designed in Ireland,
because that Fellow's reaching head discovered how little he had of what his
Party cried him up for; although it was about that time he tells, p. 118. Upon
the Prodigality of the English Court, etc. his Friends in all parts began to
entertain hopes, that they might again be employed to rescue their Country from
Servitude. In which posture of Affairs, Col. Algernon Sidney, who since Monk
acted his treacherous part, had resided at Rome, and other parts of Italy,
thought convenient to draw nearer home, that if opportunity offered, he might
not be wanting to his Duty and Public Service; a very commendable Duty, and
laudable Service to embroil his Country in continued Confusions, which till
brought to the Block, we find this Colonel incessantly engaged in, and very
earnest with Ludlow to set forward with him, and put to his helping hand:
especially upon the first Dutch War, when his Generalship was accosted on every
side, and by every Party, French, Dutch, the Devil and all: then it was the
forementioned Person of Honor pressed him to declare his concurrence, p. 165.
and his Brother Regicide Say, tells him from Amsterdam, The ruin of the present
Government in England is certainly intended, and that he had cause to believe
would be effected, p. 168. for that a considerable number in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, will appear for us, etc. Afterward De Wit, and Newport courted
him at an high degree; and his Friend Sidney invited him to meet at Basle, that
they might go together to Paris, the better to carry on the Undertaking: Say
and Brisco, add moreover, that if he will resolve to come, all the Exiles would
accompany him, otherwise not a man stir, p. 188. That great obstacle likewise
of his three Friends, Okey, etc. was set in a true light, not so foul as
represented; with full assurance to his Worthy self, and Party, of an
Honorable Reception, and secure abode with them. Notwithstanding all which
fair Proffers, this cunning old Fox would not stir out of his Swiss Den; and
had reason, for though we grant his Brutish Courage feared a Sword as little as
his Fellows, yet a Gibbet he could not digest: And further to recommend his
Prudence, in this his cautious deportment, he tells us, as the War was ended
without the least advantage to his Friends, or Cause; so he foresaw it all
along, that the Dutch were a mercenary People, and having secured their Trade,
and other Advantages, made a Peace, so far from doing them any good, as on the
contrary they promised to deliver up those called Regicides into the hands of
the King's Ministers; and deal with all Persons, who should be declared
Fugitives, or Rebels, in the same manner. A sad Disappointment this: may such
ever attend them.

2. My next observation is an Appendix of very nigh affinity to the former,
viz. That men of Fanatic Commonwealth Principles, will never live quietly
under any Monarchy whatsoever; let it be of God, or Men, nay, from their very
selves, it is all one, they will submit no longer than needs must, and be very
uneasy whilst compelled thereto; of all which the forementioned Characters, as
well as Practices, which Ludlow and his Prefacers bestows upon it, are an
abundant confirmation, for they vouchfafe it no other appellation than Tyranny,
perfect Tyranny, in the harshest sense the word is now taken, and that which
all Free People ought to extirpate with the utmost abhorrency, and detestation:
directly according with what I have already mentioned of their admired Sidney's
Maxim, that the People are sole Judges of their Superiors actions; and
foreseeing a very weighty Objection to lie in the way, such a course would make
the Remedy worse than the Disease, give occasion of continual Tumults and Civil
Wars; he very slightly replies, Civil War, in Machiavel's account, is a
Disease, Tyranny the Death of a State. Some other Authorities might have passed
better than Machiavel's, but for want of better, his must serve the turn; had
that unhappy Gentleman considered his fate, it might have prevented his own,
which though for nothing else, this dangerous Position most justly deserves: that
any man of sense should say Civil War is but a Disease! can any thing be more
Mortal to a State? have not all Tyrannies commenced from thence? with
unavoidable Oppression, and Slavery to whatever People fall under that worst of
curses: yet how far our Publishers have taken this infection, appears in that
they presume so boldly to use the same Epithet, Tyranny, all is Tyranny with
them, though never more was known, than from the no Conduct of such rash
unexperienced Phaetons; and therefore to dissuade them from any future
attempts, it is my desire they would transferr that Admonition, in their Close
given the Presbyterians, and apply it to themselves (since altogether as
agreeable) A Revenge taken against those who will not let us possess all, is a
slender Satisfaction for the hazard of utter Ruin.

3. There is but one thing more I will return upon these Critical Observers,
and that shall relate to their admired Author himself, how they can justify
that Ostentation, and Applause, he so fulsomly assumes in every the most
trivial undertaking: the First Volume, is more than one half stuffed with such
Vainglorious Rhodamontades. His defense of Warder Castle fills more Paper,
than Sir Francis Vere's Relation of the famous Ostend Siege; when he was only
blocked up to prevent his, and his fellow Rebels plundering the Loyal Gentlemen
in the Neighborhood; and could the King, who, good man, was ill furnished that
way, and had greater occasion for them elsewhere, have spared two or three
large Battering-Pieces it would have been beaten about their Ears in as few
Hours; for want of which they were starved into a Surrender: In like manner
when Prisoner, how vainly does he relate the many importunities to forsake his
Party, and upon his resolving to continue Rebel, what valuable Persons were
proffered in Exchange, as if the fortune of either Side had depended upon this
great Almanzor's abetment; when in truth, though that cursed turn raised so much
dust as choked the whole Kingdom, yet his part in it was no more than Aesop's
Fly, he did what Mischief he could, but his Vaunts far excel his Performances.
Neither was he valuable for any thing more in their Civil Transactions than a
grough positive humor, resolutely bent upon whatever his own will suggested, of
which unmanageable disposition he gave an early Specimen that little while he
was at Trinity-College Oxon, where the then President kept a strict Discipline,
and would frequently Moderate at the young Students Disputations himself: It
happened upon a time this Positive Sir was engaged in an Argument about their
Species Intentionales and Reales, or some such like Topic, for he confidently
affirmed something to be Real, which was very far from it, the good Dr.
endeavored to convince him by this following instance, The Fox wagging his
Tail, and seeing its Shadow upon the Wall, said it was an Horn, was that an
Horn, quoth he to Ludlow? Yes it was a Horn, a real Horn. Wherein he so
pertinaciously persisted, as the Old man fell into a little Passion, and put an
end to that debate, with this resolve, Well if it be a Horn, then Toot it, you
fool you: How it was expressed in Latin was not related; but I had the Passage
from a Right Reverend Person, of great Eminency, who sometime after was in the
same Presidentship, and upon a general Discourse of Fanatic Obstinacy, gave
this particular instance how naturally some men's Dispositions lead them
thereto. For at the same contradicting rate he went on in the whole course of
his Life; and though as heavy as Lead, yet as stiff as Iron, would bend to none,
but break all other men's Measures, both good and bad, that did not come up to
his Levelling Projects, (for that was his common Epithet, Ludlow the Leveller)
with two or three such Whimsical Nostrums of his, as destructive to Humane
Society as crude Mercury to the Natural body. With the like Arrogant fondness
he relates how earnest they were to compliment him into the
Lieutenant-Generalship of Ireland; whereas had not Pride and Pertinacy
altogether blinded his vain mind, half an eye might have discovered there was
no consideration of his Abilities in the Proposal, but a trick of Cromwell's to
remove him out of the way, that the dark Designs he had in agitation here might
receive no obstruction from such an unweildy fellow, as might force him upon
more Severity than was requisite in the infancy of his Usurpation. And this
surther appears upon Ireton's Death, for he being next in Command, should have
in course come into the Chief, whereas his name was never so much as thrown up
among them, but first Lambert was propounded, and then Fleetwood top'd upon
him, as most proper to keep him under, when his new Father-in Law should top
them all, and civilly detain him from coming home, that he might not be as
insolent to the Usurper, as he had been to his natural Sovereign.

We are now to follow him into Swisserland, where he highly applauds the
Reception they met with, neither indeed could all Europe have afforded them a
properer Place, the Devil and Collier, not being more alike, than these Guests,
and their Entertainers: yet the Character he gives them of the Illustrious,
High and Mighty Sovereigns, and most Honored Lords, their Excellencies of
Bern, would make one think them the most August Assembly ever sat at the Helm
of any Government, the Roman Senate was nothing to them; whereas in truth never
such a Company of Clodpated Clowns assumed the title of Magistrates; but since
agreeable both to Place, and People, they pass for tolerable there, whom a more
civilized Nation would by no means endure; at their first defection from the
House of Austria, as they had but few Gentry among them, and fewer engaged with
them, so they made an Order that none should be admitted into their new
Established Government; and their Plebeianships have ever since proceeded
accordingly, without regard to Honor, Integrity or Good Manners: as their
Strong Bodies, and hardy Constitutions qualify them for War, so their
necessitous condition engage them to Lease-out their Lives to that bloody
trade, upon which account likewise they too often prostituted both Souls, and
Consciences, in most perfidious violations of whatever Engagements they entered
into, as the French, Spaniard, and Milanese successively experienced: one of
these did since six them, though at a dear rate, upon their first Stipulation,
but is now upon better terms; and may by degrees prescribe to them according to
their own measures. This Composition of Rocks and Cataracts, was the Asylum of
our Regicides, and properly enough, as already said, for that both the Climate
was most agreeable to their rough, severe Dispositions, and the Government, the
first Commonwealth Rebels, as well Temporal, as Ecclesiastic, of these later
Ages. Nevertheless had our King been in any measure so sollicitous to
apprehend, or disturb him, and his Fellows, as they would hold the World in
hand, it might have been easily done. It Is owned how much Geneva suspected
their Power of Protection, if demanded, p. 104. and though Mr. Humelius one of
the Bern Ministers, (who with the English Tongue, had got the Fanatic Taint)
engaged some in the Government to stand their Friends; yet had our King,
assisted by his Brother of France's Recommendation, pressed earnestly to have
them delivered up to Justice, it is probable they would have given them notice
to slip away, the utmost kindness they could have shown: Outlaws, and that for
King-killing may find some private, but no public Abettors, and whatever
Government does so, ought to be adjudg'd a Common Enemy by all Monarchs in the
World.

SECT. II.
MY next Province is to give the true Character of those Execrable Regicides
whom Ludlow, and his Publishers, endeavor with so much art and daubing
otherwise to represent; for the little account they give of the Revolution does
not concern me, and is withal so mean and trivial, so deeply tinged with the
partiality and prejudice of a violent Faction, as it looks more like an
Invective than History, taking every occasion to lash at those of his old
Acquaintance, who not having so deeply engaged, were not obliged so cursedly to
persevere; and inveighs against the King and Court, as if still on the other
side the Water; though it appeared otherwise from his own Confession, for finding
how unsafe it was to stay longer in England, he scamper'd away as well as he
could, and much applauds his own Conduct in the retreat, passed incognito
through France, and arrived at that grand Sanctuary of Sedition and Schism,
Geneva; where his first Letters from home informed him, how ten of his Brother
Regicides being accused of having in their several Stations contributed to the
Death of the King, had been Condemned, and Executed, p. 59.

The Reflections he makes as to the Trials being put off, till the new Sheriffs
came on, is mere cavil, for had Love the old Sheriff, been never so factious
and obstinate, and returned a Jury all of the same Kidney, the Matter of Fact
was so apparent, and foul, as they must have found them guilty, or come under
the same Praemunire: But so great a concern as that, necessarily required an
extraordinary Commission, and the many weighty affairs upon resetling a Nation
so long in such a Chaos of Confusion, would not permit their Trials to come on
sooner, perhaps not so soon, but for the approaching Term.

He continues to carry on his Cavils against the Commissioners, at some because
they had been engaged in the Rebellion with them, at others because they
adhered to the King against it, so that it is not possible to please them unless
permitted to judge in their own Cause, or have it post-pon'd, as the Welshman
desired, till the last Day, whereas upon the whole, there was never known a
Commission of more able understanding Persons, both for Law and Parts, than sat
upon that sad occasion, nor any Trial managed with more temper, patience, and
all other kinds of fair carriage toward the Prisoners, as the worthy Sir
William Wyld then Recorder of London told them, they forgot their barbarousness
to the good King, they would not hear him, nor his just Allegations, who
shuffled now with all the dilatory impertinencies imaginable, and the Court
with an unwearied compliance let them go on: And for this Author, or rather his
Friends, to publish the quite contrary nigh Forty Years after, is the height
of baseness, and by way of Penance, might I prescribe it, they should be
obliged to Reprint, for it is very scarce, The Trial of the Regicides, that the
Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth may appear, and moreover all
the Party obliged to read it too, which I fancy would be very uneasy, the
Alchoran would down with them ten times better. Yet this must be owned, Ludlow
had certainly read those Trials, for the account he gives of his Friends, what
they said by way of Defense, or Extenuation, is taken almost verbatim from
thence, without the least notice of what was Rejoined upon them, either by
Court or Council, as to matter of Fact, or Law. Is such a man fit to write an
History? inform Posterity of the truth of things? or his Publishers men of
Reputation and Integrity, to impose such things upon the World?

The first he gives us an account of in this Martyrology of Hell is his friend
Harrison; concerning whom, because nothing is mentioned of his Parentage, and
Education, as he constantly does, when worth taking notice of; the World may
know he was a Butcher's Son of Newcastle Vnderline Staffordshire, placed Clerk
to an Attorney in Clifford's Inn, and when out of his time became a kind of
Pettifogger in that way of Practice, and was infamous enough for it, which
might occasion him, when the War brake out, to exchange his Pen for the Sword;
yet in this neither did he make any considerable advance till the Self-denying
Ordinance opened the way for such Mechanic Reformers, when likewise, though
perhaps stout enough, he was more beholding to his Confidence, than Courage,
for having a Tongue well hung, the effect of his pettifogging Profession, by
his Enthusiastical Preaching, and great pretenses to Piety, he became admired
by the Army, and advanced by Cromwell to a Major General; being one of his
chiefest Confidents, and accordingly made use of by him, to break the
Presbyterian Junto, convey the King from Hurst-Castle to St. James's, in order
to his Murder, wherein he acted according to his descent, with more than a
Butcher's Cruelty. This is Ludlow's Hero, who when brought to the Bar, did not
sneak like Sir Hardress Waller, but pleaded Not Guilty, and justified the
Sentence passed upon the King, and the Authority of those who had Commissioned
him to act as one of his Judges, p. 61. and so continues his Cants, and
Flourishes, impudently owning what he saw evidently proved, alleging that it
was done by Authority of Parliament, and could not be questioned in any
inferior Court, which being a point of Law, he desired Council might be
assigned on that head, but the Court overruled it. Thus far Ludlow, as to
their Pleadings, and no further mentioning (according to his base partiality
already observed) what the Court so fully replied to every branch of their
Allegations, both as to the reason of the thing, and matter of Law. Now since
this weak, and slender thread, was the sole strength the whole Set of Regicides
had to hang upon, till they came to the Rope, I shall here once for all give an
account of what the Court replied to that Subterfuge of theirs, so full and
clear, that had the Publishers consulted the reputation of their Party, they
would never have given occasion of its coming afresh under debate.

To that request of having Council assigned to justify the Authority by which
they acted, 'twas thought a piece of new Treason to demand it, for that their
pretended Parliament was so far from being so, that it consisted not of more
than the eighth part of a House of Commons, packed together by those very
Persons now arraigned, the better to gloss over, and carry on their Traitorous
Designs: Upon which account it was further declared, That the Trial, p. 51.
King and Lords cannot do any thing without the Commons; nor the King and
Commons without the Lords; nor Lords and Commons without the King; and for the
Prisoner to excuse, nay, justify himself, upon pretense of being empowered, by
one house, nay the eighth part of an house, to condemn their King, whom no
Authority upon earth can call in Question, and without whom both Houses
together cannot take away the meanest Subjects Life, deserves not only reproof
but Sentence, without going any further. This Point of Law Ludlow takes no
notice of, although it is a most reasonable return to every one of their Pleas,
for they all harp'd upon the same string. The Military men, no Members, would
have been excused, for that, according to their Profession, Superiors Orders
were to be obeyed without dispute; as indeed they were fairly bringing the
whole Nation to Military-Law. Such as were Members insisted upon looking back
to the Declarations and Remonstrances, from 41 forward, which was indeed a
just, though spiteful Reflection upon the Presbyterian Party for Vnkinging his
Majesty, but could not in the least justify their Vnheading him, and the
others not going along with them so far, thought it might extenuate their going
so far as they did, though doubtless it was Rebellion from the beginning, however
in those Healing times, as the term went, they were rather for skinning, than
searching the Wound too far, whereby notwithstanding the Cure was never the
better; to be sure their Plea was altogether frivolous, and as the Court told
Carew, tended not only to justify the action, but to cast a ball of Division
among those that were present; and further added to Scot, That to expatiate in
the manner he was going, tended to making a New Government, (which is the
highest Treason next to Murdering the King in the World) subvert the Laws, and
affirm a few of the Trials, P. 91.
Commons, nay, if they had been whole, the Legislative Power of the Kingdom.

Another general Observation to be made, because in common to them all, is the
Principle upon which they acted, the Light within them, the cursed Enthusiasm
of their Rebel hearts; So Harrison Try. p. 50.
declared, he followed not his own judgment, what he did, he did as out of
Conscience to the Lord, from whence he received rather assurances than
otherwise. And Carew likewise, what he did was in the fear of the Lord, and
Obedience to his holy and Righteous Law. And so most of the rest went on in the
same Cant, whereby all the Laws of God, and Man, must be superseded, as Sir O.
B. told them, to their obdurate hardened hearts, and seared Consciences.

To begin with the Laws of the Land, they being so directly contrary to this
Bloody unprecedented Fact, there was a never heard of way of Process found out,
in the name of the People, for which they were beholding to Parsons the
Jesuit's pestilent Discourse of the Succession of the Crown, penned to stir up
Sedition in Queen Elizabeth 's time, or at her death to prevent King James 's
quiet Establishment in the Throne; But failing then it served the turn of these
Jesuited Fanatics most cursedly, and to that purpose was Reprinted in 48. with
a different Title, but otherwise very little difference, and gave the Subject
Matter to that Impudent Charge against the King, with Bradshaw's as insolent
Enlargements, and Replies, to his most Reasonable and Legal Allegations. It Is
nevertheless probable the whole Pack of Bloodhounds knew not from whence the
notions were taken, and who first started them, but such only as laid the
Design, and loo'd on the rest; Nay, some thought that Bradshaw and Cook, though
they only appeared upon the Stage, as to the Law Pageantry, yet were no more
than Properties to Ol. St. John's, who stood behind the Curtain, and was chief
Assistant to Cousin Cromwell in all that cursed contrivance. To be sure this
Trial once set in motion, all the forementioned Curs took the scent, and ran
away with it most furiously, and it is probable some of them thought they did
God and the Nation as good Service as the Scribes and Pharisees when they
Crucified our Savior. Thus Carew excepted against that Form of the Indictment,
which said, he had not the fear of God before his Eyes, but was moved by the
Devil, with a Traitorous malicious heart, etc. whereas he could say in the
presence of the Lord it was done in his fear, etc. and Harrison Cants most P.
75.
profoundly of his feeling the Terrors of the presence of the Lord, that was
with his Servant in those days, (and however it seemed good to him to suffer
this turn at present) he believed e're long it would be made known from heaven,
there was more P. 50.
of God in it than men were aware of. At which blasphemous rate, all the rest,
more or less, went on, to charge heaven with their infernal Deeds; so that
since that of the Jews, there is no Record extant of such a Body of Men so
Hellishly possessed; which I shall have occasion further on to take notice of
more particularly.

There is one thing more I presume it may not be improper to acquaint the
Reader, among the former Informations; that however the Government took care,
that their Trials should be taken in short hand, and faithfully Printed; no
such thing was done at their Execution, perhaps scarce thought possible for the
Throng; or otherwise that so much impertinent babble, and Spiritual Nonsense,
nay many times Blasphemy, was not to be taken notice of, since the last time
they would trouble the World in that kind. This defect the Brotherhood supplied
by Printing The Speeches and Prayers of some of the late King's Judges, viz.
etc. together with several Occasional Speeches and Passages in their
Imprisonment, etc. and although they assure the Reader of great Veracity in the
whole performance, yet many times in relating what they Spoke, or Prayed, it is
ushered in with that common Salvo, to this effect; and whoever will have
patience to read over what is there related of, or by them, cannot imagine how
any one, unless truly Inspired, not a Fanatic Pretender, whose Memories
generally are as weak as their judgments, should carry off, such abominable
Presumptions, and Religious Delusions, wherewith every one of them, according
to that account, were undoubtedly possessed; None of the Primitive Martyrs left
the World with so much Assurance, and Selfjustification as these Wretches; they
doubted no more of Heaven, than the Executioner of their Clothes, though they had
as little reason to hope for it as Judas, dying with less Remorse, and
Recognitions of their abominable Impieties; never considering what others take
for sound Doctrine, that though their Consciences accused them not, yet were they
not thereby Justified, since there is one greater than their Consciences, and
knows all things; but what has been in all Ages observed as to the ill
management of Temporal Affairs, may be here applied in a spiritual sense, Quos
vult perdere Deus, prius dementat.

This Fanatic Legend of the Regicides, with the forementioned Trials, one of
which proves them the most impudent Traitors ever subverted Government; the
other the most desperate Enthusiasts ever abused Religion, are so culled and
falsify'd by this our Author, as to persuade the World they were true Patriots,
and great Saints; with how little reason I shall make appear by a particular
Survey of his Characters; and with the greater Brevity, because these general
Remarks, have gone very far therein.

To return therefore to Harrison, from whom we digress'd, who, as our Author
tells us, justified the Sentence passed upon the King, and the Authority of
those who had Commissioned him to act, etc. the Court might have ordered an
hasty Verdict, and pronounced as quick a Sentence, as he falsely suggests; but
they with unaccountable temper attended all his insolent Evasions, and impudent
Demands of Council, etc. and would he have attended to any thing of Law or
Reason, must have been satisfied with their Overruling his Demands. He trifled
as much as contains between 3 and 4 Pages in a large Quarto of their Trials,
before he would plead Guilty, or Not Guilty, till finding he would be entered
Mute, the same with Judgment, he cried, Not Guilty: and for how he would be
tried it must be according to the Law of the Lord, that of God and his Country
being, as he said, vain words, which nevertheless he was forced to come to;
which was the more foolish, and humorsome in him, for that being brought up in
the Law, he could not but understand, that way of procedure to be a necessary
Form, and not to be dispensed with. Neither can I take it for any thing more
than a Fanatic Story, that is a Lie, when he tells us the Executioner was in a
more than ordinary Dress, or Place, than usually assigned him in Court, where
he is an Attendant in Course, and by Office. And if he declared going out of
the Court after Sentence pronounced, that he had no reason to be ashamed of the
Cause engaged in, it was the greater shame for him, and had he met with that
barbarous usage, the Royal Party is so falsely charged to have shown him, it
would have been but a just return. With like rude and groundless Reflections,
he proceeds to the place of Execution, where Chairing-Cross formerly stood,
that the King might have the pleasure of the Spectacle, and inure himself to
Blood, p. 69. And was there no other reason to be given? Yes surely, not so
much that the Court might look toward them, as they toward the
Banqueting House, out of which they led their Sovereign to the Slaughter. And
for the King's inuring himself to Blood, the Fanatics had great reason to
complain, who hazarded his Life, and shocked his Monarchy, by that fond
impossibility of obliging them. For his Execution* and Declaration before it,
'twas according to his Life, desperate Enthusiasm, abusing Almighty God more by
his Presumptions* than had he absolutely defied him. And here I had left this
desperate Wretch, but for one Passage which I am sure Ludlow did not like, and
it is probable his friends will be as little pleased with; in the forementioned
Fanatic Legend, which begins with this Brother, we are told the Sheriff sent
three Divines to discourse him upon several heads, whereof one was the breaking
the Old Parliament; to which he replied, That was the Act and Design of
Cromwell, he knowing nothing of it, till P. 3.
called by him to go along as an Assistant that Morning it was done: Yet
afterward, says he, I was glad of it, as seeing they did intend to perpetuate
themselves, without doing those desirable things which were expected and longed
for by the Lord's people; and if the Lord's people were not satisfied with
them, I am sure all others were much less; and yet we have a new Club of
Politico's so much made up of contradiction, as to applaud those contemptible
Villains.

The next was Mr. John Carew, a Gentleman of an Ancient Family, says Ludlow,
and that Family not a little ashamed, say others, he should so basely
degenerate. It Is further said he was brought up to the Law, although at his
Arraignment he show little Skill therein, for that he would save to our Lord
Jesus Christ his Right to the Government of these Kingdoms, before he would
plead Not Guilty; I presume he had Enrolled himself among the Fifth Monarchy
Gang, an unreasonable set of Men, who might have liberty to expect Christ's
coming as long as they please, provided they would Submit to the present
Government in the mean while, but till then they will be Governed by none but
themselves, and of all Mankind none are so far from Christ's way of Governing.
How justly the Court stopped his impertinent Excursions is already mentioned; and
it is like our Author to tell us what this Prisoner replied upon Mr. Arthur
Annesly's particularly chargeing him with the Exclusion of the Members in 48.
That it was strange to find a Judge upon the Bench, give Evidence as a Witness
in the Court; this, I say, Ludlow terms an irregular Proceeding, unbecoming a
Court of Judicature, and all the while stifles what the Lord Chief Baron
Replied, You are mistaken, it is no Evidence, but shows you what Authority that
was, an Authority of Forty six Members, how is this Evidence? a Judge sure may
expostulate from his own Knowledge about any particular, fully proved before,
as this whole Charge was. Yet at the same rate is the Cavil carried on, every
thing caught at which may serve a turn, though nothing mentioned to clear a
Truth: Nay, sometimes he certainly obtrudes real fictions of his own; for I no
where find that their Enemies confessed, or commended, their Harrison 's, and
Carew 's steddiness of Mind, and contempt of Death; but that their Friends took
care they should go off with a resolute Obdurateness, take this following
Passage; Some few days after Carew Suffered, I met a Person who had been
employed by his Nephew to get a parcel of Papers out of his hands, which
related to an Entailed Estate, and so not forfeited by his Treason; which though
he had attended several times, (as careless as his Friends say he was of Life,)
could not be obtained till the last hour, which argued he had some hopes.
During this stay, the Gentleman said a Fellow came to him, he presumed an
Apothecary, and taking a Glass out of his Pocket, poured it into a Beaker and
gave it him with this Grace, The Lord strengthen you; and it produced the
designed effect, for whereas he looked wan, and trembled before, this made him
flush, and sweat, with an answerable alteration in his Discourse, and Carriage;
and this might occasion what he said at the end Speech* p. 22.
of his Prayer upon the Ladder, I am so exceeding Dry, that my Tongue is ready
to stick to my Mouth, but I would fain speak a little more. 'Twas then
discoursed that most of them took such intoxicating Doses, to be sure Peter's
had so large a Potion, that he was stupidly drunk, which made Cook who suffered
at the same time, say he feared him not fit to Suffer then.

Adrian Scroop is the next with our Author, though in the course of their
Executions there were three or four before him, and seems mentioned on purpose
to inveigh against Sir Richard Brown, whom he falsely affirms to be the
principal Witness, his Evidence was only Collateral, there were others who
proved both his Sitting and Signing so fully as he owned all himself, and
indeed there were none of them, had any thing of the Port and Language of a
Gentleman but he, both at Trial, and Execution, for he always addressed himself
to the Court with due respect, and civilly acquiesc'd in the Reasons they gave
for Overruling his Pleas; what impudence then is it for Ludlow to affirm, That
the Jury taking every thing said against the person accused for substantial
Proof, made no scruple of bringing him in Guilty of Treason? p. 66. whereas the
Proofs against him were as full as any of the rest; yet I will not deny but he
might have escaped with Life, had not Sir Richard's Testimony interposed, though
his own folly as well as baseness must bear the blame, for expressing to a
Stranger the no remorse he had of so horrid a Crime, which Sir Richard as a
Member, was bound in Honor and Conscience to declare to the House, when his
Case came to be considered. Almighty God, as already hinted, Pardons none but
upon Repentance; and can King or Parliament follow a better Precedent?

Tho. Scot follows, more especially valued by our Author and his Friends,
because so impudent as to desire it might be written upon his Tomb, Here lies
Tho. Scot, who adjudg'd the late King to die; But he lies without one, and may
all of the same Mind, die, and lie as he did; yet even this being spoken in
Parliament, ought not to be brought in Evidence, as is confidently averred
here, without the least notice of what Sir O. B. declared, There could be no
Privilege of Parliament for Treason, nor Felony neither, which that Try. p. 88.
Learned Lawyer made several times fully out. What he urged likewise of the
Convention which then was, and the Secluded Members, was altogether as
frivolous; that Long Parliament had been so perpetuated, as none but themselves
could make a Dissolution, (God keep us from such another) which the Secluded
Members came in to do as Mr. Annesly told him: and the Convention they summoned
was not so Regular, but the next Parliament confirmed all they had Enacted* and
could these Fellows who had put the whole Government out of course, think it
could ever be brought into Order, but by stepping back through those many
Irregularities they had continually heaped together? What he says of his being
a Recruiter, speaks little of Reputation, that sort of Cattle breaking thorough
in an odd manner; and less of his Policy to tell us how he was fooled by Monk:
and how well he was respected throughout the Kingdom, none could better express
than himself, who in a Speech he made to prevent the Dissolution of that fatal
long Parliament, and finding it ineffectual, concluded thus, Being your
pleasure to have it so, Try. p. 87.
I know not how to binder it, but when done I know not where to bide this hated
head of mine. And, indeed, it was the case of them all.

John Jones, and Gregory Clement, seeing what the others had said was to little
purpose, confessed the Fact, and were declared Guilty, says our Author, but is
mistaken here too, whether wilfully, or otherwise, let his Friends resolve; to
be sure Jones Pleaded, confessing he sat some days, but did not maliciously
contrive the King's Death; whereas his hand and seal being proved to the
Warrant for Execution, he then cried Peccavi, and put himself upon the Lord,
and that Honorable Court, which not having the desired effect of Life; at
their Executions they both Recanted their pleading Guilty, or begging Pardon,
and so went off; an exact testimony of Fanatic Sincerity. What he says
further of Jones being a Gentleman, of a competent Estate, and considerable
Service for the Public Cause, stands thus:

His first entrance into the World, if common report may be credited, was as
Sir Thomas Middleton's Man, for that I find his Appellation in all the Prints
of those times: and it is further said, that by his inducement Sir Thomas
engaged on the Rebel side; but his grand advance was by marrying Cromwell's
Sister, who finding him withal a Zealous Brother, made up of Faction,
Sedition, and Insolence, countenanced him accordingly in all his Designs; for
he was not only Governor of Anglesy, but Controller-General of all the Honest
Gentlemen in North Wales. Afterward he was removed into Ireland, where he
behaved himself as Servants use to do when got into Dominion, with a most
Tyrannical Arbitrariness, no less morose, and severe than Ludlow himself, who
otherwise would not have commended, a Relation, and Creature of Cromwell's.

And because he tells us of Gregory Clement's being a Merchant, I shall relate
this Passage, and then let the World judge of his integrity, honesty, how unfit
for a Public, who behaved himself so unworthily in a Private trust. He was
Apprentice to one Mr. Hukely a Spanish Merchant, who, when his time was out,
advised him to try his Fortune in the East Indies, and for his encouragement
lent him 500 l. upon his single Bond; perhaps he might have something more of
his own, but that was said to be his principal Fund, which he so well managed,
as to return about the beginning of our Troubles with an Advance of 8 or 9000
l. which made him, not only considerable upon the Exchange, but a Recruiter at
Westminster, when most honest men were gone, or forced away. At what time his
Master died I omitted to enquire, but leaving only two Daughters, the Gentleman
who married the Eldest engaged on the King's side, and so could not come to
London till the War was over, then he addressed himself to Clement, and hoped
he would not demurr to pay so just and fortunate a Debt, which notwithstanding
he did continually Shuffle, and put him off, and that with so much insolence,
as once upon the Exchange to bid him Kiss his B --. When the case was so
altered, as this Merchant came to lie in the Dungeon at Newgate in order to his
Execution, the Gentleman applied himself to him there, where he found him at
the Common Cant of all the Crew, that he had made his Peace with God, and the
World, and desired he would not disturb him with any temporal concerns, he told
him how little true Peace could be expected with God, when so unjust to Man,
with much more to the like, though very little, purpose, for the obstinate Wretch
persever'd in his vain Presumptions, and even at the Gallows declared what
great Assurances he had, though the Gentleman, mounted among the Guard, told him
there of his unjust dealing, which he cared not to take notice of, and so went
off, an horrid instance of Fanatic Delusion.

Mr. John Cook takes the next turn, his Dear Friend, and fellow Governor in
Ireland, where he was Lord Chief Justice, and otherwise had a great influence
upon Civil Affairs; yet I do not find he was so squeamish as our Author, but
continued in his Post under Cromwell. What he says of his Parts, and Gentile
Education shall be acknowledged true; yet could they not advance him in
practice, so as to keep him out of some Necessities which sat uneasy upon him;
and this, not only his Acquaintance thought put him upon that fatal Employ of
Solicitor to that pretended High Court of Justice, but he owns here at his
Trial, 'twas Avaritia non Malitia, what he spoke was for his Fee, and that he
hoped the Jury would take into Consideration, whereto both the
Sollicitor-General and Lord Chief Baron replied, that as no man can have a
Lawful Calling to pursue the Life of his King, so for a private Person, though he
only intends to beat a man, yet if he dies thereupon, in Law it is Murder: and
the like Replies were made to the many other Allegations Cook very ingeniously
urged in his Defense, with so much Candor, and Respect, as well as Law and
Reason, that it would be most unpardonable in any body but our Author, who
makes it his constant practice, to give so partial a relation, as to set forth
the three Articles his Indictment was reduced to, with a brief account of
Cook's Plea, without the least Syllable of what both Council and Court replied
in answer to every particular, so full and satisfactory, and yet withal so
fair and easy, as I never read any thing of that kind more diverting; Indeed,
all the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, knowing the Prisoner to be a man of Parts,
and for several years versed in Business, seemed to exert themselves above
their Performances at other Trials, and let him see the most artfull
flourishes, could not palliate so foul an Act, or he allege any thing by way
of Extenuation, they were not able to render frivolous, and false, with one
single breath; so that after the greatest Liberty ever vouchsafed any Person in
those Circumstances, he was forced to acknowledge their Patience in hearing
him, and that their Lordships had justly stated both the Councils Proofs, and
his Answers, if they laid aside those Trials, p. 150.
Acts, Orders, or Authorities, whereby he did at that time Conscientiously act*
and thought to be born out, etc. And being told that aggravated the matter so
as to Warrant the Authority, he desired not to be mistaken, meaning only in
point of High Treason, so that it seems he would have gladly come off with a
Misdemeanor, Misprision, or something of that kind, to have secured his Life:
Which failing, at his Execution he acted the proper part of the Party, would be
telling what a Glorious work the Lord had accomplished upon Speeches, p. 29.
his Spirit, which was to assure him he need not repent of any thing he had
done, but own it as the cause of God, and Christ, etc. In short, none of the
Pack went off more deeply plunged in Enthusiasm, the furies and follies of
Fanatic Delusion.

This Lawyer was accompanied with a Divine, of their Congregational way, the
most impudent Buffoon that ever reproached any Profession, Sacred, or other,
Hugh Peter's, upon whom it was proved that he had made it his constant business
to Blaspheme God and the King in his Pulpit Scurrilities, during the Pageantry
of that horrid Trial; and otherwise became so vile a Property to their many
dark and bloody Designs, as one would think the Devil had Commissioned him to
be his Representative, in acting that dismal Tragedy: yet being now to make
his Plea, that Infernal Fiend had so far left him destitute of that briskness
of Wit, and presence of Mind, at other times his only talent, as he could
scarce reply to any one particular Allegation, but declared in general that all
was false, with so senceless a Stupidity, as to become the object of their
Pity, who most abhorred his abominable Practices.

In the same manner he went off at his Execution, where he was so far from
being animated with courage, as our Author affirms, that Cook himself could
observe, Here is a poor Brother coming, I am afraid that he is not fit to die
at this time, etc. although he had endeavored to put what courage he could into
him, for they tell us he said, Come, Brother Peter's, Passages, and Speeches, p.
27.
let us knock at Heaven gate this Morning, God will open the Doors of Eternity
to us before Twelve of the Clock, etc. but Peter's who had acted a Part too
long, could not bear up in this last dismal Scene, no intoxicating Draught,
whereof it is said he had taken very largely, could silence the Terrors of so
great a Guilt; though it had been the whole course of his life to fool others, he
could not now fool himself.

It Is likewise an egregious falsehood in the account Ludlow gives of his Life,
That he had been a Minister in England for many years, till forced away by
Archbishop Laud 's Superstitions, etc. he was never in our Church, but sometime
at Cambridge, where he was so Insolent, and Lewd, as to be Whipped in the
Regent's Walk, (a Punishment scarce ever inflicted upon any since, nor perhaps
as long time before) the most Public place in that University, and so Expelled
for ever. Now as this affront, according to his Estimation, always rankled in
his envenomed Mind, so it rendered him very acceptable to the Godly Party, as
they termed themselves, who very much delighted in his Sarcastical Libels
against our Government both Ecclesiastical, and Civil: Nevertheless fearing to
come under a second Lash, he kept himself abroad, in Holland sometime, but
mostly in New England; till the Independents, designing to undermine
Presbytery, sent for him, who came accompanied with several young Disciples of
his own Tutoring, so managing the Army by his Cant and Buffoonry, as he became
Cromwell's Zane, so necessary a tool, as the work could not have gone on
without him, for he acted several Parts besides that of Chaplain, sometimes
Col* sometimes Agitator, and whatever else would advance his Patron's Designs
and our Confusions, and therefore it is much Ludlow took notice of him, being so
much the Vsurper's creature; but his deep engagements in the Royal Blood,
expiated for his other failings on the Commonwealth side. I shall only add
further, that upon the Restoration, he was discovered by one of those
Confidents he brought out of New England, seized upon in Bed with another man's
Wife, which his Party indeed would have for the better concealment of himself,
though they could not but know, how much his Spirit was addicted to the Flesh.

Axtell and Hacker came next, who Guarded that confounded Court, and the King
to it, set on the Soldiers to cry for Justice, etc. and for these Reasons were
charged with compassing his, the King's Death: Axtell made many long Harangues
all to the same purpose, That he was a Commission Officer, and obliged to obey
his Superior's Orders, and so ran back to the several Generals, Essex,
Manchester, and Fairfax, from whom he received his Commission, as they did
theirs from Lords and Commons; although upon enquiry, all his Orders in this
Bloody Scene were from Cromwell and Ireton: The Court suffering themselves a
long time to be teas'd with these Tautologies, in the end told him, That
neither the General, nor Lords and Commons ought to be obeyed in any unjust
thing, much less taking away the Life of their King; and this Ludlow styles
their being necessitated to fly to their old Refuge of questioning the
Authority by which he acted, as if that were not first to be inquired into in
all Actions both personal and real. What he further calls a strong unheard of
Doctrine, That no Person, nor Community, nor People have any Coercive Power
over the King, is a continued Specimen of his supercilious Arrogance, and would
he have mentioned the Precedents Sir O. Bridgman quoted, the Assertion would
have appeared much to the purpose, and the Jury been justified in that they
made no Difficulty of bringing him in Guilty.

Hacker being present at the former's Trial, saw how fruitless it would be to
make the same Allegations, and he had no other, besides he seemed to be the
dullest of them all in their common knack of Canting, for that he only read a
Speech at his Execution of ten or twelve Lines, and then desired that Axtell
would be both their mouths to God in Prayer.

It Is likewise false that the Court being sensible of an injury done to Hewlet
in finding him Guilty, for that it was made appear the Common Hangman cut off
the King's Head, procured his Pardon: for the Lord Chief Baron told the Jury,
That if they found him to be one of them in a Frock, though he did not the Fact,
it was a clear testimony of his imagining and compassing the Death of the King,
and this was not only proved by several, but from his own confession, Trial, p.
239.
That if he was to do it again, he would do it. The Pardon therefore was the
immediate effect of His Majesty's gracious Clemency, what effect it had I have
not heard, it is probable no better than upon others.

Henry Marten and Ludlow, were two of as different Tempers and Constitutions as
can be well supposed, the former a witty debonair Companion, who made Drinking
and Whoring the delight of his Soul; the other of a haughty morose disposition,
rigid and severe as a Scotch Covenanter; yet these two in the House always
hunted in the same Couples, prosecuted the most desperate Courses which at any
time came under debate, rightdown Levellers, nothing would serve them but a
Community of wealth and women; wherein Marten must be owned to have reason, for
that having squandred away an Estate of several Thousand pounds per Annum,
besides Plunder, and other Gratuities, wherewith these just Representatives
obliged each other, he could not think of a better way to supply his Luxury,
than out of other men's Stocks; to which purpose he writ a Book, called
England's Troublers Troubled, wherein all Rich men are declared Enemies to the
Mean; Lords and Gentry, Clergy and Lawyers, must come into one Common Fund,
whereof too, I presume he intended to be Treasurer, and then it could not fail
to be well disposed of. And that this might be reduced to Practice, in his own
County of Berks, whose worthy Representative he was, he forbad the people to
stand bare Hist. of Ind.
at a Sessions in 48, or pay Homage and Fealty to their Lords: yet at the same
time he Plundered them of their Horses, Goods, Money, etc. under pretense of
serving the State, and beat those that defended their own: In fine, there was
not a more Immoral, Profane Wretch ever breathed upon earth than this Marten,
who nevertheless being a Commonwealths*man, and of as inveterate a spite
against the good King as this Author, he, who most undeservedly escaped with
his Life, of a Dozen more, Tried at the same time, must be singled out for two
or three maggotty Evasions, which nothing but a Court of unwearied temper would
have born with; for he tells us whereas others confessed the Guilt, but not the
Malice; he confessed the Fact, but not the Guilt; which was justifying the
thing as all the former had done, in a more Impudent Buffooning way. This
Distinction of his the Lord Chief Baron replied to very seriously, but the
Solicitor*General ridiculed it most deservedly: neither was there any thing in
what he further urged, that all Facts were to be denominated from their
Circumstances; was that a new Notion? or any ways applicable in his Case? whose
were the most aggravating of any in the whole Pack. His addressing himself from
the Council to the Jury stood him likewise in as little stead, for his thinking
that a House of Commons, when he presumed the Court did not so, which should
the Jury more incline to believe? an Authority of his own making, as the
Solicitor briskly Trial, p. 251.
told them, or not rather condemn him for making that Authority; as they most
justly did.

In those Familiar Epistles which this Devotee of Venus writ to his Lady of
Pleasure, there is likewise a Letter in Justification of the King's Murder,
penned it seems before he came in, and had it come out before his Trial, we
might have seen how witty he would have been upon the Gallows, for it is written
in his usual buffooning way, without any thing of solid Argument, or real
thought, which our Author alone extols him for. All indifferent Judges tell us,
he had addicted himself so much to a pleasant humor of Rallying, as they
questioned whether he could have been serious, had he come to the Execution of
his justly deserved Sentence; it is great pity it was not tried. And by what
good luck he escaped that end I am next to relate, the better to refell another
gross mistake of our Authors, not to term it worse, who positively tells us,
The Convention made no provision for the securing his, Marten 's Life, or the
rest decoyed into a Surrender, whereas they passed an Act, that however
Condemned, Execution should be suspended till another Act of Parliament to that
purpose: Which accordingly was the first thing under Debate in that of 61.
where the whole dozen were Secured for Life, even Marten too, though with
greatest difficulty, by reason of his insolent Deportment at Trial, but having
some Relations of Honor and Quality, they were unwilling to have such a blemish
lie upon their Family, and found out this pleasant Stratagem to prevent it;
when Marten came to be considered it was declared on all hands none more
deserved to die; whereupon a Gentleman, in the Intrigue, stood up and said he
was as much for hanging him as any other Member, only feared having so rotten a
Carcass, his Limbs would fall asunder and disappoint the Gallows; which humor
being ingeniously prosecuted, 'twas concluded in the end, he should rot out the
remainder of his Life in the Gaol. And accordingly he was sent to the Isle of
Wight, Carisbrook-Castle, I presume, with Hevingham; from thence brought back
to Windsor, which was not a little regretted by many Loyal Gentlemen, that they
should have Liberty to walk over the Corpse of that Sovereign they had Murdered,
and among them an Honest blunt Scotch Knight understanding they were removed
for better Air, plainly told the King, they thought the Isle of Wight Air good
enough for his Father, and the worst Air in Hell was too good for such Rogues
as they: Hereupon they were removed, Marten to Chepstow Castle in
Monmouthshire, where he lingered out his days with an ordinary Competency from
some who had tricked themselves into his Estate, and other Friends, to the Year
80. the 78. of his Age, the longer doubtless for being debarred the profuseness
of his former Epicurism, yet all this without the least improvement, under such
great alterations of condition, and severe checks of Providence; for if we may
believe the Athen. Oxo. Vol. 2. 495.
Epitaph he made of himself a little before his Death, he went off with as
little sense of a future State, as he continued here in defiance of all Virtue,
Loyalty, and Religion.

What our Author next falls upon of this kind is with more than ordinary
regret, that a Trium-virate of his fellow Outlaws were seized upon in Holland,
and from thence sent home to receive the just Reward of their Treasons, the
first he empties his gall upon is Sir George* Downing, who as the King's
Minister there, laid the Scene so as to secure them, whose baseness he
aggravates by telling he had been Okey's Chaplain, kindly entertained by him,
and received many Obligations from him; all which the Factions most virulently
charged upon him from the beginning, and he as little regarded, for being by
Monk's recommendation continued in the same employments he had under Cromwell,
for which he had then contracted an implacable enmity from all the Rumpers, he
resolved to be aforehand with them, by hanging as many as possible out of the
way, who he was sure if once more in Power, would do the like by him. For
Gratitude he had conversed too long among them, not to know how little it was
regarded when Interest stood in competition; neither indeed can there be a
greater absurdity, than for any of that leven to recriminate thereupon, who so
treacherously undermined each other in their several Turns; and altogether
expressed an ingratitude great as Hell, for their too general Indemnity.

He continues his charge against the barbarous part the States acted in this
conjuncture, who contrary to a Fundamental Maxim in their Government to receive
and protect all, etc. contributed as much as in them lay to the destruction of
these Gentlemen; that they contributed any thing to the seizing of them is
absolutely false, but were much vexed at it, though when done could not prevent
it; Sir George had formerly attempted several such Straglers, and the States
had freely given him Orders to secure them; but withal took such care that
before he, or his Messengers came there, the Birds were flown. This was the
first time he outwitted them, and I dare engage had he continued there Forty
years it should have been the last. However, I find this Author elsewhere
affirming, that Interest is their darling Maxim, and there is none who know
them, doubts it; seeing therefore so great a Revolution in England, the Royal
Family restored, to which they had not been over kind from the beginning of
their Troubles, and now entering into an Alliance with that Crown, it must
really have broke all those Measures, and violated the Laws of Nations to
prohibit their Transportation, when seized, yet many of their People were very
mad for this; their Governors considered better, that however they permit their
Country to be a Common Receptacle for the Refuse of all Mankind, yet that, in
such extraordinary Cases, must be superseded to the just, and reasonable
Demands of their Neighbors: Rebels and Outlaws are Beasts of prey, and when
upon pursuit they escape out of one Royalty, the next should take the Alarm,
either hunt them away, or upon seizure deliver them up, neither can it be
expected any Prince should enter into an Alliance upon other terms; and when
it is their own concern, none stand more positively upon it than the Hollanders;
to give an instance, when the Seiur Kuivoit, Trump's Brother-in-Law, who upon
Buats folly, De Wit discovered to be against his Faction, as this Author
relates, p. 194. but escaped out of his clutches, into England, would upon the
Treaty by no means be permitted to return into his own Country, but was forced
to continue here several years, for ought I know till that grand turn which
caused De Witt's Massacre. And perhaps our Monarchy has suffered not a little
for being less severe in such Cases.

The first our Author mentions of his three unhappy Brethren is Miles Corbet, a
Gentleman of an Ancient Family in Norfolk, and so indeed he was, but proving a
withered Branch, the Old Stock by degrees perished, and came to nothing. His
Nephew Sir Thomas was a worthy Loyal Gentleman, kept this old Dotard from
defiling himself with his Sovereign's Blood till the last day, for fear the
Entail should be cut off from his Children, according to his own confession;
but then the Devil with his own as Hellish Zeal, spurred him on both to Sit, and
Sign: And it is probable upon this inducement, Sir Tho. parted with the Seat of
his Family, which to my knowledge he did, and was very kind to his Sisters with
their Descendents. For his Deportment in Ireland, our Author is too partial to
be credited, because we have so odd an account of his carriage in the House of
Commons, where he was Hist. of Ind. p. 36.
Inquisitor-General to the Committee of Examinations, having found an Expedient
to Purge both Houses of such Members as the Army, or Independents disliked,
without letting them know either their Charge, or Accusers, which the History
of Independency terms a kind of Hangman's Office, and that he looked more like
a Hangman, than the Hangman himself; it is true likewise he was constantly
called Corbet the Jew, much resembling that Nation both in Countenance, and
Actions.

The next is Barkstead, a Citizen and Goldsmith in London, says our Author, as
if he had been a Banker of Thousands; whereas the Workers in that Trade are of
as dirty and laborious a Profession as Country Blacksmiths, and take as much
Pains for a small Livelihood: This fellow's chief Employ was to make Silver
Thimbles, whereby he might become endeared to the Sisterhood, to be sure he was
Second to Ven in leading up the Mob to threaten, and force the Parliament, ay,
and King too, when matters did not go after their humors; and thus setting
forward the War, when begun, he had his advance in it, where nevertheless he
passed for a very shallow Mortal, but continuing a zealous Pretender, and
withal very officious to his Master Cromwell, he continued him a Tool upon all
occasions; as I remember made him one of his Lords; not so deserved an Advance,
as here at the Gallows.

The last is Okey, whom our Author will have a Citizen of London too, as if he
had made some great figure there; whereas he was Modester, and declared, He was
the least of the Families in Israel, and he the least of that. First, he
belonged to a Brew House as Dray-man; after that a poor Chandler near
Lyons-Key; but betaking himself to the Sword, upon our Civil Distractions, he
appeared a man of Sense, and Courage, which cultivated by Action and
Experience, rendered him one of the best Officers among them. That he was
possessed with the common Cant of the Cause, and wholly given over to their
Inspiration-Follies, and very zealous therein, cannot seem strange, for that he
never had any other Conversation; and the Success God cursed them and the
Nation withal, was a corroborating Argument to their deluded Minds of a
Righteous Undertaking: yet after all, no one of the whole Party carried himself
so like a Gentleman, and a Christian as this Okey; which not being for our
Author's design to mention, I shall take notice of, from that very account the
Brotherhood has given of his final Exit, in these following instances. 1. As
to the Death of the King, he declared himself to be none of the Council which
sat about it; knew nothing of the Col* Okey's Sp. 75.
Judges, nor of his name being there till done; that he sat but once or twice,
prayed for him, as for himself, as he had done for this King (then Regnant
Charles II.) and looked upon it as his Duty to do so. 2. That though he doubted
not a Resurrection of the Cause he had engaged in, (thorough-pac'd Enthusiasm)
yet would he leave this with all his Brethren, and Friends, that they should
keep their Places, wait upon God, and rather suffer, than do any thing to
deliver themselves, by indirect, and unjust ways. 3. That if His Majesty had
been pleased to have given him his Life; or if he had heard time enough of the
Proclamation, to come over, he would, through the Blessing of God, have lived
quietly, and rather suffered, than done any thing against the Law of the Land.
4. That whoever had proceeded against his Life, even to his quondam Chaplain,
and those in Holland, who had engaged otherwise to his Friends, he forgave as
freely, as he desired God to forgive him. 5. His last words were, And it shall
be my Prayer now, that God would give you Peace and Truth, and scatter them
that delight in Blood and War. These are some of those many wholesom^ ^dvices
he left among them, arguing so much of a good intention, a pious well disposed
mind, as it is much the Fanatics have not expunged him their Calendar, for
expressing himself so directly contrary to what the rest of their Party
professed and practiced, both Living, and Dying.

Sir Henry Vane, who brings up the Rear in this Black List, according to course
of time, deserves likewise that Preference as the Coryphaeus of Fanaticism,
right down inspiration*Mad, so furious a Bigot for whatever came uppermost in
his freakish head, that the common Appellation men gave him was, Sir Humerous
Vanity. His Father, and he, were doubtless two the most ungrateful Servants to
Good K. Charles ever advanced by Prince, and each of them qualified with Parts,
and Interest to carry on whatever designs they engaged in, yet the old one was
more cautious, and foreseeing what Fate his Son would come to, like a cunning
Vulpone, settled the Estate he had got from the Crown upon his Grandchildren.
That there was any thing of the like caution in the other, though he kept out of
that cursed Court which condemned the King, is hard to conceive, sin^e none
conduced more to the bringing him thither, and when taken off, more zealously
forward to Establish their new Commonwealth; yet in some of his Papers, that
absence of his is insisted upon, as if he hoped it might help at a dead pinch:
whereas all his other actions discovered so much of Republican rancour, that it
was thought fire might be as well permitted to continue in Thatch, as he live
at Liberty in any thing of a Monarchy; and when upon that great Revolution, it
was discovered, whatever Ludlow says to the contrary, he had been tampering
with some Malcontents of the Army, and others, in order to fresh Disturbances,
the Government thought fit to confine him, where he continued more than a year,
and then, whether upon his own motion by right of Habeas Corpus, or otherwise,
I cannot discover, was brought to Trial, with Lambert, and had he behaved
himself as Lambert did, owned the Jurisdiction of the Court, confessed his
Crime, and begged Pardon; he might have escaped with Life, as that other,
according to the Parliament's Petition to His Majesty: But being charged with a
continued series of Treasons from the King's Murder to the Restoration,
(although the Council told him they might have began with the Rebellion) he
absolutely denied they had any Power to try him; that neither the King's Death,
nor the Members themselves could dissolve the Long Parliament, whereof he being
one, no inferior Court could call him in question, with so many Cavils for
Arrest of Judgment, Council, and what not, as would have continued his Trial
till Doomsday, could he have lived so long, and his Breath held out, which
never failed him, nor words neither, though most incoherently put together. His
Trial was Printed by his Party, with several Speeches, Memorandums, etc. his
Deportment before he went, and upon the Scaffold; as likewise many Additional
Discourses of Politics, Divinity, etc. making a pretty large Quarto, the
compleatest body of Enthusiasm I ever saw, tending to this main end, That in
Right of Jesus Christ, and his People, 'twas justifiable to stand up against
any Government, Control, and Subvert at Pleasure. In like manner he would have
run on at his Execution, and because not suffered to defend the Treasons he had
for 20 Years together continually acted, would have it a violation of every
Freeborn Englishman's Right. But then for his Religious deportment, he
declared to have such Signs of Special Salvation, they are the very words of
his Prayer, as to assure himself a place no lower than the Right hand of Jesus
Christ: St. Paul was but a weak Brother in comparison to him, who after many
years labor in the Gospel could not promise himself to have attained, or were
already made perfect, etc. whereas this Commonwealth Apostle, set the Crown
upon his Trial of Sir H. V. p. 89.
head, the first day of his Spiritual Birth, and even whilst here in the Body
was made partaker of Eternal Life in the first fruits of it. But why should we
mention St. Paul, when in his last Agony he so Blasphemously emulated our
Blessed Savior himself; for instead of a Lord have mercy on my Soul; Christ
Jesus receive my Spirit; or the like; we are told his very last words of all at
the Block were as follows, Father glorify thy Servant in P. 95.
the sight of men, that he may Glorify thee, in the discharge of his Duty to
thee, and to his Country. Could any thing but Hell inspire a man at this rate?
yet all his Speeches and Prayers are move or less one continued Rhapsody of
such abominable Stuff.

I shall mention something of his Temporal Concerns, partly for that our
Author's relation is as opposite to truth as one Pole to the other; Sir Henry
Vane, says he, was a Gentleman of an Ancient Family in the County of Durham;
whereas the Family they were of, was directly South, either in Kent, or Essex,
as I am informed, till the Old Fellow, having well fleeced himself at Court,
moved Northward, upon this occasion. Raby-Castle was in the Crown, one of the
finest Royalties in the North of England, assigned King Charles, with other
Lands when Prince of Wales, for the support of his Family: When come to the
Crown, the Parliament not supplying him to carry on the Spanish War, as they
had promised both his Father and Self, he was obliged to assign it over to some
Citizens for a Sum of Money, giving them Power to let Leases, etc. Old Sir
Henry knowing this to be a considerable Purchase, agreed with the Citizens for
their interest, and then got it confirmed to him by the King, upon easy terms,
we may well presume, facilitated too by some undervaluings, for when
entertained there in his Expedition against the Scots, and finding a
magnificent Structure, according to that old way of Building, he pleasantly
told him, Sir Henry, This is more than a heap of Stones. When Cromwell gave the
Rump their Quietus, those few of them who had Country Seats retired thither,
this Hen. the 2 d. his Father being a little before Dead, to Raby-Castle;
where, because prohibited to do it any longer in the Government, he Tyrannized
over his Tenants and Neighbors, obliging the former to take new Leases, as not
allowing those they had from the Citizens; and seized upon an Estate to the
value of 200 l. per Annum, which had been Purchased by a charitable Gentleman
out of the Manor, and given to the Parish of Stanthorp, for Relief of the
Poor, support of the Free School, and repair of the Church; with many suchlike
Arbitrary Encroachments, according to the plenitude of his Self-willed Power.
The People we may imagine could not long brook such usage, but at length took
so much courage as to Petition Cromwell for Relief, who referred it, by
especial recommendation to his Commissioners of the Seal, and they finding
Matter of Fact true, did the Tenants Right to the great dissatisfaction of this
Lord Paramount.

I have been the more particular in this relation upon a double account; the
one is to clear that great Man the Earl of Strafford, whom I have frequently
found censured, by many otherwise his Admirers, for taking the Title of Raby to
his Barony, supposing it to be old Vane's Paternal Estate, whereas if taken
when first made a Peer, it was not in his Possession; if otherwise, when Earl,
the original Right continued in the Crown, the King might dispose of the Honor
to whom he pleased, as he had done before of the Estate; yet it is thought the
peevish old Secretary, for this reason, plotted the ruin of that incomparable
Minister, as both he and his Son, conduced in many other things to that of
their Master; may such ingratitude in due time meet with an Act of Resumption.
The other thing I designed to observe from the forementioned relation is, that
men of Commonwealth Principles, whatever noise they make of the Peoples Right,
Liberty, Property, etc. wherever they get into Power, and Authority are more
insolent and Arbitrary than any sort of Mankind; uneasy Neighbors, griping
Landlords, froward Masters, exact from, and impose upon all they have to do
with. And this rough self-willed management of his own private concerns, is an
Argument to me, much beyond our Author's authority, that the good Conduct of
their Marine Affairs at that time, must proceed from others of a more sedate
temper; so warm a Brain, and violent Spirit could not do any thing with
judgment, and discretion. I cannot forbear to mention what his Friends tell us
of his deportment after Condemnation, some persuading him to make Submission to
the King, and endeavor the obtaining of his Life, Trial of Sir H. V. Page 81.
he said, If the King did not think himself more concerned for his Honor, and
his Word, than he did for his Life, then he was willing they should take it;
nay, I declare, said he, I value my Life less in a good Cause, than the King
can do his Promise: with several such like Rants so abominably extravagant, as
if he studied to precipitate his own ruin; but he treated God Almighty at the
same impudent manner, so that it is hard to resolve whether his Blasphemies, or
Treasons were greatest; for both which I presume it is that our Author and his
Friends give him so high a Character, commend his Eloquence, Soundness of
Judgment, Presence of Mind, Gravity, Magnanimity, and what crowns all, Constant
adherence to the Cause of his Country; whereas Bedlam would afford us many of a
much more steady temper; and Newgate truer Patriots to the Nation's Peace, and
Welfare.

Thus have I run over the Legendary Relation of our Republican Regicides, as
laid before us by this imposing Author, wherein nevertheless we both agree as
to Matter of Fact, only what he attributes to a good, I will have proceed from
an Evil Spirit; and for Decision, my appeal shall be to the Reader, whether the
Word of Truth has not foretold, That some might come under such strange
Delusions, Jo. 16. 2.
as to turn men out of the Church, ay, and kill them too, thinking all the
while they did God great service? And could that Text be ever more literally
verified, than when a company of Illiterate Mechanics, with some others of
little, or, which is worse, bad Education, shall pretend a Commission from the
Divine Spirit, for Murdering their King, Subverting the Government, and make
every individual Person submit to their own Arbitrary Wills, and
Inspiration-Follies. For particular Men, there is no Discourse of Melancholy
but tells us what freakish Conceits the strength of Imagination has possessed
them withal; but for a considerable part of a Nation to be so carried away, we
are the only Precedent, and sure no others will be so mad as to follow us.
Since therefore I cannot parallel them with a Party, I shall do it with a
Person or two; and begin with that modern Patriarch of Speculative Atheism,
Vaninus, who when he was condemned to be burnt, for that he denied the Being of
a God, and upon the first sense of Pain, cried out, Mon Dieu, the Flames were
stopped, and he told, upon continuing to own that God now called upon, his Life
should be spared: To which he replied, They were only words of course, and he
was resolved to die in defense of his own Cause. Now, I presume, the Atheist
admires this abominable Wretch's Courage, as much as Ludlow and his Friends
that of Harrison, and the rest, and just with as much reason. But to come from
no Religion to that which is almost as bad, those Proto-Fanaticks in Queen
Elizabeth's time, Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington, what execrable Blasphemies
did they utter? even commanding God to Patronize their Delusions. And if our
Author consulted the History of Reformation among his beloved Swiss, he might
have found at the beginning they swarmed much with Anabaptists, however it is
at present, one of which cut off his Brother's Head, in presence of Father and
Mother, saying, God commanded him so to do. And the Lord Chief Baron, when he
passed Sentence upon the Five that were Tried next after Harrison, Carew, Scot,
Scroop, Jones and Clement, told them of one in Shorpshire, who killed his
Father and Mother, after he had sought of the Lord whether he might do it or
Trials, p. 101.
not, very applicable to those Wretches who pretended they had done the same
thing, in order to the Murder of the Father of their Country; and thereupon he
went on very piously to advise them, That they should try their own Spirits,
and not think every Fancy and Imagination to be Conscience: There is (says he)
a Spiritual Pride, Men may overrun themselves by their own Holiness, and
pretended Revelations, rest upon that Self-confidence, and mistake the Devil
for an Angel of Light. This was good Advice, indeed, too good for them to
follow, for they all died as they lived, under the cursed Infatuations of a
deluded Mind.

There is but one thing more I shall further observe, how the whole Current of
the Rebellion was carried on by this Inspiration-Fraud. The Presbyterians,
though they had been all along for their own Forms, in opposition to those of
our Church; yet this Evil Spirit getting in vogue, framed their Pipes
accordingly, and bellowed among the rest: but the Independents, Hugh Peter's
more-especially, with his New England Gang, having got the Trumpet-Stop,
silenced them most profoundly; nay, which is more, so propagated the Knack
among the Army, as most of their Officers, even to a Corporal, could thunder
out Extempore Nonsense, Preach and Pray, without knowing what they said, or
designing to be understood: And these were Cromwell's chiefest Properties, by
whose means he made his advance, insomuch as it was observed he scarce cared
for any Man that spoke Sense, and had several Artifices to disparage it, but
most of all it was abhorred in their Pulpit-Cants. The truth of it is, a Man of
sound Christian Principles, and good Moral Life, was as much Reprobated by
them, as the Pharisees did all but themselves; and could they have fixed that
Doctrine, of Dominion in Grace, which the Levelling Party bid fair for, no
Person should have had any Property but themselves. But when Cromwell had
attained his height, they perceived whose Tools they had been, and the most
considerable of them began to be very uneasy to him, so that with much
Stratagem he was forced to discard the most of them, and confine some in
Prison; and though by this means he kept them under during his own time, yet
that Oaff his Son was supplanted by them in less than a Year's time, and after
about half a dozen turns, in the time of a year more, all things most
miraculously returned to our times as of old. And though these Sons of Delusion
had the Confidence to foretell at Execution a Resurrection of their Cause, as
some of the Party have done of their Bodies, yet that time is still to come,
and I hope may be as far of, as that many times expected Deliverance of the
Jews* and indeed to me they have all along seemed to be equally under the same
Spiritual Obduration, after their hard and impenitent hearts, Treasuring up
unto Romans 2. 5.
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous
Judgment of God.

SECT. III.
THE little now remaining of my promised Undertaking, relates to that Bulk of
Letters and other Papers, which swell up this Third Volume to very nigh one
half; and would they be sincere, the true reason is, that this might bear
proportion with the other Two, and keep up the Crown Price, although the fresh
and true Information it contains is not worth Sixpence. And this I must further
take notice of, That these Letters of His Majesty were never but once printed
by the Factious, and that when first taken at Naseby, bearing this Title, The
King's Cabinet opened, etc. (which I have by me) with a scurrilous Preface, and
most virulent Annotations, so rude and false, as most of their own Party
blushed at them: To be sure the Loyalists were so far from being ashamed of any
thing there discovered, as they became a further Confirmation to them of the
King's great Parts, extraordinary Goodness, and most tender Regard of his
Peoples Welfare, and accordingly had them constantly printed with his other
Works both in Octavo and Folio.

But the Title here tells us it is a Collection of Letters and other Papers
relating to diverse Important Passages in the precedent Memoirs; which Other
Papers were likewise most of them printed with the Letters, or occasionally
afterward as they fell into their base Hands, and as to every Passage replied
to in my Just Defense, without any thing of Importance discovered, more than
implacable Malice, and egregious Falsehoods. One Particular I must needs repeat:
It is there made appear how grofly His Majesty was abused by that forged
Commission the Irish Rebels produced, and how villainously their
Lieutenant General Ludlow would have had Sir Phelim O Neal redeem his Life by
charging it upon him; which that Man, as bad as he had been, had more Honor
and Conscience than to do; yet a Copy of this Commission is printed in the
Collection, as undoubtedly so, though even their Memoir does but say, the Irish
pretended a Commission from the King, page 19. Vol. I. and they knew it as
certainly false, as we may them Liars: but it helps on a Design, and that is
enough.

As for this last Volume, I find but one Passage wherein our Royal Martyr is
concerned, that is aspersed, for they never mention him but to that purpose,
and this raised from his Correspondence with the Marquess of Antrim, who, our
Author tells us, was an Irish Priest, among the first in Rebellion there,
seized upon in London, upon Charles the Second's Restoration, sent Prisoner to
the Tower, from thence to Ireland, and there set at Liberty by a Letter under
the King's Hand, charging the Guilt of that Rebellion upon his Father, in that
he affirms, the Earl of Antrim did nothing without Warrant and Authority from
his Father. Thus far the Memoir, page 115. with some truth, but very little;
for first, he was not set at Liberty by the King's Letter, but they who
charged, and caused him to be Committed, not able to make good their
Allegations, he became freed in course. Neither, secondly, is it said he did
nothing without Warrant and Authority from the King his Father; the express
words of the Letter are, That what he did by way of Correspondence or
Compliance with the Irish Rebels, was in order to the Service of Our Royal
Father, warranted by his Instructions, and that the benefit thereof accrued to
the Crown. Col. p. 357. which how basely our Author would pervert, as if his
first engagement in the Rebellion, and continued going along with them, were by
the King's Allowance, every eye may discover; whereas the words can be no
further stretched, than that in process of time, he was so sensible of his
Folly, not to term it worse, as he thought to expiate for the same, by bringing
over his Confederates, as many as he could, to their due Allegiance, together
with himself. And that this he endeavored, and was all the Good King
encouraged him in, or Authorized him to do, will appear from these few
Particulars I meet with of his Undertakings. When the Scotch Covenanters first
began their Stirs, I find this Marquess of Antrim making a Proposal to the
King, of a Descent from his County of that Name, or some other of the Northern
Parts in Ireland, upon the Earl of Argyle, and his several Dependents in the
Western Parts of Scotland. But the Deep-sighted Strafford finding him unable to
accomplish what he promised upon Nals. Col. 221.
that account, it came to nothing; though doubtless he might produce several
Letters from the King, not without Encouragements, and kind Acknowledgements
for his good intentions. The next thing I find him engaged in, was more
considerable, though not full up to what he promised. When the Soots came in
43. to the Assistance of their Fellow- Rebels here, the Noble Montross, then at
Oxon with the King, laid a Design of giving them a Diversion in the Highlands,
in order whereunto this Marquess of Antrim promised to send him Ten Thousand
Men out of Ireland, and returned thither to that purpose, as the other with
great difficulty got into the Highlands, and there absconded a considerable
time in expectation of the forementioned Supply, wherein at length there was
something done, that is, Fourteen or Fifteen Hundred Men, sent under the
Command of that Brave Fellow Mac Donald, which Montross augmenting with his
several Clans there, performed those many Noble Exploits recorded to his
Eternal Glory. And this Charles the Second's Letter particularly related to,
That he drew some Forces from Ireland for the Service of Scotland, page 355.
It Is likewise said in the same Letter, That he joined with the Irish, in order
to reduce them to their Obedience: And though it does not expressly appear as to
any single Circumstances, for want of the Old King's Letters to him, yet in
general it may be concluded he was not so hot as the Priest-ridden Party there,
but willing to comply with such Concessions as the King in Honor and
Conscience might grant. For whoever consults the History of those Times in
Ireland, will find that most of the sensible Nobility and Gentry, ay, and
Commanders too, from 43. forward, discerned what Mischiefs they had brought
upon themselves, and were, to prevent further danger, desirous to comply with
His Majesty's Proposals, of a General Toleration; but the Ecclesiastics,
especially when headed by the Pope's Nuncio, and had the Mobb at their Lure,
would be satisfied with nothing but a kind of Inquisition-Establishment of
their Religion. That the Marquess we discourse of was one of the former,
appears by his Deportment at Oxon, where, I presume, he was one of the Agents
sent by the Catholic Confederates, as they termed themselves, to attend His
Majesty, with Desires and Propositions most extravagant, as they themselves
confessed; and therefore according as they promised the King, did, upon their
return, represent the absolute necessity of submitting to him, till able to
grant them more, that they might not be glad to accept less: But the Evil
Genius of that People, says my Author, (condemned to wilful Ruin and
Misfortune) Dr. Burl. p. 145.
soon evidenced how unripe they were for Mercy; and that it was not so easy to
allay the Evil Spirits they had conjured up, as to foment and irritate them.

And now from a due Consideration of the Premises, I appeal how it can be
supposed His Majesty's Letters should relate to any thing more than encouraging
this Marquess's good Endeavors to the making Matters as easy as he could, in
order to the Cessation which thereupon followed: And the Peace likewise, which
after many tedious Negotiations was concluded in 46, had doubtless his helping
Hand, though it came to nothing, by reason of the Nuncio's and his Clergies
abominable Assumings, and Superstitious Rigours; all which appears from his Son
Charles the Second's Letter, the only Authority they have for this wrested
Calumny; for it is there expressly declared, That his Compliance with the Irish
Rebels, was in order to the Service of his Royal Father, and that the Benefit
thereof accrued to the Crown. And upon a full, impartial Consideration of that
Letter, the Marquess will be found to have had very hard measure; for at his
coming over, after the Restoration, upon Complaint of the Irish Deputies here
at Court, that he was not worthy the least Countenance from His Majesty, and
that they had manifest, unquestionable Evidence of his Guilt, he was forbid the
Royal Presence, committed to the Tower, and then remitted into Ireland for his
Trial and Punishment; where, after many Months Attendance, and presumed
Examination, he was dismissed without Censure; and without any Transmission of
Charge to us, was Licensed to Transport himself into England: Whereupon the
King thought in Justice he ought to be Heard by his Council here, and producing
the forementioned Testimony under his Father's own Hand, recommended him to the
Court of Claims, in order to be repossess'd of his Estate, as more deserving
than the Rebels on the other side, who had done all the mischief, without the
least good, and had no other Title than Seven or Eight Years quiet Possession
since their Master Cromwell made the Dividend. However, I am not to plead the
Marquess's Case, any further than our Royal Martyr is concerned, who, that he
should be concluded to promote Popery, or wish well to the Rebellion, because
he plough'd sometimes with their Heifer, in order to an Accommodation, is a
true piece of Fanatic Spite, and exactly resembles the grand Author, the
Father of Lies; they might as well conclude him a Presbyterian, for that he
corresponded with some Scotch-Covenanters; or wished well to the English
Rebellion, and Army, because he treated with Cromwell and his Mirmidons, when
in their Hands; whereas all he did, was to show, there should be no defect on
his side, in order to the Nation's true Peace and Settlement. Neither is there
any thing more common between Enemies, either in Courts, or Camps, than to work
upon the Discontents, or good Dispositions, of some in Employment on the
adverse Side, in order to Intelligence, or any other beneficial End, as the
Circumstances they are in require. Dolus an Virtus? is a known Rule, and to
give an instance thereof in our present Case, as to the Irish Affairs, by those
that managed them as well against the King, as Popish Rebels; Sir Charles Coot
being shut up in Londonderry by such of the Romanists as had gone over to the
King, and reduced to great Necessity, made no Dr Burl. 217.
scruple of treating with Owen O Neil, a General of the Bloodyest Irish, and he
alone who would not come in to the Duke of Ormond 's Peace, that he should
raise the Siege, upon the Payment of 2000 l. in Money, with other
Considerations, of Ammunition and Cattle, which was mutually performed on either
Side: And the then Colonel Monk, in Command there, had done something of the
like kind before. It Is true, indeed, their Worships at Westminster, who at that
time had got all into their hands, seemed to mut^^r at it; but the Grandees,
and Military Men, not only approved, but applauded what they had done, the
Exigencies they were in duly considered.

I shall mention but one thing more in Defense of our Royal Martyr, as to
Correspondencies of this kind. Most of the Letters taken at Naseby, and so
basely printed by the Junto, were to the Queen, in the first of which we find
this Passage, I forgot in my former to tell thee, that Lenthall the Speaker
brags, Cardinal Mazarine keeps a strict Intelligence with him: -- As for Sabran
(the French Envoy at London) I am confident he or his Instructions are not
right for him that is eternally thine. Now in their Annotations to the first
Edition aforementioned, as they charge the King most basely, even for
Corresponding with his Queen, because of the Romish Persuasion, as if thereby
he designed to bring in those Rites; so no notice is taken of this their
Speaker's Correspondence, either to deny or justify it: And to give such
Devils their due, since resolved to persevere in their Rebellion, 'twas as
justifiable as any thing they did. But why then so severe upon their King, that
they should dare to steal the Horse, and not give him leave to look over the
Hedge, yet at the same insolent rate do these Second Publishers of his Letters
use him; for though they had not so much Confidence as to adjoin the
Annotations, their Predecessors made, they have found out a more contracted way
of expressing their ill-natured Prosecution, by presenting us with a Passage
out of his Declaration dated from Newark, March 9o. 1641. wherein he tells the
Parliament, That whatsoever they were advertised from Rome, Paris, or Venice,
of the Pope's Nuncio's soliciting France, Spain, etc. for Foreign Aids, was
false; thereupon most solemnly protests against the thing; and indeed it has
since appeared to be one of the many sinister Stratagems to ruin him, and
themselves: These thorough-pac'd Calumniators thought, I say, to do the
business with one general dash, of so great a latitude, as to comprehend
whatever from first to last had been brought against him; their words are
these, If this Passage be compared with the preceding Letters and Instructions,
all Equitable Men may judge, whether the King did not pass Sentence upon
himself, and absolve the High-Court of Justice, p. 321. That Dolus latet in
Vniversalibus is acknowledged on all hands: The Devil did not more covertly
charge Job, than these his Agents this Good Man; and as he was given into their
power in the same manner, nay, even to the touching of his Life; so never any
since, mere Man, was attacked with greater Slanders, bore them and his many
other Afflictions more patiently, and as gloriously sacrificed his Life, in
Defense of that Religion, and those Laws, which these worst of Men would hold
the World in hand afresh he designed to subvert, and betray.

And here I had finished my own, and Readers trouble, but that a spiteful young
Fellow, whom I took notice of in the end of my Defense, for defaming the Memory
of our Royal Martyr, in his Life of Milton, has continued the like inveterate
humor in another Piece which he terms Amyntor; where he so basely catches at,
and perverts every thing which in the most forced sense that can be put upon
Words or Things, tends to disorder, or otherwise disturb those Sacred Ashes of
his; an Action which among all the sober Greeks and Romans was looked upon as
the greatest defection from Humanity, and what the Barbarous Nations were
seldom guilty of. As to the Controversy about his Divine Meditations, it shall
be wholly left to his worthy Antagonist, who has abundantly satisfied all Men
that will be so. That there are others, whom all the World shall not oblige to
confess an Error, or amend it, is too clear to be denied, and too great a Folly
to be regarded.

My Exceptions shall commence at that which he takes against Mr. Blackall, for
calling him the Best of Kings, and the Best of Men; which, he says, Some, who
otherwise honor the Memory of King Charles, are angry to hear. It seems this
Gentleman is none of those Some, and if he had been pleased to tell us who they
were, we might have been better able to judge of what degree their Honor was,
real or pretended; for some may allege a Respect to the Prince, on purpose to
aggravate the Mistake in the Preacher, or otherwise humor him who first found
fault. I would desire him further to consider whether an Hyperbole may not be
allowed in a flight of Rhetoric; and to call him the Best of Kings and Men,
can be stretched no further, than that he ought to be ranked among those that
have been most Eminent in either of those Qualities. Nevertheless, if taken in
the literal sense, it is highly disingenuous to ascend to the Apostles, who,
though indeed Men, yet was there an infallible Assistance of God's Holy Spirit
attending their Ministry, in which case nothing of Comparison could be
supposed by any ingenious Person; from which how far this Fault finder is,
appears in that he urges a thing invidiously, which is no Article of his
Creed; and should it be brought against him upon another occasion, would be
rejected with a most Blasphemous Contempt: And hereof he gives us a tacit
intimation, by leaping so suddenly out of the Pale of the Church, where he
might have found several Confessors of all Orders and Degrees, for an exact
parallel; and comes to the Greeks and Romans, many of whom, he says, did
infinitely excel him in all Moral and Heroic Virtues. A bold stroke this, and
therefore he goes no further than the first dash, though he could not but imagine
we should be desirous to know who those Persons were, and wherein they outdid
him: Would he have had him imitate Cato and Brutus in their Self-homicide? or
Nascia, or Opinius, in cutting off the Seditious Gracchi? That indeed had not
been amiss; but neither our Laws nor our Religion will admit of such Heroicks;
so that it had been properer to have continued in the Christian Economy,
where, if we consider him either as a private Person, or a Prince, few will be
found to have come up to him, none outdone him, as several have made appear,
who knew him better, and were much more competent Judges than this unthinking
Prate-a-pace.

The Advantage likewise he thinks to take of Mr. Blackall, by fawning upon His
present Majesty, will return upon himself, in a grand defect both of that
Good*manners and Justice he so falsely charge the other withal. Comparisons
have been ever looked upon as an odious way of arguing, at leastwise ought to
be so managed, as the Disparity may not reflect upon the Person whom they would
seem to advance. Now this bold Man need not be told, that Charles I. was His
present Majesty's Grandfather; by which Relation, that of Royal was added to
the Ancient Princely Blood of his Family; that he must needs be sensible what
cruel measures he met with from a most perfidious Race of Rebels, who regarded
nothing which their Forefathers had esteemed most Sacred and Religious; that
the Principles upon which they acted, strike at all Monarchy whatsoever; and
that this Fellow includes a tacit Threat, in mentioning those Defects wherewith
the Grandfather was so falsely charged; as if, when they thought fit, or
rather, could find a sit opportunity, they would act over the same Part again:
For it is all Tyranny with them; and whenever they promise any one to make him a
Glorious Prince, 'twill be, as in the sad Subject we are upon, by Martyrdom.

And this is what I am farther to remonstrate, That all his Allegations are
absolutely false. That Good King was not in the least guilty of any of those
Popular Aspersions which in this Comparison of his are so basely revived, and
supposed true: He never dispensed with express Laws in favor of Popish
Recusants, nor protected any of his Chaplains against the Parliament for
Preaching up Arbitrary Power, nor was in the least degree accessory to any of
those reproachful Suggestions this Son of a Potato so impudently runs on with,
as the Just Defense, I engaged in, makes appear at large, and thereto he is
remitted: where likewise he may find Satisfaction in reference to the Letter
sent Pope Gregory XV. the Circumstances he was then in considered, and with how
great Prudence it was penned; which that vile Pamphlet in Defense of the
Parliament 40, does therefore add to, and alter most abominably. All these are
so fully replied to, and in every respect made appear to be absolutely false,
as I shall not further concern my self in any thing of that kind, but only take
notice of two new Piques this snarling Fellow has started afresh, though it
only shows what little Nothings such Currish Humors will bark at.

The one indeed relates in general to all our Kings, from Edward the Confessor
downward, and perhaps in its Original Purport reaches as high as the King of
Heaven, in this Man's bold Reflections upon that Divine Miraculous Gift which
in the foresaid Edward's time was discovered, and has ever since accompanied
all our Crowned Heads, in Curing that Distemper by the Ancients termed
Scrofula, but by us, (from this extraordinary way, not of the King's touching
the affected Part, as he prates at large, but stroaking the lower part of the
Face toward the Neck and Throat, where indeed the Distemper oftenest resides,
with imploring God's Blessing upon the Means used, in a a Solemn Office, which
he so impiously ridicules) the King's Evil.

The other thing I shall reflect upon, is the strong Effort of his weak
Endeavors, to recommend the setting aside that Solemn Observation of the 30th
of January, being the Day of the Martyrdom of the Blessed King Charles I. and
ordered by Act of Parliament to be most Religiously (...) to the (...)punc;
kept, to implore the Mercy of God, that neither the Guilt of that Sacred and
Innocent Blood, nor those other Sins by which God was provoked to deliver up
both us and our King into the Hands of cruel and unreasonable Men, may at any
time hereafter be visited upon us, or our Posterity. This was the end of its
Institution, which how little effect it has hitherto had, too sadly appears,
in that this bold Fellow, and too many like him, dare to extenuate or justify
so Execrable a Fact. Such Men and such Principles prevailing every day at the
rate they do, is to me little less than Demonstration, that the anger of the
Lord is not turned away, but his hand continues stretched out still.

For the former of these, the Cure of the Distemper by the Royal Touch, there
is no part nor corner of the Kingdom without pregnant Testimonies as to the
Matter of Fact, so fully vouched both by the Parties healed, and others, as the
Cortex may be as soon denied to remove a Fit of an Ague, or a Dose of Laudanum
to procure Sleep; so ridiculous and impertinent is this vain Assumer, to
inveigh against and decry a thing which most of the able Physicians and
Chyrurgeons in Town could have informed him to be experimentally true, and many
hundred Families afford Patients so recovered. Yet since he has given me this
Occasion, I shall mention a Cure or two of our Royal Martyr, which may not a
little shock his Irish Infidelity. Ludlow, in his First Volume, tells us, and I
presume 'twas complained of in the House, what a Concourse of People resorted
to His Majesty, when delivered up by the Scots, as he went from Newcastle to
Holmby, and was kept there, particularly many came to be Cured of the Evil; and
so it continued all along when the Army had taken him into their hands,
especially when brought nigher London; for during his Confinement at
Hampton Court, there were several Healings, where, his Chaplains not suffered
to attend him, he performed the Priest's Office too: The whole was in this
manner: The People kneeling down in two Rows, he went between them, and
stroaking every one, used this expression, I touch, God heal. A Person now
living in Chancery Lane, by Name Oglethorp, was then touched by him, and gives
this Account of himself, That he had been several Months, more than a Year,
under the Chyrurgeons hands with a sore Arm, wherein were many Holes, and other
sad Breaches, so far from any thing of Cure, as he every day grew worse, till
having obtained the Royal Touch, his Sores dried up in a short time, and he
has ever since, which is more than fifty Years, continued in a vigorous state
of Health, and freely shows the Holes and Cavities in his Arm, to God's Glory,
by the King's Means, when all others were ineffectual. What follows, is yet
more remarkable: As they hurried His Majesty from Hurst Castle, toward London,
in order to his Murder, passing through Winchester, a poor Man so miserably
overgrown with that Distemper, as his Face was all run over with Scabs and
Blotches, pressed earnestly to be Touched; but the cruel Soldiers not
permitting him, and the King perceiving it, used this expression, May God do
for thee, though they will not let me use the Means. The poor Fellow went away
without any hope of Redress, but coming at night to wash his Face with a Water
which some body had prescribed him, he found none in the Bottle; and what was
stranger, it seemed to have been dried up by the Stone-Bottle, for that it was
broke out into Scales and Blotches in every part, whilst the Man's Face in a
few Days dried up, and was perfectly well. Now before our daring Amyntor
explode this, according to his no laudable Practice, let him send or go to
Winchester, where, I presume, the Bottle is still in being, for the Wife is
said to be yet living, to be sure all the ancient People in the City will
witness it, and scarce a Person of any Quality in the whole Country but had the
Curiosity to see it: Which brings on one Circumstance more; A Gentlewoman,
among some other Strangers, having the Bottle in her Hand, broke off with her
Finger one of the loose Scales; the Man had immediately a little Scab rose on
his Lip, and not knowing what was done, expostulated with his Wife whether no
body had hurt the Bottle? which she thereupon was obliged to acknowledge. Dr.
Turbervill, the famous Oculist at Sarum, did use to declare among his Friends,
that he had often met with that Distemper in the Eyes, and was seldom able to
master it; but finding the King's Touch as seldom failed, advised all Patients
which came to him in that Condition, to take that course of Cure. This I have
mentioned, in order to the following Passage: Going, nigh Forty Years since,
(for it was the Winter after the Restoration) from Deptford to Lambeth, the
Coachman, upon some little concern of his own, stayed at an Inn or Alehouse
on the Way; whereupon a Gentleman in our Company said there was a Woman in that
House well worth our taking notice of, for that she was cured of a Blindness,
by wiping her Eyes with a Handkerchief dipped in the Blood of the Old King.
Being called, she owned the thing, which two or three more in the Family
testified. We put many Questions to her, whereof I only remember that she
replied, It was not a Blindness from her birth, but bred in her Eyes: Which,
from the forementioned Account of Dr. Turbervill, gives me reason to conclude
it the Evil. And this I have purposely mentioned, in Defense of what Dr.
Perencheff says of the Veneration People had for the Chips of the Block, his
Hair, etc. and to let Amyntor know the Popish Legends may be laughed at, and
yet we ought to be serious in such Passages as these.

Come we in the next place from Matter of Fact, to the Reason of the Thing,
where, I know, it will much disguist this Patron of Novelties, to tell him,
that Kings, in former days, were looked upon as Sacred Persons, Anointed to
their Office, according to that Divine Institution of Almighty God in his own
Theocraty, with a Respect and Veneration, as the Ministers the Viceroys of
Heaven: And whatever he talks of Juggles, that profound Deference the Eastern
Nations paid their Princes, (from whence all People and all Government
proceeded) seems to intimate, that Nature it self is not without some Impresses
of that kind. And the learned Primate Usher gives several Authorities Of the
Power of Princes.
out of Homer and other Ancients to confirm the same. Now if with that
Designation to so high an Office, God, among other Gifts, communicated one of
Healing, and that so inseparable to the Character, as not to be lost by some
Irregularities of Life, which David himself was not free from: so as neither
Edward the Confessor's Superstition, nor Charles the Second's no Saintship,
could obstruct that Salvation which in this sense God may be said to give unto
Kings, is a Truth altogether agreeable with the Principles of Revealed
Religion. But knowing how prone this Amyntor is to cavil at such sound
Doctrine, I shall proceed more Philosophically, and let him know, that the
every way Profound, as well in Humility of Mind, as Depth of Judgment, and all
Solid Learning, Doctor Barrow, in his Excellent Discourses of the Creed, among
other Arguments to prove the Being of God, brings that of Supernatural Page 12^.
Effects. For although the Great Creator is said to have rested ceased from his
Works of that kind at the Six Days end; yet did he not so tie up his own hands,
as never more to intermeddle, but reserved to himself a liberty to alter when
he thinks fit the Course of Nature, cross and check the Stream of Things, for
the clearer Illustration of his Glory; the confirming that he made Nature,
because he can command it, and control at pleasure; whereof he gives several
remarkable Instances, as well from Profane as Sacred Story, of Fire being
withheld from burning, Waters from flowing, the Sick being cured without
Medicinal Applications, of long Chronical Distempers; of Murders strangely
detected, Plots miraculously discovered, with many such like Extraordinary
Providence, no less signal in their Cause than Event. And when de facto any
such things appear to have been done, as in the Case before us, how can we
otherwise conclude, than that the King is a Sacred Person, whom the Sovereign
Lord of all things has placed here as his Representative, a God upon Earth,
and that we ought to pay him a Veneration agreeable to so Divine a Character.
This, in better times than we live in, has past not only for good Divinity,
but good Policy too; and whatever Notions of Liberty have of late been started,
I fear, without such a Regular Subordination, and Conscientious Regard, it will
be a difficult matter long to continue the Peace and Welfare of any Humane
Society.

The forementioned Doctor leaves his Discourse on this Head, with one Remark
very much a propo to this our new Sir Positive. They are much mistaken (says
he) who place a kind of Wisdom in being very incredulous, unwilling to assent
to any Testimony, how clear and full soever; for this is not Wisdom, but the
worst kind of Folly, accompanied with Disingenuity, Obstinacy, Rudeness, and
the like bad Dispositions. So that compare the two sorts of Fools, the
credulous Fool, who yields his Assent readily, upon any slight ground, and the
suspicious Fool, who never will be stirred by any the strongest Reason, or
clearest Testimony, and we shall find the latter in most respects the worst of
the two; his Folly arises from worse Causes, has worse Adjuncts, and produces
worse Effects: Credulity may spring from an airy Complexion, and modest Opinion
of one's self; Suspiciousness has its birth from an earthy Temper of Body, or
Selfconceitedness of Mind; that is apt to correct an Error, this intractable,
stiff and incorrigible in his Ignorance or Mistakes; both include want of
Judgment, but this pretending to more, becomes thereby more dangerous. In fine,
were Men, in their other Affairs, or in ordinary Converse, so diffident to
plain Testimony, as some seem to be in Matters of Religion, and Almighty God,
they would find great Inconveniences to proceed from thence; their Business
would stick, their Conversation would be distastful, they would be much more
offensive, and no less ridiculous than the most credulous Fool in the World.

What now alone remains to be considered, is the Thirtieth of January Fast, a
very great Eyesore to all Calves*Heads and Commonwealths-men, for which reason
they have obliged this their Milton junior to attaque it; neither indeed could
they have fixed upon a fitter Person on this side Hell, he who makes it his
constant business to Libel the Religion of so great a part, and the Government
of very nigh the whole World, Christianity and Monarchy, must needs be thought
the properest Instrument to decry the Commemoration of a Prince so eminently
suffering on both those accounts; and this has been already observed their new
Mode of going thorough-stitch, doing all at once; Renounce their Allegiance to
God, and then there can be none due to his Anointed: Abdicate the 13 th to the
Romans, and the 30 th of January will fall in course. Thus that Figure-flinger
to every Faction, Partridge, in his Almanac for the Year 89, left out both
that, and the 29th of May, but so he did likewise Good Friday and
Holy-Thursday. Now if such Fellows as these should be hearkened to in their
Freaks, what a thorough Reformation should we have, how briskly would they
carry us back to all the Confusions of 48, and 59. For this is Amyntor's, and
all his Confederates Design; we must not recount their former Villainies, that
they may the more securely re act them; forget past Troubles, without any
assurance of future Peace; and therefore I shall make but one general Reply to
all his Cavils, both against the Preachers and the Day, and that shall be in
the words of the Act which enjoined it so solemnly to be observed, wherein it is
declared to be an Horrid, 12 Car. II.
Impious, Execrable Murder, and unparalleled Treason, committed by a Party of
wretched Men, desperately wicked, and hardened in Impiety, who were neither true
Protestants, nor true Subjects, but Miscreants, whose Fanatic Rage gave the
Protestant Religion the greatest Wound and Reproach, and the people of England
the most insupportable Shame and Infamy it was possible for the Enemies of God
and the King to bring upon them.

These were our Nations Thoughts, when newly recovered out of Twenty Years
Rebellion and Anarchy; and it is a sad sign of our relapsing into that old
Distemper, when a new Generation of such wretched Miscreants attempt to
justify what was then done, with every thing else which directly tends to
Immorality and Irreligion; for so most, if not all who of late have appeared in
this unworthy Cause, will be found under one or two of these three, though too
common, not yet D -- y T -- d St -- ns
commendable, Denominations, Cheists, Atheists, and Sodomites. Can they imagine
any Person of Sense and Sobriety should have the less Regard for our Royal
Martyr, because such impious Wretches dare to inveigh against him? and not
rather conclude him the Best of Kings and Men, because exclaimed against only
by such, as in all other things approve themselves the very Refuse of Mankind?
No, doubtless, when these Shimei's and Rahshekah's have railed all they can, as
long as there is any thing of Virtue and Religion, of Honor and Conscience in
the World, the Memory of this Excellent Prince will be Sacred, and the Shedding
his Innocent Blood most devoutly Deprecated, with Remembe^r not Lord our
offenses, nor nor the offenses of our Forefathers, etc.

That this Amyntor, as he terms himself, or perhaps, I more properly, Milton
Junior, should so violently prosecute that Old Snarling Cynick's Libels, is not
easily to be resolved. Personal Disgust he can have none, nor Relative, unless
by an odd bye-way which some time since came into my head, fancying that the
Irish Priest, his reputed Father, might be one of those Rigid Ecclesiastics
which adhered to, and put the Nuncio upon breaking all Ways and Means of
Accommodation, and, among many other very bad Qualities, might traduce that of
an inveterate Enmity to this his Rightful and too Gracious Sovereign. For we
must know, as the English Rebels upbraided the King with too great indulgence
to the Irish* so they, that is, the Priests and Priest-ridden Party looked upon
him as an obstinate Heretic, who would never condescend to let them have their
own Wills in all things, and thereupon made Overtures to most Catholic Princes
in Europe, of holding the Kingdom from Theirs, and their Father the Pope's
Donation. Now this Son of that Potato, finding how ill the Project succeeded on
the Romish side, herds himself among the Fanatics and Commonwealths-men, and
is become a zealous Prosecutor of Milton's Malice against Monarchy in general,
and that Monarch more-especially to whom he was obliged to pay the profoundest
Veneration; but withal, the Matter is managed at such an hotheaded rate, with
so little of Milton's Cunning or Parts, as when they meet in the Infernal
Regions, the gruff Ghost will give him a severe Reprimand, for managing the
Knave's Part so like a Fool. And this indeed is the sole Consolation any Man of
Observation can have, as to the no-Accomplishment of what their busy Heads
have always in Projection, they over-act their Parts, have more Will but worse
Management than their Predecessors, whereof take this Instance; There was one
A. M. some Years since, not only a great Imitator, but Sub-Secretary to Milton,
when both their Commonwealthships most pitifully sneaked to Cromwell's Tyranny,
this Person came afterward to make a Figure so far as to be a Representative,
was of a Reserved Conversation, and Thoughtful Wit, which he employed to do
what mischief he could both to Crown and Church, as occasion served, but did
not venture at All, as this Hot-spur does, without Regard to God or Man, the
Living or Dead. Yet to show how these two agreed in their Characters, I shall
end all with this Passage; When this Mr. M -- ll was dead, an Admirer of his
went to one of their own common Acquaintance, whom he knew to have an ingenious
Fancy that way, and desired him to make an Epitaph upon their departed Friend:
which he set about, and finishing, gave it to the Person who made the Request;
who, with a great deal of formality, said it was very well, but, in his
Judgment, fell short of the Party's just Deserts. The Composer knowing how much
he had done the contrary, was so far concerned, as to go to work a contrary
way, and made another in Burlesque, which ended thus, Poeta mediocris,
Politicus minimus, Christianus nullus. Whether this Amyntor has so much as a
Mediocrity as to the first, may be questioned; but for the other two, his
little of the Politics, and no Christianity, they are so altogether agreeable,
as nothing can be more his due but a Halter, and thereto we remit him.

THE CONCLUSION.
'TWAS an Observation long since of the Philosophers, Odiorum acriores Causae
quando iniquoe: And the Reason given is very consistent; The less (say they)
such malevolent Tempers have from the Object, the more they must supply from
themselves, make up the defect of demerit in the Person, by the virulency of
their own perverse Dispositions, and malicious Calumnies. That this has been
all along the practice of Man's corrupt Nature, is apparent from numberless
Instances in Profane History, though I shall mention but one or two from
Sacred. The Royal Prophet never more passionately complains than upon this
account of all his Enemies, none were so outrageous as they Ps. 35. 19.
which hated him without a cause. His -- 69. 4.
familiar Friends, in whom he trusted, and upon whom he had laid the greatest
obligations, magnified themselves most against him. And though this was
literally true in the Psalmist's own Person, yet in the Mystery he foretold it
of our Blessed Savior, and accordingly he applied it to himself, in the gross
Infidelity of the Jews, with their incessant Projects to take away his Life,
notwithstanding he had done among them the works which none other man did; Jo.
15. 24, 25.
but this, he tells us, comes to pass, that the word might be fulfilled which
is written in their Law, They hated me without a cause. How applicable this is
to our Royal Martyr's treatment, every eye may discover, and I shall not here
add any thing to what has been already said, either as to those barbarous,
inhumane Vsages wherewith our Christian Pharisees ^o Jewishly paralleled their
Predecessors there, nor enlarge upon those Just Commendations the Wise and Good
ever have, and ever must acknowledge due to his most Sacred Memory. And
therefore I desire all who wish well to our Old Establishments, upon which
alone the Nation's Peace and Welfare depends, to take notice, That the Design
of this THIRD PART, is not so much to vindicate the King, as to caution the
People against a new Set of King-killers: For it is my real Belief, not that I
would have them take it in Charity neither, that those former thought, nay,
knew their many odious Reflections upon that Monarch to be false, but could not
without such vile infernal Arts carry on the grand Intrigue they were so hot
upon, of Subverting the Monarchy. Thus that Rump Buffoon, Harry Marten,
declared publicly in the House, If we must have a King, he already so, was as
proper as any Gentleman in England; and thereupon did freely own, what he stood
against was the Thing, not the Person: And many others, upon the like Occasion,
were forced to blunder out the like Acknowledgments. But when Cromwell and
Ireton had made things ripe for his Murder, then the Cue was given to blacken
him all that they could, which nevertheless struck at him most in his Politic
Capacity. Now to bring this down to our present Projectors, so forward to
revive that Good Old Cause, they tread directly in the same steps, and in order
thereto, with redoubled Impudence, revive the Old Defamations.

What indeed they further entertain us with, must be owned altogether New, but
withal too imposing upon this Age of ours, though too easily imposed upon; the
Characters, I mean, given those of the Rump Oligarchy, and Officers of the
Army, who suffered for no greater Offense than Ruin of King and Kingdom, are
so extravagantly fulsom and false, as every one of the least Thought may justly
suspect whatever they relate of other Matters, to be as far from Truth. Can any
one imagine so foul an Original as they propound, should be worth copying; for
that, when first Drawn, it appeared most monstrous, a kind of Gorgon, could not
be looked upon without Horror and Detestation? How, I say, could this latter
Brood, these Sons of Innovation, think to make us enamored with a
Commonwealth, when the only Persons they commend for the wise Administration
thereof, never had any thing of sober Sense, or solid Principles; as that
Maggotty Hot-spur, Sir H. Vane, equally made up of Freak and Fury; that Sink of
all Immorality and Profaneness, Harry Marten; Corbet the Jew, Ludlow the
Cynick, with twenty or thirty more, the most unclean, and withal unweildy
Beasts that were ever packed together in one Stall; no more fit to be the
Guardians of a Nation, than so many Wolves to a Flock of Sheep: neither is it
possible for any one to cry up and applaud them, as we find many nowadays do,
did they not lie under the like Lycanthropy.

The Reflections likewise upon their Trials are truly Commonwealthish, that is,
most false and disingenuous, as, it is hoped, has been all along shown, to the
Satisfaction of every honest Man; from such as are otherwise it is not to be
expected; yet I could have told them, there were several Gentlemen, and some
perhaps of both Houses, earnestly pressed for a Bill of Attainder, as of
quicker dispatch, without going through the tedious Forms of Law, in so clear a
Matter of Fact. And certainly, if such a Bill had been ever proper, 'twas here:
but the generality of the Nation were then grown so experimentally Wise, and
thereupon Considerate, as to abhor what they had seen so fatal in the Case of
Laud, and Strafford, with numberless other Arbitrary Exorbitances, which many
of themselves had most sadly felt from every prevailing Junto. Upon which
account, great care was taken that the whole Current of Affairs should be
brought into the old Channel; no Man questioned either for Estate or Life, but
according to the immemorial Vsages of our Ancestors; and this was done with all
Exactness imaginable, against so horrid, and withal so so unprecedented a Fact,
as the like was never seen nor heard of among the Children of Men. And that
now, after nigh Forty Years, this Regular Procedure should be arraigned, basely
represented, and the worthy Judges of the Court impudently slandered, in the
Remains, forsooth, of a Party so desperately engaged, as, had he not fled from
Justice, would have been one of the first brought under its most deserved
Severity, is not a little surprising; and yet to make it more, all this is made
Public by a Cabal of Men, with such high Elogium's upon their Persons, and
tacit Justifications of their Treasons, as if none but Rebels and Regicides
were worthy to Govern the Nation: And this may add a further Surprise yet, that
such abominable Insolences should be so tamely suffered, as if we had a mind
once more to come under their cruel Clutches; which, could the Innocent escape,
should never be my concern, to see befall such as might prevent it if they
pleased.

The only thing therefore I shall further recommend, is a cautious Distrust of
whatever these Part-taking Historians impose upon the World; that we would Try
their Spirits in a Civil as well as Religious sense, by which means it will
soon appear how much they have, in each respect, of the Old Pharisee, the
painted Sepulcher, with a great deal of flourish and positive Ostentation to
set themselves of; whereas, upon a thorough Search, there is nothing to be
found underneath but the rotten Bones of Malice and Self-Interest, of Fraud,
and Factious Designs, a reviving stale Lies to foment fresh Mischiefs. And were
this Course truly taken, would our Politico's, nowadays so numerous, go to
the bottom of Things, not content themselves with a superficial View, it would
much abate their Critical Severities upon the Royal Cause, the Management of
Affairs during those miserable Distractions of Rebellion and Anarchy. When the
Battle is fought, and Day lost, every Pretender to the Blade will be forward to
tell, at least guess where the Courage or Conduct failed; who, had they been in
Command, might have shown greater Defects upon each account. With as little
regard to Candor and Judgment are the forementioned Transactions most rashly
run down; since they cannot be presumed to consider either, on the one hand,
how difficult the Steerage was in those rough Seas; nor, on the other, how much
they expose themselves to the next Generation for greater Defects in much
calmer Weather, when all those violent Storms of Popular Rage and Zealous
Frenzy are much abated, and with due Application might have been quite down;
neither can it be otherwise expected, but that After-days should be as forward
as ours, and perhaps with more Reason reflect what no Advances we have made
upon many great Advantages: On the contrary, Religion has been so long
suffered to run a-float, as it is now scarce possible to retrieve her from being
lost; and in what Posture our Civil-Administrations stand, we may not, but they
will presume to judge.

FINIS.

