Advertisement.
A Defense of the Blessed Trinity. By Isaac Barrow. D. D.

Price twelve Pence.

A BRIEF STATE OF THE Socinian Controversy. Concerning a TRINITY in UNITY.

By Isaac Barrow, D. D. Late Master of Trinity-College, in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, School. Price two Pence.

A BRIEF STATE OF THE Socinian Controversy.
V. Defense of the B. Trinity, p. 5.
THe Sacred Trinity may be considered, either as it is in it self, wrapped up in
unexplicable Folds of Mystery; or, as it has discovered it self, operating in
wonderful Methods of Grace toward us.

As it is in it self, it is an Object too bright and dazzling for our weak Eye to
fasten upon; an Abyss too deep for our short Reason to fathom. I can only say,
That we are so bound to mind it, as to exercise our Faith, and express our
Humility, in willingly believing, in submissively adoring those high Mysteries,
which are revealed in the Holy Oracles concerning it; by that Spirit it self,
which searches the Depths of God, and by that Only Son of God, who residing in
his Father's Bosom, has thence brought them forth, and Expounded them to us,
so far as was fit for our Capacity and use. And the Lectures so read by the
Eternal Wisdom of God, the Propositions uttered by the Mouth of Truth it self,
we are obliged with a Docile Ear, and a Credulous Heart, to entertain.

That there is One Divine Nature or Essence, common unto Three Persons,
incomprehensibly United, and ineffably Distinguished; united in Essential
Attributes, distinguished by peculiar Idioms and Relations; all equally
Infinite in every Divine Perfection, each different from other in Order and
Manner of Subsistence; that there is a mutual inexistence of One in All, and
All in One; a Communication without any Deprivation or Diminution in the
Communicant; an Eternal Generation, and an Eternal Procession without
Precedence or Succession, without proper Causality or Dependence: A Father
imparting his own, and the Son receiving his Father's Life, and a Spirit
issuing from both, without any Division or Multiplication of Essence; These are
Notions which may well puzzle our Reason, in conceiving how they agree, but
should not stagger our Faith, in assenting that they are true. Upon which we
should meditate, not with hope to comprehend, but with disposition to admire,
veiling our Faces in the Presence, and prostrating our Reason at the Feet of
Wisdom so far transcending us.

There be those, who because they cannot untie, dare to cut in sunder these
Sacred Knots. Who, because they cannot fully conceive it, dare flatly to deny
them. Who, instead of confessing their own Infirmity, do charge the plain
Doctrines and Assertions of Holy Scripture with Impossibility. Others seem to
think, they can demonstrate these Mysteries by Arguments grounded upon
Principles of Natural Light, and express it by Similitudes derived from common
Experience. To repress the Presumption of the former, and to restrain the
Curiosity of the latter; the following Consideration (improved by your
Thoughts) may perhaps somewhat conduce.

We may consider, That our Reason is no competent or capable Judge coneerning
Propositions of this Nature. It Is not sufficient, nor was ever designed to
sound such Depths; to descry the Radical Principles of all Being; to reach the
extreme Possibilities of Things.

Such an Intellectual Capacity is vouchsafed to us, as does suit to our Degree
(the lowest Rank of Intelligent Creatures) as becomes our Station in this
inferior Part of the World; as may qualify us to discharge the petty Businesses
committed to our Management, and the facile Duties incumbent on us. But to
know, What God is; How he subsisteth; what he can; what he should do; by our
natural Perspicacity, or by any means we can use, farther than he pleases to
reveal, does not suit to the Meanness of our Condition, or the Narrowness of
our Capacity. These really are the most elevated Sublimities, and the
abstrusest Subtilties that are, or can be in the nature of things. He that can
penetrate them, may erect his Tribunal any where in the World, and pretend
justly that nothing in Heaven or Earth is exempted from his Judgment.

But in truth, how unfit our Reason is to exercise such Universal Jurisdiction,
we may discern by comparing it to our Sense. It is obvious, that many Beasts do
(by advantage of a finer Sense) See, Hear, Smell things imperceptible to us.
And were it not very unreasonable to conclude, that such things do not exist,
or are in themselves altogether insensible, because they do not all appear to
us? Is it not evident, that we ought to impute their Imperceptibility
(respecting us) to the defect of our Sense, to its Dullness and Grossness, in
regard to the Subtilty of those Objects? Even so may Propositions in
themselves, and in regard to the Capacity of higher Understandings; (for there
are gradual Differences in Understanding, as well as in Sense) be true and very
intelligible, which to our inferior Reason seem unintelligible, or repugnant
to the Prenotions, with which our Soul is imbued: And our not discerning those
Truths, may argue the Blindness and Weakness of our Understanding, not any
Fault or Inconsistency in the Things themselves. Nor should it cause us any
wise to distrust them, if they come recommended to our Belief by competent
Authority.

It cannot be reasonable out of Principles drawn from ordinary Experience, P.
21.
about these most low and imperfect Things to collect; that there can be no
other kind of Unions, of Distinctions, of Generations, of Processions, than
such as our own gross Sense does represent to us. Reason it self more forcibly
does oblige us to think, that to sublimer Beings there do pertain Modes of
Existence and Action, Unions and Distinctions, Influences and Emanations of a
more high and perfect Kind: Such as our course Apprehension cannot adequate,
nor our rude Language express: Which we perhaps, have no Faculty subtle enough
to conceive distinctly, nor can attain any congruous Principles, from which to
Discourse solidly about them. No Words, Id. on the Creed, p. 337.
perhaps, which we do use to signify our Conceptions about these Material and
Inferior Things, will perfectly and adequately suit to a Mystery, so much
remote from the common Objects of our Knowledge, so far transcending our
Capacity. Shall we then, who cannot pierce into the Nature of a Peble; that
cannot apprehend how a Mushroom does grow; V. Defense of the B. Trinity, p. 26.
that are baffled in our Philosophy about a Gnat or a Worm, debate and decide
(beyond what is taught us from above) concerning the precise manner of Divine
Essence, Subsistence, or Generation? I do (says St. Chrysostom) eat Meats, but
how they are divided into Phlegm, into Blood, into Juice, into Choler, I am
ignorant. These things which every day we see and taste, we do not know; and
are we curious about the Essence of God?

Wherefore do we stretch our Judgment beyond its Limits, P. 55.
unto Things so infinitely exceeding it? Why do we suffer our Reason to be
Pragmatical, unjustly Invading the Office not belonging thereto; intruding into
Things which it has not seen, Col. ii. 18. nor can comprehend; those secret
Things, which belong to the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. xxix. 29. and the comprehension
whereof he has reserved unto himself?

These Considerations may suffice in some manner, to show, that St. Chrysostom
had reason to exclaim so much against the Madness, as he styleth, it, of those,
who are busily Curious in Speculation about the Essence of God; daring to
subject Divine Mysteries to their own Ratiocinations. That St. Basil's Advice
was wholesome, not to be meddlesom about things, about which Holy Scripture is
silent.

That Zeno Veronens.
another Ancient Writer did say no less prettily, than truly, that in these
Matters curiositas reum facit, non peritum; we may easilier incur blame, than
attain Skill by nice Enquiry into them. That many of the Fathers do with great
Wisdom dislike and dissuade the searching (...), the manner of Things being
true or possible, as a suspicious Mark, or a dangerous Motive of Infidelity.
That St. Paul's Rules, Romans xii. 3. (...), to be wise so as withal to be sober,
and modest; and (...), not to conceit any thing without warrant of Scripture, 1
Cor. iv. 6. are in this Case most especially to be heeded. That, according to
St. Peter's Admonition, we should as newborn Babes (unprepossess'd with any
Notions or Fancies of our own) long for, 1 Pet. ii. 2. (...).
and greedily suck in the sincere milk of the Word; not diluting it with baser
Liquors of Humane Device. That where God does interpose his definitive
Sentence, our Reason has nothing to do but to attend and submit. No Right to
Vote, no License to Debate the Matter. Its Duty is to listen and approve
whatever God speaks, to read and subscribe to whatever he writes. At least
in any case it should be mute, or ready to follow Job, saying, Behold, I am
vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, Job xl. 4.

In fine; The Testimony of God, with a sufficient clearness represented to the
Capacity of an Honest and Docile Mind (void of all partial Respects, and clear
from all sorts of Prejudice; loving Truth, and forward to entertain it;
abhorring to wrest or wrack Things, to use any Fraud or Violence upon any
Principle, or Ground of Truth) the Testimony of God, I say, so revealed,
whatever Exception, our shallow Reason can thrust in, should absolutely
convince our Judgment, and constrain our Faith.

If the Holy Scripture teaches us plainly, and frequently does inculcate upon
us (that which also the uniform Course of Nature, and the peaceable Government
of the World does also speak) That there is but One True God. If it as
manifestly does ascribe to the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity, the same
August Names, the same Peculiar Characters, the same Divine Attributes
(essential to the Deity) the same Superlatively admirable Operations of
Creation and Providence: If it also does prescribe to them, the same Supreme
Honors, Services, Praises and Acknowledgments to be paid unto them All; this
may be abundantly enough to satisfy our Minds, to stop our Mouths, to smother
all Doubt and Dispute about this High and Holy Mystery.

It was exceeding Goodness in God, that he would condescend so far to instruct
us; to disclose so Noble a Truth unto us; to enrich our Minds with that (...),
that most excellent Knowledge of himself. And it would be no small Ingratitude
and Unworthiness in us, any wise to suspect his Word, or pervert his Meaning;
any wise to subject his Venerable Oracles to our rude Canvasses and Cavils.

In fine; The proper Employment of our Mind about these Mysteries, is not to
search and speculate about them, to Discourse flippantly and boldly about them;
but with a pious Credulity to embrace them, with all humble Respect to Adore
them.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, in Cornhil.
A Seasonable Vindication of the B. Trinity. Being an Answer to this Question,
Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the Works of the
Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Right Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of Worcester. Price
12d.

A Method of daily Devotion. A Method of Devotion for the Lord's Day. Likewise
several small Books against Debauchery, Profaness, Blasphemy, Cursing, and
Swearing, etc. Price two Pence each, and something cheaper to them that give
away Numbers.

All these by Dr. Ashton.


