A COMPANION FOR Midwives, Childbearing Women, AND NURSES.

Directing them How to perform their Respective Offices.

Together with an ESSAY, endeavoring to show the Influence of Moral Abuses
upon the Health of Children.

By Robert Barret, Brother of Surgeons-Hall in London.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Ax, at the Blue Ball in Duck-Lane. 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable and Virtuous ELIZABETH, Countess of ANGLESEY, ONE OF
THE Most Renowned Family of the Ancient Earls of Rutland, etc.
Madam,
THe Inexpressible Favors I Have Received of your Noble Family, and particularly
of yourself, ever since I had the Undeserved Honor of being employed in
serving them, has encouraged me to Prefix your Ladyship's name to this small
Treatise; which contains a description of all the Diseases belonging to
Childbearing Women. I should not have adventured to disturb your ease by such
a solemn address, or amuse the World with any Public Appearance upon this
Subject; had I not been forced into it by the Lamentable Condition of Poor
Women, that perish daily, together with their Children, merely through the
ignorance and negligence of those, whose hands they are entrusted to. 'Twas
only the just sense of the misery and distress of Women, that raised at once
both my Compassion and Indignation, and obliged me to transgress all my wonted
measures of silence and retirement. The Censorious and Ungrateful temper of the
Age we now live in, is enough to scare any Man that only minds his Interest,
from appearing on the Public Stage; but the respect and pity I owe to the fair
Sex; surmounted all the Objections of Policy and Interest, and would not suffer
me any longer to conceal, what knowledge of these things my twenty years
Diligent and Laborious Experience has afforded me; what method Persons
concerned in such Cases ought to observe; And what are the most approved
Remedies, that by the Blessing of God I have seen most effectual and successful
in relieving Poor Women. I hope, what I have delivered in these few sheets, if
seriously considered, may prove a check to the Headstrong, and a Guide to those
that are doubtful. Especially when ushered into the World, under the shadow of
your Ladyship's Illustrious Name; which will doubtless recommend it to the
perusal of a great many, and screen me from the Slanders and Calumnies of
Envious Detracters.

Upon this Account was I so ambitious of obtaining your Ladyship's Patronage,
considering how Illustrious a Family you are sprung of, how much ye retain, nay,
add to the Honor of your Noble Ancestors, what a large share of Virtue and
Engaging Goodness ye possess, while Beauty Guards you on the Right, and Piety
on your Left; How much of Civility and Charity to strangers, Condescension to
your Inferiors, and evenness and constancy of temper, ye discover in all your
Actions; that I think truly I may apply without flattery that saying of
Solomon, Many Women have done Virtuously, but she has excelled them all.

That surpassing wisdom that shined so brightly in all the Conduct of your
Life; that excellency and sweetness of temper, that never could be disturbed by
the highest Provocations imaginable; but still kept its even steady course,
Notwithstanding all the shocks and rubbs of unlucky accidents; That Eminent
Piety and Goodness that sweetens the bitterness of affliction, and loudly
proclaims how justly ye are Entitled to the Favor of Heaven; That
distinguishing Order and Regularity in your Noble Family, that plainly
discovers the Wisdom and Discretion of its worthy Governess; These (I say) are
all fit Topics for a Panegyrist to insist upon.

But I forbear to pay even the due tribute of your Praise, for fear I should
offend your Modesty; and shall only beg leave to join with the Multitude of
your admirers in praying, that God would bless and prosper you and every Branch
of your Noble Family. May ye be Crowned with all the Blessings of this lower
World, as an earnest of that Immortal weight of Glory that awaits you in the
World to come. And when ye bid adieu to the lovely Tabernacle of Clay, may your
Tomb* be Clad and Beautified with higher Glory and Fame, than ever the Chaste
Lucretia's was. Which is the Hearty Prayer of,

Your Honors most Humbly Devoted in all Dutiful Obedience ROBERT BARRET.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
I AM sensible that this Age into which our Common Lot is fallen, makes High
Pretensions to Learning and Wit, and is apt to Damn with an assuming Air, every
thing that is not Recommended to the World with a Noisy Jangle of Letters, and
some Empty Farces of Wit. But the Design I had before my Eyes, in writing this
Plain and Familiar Treatise, would not allow of any such Gaudy Accoutrements.
So I even laid 'em quite aside, and have only endeavored to dispense some Real
and Substantial Good to my indigent Fellow Creatures, and to serve my Creator
in a Conscientious Discharge of what I understand to be my Duty. I would only
advise such as make it their business to decry my honest undertaking to
acquaint themselves more with the Scriptures, and the duties of a Christian;
and then they will know that one talent is called for Emprovement of as well as
ten, and that as Gifts and knowledge is received, so they ought to be
distributed, especially when they are such as concern not only a private Good,
but the advantage of the Public. If this do fall into the hands of any whose,
parts though large and highflown be Spiritualis'd and wrought into a Christian
temper, I doubt not but they will be ready to grant all my request, which is,
only to pity failings, and Lovingly to admonish* which shall be most cordially
and thankfully received by me. But when I consider how unwilling the Generality
of this World is either to reform themselves or to join Christian hands in a
reformation with others, it puts me in mind of a Golden saying of Seneca's (a
Heathen better principled than many called Christians) viz. A great part of our
time we spend in doing ill, the greatest part in doing nothing, and all in
doing what we should not. Yet, I shall not be discouraged, but go on in
prosecution of my design, which I am self Conscious is both Innocent and
Honest; and which I Am Confident will meet with approbation from such as are
willing to be informed, or will take the pains to weigh and consider what I
have said, and put my Prescriptions to the Trial; then they will be sensible of
the force of my reasoning, and the efficacy of my Remedies.

The Treatise I here present you with contains a Description of all the
Indispositions of Women with Child and in Childbed, with the Art of well
Practicing Midwifery and Nursing. I have backed every thing with examples from
my own Practice; which I chose rather to follow than the common road of Books
upon that Subject. That the undertaking is in so far laudable, I hope none will
deny; for though Surgeons now a days may lie under an ill imputation as being
generally men of dissolute Lives and no Principle; yet the Art it self is
Particularly recommended of God, and has been Valued and esteemed by all the
wisest of Nations. Its Pedigree is as Ancient as Adam. We cannot reasonably
suppose that Adam, who was so universally Skilled in the Natures of all Plants,
should have been ignorant of their Vulnerary Qualities: Or that he would not
employ this his Skill in endeavoring to cure Wounds, or Hurts, when any of his
New-planted Stock had the Misfortune te receive 'em. Abel was wounded and
killed by Cain, and can we imagine that Adam's Prudence would not use its
Chirurgical endeavors to redress such disasters, when possible. Though Moses's
account of those early times be but narrow and scanty, yet in the short remarke
he has made, we find that the Earth was filled with Violence, and Lamech
committed Murder and Gloried in it. To be Sure, the Art of Surgery could not be
asleep, when the world stood so much in need of its assistance. Soon after
Moses's History we are informed that Podalius and Machaon sons to Aesculapius
were Surgeons to the Grecian Camp before Troy. Cicero de Not. Deor. Tells us
that Aesculapius himself drew teeth and dressd wounds; Appolo was an Oculist.
Hippocrates not only understood Surgery, but Practiced it; and Celeus the same.
Among the Arabians the chief Surgeon was Albucasus: and thus in all the Records
of time whether sacred or profane we find a continued successive series of
Surgeons, who were all men of noted excellency and esteem. So Careful was the
Divine Providence, as never to leave the World destitute of such useful
Members.

And as Surgery in General, so Midwifry in Particular has been always looked
upon as an Inestimable Art. And indeed it is no wonder that all the Ancients did
so fondly hug the Art, that conducts Man with safety from the the first
Principle of his Conception, through all the difficulties and Shocks he
encounters both during his Emprisonment in the womb, and in his hazardous
Passage from thence into this our World. The elevated thoughts they entertained
of Man's Noble and God-like Original must needs have inspired 'em with a Zeal
for maintaining* this Art that is only ^usied about the same Pythagoras, the
Interpreter of the Gods, called, Man the measure of all things; and Plato
styles him; The Wonder of Wonders. Theophrastus thought him the great Pattern
of the Universe. Aristotle Christened him, A Politic Animal, born for Society,
whom God made with his Face upright, whereas all other Creatures look with
theirs downwards. Tully calls him a Divine Creature, full of Reasons and
Counsel. Pliny Entitles him, The Epitom^ of the World and delight of Nature. In
fine all the Ancient World joined with one Voice in calling Man a Micracosm, a
little world within a bigger. Doubtless they that were so large in expressing
their esteem of the Human race, could not but entertain Honorable apprehensions
of the Science, that serves to Solemnise and facilitate Man's Entry into the
World.

But I purposely wave all instances from profane History, and shall only
consider a little what we may learn in this matter from Holy writing. I find
every Page of the Scripture full of Instances of Gods tenderness to Children,
his care in regulating their growth from their conception to the time of their
birth; his countenancing and encoraging Midwifes of a sincere honest Principle,
and his detestation of such as dealt deceitfully with poor Women, or acted
cruelty to the innocent Babes. He first of all gave them his Divine example in
Midwifing Man from the Womb of nothing into a state of existence; and then
Particularly provided for his Marriage and Capacity of having Children; as we
read at Large Genesis 1. God said, let us make Man according to our likewise. Thu^
God Created the Man in his Image; and he Created him Male and Female Chap. 2
and the Lord God caused an heavy sleep to fall upon the Man, and he slept, and
he took one of his Ribs and he closed up the Flesh instead thereof; And the Rib
which the Lord God had taken from the Man, made he a Woman, and brought her to
the Man. Therefore shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and Cleave to his
Wife, and they shall be one Flesh. Genesis 4. And Adam knew Eve his Wife and she
conceived, and bare Cain, and said I have gotten a Man from the Lord. And as
God signalized his ear in Adams Children, so in those of his Posterity; as
Genesis 9. And God blessed Noah, and his Sons, and said unto them be fruitful and
Multiply, and replenish the Earth; and Genesis 6. So when Men began to be
Multiplied upon the Earth, and there were Daughters born unto them, then the
Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that they were fair, and they took them
Wives of all they liked* In the like manner Genesis 21. Then God heard the Voice
of the Child, and the Angel of God called to Hagar from Heaven, and said unto
her what aileth thee Hagar, fear not for God has heard the Voice of the Child
where he is. See likewise how God resented the Honesty of good Midwifes Exodus
1. The Ephesian King said to the Hebrew Midwives, when ye do the Office of a
Midwife to the Hebrew Women, and set them upon the Stools, if it be a Son, ye
shall kill him, but if it be a Daughter then she shall Live; but the Midwives
feared God and did not as the King of Egypt Commanded them; and when he called
for 'em again, Answered him, that the Hebrew Women are not as the Women of
Egypt for they are Lively and are delivered before the Midwife come at 'em. How
happy are those that fear God rather than wilful Kings! And because the
Midwives feared God, he made them Houses and blessed their works. An
Astonishing Consideration for such Women, as for their own worldly Interest and
Gain suffer poor Women and their Children to perish for want of timely
assistance. Whereas the Unerring Spirit that dictated the Holy Writings is so
Particular in commending the good Offices of tender hearted Women, and in
exposing the Cruelty and Barbarity of such as make nothing of such a great
Concern; like Herod, who commanded the Midwives to Murder all the Male Children
at the Birth; and t^ prosecute it mo^e vigo^ously, suffered one of his own
children to be murdered, that the Mob should take it down with less Reluctance.
And the Scriptures, for our instruction and Determent, are very particular in
describing the first Springs, and all the succeeding Progress of this Hellish
Design, which he so cunningly disguised, Mat. 2.7. And Herod privily called the
Wise Men, and diligently inquired of them* what time the Star appeared, and
sent 'em to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the Young Child,
and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship
him also. When the Wise Men saw the Star, they rejoiced, with an exceeding
Great Joy, and went into the House, and found the Babe with Mary his Mother,
and fell down and worshipped him, and presented to him Gifts, Gold,
Frankincense and Myrrh. And being warned of God in a Dream, that they should
not return to Herod, they returned into their own Country another way. After
their departure, behold the Angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a Dream,
saying, Arise, and take the Babe, and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, and be
there till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek the Young Child to destroy
him. So he arose, and took the Babe, and his Mother by Night, and departed into
Egypt, and was there until the Death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled what
was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, out of Egypt have I called my
Son. Then Herod seeing that he was mocked of the Wisemen, was exceeding worth
and sent forth and slew all the Male Children that were in Bethlehem, and all
the Coasts thereof, from two Years Old and Under, according to the time which
he had diligently inquired of the Wisemen. So in Rama was a Voice heard, Rachel
weeping for her Children and would not be Comforted because they were not, etc.

Were our Midwifes more acquainted with the Scriptures, and the Duties enjoined
them relating to their Office, they would take more care to inform their
Judgments, and improve their Knowledge; and not venture so rashly upon a
business of such Consequence, without being better provided with Skill and
Experience: This would teach 'em to wait with Patience for a timely Birth, not
to anticipate or hasten the labor for their own Ends, and to neglect nothing
in its season that may contribute to the safety of Mother and Child. Therefore
I have not only given plain and familiar directions how she is to behave her
self in the whole course of her attendance; but have endeavored to press her
to her Duty, with such Moral Considerations as no true Christians ought to
slight. I doubt not but such as are over confident of their scanty Knowledge,
or Guilty of the Crimes I lay to their charge, will frowardly decry my
undertaking, and endeavor to stifle so plain a discovery of the Crimes they
have no mind to part with. But I shall gain my design if I can but prove
serviceable to those that are desirous to know, and propose nothing to
themselves but the safety and welfare of Mother and Child.

ROBERT BARRET.
Removed from my House in Charterhouse-street London, to Greenwich in Kent, at
the Surgeons Arms over against the Church.

Where you may have the Elixir, Rha. Indicum, or Indian Counter-poyson. It is a
most admirable Cordial expelling sharp Gripings, Clammy and Tartarous humors
from the Stomach and Bowels: It strengthens the Liver and Cures all sorts of
Fluxes, Melancholy, Green Sickness and Rickets in Children, there is not a
better specific given to Women, which are apt to miscarry and may be taken all
the time she is with Child, from one spoonful to three, at a time upon any
illness. Prepared by him from one Shilling to Five, each Bottle, of a pleasant
taste. He prepares a Restorative Pill for Consumptions, Asthma's, it eases all
manner of pain, it is an excellent Pectoral; he cures most Distempers of the
Womb, and freely gives advice.



The Contents.
Section I.
COntaining the Character of a Midwife, with Directions how to perform her
Office toward Mother and Child, as well in the time of Labor, as before and
after Delivery, with a full and brief Description of the various sorts of
Unnatural Labors, and the more Dangerous Symptoms of Women in Child bed with
the most approved Methods of Relief.

Chap. I. Containing the Character of a Midwife, with some short Remarks on her
Humor, manners and conduct in performing her duty. Chap. II, What preparatory
Offices are incumbent on a Midwife, when the Woman is near the time of her
Delivery. Chap. III. Explaining a Midwife's Duty in time of Travel. Chap. IV.
Containing directions to a Midwife, what to do when the Child is just come into
the World. Chap. V. How to Manage the Woman when delivered. Chap. VI. How to
know whether the Child in the Womb be dead or alive; if dead, how to perform
her Office; with directions in case of a Mola or false Conception. Chap. VII.
Of the different sorts of Vnatural Labors, with the best Methods of assistance
on such extraordinary occasions. Chap. VIII. Of the Cesarean Section or cutting
the Child out of the Mothers Womb. Chap. IX. Of the various Symptoms happening
to Women in Child bed and the most successful Methods of cure.
Section II.
OF the Instruments of Generation in Women, the Membranes that enfold the Child
in the Womb; The manner of its Generation Increase and Nourishment in the Womb;
The Causes of Barrenness and the means to prevent it. The Conduct of a Woman
going with Child, the signs of Conception, and the Prevention of Miscarriage.

Chap. I. Of the Parts serving for Generation in Women. Chap. II. Of the
Membranes enfolding the Child in the Womb. Chap. III. Of the manner of
generating the Infant in the Womb, and its gradual Nourishment and Increase
from the first Minute of Conception to the hour of Birth. Chap. IIII. Of the
Causes of Barrenness and Means to prevent it. Chap. V. Directions how a Woman
shall know when she has conceived, and what Conduct she ought to observe during
the time of her being with Child, so as to prevent Miscarriage.
Sect. III.
EXplaining the Duty of a Nurse with reference to the Child, from the ^ime of
its Birth to its removal from he^ conduct. Together with an Essay, endeavoring
to show what Influence Moral abuses may have upon its health.

SECTION I. Containing the Character of a Midwife, with Directions how to
perform her Office toward Mother and Child, as well in the time of Labor, as
before, and after Delivery; with a full and brief description of the various
sorts of unnatural Labors, and the more dangerous Symptoms of Women in
Childbed; with the most approved methods of Relief.
CHAP. I. Containing the Character of a Midwife; with some short Remarks on her
Humor, Manners, and Conduct in performing her Duty.
IN these Days there are many Women that take upon 'em the knowledge and
practice of Midwifry, barely upon the privilege of their Age. As if a Woman
were more expert in that Art for her Dottage, or Old Age; or as if the mystery
of it were obvious to any that has but lived some scores of Years: But by their
favor, I must be allowed to acquaint 'em that the knowledge and dexterity of a
good Midwife is not to be come at so cheap and easily as they imagine; the
sacred Shrines of Knowledge are not so accessible, as to be Patent to every
lazy Adventurer: no, the Understanding must be peculiarly instructed in that
Affair, and then succeeding Experience and Practice must qualify the Hand for
performing its Office. I Have endeavored in this small Treatise to assist 'em in
both; but before I proceed any further, there are some accessory qualities
besides that of Knowledge and Dexterity, which are very graceful and desirable
in a Midwife, which I cannot well pass by.

She ought to be neither too young, nor too Old, of a good habit of Body, her
Hands small and gentile, with her Nails pared close, and without Rings, in the
time of her Duty. She must be cheerful, pleasant, strong, laborious, and inured
to Fatigue; it being required that she should be ^tirring at all hours, and
abiding a long time together with her Patient.

She ought to be Courteous, Sober, Chaste; of an even patient Temper; not apt
to repine or quarrel: she ought to be Wise and Silent, not apt to talk
foolishly of what she sees in the Houses where she has to do; to observe the
Humor of her Patient, and endeavor to divert her with what she finds most
agreeable. She ought to be a Woman of Understanding, capable to counsel,
advise, and Comfort the Person in Labor; to bear her up under despondency, to
fortify her against Fear, or Immoderate Repining. Lastly, she ought to be a
Religious, Pious Woman, as the fittest Person to be about People in that
Extremity of Danger. Women of no Principle are generally biased by Interest,
or an imaginary Reputation. They love to engross all the Credit and Honor of
an Operation to themselves; rather than any body should share with them in a
Creditable Performance, they will endanger the Life both of Mother and Child. But
such Women who are either tender of their own own Souls, or of their Patients
Lives, will be more willing to yield to any thing that may contribute to their
Benefit. If the assistance of a Man-Surgeon be necessary to accomplish the
work, they will give 'em timely notice to send for him. One would think that it
would justify a Midwife's Knowledge and Honesty to send for an Assistant in
case of danger, more than if she confided too much in her own Capacity. To
suffer either Woman or Child to die under her Hand, is a tarnish upon her
Reputation. But to advise or counsel a poor Woman in case of Extremity to be
Laid by a Man, and so save her Life, is a Laudable Action. Suppose she waved
her imaginary Reputation to save their Lives, she will be valued and esteemed the
more amongst all the good and Wise.

The cases in which they ought to call for Assistance are; when the Child
presents amiss, or the Birth comes wrong, either with, or without Pain. When
Floodings happen with Blood (though there be little or no Pain.) When the Waters
are broken, and the Child does not follow, whether at full time or not. In this
last Case, it is absolutely necessary; for Convulsions, and many other dismal
accidents may happen upon retarding the Delivery.

There are some froward and self-conceited Midwives, that stand not to persuade
the poor Women, that whenever a Man comes, one or both must necessarily die. By
this means it sometimes comes to pass that a Man is not sent for, till the last
Gasp, till the Woman be just a dying, or the Child dead already. But such as
have ever experienced the benefit of being Laid by a Skillful Man-Midwife,
will not be so easily scared by such inconsiderable Bugbears. A Man expert in his
Galling, if timely sent for, will deliver the Woman in a Moment, save her a
great deal of Trouble and Pain* and by successful Operations, justify the
Merits of his Profession.

We have some Instances of public Punishment inflicted on such Midwives, in
the Neighboring Kingdom of France, for being accessory to the murder both of
the Mother and Child. I remember a particular Example, when the King of France
called a Midwife in Question for not calling for a Man's Assistance in a case
of extreme danger; the Crime was looked upon as but one remove from murder; and
the barbarous Woman forbid public Practice for ever.

CHAP. II. What preparatory offices are incumbent on the Midwife, when the
Woman is near the time of her Delivery.
WHen a Woman with Child is apprehensive of her approaching Labor, she ought
to have her House and Family in Order, lest any occasional Disorder should
disturb her in the time of her Lying-in; she ought to have her own Room clean
and sweet; the Linen about her Body clean, and what Linen is necessary for
other occasions got ready, and in its proper place; that when her Pains come,
they may not be hurrying and shuffling about from Room to Room, crying Where is
this? or, Where is that? When all things within doors are put to rights, they
ought to be quick in calling the Midwife, rather sooner, than later. Some Women
have a trick of putting it off as long as ever they can before they send for
the midwife* but the safer way is to send for her as soon as they find the
least motion to a Delivery, for fear of a Surprisal. Her midwife being called,
the next thing is to send for the Assistance of some sober, wise Women, among
her Neighbors, such as have gone through the like hazard before; but above
all, take care there be no frightful, whimsical, resolute, headstrong, drunken,
whispering, talkative, sluttish Women amongst them: Any of these Extremes is
not not only unsuitable, and unbecoming, but highly pernicious. One of such
Women may do more harm than three modest, wise Women can do good.

CHAP. III Explaining a Midwife's Duty in time of Travel.
First know if she is in her full time, by asking her, and when you find her
Pains growing, let her walk leisurely up and down the Chamber for some time;
afterward she may lie down, keeping herself warm; then give her the following
Draught, which may be repeated every hour or two.

Take three or four Spoonfuls of Cinnamon Water, twenty drops of Spirit of
Hartshorn, and half a dram of Borax, finely powdered; mix all together, and
give it her to drink, when lying upon the Bed.

After that she may rise and walk again, expecting the coming down of her
Waters, and the opening of the Womb, and after a hour or two take the like
quantity again, if her Pains don't prevent it.

As to the Posture of her Body; it is certain all Women are not alike easy in
the same Posture. Some are best Delivered lying in their Beds, others sitting
on a Chair or Stool, or on the side of the Bed; others on their Knees, being
supported by People under their Arms.

But if she be Delivered in her Bed, which I take to be the best way, let her
be laid upon her Back, her Head lifted up a little higher with a Pillow; her
Thighs and Knees must be a good way separated, the one from the other, with her
Legs bowed, and drawn up toward her Buttocks; the Soles of her Feet, and her
Heels being held by two strong Women.

Her own Personal Duty is to be of good Courage, to force her Pains down as
much as she can, by stopping her Mouth, and keeping her Breath. And when her
Pains come quick and strong, beginning at the Reins, and sliding down forwards
to the Navel, and then to the Groins; and also inwardly at the bottom of the
Belly down to the Neck of the Womb; it is a certain Sign that the Woman is in
Labor, or will miscarry. But for more Satisfaction, the midwife may put up her
Hand, after having anointed it with fine Oil, Lard, ot Butter; and if she
perceive the Inner Neck of the Womb to dilate it self, she ought to look for
the Delivery, for that puts it beyond all doubt that Nature is pushing the
Child forwards.

Therefore if she see the Birth come naturally, and the Pains grow thicker and
faster, and feel the Womb opening its Orifice to make way for the Child,
endeavoring its Exit, she ought to assist Nature, and withal encourage the
Mother to strain and press with her Lower Parts; but with all possible Caution,
so as not to over-act her part or anticipate Nature; for if she be so hasty as
to widen the Passage with her Fingers, or to break the Membranes before the
Birth be advanced, she creates a great deal of Mischief, in making the Waters
to break and spend themselves, before the Child be come up to be benefited by
it. The just consideration of such a Consequence ought to oblige all Midwives
to wait till the Membranes burst of their own accord. Some, I warrant you, are
in haste, and want to be gone to another Woman's Labor; and if the Membranes
linger in bursting of their own accord, they will tear 'em with their Nails
rather than dance Attendance upon one Woman. Thus these unchristian Women
endanger both the Life of Mother and Child, which is not half so much in their
View as the Money. The preserving the Passages slippery and moist, facilitates
the Birth, and lessens the poor Woman's Pain; which cannot but receive Increase,
when the Waters designed for moistning the passage, are unseasonably let out.

If the Child present naturally, the Head comes first; then the Midwife must
take it gently between her two Hands, and when the Pains return, slip down her
Hands under the Arm-holes, and gently draw the Infant forth by degrees; but she
must observe always to stay her Hand when the Pains begin to relent. This must
be performed by a delicate tender Hand, lest the Child by any rough or harsh
handling, should receive a deformed shape of Body.

CHAP. IV Containing Directions to a midwife, what to do when the Child is just
come into the World.
WHen the Child is come into the World, which is commonly with his Face
downward, it must be suddenly turned upon its back, to prevent its being
stifled for want of Air. Then let the Midwife pull out the Navel-string,
leaving the length of Four Fingers; and tie it with a silk Thread as near the
Belly as may be laid aside; while this is a doing, all Care must be had, that
the Head and Stomach be well covered and that nothing come upon the Face.

The Midwife's next task is gently to draw forth the Afterbirth. If the
Navel-string be not broken, it will easily conduct the Hand (by following it)
to the place where the Afterbirth lies, which is generally between the Navel,
and Small of the Woman's Belly. And indeed it is a great Convenience to have
this guide, upon which account I would advise all Midwives to be very cautious
in handling the Navel-string, for fear they break it. As soon then as you have
introduced your Hand into the Womb, toward its Fund, or Bottom, you will find
the Burden, which you may know by a great number of little unequal Risings,
which are always made there by the Roots of the Umbilical Vessels, on the one
side where they terminate, which makes it to be easily distinguishable from the
Womb. If it still adhere to the Womb, you must put some of your Fingers between
it and the Womb, endeavoring by little and little to squeeze 'em in, till ye
find it quite loose, and then draw it forth very carefully. But in all this
Operation, you must carefully take notice not to scratch or scrape the least
part of the Womb, for fear of creating a Flooding, Inflammation, Gangrene, or
Ulcers, which generally prove very fatal: As likewise not to draw it out till
it be wholly, or most part of it separated, for fear of drawing forth the Womb
along with it. Besides, the Company is generally curious to see it, and if it
be whole, not torn, or rent, it redounds to the credit and reputation of the
Midwife. Therefore I would advise all Midwives never to extract the Burden,
without putting up their Hand to separate it cleanly from the Womb.

This done, the Child may be held in a good Mothers Lap, and kept warm, whilst
the Midwife is busied in taking Care of the Woman; to get her into Bed, and her
Skirt ready, and her Closures, putting five double up to the Womb, to prevent
the cold Air's entering in. Then she must lay her Legs across, and so be left
to fall asleep by degrees. If she be very Faintish, she may take a Dram of
Confection Alkermes in Cinnamon Water, or Wine, or fine Oil and Sugar Candy, or
Nutmeg and Sugar, or Oil of Sweet Almonds, and Syrup of Maidenhair, or a little
Gruel, or Cawdel.

The Woman being thus taken Care of, she must turn next to the Child; and
having tied up the Navel-string, she ought in the next place to cleanse the
Infant, not only in the Face, but over the whole Body; then anoint the Groins,
Hips, Buttocks, Thighs, and Joints, with Oil of sweet Almonds, or fresh Butter
and Beer, or Water and Lard, warmed. This makes the Skin more firm, shuts up
its Pores, securing 'em from the offense of the Circumambient Air. After the
Child is thus well anointed, dried, and wrapped up, she may give it in a Spoon a
little fine Oil and Sugar, with a little Cinnamon Water, or Sack and Sugar and
Oil; or Mithridate, taking the quantity of a Pease in Wine, with a little
Spirit of Lavender. After that let it rest half an hour, then let it go to the
Breast; or if you please, you may first give a Pap Spoonful of Gruel, or
Cawdel, to make the Mouth slippery.

It many times happens that the Mother having two Children in her Belly, the
one comes forth very well, and the other with a great deal of Difficulty; in
which case, that which comes first is the strongest. The Midwife's Duty upon
such Occasions is, when the first is brought forth, to Cut the Navel-String, as
was above directed, and tie it fast to the Woman's Thigh with Tape, or
Filleting; and then set about drawing forth the other Infant; which must be
gone about very Cautiously, observing all the Rules already mentioned.

CHAP. V. How to manage the Woman when Delivered.
Having now conducted you through the different Circumstances of Labor and
Delivery; my next Business is to show, how you are to treat the Woman when laid
in the Straw.

You must apply a little Plaster of Galbanum of the bigness of two or three
Fingers Breadth to the Navel, in the middle of which may be put two or three
Grains of Musk, or Civet with Lint. This is good for stopping After-Pains.

The next Care is to be bad of the Breast. Some put upon 'em a round Cerecloth
of Diachylum cum Gummis. I would recommend the following.

Take Wax, Oil of Myrrh, Honey, of each two Ounces, Wheat Flour one Spoonful,
melt these altogether, then make a Cerecloth.

Let them have holes in the middle for the Nipples to go through. It Is fitting
likewise to wet the Nipples with the best Rectified Spirit of Wine.

In regulating the Conduct of a Woman in Childbed, respect must be had to her
Condition and Quality; and for want of this Consideration many Women Perish.
She that thinks to treat an ordinary Laboring Country Woman, like a Person of
Quality, kills her outright; and she that pretends to govern a Person of
Quality like an ordinary Country Woman, does the same to her. If ye give to one
of these strong Stomachs, presently after their Delivery, any strong Broth, or
Eggs, or a draught of Milk, they are like Mills that always grind, and empty as
fast as you pour in; such little Cordials have no effect upon some, which
perhaps would be too strong for a more delicate Constitution; for we find by
daily Experience, that what gives one a Fever, keeps another from it. And
therefore Women in Childbed are to be governed according to their several
respective Constitutions. As for the Women that are tenderly brought up, great
Care must be taken in giving 'em no Meats that clog the Stomach, or are hard to
be digested. For the first eight days of her Lying-in, boiled Meat is more
suited to her Condition than Roasted ^^^uch as (...), the juice of Veal, or
Capon, or Barly-water; with fine Sugar dissolved with the Juice of a Lemmon* or
Cinnamon boiled in it, or Coriander Seeds. If she drink Wine, let it be two
thirds water, to one part wine; in the Morning White Wind, in the Afternoon
Claret; now and then Almond-Milk is not amiss.

Some Women are so disturbed in Childbed, that they cannot sleep; such I wou^d
advice to drink Barly-water, well bo^^, without straining, mixed with the Syrup
of Cowslips, or Syrup of Poppies, or a little Dias^ordium, according as their
Circumstances may require.

CHAP. VI. How to know whether the Child in the Womb be dead or alive; if dead,
how to perform her Office; with Directions in case of a Mola, or false
Conception.
SOmetimes the Child is Dead in the Mothers Belly, in which case her Labor is
much more difficult and hazardous than when alive; and therefore I have thought
fit to give some Directions relating to it; and in the first place shall put
you in some clearer Light, in order to know whether the Child be alive or dead,
that so you may be able to proportionate your Endeavors to the Circumstances
of the Patient.

The Child may be known to be alive, if the Mother be at her full Reckoning,
and has received no hurt; if she have had her Health well all the time of her
going with Child; and if she feels it stir. But they must take care not to
deceive themselves in framing a Judgment from its seeming to stir. I have
delivered a Woman, whose Child had been dead above four hours, as was visible
by its Corruption, yet the Mother affirmed that she felt it stir but a very
little before she was delivered. That imaginary Motion is distinguishable from
the Real, by this, that in the former, it only swags from one side to another
without brisking or leaping, as it does in the latter. This is easily
perceivable.

When the Child is alive, he by his struggling disposes the Waters to a
breaking, if the Mother be willing to help down with her Pains; but when dead,
the Waters are slow in breaking, and must be broken by the Hand of the Midwife,
unless the Woman be very strong to help her self. If she find no Relief by hot
and forcing Medicines, then to be sure the Child is dead, and recourse must be
had to more than ordinary Assistance. If it has not stirred in the Womb for a
long time; if she feel a great Weight hanging upon her Womb about the time of
the Birth; if she void stinking, corrupted Matter; if she have fainting, and
cold Sweats, or floods much before she come at her full time; if the Waters
broke four or five days before Delivery; if her Lips or top of the Nostrils be
pale and cold; the Belly, though not sunk, yet softer; her Eyes sunk; with a
great pain about the Navel and Loins, and a stinking Breath; if her Breasts
flag, and her Countenance have a languishing Aspect; or her Color turned into
a tawny whiteness, and her Lower Belly, Feet, etc. cold. In all these Cases,
there is just reason for suspecting that the Child is dead in her Womb. The
which if it be, the Labor will be both long and dangerous, by reason of the
dead Child's Inactivity, and the Mothers Weakness, in not being able to thrust
it out without some accessory help. In this case, the hand of a Surgeon is
needful to draw it out, and that as speedily as may be; for if the Child
continue dead for any time in this its dark Abode, the Mother is in a fair way
of losing her Life.

A Mola is a Mass of Flesh without Bowels or Bones, being an imperfect
Conception owing to the Fault of the Seed. And because the extracting of a
Mola, and a dead Child are much at one, as to the manner of Operation, I Will
join 'em together. Here I must again give you notice, that whenever any such
preternatural thing is lodged in the Womb, you ought to draw it out with all
possible Speed; for if it continue there for any time, it fastens to the Womb,
and sticks there for many Years. As the worthy Ambrose Pareus tells us in the
Story of the Pewterer's Wife, that had one for seventeen Years; whom he opened
after her Death.

The manner of extracting all these Preternatural things, is just the same as
when the Burden stays behind in a Natural Birth, and the Navel-string broke:
So I conclude it needless to repeat the Directions I have already given upon
that Head.

A False Conception, tho much less than a Mola, yet it often puts a Woman to a
great deal of Trouble, and frequently in hazard of her Life, by reason of the
great Floodings that attend it; for the Womb endeavoring to expel it, squeezes
through the passage a very great discharge of Blood; and the passage is
generally so narrow that a Man's Hand cannot well get in to assist it. As we
find always that the Womb does not open, or dilate it self beyond the
Proportion of what it contains; and so it proves a difficult matter to get two
Fingers in to help it forward, though in the mean while the Womb is not able to
void it without Foreign Assistance.

It Is true, a False Conception has the same effect in stopping the Monthly
Terms as the true; the Belly swells, the Breasts grow big, and both Color and
Appetite suffer the same alteration equally in both. But though they Jump in
these generals, there are particular Signs that rid marches betwixt them. A
false Conception has no regular, nor periodical Motion, neither does it stir
from side to side, except it be pressed. The Belly is hard, the Feet apt to
swell, and she her self becomes more heavy and unwieldy, and not so nimble or
cliver as in a true Conception. The Breasts do not swell so much as in a true
Conception, and the whole Body grows soft, and consumes away. A false
Conception may be made in three Months, but a Child stirs not till after
three; it is very rare if it happen sooner; in some it is near four Months before
the Child quicken. The Birth of an Infant never exceeds the eleventh Month,
whereas a false Conception may be hatched by Obstructions, and lodged there for
many Years, nay as long as they live.

These false Conceptions are various; there be Moles of a Fleshy Substance
engendered in the concavity of the Matrix, and adhering to its sides, but
borrowing nothing of its Substance. Others are windy, watery, or membranous, as
a thin bag filled with Blood. Sometimes Moles engender with the Infant, and
deprive the Infant of its Nourishment. Some Children are almost Starved in such
a condition, both for wan^^^ room, and of the true Spirits of Life, which are
anticipated by it.

When a Woman Evacuates of a false Conception from the latter end of the first
to the end of the second or third Month, it may be called Expulsion; If what
the Woman retains in a true conception, do quickly slide away again, it is
called Effluxion; but when the Faetus is formed and alive, and hurries out of
the Womb before its time, as in the second, third, fourth, or sixth Month, it is
called Abortion, or Miscarriage.

CHAP. VII. Of the different sorts of unnatural Labors, with the best Methods
of assisting on such extraordinary occasions.
THere are many Operations full of difficulty and danger, which some forward
Midwives are bold enough in undertaking, but for want of Industry, or necessary
knowledge, cannot effect; and thus very often leave the poor Woman in a more
Tragical condition, than than if they had not meddled with her.

I have met with several Instances of this nature. I was once sent for to a
Gentlewoman, that through abuse of her Midwife was reduced to a deplorable
condition. Her Midwife, it seems, was a topping, fine Woman, with her minute
Watch at her Side; she had so much business forsooth, such and such fine Ladies
expected her, and she could not stay: Accordingly she pressed the poor woman to
bear down with all her might: In fine, she was delivered in a hurry, some
pieces of the Burden were brought away, and some remained behind: But the sage
Midwife being a woman of Reputation, and one that made a blustering Figure,
persuaded them not to be be troubled at what remained* affirming that it would
come away of it self; that nothing more was to be done at that time, and if the
woman would but have Patience, all would go well with her. When I was sent for,
the woman was oppressed with a violent Pain in her Head, and perpetually voided
black, stinking, corrupted Humors. Immediately I put up my Hand, and brought
away the bigness of a Turkey-Egg, of the Burden, which smelt so ill as to
annoy all the women in the Room. When this was taken away, she retrieved apace,
and found herself much benefited in a very short time.

I was sent for another time to deliver a woman of an unnatural Birth. It seems
the Child presented the Hand first through the Birth; and the Midwife resolving
to have the honor of the Delivery to her self before I came, would not stay to
put up the Arm again, but boldly ventured to twist it off, Then she grop'd for
the Head, but could not find it. The poor woman Languishing cried out, Help,
Help, Help. But the doughty Midwife encouraged her to be patient, telling her
all was well. When I came, I found the woman almost dead, and immediately
Delivered her. When the Child came forth gasping, and its Arm off, I was
frightened; but they presently resolved my doubts, by telling that they had
pulled it off three hours before I came.

The Method I use in such cases, which I always find successful, is this I
gently introduce my Hand into the Entry of the Womb, then I turn the Child,
and bring it out by the Feet, or as they say, Footling way, pulling it gently
till the Hips are come forth. But in the interim, I wrap the parts in a single
Napkin, for the viscous humors that surround 'em, prevent any sure hold of
'em. Then I bring down the Arms along the Child's Body, turning the head to the
Share-bone, with the Face downwards. There are some Children that have the Head
so big, that when the whole Body is born, yet that stops in the Passage. In
that case I endeavor gently to disengage it from the Bones in the Passage,
with my Fingers. All the Operation I dispatch as soon as possibly I can, for
fear the Child should be suffocated; which would certainly ensue, if it
remained long in that Posture.

I was sent for to another woman in her Labor, where I met with this unnatural
Symptom, that the Child's Head thrust the Neck of the Womb forth before it.
Women troubled with a bearing down of the Womb before they Conceive, and whose
womb is very moist, are very much subject to this Accident, by reason of the
previous Relaxation of the Ligaments. In this case, I only lay my Hand on each
side of the Head, and forbear to pull, or draw hastily, for fear the womb
should fall out, as it is very apt to do. I waited patiently till the Child
advanced of it self, and the Woman had forced it out by her own pressure.

I remember of another Case not very common, which it may be worth your while
to take notice of. I was sent for to a woman that had lingered in her Labor
for five or six days. When I came and examined her Condition, I found the
Child's Head in the Passage presenting toward a regular Birth; but the woman
was very little, and 'twas her first Child, which occasioned a narrowness in
the Passage. Besides, she was stricken in Years, and her Womb deprived of its
youthful Moisture. When I seriously weighed all these Indications, I thought
it necessary to foment the womb with white wind and Oil of Roses, with a
Sponge, as often, and as hot as she could bear it. I gave Cordials inwardly,
and some sweating Powders. These things were so effectual in dilating the womb,
that by the blessing of God I drew forth a fine boy, and saved the poor Mother.

Another time I was sent for to a woman that was in a very sad Condition. The
Midwife had brought the Head of the Child into the World, and the womb closed
about the Neck, and hindered the egress of the rest. This Accident may happen
through the Laziness of the Midwife in losing Time, and not drawing forth the
Child when it is upon the move, or not keeping touch with the Mothers
Endeavors. Sometimes indeed the Head is small, and disproportionate to the
rest of the body; the Shoulders large and broad; so they stick in the passage
unless forwarded by help of Art. In this case, I use to put my fingers first
under one Arm, then under the other, and so forward 'em by degrees, but withal
very gently and cautiously, and observing the Mothers endeavors; all which if
right managed, will make a quick Birth. But I must again caution you to make as
much use as you can of the Woman's own pressure, for if ye discourage or
prevent her bearing down, all her pains will vanish; and so the Child Perish
locked up in the Passage.

Sometimes both Hands come forth first together, and leave the rest of the Body
in Prison. I remember a remarkable Instance of such a thing, which I shall give
you a Circumstantial Account of. I was called for in great haste to attend a
Woman in Labor; the Midwife said they ought to have sent for no Body; That she
would finish the work her self, having brought part of the Child to the World
already, and the rest would quickly follow if they would but have Patience. She
added, that 'twas not a Sergeons Province, 'twas hers; that if Dr. Chamberlain
came, or any Body else, she would not quit her stool, nor yield her ^^^ce to
any Body. I came* and was amazed to see the Midwife so resolute and confident
of her own undertakings; I said nothing, but retired into the next Room at the
desire of the Gentlewoman's Mother and Husband. The Midwife continued tugging
and sweating, and after all she began to see that all her endeavors were in
vain; so she starts up, and drank a good draught of Cinnamon Water instead of
the Poor Gentlewoman; This gave her a little assurance, so she bluntly cried, I
care not, He may come, if he will. So I was called in, and found the Midwife a
little softer in her temper, but the poor Woman almost spent. However, I was
willing to satisfy my own Curiosity, and to try if I could do her any service.
I examined how Cases stood with her, and found that that part which the Midwife
cried was already come into the World was the two hands, which she had almost
lugg'd off. I presently altered the Posture of the Woman laying her Hips a
little higher than her Head. The Head of the Child lay partly on the sharebone
and toward the right Groyn. I caused her therefore to lean a little to the
opposite side, in order to recover the right Posture. By this means, through* Gods
Blessing, I put the two hands back and brought the Head toward the Birth. This
gave me some hopes; so I encouraged the Woman to forward her pains as much as
possible; and gave her as much of the Cinnamon Water as her goodly Midwife had
pleased to leave, and mixed it with some drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn. This
done, 'twas not long before I brought the Child fairly into the World, but it
was Dead, and both Arms and Breast so Prodigiously mortified that all the Women
stood in Amazement. But the Mother is still alive and Healthy; I have laid her
twice since of live Children -- In such Cases as this is, I would advise all
Women to send for assistance as speedily as they can, because many Women and
Children are Murdered after this manner.

Another sort of unnatural Labor is, when both Hands and Feet come together.
It Is altogether impossible the Child should be Born so; therefore some method
of recovering the right Posture must be thought of. I ve met with such a Case;
when the Midwife has pulled and lugg'd with all her force and might, but still
in vain. At length she bid 'em send for a Man, but withal confidently affirmed
that no Man in the World could do more than she did. When I came, I found that
her lugging and pulling had so fixed the Child in the passage that I was hardly
able to put it back. But wi^^ much ado I turned it; and gave the Woman a good
Spoonful of my Elixir, which immediately brought her pains upon her a fresh. I
brought the Child out by the Feet, though the Midwife had almost twisted both a
Leg and an Arm off. The Mother and Child came both through.

Sometimes the Knees present to the Birth, with the Legs folded up to the
Buttocks; as I perceived once in a Woman by putting up my hand, and finding the
part that presented hard and round, and much smaller than the Head. Immediately
I turned the Child to a right posture (...) the Head foremost, and gently
bathed the Womb with a Sponge wet in Oil of Lillies warm: Thus by Gods help I
got the Child into the World alive, and (...) mother safe.

Another time I met with the Shoulders and Back presenting first; but continued
in my wonted course of putting the Child back, and turning the Head toward the
Birth; and thus brought forth a live Child.

I delivered a Woman once, when the Child advanced its breech foremost, though
it often voided the ordure by its Fundament: I gently slid up my Hand on each
side the Buttocks, and introduced 'em by degrees into the Groins, and so by
wagging it from side to side, I disengaged it; and brought it out by the Feet
and Legs, and saved both its own, and its Mother's Life.

Sometimes the Navel-string comes first; then ye must endeavor to put the
Child back, and turn it, till ye get hold of the Feet, and then convey it
gently through the Passage.

If the Burden offer first, or comes quite forth, it is a sign that the Child
is dead, or near to Death. It is generally accompanied with great Flooding,
which is also a very ill Sign. In this case ye must never venture to thrust it
back, but fetch it away the very Moment ye discover it, and then conduct the
Child out by the Feet. And take this for a general Rule, that in all Floodings
ye ought to be as quick as possible in bringing the Child into the World; for
if ye delay, Convulsions may happen, and then both Mother and Child are in
great danger.

I remember to have met with a pretty odd Circumstance, which I think it not
improper to insert here. A Gentlewoman going with her first Child, by
hearkening to extravagant Advice, had almost run the Risque of her own, and her
Child's Life. She had all over her a great many Childbearing Spots, brown,
rough Tubercles; I have seen such a thing happen to Women with Child upon their
Foreheads, Temples, or Cheeks, many times as large as a Fingers breadth or
more; they are so plaguey troublesome, that though taken away, they commonly
return again. After Delivery, indeed they use to vanish of their own accord.
But this Patient was so extremely afflicted, that I never saw a Woman in the
like Condition. I directed her to the following Ointment.

Take one Dram of Sperma Ceti, half an Ounce of Ointment of Roses, two Drams of
the Spirit of Vinegar. Melt all over the Fire; and use it Night and Morning
after the Skin is well cleansed.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Cesarean Section, or Cutting the Child out of the Mother's
Womb.
WHen the Woman dies, and the Child is alive in her Belly, we sometimes open
her up, and take out the Child. Some foolish People talk of performing this
Operation upon living Women, in a dangerous Labor, to save the Child's Life;
and therefore would call it Cesarean Section, in imitation of Cesar's Birth:
it is true there would be some pretext of excuse to make Martyrs of poor Women
to bring a second Caesar, or some great and new Prophet, into our Western World;
but it is not known that ever there was any Law, Christian, or Civil, which
countenanced the Martyrdom of the Mother to save the Child. Some Country
Gossips will tell you they know such yet living, whose Sides have been opened
to make way for the Child: But such Stories as these, are only fit
Entertainment for Fools and Children.

A Surgeon must never practice this cruel Operation whilst the Mother is alive;
but when she is dead, he ought not to neglect it, and what he does, he must do
it quickly, because delay will certainly be the Death of the Child. The Greeks
were acquainted with this Operation, and called it Embriulie. Most Authors
would have it made on the left side of the Belly, it being more free from the
Liver, which is on the right. Some are for opening just in the middle of the
Belly, between the two right Muscles, because in this place there is only the
covering and the white Line to cut. To dispatch then with more ease and speed,
the Surgeon having placed himself, the dead Body may be a little raised. Let
him take a good sharp Incision-Knife, make one or two strokes into the
Peritonaeum, and then gently take out the Child.

CHAP. IX. Of the Various Symptoms happening to Women in Childbed, and the
Methods of Cure.
THE Womb may be fitly compared to a rough Sea, in which the Child floats for
the space of nine Months. The Labor of Delivery, is the only Port, but full of
dangerous Rocks. The Woman, after she has arrived at the desired Port of
Delivery, and has disengaged her self of her Loading, has yet much need of help
to defend her self against a great many Inconveniences, which may ensue upon
her Travel.

In the first place she must keep a Temperate Diet, having a great care not to
over-fill her self after so great an Evacuation. Indeed her Diet must be like
that of Wounded Persons: Neither are Nurses Tales to be believed, who exhort
'em to fill after so great an emptiness, telling them that the loss of Blood
must be restored. These are mere Fooleries; for that Blood which she has lost,
is but unnecessary and useless Blood, damned up in the Womb for the space of
nine Months; the Efflux of which, must needs be conducive to Health. Her
Nourishment therefore for the first Days must be but slender, for fear of
falling into a Fever; and hastening the Milk too fast into the Breasts, where
it is in danger of Curding, or Apostematising. Upon this account, she ought to
confine her self for some time to Panada's, Broths, Gellies, Potch'd Eggs, etc.
If she be very strong and hearty and can Nurse her Child, she may feed a little
more plentifully, and drink often Barley Water, wherein some Coriander, or
Caraway, or Fennel Seeds may be boiled. This will partly add to the Child's
Health, keeping it free of Gripes, Throws, and sour Belchings.

Some Women after Delivery are troubled with a Tentigo, when the Clitoris
increases to an over great measure; it is a Nervous piece of Flesh, which the
Lips or Wings of the Privities do embrace, and which undergoes Erection in the
Act of Venery. In some it is as big as the Neck of a Goose, and hangs below the
Orifice of the Privities. Sometimes this may be occasioned by the Midwife's
hurting the part. Or it may become loose and porous, by often handling, which
may cause a great concourse of Humors, and so the Nervous Body is enlarged to
an extraordinary bigness. I have oftentimes cured this Symptom by cutting it
away, but so as to avoid Inflammation.

Some are troubled with Hemorrhoids of the Womb, which are little
Protuberancies like those of the Fundament, produced in the Neck of the Womb
by the abundance of Feculent Blood that resorts thither, where the Veins end.
They are cured by revulsion of Humors, by mitigating, asswaging Insessions;
and Purging, if other Circumstances do not forbid.

Oftentimes the Woman receives prejudice from the Bruises and Rents of the
outward parts of the Womb, occasioned by hard Labor. The Child's Head in
passing makes a violent Distention and Separation of the four Caruncles. And
those parts having once given way to an Infant, are ever after easily relaxed
and extended, and so every Travel comes with less pain than the preceding.
Sometimes it happens, that the Midwife's Nails have scratched and rent the
parts, through Carelessness and Inadvertency. But whenever such Contusions, or
Rents happen, they must not be neglected, lest they degenerate into malignant
Ulcers.

After pains are the common Bane of the Welfare of Women in Childbed. They say,
they are not so much troubled with 'em of their first Child, as of the
following. But that is no certain Rule. Experience confirms, that they happen
indifferently after first or last Labors, according as their various
Dispositions are. Let the Nurse lay on a Galbanum Plaster, and keep the Belly
very hot; and then give her some Cinnamon Water with Mithridate, and a few
drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn, or liquid Laudanum. This will very often
carry off their Gripings, Collicks, and other After-pains. Commonly they go
away of themselves in 2 or 3 Days time. If they be sharp and obstinate, and
threaten to continue longer, you must give from one Ounce to two or three of
Aqua Bryoniae Composita, with some drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn, and a Dram
of Confectio Alkermes. Some give this same Draught to hasten and facilitate the
Birth, or to bring away the Afterbirth and cleanse the Womb.

As to the Lochia which flow from the Womb in Childbed; Galen says, They are
only Vicious Humors, and the residue of the Blood with which the Child was
nourished in the Womb; which flows out when the Womb is opened by the Birth.
Perhaps it is the same Blood as used to be purged out every Month before
Conception. It may proceed from a Wound made by loosening the Burden from the
Womb; for when it comes first away, they appear very red; the third Day they
discolor, and are less bloody; and gradually decay every Day as the Vessels
close, till at length they turn very Pale and Green. To bring these Lochia well
down, ye must keep the Woman free from any diversion by Looseness, or any
strong Passions of the Mind, as great Fear, or Grief, or Anger, or Swoonings;
these, or great Colds, or Astringents, produce the worst and most dangerous
Symptoms that can befall a Woman after Delivery. You may give her Spirit of
Hartshorn in every thing she takes: Let her drink Broths, or Gellies, boiled
with Maidenhair, or Pellitory of the Wall, or Camomile Flowers. It is equally
dangerous, whether there happen too great an abundance of the Lochia, or if
they be suppressed unseasonably. I have seen when the Floodings have been
excessive, that Convulsions, Syncope's, and Fainting Fits have ensued, her Legs
and Thighs swelled, and after all become Hydropick. I have often times let Blood
in such a case with very good success: and then gave half an Ounce of Conserve
of Roses, and two Drams of Diascordium, and thirty drops of Liquid Laudanum
made into an Electuary, with a strong Decoction of Oak-Barks boiled in Spring
Water, with some sticks of Cinnamon in it, to drink for a Day or two. Give the
Electuary twice a Day.

Another Inconvenience that Women in Childbed are liable to, is the Relaxation
of the Matrix. It may proceed from great Fluxes which fall down upon the
Ligaments, causing them to wax loose; or from the Woman's straining her self in
Travel before her Time, or from the Midwife's putting up her Hand into the
Womb, and tearing down she knows not what: Sometimes Women with Child by lacing
themselves too strait, cause a conflux of Wind in those parts, which makes a
Sense as if it were the Head of the Child, and hinders her to stand upright, or
go. You must keep her loose with Lenitive Electuary, foment the part with a
strong Decoction of Oakbark in Red Wine, or Smiths Water; or Fume with Mastich
upon a hot Iron, that the Smoke may go up her Body, Morning and Night.

SECT. II. Of the Instruments of Generation in Women; the Membranes that enfold
the Child in the Womb; the Manner of its Generation, Increase, and Nourishment
in the Womb; the Causes of Barrenness, and the Means to prevent it; the Conduct
of a Woman going with Child; the Signs of Conception, and the Prevention of
Miscarriage.
CHAP. I. Of the Parts serving for Generation in Women.
I Shall begin this Description of the Instruments of Generation in Women, by
the Spermatick Preparatory Vessels; some of which agree pretty much with those
in Men, as the Spermatick Vessels, the Stones, and the Vasa deferentia, but
differ in some remarkable Circumstances. In Women the Spermatick Vessels are
shorter, by reason of the shortness of the Passage: They have more Wreathings,
Windings, and Turnings, where they make the Corpus Varicosum about the
Testicle, that the Seed may have a sufficient stay for its due preparation.
Secondly, they differ in their Insertion. In Women they go not whole to the
Testicles as in a Man, but are divided in the midway, whence the greater part
goes to the Testicles, to form the Corpus Varicosum; the lesser part to the
Womb, into whose Sides they are disseminated, to nourish the Womb, and the
Child therein. By these Vessels some part of the Menstrual Blood may be purged
forth in such as are not with Child. The second is distributed to the Vas
deferens, or Trumpet of the Womb. The third creeps along the Sides of the Womb,
insinuating it self among the Hypogastrick Veins, with which and the Arteries
they are joined by Anastomoses. The Spermatick Veins receive the Hypogastrick
Arteries, as they pass by the Sides of the Vterus, that the Blood might be the
better elaborated. They are intermixed with many wonderful Anastamoses for the
preparation of Seed; for if you blow up the Spermatick Vein, both the right and
left Vessels of the Womb are blown up. From hence ye may understand the Mutual
Communication among all the Vessels of the Matrix, as has been observed by
Fallopius, Platerus, Riolanus, Dr. Tyson, Mr. Cooper, and others.

The Testicles in Women, are placed within the Hypogastrium, in some about two
Inches above the bottom of the Matrix. Their Figure is more broad and flat on
the fore and hinder parts; they are also more hollow and fuller of Spermatick
Juice. You may find 'em conglomerated or gathered into a knob of diverse little
Kernels, or Bladders, more or less, which contain the thick Seed. In Men the
Testicles have four Membranes, or Coats, but in Women only one; they are in a
closer warmer place, and so do not need so thick a covering. This single Coat
is called by some Dartos; but where they receive the Seminal Vessels, they are
half covered over with the Peritonaeum, and are knit to the Sides of the Vterus
by the two upper Ligaments, which are loose and Membranous, and out of which,
in the time of Coition, the Seed is thrown. They have no Parastatae, nor any
Cremasters, but are stayed by the broad lateral Ligaments, called the Batts
Wings. Their use is to make, elaborate, and perfect the Seed.

The Vasa deferentia in Women, spring from the lower part of the Testicles, and
are either inserted with very short passages into the bottom of the Womb, or
disseminated at the Trumpets of the Womb. They pass by the Membranous Ligaments
to the Matrix. Their use is partly to carry the Seed to the Trumpets of the
Womb, to be there further perfected and better elaborated, and then reserve it
for use.

These Tubae Fallopianae, so called from their likeness to a Trumpet of War,
and found out by Fallopius, are two in number, one on each side, of a nervous,
thick, white, and hard substance, of a long round Figure, hollow within. Now as
the Vesicae seminales, are in Men to preserve the Seed, such are these blind
Passages in Women, through which the concocted Seed is carried, and here laid
up as in a Storehouse, where it is also better digested, by the virtue of the
Testicles; from whence it is sent by the Cornua into the Cavity of the Womb.

The Vterus, Matrix or Womb, the receptacle both of the Seed and the Child, has
its Situation in the middle of the Hypogastrium, Called Pelvis, The Basin, by
the Os Sacrum and the Flank Bones, between the Intestinum Rectum and the
Bladder. In Virgins tho of a big stature, it does not exceed the magnitude of a
Wallnut. But in Women with Child it dilates it self to such a Capacity as to
contain the Child. Nature made it at first small, to embrace, clasp round and
cherish the Seed, which is but very little in Quantity. The substance of the
Womb is Membranous, that it may be distended or contracted as need shall
require. It Is full of wrinkles, which in Women impregnated are extended, to
widen the Womb; but after the Child is gone and in Old Age they are Contracted
again. The fundus or Bottom is derived from the Spermatick Vessels, or those by
which the Vassa Praeparantia are constituted; as also from the Hemorrhoidal
Branch, whence is the great consent between the Womb and the Spleen. In Women
not with Child, the Menstrual Blood always flows through the Arteries. What is
not thus evacuated returns back again to the heart, by the Veins which are
joined to the Arteries. In the time of flowing they are opened and gape. They
resemble Cups or Saucers, called, Acetabula or Cotyledones. To these, when a
Woman is with Child, the Placenta is joined, which receive the Blood for its
Nourishment. The Womb is furnished with many Nerves from the Par Vagum, and the
Nerves of the Os Sacrum, which run all along the Mouth of the Womb and the
Vulva, for quickening the Sense of Pleasure. The use of the Womb is to attract
receive, retain, preserve and cherish the Seed in order to Conception; and
after Conception to contain and nourish the Faetus till the time of Birth. The
Cavity of the Neck is rough, by reason of the wrinkles whose edges tend
inwards, least the Seed when thrown in should slip out again; as we see in
Barren Women, whose slipperiness prevents Conception. At the upper part near
the Vulva is the insertion of the Bladder; to sight it is like a straw. Thence
the Urine is voided by the Meatus Vrinarius, which is short and straight but
dilatable, so as to give Passage to a large stone. It is covered without by a
fleshy Muscle, called Spincter.

The Membrane called Hymen, is a Sign or Note of Virginity, because it is not to
be found in any but Virgins. That there is such a thing it is not to be doubted,
we have such great Authorities for it. But in Sickly young Girls, or such as
are of a wanton temper, it is not so perfect as in a Healthy young Maid, that is
Virtuous in Thought and in Deed. It was taken notice of as an undoubted Sign of
Virginity among the Hebrews, as Moses has at large declared, Deuteronomy. 22. It is
situated in the Neck of the Womb, just behind the Insertion of the Neck of the
Bladder, or a little more inwards; This membrane goes cross the Cavity like a
Diaphragma or Midriff. In the first coition Pain and Bloodshed ensues upon
breaking it. Its use is to defend the Internal Parts.

As to the Vulva or External Parts, the more Noted are the Pubes or Mons
Veneris, which is the part where the hair grows and is properly termed the
Privity; a soft substance, partly skin, partly spongy flesh placed upon a
Portion of hard fat. The like of which is not to be seen in the whole Body.

CHAP. II. Of the Membranes enfolding the Child in the Womb.
THE first thing bred in the Womb after Conception, is the membranes enfolding
the Child, which are but two in human kind, viz. The Amnios and Chorion; to
which Last belongs the Placenta or Womb-Cake. All these together make what we
call the Secundine or Afterbirth; it is so called by reason it is the second
Habitation of the Child next to the Womb, and also because it comes away by a
second Birth after the Child or the first Birth. The Amnios from its softness
and thinness is the first membrane; it is called also Agnina, Indusium, Charta
Virginea. It is the thinnest of the Tunicles, white, soft and transparent and
furnished with some few veins and Arteries which are dispersed within its
foldings. It compasses the Child immediately, and cleaves almost every where to
the Chorion, especially at the ends. It is united to it at the middle above the
Placenta, where the Vasa Vmbilicalia, or Navel-string, comes forth. But it is
easily separated from it. It contains within it plenty of humidity and humors,
in which the child swims, that by its floating therein, it might be the
lighter, and less burdensome to the Mother, and might avoid striking against
any of the Neighboring hard parts; and that the Membranes being broke, and the
humor running out at the time of Birth, the child's way through the Neck of the
womb, might be rendered smooth, slippery and easy. When this humor flows out,
the Midwives call it, the breaking of the waters

Part of the Amnios does now and then hang about the head of the child; thence
the Infant is said to be born with a cawl: Some take this for a presage of
Good, some of Evil; some of Short Life, some of Long; but it has relation to
none of these things; for it has been found on the head of both happy and
miserable, short and long lived persons.

Chorion is the Second membrane, and compasses the child like a circle. It
immediately compasses the former, and lies beneath it, whose inner and hollow
part ^t covers and invellops, extending it self according to the magnitude
thereof. It is with some difficulty separated from the Amnios, and strongly
bears up and unites the Vessels to the Placenta; that side next to the child is
smooth and slippery, except where it is fastened to the Placenta, which is for
the most part on the upper and foreside. The Placenta Vteri, or Womb-Cake,
because of its shape, called also Hepar Vteri, the Womb-Liver, from its Nature
and Office; is a round Mass of Flesh, furnished with Diverse Vessels, through
which the Child receives its Nutriment; it is in Number but one, even in those
who bear two or more Children at once; so many Cells are inserted into it in
Diverse places; its magnitude is various, yet it is generally found about ten or
twelve Inches Diameter. It Is constituted of an Infinite Number of little
Fibers, with congealed Blood interposed, but its Parenchyma is not every where
alike, for in some parts it is glandulous and thicker, being variously
Interwoven with Capillary Veins, joined together by various Anastomoses,
through which the Blood in the Child runs back out of the Arteries into the
Veins, to nourish the Child, as the true Liver does in grown Persons. This
Blood it sucks out of the Veins of the Womb, and prepares it for use. It sends
it through the greater Umbilical Vein to the Liver of the Child, that so it may
be carried to the Heart; out of which it is sent, by the Arteries, into the
whole Body of the Child for Nourishment: Vena Vmbilicalis passing through the
two Coats of the Peritonaeum, is inserted into the Liver by a cleft going through
the Navel; it is variously rouled or twisted about, that its length might not
prove troublesome. From the Navel, it goes over the right and left sides of the
Throat and Neck, turning it self back at the hinder part of the head, and so
over the middle of the Forehead to the Placenta; sometimes it encompasses the
Neck like a Chain. The Child being born, this Navel-string must be tied with a
strong thread, wound often about, the distance of two or three Inches from the
belly of the Infant; three Inches from the binding, it must be cut off;
afterward the Navel is to be carefully looked to, till it is dry, and falls
off of its own accord.

It is plain that Urine is not voided by the Urachus, by a Child in the Womb,
as the Ancients have imagined; but it is certainly voided by its Yard into the
Membrane Amnios; whence it is, that it is so full of water: a great part of it
in some remains in the Bladder, which is the Cause that always Newborn
Children are for the first day continually Pissing.

CHAP. III. Of the manner of generating the Infant in the Womb, and its gradual
Nourishment and Increase from the first Minute of Conception to the Hour of
Birth.
WHen the Womb, that by Enjoyment Naturally receives Seed for Generation, as a
Lodestone attracts Iron, or as Heat Straws or Feathers; has now by its Virtue
locked it up, from the first Day until the Sixth or Seventh, there arise very
many and small Fibers or Hairs; The Vital Spirits giving down Seed toward
conception and form, distinguishing the chiefest Members by the Tenth Day,
being let in by certain Veins of the Secundine, to which the Matrix is fixed,
the Blood is imported, and of which the Navel is generated* But at the very
same time three small spots, not unlike to curds of Milk, arise where the
Liver, Heart, and Brain have their places; then presently a Vein directed by
the Navel attracts the thicker Blood Confused with the Seed, and makes it fit
for Nourishment. In the other Branches are generated those Textures, or rather
Webs of Veins: So from the Aorta, or great Arterial Pulsation Veins are
derived, diffusing the Vital Spirits through the whole Body; the Heart is the
Fountain and Original of Vital Heat, without which no Creature or Member can
thrive. Within the time aforesaid also is generated the highest and chiefest
part of this Noble structure, the Brain; for the whole mass of Seed being
filled with the Animal Spirits, that Contracts a great part of the general
moisture, and includes it in a certain concavity wherein the Brain may be
formed; but as to the outside, it is inveloped with a certain covering, which
being toasted and dried with heat, is brought into a Bony substance and becomes
a Scull. As Veins have their Original from the Liver, Arteries from the Heart,
so also Nerves from the Brain. All these Parts are distinctly formed by the
Eighteenth Day of the first Month from the very conception, and are then called
a Child, which the Ancients have comprehended in these two Verses.

Sex in lacte dies, ter sunt in sanguine Trini.
Bisseni carnem, ter seni membra figurant.
Hyppocrates gives this Account, viz. If you account the Days double from the
time of conception, you will find them quicken; and the time of quickening
being tripled, makes up the Day of the Birth. As for Example, if the Infant be
formed in Forty five Days it will stir in Ninety Days, which is the third of
the time that it lies hid in the Womb; for in the Ninth Month it will come
forth and make haste to the Birth; although Females are often times Born in the
tenth Month. So much for the formation, increase and perfection of the Infant,
according to the account of days and times.

CHAP. IV. Of the Causes of Barrenness and the means to prevent it.
THE Womb is undoubtedly the Noblest Member of the Body; it deserves by far the
highest Character, and is esteemed as such by all Mankind. It Is true, some
unlucky wretches have the impudence to Curse their Parents, and Blaspheme
against the Womb that hatched 'em. But their Example is no subject of
Imitation. They Are only a gang of youthful conceited Sparks* that love to see
themselves appear gay in their Blooming Feathers, and scorn all Subjection to
Old Age. Patience is the best remedy for this distemper. Let their ruffling
Spirits take their course; it is in vain to offer to check 'em, though their
wickedness do oft-times cause the grave tears to drop. Nothing but time will
change the Scene; after they have run on for some time in their Carreer,
they will begin to relent, and wish to themselves that they had not taken up with
the trifling flatteries of youth, or behaved so unnaturally to the Virtuous
Womb that bare 'em, or been so forgetful of their own Original. We are all the
Fruit of the Womb, and the whole World is governed by its fertile Product; And
therefore it is a duty Incumbent upon us to advance the fertility of the womb as
much as possible, and assist 'em in the removal of the Impediments that block
it up, and condemn it to an empty Barrenness Fertility was anciently so much
esteemed by our forefathers, that when ever the Daughter of a Family was
brought to Bed of a Child; then all without doors and within, with one consent,
cried, Heavens and the great God have blessed our Family by sending a Child
amongst us; We all Praise him as most wonderful for his mercy toward us.

But there is no Necessity of amassing Arguments for the encouragement of
Fertility, or aggravating the curse of Barrenness; I could appeal to every
Woman's thoughts what a blessing it is to have Children, though with inexpressible
Pain and Labor, and how uneasy and bitter it is to be deprived of 'em by the
shutting up of their Womb, though attended with all the agreeable Circumstances
of Health, Pleasure and Freedom from Trouble. How unhappy was a Fair Lady, no
less than an Emperess, that complained passionately of her Misfortune, saying;
there could be no greater Subject of Regreat than to die without Children.

A Woman that is fit for bearing of Children should be of a good Temperament,
of a regular Life and Conversation; whatever is sit in general for the welfare
and healthy Constitution of the Body is conducive to fertility. Hippocrates
takes notice of eights things that are good for making the Body fair and full.
The first is to be merry and enjoy content and ease of mind. The second is to
sleep moderately, eat Meat of good Nourishment, go warm in Apparel; to use
moderate Exercise and keep good Company; but above all to be accustomed to
changes of Air, not to keep locked up in a Chamber, and closely confined, which
murders Health. Those that have in their youth been exposed to the schocks of
wind or weather, are less liable to be hurt by an occasional accident; whereas
we see it the misfortune of such as have been long accustomed to Niceties, and
a Delicate tender way of living, that they are apt to be offended by the Sun,
the Wind, the Morning or Evening Air; they are frequently out of Tune, always
stuffing their Guts with slops, having their Chamber Windows adorned like an
Apothecaries Shop with Pill-Boxes and Gally-Pots. And in end they flip off the
Stage of a sudden, without any Posterity to succeed 'em.

The Signs and Causes of Barrenness are attributed either to Age, or Evil
temperature of the Body, or vicious conformation of the Womb. Sometimes the
Vagina or Neck is so narrow, that it cannot make way for the entrance of the
Yard. It knocks in vain at the Door, and meets with such resistance in the
antichamber as obliges it to retire. No conception can be without the entrance
of the Yard, and the consequent emission of Seed; It Is true indeed, a false
conception may arise from the abundance of the Mother's Seed in the Womb; but a
true conception cannot be without the Man's. The Orifice or Vagina may be shut
up by some Tumor or Callosity, or by abundance of ill humors that join
together, and make as it were a compress of the part.

Sometimes there is no defect in the Vagina; the inward Orifice opens regularly
enough to give way for passing the Seed; yet Women Nevertheless continue
Barren; if their Womb be cold, and the Seed be not received with some welcome
warth, then it slips out again for want of kind Entertainment. Or if the Womb
be moist, by reason of the Seed's being choked and extinguished in the
prevailing moisture, which is commonly accompanied with a cold temperature; or
if the Womb be too dry and hot, for then the Seed is burnt up and exhaled. It Is
the moderate and temperate constitution that is blessed with many Children.

Some Women have their parts so unctuous and slippery, that the Womb does not
retain and embrace the Seed, but suffers it to slip out again. This may come by
the frequent running of the whites. Some likewise who are Hectic, Hydropick,
Feverish, or Sickly, are not apt to conceive.

We ought to endeavor to remove all these hindrances by their respective
cures, and so bring such Women from under the Malediction of Barrenness. We
have daily instances of Women that having continued for some time Barren, do
become fertile; Nature it self oft-times vanquishes the difficulties that stood
in the way, as in the Queen, Mother of France, that was Barren for two Years
together, and then bore their present Monarch Lewis the Fourteenth.

If there be a Narrowness in the Neck of the Womb, or Orifice, it may hinder
Conception. The Signs are the Stoppage of the Courses followed with a
depressing weighty pain; for the Passage being so narrow, she cannot receive
the Man, or his Seed, and is deprived of the Benefit of Coition; neither can
the Flowers have a free passage, but being beat back, retire to the Womb, where
they create a sense of weight, and would obstruct Conception, tho the Passage
should happen to be enlarged. -- I have sometimes met with a spongy luxuriant
Flesh, of a Brawny Substance, in those parts. I have had very good success, by
ordering Insessions, and Fomentations in these Cases.

In a word, whoever would remove Barrenness, must endeavor to find out the
Cause of it, and apply the respective Remedies; as, whether it proceeds from
any fault in either Instruments of Generation, or in the Seed; or from an undue
proportion and mixture of the two; or from Obstructions in the Womb, or its
Coldness, Heat, and other irregular Conditions.

CHAP. V. Directions how a Woman shall know when she has Conceived; what
Conduct she ought to observe during the Time of her being with Child, so as to
prevent Miscarriage.
I Have thought fit to join the Signs of Conception and Abortion together, that
Women as soon as ever they have observed themselves with Child, may take care
to avoid all the Causes of Abortion.

First, It Is thought a credible Sign of Conception, if the Woman either the
tenth Day after Coition, or sooner perceive her Terms, be they Whites, or Reds,
with Pains and Giddiness in her Head, and a Mist over the Sight, and afterward
the Apples of the Eyes lessened, the Eyes swelled, and swarthy; the Breasts
grown big and hard with pain, and the Nipples grown red: If she be troubled
with a great loathing of Meat and Drink, with Longings after various Meats, and
a continual Vomiting, sour Belchings, sudden Joy followed by sudden Grief, a
shooting pain about the Back and Belly. The Courses stop when a Woman has
Conceived: The Urine becomes White, with a Cloud swimming at the top, wherein
are to be seen many Atoms; which in the first Month do commonly sink to the
bottom; and if ye shake it, it seems like Wool.

If the Courses flow often out of the Womb in the time of Childbearing; it is an
Argument of an Unhealthy Child; where, by the bye, it is to be remarked, that
the fattest Women generally bear weakest Infants.

Abortion, or Miscarriage, is when a Woman brings forth an Untimely Birth;
which may proceed from diverse Causes, as from a sudden Fright, or Fall; from
Running, Leaping, or using immoderate Exercise; from unreasonable Watchings,
great Wrath, over much Fear, Grief, or Sorrow; from longing for that which is
not to be had, unsatiable Copulation and Lust, unusual Fatness against Nature,
etc. Syncope's, or Swoonings, Blows, or such like External Accidents, are
common Causes; as also a Flux of the Womb, which is a very dangerous Symptom,
and signifies that the Vessels and Membranes of the Womb are broken, and
Abortion just at hand. If Blood either pure or watery come from her, it is a
Sign likewise that the Ligaments wherewith the Child is fastened to the Womb,
are broken asunder, which makes the Mouth of the Womb open, and alters the
Situation of the Child; thus it rolls down toward the Gate, and the Woman
bending her Strength, the Child is unseasonably expelled, to her own great
danger.

To prevent such Tragical Consequences, I would have all Women endeavor to
qualify and temperate their Humor. Upon every Surprise, let her lie down upon
her Bed, and endeavor to forget what is past; let her by all means see to keep
her self cleanly and dry; let her be cheerful, and avoid all violent Motion;
abstain from all Mourning, Sighing, and extraordinary Grief, not rising up too
suddenly, nor leaping, or overreaching with her Arms; let her Company be
agreeable, her Diet frugal and moderate. She must be very careful to abstain
from gross Meats, or such as are of difficult Digestion. In the Morning let her
Eat variety of Gruels, Panado's, Broths, and such like; and at Night the same.
At Dinner, let her please her self, and take what she likes best, provided it
be not heavy, or indigestible; Mutton, Veal, Rabbets, etc. are convenient Food
for her.

Above all, let her be careful of avoiding Costiveness, nothing is more likely
to occasion a Miscarriage. To prevent this Inconveniency, let her take half an
Ounce of Lenitive Electuary, with half a Dram of Sal Prunel, or Cremor Tartari;
mix 'em very well, and let her take it before Dinner; it gently opens and
loosens the Bowels, and is a noble thing in many other cases. If often taken,
it prevents breeding the Stone, and Melancholy Fevers: It may be taken also
at Night, works very gently and pleasantly, and requires no Confinement.

If her Blood be exalted and high, let her take seven or eight Ounces of Blood
from the Arm: If she be weak, I would recommend to her the following
Prescription, which I value as a Jewel, and have always found very successful
in such Cases.

Take a Quart of fine Caraway Water two Ounces of fine Rhubarb, an Ounce of the
Syrop of Clove-Gilliflowers. Mix altogether in a bottle, and shake it three or
four times a Day for one Week, then strain it off as ye make use of it; take
two or three Spoonfuls.

Some that are very weak may take it once in two Days all the time of their
being with Child. I value it as an incomparable Medicine. If ye please, ye may
distill the following Water.

Take of fresh Eringo Roots one Pound, Dates half a Pound, Sweet Almonds four
Ounces, bruise and pound 'em all to a Pulp: Then add Nutmegs three Ounces Mace
half an Ounce, Barley and Cinnamon water, of each a Quart; Canary and
Balm-water, of each a Quart; mix and distill, adding to every Quart, when drawn
off, four Ounces of fine powdered Sugar: This daily taken, nourishes the Child
in the Womb, and prevents Miscarriages.

The following Decoction of Rhubarb, is very good in such cases.

Take two Ounces of Rhubarb, four Ounces of Corants bruised, three Ounces of
the Roots of Sorrel, half an Ounce of sweet Fennel-seed, three Pound of
Fountain Water, boil all to two Pound; then strain and add of white Sugar
clarified, three Ounces. You may take from two Spoonfuls to three, in Milk
Water, or White Wind, or Ale.

If in case of a sudden Indisposition, ye prove Feverish and Bound, and cannot
get the abovementioned things made, ye may send to the Apothecaries for one
Ounce of Diaprunum Lenitive, and ten Grains of Sal Prunellae; and take the one
half of it going to Bed, and the other half next Morning; drink warm Ale after
it. It Is a delicate thing to cool and loosen the Belly; to quench Thirst, and
refresh the Body in Consumptions, Hectic Fevers, etc. if taken often.

On the other hand it is as bad to have too great a Looseness as to be Bound too
long. For once or twice a Day is sufficient. If therefore ye be subject to be
over loose, you may at Night take half an Ounce of Conserve of Red Roses, with
half a Dram of Diascordium; and qualify your Drink with a piece of Steel made
red hot.

I would recommend the following Electuary for stopping of Vomiting, expelling
Wind, removing the Cholick, and in general against all cold Diseases in the
Head; which is also very effectual in stopping a Looseness, and strengthening
the Child in the Mothers Womb.

Take Conserve of Red Roses, Green Ginger preserved, of each two Ounces: Spirit
of Vitriol two Drams: Work 'em very well in a Mortar, then add half an Ounce of
the Powder of Cinnamon, one Dram of the Powder of Cloves, and as much of the
Syrup of Violets, as is necessary for the Consistency of an Electuary. Take one
Dram of it as often as ye have occasion; now and then a Draught of
Cinnamon Water upon it, is extraordinary good.

If the Woman with Child be troubled with a Singultus, or Hickup; Take three
Grains of Musk powdered in a Glass Mortar. Add to it two Ounces of strong
Cinnamon Water, and ten or fifteen Grains of the Oil of Cloves, and take a
Spoonful of it at a time, till it be stopped.

The Sugar of Tormentil, is extraordinary good for strengthening and fastening
the Foetus in the Womb, if taken twice or thrice a Day, in half an Ounce or
more of Distilled Milk-water: It Is made after this manner.

Take of Tormentil Roots powdered one Ounce and a half, Cinnamon Powder half an
Ounce, of white Sugar Candy one Pound, Cinnamon Water one Pint; add all
together, put 'em in an Earthen Pan over the Fire, stirring it gently with a
Silver Spoon, till it become dry: Keep it for use in a Gallypot tied down
close. If you will, you may take a Dram of Confectio Alkermes with it, or the
Syrup of the Juice of Alkermes.

The following is also very useful; it is called, Pulvis Griseus, or the Gray
Powder.

Take Crab's-eyes, Sage, of each two Ounces finely powdered, white Chalk one
Ounce, Nutmegs powdered two Drams. Mix all very well in a Mortar, and tie it
down in a Glass. It Is an admirable thing against Looseness, pains of the
Stomach, tho never so vehement, and Heart-burning. You may take half a Dram, or
a Dram in Barley Cream, or Milk, twice a Day. Ye may give to a Child as much as
will lie upon a Sixpence.

If she be troubled with Swooning, or Fainting Fits, the following Corallated
Powder is admirable good.

Take of Red Coral finely powdered, Sugar treble refined, of each two Ounces,
Oil of Cinnamon ten Drops, or Powder of Cinnamon two Drams finely powdered, and
mixed in a Mortar very well. Then take half a Dram, or a Dram in any Cordial
Water.

If she be troubled with Coughs, Asthma's, Obstructions of the Lungs, etc.
which are all very apt to procure Abortion; she may make use of the following
Powder.

Take fine Benjamin an Ounce and an half, Sulphur Vive three Ounces, Annisee^s
one Ounce, Sugar of Roses two Ounces; powder all very finely, then mix 'em: The
Dose is half a Dram twice a Day, in a soft boiled Egg, Morning and Night: Or ye
may take it three times a Day, in Syrup of Hyssop, or Liquorice. Or,

Take Spanish Juice of Liquorice sliced thin, three Ounces, put it in two Pound
of Canary, let it be shak'd three or four times a day; then add
Elecampain-Roots sliced one Ounce: After one Week, ye may take from three to
four Spoonfuls often. If ye please ye may add to it some Syrup of Hyssop, or
some Syrup of Jujubes. I have seen wonderful success with it.

Sometimes Women with Child are very subject to Pains in the Stomach, and
loathing of Meat: I use to give on such occasions, the following Electuary.

Take Conserve of Clovegilliflowers, and Conserve of Red Roses, of each two
Ounces, Syrup of Citron one Ounce, Cloves in gross Powder, one Ounce; mix it in
a Mortar for an Electuary. You may take the quantity of a Nutmeg in a morning,
and as much at Night.

As to the Fluxes, of whatever sort, that may occasion Abortion, or
Miscarriage, I advise you to take fifteen or thirty drops of Laudanum Liquidum
Cydoniatum in a Glass of Canary going to Bed, and repeat it often: It
wonderfully eases all Pains, procures Sleep, stops all Fluxes in a short time,
removes Colic Pains, or any sort of Disturbance in the Body, and comforts the
Spirits. Or she may take two or three Spoonfuls of a Pearl Cordial, or the same
quantity of the Syrup of Corals, which I choose to prepare after this manner.

Take of Juice of Limons, or Lime-Juice, or extraordinary good Vinegar, one
Pint, white Sugar Candy finely powdered, one Pound; gently melt it over the
Fire, and add of the Powder of Red Corals finely powdered, two Ounces; then
continue still to keep it stirring with a Silver Spoon till quite cold. Give a
Spoonful or two Morning and Evening. It stops Fluxes of all sorts, as the
Bloody Flux, the Running, called Gonorrhoea; spitting of Blood, etc. In a word,
it may be called a general Syrup for all Weaknesses, and may be taken in soft
Ale, or Small-Beer.

Upon Flooding, (or even in Women with Child) I have let Blood very often with
good success, and have given this Syrup of Corals with some drops of Laudanam
Liquidam, and so set 'em to Bed to lie as still as they can. In some
Constitutions, eight Grains of Pilulae de Styrace, or the Pills of Storax, are
very successful; they stop Coughs, or Fluxes, and may be given every Night, or
every other Night: It Is to be had at most Apothecaries ready prepared; so I
shall not give my self the trouble to transcribe its Composition. I could
easily give a thousand Recipe's, but I mention nothing but what I have often
proved to be successful.

For the Whites, and all sorts of Weaknesses that may occasion Miscarriage, you
may purge once or twice, as the Condition of the Patient requires; and then
give the following Receipt.

Take of the whitest and best Isinglass cut into bits, and well bruised, two
Ounces, and a Pint or two of Water; put all over the Fire, let it simmer, then
take it off, cover it close all Night: The next Day boil it gently till it be
all dissolved. Then strain it, and add one Pint of New Milk, and an Ounce or
two of white Sugar Candy powdered and melted in the Milk over the Fire gently;
then mix all together. This makes an excellent Gelly. Ye may take half a Pint,
or a Pint, Night and Morning, in distilled Milk-water, for a Fortnight
together, or longer. If ye will ye may every time add Powder of Cinnamon, as
much as a Sixpence will hold.

SECT. III. The Character and Duty of a Nurse, with reference to the Child,
from the Time of its Birth, to its removal from her Conduct. Together with an
Essay upon what Influence Moral Abuses may have upon its Health.
I Hope none will deny that the Health and Welfare of Children, depends much
upon the Condition of the Nurse; therefore I thought it not amiss to assist you
a little in the choice of one.

First, Let her be Young and Healthy; for if ye give very stale Milk, and from
an infirm Woman, the Child for ever may suffer. Let her feed upon such Food as
she was accustomed to before. If ye follow the way of our City Dames in taking
her into the House, and feeding her high, this makes the Milk rampant, the
Child Humoursom and Fanciful, always crying for Slops, and such like corrupting
Food. Hippocrates affirms, That the Nurse ought to take the Child from its
Mothers Womb, and inure it to eat such like course Food as she gives to her own
at Home; this makes the Child brisk and hardy, and fit for launching into an
ill World.

In the next place choose one Lively, Witty, and of a meek Temper. Galen and
other Greek Physicians, were very curious in this particular; to make choice of
a Nurse of good Education and Wit. Some Nurses are Humoursom, still
complaining, Peevish, and Fretful; crying, perhaps, to have their Wages raised,
to be better Entertained, etc. Others are better Conditioned, easy in their
Humor, and not so difficult to please. Now since the Child partakes much of a
Nurses Complexion and Humor, by sucking her Milk, we ought to be very cautious
in choosing a Nurse endowed with the same Qualities as we wish to our Children.
If they are Immoral, Debauched, Cursing, Swearing, etc. their very Example and
Company is influencive upon Children, who are generally more led by the Eye,
than the Ear; and retain those Impressions fastest, which are stamped upon 'em
in their Young and Tender Years. For the Moisture and pliableness of their
tender Brains, makes way for deeper Furrows, than when of a firmer and
compacter consistency. Besides, they are liable to be infected not only by
their external Words and Actions, but by the internal Bias and Inclinations of
their Minds, be what they will, by reason of the Affinity intercedes betwixt
the Qualities of the Milk, and the Disposition of the Person that gives it.

A Nurse also ought to be diligent and careful, some are huffing and bouncing
about, and do not mind the poor Child, but let it sit or lie half a Day in a
wet Condition, starving and cripling; it is a great abuse too frequent and
common among 'em: Mothers ought to take care to surprise Nurses at their own
Houses, when they are not aware, and find out the Miscarriage of these She
Murderers, that they may not go unpunished.

In the beginning the Child must not Suck too much, nor too often, that his
Stomach not yet accustomed to concoct the Milk, may be brought on by degrees,
and so enabled to digest it afterward. Let its Portions be augmented every Day
by little and little, till it be in a capacity to take its Belly full. Some
when they find a Nurses Milk very good, do allow the Child nothing for the
first two Months, but what it sucks from the Breasts; after that the Child must
have stronger Nourishment; as Pap, Fine Gruels, Milk-Water and Oatmeal with
Canary, or what else the Child's Friends, or the Nurse thinks fit. When the
Child's Belly is full, it must be put into the Cradle, and turned toward the
Fire. The Nurse may sing with a soft Voice to lull it asleep, rocking gently
all the while. If the Nurse be cleanly, and mind her Business, she will shift
the Child three or four times a Day, or oftener. Every thing about it ought to
be clean and sweet, clean soft Rags behind the Child's Ears, and under the
Armpits, every time she opens it.

The Nurse must be very careful the Navel-String fall not off too soon, before
the Vessels be quite closed. She ought always to keep a Bolster on the top of
it, with a Cloth wet in Vinegar and Water, till it be wholly depressed and as
it were sunk inwards.

She ought to put upon the Mould of the Head under the Biggin another Compress
to keep the Brain warm. Above all let her be very careful not to suffer the
Child to ^ry too much at first, lest the Navel be forced outward, or a Rupture
happen in the Groyn; she may prevent it. ^rying as much as possible, by often
turning it clean and dry, and removing what may fright or grieve it, which very
often occasions fits of Convulsions in Children: These Fits are so common among
Children, that no Nurse ought to be ignorant of their Symptoms and Method of
Cure; perhaps the following Account, the ^rief, may be of use to those that are
willing to learn.

The Signs of Convulsion-Fits, are the hanging backward of the Head, insomuch
that the hinder part of the Head seems to touch the Shoulders; sometimes the
Child's Head bends forward all of a sudden. If the Child be Bound, give it a
Clyster of Milk, with half an Ounce of Ma^^^s dissolved in it. Ye may give it
inwardly some Mint-water, dissolving in it five or (...) Grains of Mithridate,
with some drops of Spirit of Hartshorn. This is good also against all kind of
Worms, if ye add a sufficient quantity of the Spirit. Outwardly ye may anoint,
the Backbone with Oil of Amber from the Head, quite down to the Hips every
Night: If the Fits continue, ye may give two or three drops inwardly; elder
Persons can take more.

Let the Nurse boil Water and Bread very well; then add Milk to it; and give it
to the Child; sometimes she may add a little C^^^ry; and at Night, if the Child
prove very froward, add a little Diascordium, every other Night. Now and then
if the Child prove Restless, the Nurse that gives Suck, may drink a good
Draught of White Wind Posset, with a Dram of Diascordium, mixed with it. She
ought to keep her self stirring and bustling up and down, that the Milk may be
the ste^r. A moderate Exercise, and a temperate way of Living, are very useful
Companions for a good Nurse. We see that Persons of Quality and Honor
generally Bury two or three out of four Children* whilst the Country Labourer
says seven out of eight: The reason of the D^^^^^ence is too evident.

Wh^^ the Child is New Born, it is sometimes extremely afflicted with Throws
and Violent Pains. To remove so dangerous a Symptom, I counsel you immediately
upon its coming into the World, to rub (...) all over with hot Canary, or
White Wind and fresh Butter, or Lard, and dry the Child with hot Flannel. To
some ^hildren (if their Circumstances require) ye must presently give a Clyster
of (...) Milk with a Spoonful of the Syrup of Cowslips, and a Spoonful or two
to the Mother as soon as she is in Bed. After that she may take in her Mouth a
Spoonful of Sugar with some Nutmegs. And sometimes a little of the Tincture of
Saffron. It Is made thus.

Take Saffron two Drams, Cochineil powdered a Dram, Treacle-water* half a Pint,
shaking it three or four times a Day at first; then let it stand in your Closet
as the best of Cordials. It chears the Heart, resists Melancholy, expels
Poison, and carries off a Fever; if ye take two or three Ounces of it. It may
be given also to such Children as are troubled with Phlegm.

You ought to have Syrup of Violets by you, and put up a Violet Comfit, for the
Child's Gripes; or a Suppository of a Marshmallow Root dipped in Oil, or fresh
Butter, or Lard, stroaking the Stomach.

Sometimes Infants are troubled with a Sore mouth, or as some will have it, a
Cancer in their mouths. In this case, take of Borax finely powdered a little in
a Quill, and blow it into the Child's mouth. Let it take often of the Syrup of
Mulberries, Barberries or Slows, or of the Syrup of Woodsorrel.

If the child be troubled with Fits, as it frequently happens, take Syrup of
single Piony one Ounce, Spirit of Castor a Dram, Treacle Water two Ounces, mix
all very well, and let the child take it often. And ye may add sometimes five
drops of liquid Laudanum.

If the child be afflicted with Worms, or be Pot-belly'd, let it take 3 of the
following Powders every change of the Moon. The Powder is to be kept in a
Glass, and is to be taken in Broth in the morning. It Is as follows:

Take Crabs Eyes, Scammony finely powdered, of each an Ounce; of Sweet Mercury
half an Ounce. They must be first well levigated, and then mixed. The child may
take, according to its strength, from ten Grains to fifteen or sixteen.

Sometimes children are born with their Cods full of Wind, then ye must bathe
them with hot White Wine and Fresh Butter; then truss up the child with hot
Flannel, and give it a spoonful as often as ye will of this Infusion.

Take one Ounce of Anniseeds, one Ounce of Ginger, steep 'em in one pint of
good Canary, and keep it for use.

If the Infant be troubled with the Fall of the Fundament, ye must take the
upper Leather of an Old Shoe, cut it small, and lay it upon the coals in a
chafing dish, in a close stool, and set the child right over the smoke of it,
and keep the part warm with hot Flannel. This will certainly cure it.

Sometimes the Thighs and Legs of children are so weak and feeble that they
ought to be artificially strengthened. I can be very positive in commending the
following Ointment on such occasions.

Take Neatsfoot Oil one Gallon, fine Brandy two Pound, Fresh Butter eight
Pound, Green Wheat in June twenty Pound, Bay Leaves one Pound; Bruise all in a
Mortar very well, then put it into a large well-glaz'd Pot, and stir it very
well, then cover it with Paste very close all round the top; put it into an
Oven to bake as long as a good big Loaf, then draw it out; before it be cold,
strain it out into a good Pot; and if ye will add one pound of the Marrow of
Ox Bones it will be the better. You must rub the hinder parts of the Thighs
and Legs by a fire morning and night. It Is a wonderful strengthener of the
Legs. I have cured a child in three months with the bare using of it, after it
had been given over by an Eminent Physician that had it in hand three years,
and at last said, it would never be able to go in this world. This Ointment has
a wonderful Virtue in asswaging the hardness of Breasts, or curdling of the
Milk, if ye add to every ounce of it two Drams of Sperma Coeti. I anoint 'em
with it twice a day, and draw the Nipple very well, and meet with extraordinary
success in it. For sore Nipples it is incomparable; Dry the Nipple with a Rag,
before ye anoint; and after anointing, keep the Rag close to the Nipple.

Whilst I am discoursing of Young Children, I Will take occasion to communicate
to you the Composition of another Ointment that is of extraordinary Service in
healing all manner of out-breakings in childrens Faces or Heads. The
Composition is this.

Take the Fat End of the best Breast of Mutton you can get, spit it and roast
it; all the while it is at the fire, baste it extraordinary well with Tar; and
put one ounce of Cinnamon, and half an ounce of Cloves grossly powdered, into
the Dripping-Pan; so let it drop on the Pouders while it roasts. Let it stand
all night, the next day strain it out into a Pot for use. And withal, give the
child every day of the Syrup of Rhubarb in Drink or Broth, with Syrup of
Violets.

The Woman that observes these Rules, and manages her Infants neatly, is in a
fair way of having Lusty Children.

Some Women are over-careless in not giving the child to suck when it needs it
(though by the bye, it is as great a Fault to over-suckle a child, and choke it
with crude raw humors, that undigested Milk must needs produce.) They Will take
occasion, when the child is disordered, to squeeze a drop or two out of their
Breasts, and cry, Look ye, the Child cares not for sucking. A careful and
observing Mother ought to pry into these Abuses; which are by so much of the
deeper dye, as they are committed against an innocent Babe. It looks so brutish
and unchristian like, to be slack in a duty of this Nature, that it is highly
unsufferable, if not unpardonable.

It Is the Duty of Nurses to read the Holy Scriptures for their instruction, in
what they ought to do either in reference to God, or their Neighbor, the
Family they live in, or the Child they have in charge. They ought to keep good
hours, and be of an even unmuddied temper, otherwise they corrupt and pervert
their Milk by the boiling and ferment of any passion they are liable to. A
froward Woman is the worst qualified Woman in the World for a Nurse; she is
generally ill inclined, never easy but after mischief, like the foaming of the
Sea in a storm, never at rest till a wrack appear. Such as can govern and
bridle their own passions, and move with an equal steady temper, are justly
entitled to a preference upon this score; and seem to be much allied to Heaven
it self; whilst Pride, Envy, Malice and Vexation of Spirit, are natural and fit
Guests for Hell. The Apostle observes that such as will not be governed, nor
control their undutiful, envious and spiteful humors, the Spirit of the Air
watches for their Souls; and then what revenge have they when humbled into the
Pit of Sorrow, or what satisfaction for their Lustful raving desires? Whereas
the Complaisant easy temper entails Joy and Satisfaction to its owner, both in
the Conversation of this World, and in the well grounded hopes of a future
Felicity. May we never be at rest, till we conquer and overcome all our
confused and impious passions, that murder the Education of Children, both in
the Persons of Parents and Nurses. The Savagest of Beasts are never hurried
with such Passion as to relent in their care and tenderness toward their
young; which may serve to reproach and condemn all Parents or Nurses, that are
at any time liable to such unnatural excesses, as to forget their Infants.

And while I am speaking of the Duty of Nurses, I may be allowed to include
Parents, since they are the Nurses nature at first designed, before our
hireling Hackney method obtained. Nor do I think my self much mistaken when I
affirm that no Passion, Desire, nor any other irregular humor ought to
Anticipate the Duty of Parents to their Children. How far short many Women come
of this Rule, in denying to nourish and suckle their own Children, I leave
'emselves to Judge. Indeed the case is altered, when Sickness, Weakness, or any
natural Impediment lies in the way, for nature ought to be obeyed and followed,
not forced. But if her Health, abundance of Milk and other favorable
Circumstances, do all Counsel her to suckle her own Child; Methinks she neither
weighs the Dictates of her own Conscience, nor the infinite advantages would
redound to her poor child, that would be guilty of such an omission. It Is both
unjustifiable and horrid, that Christians should make the good and benefit of
their children truckle to their own sloth and niceness. Doubtless, if Nature
had not obliged 'em with stronger Ties, such Women would have declined carrying
and nourishing their Children in their Wombs. I think I do not stretch the
Parallel a bit, when I account it as unnatural for a woman, fit for suckling,
to deny her Milk for nourishment to her child, till it be able to digest other
Food; as it would be to decline nourishing it in the Womb, supposing Nature had
left a Possibility of avoiding it. The child is by Nature equally entitled to
both. Solomon, when speaking of his brother, he does not say, He that lay in
the same Womb with me, but he that sucked the Breasts of my Mother. Had he
lived in this Age, he had been obliged to forge another Character for a Brother.

Besides this early care of nourishing their bodies, in a discreet, cleanly,
regular manner, there is yet another Duty incumbent upon Nurses (or rather
Parents, if ye will) which requires almost as early a Commencement as the other,
viz. The care of their Souls. The first step of it is to initiate them in the
Religion of their Fathers by the Sacrament of Baptism, a Duty now a days too
much neglected and slighted. The Life of so tender a Creature is but a blast,
and in danger of being gone every moment, by reason of the infinite dangers, it
is obnoxious to, which adult People are not troubled with; Doubtless therefore
it is a superlative Crime either in Minister or Parent to be backward in so
necessary a thing; not that I think we are to despair of Gods Mercy to poor
Children that dye without Baptism; but that I esteem it a considerable
advantage, which Parents unjustly deny them. Baptism is the Lavre of
Regeneration, which contributes to the washing away and cleansing us from the
innate Affections and Propensions to do Evil, that have stuck to our Race ever
since our Common Mother's Converse with the Serpent; and 'twere well for us all
that we were more sensible of the use and obligation of our Baptismal Vows. The
just sense of that would make us more active in reforming our own Lives, and in
forming those of our children. They ought to be early acquainted with the
Principles of our Religion; and while they are not capable to understand, they
come under obligations by their Baptism, tho* they are not sensible of it; And
it is the Parents Duty to see them put their Baptismal Vows in Practice. As soon
as they are capable to know, they ought to be well and carefully instructed in
their Religion; A child ought to be trained up when young in the way he should
go, according to the Wise Man's advice; that he may not be carried away with
every pretended new Religion, which is like a gay Ribbon fine in its Colors,
till the Air have made it fade. The Propagaters of new Doctrines use all
possible Intrigues to duckoy a child into their Communion, they have Public
Shops of Envy and Interest, where they decry all the World but themselves, and
rail against Monarchy and Magistracy; which is a very agreeable sound to unruly
Tempers that hate to be Curbed. They are like a Jaded Horse that shows his
Teeth, and kicks and spurns and frets at the spurs of his Rider. They Are daily
firing Granado's against the Catholic Church of England, under the pretense of
greater Purity of Doctrine and Sanctity of Life. They gnaw at her Pillars, till
their Teeth look black bursting with Envy and Malice, that sully's and
imbitters their very Countenances; just like a Confectioners Boy not half out
of his time, that by idly devouring his Masters Sugar, comes to have his Teeth
rot out of his Head, and to grin at his former Folly, bearing in his Nauseous
Phiz the solid marks of his Crime.

But we have the word of a great Man for it, that the Church is built upon
Zion, which cannot be moved by a stiff-neck'd People. God is engaged on her
behalf, and besides the secular Power stands by her side; God has been
graciously pleased to put it into the Hearts of the great Assemblies of the
Representatives of the Nation, to advance their Country's good by Espousing her
Interest, preserving her Peace, and defending her Privileges and Immunities,
against the assaults of selfish and malicious Men, who by their Scully
pretenses to Religion and Probity of Life; would endeavor to shake her
everlasting Foundation. A parcel of narrow Soul'd peevish Creatures that are
strangers to the Liberty and Freedom of a Christian State. Charity, Forbearance
and Condescension are by us reckoned the Life of Christianity; but they think
nothing of that matter. To be Hospitable to the Indigent Neighbors, and to
receive the way fairing Man with Cheerfulness and Civility, to open their Bosom
unto all, is the Character of the Charitable Church of England; but they on the
contrary wrap up their Talent for their own selfish ends, and can think of no
good but what centers in their own narrow sphere.

I mention this sectary way of Rolling from Opinion to Opinion, and Hotly
Damning all who are not of the Fraternity they have embarked into, because I
take their way of Demeanor to be influencive on the complexions of their
bodies. The continued Rage and Bitterness of unchristian Zeal that attends 'em,
does insensibly sharpen the humors, and exhaust the Balmy softer Particles of
their Blood and Spirits. And if Parents were careful, in Nursing their
children, to fortify and arm them against their temptations and snares, we
should not be so much pestered with 'em.

In the next place, to secure children from Vanity and Vice, its natural
consequent, is the best way to preserve their healths, tho generally neglected.
Vanity is now adays like Rome's Eagles, at the Meridian of their Power, that
carried conquest in their Wings, to all places whither they pleased to resort.
I believe I may safely say, that the bulk of our English Vices are owing to a
Foreign Vanity crept in amongst us of late. What Diviner (if any such there be)
could have foreseen that Foreign Vices would have reached our once sacred
Groves, the quiet and innocent Recesses of the Country (not to speak of the
City?) The Gentleman now has changed the Plough and Cart for a gilded Coach,
and a numerous train of Pimps, and Whore-setters for Attendants. A Gentleman
that knows (perhaps very early) that he is to Heir an Estate, thinks it is but
washing the Ethiopian, for him to accomplish and improve himself by Books, or
the other solitary companions of a Country-Life: No, he must come to Town, and
there cram his Brain with the sturdy Notions and Maxims that prevail for the
time. He goes to visit a Lady of Quality, that is ready to receive him, well
dressed, and furnished out with borrowed Weeds: She has her Lodgings in some
Modish Place, fit to entertain a Gentleman in; there he spends his time, and
pays soundly for his Familiarity, and is clapped into the Bargain: After having
cloyed his puny stomach, he sneaks away privily, in a Stage-Coach, to his house
in the Country; there he murders the Virtuous Womb of his Dear Lady, and darts
into the Royal Arch, his contagious, lo^thsome Sperm, which is innocently
received, and hugged in the crowned Act of Conception. Thus he is guilty of the
Blood of his Family, Ruins his Lady, makes his Posterity a puny, sickly,
miserable Crew; and to crown all, expires his last, from a Bed of Rottenness
and Disgra^e. Thus it is that one vain desire, one minute of mistaken pleasure,
fills a whole Family with Misery and Ru^^e.

In fine, all the Transactions of this foolish and wicked world, create the
most unpleasing, cutting Reflections that can enter into the mind of any
thinking man. They are so variously wicked, that Proteus like they change
shapes every Day; and modishness is looked upon in vice as well as other
things. Though they resemble the great Machines of Heaven and Earth in their
motion and volubility, yet not in their regularity; for the Sun rises in the
East at Morn, visits the South by Noon, and makes the West his Bed, without
chopping or changing.

The Moon swerveth not from her appointed limits, she observes her times of
change, and regularly influences the Sea; And in a word the whole offspring of
Nature moves as at first; but only that Monster Man, the partaker of a
Heavenly Soul, and designed Master of all, lives in opposition to all Laws and
Sanctions either of God or Nature. Did not heaven deal mercifully with us, in
stretching out a Staff oftener than a Rod, in courting us with Balmy
persuasives, and delaying to execute Justice. To be sure, our World had many
Centuries of Years ago, been past the Frontiers, where now it stands tottering,
and immersed in the very Center of the Valley of Tears and Death. Though the
sad Effects of Adam's Fate are derived to all the depraved Species, yet they
add to that guilt by parallel habits of their own minting, which change the
whole Mass of our Nature, and set 'em in a Diametrical opposition to all that
is called Good. All which is too too evident in the Manners and Actions of our
Children and Youth. They Will obey no Parent but the Flesh, and hug no Brother
but a Son of Belial, they know no Friend but the unrighteous Mammon, and keep
aloof from no Enemies but those that wish 'em best.

Now since Cases stand so, where can banished Virtue plant its Feet but on the
bottom of a good discreet Education; or who shall be able to withstand the
doughty Champions of Vice, but such as have maintained the warfare from their
Mothers Womb? Would ye have your Sons healthy and strong, not weakened by Vice,
nor rotten through prevailing Corruption, pray inure 'em in their tender years
to a governable Disposition, by regulating their Food, Diet, and other
Concerns, not by their own Appetites, but by the measures of Discretion and
Wisdom; thus, being early acquainted with Controulment, they shall not think it
strange, when of riper years, to deny themselves their vicious Inclinations.
But above all, endeavor to choke in 'em the least Seeds of Vanity,
Affectation, or Self-Conceit, which are all twins of the same Mother, that
conspire together to be the Bane of all Goodness or Improvement, and the Fertile
Source of an infinite number of Vices. Girls are most liable to be tainted with
them, they are generally possessed with such an overgrown Opinion of their own
Endowments, that they long to display their Cabinet; they know no inward
Enjoyment of Thought, Wit, or Wisdom, but what lies in communicating the same
upon all Occasions. As soon as they have attained to the use of their Organs of
Speech, the first word they utter after Dad and Mam is Husband; who from that
time reigns in their Thoughts so much, that they make it their chief business
to project for the having of him. This eternal Rack of Thought attended with
Passion and Eagerness, diverts 'em from nobler Objects, and proves the bane of
their Growth and Health, in exhausting the Spirits that should have waited upon
their Natural and Animal Functions; and it is ten to one but it betrays her to
an untimely indiscreet Marriage, to the ruin of her self and Posterity, (if
any she have.) Or if her Stars prove unkind in baulking her Fancy, she casts
about and plyes where she can; she uses all the Stratagems of Cunning to Duckoy
a Lover; scarce any of 'em, how fair so ever, but is guilty of the little
innocent Frauds of a Patch and a Wash, hoping from them for greater accessions
of Beauty, which they imagine they have in a great measure obtained. The chaste
Lucretia did not take such pains to captivate Men, but on the contrary by her
Resolution and Virtue raised to her self a deathless Monument; and Judith in
sacred Writ has immortalis'd her Fame by such noble Virtues as they despise.
It Is undoubtedly an infinite loss to the Nation, that the fair Sex should be so
biased and perverted, considering what an Ascendant they have over the Minds
of Men, by virtue of their Natural Charms, though the Artificial were laid
aside; especially here in England, where Beauty seems to have placed her
Throne. To do them Justice, they are of an ingenious clear Complexion, if they
do not spoil themselves with irregular Appetites, and tippling at strong Waters.
They seem to stand in the middle betwixt two Extremes; those to the Southward
are swarthy and black; those to the Northward Masculine and clumsely built.
They carry an Air of Freedom and Disengagement in their Faces, which seems to
be in a great measure owing to the liberty of Discourse and Conversation we
allow 'em, which the Eastern Women are unjustly deprived of, though both God
and Nature have fairly entitled 'em to it. I never could understand where the
Policy of blocking up Women could lie; for it is impossible they should ever
become more Virtuous for being confined to the Melancholy of a Cloister or
Seraglio. On the contrary, in order to sooth their Melancholy Hours, they must
indulge and encourage loose Thoughts, as being the most divertive, and
privately seek for the Satisfaction that they dare not own in Public; for the
being obliged to diss^mble and conceal any Intrigue of Love does but make the
warm Guest welcomer.

But now I think on it, while I am discoursing of the Education of Girls and
young Women, it would not be improper to take notice of the Grand Concern of
Matrimony; which Parents are obliged to take care of, in its proper season.
Matrimony is in many Cases conducive to the Health of Women; and it is pity that
either negligence of Friends, or bad Fortune should put a Woman to the Dilemma
of either impairing her Health by denying her self the natural Privilege of
enjoying Man, or expose her self in a disallowable manner. Wherefore I would
advise all Parents to provide Husbands for their Daughters, and to qualify
them for proving good Wives; because Marriage is a business of extreme
Consequence, it is the Gordian Knot which no Alexander can cut. By this a Man
establishes either his Happiness or Misery during Life. If my Friend prove
false, I can make a league with another; if my Servant be unfaithful, I can
change him: but though my Wife prove so, she must remain mine. If she prove
Virtuous and Good, she adds Blessings and Comfort to all her Husband's
Undertakings; she presents him with fair and well bred Children to adorn his
Table, and support his old Age; She gives her King Loyal Subjects, and her
Country good and just Patriots. In her Beloved's Absence she shuts her Gates to
all Foreigners, and upon his return Caresses him with chaste Embraces; her
Breasts receive his Cares, and her Lips drop Joy and Comfort. The Woman that
behaves her self after this manner, gives loud Instances of the Justice her
Parents did her in a Virtuous Education. Let her marry one of the same Faith
and Worship with her self, to prevent all Domestic Jarrs; Mutual Consent and
Agreement are the greatest encouragements of Virtue and Goodness; for when the
Society is agreeable, Virtue is mutually advanced and improved. It becomes
stale and musty in a solitary Breast; but the advantage of Society keeps it
fresh and in Vigor: It gives occasion for displaying a great many sociable
Virtues, which otherwise would be condemned to lie dormant; and adds a luster
and external Glory which recommends it to the World with a more engaging Air.
When I reflect upon what Mr. Cowley said of Verse with reference to Virtue; I
think it not unapplicable to Company and Society. His admirable words are
these: Not Winds to Voyagers at Sea,
Nor Showers to Earth more necessary be,
Heavens Vital Seed cast on the Womb of Earth,
To give the fruitful Tear a Birth;
Than Verse to Virtue which can do
The Midwife's Office, and the Nurse's too;
It feeds it strongly, and it clothes it gay,
And when it dies with comely Pride,
Embalms it, and erects it a Pyramid
That never will decay,
Till Heaven it self shall melt away,
And naught behind it stay.


I need to stay to make the Application. I hope none will deny that Society is
useful for feeding, clothing, defending, and propagating Virtue, as much as
Verse. And yet we see how little sensible some People are of this, that confine
their Women to Retirements, and solitary Abodes, under the serious pretense of
Religion and a severe Life. I am very far from thinking that Religion requires
any such solitary Confinements; a fellow Traveller makes the Journey to Heaven
easy and pleasant; Company sweetens all the bitterness of Earthly Crosses, and
inspires a mutual Courage and Resolution, especially when the Companions are
such as are tied and united to one another with the strictest bonds of Love and
Affection. God thought Man unfit for his paradisaical State, till he gave him a
help correspondent to his Affections, and a fit Object for him to converse
with. For this Cause was she created out of himself, to endear her more to him.
And if 'twas so necessary in Adam's Case, what must it be in ours? He was made
Lord over all Creatures, and received of them his due Tribute of Submission and
Obedience, without the least fear of Rebellion: This Imperial Residence was in
a place that afforded all things for his Pleasure, and seemed to contain an
Abridgment and Quintessence of all the natural product of the Earth, as he
himself was of the Universe. And as he had whereupon to feed plentifully, so
his Appetite was regular and needed no Curb, no Companion to mind him of his
Excess, or to assist him when oppressed. Doubtless, fallen Man that wants all
the Advantages he enjoyed, and is obnoxious to all the Inconveniences that his
State could not admit of, must needs think that the necessity and fitness of
having a Helpmeet for him, is greater on his side than on Adam^s.

To return to the Education of Children when very young, they ought to be fed
(I say) with simple and easy Fare, such as would not burden their Stomachs.
Varieties hurt 'em, and do but cloy. 'Twould not be amiss if they were brought
up a little hardily: An over delicate Nurse makes a tender puny Child, and
froward and disorderly to boot.

He who of all Men living was the most wisely brought up, was inured from his
very Birth to Cold, and all the occasional Variations of the Air: His first Bed
was cold Earth, his Apparel Coarse and Scanty, and a few days after he was
carried to Egypt, a place very hot. His Meat was very offensive, as the Prophet
Isaiah says, He shall eat Butter and Honey, that he may know to eschew Evil,
and choose the Good. Though he was very God, yet being also Man, he omitted not
such natural Remedies as are, and ought to be used by the rest of the Sons of
Men. Where he left the ordinary course of Nature, and made use of a
supernatural Power, the Scripture is particular in distinguishing that from his
natural Actions. As in the Case of his miraculous Conception, Isaiah 7.14.
Therefore the Lord himself shall give a sign, behold a Virgin shall conceive,
and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Emmanuel. And Moses acquainted the
World with the same, under the Notion of a Miracle. And Luke 5. All things are
possible to God, as the Angel told the Virgin. -- For lo, as soon as the Voice
of thy Salutation sounded in my Ears, the Babe leaped in my Womb for joy, --
And Mary said, My Soul does magnify the Lord. Now his supernatural Conception
did not exempt him from such natural Infirmities as we are liable to, which
were wisely provided against in such a manner as ought to serve us for an
Example, Romans 1. v. 3. Equal with God, made of the Seed of David, according to
the Flesh, Phil 2. He was found in fashion as a Man. Heb. 2.16. For verily he
took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham.
And his Birth it self was in every thing Parallel to that of an ordinary Man's.
His Mother was not exempted from the general Punishment, Gen 3.16. I will
greatly multiply thy Sorrow, in Sorrow thou shall bring forth Children: And
David his Type and Personater says, Psalm. 139. For thou have possessed my
Veins, thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb. I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made; Mavelous are thy Works, and that my Soul
knows right well. My Substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in
secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. All these
Expressions are equally applicable to David that personates our Savior, or to
Christ himself the Antitype.

I should not have mentioned the Birth of our Savior, but that I lately met
with a lewd Man that kept Libertin and Atheistical Company, (he was a Nurses
Husband) who would needs deny that our Savior's Education and manner of Living
was any convenient Subject of Imitation for us, in regulating the Diet and
Nourishment of our Children.

It Is incredible what Wickedness Nurses are guilty of, in pampering and
stuffing Children, to make 'em look full and bloated, which not only fills and
loads the Child with noxious Humors, the natural Source of Chronical
Distempers, but overwhelms the Spirits keeps the more active Principle at
under, fixes such heavy Loads and Weights upon the Wheels of Understanding,
that they move but slowly, and are unfit for any thing that is subtle or fine,
or requires poring and penetration; they are fit for nothing but what is as
gross and material as their own tough Humors. Nor does their Understanding
only suffer, but the Will also, the Affections, Passions and Humors of the
Mind. They become as stiff and obstinate in their Wills, as the thick slimy
Humors within 'em are unpliable. They are not capable of any Inclinations but
what are Sensual and Gross; it is as impossible for them to soar after a lofty
and Noble Object, as for a stone to move upwards; yet put them out of their
Element when ye lay before them any thing spiritual and abstracted; that they
cannot away with, it grates disagreeably upon their lazy senses: They only Love
and Covet what is low, mean and Earthy, and all of a piece with their own
coarse constitution.

'Twere better for our Nurses therefore to imitate the Education of our Blessed
Savior, to inure their Children to endure Cold, Wet, or other inconveniences,
that they may damage 'em less when they grow older. How many Men and Women dye
by having been exposd to Cold or Wet; which could not have been of any great
consequence, had they been acquainted with the like in their Younger Years: Or
by the sudden changes of Cold and Heat, which we see was Wisely prevented in
the Conduct of our Savior's Infancy.

In like manner their Fare ought to be simple, easy and moderate, both to
prevent the inconveniences already mentioned, and to secure 'em from danger of
Death, if ever they should happen to be stinted to short Commons, or be obliged
to eat sorry Food.

Who accustom not their Children to this manner of Restraint in their natural
Demands, will never be able to confine 'em to Virtue and Goodness in other
things. Their Minds that are accustomed to have all their Natural sway in
Eating and Drinking, will be expecting the same in every thing else; and so
will not be easily controlled by Parents, or persuaded to curb their Natural
Vicious Inclinations.

Nurses do not think that they are the Causes of all the Curses entailed upon
disobedient stubborn Children, Prove. 24. Hearken to thy Father that begat thee,
and despise not thy Mother when she is old. This was the Exhortation of the
same Wise Man as threatens, Prove. 3.17. The Eye that mocketh his Father, and
despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and
the Young Eagles shall eat it. Exodus 21.17. He that curses Father or Mother,
let him die the Death. Numb. 30, 5. The Maid that had made a Vow, was not
suffered to perform it, without the consent of her Parents. If our Nurses were
more careful in feeding the Children, then we should have 'em more obedient,
pliable and sweet tempered than now they are; more inclinable to Love their
Neighbors (which is one half of all their duty) more easy and manageable in
their Moral and Religious concerns. But while they continue in their heavy,
dull, phlegmatic course, we are to expect nothing but sour, unactive, ill
tempered Children. I shall only recommend to them the saying of a Wise Man,
Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should go; to fear the Lord, and
keep his Commandments.

FINIS.

