A SERMON Preached at the Triennial Uisitation OF THE Right Reverend FATHER in
GOD, SETH, Lord Bishop OF SARUM, Held at Reading, Sept. 6. 1683.

By JOHN BARROW, Canon of Windsor, and Vicar of New-Windsor, Berks.

LONDON, Printed by Ralph Holt, for John Gellibrand at the Golden Ball in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, SETH, Lord Bishop OF SARUM.
My Lord,
I Had not ventured to expose this Discourse in the way I now do, but for your
Lordships Encouragement of it; and, under such Patronage, I shall have the less
Apprehensions of those People, who may find themselves too much concerned in
the Case, to be any thing pleased with a Subject of this nature: However it may
affect them, I have still the Satisfaction of having endeavored, as well as I
could, the Explaining and Vindicating a Text very difficult, and liable to be
turned to very ill Constructions: And if it any way serves to confirm the
Friends of our Church, or to rectify those who are in lower Degrees of
Prejudice against it, it is as much as can be hoped by

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient, Most Faithful, and most Humble Servant,
John Barrow.

PHILIP. I. 15, 16, 17, 18. Some indeed preach Christ even of Envy and Strife,
and some also of Good Will:

The one preach Christ of Contention, not Sincerely; supposing to add
Affliction to my Bonds:

But the other of Love, knowing that I am set for the Defense of the Gospel:

What then? Notwithstanding, every way, whether in Pretense, or in Truth,
Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.


AMong the other Texts which have been so ill used by those that maintain the
Divisions of our Church, there is none more likely to be urged in the behalf of
the Dissenting Preachers, nor any with greater appearance of strength than That
I have now read. For, granting us all, we may possibly think we have Cause to
believe, tho they never will, that such Pastors as they, are unsent and
unqualified, all the ill and contentious Preachers in the World; Yet, since
they preach Christ, they may press us still, that we ought to be so far from
Discouraging of them, that, after the Example of St. Paul in the Text, we ought
to Rejoice that the Doctrine of Christ is any way preached. And how can such
Rejoicing consist with the usual Prosecution of them? Or, if We thus prosecute,
or otherwise think fit to appear against them, how little do we show of the
meek and Heavenly Temper of St. Paul, whose Successors we would yet pretend our
selves to be? Nay farther, they may not be wanting to tell us, that if we do
not Rejoice in their assisting us, it is We that envy the Success of the
Gospel, and must be content to take the worst Character in the Text to our
selves.

For the satisfying which Plea, I shall take the whole Force of it into
Consideration in the following Discourse; and the better to do it, shall
propose three Inquiries: I. Who those were of whom St. Paul here pronounces,
That they preached Christ out of Strife and Contention? II. How far we are to
understand he rejoiced in their Preaching? III. Whether the Case of the
Contentious Preachers in the Text, and those of our Times, be so much the same,
that the Governors of our Church, should, by Virtue of this Place, or St.
Paul's Example in it, be so obliged to Rejoice in their Ministry, as not to
endeavor the Suppressing of it?


And if, in managing these, any Right be done to the Sense of the Words, and
the present Methods of the Government with respect to these Men, I shall hope
it may be thought not altogether improper in this Assembly, since 'twill be the
impleading of Preachers before Preachers; of those that say they can
understand, and teach Christianity, before those that do, and rightfully do it.

We shall, First, then inquire, who Those Paul here pronounces, That they
preached Christ of Strife and Contention? The resolving of which, will very
much depend upon our determining, whether they were Jews remaining still such,
or Judaizing Christians, or some other Christian Converts, of which he was now
speaking?

The Learned Grotius, In Loc.
who would have the Jews here meant, gives this Account of them: That to put a
stop to the Doctrine of Christianity, they every where rumoured of what sort it
was, by what Arguments supported; That so the greater Recourse might be had to
St. Paul, to know the whole of the matter from Himself: And all such Resort, in
the Place and Circumstances that He now was, they knew would be dangerous, and
might wish Fatal to him. Which is, indeed, a very full account of the Strife
and Contention with which they were acted. But, with all Submission, does not
seem so fairly to answer for what the Apostle mentions no less than three times
in the Text, Their preaching of Christ: For their spiteful Noising what the
Christian Sect held, cannot be called, but very abusively, a Preaching of
Christ. Besides that he opposes them in this very place, to Those that preached
Christ out of Truth and Good Will. From which it should seem, that the Gospel
on both Hands was fervently preached, and the difference only, that it was not
done from the same pious Principle. In short, that they were not Unbelieving
Jews, I am farther confirmed from the Verse immediately foregoing, where St.
Paul tells us, Many Brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my Bonds, are
much more bold to speak the Word without Fear; And then it follows, Some indeed
preach Christ even of Envy and Strife: It is evident therefore that they were
Brethren, of the Family of Christ, tho none of the greatest Sincerity among
them.

If next, it be said, They were Judaizing Brethren, and under these we must
comprehend the Gnostics, 'twill be hard to say with any Propriety, that they
preached Christ; for they preached Christ and Moses, and the latter, Doctrines
very distant from either. And if farther it be urged, that supposing they did
so, the Apostle might rejoice that they preached Christ any ways, since 'twas
better that the Gentiles who lived in gross Idolatry, should have some knowledge
of Christ, tho with mixtures, than know nothing at all of him: 'Twill be
plausibly said, but not on a sudden so easy to reconcile this Apostles
Rejoicing in such sort of Preachers, with the repeated Cautions he gives
against these very Men, and with the plainest Reference to them, Beware of
Dogs, Beware of Evil Workers, Beware of the Concision: At the third Chapter of
this very Epist. v. 2.

Pressed therefore with these Difficulties, I shall rather conceive this Place
neither refers to the Unconverted Jews, nor Judaizing Christians, nor, among
those, to the Gnostick Teachers; But to such as indeed preached pure
Christianity, tho from no pure Mind: Preaching Christ, but out of Strife; with
Design to create Strife and Division in the Church, such as was when one said,
1 Cor. 1. 12.
I am of Paul, another of Apollos, and another of Cephas; And out of Envy;
Envying this great Apostle of Christ, the Glory of his Success; And out of
Contention; Contending with him for the number of Proselytes: By this means,
supposing to add Affliction to his Bonds; supposing, because Vainglorious
Themselves, that he might be of a Temper like Theirs, and so grieved and
afflicted to be rivalled in Fame, and to be outvyed in the multitude of
Converts.

And those Preachers, tho still Christians, who could go thus far in Envy, may
not ill be supposed to advance to such a Height of That, and of Contention, as
to wish St. Paul was taken out of their way; For one Vice admitted is not only
an Inlet to another, but a greater; and from hence, to his Bonds they might
desire the Addition of more, and of worse, and even of the last of all temporal
Afflictions. So that when we departed from the excellent Grotius, it was not so
much for assigning a Wrong Cause (for they certainly were bad Friends of the
Apostles) as for his pitching upon the wrong Men; The Unbelieving Jews, when
the Context is so plain, They were Brethren in the Lord.

Having therefore considered who these Preachers might most probably be,

We come 2 ly. to inquire, How far we are their Preaching.

In proposing of which, I cannot forbear observing, by the way, that those who
may urge this Passage for the countenancing the disorderly Preachers abroad in
our days, will never be able to make it appear, that it solely refers to the
Subject of Preaching, which yet this Plea supposes it to do. For, if they make
a Comment from the Verses preceding, to the Sense we have heard, and press that
the Apostle more than once rejoiced that Christ was preached in any sort
whatever, and that therefore those that succeed him should be of the like mind:
I think I may with great safety tell them, That at least some part of this
Rejoicing relates to a matter of a quite different Consideration: I rejoice,
says the Apostle, yea, and will rejoice. For, as he adds in the very next
words, I know that this shall turn to my Salvation, through your Prayer, and
the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. So that, it is plain, some share of
his Rejoicing is to be given to the Blessed Hopes and Assurance he had, that
his patient bearing the Malice of these Enemies, would at length redound to the
Augmentation of his Glory and Happiness. If therefore they press us with what
went before, by way of Abatement, we might take in what follows; which they
must allow to be no unfair way of Interpretation, unless they will incur the
Censure of St. Chrysostom, De Profect. Evarg.
who observes in his time some Men perverted this very Text, Not understanding
what preceded, or what followed.

But omitting this, and to answer more directly how far the Apostle rejoiced in
the Preachers he was now speaking of, it may not be amiss to consider, what the
Success of their preaching Christ Eventually proved: And what the Real and True
Purpose was, from which they took this Office upon them. Accidentally it proved
the means of propagating the Knowledge of the Gospel; and 'twas very consistent
with the Piety of St. Paul to rejoice, that, since himself now in Bonds could
not do it, others were industrious to diffuse the Doctrine of his Savior in
the World: Which still might be, without his being satisfied with the Motives
of their Diligence, in which he could no more express a Complacencie, than he
would have done in Strife, or Envy, or Contention it self. However, says he,
whether in Pretense, or in Truth, Christ is Preached; Whether by Occasion, as
(...) signifies, by Accident only; Or whether by Truth, from the true Design of
those that undertake it, the Gospel was declared: And in this He rejoiced, yea,
and would rejoice; Not that they preached from any ill Inducement: But that by
this means, the Providence of God, bringing Good out of Evil, great numbers
were brought to the Knowledge of Christ, who were before in Ignorance of Him.

From whence we now proceed in the third same, that the Governors of our
Church should by Virtue of this Passage, or St. Paul's Example in it, be so
obliged to Rejoice in their Ministry, as not to endeavor the Suppressing of it?

To which I answer; 1. That it would be remembered, There is nothing in this
Passage that is any Approbation of such sort of Preachers, as those the Apostle
had occasion here to mention.

All that he does, and it is indeed with great Gentleness he does it, is, to
take Notice that there were some of the Christian Name who preached Christ of
Envy and Strife; and not from the true and sincere Intention which was to have
bin so much wished among them: But this, however, is very far from a
Commendation of them. In Loc.
He does not, says Erasmus, encourage that any should preach Christ
unsincerely, but out of things that were not well done, collects what was best;
and contemns their Personal Hatred to himself, so long as it any ways promoted
the Gospel. And how calmly soever the Apostle here reflects upon such sort of
Preachers, it is manifest in the very next Chapter; v. 3.
He exhorts the Philippians, That nothing be done by them out of Strife and
Vainglory, which are the very Things, for which these Men are particularly
marked.

If therefore our Dissenters shall think fit to tell the Governors of the
Church, They ought, with St. Paul, to rejoice in their Success; they may withal
consider, St. Paul expresses little Likeing to the Men, or the Principles upon
which they set Themselves to work: And from his Example they can, consequently,
build little Kindness to Themselves; which notwithstanding is that they are
most supposed to mean. But

2. Were this Passage allowed to be a Temporary Forbearance of such Unsincere
Preachers, yet it is no Direction to the People to hear them.

It Is observable to this Purpose, that those to whom the Apostle here writes,
were no Hearers of such Preachers, but of St. Paul, and of those that, like
Himself, preached Christ out of Truth; being planted under Bishops, as appears
by v. 1. Not that there were more Bishops than one in Philippi it self, but
that there were more in the Territories of this Metropolis. And those under
their Charge are advised, and directed in this very Chapter, as much as the
most fervent Prayers in the Case could be instructive to them, That their Love
might abound yet more and more in Knowledge and in all Judgment; that they might
approve things that are excellent; that they might be sincere, (which it is
evident those Preachers were not) and without Offense, till the day of Christ,
at 9, and 10. verse. That they would stand fast in one Mind, striving together
for the Faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by their Adversaries, at
27, and 28. verse. And more particularly, he commends them in Chap. 2. As those
who had always obeyed, not as in his Presence only, but now much more in his
Absence, v. 12. So that here are Prayers that they might, and Commendations
that they did stand fast in the Doctrine he had planted among them, or of those
that himself had appointed in his Absence; But not one word to recommend this
other kind of Preachers to the Hearing of his Converts. He only tells them,
such Preachers were gone abroad in the World; And safely he might tell them, as
those that were not likely to be drawn aside, either from himself, or those
that preached the Gospel out of Good Will, and from unfeigned Sincerity. But it
must be a very odd Deduction from this, if the Dissenting Preachers among us,
will from hence conclude, That our Rulers are obliged to let the World run
after them, from St. Paul's Example of Not giving the People the least hint in
the World to be Followers of such Preachers.

3. 'Twould be farther added, that a great Difference is to be put between
preaching the Gospel, from what Principle soever, to a People Unconverted, and
gathering a Church from out of a Church already rightly settled. That those who
here preached Christ of Envy and Strife, did not so much intermeddle with
Persons Converted before, as endeavor to make new Converts to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, seems very clear and evident from the Contentious end of their
Preaching, which was to add, as the Apostle here tells us, Affliction to his
Bonds. They very well knew, as St. Chrysostom observes, Ubi supra.
that he was already obnoxious to Nero for publishing a Doctrine so contrary to
his Vices; and therefore they preached the same Doctrine St. Paul did, that so
this Persecutor hearing from his Enemies the vast Progress of it, might be the
more exasperated against him.

But thus to exasperate him, their readiest way was, not so much to confirm the
Disciples this Apostle had made, as to add more to them; and by winning over as
many as they could, both of Jews and Gentiles, to spread the Gospel of our
Savior the more, that the Adversaries of it, might the easier be induced to
the utmost Rage and Severity against him, as being esteemed the Head of the
Party. But, all this while, they taught those who had not learned before the
Gospel of Christ; which cannot be the Case of the bold and Contentious
Preachers of our Times. They do not pretend to teach a People already untaught,
or to carry the Gospel where 'twas never heard; but obtrude themselves upon
those that were before instructed in the Faith, set up a Church within a Church
already committed to the Care of Lawful and Competent Guides; And thus putting
their Sickle into other men's Harvest, they have so little share in St. Paul's
Rejoicing, that they have his own Practice expressly against them, So have I
strived, says he, to preach the Gospel, Romans 15. 20. 21.
Not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another Man's Foundation.
But as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, and they
that have not heard, shall understand.

4. And lastly, it would farther be observed, that a vast Difference is to be
made between preaching Christ from Contention, or Envy to a Particular Person,
and preaching up a general Contention, in the Name of Christ.




It has already bin mentioned that those here took notice of, were such as
preached the Gospel out of Envy to St. Paul; such as looked with a very ill Eye
upon the glorious Success of his Ministry, and therefore out of Emulation and
Strife contended with him for the number of Disciples, and the multiplying
those, they supposed, but vainly, might add Grief of Mind to his Bodily
Confinement; might add new Griefs, and fresh Dangers to him from his Enemies at
Rome, where he was now set for the Defense of the Gospel, or for his having
defended and maintained it.

A Design in those that carried it on, widely different from the very Spirit of
Christianity; But yet they preached Christianity still, for, 'twas Christ whom
they preached; and when it is said, they did it not of Truth and Sincerity, it
does not refer to the Matter of their Doctrine, as if they taught what was
false and unfound; but to their Intention, which was not so truly to advance
the Knowledge of Christ in the World, as to grieve this Blessed Apostle, and to
create him more Hardships and ill Usage.

He does not, says the Father before mentioned, and after him In Loc.
Theophylact, and both confirmed by Advers. Marcion. lib. 5. circa finem.
Tertullian, and ad Jubaianum Ep. 73. vid. Firmil. ad Cypr. Ep. 75.
St. Cyprian, where it falls in their way to consider this place; He does not
speak of such who taught Heretical Doctrines, but of those who rightly taught
Christ, but did it from no right Purpose of Mind. So that whatever the Motives
were to themselves of undertaking the Ministry, it appears, what they taught
was no other than Orthodox,

But as for our present Contentious Preachers, 'twill be difficult for them to
make it appear that they preach the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus. 'Twill be
hard for them to show that they do not preach up a National Contention in the
Name of Christ, which was more than these did. Why else do we hear from them so
many Doctrines, tending not only to lessen, but destroy the very Being and
Authority of that Church, which is established upon the Foundation of Prophets
and Apostles! Why else do we hear from them so many Positions, destructive of
Monarchy, and so dangerous to Kings, for whom this very Apostle exhorts us,
especially to make Supplications, and Prayers, and Thanksgivings? And if thus
they preach another Gospel than his, whatever Favor this Passage may afford
them, I do not know how it can relieve them from Another wherein the same Mouth
pronounces, That tho he, Gal. 1. 8.
or an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Gospel, than what he had
preached, let him be accursed.

If therefore, upon the whole, the Preachers now such, in defiance of the Laws,
instead of carrying on a Personal Contention, promote, and have effectually
promoted, a most Dangerous, and most Universal Disturbance; I cannot but
conceive, the Difference is so wide between those the Apostle refers to in this
place, and those we meet with in the present Age, that if our Governors, as
the Government has ever been kind to its cost, should still think it safe and
prudent to forbear the suppressing of them; it is more than these Men can
reasonably expect from any thing this Text can oblige them to do.

And this being done, I shall now think of closing the whole, with such
Reflections upon what has been said, as may either concern I. The dissenting
Preachers, or II. Our selves of this Clergy, or III. The People that are
Hearers of Them, or of Us. And


Strife and Contention, and from unsincere Ends.

If they say they have considered this already, and do not take themselves to
be concerned in it; I would pray them, as Casuists, to resolve us, whether,
supposing a third sort of Men should begin a Separation in the Church, without
any just Cause; afterward, refuse all reasonable Terms of Accommodation; and
farther, take all the Courses they could think of to perpetuate the Difference,
they would not believe they were something influenced by a Spirit of Contention?

They must thus pronounce, if they think there are such things as Contention,
or Strife in the World; and if they do so, at the very same time, they
pronounce against themselves.

For, that they begun the Breach without any just Cause, there can nothing be
more evident than their separating from us, not as we did from Rome, from the
ever justifiable Cause of its having corrupted the Substantials of Religion;
But for Things, in their own Nature, Harmless and Indifferent; For the sake of
things, which they never did, and never will be able to oppose, but by so many
Cavils as will argue more plainly a Desire of Contention, than any just
Exception they have to them.

That they refuse all reasonable Terms of Accommodation, they have put beyond
all Question since the little fruit of all Conferences held with them, and the
absolute Stiffness with which they insist to this very day, that the Government
should yield all to them, without any due Compliance on their Parts.

And that they endeavor to perpetuate the Difference, as much as in them lies,
what more convincing Arguments can we have, than their raising new Academies?
For by this they do not mean the Controversy shall die with them: What more
convincing Arguments can we have, than the Universal Cry of their Leaders, till
then never heard of, against the very Doctrines of our Church for some time
before the Expiration of the Act for renouncing the Covenant? By which, what
could they mean, but that this which at first they said to be so great a Snare
to their Consciences, being now taken away, they must either honestly come over
to our Church, or start some new Difference to keep on foot their Separation
from it?

But leaving this with them, from a Contentious, I am next to pass to an
Unsincere End of preaching the Gospel. And here again, I would calmly ask them,
if themselves were to assign the marks of Sincerity in the serving of Christ,
whether one would not be, a proposing at first to serve him aright, so that men
should not run before they were sent, or serve the God of Order in disorderly
ways? Which yet they must give us leave to fear themselves do, till we have
from them a better account, than has hitherto been given, of the lawfulness of
their Call to the Work of the Ministry.

I would have them ask themselves, if they preach so sincerely as they pretend,
what they mean by their designed and affected clouding the simplicity of the
Gospel with mysterious and set Phrases? Whether they do not justly give
occasion to think they have some bad Ends to serve upon their Hearers, when
they thus artificially cast a Mist before their Eyes, create Depths where there
are none, and obscuring plain Truths, amuse and confound, instead of
instructing, or enlightening their Followers?

I would have them ask themselves, if they only mean the Honor and Success of
the Gospel of Christ, why they choose, so observably, to preach in such Places
where there are great Presumptions they may rather consult their own Profit and
Advantage? Why in Market Towns, in populous and rich Places, but to get more
Proselytes, that is, more Benefactors, rather than in Finland, or the steril
parts of Norway, where Preaching is more scarce, and the Maintenance more low?
For, I cannot imagine but that were their zeal for the Glory of God, the
yearning of their Bowels for the Souls of Men, so great as they say, they would
give their first Care to the Souls that most need it, and exercise their zeal
in a barren and dry Land, as well as that which flows with Milk and with Honey;
And since they don't do this, I know not how to name the Principle that guides
them, but I am not very sure that it is the Sincerity, from which this Apostle
told the Corinthians, I seek not yours, but you. 2 Cor. 12. 14.


If therefore these amount to Proofs of their Contention, and Unsincerity in
preaching the Gospel, it is plain they live in two as ill Vices as can belong
to any Christian Preachers. If they only amount to so many strong and vehement
Presumptions, it is yet a mighty scandal they give to Christianity; and if they
are the Ingenious, the Knowing and Conscientious Persons they would be taken
for, they cannot but consider the Advantages they give by this means to the
common Enemies of all Religion: Not omitting, that whatever turbulent Practices
their Followers may be guilty of, are very justly to be charged upon
themselves, whose very preaching contrary to Law, first brought the Law in
Contempt with their Hearers; and if afterward they run into greater
Enormities, it is but Proficiency still in that Contempt of Government, which
the Example, as well as the Doctrines of their Leaders had taught them.

And now, if after all, the dissenting Preachers will shift this from
themselves, and say we have taken all along for granted their being Contentious
and Unsincere Preachers, which is more than they think they have reason to
acknowledge themselves to have bin, I shall only add, that they cannot,
notwithstanding, say this urged improperly to them, since both they and we
agree that the Faulty and the Criminal may be pressed with Considerations
suitable to their Case, tho we are not sure we shall always convince them.

We pass next to the second general Inference our selves, who have the Honor
of being of this Clergy: And under this I would first humbly offer the great
Care we ought to take, as at the first Entrance upon our Holy Office, so through
the whole course of it, to preach the Gospel in Truth and Sincerity. For, we
see, the best things, eaven the preaching of Christ, is not to be undertaken
but from a Pure and Sincere Mind. We are therefore not only to deliver what is
Truth, but to do it from a True and Unfeigned Intention of promoting the Glory
of God in the World, and setting forward the Salvation of Men; in comparison of
this despising the other considerations of worldly Advantage, Honor, or
Respect; which yet are due to us for our Worksake: and much more detesting the
Exercise of so Holy a Function as ours, from the Unholy Ends of Strife,
Vainglory, Envy, or Ambition. It will be hard to convince Gainsayers that we
preach the Gospel out of Good will, if we give them cause to think that we only
preach it from Good will to our selves; and besides the great fitness that a
pure Religion should be taught from a pure Principle, there is this Advantage
in it, which I shall ever think very Considerable, that when we sincerely and
principally mean the Glory of God, and good of Souls by it, 'twill be that
which will secure us in the course of our Ministry, from those mean
Complyances, those unmanly Arts, and little Condescensions, which make any Man,
for Interest, cheap and contemptible, but of all Men, a Clergyman most.

2. From hence I infer, the great Diligence we should use in our several
Stations, lest those that preach Christ out of Strife and Contention should
out-watch and out-labour us. If we will not take Care of our Province, we are
sensibly convinced that others are ready at hand to invade it; they will tell
our Charge, out of Charity to them: and tho we know well enough, it is the
Charity of our Charge they expect again; yet the very Pretense would be taken
away from them, the very Reproach be taken away from us, who ought so well to
fill our several Places, as to leave no room for any Intruder: But room would
be left, and Advantages taken, and the People stray more from us, and our own
Sincerity be called into question, if we were remiss in the work of the
Ministry; and the Consequence of this, as well as the Guilt of so great a
Neglect, are too well known, and I hope so well precautioned, as not to need
any farther enlargement, where I now am.

3. From hence I infer, the great reason we our selves have, not to give any
Countenance to Contentious Preachers, by Uncanonical Practices, or Complyances.
For so much as we recede, in any Point whatever, from the stated Discipline of
the Church, so much Encouragement we manifestly give to those who preach in
direct Opposition to it. If, to gratify any one, we will administer the
Sacrament sitting, baptize without Sureties, or the sign of the Cross, or marry
without Banns or License, or on any occasion, wilfully omit the Prayers of the
Church, it is to do what themselves could wish; and with this further
Circumstance, that they have it in their Power to say of us; we our selves as
to these things, and the needlessness of them, are of the same Opinion with
them: And what is this, but to strengthen their Obstinacy, and, by our own
Example, to confirm them in the Contempt of that very Church, the Authority of
which we have obliged our selves to preserve?

4. And lastly, From hence I infer, the vast Obligation under which we all are,
to avoid Contention one with another. For, why should we, who have had both the
Honor and Blessing of the same Episcopal Imposition of Hands, have the same
great Concern of Souls to advance, and do it by preaching the same Gospel of
Peace, why, of all Men, should we have Variance with each other? It is too much
occasion of Contest our Enemies give us; and with them it is a noble Contention,
because it is a Contending for the Truth. But if to the Breaches they make upon
us, we will open more of our own Accord, and divide that Force with which we
should oppose them; they may in all probability succeed, but it will be little
Credit either to our Courage, or to our Integrity. In two words, could so
monstrous a thing be supposed, as that any of our own Body could fly in the
Face of their lawful Superiors, betray the Peace and Settlement of the Church
of which they are Members, and Preach, or Act out of Envy and Strife; the
mildest thing to be said of them is, that the greatest Kindness they can show
to our Church, next to that of public Retractation and Amendment, would be
publicly to Renounce it: For the same Reason, that it would be better for the
Obstinate and Scandalous to renounce their Baptism, than under the Pretense of
it to fall into such Practices as cause the Name of Christ to be blasphemed.

From whence, in the last place, I proceed Contentious Preachers among us, or
of our selves. And here I would pray their Permission to mind them.

1. That they would not think the worse of Christianity, for the Jarrs and
Contentions of the Preachers of it. Indeed, if all who pretend to teach, did
but truly follow this Doctrine, we should hear of no Divisions: The sweet and
peaceable Genius of it, would either prevent, or cure Animosities; and Love and
Unity would be, as of old, its Honorable Badges: But if instead of this, some
will propagate more of Contention than Christ; and we, as it is our Duty,
withstand them, the People from hence, would very ill collect, that
Christianity tended to Variance, without considering that it lies more in the
Temper of these Men: They would much worse collect, that because the Preachers
of it do not always agree, Christianity it self is nothing at the Bottom; For
our very differing about the Superstructure supposes on all hands the
Foundation to be Real. They cannot therefore, in reason, admit any Prejudice
against Religion for the sake of its Ministers; but ought, on the contrary, to
discriminate those Ministers who do so much Disservice to Religion. 2. From
hence I would likewise mind them how great Care they ought to take, what
Spiritual Guides they commit themselves to. For, if they follow Contentious
Preachers, it is very great odds but that they themselves will in a short time
be as perverse and contentious as they; their Nature will be sowred by the
Principles of their Leaders, and the visible signs of their profiting by their
Ministry will be, their being more Sour, and more Froward still. So that to the
Ease and Innocence of their Lives, it is necessary they consider, who it is
that they take for the Conduct of them. Not that I mean they are left at large
to choose or to follow what Preachers they will; For God, and the Government
have determined that for them, and the same Providence which made them
Inhabitants of such a Place, has fixed such a one as the Preacher of it, from
whom they are not, without the most weighty Causes, to depart: But before they
depart from a lawful Ministry, it concerns them to be well satisfied what other
Ministry they put themselves under; to try the Spirits, and examine whether
Doctrines, in their natural Consequence, tending to Strife, the Subversion, or
Disturbance of all Order and good Government, relish more of pure and
incorrupt Christianity, than the quiet Submission to God and to Magistrates,
which our Church has ever taught, and which cannot be left, upon any
Exceptions, for any other Church, against which there will not more, and more
just Exceptions be readily found. 3. And to conclude, From the whole I infer,
the great Obligation upon those of the Laity, whose Office requires it, to use
all lawful Means of putting a stop to this sort of Preachers. If they will not,
as one would think by this time they should, in Conscience desist; I shall
think it no hard Conclusion to say, it is you that ought in Conscience, to
suppress them; the Places you are in, and the Oaths you have taken, will press
you more to it, than I shall now do: I shall only tell you, if they have no
Right to the Apostles Rejoicing, they have less to your Favor and if they tell
us, this is preaching Persecution, 'twill be very difficult for them to prove,
that any are Persecuted but for Righteousness sake; which can never be their
Case, as matters now stand, unless, by a very soft Figure, we will call those
the Schools of Righteousness, which have so lately, and more than once appeared
the Nurseries of Rebellion. I would not say this in the manner I do, but that
the whole Being of our Church is at Stake, These the Men that boldly undermine
it, and you that are set as the Guardians of it. All they can have to plead for
themselves, your Ministers, you need not fear, will be able to answer; But
after all, it is you will soonest convince them, I mean, you that are in Office,
and will faithfully execute it. Which that you may do, and we with like
Sincerity perform our Parts, and both so successfully as to secure the Peace of
Christ's Church, Let us in the humblest manner beseech the Prince of Peace, and
great Bishop of our Souls, even the Lord Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father,
and the Blessed and Eternal Spirit, be all Honor and Praise, and Might and
Dominion, now and evermore,
Amen.
FINIS.

