THE LORD'S ARM STRETCHED OVT IN AN Answer of Prayer: OR, A true Relation of
the wonderful Deliverance of JAMES BARROW, the Son of John Barrow of Olaves
Southwark, who was possessed with Evil Spirits near two years. The diversity of
Means used, with the Way in which he was delivered.

Published by me, John Barrow.

O Thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come,

Psalm. 65. 2. He will regard the Prayer of the Destitute, and will not despise
their Prayer,

Psalm. 102. 17. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye
shall receive,

Mat. 21. 22. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1664.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
Christian Reader,
MAny may be ready to judge, that this wonderful and merciful manifestation of
God's Power and Goodness in the delivering my Child from so great an Evil, does
arise rather from ostentation, than from any real cause I had to publish the
same: for I know, that it was in all Ages, the design of Satan to put an odium
upon the best of works that have been done in the world. Hence it was said of
Christ, that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, that by
that means the Jews might hide from the eyes of the People, the Goodness and
Power of God, which was plainly seen in what Christ did. Things of this nature
will not pass without censure.

Such is the reigning power of Satan in the hearts of many at this day also,
that a work of this kind will by them be stigmatized, and the persons also that
God made use of as instruments in his hand to do it. I therefore thought it
meet, to give the Reader to understand, that my end, in the publishing of what
God has done for me, in taking my Child out of the hands of Satan, is not the
lifting up of my self, nor those men that wrestled with the Lord for me; God
who knows the secrets of all hearts, knows it: but that he alone might have the
glory and praise of so great a mercy, to whom I desire to give it, and to no
other but him alone, which is the main reason why I make the world acquainted
with it; for should I conceal so great a Mercy, it would be ingratitude in me.

Another reason that has induced me to publish what has been the Lords
doings, is, that others might be stirred up to praise the Lord with me, who is
a God hearing prayer; of whom we may say, as once Moses did, Who is like unto
thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? who is like unto thee, glorious in Holiness,
fearful in Praises, doing Wonders! Exodus 15. 11. for surely it would not only
be ingratitude in me to the Lord, to conceal a thing of such weight, but it
would accuse me of want of love to other Christians, who may thereby be not
only occasioned to praise the Lord, but encouraged to seek the Lord in all
their straits, forsaking those vain, if not wicked proceedings of some, who by
Charms, think to deliver from the power of the Devil, as will appear in the
following Discourse: for I my self indeed, being no otherwise, nor no better
informed, endeavored the help of my Child by such means, as I have now cause
to repent that ere I made use of them; but the Lord was pleased at length to
let me see my folly therein, after I had spent and wasted that little estate I
had, as is well known to many: therefore what ends I should have in what I do,
may be easily discerned by the Wise.

I know there are some tongues that will not be wanting to sander me and my
Child with dissimulation, though it is well-known by many it was no such
matter, neither can it be in reason so judged; seeing there was no profit made
thereby, but as I said, it was to the impoverishing of me and mine. Whatever is
said by any, shall not I hope trouble me, I having a good Conscience. I bless
the Lord my Child is now well, and has continued so ever since the Lord was
sought to. Blessed be the Lord; let all his Saints bless him with me.

John Barrow.

The Lord's Arm stretched out in an Answer of Prayer, etc.
IN July, 1661. was the beginning of the lamentable and deplorable trouble of
my poor Child, who was then taken ill after this manner following.

His Mother, my Wife, bad him read his Book, which he did; and after he had
read a Chapter, he was taken with a violent burning, so great, that we thought
it would cost him his life. In this condition he continued about a week, at the
end whereof, being on his Legs again, he would walk up and down the room,
throwing his hat from his head, laying his hands under his belly, and screeking
out lamentably, forty times in a day or more; this lasting some eight or ten
days, he was afterward taken in another manner: as he walked about the
Chamber, there was heard a croaking in his throat, very strange to them that
heard it, which continued eight or ten days, or thereabouts.

Suddenly after this there appeared Rats to him, and Cats with Rats in their
claws, dancing them sometimes coming (as he said) with glasses of Sack in
their claws, and Pasties, offering them to the Child, but he refused to
receive them, and threw things at them; then they would demand his Soul,
bidding him give it to the Devil, but he refused to condescend to them. They
told him when his Father and Mother was gone forth, they would come and dine
with him at the long Table; after which time he could neither eat nor drink,
except he did first go behind the door and sing, with his hat off; otherwise
what he eat or drank would not go down, but endanger the choking of him.

Suddenly after this, he was taken above thirty times in a day both lame, dumb
and blind, continuing so for a time. After this, I no sooner went out about my
employment, (which lay abroad) but he would be cast upon the ground with a
great force, insomuch that I could not otherwise conclude but it must be done
by the malice and power of the Devil. When he was upon the ground he would
strike himself upon the face with all his force, to the great amazement of the
spectators, which were several Friends of mine that came to see my Child,
hearing what condition he was in, by reason of whose coming, as we supposed, he
was changed into diverse and several actions; for the more they came to see him,
the more his fits came upon him, which we perceiving, desired them to forbear
coming; they did so, and then his fits abated.

After this he was confined to a certain stool that was in the house, insomuch
that if any one else did sit down on that stool, he would be thrown flat on the
ground, as it were dead, and not arise as long as any one else did sit on the
aforesaid stool.

At a certain time going to a Neighbors house he carried this stool with him,
because he could sit upon no other; some friends and acquaintance of mine being
desirous to see the Boy, came to my Neighbors house where he was; they were no
sooner come in but he fell into the same fits, using the same action as is
above related: At the end of which fits, he said he would go home to dinner,
which accordingly he did, and at his going, he bad that none of them should sit
upon his stool, if they did, he told them he should know it. The boy being at
home at dinner fell down flat on his back, spreading his arms much to my
admiration; but suddenly he got up and said, I know that some body has sat
upon my stool.

When he was about to eat (according to his accustomed manner) he went behind
the door to sing, but said he, I will not sing, (at which time he was like to
be choked with his food) as he often would say, but till he did sing he could
not swallow one bit. After he had ate he went again in haste to the Neighbors
house, where my Friends were still waiting for his coming; as soon as he came,
he told them, That some of them had sat upon his stool; they seemingly denied,
but he confidently affirmed, they did; which at the last, they that sat
thereon did confess, and wonder how he should know it. After this he would walk
up and down in a frantic manner with a hammer in his hand, often calling upon
four persons, viz. Sam. Man, John Sames, Mol Williams, Mary Prett; saying,
Mary, O Mary, O brave Mol, I Will fit you Mol, often throwing the hammer behind
the door: Thus he continued part of the day calling over the aforesaid Names.
Many asked me when they heard him, Whether I knew any such? My answer was, I
knew none but I supposed they were such canting names suitable to him that
taught him, and caused all the rest of his troubles.

At another time as he was sitting at a Table, he had gotten paper, a pen, and
ink, and a pin; I seeing him have a pin, ask him, what he would do with that
pin? he answered not, but hung down his head as though he had been ashamed; I
then spoke hastily to him, and took the pin from him, at which he fell a
crying; with that I asked him again, what he would do with that pin? then he
asked me, whether God were not above the Devil? I said, Yea, God is above the
Devil, he told me then, he must write down that: I would not be so put off, but
would know what he would do with the pin, but no answer could I get for a
while, at length he told me there was a young man, that prayed with him, and
told him, that if he would go with him to such a place in the Country, that
then he should be well. This was all I could get from him, supposing these put
offs were of the Devil, who would not suffer him to tell me what he would do
with it.

At another time he sat with his legs across; I went to him and pulled his
legs asunder, with that he fell a screeking out, and called for his mother to
pull off his hose and shoes, which she did, and found his legs and feet so
cold, that there was no heat at all to be felt in them; my wife then applied
some warm clothes to them, but the boy seemed to be in extreme torture, crying
out in a very lamentable manner for three quarters of an hour, O what shall I
do! O what shall I do! etc. at last he called for his hose and shoes to put
them on again, but could not by reason of the pain he was in; but so soon, as
by our help, they were got on, he presently was well, and leaped up and down
the room as at other times.

At another time as he was sitting in the yard on a block, a Rat did appear to
him (as he said) unto which he was heard to say, Satan, thou must be burned in
hell fire, and all that do obey thee, often rehearsing these words: and further
said, that Christ was manifest to destroy the works of the Devil. Neighbors
coming in, and hearing these sayings, and seeing his actions (for he sat
fillipping with his fingers) did very much wonder at it. He said moreover, the
Rat told him he must go up stairs, and play with his pretty Rat there; and up
stairs he would often go: He also had a little box with single money in it,
which would sometimes be forced out of his hand, which he would strive to take
up often, repeating these words, I will not sing, I will not sing, but could by
no means take it up, except he did sing.

He had many times very strange actions, sometimes after this, and sometimes
after that manner, as running up and down the house with his hands to his ears,
and hopping, as though he were mad: sometimes he would sweat very much; and
sometimes he would labor and strive, as if he had been ready to be choked,
with some thing that did rise in his throat: sometimes he would be confined to
a place where my servants were at work, in which place he would lie down with
his back upon a board, stretching forth his arms, and beat himself on the face
and head as hard as he could; and this he would do often in a day, rising very
much like a Changling. Diverse times as we did walk abroad together, he would
be taken with lameness, his limbs hanging down, insomuch that I was forced to
bring him home in men's arms: Sometimes he must be drawn behind a door in a
chair, and there be forced to sing, etc.

One thing more is very observable, that when I did set him to read, he could
not utter the name of God, nor of Christ, but any other words he would speak
very well. Moreover, if any other did take the Bible, and mention the word God
or Christ in his hearing, he would roar and cry, making a hideous noise.

In this great extremity, I knew not otherwise what to do, but to apply my self
to Physicians and Astrologers, and suchlike men, for help, but could meet with
none from them; at length after I had made use of them, one John Hubbard was
commended to me, and he and another with him came to my house; I asked him,
whether he could do my Child any good? he said, Yea, he was not the first that
he had meddled with in that condition, for he told me that he was bewitched: I
asked him what I should give him? he said, he must make no bargain, for the
Witch had power over him to come again: yet notwithstanding, he went on, and
used many fopperies and charms, as hanging papers about his neck, and putting
quils under the door, with quicksilver, and such kind of stuff, which did him
no good, and so I told him, he coming often to my house; then he told me he
must use some stronger means, and that he had learned more experience; thus he
kept me in suspense half a year: after this he would have the Boys hair cut off
from his crown in a round circle, also the nails of his fingers and toes must
be pared, then he must go to an Oaken-tree, and the Boy with him, three or four
miles off, taking some oaken boughs home with him, which boughs he put to the
soals of his feet, and some about his belly, and other places about the house;
the Boy must sleep with them all night, and then take them off the next
morning, then he must go to the tree again, taking with him a mallet and an
augor, and a wooden peg, and a hammer; the augor was to bore a hole to the
heart of the tree, the hair of the boys head, and the paring of his nails, were
to be rapped up in a paper, and rammed into the hole he had made, and the peg
was to keep it in; which did signify, as he said, that the Witch would be
forced to come every morning and evening to that tree, and that would weary
her, and then she would come and compound with him: he said moreover, the Witch
did come to him, and asked him, why he did torment her so? But my Child being
never the better, I seeing all was but a cheat, I left him.

After all this, I used the advice of Doctors, Astrologers, and Apothecaries,
from whom he took Physic; and at last there was something came up in his
throat, which made him vomit, to the sad admiration of the beholders, which
held him about three quarters of an hour, and at last he gave a groan, and a
great deal of water came forth of his mouth, and nothing else as we could see:
at length he came to himself, and continued well for about three months. The
Boy desiring to go forth to be Apprentice, I accordingly provided him a Master,
with whom he was near half the three months that he was well: but being at a
certain time in his Masters Garden, his fellow Apprentice being there with him,
he told him, that he knew he should be mad; his fellow Apprentice asked him why
he said so? he told him that a Rat appeared to him often times: the next day,
about the same hour, as near as could be computed, the Rat entered into him;
the news was sent to me, which was very unwelcome: I went the next day and
found him in bed, looking and acting like a Changling, I caused him to rise and
put on his clothes, and a very good dinner was provided, but not a bit could he
eat: his Master desired me to take him home with me, lest he should be starved;
which accordingly I did, and then he did eat. In a short time after I carried
him to his Master again, but nothing he could eat there; his Master then
brought him to me again, and told me, he knew not what to do with him: his
Master was no sooner gone, and left him with me, but the Boy turned his face to
the wall, and whispered, and straightway came to himself, saying, How came I
hither? I thought I had been at work.

Then I counseled him to be a good boy, and go home to his Master, and show
himself a wise lad; he then went home to his Master, and fell to work, but that
lasted not long; at length his master was very hasty with me, still asking me
what he should do? but I could not well tell, neither could he, which caused a
difference between us; but at length his Master told me, that he heard of a man
which came from Ireland, that cured all diseases; which I did not believe,
because he was a Roman Catholic; yet nevertheless, he persuaded me to carry
the boy to him (his Master being a traveller, and acquainted with the
Catholics) which I did, and was no sooner come, but they pulled out their
Crosses, and put them behind the boys head, which the boy not seeing, fell a
roaring; they conceiting it was the Devil that roared at the Cross, as at a
thing he could not endure.

Forthwith my self, the Boy and his Master must go before the Lord Abony, we
coming before his Lordship, one of his servants drew forth a Cross or Crucifix;
at which the Boy roared as abovesaid; I told the Lord Abony I would relate the
heads of the Boys trouble, but that I feared neither my Memory nor his Patience
could bear it. He bad me go on and he would hear me; then I declared to him the
whole matter, which after he had heard, he gave me a Ticket to carry to the
aforesaid Gentleman at his lodging; But things falling out contrary to our
expectation, he being at that time at St. James's, we went thither, found him
and presented the Ticket to him, which when he had read, he had me bring the
Lad into the Queens Chapel, there being more than 500 impotent people, as
dumb, lame, blind and the like, yet he meddled with none of them, only read his
Ave-Maries, Creeds and the like. Then he called for a Pot of Holy Water, as
they call it, and kneeled down with his Friars, and rising up again, he called
for a Ribband, Brimstone and a Candle, the Ribband he tied in three knots about
my Boys neck, then takes a piece of paper and burns the Brimstone under his
nose, speaking several words in Latin three times over; The Boy all this time
roaring and stamping at their Altar, being so outrageous that three or four men
were fain to hold him, and as much as they could do. There were several
Countesses, Ladies and Gentlewomen (as I supposed them to be) who beholding the
Boy, wept sorely. The place being very full of People, this thing was soon
blazed all about Westminster; forthwith the Boy spoke, who had been dumb ten or
twelve days before. Then the Gentleman asked the Boy what he did see? Who
replied, A Rat. He asked him which way the Rat went? The Boy said, Toward the
Priest. With that the Lord Abony presented the Boy to me, and bad me bring him
in at another door, which I did; many Friars flocking about me, bad me make the
Boy a Catholic: I told them I was not such a Fool as he that was at their
Altar, who promised them that if they cured him of his stuttering speech, he
would become a Catholic. Then they asked me what the Boys Name was? I told
them, James. They said to the Boy, James, pray to St. James. I asked them what
rule they had in Scripture for that? They told me in the time of the Law Angels
did worship the Patriarhs. I told them those were but Salutations, and desired
them to turn to the Revelations and read that passage between John and the
Angel; when John would have worshipped him, the Angel would not suffer him, but
said, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant; worship God. Then they
urged the sayings of their Fathers, as they call them, which is their usual
way, leaving the Scriptures. I told them if they would stick to the Scriptures,
I would confer further with them, but they would not; so we ceased.

But to proceed, by that day seven days the Boy was as bad as before; but in
the mean time there was great joy amongst them, they supposing they had wrought
a Miracle. Priests and Jesuits, etc. came to see the Boy, bringing their
Crosses, Holy Water and Ribbands, which the Boy mocked at, holding his two
fingers across, and laughing at them. One of them endeavored to put a Ribband
about his neck, but the Boy would not let him; which when he saw, he swore,
Damn him, and fell a cursing.

But afterward they hearing the boy was as Bad as ever, their joy was turned
into mourning. The Lord Abony sent for me, but I denying to come, he sent for
me again by one of his chiefest Gentlemen, to desire the Boy might come again
to the Priest, that he might touch him once more; at which I gave him a flat
denial, and told him that I had no faith in the thing when I was at their
Altar. The Boys Master being desirous he might go again to the Priest, sent
for him; I could not deny sending the Boy to him because he was his Apprentice,
but sent him: His Master sent me word he would carry the Boy to the Gentleman
again, for said he, If he do him no good, he can do him no hurt. I asked
counsel of some friends what I should do in this matter? They said, 'twere good
I should see what became of the Boy, and to let him try what good could be done
him. Whereupon I did go, it being the first day of the week, a Coach was
provided, and we came to the Gentleman; coming into the room where he was, he
looked on the Boy as he used to do, then opened his Book and read Prayers,
calling for a Ribband, Brimstone, and a Candle as he had done before, with his
Holy Water, throwing much of it at the Glass Window; the Boy all the while
roared, making a hideous noise, stamping with his feet, having a croaking in
his throat contrary to nature; he using his stuff as aforesaid, the Boy
groaned, and then spoke to their great rejoicing. Then the Priest came and
delivered the Boy to me, and told me, the Boy was Bewitched, that I had ill
Neighbors, and bade the Boy go to his Master, and not go home to me, for that
would be safest for him. But this charm lasted but twenty four hours, for then
the Boy was as bad as before. I further considering with my self what I should
do in the thing, being tossed about by the opinions of men, besought the Lord to
direct me what to do, for I had sinned in treading these bypath. At last it
came into my mind, that Fasting and Prayer was the only means to be used in
this case, that Scripture being set upon my heart, This sort, or kind, comes
not out but by fasting. I conceiving it might be some evil Spirit, or Spirits,
he was possessed with, by the malice of some Witch, I craved the advice of
godly Ministers and Friends; among the rest one of them told me, it was a
difficult thing, and bad me get four Ministers and four Doctors to consult
with; then I went to two more, and one of them desired me to go to another,
that was a learned Doctor, who heard me repeat the heads of all these things,
with much admiration. I told him that some People said the Boy dissembled; but
I said, I did perceive it was the craft and malice of the Devil. He pausing a
while, told me, that it was his thoughts also, and called for the Boy, and told
him, he knew he was a dissemler, the Boy making faces, mocks, and wry-mouths at
him: The Doctor told him, he could take him up into his Chamber, and show him
the appearances of Spirits: I desired the Doctor he would do so, and I would
stay-below; but, to put me off, he called for a Latin Bible, and read some
words in latin to him; with that he told me, that thereby he knew he
dissemled, because he did not roar as at other times, when the word God is read
in Latin. I desired him to put the Boy forth, and I would talk further with
him; the Boy was caused to withdraw, then said I, Now Doctor, you and I are
here, I must tell you plainly, the Devil is too cunning for you and I, for he
can hold his tongue when he lists for his advantage: Now Doctor, I will tell
what I have done, I have both stripped and whipped him till it has grieved me to
the heart, and yet I cold make a Joynstool speak as soon as he. The Doctor bid
me send him to Bedlam, for I had fed him too high: but I told him, three pence
a day would keep him. I left my Doctor, and came again to him a week after: he
asked me how the Boy did? I told him, as bad as he was before, and that he was
at the door: he asked me, what I would have him to do? I said, I would desire
him to have him up into his Chamber, and try his skill; he said, he had not
time, and called for his cloak, for he must forthwith be gone. I perceiving it
was the Devils work to hinder his dis-possession, left the Doctor and departed.

Being thus tossed about from one to another, at last, by the providence of
Almighty God, I was cast amongst a poor despised People, whom the Lord owned as
instruments in his hand, to do this great Work; to his eternal Praise I speak
it; for the Lord saw their fastings, and heard their prayers in the behalf of
my poor Child, at a wonderful rate. The true Relation of which, is that which
follows.

As was said, It pleased the Lord to bring me among a People, who were
persuaded that the Lord would be found, if sought unto, in behalf of my Child;
judging, according to what is before related, that he was possessed with some
Evil Spirit; and believing that that kind might be cast out by fasting and
prayer, some of them did agree to keep a day for that purpose; which was
performed in the month of July, 1663. by John Clayton, Rich. Aylmore, Rich.
Webb and Tho. Mildman; Who being met together, one of them spoke as follows.

My friends, said he, We are come about a weighty work, a work too great for
such poor unworthy creatures as we are to perform, and therefore it becomes us
to go unto God. No sooner was the word GOD pronounced, but the Boy slipped down
from the Chair he sat in, crying out with such a hideous noise, that made him
that spoke, tremble, though he had no sense of fear upon him; he going on in
his discourse, mentioned the name JESUS, at which the Boy roared again, and in
a strange manner, spread himself on the floar, where he lay with one leg
backward and another forward, with his arms spread out: Also after he had ended
his Exhortation, they went to prayer, and even when the Name of God or Christ
was pronounced, the Boy was tormented, and much enraged; for he would double
his fist, and seem by his looks to threaten him that prayed, endeavoring to
get nearer and nearer to him, till God or Christ was named, at which words he
would start back, as though he was frighted, using endeavors to get out of the
Chamber, and had, but that two of them held the door and would not let him;
which when he perceived, he crept to the farthest corner of the room, crying
out, Legate, go to the Devil Legate, will not you go to the Devil, Legate, Go to
the Devil Legate, go to the Devil Legate. It was observed, that though he often
repeated these words, yet his mouth was open, but his lips moved not; at which
time he used many strange and absurd actions: They offered him a Bible, which
he would not look into, but seemed to be much tormented: they then offered him
another Book, at which he was not at all troubled: Thus they continued till
about noon, and then he fell asleep, and slep a pretty while, and when he
awoke, he was like a natural fool, and could not speak a word, saying, Legate go
to the Devil, as aforesaid; from whence it appears, that it was not he that
spoke, but the Evil Spirit in him, making Crosses, wetting them with spittle,
playing with, and spitting on the Andirons that stood in the Chimney; and when
they were taken from him; he cried like a Child: after this they showed him a
Bible again, at which he was not troubled, but seemed to rejoice: In this
condition he continued till toward night, and then he fell into a very strange
fit of raging and roaring, calling Legate many times. While this fit was on him,
one went down stairs, and staid a little, and then came up again, against whom
the Boy was so enraged, that he spit at him, and would have struck him, but
that he was held by two others. After this the evening came on, and they
commended him and their work to the Lord, who was able to do more for him than
they were able to ask. The answer of this day was, the restoring of his speech
in such a measure, that one might understand him.

The 14th of September, 1663. was the second day that they set apart to seek
the Lord in behalf of my Child; at which time there were only three exercised
in the duty of Prayer, to wit, John Clayton, Rich. Webb, and Rich. Aylmore,
except some women (who were spectators) my self and my wife. When they were
met, they applied themselves to the Lord in prayer, as they did the day before;
in which duty they had spent the greatest part of the day, and the Boy seemed
not to be troubled until it grew toward night, and then he fell into a very
great Agony, roaring and crying, Legate, Legate many times, and was so
outrageous, that he was held by two of them; but a little before night, this
fit left him, and then they committed him, themselves, and their work into the
hands of God, who disposes all things according to the Counsel of his own
will. The answer of this days work was, that whereas before he cold not hold a
Cup in his hand to drink, but took it in his teeth, before they parted, he took
a pot in his hand, and drunk as orderly as. I or any one could, and the next
day he read a Chapter without trouble.

And so they were led to the third days work, being September 21. 1663. The
persons that met this day, were Rich. Webb, Tho. Mildman, Rich. Pilgrim, Rich.
Aylmore, John Smith, John Borchit, John Clayton, with some others, both
strangers and acquaintance; this day they endeavored to be there as soon as
they could, but neither my self, nor my wife, nor Boy, were come to the place
appointed; two friends came to meet us, and found us in the way coming, but had
been troubled with the Child, by reason of strong temptations of the Devil,
namely, to cut his throat, or drown himself, or knock out his brains against a
post. His mother asked him, if he would go to Hell? Yea, said he, with all my
heart: But at the last he came to the place where the aforesaid friends were,
and went laughing up the stairs like a fool, and when he was come in, looked
earnestly about him, and seemed to count them that were there, by pointing at
them: Then after some discourse about the work of the day, as in relation to
Christ's Promises, upon our agreeing together, we found our selves in an
oneness of spirit, believing the Lords Presence, and then one went to prayer.
The first that prayed, concluded his prayer without any material observation
from the Boy, except some inward fretting, which did appear by his looks, and
snatching with his hand at his face and head.

The second that prayed with an holy boldness, asked of God a sign whether the
work should be finished that day; the sign was, That if God would do it that
day, That the Spirit should be roused up immediately: and so it pleased the
Lord to answer, that at that very time, the Spirit did roar in the Boy with an
hideous noise, after a manner that we could not tell what to compare it to, but
something like the noise a dog makes when he howls, and toar open his clothes,
throwing his Hankercher that was about his neck on the floor, treading on it
with his feet, and spitting at him that was at prayer, crying out, You cannot
do the work: Our friend replied, Satan, thou art a Liar, for through the
strength of the Lord we are able to do it, or words to that purpose; further
replying, Thou damned fiend, thou enemy to mankind, who were a Liar from the
beginning, I adjure thee in the Name of Jesus of Nazereth, come forth: at which
he roared, and beat himself, crying out, What, three days! two days was
enough; looking wishly on all as we stood about him, saying, What, nothing but
pray! what, all pray! all mad! will you kill your selves with praying? three
days is too much in conscience. Then one said, if three days would not be
enough, we would have three and three too: and then he was very much troubled,
and beat himself again, and howled as before. And then he endeavored to
persuade us, that there was a dinner below, we might go down to that, and eat
it. But answer was made, that we had set our selves to fasting and prayer to
plead with God against him, and would not eat till the Sun went down: and then
he would persuade us, that it was night and dark, and time to go home. Answer
was made, Thou art a liar as from the beginning; for then it was about eleven
or twelve of the clock, Again, he told there was a bed, we might go to bed: And
when none of these lies and deceits would do, he began with other stratagems,
and told us that we had got for every day one, could not we be contented?
Answer was made, that we would not give over while any did remain. And then he
fixed his eyes on the window strangely, and fell a calling for more help, as
though some stood without, and beckned with his hand to them, and bad them come
in; Why did you go out? come back again, come back again, they will not hurt
you, you need not fear, you may come if you will; come quickly, what, are you
mad to stand there? and then would beat himself for anger that they did not
come when he called.

It was observed that two hats hung in the Window, and a friend took them down,
supposing the Boy might heed them, and when they were down he cried the more,
Now there is more room, now you may come if you will; come away, come, come:
and then cried, Diabolus, Diabolus, many times, saying it many times, Come, or
the work will be done. And one taking him by the hand, he cried, Let my manus
go, many times. One asked me whether I had taught him any Latin? I said, No.
Then the Boy sweat much, and seemed to be in a great toil or agony: and then
told us, If we would not give over and depart quickly, the house would fall and
kill us all, you will be all killed.

Now it was observed, that at the departure of every Spirit (which was, as we
suppose, five, at distinct times) their departure was with a kind of strange
rising upwards to his throat as if he was ready to be choked, bursting forth
with a kind of belching, and throwing forth his hand, saying, There is one
gone; so in the departure, giving the distinct number of them as they went
forth, crying out when the third was gone, There is one for every day, as
aforesaid: And when the fourth went out, he shaked his hand after him, saying,
Fare thee well, farewell, there is four; now all is gone, now all is gone. One
said, Thou art a Liar; for till God put praise into this Boys mouth, we will
not give over: But when he said, four were gone, it was to be observed, he did
butten up his doublet very carefully and orderly, measuring the breast of it,
to see whether he did it even; after which he fell asleep, and slept, as near
as we could judge, an hour and an half, or thereabouts: in all which time, we
continued earnest in prayer to God, and at the last he awaked and looked about
him wildly, and in a little time the fifth spirit began to roar and to be
disturbed, as the other before; and then one of us did adjure him in the Name
of Jesus to come out: Then he said, If he did, he would go into another; upon
which he was commanded to come out and go to his own place. Then we heard him
cry, Legate, come out, come out, come out, thou must come out, thou must come
out, often saying it over; and then stopped his mouth with his hands, and coat, and
knees, and arms, as if he were resolved to stop in the Devil with them; but at
the last, to the praise of our God be it spoken for ever, which works
wonders, by his own Power alone brought him out; he brought him out with a
sneeze and a kind of thruttling in his throat, and so the fifth came forth: at
which time the Boy sat very still, with a very sober countenance, lifting up
his hands and eyes, as though he had matter of praise in his mind, for the
space of three hours: and at that time I was desired to speak to him, but found
him dumb, and then he sat down again, and we applied our selves to the Lord in
prayer; and the last that prayed, asked of God a sign, as in the morning,
whether the work was done? and that if it was done, the Lord should put praises
into the Boys mouth; and then the Boy did lift up his hands and eyes, which we
did look upon as an Answer from the Lord: and so with one accord returned
praise to God with all our hearts: and when we had concluded, we asked the Boy
how he did? but he could not speak: One asked him whether we should pray for
him? but he did not answer. James, said one, if we shall pray for thee, give us
a sign; then he did lift up his hands and eyes: and then they went to prayer
again that the Lord might loose his tongue, and so they left him (my self, his
mother and two other friends more with him) and went into the Kitchen. One of
the friends that stayed above put his finger into his mouth, and finding his
tongue doubled, labored to unfold it, and groaned in spirit to the Lord; and
it pleased the Lord so to loose his tongue, that he spoke, and praised his holy
Name, who alone works great Wonders. Then we found that the Lord had answered
our prayers, to the great joy of us all; then we sung forth his praise, and met
that day sevennight, and kept it a day of thanksgiving to God, for that he was
pleased to show us that his hand was not shortened, nor his ear heavy that it
could not hear, but that he is the same to day, and yesterday, and for ever.
This in the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

A true RELATION of the wonderful Deliverance of Hannah Crump, Daughter of John
Crump of Warwick, who was sore afflicted by Witchcraft, for the space of nine
months; with the several means used, and way in which she was relieved.
Christian Reader,
THis following Relation, is not put forth to reflect upon any sort of People,
nor to seek any popular applause from any; but only to show that the Lord's
hand is not shortened that he cannot save, or that his ear is heavy that he
cannot hear; but the Iniquities of the sons of men in this day have hindered
good things from us, as well as it did in times past; and that the want of
Faith in Gods promises, have made us want those spiritual presences of God by
his Spirit; and to manifest that if we seek him in the way of his Appointments,
he will be found of us, as he has said; Yea, if we have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, great things shall be obtained by Faith in the Promises he has
made, being the only means he has appointed (through Christ) to draw down the
Benefits and Privileges that belong to his servants by promise. And therefore
we having had great experience of the Lords faithfulness in our approaches to
the Throne of Grace many a time, have taken liberty to declare in his
particular Treatise, two special Appearances of our God in answering our
Prayers. The first is that that goes before; the second is as follows.

One John Crump of Warwick having a Daughter which was very much afflicted with
strange fits, to the amazement of all her Relations, her grieved Father left no
means unattempted for the Recovery of his afflicted Child, as Physic, and
what the wisdom of man would afford him in the place where he lived; but all
proved in vain. Then at last He and one other of his Daughters came up to
London, and brought up the afflicted Maid, in order to get Cure; himself being
here before, and having made way to get her into Thomas Hospital in Southwark;
she being come, the day of her reception was appointed, her Father with two of
her sisters (one living in Town) brought her to the said Hospital: But so it
happened that when the Officers came to receive her, she was taken with one of
her fits in such a manner that they would not; but said she was fitter for
Bedlam than to come into an Hospital among sick People. Thus her Father being
filled with care and sorrow, knew not well what course to take, but was then
advised to have her to a man that lived in Winchester Park in Southwark; which
advice he accepted of, and went to the said man with his Daughter; and after
some time of discourse and consideration he (professing some skill in
Astrology) told them she was bewitched, and that if he did take her in hand he
would have five pound, ye could not promise perfect cure: For (said he) if I
cannot be strong enough for the Witch, after I have taken the affliction from
the Maiden I must bear it my self; but if I can be strong enough for the Witch,
she must bear it, till she dispose of it to some other, for none of her
Familiars will bear it. The Father of the Maid having received this Answer, had
no encouragement to make use of him.

Thus being at last almost without hope of obtaining any help for his
distressed Daughter, whose distracted condition was the cause of much trouble
and sorrow to all her Relations, beholding her (if not prevented) to bite her
own flesh, or doing other violence to her self, or such as came to hold her;
also, that if her own father had at any time taken a Bible to read, she would
have been gone and not heard nor read her self, but would fall into her raging
fits. And now her Father having used all ways for help, and could find none,
like to the poor man that waited for the moving of the waters, so had he waited
on outward means, and at last met with the mercy of the same compassionate
Jesus as the poor man did: For in the month of July 1662. the Lord drew forth
the heart of one of her sisters to desire that we would ^^ep a day in fasting
and Prayer in the behalf of her sister, which we were ready to perform, and
appointed a day; at which time appointed we came to the house where this
afflicted Maid was, and there we found her in a deplorable condition, which put
us upon some consideration of the work before us, calling to mind the Promises
of God for our encouragement; knowing and believing that that God that cannot
lie, would be found of them that diligently seek him according, to his Promise,
Mat. 18. 19, 20. Mark. 11. 24. We having Gods Word to confirm our Faith, and
nothing but his Glory for our end, and the distressed condition of the Maid,
being an object of Pity, seeing her bound with the bonds of Satan, we applied
our selves to the Throne of Grace by Prayer: The Maid being laid on a bed, lay
a pretty while undisturbed, but at last she rose and was in a very great rage,
and unlaced her clothes to her vevery skin, pulling her headclothes off her
head, crying out in a lamentable manner; in which fit her Father and Sister
proved too weak to deal with her, one of us rising from our knees to help hold
her; she finding her self mastered, said, If we would let her alone she would
sit down and be quiet: Then we set her down in a Chair, she was no sooner sat,
but she said to him that held her she would kick him, and as she spoke, did so:
Soon after she lay down again, and seemed to sleep between whiles, and after a
little time rose again, and as before, pulled open her clothes, struck her
father and sister, took up fire from the hearth, clapped it to her sisters arm,
burnt it the breadth of a shilling that the skin shriveled off presently; and
thus she remained by fitts most part of the day, sometimes endeavoring to pull
down all the Hangings about the Bed and Chimney, breaking the Windows; at other
times making excuses to go down from us, and did so far prevail with her
sister, that she was let go down, but was not willing to come up again; but
that she had left a Tobacco-pipe above, which they refused to bring her down,
and rather than she would be without it, she came up for it, and so was kept in
by shutting of the door: The reason why she set so much by her pipe, was,
because she took very much Tobacco. About midday as she lay on the bed, being
pretty quiet, one asked her how she came into this condition? she answered,
That one time she was sick, and there came a woman to her and brought her an
Apple, which she did eat, and (says she) it lies here still (pointing to her
throat.) We perceiving by this that she might be bewitched, therefore in our
petitions to the Lord made mention of the Witch, and desired he would be
pleased to rebuke her power, if any such thing were: but at such times as we
spoke those words she would taunt at us, and say in an extreme rage, What have
you to do-with the Witch, cannot you let her alone? she does not trouble you,
and would labor to disturb us all the ways she could, so that at the last she
was fain to be held down on the Bed by her sisters; but while they held her
down she struck one of us on the face violently, while he was at Prayer by her,
insomuch that she made her own arm swell: After this one of us being at Prayer
at the beds feet, and she perceiving she could not reach him, spat at him, so
that it hung on his hair and breast, very loathsome to behold; but he continued
in Prayer, was not any way moved at it; and soon after the evening came on, we
left her very quiet on the bed, as one that was willing to rest her self after
a weary days work: And truly the Lord was so pleased to give in an answer
after such a manner, that after this day she would take a Bible and read an hour
or two together; and in a small time God clothed our friend John Crump and his
daughter Hannah with garments of joy for sorrow, and filled all the hearts of
their Relations with praise; and so she continues in good health unto this day,
free from that affliction, which began upon her on the first of November 1661,
and continued till the time aforementioned: for which Mercy we may say with the
Prophet, O bless the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever.

And let all the people of England know to whom this may come, that not by our
own power, but by the Power of God, in the Name of Jesus, were these two made
perfectly whole. We whose names are here under written were eyewitnesses of
this great Work of God.

John Clayton. Richard Aylmore. Mary Boune, the Maids sister. Joel Iasut.


FINIS.

