

THE MONK VNVAIL'D: Or, A Facetious Dialogue, Discovering the several
Intrigues, and subtle Practices, together with the lewd and scandalous Lives of
Monks, Friars, and other pretended Religious Votaries of the Church of ROME.

Written by an Eminent PAPIST in French.

Faithfully TRANSLATED by C. V. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1678.

TO THE READER.
IF Monks are such as they would seem to be, they would make of this Book a
Meritorious Subject: For in case what it contains be untrue (as they will not
fail to say) they ought to rejoice, by having occasion to suffer the being
ill-spoken of and calumniated, and to exercise that Patience which they Preach
unto us with so fair a zeal: But in case it contains truth (as indeed it does)
they will receive this small mortification with the same Humility and
Resignation which they have so often in their mouths: But as they are nothing
less than what they seem to be; they will also act quite contrary to what ought
to be expected from them. At the very moment then of this Dialogues appearing,
you will see them running up and down on all sides, to learn who is its Author;
They will say, that this Book is full of Falsities, Impostures, Impieties, and
Insolences; that the Author is an Atheist, a Libertine, a wicked man, a
Heretic, an Excomunicated person. This being their manner of speech, What is
to be done in this case? As for my part, I declare, and take God to witness,
that I am a Roman Cat^olick; that I honor with a deep respect the Religious
Orders, if there be any that have maintained themselves according to the
holiness of their Institution, and of their Rule, which I wish with all my
soul, to see them in the way which the Holy Patriarchs have traced out to them;
whereof they have kept the Habit and the Name: And it is with great trouble,
that I see the misrule and disorders which are slipped in amongst them; which I
do not write for any hatred, but to make appear to them, their Artifices are
common; that they now abuse Fools and silly Women, and that by the grace of
God, there are found out persons, who know Wolves under Sheeps-cloathing.
Peradventure some scrupulous person or other, will find fault, that I cause to
let slip from this secularized Monk some words a little free; but besides, that
it happens not often from a man coming out of a Cloister. The Reader may take
notice if he please, that I imitate the Limner, who drawing a Picture, aims
naturally to represent; and who would offend the Rules of his Art, and of true
resemblance, if he caused us to behold a Hector in a serious countenance. I
question not the Monks finding many faults in this little Book; neither am I so
vain to believe the same exempt from any: Nay, I allow that therein they may
justly discover an infinite number; yet let them reckon for defaults, the
omission of an infinite of Stories and Intrigues, which they know are wanting
in it.

The MONK turned Secular: Or, a Dialogue between Florimond a Country-Curate,
and Patrick a Secularized Monk.
Florimond. GOD be praised, dear Patrick, you are now become one of us; I did
never embrace you with so much joy and constancy, as I do at this time.


Patrick. Neither so closely; for this habit bulks not out so much as the other
did.


Flor. In truth it becomes you mighty well; O God, how glad am I to behold you
with your Hood off!


Patr. You will now trust me; for the reason why you did not so before was,
because that men looking through Grates ought not to be trusted.


Flor. It was for that reason that I told you, that I never did embrace you
with so much confidence.


Patr. Blessed be God, that hereafter some trust may be reposed in me; for it
is a common saying, That a Woman's forepart ought to be mistrusted, a Mules
hinder part, but a Monk all over.


Flor. Let us sit down, we shall be more at our ease; it must be owned, that
that sort of people are very much cried out against.


Patr. Nay rather say, that they are in good repute and well dealt with, in
being suffered to live; for if they were known for what they are, and that all
their wickednesses, all their sherking tricks which they act within, and
without their Cloisters, were made public, that cursed brood would be buried
under the very ruins of their Convents.


Flor. You say too much.


Patr. I do not declare the hundred thousand part of what is real, neither of
what they deserve.


Flor. Therefore do I not repent for not having made my self a Monk: For I will
tell you freely, that even since I have been possessed of my Benefice, I had a
design to have betaken my self to some Religious Fellow-ship, to pass the
remainder of my days in tranquillity and devotion.


Patr. The Lord bless you.


Fl. I did propose to my self things to be found amongst them which are not to
be found amongst Country People; as the conversing with learned men, frequent
examples of virtue, which keeps a man from falling into that luke-warmness,
that languishing of spirit which befalls Country Ecclesiastical persons by
being alone: In short, the union which is within Religious Houses is a great
help.


Patr. What union in Religious Houses? have you not read what Ariosto says in
his fourteenth Canto, that discord was found by St. Michael within a Monastery.
What a good man are you for having had such thoughts? I am vexed that a person
of wit and reason, like your self, should be able to fall into that Error; is
it possible that you have believed that Union, Tranquillity and Devotion was to
be found within a Cloister, together with examples of virtue?


Flor. Such were my Conceptions.


Patr. Alas poor man, where were your thoughts? I would have you to know that a
Monk's Cloister is a foul Coyl, a refuge for Drones; that it is the receptacle
for all Vices, a sink of noisome filthiness, and of all imaginable Villainies.


Flor. Ha, ha.


Patr. It Is the School of Impudence, Hypocrisy, Impostors, Knavery,
Infidelity, Impiety, nay of Atheism it self.


Flor. What say you?


Patr. It is a gulf of all manner of Prophanations, Sacriledges, and of all
the abominations which are possible to be committed.


Flor. Fie, say not so:


Patr. I speak truth.


Flor. I did indeed believe that Religious persons had not preserved themselves
according to their first Institution; that they had lost very much of that
purity and fervor which did at first animate them; that they were jealous the
one of the other, and very much biased; that they did sometimes give occasion
of scandal, and that they often were the occasion of evil talk: But I should
never have believed that they were so horribly wicked.


Patr. What, not so horribly wicked? He that would go about to describe the
insolency, leudness, and debaucheries of those lost and abandoned persons,
their turnings and windings, their goings abroad, and returns home, their
circuits, pretenses, and the feignings whereof those Foxes make use, to
introduce themselves into Houses, to catch and delude people; I say, whosoever
would put in writing the Cheats, stratagems, and sherking tricks which these
Apes, these furred Cats cover with a Religious habit, more Volums might be made
of them, than all the Booksellers of Paris are Masters of.


Flor. Hyperboles! you are in wrath, you would do them a mischief.


Patr. I say whosoever would bring to light their Intrigues, Commerce, Visits,
Infamous Practices, loose Entertainments, Love Letters, their speaking with a
double meaning, the baits they lay to Women's Chastity, and to Religious Maids;
the same would employ for ten years all the Printing-Houses of Europe. Evil
befall those who hearken to them, or believe them; and to those who having young
Wives or Daughters, receive them within their Houses under any pretension
whatsoever.


Flor. What a flood of passion, how you handle them, poor Monks! you may say of
them what you please; but for all that they do very much edify the people,
were it but by their outward appearance, as their modest Habit, Austerities,
Vows, Retirements: nay, their very Convents and their Wards do inspire Devotion
into us; at entrance whereof you behold Crosses, Images, devices of Charity,
Humility, Mortification, Austerity, Self-denial, and of Penitence.


Patr. Yea, at entrance of their Convents and Wards may be seen what the
Prophet Ezekiel saw at one of the doors of the Temple of Jerusalem, Idolum zeli
in ipso introitu, the figure and appearance of Zeal at entrance: but have you
taken notice of that which the very same Prophet says in the same place? Fili
fode parietem, and videbis abominationes pessimas quas isti faciunt. The walls
of their Wards are to be bored through to behold what is acted within, and
there will only appear hatreds, parties, leagues, quarrels, briberies,
disorders, debaucheries, jollity and drunkenness.


Flor. Ha, ha.


Patr. There may be beheld Epicurism and Impiety, under the veil of Devotion;
vanity, pride, and ambition, under the cloak of Humility; riches and abundance
under the coat of Poverty; daintiness, gluttony and sensuality, under the habit
of Mortification and Penitence. Within may be found Vagabonds cloystered up,
solitary persons keeping Company; Bald-pated men, Gallants; dirty fellows
Courtiers; poor men delicious, beggars rich; and voluptuous Satyrs turned
Minions: fair-spoken regular persons may be seen without rule, and Religious
persons without Religion.


Flor. Your Antithesis causes me to laugh.


Patr. People will be surprised to see persons (professing sacred Vows) devoted
to all manner of Wickednesses; Monks assiduously running about the Streets, men
who have seemingly quitted the world to be continually a-visiting: Thrusting
themselves into Houses, and rendering themselves Mediators, Sollicitors,
Match-makers, Contrivers of Wills, Gifts, Legacies, Foundations, Burials,
Annuities, informing themselves of all things, meddling and intermedling
everywhere.


Flor. Nothing makes me so much against them as that.


Patr. In fine you will take it for a scandalous thing to see under a Hood, and
a penitential bag, persons more dissolute, more insolent, and more lost, than
Ruffians and rude Soldiers.


Flor. In case you had Thunder at your command, you would reduce to ashes both
Monks and Frieries. In truth you surprise me, I had never believed the like of
persons who pretend themselves to be the very Cream of Religion.


Pat. They Cream! whip such Cream.


Flor. Notwithstanding there is one thing amongst them which serves for good
example, and that is to see their Churches so well set-out, and that two or
three times a Month full Indulgences are to be had there; that frequent
Preaching may be heard there, and the holy Sacrament often exposed, and that
there is Music and Blessing.


Patr. Alas poor man! how will you be able to discern the motives and
intentions of those Impostors? They know the inclinations of the Vulgar, who
are taken with exterior things and appearances, and run after sights, being led
by their senses; lovers of State-Novelties, Solemnities, Beautifyings,
Adornings of Gilt-things, Pictures, Harmony, who as Geese follow one anther;
delight to pray amongst a multitude, in a crowd, and in company.


Flor. It Is against what the Son of God teaches us; who says, When thou have a
mind to pray enter into thy Closet, and the door being shut, pray to thy Father
in secret, and he who sees thee in secret, will reward thee openly.


Patr. You say right; these seducers then making use of the weakness of the
People, do entice them by such things as they know are relishing, and draw them
by seeming devotion and holiness; allure them by Indulgences, by Chapels
garnished and set out with Images; where Vows are rendered to Thighs, Legs,
Feet, Arms, Hands, Hearts, Eyes, Ears, Heads and Breasts of Wax. They call and
recall these good Idiots by the jingling of Bells, stay them by Vespers and
Music, by the exposing and blessing of the holy Sacrament.


Flor. Are not those holy things?


Patr. Truly such are holy things, as the beautifying of Churches and Chapels,
Indulgences, Sermons, Vespers, Exposing and Blessing of the holy Sacrament.
Neither do I blame that, it is the intention and the end for which the same is
done.


Flor. It Is to incite People to Devotion.


P. And to put Money in the Basin.


F. How Money in the Basin?


P. Did you never take notice that on solemn days, which are very frequent with
them, when there are Indulgences, Sermons, Music, Exposing and Blessing the
holy Sacrament; that there is also at the Entrance of their Churches a great
Basin on the Table, covered with a Carpet, in which Basin People put Money.


F. It is true.


P. And it is for the causing of this Basin to ring that the Bells are rung; it
is this Basin that causes the writing to be stuck up at the door for
Indulgences; it is for this Basin sake that the Altars are adorned, that there
is Preaching, that the holy Sacrament is exposed, and the Blessing is given; it
is at the sound of this Basin, that the intentions of those Brothers is a great
deal better known than by that of the Bells; it is to make them Masters of the
Peoples Money, that they set out their Altars; it is to suborn weak spirits,
that they adorn their Churches; it is to bring gain to themselves that they
invite the People to get Indulgences; in such wise that though their pretension
is the honor and glory of God, self-interest is the true motive. They would
put upon their Altars for a Motto these words of the Mass, Ad laudem and
gloriam nominis tui, ad utilitatem quoque nostram, to Gods praise, but our own
profit.


F. You are pleasant, must not every one live by his own Trade?


P. Is it the Trade of Religious men to make Religion bend to their interests,
to make bates of holy things to get money, to make of their Churches a Fair of
St. Germains.


F. I should not so much mislike the beautifying of their Churches as those
frequent and excessive Indulgences, and those Chapels so much waxified.


P. Are they not very pleasant to have Indulgences almost for all the days of
the year? I should counsel them to suffer their writings to remain always
posted at their Churches door, like a Sign, or a Tavern-Bush. Read their Books
of Brotherhood, you will see for Sunday 18000 years Indulgence, and as many
Quarantaines; for Monday full Indulgence, Tuesday 10000 years Indulgence,
Wednesday the same as well as Thursday and Friday; for Saturday full
Indulgence, Sunday 48000 years, Monday 10000, etc. But I believe these
Indulgences are nothing but the written Tables surrounded with leaves without
fruit, as well as their Chapels are nothing else but miracles of Wax, and are
laden only with the workmanship of their Impostors.


F. I know not what to say thereof, you ought to know it better than I: if that
be true they are great abuses. But you say nothing of the Sermons they preach
at home and elsewhere; you cannot disallow that the Religious Fellowships are
the Nurseries of Preachers, who disperse themselves throughout out the whole
Christian World; that it is from thence that Laborers are drawn out, to be
sent into the Lords Harvest; that they are the Trumpets of the Gospel, animated
by the Preachings of the Holy Ghost, which beat down the Bulwarks of sin, even
as the Israelites Trumpets did beat down the walls of the City of Jericho.


P. It is a pretty Elogium which you give them, if they were sensible of this
you should have Letters adopting you Son, and you should be made partaker of
all Masses, Oblations, Sacrifices, Orisons, Conserts, Lessons, Prayers,
Meditations, Blessings, Feasts, Watchings, Abstinences, Mortifications,
Austerities, Macerations, Penitences, Pilgrimages; Hairy shirts, Disciplines,
and other pious works, which are either acted or not acted by them.


F. Let us forbear jesting and agree, that I have said nothing concerning their
Preachers, which is not very true.


P. Yea, especially when you have called them Trumpets; for that sort of
People, no more than such Instruments, never sound unless they are full of
wind; but it is not the same which blew in the Assembly when the Holy Ghost
came down on the Apostles. Is it possible, that the noise they make has so
much stunned you, that you have not been able to perceive what moves their
bawlings; that you have not been able to see, it is interest and vanity, which
raise these Preachings, to make use of the terms of Ecclesiasticus; that those
two motives make up the stairs, and steps which conduct them to the Pulpit;
that they only mount that eminent place to be seen; that their tongue stirs to
no other end than to be the occasion of the stirring of their Jaws; in short
that they only belabour with their hands to have them filled.


F. You are a dangerous man.


P. For I would have you know, that as there is nothing which so much raises
the Religious Fraternities, and particularly Religious persons, as does the
employment of Preaching; so they study and apply themselves for the most part
thereto, but in such a manner as in no wise to be profitable in the Churches,
as they never do. For even as they are formed to live in Love, in Hypocrisy,
and with Confidence, which are the three Characters of a Monkish spirit; so are
they instructed to Preach as they live, that is to say, to make plausible
Discourses, and to accompany them with wry faces, and to spread themselves
forth with impudence. Who would not laugh to see these Apes come into the
Pulpit with a Stoical Countenance and Gravity; who after their having fiercely
beheld their Auditors, they pull and draw themselves up together, biting their
lips? after having methodically put down their Hoods, they raise up their eyes
to Heaven with an Hypocritical Countenance? who after their having made a great
sign of the Cross, they hold forth and expound with a premeditated Tone, which
I can hardly call Gods word. But who would not be in wrath to behold their
several changes and disguises, when by their prating they choke that holy Word?
who would not murmer to see how they cause that daughter of Heaven to appear,
that Messengeress of God in the Pulpit, as if she were upon a Theater, a
Curtesan and Strumpet, or like unto a Comedianess, who would not tremble
through spite to see them mask up that holy Minerva, come forth of the brains
of Jupiter. What do I say mask her? for they curle her up, and paint her like
unto a wanton Venus.


F. You mount the great horse, and are going to preach, unless you look to it.


P. I cannot contain, when I think upon those abuses. Is it not a ridiculous
thing to behold a begging Monk who ought to preach the Fundamental Truths of
our Religion and Salvation, Curling his Cord, in accent and gesture aiming at
a Parisian air, acting the art of begging, and playing the Hypocrite all at
once? But that which makes me yet the more inveterate, is, that their affected
impertinence meets with approbation from the people, and that the word of God
cannot be tasted unless it be perfumed and adorned with all the flowers of
Rhetoric, and the Academical Graces. What fruit think you then can proceed
from persons who aim at nothing but to please! -- Who care not for gaining
Souls, but Ears; who in preaching endeavor not to persuade people any thing,
save that they preach well! If they are laborers as you have alleged, are
they not laborers in iniquity? If they are Trees drawn out of the Nurseries of
Cloisters, are not they such, which bring forth naughty fruit, and which our
Savior condemns to be rooted up? If they are Trumpets (seeing you call them
so) are they not of that naughty brass to which St. Paul compares himself, 1
Cor. 13. 1. and to which may justly be compared all such whose Sermons are void
of charity, yea even although in Eloquence they went beyond the very Angels?


F. Well, let that pass; but what have you to say concerning their Vespers, the
exposing and blessing of the holy Sacrament, which you seemingly tax?


P. God forbid, but when I see the holy Sacrament exposed at the upperend of
their Tabernacles, I should think that God is there, as heretofore he was on
Mount Calvary.


F. That is a good thought.


P. I mean, that he is there between two Thieves.


F. You are wicked.


P. And in the Blessing which they do give, I mark this, that even as when we
would have some body to remember something, it is the last thing you charge him
withal, and that you recommended to him; so also these devout Fathers, as they
bless and take leave of the people, make to them the sign of the Cross, by that
sign signifying to them not to forget them at their return.


F. You are a pleasant Interpreter.


P. Why do you imagine, that their Bells tingle so much, and so often? it is
only to allure the devout femal sex, under the pious pretense of Vespers, which
being ended, you may behold some of these Rommagrobis of Monks coming forth,
who greedily accost Women, and after a small chat lead them in dark Chapels.
It is there where there are bad actions and prating, and praying by feeling as
well as after Vespers.


F. What do you mean by those Vespers? nay, I comprehend you, I understand you,
you are malicious.


P. I beg your pardon for this Equivocation, tending a little to Libertinisme;
sometimes some Cloyster-saying slips from me, I did believe my self still a
Monk. But let us speak freely, and without equivocation; their Churches are now
like unto that Temple of Athens, which was dedicated to Impudence, or otherwise
like that of Corinth, which was consecrated to Venus. It is in these Churches
where all shame is lost; it is there where there is public wooing; it is there
where more Incense is given to Ladies than to Divinity it self.


F. What, is this profanation seen in all Churches? it is only where the Monks
inhabit.


P. I own that wheresoever men pray Pel-mel with Women there is prattling. But
it is evident that there is less elsewhere, than where these reverend Fathers
inhabit.


F. What would you have? they are obliged by interest to this toleration. In
case they would rectify this abuse, they would render their Churches deserts;
they must be complaisant to draw and entertain people.


P. It is well spoken, you begin to know them.


F. In truth this Toleration in Churches is scandalous; I do not believe that
Hugenots and Turks do the same.


P. Hugenots are modest in their Sermons. You see no Libertinisme in the Turks
Mosques; Women are separated from the Men, and sit in so close a place that no
body can see them.


F. I was some days since a-reading, that the Muscovites, who are Schismatics,
when they have enjoyed Women, dare not enter into the Churches, but keep
without, till they have bathed and washed themselves.


P. Quite contrary do our Christians, for they enter into Churches to enjoy
Women.


F. What a shame it is!


P. That is nothing; what would you say, if you had seen Monks snatch Women in
the Church, and in that holy place satisfy their brutal lasciviousness?


F. Is it possible! I would to God it were untrue, or that it had happened but
once.


F. What I say you so? I cannot believe it, that Religious men do so in
Churches; oh God?


P. I am amazed to see you surprised at this, seeing you have read the factum
of the Nuns of St. Clare of Provence against the Cordeliers; and there are
things no less abominable.


F. It is true; but I did only believe Cordeliers capable of such excesses.


P. What! only Cordeliers guilty? why then you think the Carmelites, the
Augustines, Jacobines, more chaste!


F. At least they are not so much defamed.


P. It is then to be feared that it would be a hard matter to persuade you,
that the other Orders, who appear or bear the name of Reformed, as Capuchins
and Recolets, Pickpuces, Minimes, Carmelites, Barefooted Austins, were capable
of the like abuses.


F. Yea surely.


P. Nevertheless there are Religious persons of these Orders, who have acted
these horrid Sacriledges.


F. What, of all those Orders?


P. I do not say of all, but I know Religious men of three of those Orders
which I have named, who have done what I have acquainted you withal, and I
abhor to speak it.


F. O God! but can they find Women loose enough to proceed so far?


P. Is it a thing to be admired at? nay hold it for a certain truth, that when
a Woman has once abandoned her self to a Monk, she is capable of all
debauchery. Those Devils take from them all sense of Religion and fear, corrupt
their minds by infernal and diabolical maxims, entertain them with discourses
full of filth and nastiness; and in truth make them at last a subject capable
of all manner of abomination.


F. They ought all to be burnt.


P. You are rigorous; then abundance of wood must be made use of. What will you
have? they satisfy themselves where they can.


F. What in the Church!


P. The Children of that offspring have no need of Baptism, for they are
begotten Children of the Church.


F. I cannot endure jesting on this subject; but have they so small a respect
for holy places? what are they not guilty of acting elsewhere?


P. Ha, ha, elsewhere. They are Dogs, Goats, Monsters of Adultery, and go
beyond whatever Petronius, Bocacius, or Aretine, have described. Where do you
imagine they go for the most part, when you behold them going with so much
fierceness and haste along the street? they are running after some prey, and
need only to be followed to discover a debauched house.


F. What say you then! Is it possible that they dare presume to appear there,
with those great Beads at their Girdle? where Crucifixes hang, Deathsheads,
Relics, Medals, and Caravaca-Crosses? It was a crime punishable by death to
carry into lewd places, Money or Coin wherein the Effigies of Augustus Caesar
was engraven.


P. You discourse of what was done in King Guillemots time; it is now a common
thing. And those who frequent those lewd places, say that for one Layman four
Monks may be found there; which makes me that I cannot forbear laughing when I
think upon the Patriarch Jacob's Vision.


F. What, the Vision of the Ladder?


P. No; it is that wherein he beheld speckled and party-colored males covering
femals.


F. Fie, fie, we ought to be very serious in the applications we make of
Scriptures and holy things. I call to mind with horror, with what profaneness a
Monk told me, that the Creed did expressly declare the sins of the flesh
pardonable; for instead of saying [ Remissionem peccatorum, carnis
Resurrectionem] this impudent fellow confounding the words of the Creed, did
say, [ Remissionem peccatorum carnis] the remission of the sins of the flesh.


P. God forbid that I should make any such use of Jacob's Vision, wherein that
Patriarch relates, Vidi ascendentes super faeminas masculos diversorum Colorum.
But in good faith, it is not likely that Jacob saw Jacobins, Carmelites, Friars
of St. Augustine's Order (who are all a party-colored sort of people) upon
women.


F. In that you had a pleasant thought. If that which the Patriarchs saw in
their time, was a figure of what was to come to pass in ours, I make no doubt
but that the Scripture intended to describe our speckled and party-colored
Monks and Friars. But to our purpose; Is that true which was lately told of a
Monk, who went to visit a sick woman, and who? etc.


P. I know what you mean, 'twas an Augustine Friar, with a long pair of sleeves;
pray press me not to name him.


F. I do not very well know that story, I pray oblige me with the relation of
it.


P. There was a good Fellow, who was in love with a very handsome young Widow,
who daily came to Mass in his Church, which was not far from her habitation;
and he being a Sacristan, upon his first beholding her, failed not, with a
smiling countenance, and his head half out of his Hood to go to her, and to
acquaint her that Mass would soon begin, and that for her sake he would forward
it. These small kindnesses were a means that at his passing through the Church,
procured him now and then some favorable looks, which proceeded in that fair
one, rather from civility, than from any inclination she had for that
Bald-pate. But he took it in another sense: and this Lady falling sick, and
having for three or four days been absent from Mass, this good Father missing
her makes an inquiry, and having understood the reason, fails not to give her a
visit, and to assure her how much he was concerned for her Indisposition, and
to profer her such small services as he was capable of; withal acquainting her,
that if she pleased, he would bring her some Relics from their Church, and
some of St. Nicholas's small loaves, by which several people had received ease.


F. All things are well spoken of a Monk, and you set him out so well, that
methinks I see him.


P. And you may imagine, this Woman could not choose but thank him, and tell
him, she was most infinitely obliged to him for the care he had of her health;
and that she did most willingly accept his kind proffer. But Father (says she)
pray what rare Relics have you? We have, says he, the holy Thorn, one of St.
Margarets Bones, one of Charles Barroness's Hose. These are curious Relics,
replies the sick Woman; but what virtues has St. Nicholas Bread? So many, says
the Monk, that sometimes several thousands of poor people have been cured by it
of the Ague in one City or Country. It quells the rage of evil spirits, it
quenches fire, and preserves houses from an irreparable conflagration, calms
the wind, and the waves of the Sea, diverts hail and tempests from fields, and
helps to defend from thunder, nay, it makes a person Musquet-proof.


F. It would be good to make of it Ammunition-bread for the Soldiers.


P. Be patient; it makes barren Women fruitful, and preserves the fruit of the
womb after conception, and eases their pains in Childbirth. It maintains in
health whosoever eats of it, it keeps from ill luck those who carry it about
them; it brings away from the tender throats of young Children the bones of
fish, bits of glass, needles, nails and the like, which they may have swallowed
unawares. It cures all Fevers, nay evil and pestilent, also Epidemical ones,
and the most incurable diseases; preserves from all poisons, delivers whole
Cities, nay Provinces from the Plague. In short, it operates many other
Miracles of the like nature. Father (says the good Woman) how much shall I be
obliged to you, if you will be so kind as to bring me a little of that blessed
bread, and of those holy Relics? To which he agreed, and in the morning comes
and brings I know not what sowed up in a fine bit of Taffity, tied with a
Ribbon at the end; and after a small Preamble made in commendation of those
Relics, begged leave of the Lady to tie them about her neck; then presenting
them to her to kiss, he pulled the pin from her smock, and puts this mystical
remedy between her two breasts.


F. O the Knave! she was a weak Woman.


P. Hitherto there was no great harm; but these breasts being uncovered, did so
far move him, that he cried out, Ah Madam, what a many beauties! must I receive
a wound from the same place where I intended to bring help! O Madam, I beseech
you suffer me, at which words he kissed her breast, she not being able to hinder
him.


F. O the thief!


P. That was not all.


F. You are going to tell me some Roguery.


P. I must acquaint you with the matter, how it was acted: there is no harm in
making vice to appear in all its colors, to cause horror of it: why then this
devout Father coming upon the bed would have this woman to touch another kind
of Relics.


F. O the infamous fellow! O the villain!


P. This caused the Woman to cry out, and my good Monk too; alas Madam, alas
Madam, have compassion on me. But hearing some body coming up, he was forced to
lose his prize; and as if nothing had happened, thrusting in again his head into
his Hood, and holding his Beads in one hand, running to the Maid who was come
up by reason of the noise, he told her very soberly, That her Lady had just now
felt a violent pang, which had caused her to cry out, and that she should be
very careful of her; in the mean while, says he, I will go and desire our
Fathers to pray God for her: So my Pilgrim saved himself.


F. O Tempora, O mores!


P. You cause me to laugh with your Exclamations. These are small matters, I
could tell you other Stories, which would make you cry out at anotherguess rate.


F. But is not a Religious person punished when he is guilty of the like
follies?


P. Yea verily, when its known; wherefore it ought to be taken notice of, that
whatever misdemeanors Monastical Order fall into they still strive to preserve
the outside, that is to say, to maintain themselves in esteem and reputation,
especially the Mendicants, whose Revenue is partly assigned upon the
benevolence of the public; so that when some scandalous fault is committed,
the same is punished, because that scandal has that of evil with it, in respect
of Monks, that if peoples charity be cooled their Kitchen grows cold, and it is
a stumbling block which breaks the pots and pans; which being a common interest
amongst all Religious persons, the Delinquents miss not to be cried out against
and to be chastised. Nevertheless with this Distinction, that in case it be a
poor fellow, whose talent reaches not to bring Grist to the Mill, he has his
fill of a Prison bestowed upon him; but if he be a Grand-man of the Order, a
Doctor of Paris, a Reader of Divinity, a Preacher, or some great man of the
Fraternity, he is sent to another Monastery, far off, with special and
honorable Commissions.


F. It is then very serviceable amongst them to be endued with Talents.


P. Yea truly, I know one, who was very well indu'd with that of Preaching, and
is a very handsome man, but otherwise mighty debauched, who having got a Nun
with Child at Tulin in Dolphine, was streight-ways sent to Dole, where he did
Preach with so much seeming zeal, that he was taken for a Saint; and women who
knew nothing of this matter, cried out, Blessed be the womb that bare thee.


F. This is the advantage which such kind of people have, when they have
committed some fault in one place, they need only transport themselves
elsewhere, where they are not known, and where, as if nothing were, they begin
new pranks. It Is not so with an Ecclesiastical person, who is tied to his
Benefice; and if he be tardy, his Crime appears upon his door; (that I may use
the words in Genesis). He must for the remainder of his days wipe off the
shame; whereas these fellows, after they have disgraced themselves in one
place, go and receive honor and respect in another.


P. Such as you talk of are very few; yet this would not hinder me from
accepting a Benefice in the Country, in case I could find it out. I am weary
of tumbling and living amongst the multitude, and would be glad to be my self,
as you are, to pass the rest of my days in a quiet retirement.


F. You are in respect of our condition, what I was in respect of yours. I did
propose to my self sweetness in a Cloister, and you believe to find the like in
a Benefice in the Country. Alas, how much are you deceived! bethink your self,
how miserable a thing it is to be confined to a Village, to live amongst
Peasants, who are like unto so many wild beasts, to pass your days without
conversing, without succor, without comfort; and at the end of this to be
reduced, as most are, to a most miserable and congruous portion.


P. Nothing is so much against my mind, as those congruous, or rather
incongruous portions: I cannot digest that injustice, which is apparent in the
division of Church-revenues, where those that do least have most.


F. Is it not an unjust thing to see men, having three and 4000 Livres per
annum, of Church-revenues, that exercise no function in the Church! to see the
Tithes raked from Parishes, by persons, who do no service in the Parishes? and
yet, which is most unsufferable, to see those very men that do service, share
their dues with others, from whom they should rather receive them. Is it not a
shameful thing, that in Churches, which yield them three and 4000 Livres
revenue, they will not so much as find a Cloth to cover the Altar, nothing
appearing there but Cobwebs and Dust?


P. That sort of people are of the Mageriens Religion, who worship Jupiter the
dusty, and whose Oratory had no cieling; yet they will tell you, that they have
the right of Nomination and Presentation, and that they are the
Primitive-Patrons and Donors.


F. It Is true, they are the Patrons, for they have patronised themselves into
our Revenues: they are Primitive, for they are beforehand with us, and are the
first that take our money.


P. They are in regard of benefits, even as direct Lords are in respect of
Fonds, whereof they draw the profit without manuring.


F. We are then their Emphriotes, and by consequence they our Lords; nay rather
our Surgeons, for they bleed us.


P. Yea, etc. But to return to our purpose; in my opinion this right of
Nomination and Patronage, name it as you please, is a great abuse.


F. I call it Right of Brokeridg.


P. You are in the right: for in case a Parson in a Benefice be sick,
streightway there is running to the Doctor, to inquire of his health; and if he
be in danger, there is spurring, flying, bribery, soliciting, entreaties,
begging for letters of recommendation; nay there is besetting, assassinating,
yea Patrons are sometimes ruined.


F. It Is the zeal of the Lords House devours those runners after Benefices;
it is that makes them afraid of Divine service, lest it be not performed. But
you speak only of Patrons, you say nothing at all of Matrons; such methinks
take the shortest way, who go directly to them, and put evidence into their
hands; for these Gentlemen Primitives, Patrons, and Donors, being all persons
of Quality, and of generous Spirits, bestow Benefice for Benefice.


P. A fair and worthy Calling, which implies, that the Ladies have the Key of
the Vestry, to speak properly, that people are made to enter the Church by
kicks on the Arse.


F. Softly; you express things after a strange rate: Do you call that speaking
neatly?


P. I retain a little tang of the Climate whence I came, I still think to have
my head in a hood; you must pardon me, by degrees I shall correct my self. But
let us proceed, if you please; I say that this abuse in the Church is of bad
consequence, for it binds the hands of Bishops, who cannot well refuse a
Benefice to him that is nominated, provided he be indifferently endowed with
knowledge, and have no ill report; as if it did particularly suffice for
Beneficed Curates, to be without scandal, whereas over and above he ought to be
endued with great Virtues, and Talents for the Conduct and Government of souls.


F. There are some Diocesses, as that of Sens, where there is but little care
of such Nominations, nay not so much as what Rome provides. A Priest should
wait for his justification, by his sufficiency and his virtue, whereof he ought
to have given proofs within the Diocese, by a probation of certain time, before
he be admitted to bear the name of Pastor.


P. This ought to be done everywhere: in Truth Mr. De Sans was a Prelate, he
was incessantly busied about reforming his Diocese, and did sharply keep down
the Monks -- I have always had a particular veneration for him, since he took
those poor Nuns of St. Clare of Provence, out of the Cordeliers Claws, who were
their directors.


F. I have wondered a hundred times, how Bishops suffer Nuns to be governed by
those filthy Varlets.


P. The Jacobins have done no less in such houses as were under their Conduct:
when I was a Scholar in a City of Languedock, I often went to visit one of my
kinswomen.

She was a Nun in a Monastery of St. Katherine of Sienna, whose director was a
Jacobin, a man of years, and of a good countenance; but otherwise a great
prater and babbler, whom I did often serve at Mass. This Father, being in the
Vestry, after he had undrest, did tell the Maids a thousand stories. I heard
him once tell a young one, that he had the last night dreamed of her, and that
in that dream he had ejaculatory Prayers, with great sighs and tenderness of
heart. Another time, entertaining himself with two of those Maids, he told them
what a devotion he had for Breasts, and that to enter into Paradise, he was in
the mind that one must first be in favor with Breasts; that it was to renew the
Martyrdom and Persecutions of the Primitive-Church, to keep those innocent
Breasts imprisoned, and to hinder them from seeing daylight; that they would
answer it before God Almighty, for using so much cruelty toward them, by not
suffering them to breath in the open air, and for smothering them in so narrow
a Prison.


F. Durst he prate of these follies to them?


P. That had been but a small matter only to prate of them, had he not acted
also. One day I perceived, that putting his hand through the Bar, he put it in
a fair Nuns breast.


F. He did visit the Breasts, which were Prisoners, and had a mind to enter into
Paradise. Yet this comes not near those abominable filthinesses, into which
those Devils of Cordeliers had plunged that Monastery of Provence. I wish that
Factum were reprinted, and that it were spread about everywhere, to the end
that those Goats might not dare any more to appear, but be forced to flee to
some solitary place, like unto these Scape-goats, laden with the sins of the
people, whereof mention is made in Leviticus.


P. Do you believe that that would avail in any thing? The Hood is an
Headpiece, and their Frock a Coatmale of good proof against all that. What
have these great men gained, William of St. Amor, Agrippa, Buchanan, Erasmus,
Canus, Bishop of Belley, and so many other, who have laid open the Monks
wickednesses? have they served to any other end, than the burning or
prohibiting their books, and for their own parts, the posting themselves for
Heretics?


F. As if it was all one to be a Heretic, and to write against those who
dishonor the Church!


P. The provoking of those wasps is a dangerous matter; for they go about the
Vatican buzzing, and perforce must have their demands granted. The Pope must
certainly excommunicate, and pronounce Anathemas on all such as they please,
otherwise all would be spoiled. When William of St. Amor had put forth against
them his Book, De periculis novissimorum temporum, of the danger of the last
days, they cried out upon it, and so much debated the same, that Pope Alexander
the fourth was forced to give, one upon the neck of the other, Forty Bulls in
their favor, for condemning of this Book; which though it was burnt by reason
of their earnest suit, was notwithstanding afterward (pray take notice of
this) acknowledged and declared innocent by the voice of the whole Consistory.
Yet after all this, these Furies did so bestir themselves, that they obtained
another Bull, by which the Author of it was prohibited to enter France, and the
University of Sorbonne to receive him.


F. It Is certainly true, what Alexander the sixth did say, that it was better
to have offended the most Potent King in the world, than a Franciscan, or
Dominican Friar.


P. And did not Paul the Fifth more fear the Monks discontent, than that of the
republique of Venice?


F. Then I cease admiring at our Popes yielding to them so freely their demands.


P. The Popes are very glad to entertain them: For do you imagine the
Triple-Crown did not tremble to see four or five hundred thousand Hoods stir
and grumble? they would make the Pope himself to pass for a Heretic, if he
should deny them their demands.


F. Cursed generation! they ought then to be smitten by an invisible hand, and
have Books made against them without any name to them.


P. All that would still avail nothing, for being very powerful with Sovereigns
and Ministers of State, who are afraid to send them back discontented, they
presently obtain Orders of Council, prohibiting all Booksellers, and Printers,
to expose to sale, or publish such Books upon pain of Death, as they did the
Works of Mounsieur De Belley: so that those Books, which were as an antidote
against the corruptions of the times, were prohibited, and durst not appear
save in the Closet of some curious person, who only read them in private. Had
it not been for this, I had caused to be Printed, for the diversion of the
public, a small work which I have made, containing six Chapters. The first
treates of the super-eminencies and prerogatives of the most holy Hood; the
second of the mysterious differences and proprieties of Cords, Strings,
Girdles, and Thongs, be they of Tow, Horse-hair, Woollen, or Leather; the third
of the miraculous privileges of Socks, Hooks, and Sandals; the fourth of the
holy fullness of the mumpers-Bag, who work miracles amongst the people; the
fifth of the curious Original of Hooks, Wooden-pegs, and Buckles of Horn,
whereof certain orders make use as an important help to devotion; and the sixth
of the nobility of some Brother-mumper.


F. Yet they ought to have caused that small work to have been Printed, which
in truth would have been very pleasant. But what do you understand by that
nobility of some Brother-mumper?


P. By that I mean, that there are certain Friars, who would persuade us, that
such a one is a Gentleman, that formerly he bore Arms, that he has had Command
in the Army. This is done to the end that fools being prepossest with this
opinion, and admiring this example of Conversion and Submission, may more
largely bestow their Alms; for, say they, here is what may well teach us to
mortify our selves: Do you behold that Brother who begs and carries the bag,
demanding Alms? He is a Gentleman: then the Husband bids the Wife fetch up a
pint of the best in the Cellar, and empty it into the brothers Bottle, who will
pray for them.


F. In good truth you ought to have published that piece.


P. Yea, but those mumpers -- who know all things, and are everywhere, would
have suppressed it before it had come to light; and when they can do no better,
they buy, or cause to be bought up by their Friends, all the Copies of a Book,
and gather them to themselves, as the Cordeliers have done of the Factum of the
Nuns of Provence, in such wise, that an Author is frustrated of his
expectation, and the public deprived of their pleasure which they might have
received --


F. The meaning then is, that they will continually guard against all blows
that can be given them.


P. Yes, unless you use against them Libels and Pasquels, as they do at Rome
against the Pope and Cardinals.


F. How should that be done?


P. I would do thus: as soon as it should be known that a Monk had played some
prank, it should immediately be posted up in some of the most frequented
places. By this means the people going and coming, who should see it, would
spread the same quite through the City. Then for example's sake, I would put in
my Paper to be posted up: Such a day, such a father, of such an order, was
surprised in a bawdy house with a Curtisan by three good companions, who having
seized him, threatened that they would call the Captain of that quarter, which
obliged this good religious person, that he might free himself out of their
hands, to present them with his Advent and Lent-Money, with all he had begged,
and all had been gathered for him at the Church-doors; as also to pay the
Collation, which they had sent for to treat the Monk -- Such a Father the
festival day of their blessed Patriarch, having confessed, or seeming to have
confessed a Curtesan (known to be such a one) at his going from thence,
returned to the Convent; and the wench being gone to wait for him at the gate,
this good Father was seen to cause her to enter the Porters Lodge, who doubtless
was privy to the design, where she remained at least five or six hours, without
doubt to fulfill the penance which he had enjoined her. -- Such a day there was
difference in such a Monastery occasioned by a Maid, whom Father Guardian had
kept for some days in his Chamber, which being discovered by the Father Vicar,
and other religious persons swore, they would make a noise, unless they had
some share in the prize. The Father Guardian could not agree to it, because the
wench had been his Creature a long time. But at last, to prevent the noise and
scandal, he quitted her to them, though with much ado; for he keeps her with
the money, which he gets for the Books of Devotion he makes; for Mass, which
good people cause him to say, and for the Octaves he Preaches.


F. It would be a most excellent way to mortify that kind of people, to stick
up such Papers. But what you have just now said, do you alledg it for example
sake, or for things really done? --


P. I know the religious persons, who have been guilty of such things; they are
all Reverend Cordeliers. --


F. O God!


P. What a good man are you? little else daily appears.


F. Truly, Thus Father Guardian makes use of good means, to keep his Whore with
Books of Devotion, Sermons and Masses.


P. He cannot keep her with more holy things.


F. Yea, but he makes a profane use of them. Alas, what would good St. Francis
say, if he should again return into this world, and behold such execrable
things!


P. What would he say, if he saw Cordeliers take their Hood off their heads,
and cover a great Bottle with it, singing round about it Bacchanal Songs; if he
saw them stigmatized with no other marks, but such as they give one another; or
such as Cancers and Buboes have left behind them! How would he be surprised, in
case he was informed, that Carousing Monks, after their having given Wenches a
Collation in the Church, the doors being shut, should throw themselves upon
them, and flea their very Breasts by their excessive kissing and rubbing them
with their great Beards? What would that good Saint say, if word was brought
him, that a Capuchin, debauching himself in a house in the Country, caused a
dozen small Butter-flies to be tied to his Beard, and made twenty Capers in
that ridiculous condition? What would it be if all the holy Patriarchs did come
to keep grand days, each in his order, in case they found within the small
Caves of their religious persons, Bawdy-Books, Love Letters, Assignation-notes,
Sweetmeats, Muscadine, Rosa solis, Dice, Cards. Tobacco and Pipes; if they saw
religious persons Carowsing a whole night amongst Pots and Classes, burning out
the Candles which their Benefactors had bestowed upon them at their begging? If
they heard them blaspheme God like Archers, and utter more insolences and
villainies, than Soldiers boys belonging to an Army would speak? What would it
be, in case they found some, who after their having debauched themselves for
one part of the night, had stripped themselves stark-naked, and danced in that
manner, in infamous postures, which was done in a Monastry of the Barefooted?
If they were acquainted, that religious persons at their coming from Preaching,
should have showed to servant-maids their Privy-parts? that Maids who come to
them complain, that in their confessing them, they put their hands between
their Breasts and Thighs. What would St. Austin say, who was afraid to inhabit
under the same roof with his Sister, if he found debauched Wenches in their
Chambers? If he saw some of them go publicly to Bawdy-houses? If he found them
armed with Trencherknives, and ready to cut one another throats, as they did
two years since in a great Convent at Paris? What would St. Dominicus say, if
he beheld Jacobins wear Holland-shirts, Silkstockins, a Chamlet-Coat, with
Silver-Galoon, a white Scarf with Golden Fringe, under the habit he gave them?
What would St. Francis of Paul, that good man, not say, if he found Pistols in
religious persons Pockets, and Sword-Blades in their sticks? If he heard, that
in one of their Missions, three of his did keep and entertain for two months a
debauched Wench? If Minimes were named to him, who being in a Parlour of Nuns,
should have tucked up their Gowns, and for half an hours time danced before
them? What would Helias say, if he found a Carmelite, that had broken his Leg
by falling into a Well, without a brim, when he was crossing a garden in the
night, intending to go lie with a Woman? [ N. B. the Author only touches here
the most common things, and suppresses such stories as would cause horror.] In
short, once more, What would that good St. Francis say, if he saw that his
Children have most ignominiously caused his Will to be annulled?


F. How, annul his Will?


P. Why, then you know not what it is that good Saint obliged them to by his
Will, foreseeing the evils which idleness would bring upon them: he bound them
to work, and to live by the labor of their hands; forbidding them to have
recourse to begging, unless their labor was not sufficient for their
maintenance? But they, to whom this clause was too burdensome, caused sentence
to be pronounced by Nich. 3. and Gregory 9. to absolve them from any obligation
of keeping to this Will, as being of no force nor validity.


F. Alas, idle fellows! if ever they come a-begging to my house, I shall send
them packing, both their selves and their Ass, to the Will of their Father.


P. Speaking of their Ass, you put me in mind of the Golden-Ass of Apuleius, to
whom this Author caused to be pleasantly rehearsed the begging of certain
Priests of the Goddess of Syria. That Ass then reports, that those people did
frequent the Villages, showing the Effigies of their Gods, promising
Country People, that they should be prosperous and favorable; that in exposing
their Idols, people did offer them in requital Copper and Silver-money, which
those mumpers did pocket up very conveniently: besides those offerings, there
was given them, Wine, Milk, Cheese, Wheat, Rye, Herbs, which they did put in
Bags and Bottles, brought on purpose. All that, says that poor Ass, both Gods,
and what they had begged, was laid on my back, and after that these Quacks had
Forraged whole Countries throughout, I was led home fully laden, and out of
breath, to lay up again, the Gods in the Temples, and the booty in the Cellars
and Garrets.


F. Laying aside those Idols, those Asses of begging Monks, who might be able
to say the same thing, in case they had the gift of the Tongue, as Balaams Ass
had; for the Monks who sweep away all they can in houses of poor
Countrey-people, they beg Wheat, Wine, Eggs, Oil, Butter, Cheese, Bacon,
Sassages, Thread, Linen, Tow, and put all these upon their Ass.


P. They do not expose Idols to sight, but give Images of their Saints, of St.
Francis, St. Antonio of Padua, St. Dominicus, St. Austin, St. Nicholas, of our
Lady of mount Carmel, of Lights, of the Rosary of Angels, of Grace, of Joy, of
Consent, of good Help, of good Hope, of good Rancounter, of good News, of good
Delivery, of Comfort, of Slavery, of good Carriage, of Piety, and of our Lady
of the seven Pains. Besides, they give them Agnus dei's, Gospels, names of
Jesus in red letters, which they say cures the ague.


F. What a trade's here?


P. All this is nothing: there was one, who after the Canonizing of St. Francis
of Sales, seeing that the people had some devotion for that Saint, run through
the Villages, exposing to view that Saints relics, as he pretended, in a
small Casquet covered with Taffety, which they did present to young women to be
kissed; receiving with a great deal of devotion the money which they gave them
to say Masses, although his rule did forbid the taking of any; but he alleged,
that in this case it was permitted him. By mishap he went to sell his Balsam in
a small City, where there was a wise Curate, who demanded of him his
Attestation, Approbation, and Warrant from the Bishop, without which it is a
crime to produce such things. But he having no Passport, and finding himself
threatened to be had before the Prelate, shut himself up with his bones and
booty in his Convent.


F. He may be gone with his Relics elsewhere.


P. You may believe it; this is their manner of way.


F. But you acquaint me not who is this Carrier abroad of relics?


P. He is of those who would be stricter than the strictest observers of St.
Francis, who profess his rule ad litteram, as they say, and who in the case of
a Monks perfection, bear him up at least half a foot beyond the Capuchins.


F. It Is then a Recollett.


P. Tu dixisti, you have said it.


F. O the Shirks, the Mountebanks! it was a hard thing for me to believe what
lately a Gentleman of Dauphine was telling me concerning those people; but I
now believe it. He acquainted me that two Recolletts, begging in his
Neighborhood, went to take their Lodging in a good Citizens house, who did
commonly receive them, and made them sup with two good fellows of his Friends,
who were also at his house; who seeing these two Monks of a good humor, made
them drink heartily. After supper, these two Laymen would smoke, and these two
religious persons joined with them, and smoaked also; then they began to drink
again, afterward to dance, and my religious persons did the like. In fine,
they did so debauch themselves, that they took off their hoods, and put on
other Clothes, and so went in company with those Laymen, to pass the rest of
the night in drinking in an Alehouse, to smoke, dance, and kiss the Maids.


P. By that means they observe very well the rule ad litteram; but seeing we
are discoursing concerning those people, I will impart unto you something
remarkable, which Alcippus, whom you know very well, did the last winter: he
perceived two going out of their Convent on a snowy day, each having his staff,
and a certain Rocket, which they put over their Coats: being surprised to see
such people go abroad in such bad weather, and in a traveling habit, he had a
mind to know what would become of them; therefore he followed them, and as they
passed through the streets, women cried out, Alas, where go those poor Fathers
this weather! he still following them by his eye, he saw them enter a Widows
house and within a minute after the Maid goes out with a Flaggon, and a Napkin,
to a Neighbouring-Cooks for some Wine and a Pie.


F. Without doubt they did make that woman believe that they came out of the
Country, and that they were almost starved for hunger and cold.


P. It Is likely so: they continued there about an hour, and having gone forth,
they fetched a great Circuit, and returning by another way, other women said
the same; O do you see those good Fathers? Whence can they come this bad
weather? Alas, how much do they endure to gain Paradise! without doubt they
come from seeing some sick person in the Country. Jesu Maria, how much they
endure! My Blades having accomplished this fair journey, went to secure
themselves in their Convent.


F. What sort of Pilgrims were these?


P. It Is no hard matter to judge, that this was done for two Ends, the one to go
juncket at that Woman's house; the other to cause the people believe, that they
suffer very much; that they are exposed to many hardships, insomuch that they
passing the next day by the same ways to beg, find people well-disposed to fill
up their Bottle and their Bag.


F. O Rascals! Do you not believe that the Capuchins do as much?


P. Are they not Monks as well as the Recolletts? Do you think they want
dexterity and craft more than the other?


F. Those Capuchins are good.


P. Ha, ha, They are the quintescence of the four sorts of Mendicants, the most
famous University of Begging in the Christian World, the most famous University
of Knavery that we have, which produces Masters in the art of Idling,
Batchelors in the use of Funnels and Bottles, Doctors of Begging, and
Professors of the Bag.


F. They are visiters of Castles, and make long Stations in noble-mens houses.


P. Great Zealots of the Cross, of Mortification, of Poverty, the inconvenience
whereof they very little feel, being the best accommodated Mendicants in the
whole Monastical order. Have you ever observed the tales they tell to great
fools and young women? Whom they acquaint, that oftentimes at the ringing of
the Bell to meals, they find nothing but a mess of Pottage; but grace being
said, the Bell at the gate is heard to Ring; where the Porter going to open,
finds Bread and Bottles of Wine, which is sent by some good soul, without which
they must have been fain to have dined with a mess of Broth; but that God will
not have those who throw themselves upon his Providence to starsameve.


F. I have notwithstanding had very good cheer with them. I was invited to
their Convent by one of the Lords of the Order, who treated me most excellently
well. As soon as he had me within, he introduced me to the Guardian, and to
another of the chief. Sir, says he, here is one of our Friends, whom we ought
not to mistrust; he receives us at his house when we go thither, and did us the
honor two years since to Preach here; and it is very reasonable we should
treat him. Mum for that, says the Father Guardian; but how shall we do? We
must, said he who had invited me, send Brother Lewis with the Brother Gardener
to carry a Colliflower to the Lieutenant General, and they will acquaint him
that we have with us one of our Benefactors, who is come to see us as he past
by, whom we desire to treat with a Bottle of good Wine: from thence they will
go to the Lady his Mother, who is devoted to your Reverence; she will make a
Pie, or a Cake, in case she be also acquainted, we have this Friend here. The
Hostess of the Golden-Cross, who is a good Friend to Father Ralph, will, it is
likely, send us a Woodcock or two, or a fat Capon, and, if your Reverence like
it, a bit of Veal may be taken up at the Kings Attorneys Butchers, according to
the leave he has given us, which we will send to be baked at Mrs. Fluries.
Father Guardian, having given these orders, in less than two hours time comes
twice as much as meat as was required. The Lieutenant sends six pints of most
excellent Wine, the Hostess at the Golden-Cross two Woodcocks, Father Guardians
devout Lady, besides a Pie of Potatoes, sent Cakes, Biskets and Mackroons, and
Mrs. Fluries added a large Liveret to a Loin of Veal, which was taken up at the
Butchers.


P. You had wherewithal to make merry.


F. And so we did.


P. You have named one Father Ralph: I knew in Averna one of that name, whose
Beads, as he said, had the virtue to cause barren women prove with Child. So
that there was no barren women in any place, where that Father had been, but
were advised to make use of Father Ralph's Beads.


F. I know not if he be the same, they have amongst them several of that name;
but seeing we are talking of the Capuchins, I would fain know why those same,
and the Barefooted Augustins wear those great Hoods like an Hypocras-bag.


P. I Will tell you then: as that Bag serves to refine and rectify Liquors,
separating the pure from the impure; so those people have purified and
rectified St. Francis's and St. Austins Order, and having filtered as it were
those two Orders, in memory thereof they carry the figure of the Bag on their
heads.


P. You have at this time paid me, all your arrears: but what do you say of
their great Beards?


P. I say, they are at present what they were formerly, the sacred Forests in
the midst whereof the Gods had their Oracles; that their hair are precious
excrements, and are as many small threads, wherewith Cupid chains Ladys hearts.


F. You have again satisfied me this time, I would fain make love to those
Beards.


P. What, to those Beards? You never saw any thing so gallant; upon my faith I
jest not, but speak in good earnest.


F. Yea, with this ridiculous garb and these naked feet.


P. Alas, so far is it from being a hinderance, that I will make it appear to
you, it does promote their passion. First, Women have extravagant and irregular
appetites, which is the occasion that they fancy those Satyrs. Secondly, When
they are in love, they have great care to keep their arms and their feet white,
to make that curious Sex greedy to pry very far in them, whereby they affect
deeply their sight and imagination, which being gained, I give you leave to
judge whether the rest make any resistance.


F. What you say in this, is very likely.


P. Therefore on this subject, I will make you laugh at an adventure, which
befell a friend of mine at Lions, whither he went last winter about some
affairs. He lodged at a Widows house infatuated by those hooded fellows; and he
told me, that upon a Sunday after dinner, having kept himself in his Chamber a
writing till two of the Clock, and intending to seal his Letters, there being
no Maid to bring him a Candle; the Mistress having sent her to obtain pardons
from the Carmelites, he went to the Kitchen to light his Wax-Candle, where he
found his Landlady rosting two Woodcocks and two Partridges. The man seeing
this fine preparation, said to the Woman, Madam, what is the meaning of this?
do you make a Wedding to day? no, says she, it is for some Gentlemen, who are
playing at our Neighbors, that have prayed me to let these be roasted here,
because their Jack is broke: he returning to his Chamber, saw upon the stairs
two Barefooted Austin-Fryers, to whom immediately the Landlady did open the
door. This caused him to defer sealing his Letters, to see the result of
things: in the interim while the Landlady was showing them to a Chamber, he
returns into the kitchen, and slips into a Chamber joining to that which they
were gone into, and which was only parted with a Wainscot-partition: by
good-luck there was in that room a Table covered with a Carpet, which reached
down to the feet of it: there my man hides himself, where he overheard
pleasant things.


F. This is worth a great deal of Money.


P. The Landlady then having conducted those two black Capuchines into the
other room, told them, that Mrs. Jane would come immediately, that in the mean
while she must needs make a step into the Kitchen: then he heard one of those
Augustins ask the other for his Comb, and without doubt it was to Comb his
Beard. It was no sooner done, but Mrs. Jane came in: This Father which had
spoke before, told her, You are most heartily welcome, you have delivered me
from a great pain, I did even tremble for fear lest you should not come at all.
I did not intend to fail you, replys Mrs. Jane; I have sent my Maid to hear the
Carmelites, who are people which keep them long, and told her that I went to
Vrsula's: you are, said the Father, the most obliging and most lovely person in
the world: Well, well, said Mrs. Jane, let us bar complements at this time: O
what a warm hand is here, says the Father? Ah, do but mind the fervor of my
soul: you are a great kisser, says Mrs. Jane, what a white arm is that? not so
white as that fair breast, replys the Augustine.


F. And what did his companion do in the mean while?


P. You ask me the same question, which I did that Friend, he went presently,
said he to me, to the Landlady, who said, O how plump they are! Jesus, and how
white tool (without doubt he did show her his legs). After this the Roast-meat
being set upon the Table, come say they, we must dispatch; here, shall us wash?
I love mightily that good Father N. says the Landlady, he has helped to Cook
the meat: see how his sleeves are tucked up, he has reason to show his naked
arms, for upon my faith, they are very white: I had rather see that white skin,
than all the small Goslings of our Town: you would not think, added she, that
one of our boarders came into the Kitchen whilst I was turning the spit, whom I
fob'd off with a pretense, that it was for some Gentlemen who were playing at
one of our She-neighbours, who had brought it me here to Roast, because her
Jack was broke; he swallowed the Gudgeon presently, and so went up to his
Chamber again.


F. I should not have been able to have forborne laughing, had I been hid in the
same place where your friend was.


P. Why, he was very near spoiling all (as he told me), and was forced to go
from under the Table, not being able to contain from laughing any longer;
besides, he was in haste to carry his Letter to the Posthouse, and had it not
been for that, he had heard the end of the Comedy.


F. Certainly he heard enough: but who'd have thought so much of these
Turlupins?


P. Why do you give them that name?


F. It is in derision.


P. You have hit better than you thought for: Do you know what Turlupin means?
They were a sort of Heretics, who said we ought not to be ashamed to show
those members which nature had given us: so that you have nicked the right name
for 'em exactly.


F. I am glad of it: I will henceforward call all Barefooted Monks by no other
name than Turlupines.


P. You may call them Nudipedales, who were another sort of Heretics, that, as
St. Austin tells* us, were persuaded, that perfection only consisted in going
barefooted


F. The word Turlupins pleases me better than that of Nudipedales, and
therefore I will keep to that: but is it not a horrible thing then, that those
Turlupines should draw on women to sin by marks of penitence? This nakedness is
against common shame and honesty, one ought to oblige those people to have
their arms and legs covered.


P. Something must be permitted them to comfort themselves against that
vexation which their great Beard causes, specially when it begins to look
grayish.


F. I believe that Beard of theirs is very troublesome to them.


P. You cannot imagine how much they are tormented about it, and with what
jealousy they look upon other. Monks which are shaved. These fools spend whole
hours to pluck out gray-hairs, to root out those forerunners of age, to black
their Beards: and when they are with their women, they will tell them that they
are but five and thirty years of age, that the great Austerities, and continual
Macerations, and inconveniences of a religious life, make them grow white
before their time. What do you think, say they? How extremely do these waste
the body, and shorten a man's days?


F. Subtle Foxes!


P. They are certainly Foxes, but such as Sampson let loose into the
Philistines Corn, which had firebrarnds at their tails.


F. Ah truly, the comparison is not amiss, you always make some scurvy
application of Scriptures; but yet at last say what you can, they are not all
of an amorous complexion, nor do they all take pains to pluck hairs out of
their Beards.


P. Those that are not tainted with that folly, look upon themselves to be
Statesmen, and set up for Directors and Counselors, wherein their Beards is a
mighty help to them; for although it be not a certain sign of Wisdom, the seat
of that virtue being in the brain, and not in the chin; yet the spirit of man,
as knowing as it is, suffers it self to be cheated by those foolish
appearances. Hence it is that a Magistrate will appear to us more majestic in
his Robes, a Prelate more awful in his pontifical habit, and so likewise a Monk
more wise and venerable with a long Beard. Those therefore amongst them, who
are more inclined to ambition than love, apply themselves to make higher
Conquests, and to govern the minds of great ones. They insinuate themselves
into their houses by their addresses, and keep themselves there by flattery,
and by that false sign of honesty which hangs at their chin: as in appearance
they profess they have quitted all pretensions and interests upon the face of
the earth, and that they have absolutely devoted themselves to God, and to the
study of Wisdom; their flattery is therefore so much the more dangerous, and of
greater efficacy; for a person of Quality, were he the greatest fool upon
earth, cannot forbear having a high esteem of his person, seeing himself so
extolled by people, he believes to have a right in the sharing of glory: and
thus he will take for his own merit, the submissions and venerations that those
Loobies give only to his Authority, or to his great Estate.


F. In this you say nothing but what may be affirmed of all Monks.


P. I own it, for all generally do use subtilty and flattery; but you must
agree with me, that great Beards causing religious persons to appear more
venerable, and serving them as it were for Letters of Recommendation, those who
are endued with that prerogative, have a marvelous advantage over the other;
for if all them have the knack to insinuate and root themselves in the minds
and houses of great ones, it may be said of those that they do there establish
themselves highly and profoundly in length and breadth, according to all the
dimensions of their Beards.


F. Yea very well, etc. I was formerly Chaplain to an old Don, who had been in
the Wars, and there having got vast riches, he left off all business to spend
the remainder of his days in Tranquillity, and at ease; he commonly kept
himself in a fair house, which he had two Leagues off Paris, where he was very
often visited by religious persons: he did receive them all with great
kindness, taking a world of delight and satisfaction in their company; also
those people did extremely well act their parts in all the visits they gave him.


P. It Is that wherein they cannot err, they know a man before ever they have
seen him, they know the qualities of his body and mind, what his ability is,
and which are his blind sides; they see that in the memoirs they find within
the Convent, where persons of Quality, with whom they have some concerns, or at
least will pretend it, are described to the life, from head to foot; so that
they are only to conform their steps and movements according to those rules;
therefore being provided with these advices, they take for fundamental maxims,
never to lose the sight, the humor and inclinations of the party with whom
they have to do, always to be with them, and to calculate all their discourses
and motions to the meridian of their tempers. By this means they seize on a
man's mind at the first sally, and as I may so speak, make him a Proselite to
them by a crafty Countermine. But this is not the sole advantage which they
have, for as Monks make it much their business to travel up and down almost all
Countries, and so consequently cannot but meet with several persons, who have
either seen Italy or Spain, or else a great part of France, those things they
have taken notice of, are of a most singular help and service to them, and that
makes them to be very pleasant and charming in their Conversations: moreover,
they are acquainted with many excellent Recipes, even for most sort of
distempers; for you must know, all Monks are Physicians, they understand
Buildings, Gardens, Trees, Flowers, Fountains; nay they also make Presents of
seeds from Foreign Countries, which causes them to get many a good meals meat.
All this joined to a great stock of confidence and flattery, makes them to be
received everywhere, so that indeed no door is shut against them, nay not so
much as the Closet.


F. It is true: but if they have the good luck to meet with any person of
Quality that will let them govern them, I warrant you they know to a
hairsbreadth how to make a mouth of him.


P. It Is what I was just a-going to acquaint you with, O, it is Nuts and Sack
to them, when they have got so far. When I was a Preacher at Toulouse, will one
say, I had all the chief members of Parliament for my particular good friends.
I caused a suit-in-law to be recovered for a Gentleman of Languedock, and Son
to one of our Benefactors, where the concern was above 6000 Livres per annum;
although his Adversary was one of the eminentest in all the Province, never was
any business carried on with greater vehemence against one by an opposite
party, than that was; but notwithstanding I got the better for him, by the
influence I had over my friends on the bench. When e're I happen to go to that
good Gentleman's, he embraces me, falls about my neck and kisses me, and calls
me his Protector, his Tutelar Angel, his Savior, which makes me to shun as
much as I can going to his house, because when I once am there, he will hardly
ever let me get away from him again. Another of them peradventure will say,
That all the two years that he has lived at Provence, a Coach was continually
at the door of the Convent, either from the Kings Lieutenant, or from Monsieur
the Intendent, to have him thither; that there was such striving for his
company, that he could not be at one persons house, without giving jealousy to
another; and it was that only consideration which caused him to leave that
Country, in the which he could not enjoy a moments retirement to himself; that
he daily receives the most obliging Letters in the world, to invite him to a
return, that he must of necessity feign an indiposition to defend himself from
their extreme civilities; and that he very much fears, lest those persons, who
are of most Authority there, will obtain from the General an express order to
command his return.


F. About six Months since I had one of them at my house, just in the same
condition: 'twas a Tiersair, endowed with a most lovely Bread; he came from
Paris, where he had dwelt a year, having been sent thither about some affairs
concerning his Province: he acquainted me, that his employ having caused him to
be known to a great many of the Grandees at Court, he had had the happiness to
make them all his Friends; that he had brought from Rome, from whence he came
before his going to Paris, Beads and very rare Meddals, which he had presented
to Princesses, Dutchesses, and Marchionesses; that those small trifles had
procured him a very great access, and familiarity amongst them. That there came
none to hear him Preach, being at Paris, but such as kept a rustling in their
Velvets and Brocards; and that he spent all the afternoon in Alcoves, and with
the Ladies, sitting down by them upon their beds. He further told me, that
notwithstanding the multitude of businesses which he had, and the frequent
visits he was fain to make; yet he could not defend himself from Preaching ten
or twelve times, being so extremely solicited thereunto by persons of the
highest Quality, who did, as it were, drag him into the Pulpit, that he had
Preached at St. Germans of Auxerois, at St. Eustas, at Notradama, at St. Andre
Deans, at St. Nicholas in the Fields, at St. Severin, at the Valdegrace, at the
Carmelites, Fillesdieu, at the Fevillantines, Vrsulines, and at the Maquelonets.


P. Ha! here was good store of Preaching indeed. You should have asked him if
he had not been mightily urged to Preach, during Lent.


F. I did not omit it: he told me he had been offered three Pulpits, and that
he could not accept of one for a certain reason, which he then told me: as I
remember it was, because he was to be at the general Chapter, which was to be
held the Lent ensuing.


P. Believe him!


F. Preaching is one of the most extravagant transports that these Monks have.


P. Yes indeed, I think it is the greatest of all: they will severely baldernoe
you in their Sermons at Lent, Advent, the Octaves, with their designs, ideas,
thoughts, divisions; with their first, and second, and third points, and it
shall please you. O! you will not find one that has not Preached before a
Parliament: and is not this to fall from heaven, will they say to you, after
that they have Preached before a Parliament at Bordeaux, and at Grenoble, to
come and take up with a diminutive Parish? to Preach to pitiful ink-sops,
pettifoggers, and rake fcum-notaries? But yet, as debasing as it is, it is an
employment which I have voluntarily courted, and I will strive to lower my
self, even to their reaches, and to accommodate my self according to their
capacity. I will retrench from my Sermons, whatever is eloquent, refined, and
raised, that so I may not cast pearls before swine; I will utter only the most
Moral, and the most Palpable truths; I can do that playing, and with the
greatest ease and refreshing to me imaginable; thereby I shall be dispensed
withal, from rising at midnight, and going to the quire at other hours.


F. Just so they speak.


P. But as to your old Gentleman, whose Chaplain you were, you began to speak
something of him, and afterward let the discourse fall again.


F. Have we not left him in good hands, having left him in the hands of Monks?


P. You say very right. But what, was he alone? had he neither Wife nor
Children?


F. He had a Wife excessively old, but no Children.


P. Oh! I do not marvel at their keeping so close to him; these vultures smelt
their prey, but orders were most received there?


F. Above all other were the Jacobins, Capuchins, Carmelites, and Barefooted
Austins.


P. Four great Satchelly Evangelists, what a battery there was of Hoods, two
round, and two pointed, against two Cripples?


F. Those good people are always visited by one of the four, and sometimes by
all four at a time.


P. That is to say, that your old Blade was surrounded by those four sorts of
Animals, who observed him well-near as narrowly as he of the Revelations, who
was invested by four Beasts, that had eyes before and behind, in circuitu sedis
quatuor animalia plena oculis ante and retro. Round about the Throne were four
Beasts full of eyes before and behind.


F. That passage pretty well explains the thing, were it not that our good man
did not look on those Creatures as Beasts, but like unto Angels.


P. But then we must say, that they were the four Angels which were spoken of
in the same Revelations, who only employ themselves to hurt both Sea and Land,
Quatuor Angeli quibus datum est nocere terrae and mari.


F. These did not seem to intend any hurt to that house, nay quite the
contrary, to procure it all kind of advantages, and spiritual blessings; they
were continually Preaching to them concerning the shortness of this life, of
the Contempt we ought to have of these earthly, vain, and perishable goods; of
the absolute necessity of minding our eternal salvation; on the uncertainty of
the hour of death; on the need that Christians have to be helped by Prayers in
this dangerous passage; that it was then that Satan did redouble his strength
to destroy souls.


P. Ah! good Apostles: and why thus the Angels of darkness appear, just like
the Angels of light. But pray Sir, go on if you please.


F. That their suffrages were very necessary to those that were ready to dye,
that there were no oblations more acceptable to God, than the sacrifice of the
Mass; that a man ought with his estate to lay up for himself a treasure in the
other world; that relations, when they once come to inherit another persons
fortune, do take no care to make any Prayers to God for them; that they forget
the memory of them with the sound of the Bells; that David had very well
foreseen that ingratitude, when he said, Periit memoria eorum cum sonitu, their
memory perishes with the sound.


P. Do not you perceive somewhat in this, Comrade?


F. Yes, that so such a necessary succor might not be made to depend only on
the will of the heirs, there was no better way in the world could be thought
on, than this of inventing a good number of Masses to be mumbled over; that the
departed were very much relieved, and comforted by Communities that are
composed of a good many religious persons; that as soon as any Benefactor was
dead, notice should be given to all the Convents of one order, and that Masses
should be said for him all over Christendom.


P. Good now! and was this their prattle?


F. These were the ordinary discourses wherewith they did trouble the ears of
those good people. In short, those four orders did present themselves like a
Chariot with four wheels, to lead them to Paradise: the Jacobins had inrowled
themselves in the fraternity of St. Rosair, the Carmelites in that of
Scapulary, the Capuchins had given themselves Letters of filiation, and the
Augustins the girdle of their glorious Patriarch. Every one of these orders was
welcome for some particular reason or other; the Jacobins were considered for
the sake of St. Dominicus, whose name Monsieur was off. The Lady did love the
Capuchins for the sake of St. Francis of Assize; because she was eased of a
pain in the reins, when ever she did sit down.


P. That was mighty lucky.


F. The Carmelites were reverenced as Brothers of the Virgin, and the
Augustines were very much in esteem, because of the great miracles, which were
reported to be wrought by Father Barnard of their order (for that reason
surnamed Father of miracles) at Lions in their Church of the Russet-Cross.


P. Ay indeed, these are four reasons which ought to render the said four
orders very recommendable.


F. The great Augustins had formerly been in favor, but they were outdone by
the Barefooted ones, at whose hands the Lady had received St. Austins girdle,
which did put the other into so much wrath, that they would come thither no
more.


P. A great Augustine to invite Madam to take the Girdle of St. Austin, one day
begun to speak ( mirabilia) wonders of that girdle, and of the
Arch-brother-hood thereof erected among them.


F. I shall be very glad to hear what he did say of that noble Thong.


P. The three Laws ( says he) that of Nature, the written Law, and the Law of
Grace have enjoyed the use of the Leather-girdle: for the first we have nothing
expressed, but it is most probable that our forefathers being clad with skins, as
it is said in Genesis, Fecit Dominus Adae and Vxori ejus Tunicas Pelliceas. God
Almighty making to our Father Adam, and to his wife Coats of skins, they were
to wear a girdle of the same stuff: as for the written law, it is not permitted
us to revoke it, in doubt whether the Prophet Elias did not wear it upon his
reins. See the sixth Book of Kings, Chap. 1. which says of Elias, Vir pilosus
and zona pellicea accinctus Renibus.


F. He derived this Thong from a great antiquity.


P. Nay much less of St. John the Baptist, in the Law of Grace, triumphing in
the desert of worldly delicacies, who had his body covered with a prickly-coat,
woven with Camels hair, and his Reins girded with a Leather-girdle. Johannes
habebat vestimentum de pilis Camelorum, and zonam pelliceam circa lumbos suos.


F. Had not he so much wit in his brains, as to say that St. John had been an
Augustine?


P. Many have thought ( said he further) that the girdle of the Apostles, St.
Peter, and St. Paul was of Leather, etc. But who should be able to see that the
blessed Virgin, that Queen of heaven and earth, that Empress over men and
angels, has vouchsafed to honor the Leather-girdle, by the holy and sacred
incircling of her Virgin-body, wearing it about her Reins? would it not be to
exalt and raise the honor, nobleness, and dignity of this girdle, to the
height and extremity of its greatness? Paulinus Bergomensis, and the Reverend
Father Brother Austin of Tolentine. The Lady being afraid of those Citations,
which this Father was going to huddle over to her, very fairly told him, that
she had had about her that blessed girdle above this twelve month: and who gave
it you, replied the Augustins, seeing that his Cake was like to prove dough: it
was, says she, the Reverend, Reformed Augustine- Fathers. There are no other
reformed Augustins than we, replies briskly this Monk; I mean the little
Fathers, says the Lady: they are very little Fathers in comparison of us,
replies again the Augustine, and know, Madam, that we are the true reformed
Augustins: it does not belong to the Barefooted ones to give the girdle of St.
Austin, for that belongs only to us. Are they not of St. Austins order, says
the Lady to him again? no, they are not, replied the Augustins. Thereupon
happened to come in a Barefooted Augustine, just as if God had sent him thither
directly on purpose; which made the poor Lady presently to cry out, Father, you
are come very fortunately, to defend your own cause. This Father here says,
that it does not belong to you to give St. Austins girdle; and why not, says
the Barefooted- Monk? are we not Friars of St. Austins order? no, you are not,
says the other, Our Father St. Austin by his writing, confesses himself, and
owns that being a Monk, he was not Barefooted, neither could he endure it,
although living in a hot Climate, as Africa was. See here his own words in his
first Sermon of the Apostles, Chap. 6. where he says, Calceamenta quibus
utimur, coria mortuorum sunt nobis tegmina pedum. The shoes which we use are
made of the skins of dead beasts, and serve for coverings to our feet. This is
for the going shooed, and for the great sleeves, the Bull of Alexander the
fourth is formal, which says, Vt Priores universi, ac singuli fratres ordine
Augustini antiquis vestibus suis contenti maneant, largas and protensas
manicas, desuper cucullos deferant, and per amplas corrigias patenter omnibus
apparentes, etc. That is to say, that all the Priors, and all the religious
persons of the order of St. Austin, should be clothed with their ancient
clothes, wearing broad and long sleeves, whence it follows ( which he added)
that there are no other besides the Augustins wearing shoes and stockings, and
with great sleeves, who follow the true institution of St. Austin, and who are
his true religious persons.


F. What could the Barefooted ones answer against such concluding reasons for
going with shoes on, and for the sleeves too? As for my part, I should have
adjudged the girdle for those who wear shoes, and not to the Barefooted.


P. The little Father knew very well how to ward off the blow; he said that the
true Monks of St. Austins order ought not so much to tie themselves to his
habit, to his wearing of shoes, and to his sleeves, as to his virtues; and
that those were his true Children, who were religious observers of him in
goodness, rather than in exterior things, which contributed nothing to
perfection. This hypocritical and specious answer did so much please the old
Gentleman and his Lady, that the other, whatever he alleged, could not be
heard; so that he went away highly incensed, leaving to his enemy the field
free and open.


F. So then, the controversy was decided in favor of the little Augustins as
to the distribution of the girdle


P. Yes, this affair was dispatched; but the reformed Monk knew much better how
to gird it about the good old Ladies waste, assuring her, that it had been sent
by Reverend Fathe Barnard (called the Father of Miracles), who had blessed it,
and caused it to touch all their relics of the Russet-cross.


F. But was their no jealousies amongst the four orders that remained in favor?


P. Yes, you may easily imagine it: as much, because they did all make their
visits to one and the same end, as because every one of them did cry up his own
order above all the rest.


F. Well, but what did those juglers say then?


P. The Carmelites did attribute to themselves the right of eldership above all
the others, saying, That they were from the time of the written law, before the
Advent of the Messiah, that they were descended from Elias, that their orders
were before all the rest; That he was the fountain of Elias, running down from
mount Carmel, and having been instituted by Elias, had been renewed by Elizeus,
and other children of the Prophets: as also by the great forerunner of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, St. John, who had been superior of the Carmelites
order.


F. That observation is very pretty. I never heard before that St. John had
been a Carmelite; neither can I believe it yet, for St. Luke says, he never
drank any Wine.


P. That it was he, who restored and renewed it in the new-law, that their
order was to endure to the end of the world, to oppose his founder Elias to
Antichrist; that they had been dispensed by Honoricus the fourth, from the
jurisdiction of Princes and Bishops; that they were the Brothers of the Virgin,
that there were three years of indulgence for those who should call them by
that name. The Jacobins did brag of their rooting out the Albigenses, to have
been made great Masters of the Holy Palace, to depend only upon the Pope; to
have the right and pre-eminence of Preaching in all Pulpits, without the
Bishops consent; to have the privilege, that noblemen and their Ladies should
come, and be confessed before them, and to no other, that they had power of
administering the Sacraments, wherever they thought fit: to conclude, that they
were exempted from all manner of Ecclesiastical censures.


F. What a deal was here!


P. The Capuchins lifted up their voice like a Trumpet, and vapour'd, that in
St. Francis 's order had been 6 Emperors, 40 Kings, 15 Princes, 66 Dukes, 60
Marquesses, 117 Earls, 465 Kings Sons, or Emperors, 6 Popes, 57 Cardinals, 12
Patriarchs, 128 Archbishops, 590 Bishops, 920 Martyrs, and 57 Canonised Saints.


F. And of what did the Barefooted Augustins boast, I pray now?


P. Those black Turlupins? why, they called themselves the Professors of the
Hermetick-life, which they made to appear by the length of their Beards, and by
the nakedness of their feet; the legittimate Children of St. Austin, his not
only pretended, but truly reformed Monks: they did also display all their
portentous miracles, which they daily performed in their Church of our Lady of
Lasier in Dauphine.


F. But what miracles were they, that they did so much then brag of? Let me
hear of some, if you can remember any.


P. One day the Physician being come about some indisposition of our good old
Lady, one of these Augustins which were there, acquainted us with a miracle
newly wrought upon a young maiden, named Joane Mole, which had been condemned
to be hanged at Valentia, for having thrown her Child into a River. This
Augustine acquainted me then, that a Capuchin-Fryer, named (if I forget not)
Father Marcelin of Montel, having been appointed to accompany this unfortunate
woman to the place of execution, did make a vow to go and say Mass, and give
thanks in the Osier-Chappel, to the holy Virgin, in case she did deliver this
maiden from this infamous death The which vow being renewed by the Capuchin at
the sight of the Gibbet, the success proved thus, That after execution, the
maid having been cut down, was found to be alive, and after some respite began
to speak. Truly this Capuchin-Fryer made a very equitable vow, says the Doctor,
to keep from the hands of Justice, a Mother which had drowned her Child. But
Father, do you call this a miracle? yes surely, it is one, replied the Augustine:
ay, but I do not call that a miracle, says the Physician, it is an effect which
may be attributed to a natural cause; for besides that there are examples
enough to prove that a criminal has survived his punishment, may it not be
likely, that the executioner may have been greased in the fist on the behalf of
a young woman, for whom the Capuchin might have made vows? Alas, Sir, miracles
are not to be jested withal, says this Austin-Fryer with earnestness. I jest
not with miracles, replys the Physician, but I deny this to be one; for without
being in any necessity to bring reasons peculiar to my profession, why will you
not have it so, that the executioner may have spared a maid, for whom a
Capuchin-Fryer had a kindness? and that being granted me, as it may be very
probably believed, then it will prove but a miracle of love, which has
triumphed over the rope of an executioner, after it had triumphed over that
belonging to the Capuchin-Fryer. We all bursting forth in a laughter, by reason
of this pleasant joke, the Father was so confounded, that he could not reply
otherwise, save that Physicians had no religion, and did acknowledge no other
Deity besides Nature.


F. But if you please, we will return to those Monks boastings. Do they not
produce some quarrels amongst them? for this would be a greater miracle than
that which St. Austin did alledg, if these kind of people had been long without
quarrelling.


P. They did contain as much as was possible in the Presence of the old
Gentleman, and his Lady; but it happened one day, that they fell out briskly in
the garden.


F. I should be glad to understand how it was.


P. Our old Gentleman finding himself indisposed, I know not how, but they had
notice of it, and the next day they all came almost at the same time, and
hovered over him round about his bed.


F. It Is not a question to be asked, whether or no they complemented him from
the Brotherhood.


P. O, no! these fellows clung to him as close as Bees! assuring him, that the
Brotherhood were partakers of his indisposition, and that they directed their
vows and their prayers to heaven for his recovery; that they wished they were
able to divide his distemper amongst themselves; that the Reverend Father
Provincial, the Reverend Father Assistant, the Reverend Father Definitor, the
Reverend Father Prior, the Reverend Father Guardian, the Reverend Father Vicar,
the Reverend Father Proctor, the Reverend Father Lecturer, the Reverend Father
Preacher, and the Reverend Father Sacristan, the Reverend Father Bassill, the
Reverend Father Polycarpus, the Reverend Father Appollinarius, the Reverend
Father Eleazar, the Reverend Father Amable, the Reverend Father Marcellin, the
Reverend Father Gregory, the Reverend Father Antony, the Reverend Father
Martial, the Reverend Father Bonadventure, the Reverend Father Gratian, the
Reverend Father Lewis, the Reverend Father Boniface, the Reverend Father
Archangell, the Reverend Father Protais, did kiss his hands.


F. What a parcel of Reverend Fathers are here?


P. That they had all of them said Mass on his behalf, to beg of God his
health, and would not fail to give themselves the honor of waiting upon him in
a visit. The Carmelite brought him a small thread of Elias's Cloak, the which
(as they say) their order has inherited: the Jacobin gave him a grain, which
he assured him was from St. Dominicus's Rosary. The Augustine in a small sacred
Rag, blessed by the miraculous Father Bernard, and the Capuchin, presented him
with a little piece of their Generals-Coat, who had lately passed through
France.


F. How insolently do they abuse peoples credulity?


P. Every one of them had brought for a companion his Brother-Apothecary; these
Apothecaries did likewise play their parts very well, the one presented him
with a small box of Corroborative Opiat, another with a Viol of precious
specific essence, to reestablish natural heat; another with a most admirable
Elixir, and the other with Lozenges, proper to loosen that viscous phlegm which
lay upon his Lungs.


F. But as to the quarrel?


P. These Fathers having then feasted their paunches with the Lady at one side
of the old Gentleman's bed, every one of them in their turn fell to talk of the
miracles of their orders; especially the Carmelite, who did, and not without a
great deal of reason, extremely value himself upon the Quality of the Virgins
Brother; at last rising from table, being gone to walk in the Garden, the
Jacobin, who was a wag, addressing himself to me, told me, We are all much
troubled, these Fathers, and my self, that this good Gentleman, by reason of
his indisposition, has not been able to eat with us; but we had this comfort
to have dined with two of our Saviors Uncles. How! Father, said I? At first
not comprehending what he meant: the Virgins Brothers, replied he, are they not
our Saviors Uncles? we all set our selves a-laughing, but only the Carmelite,
who in a great fury said unto that Jacobin, Ah! it is a very fine thing indeed
to see a Monk laugh at our Popes Bulls; but it is not a thing to be wondered
at, that you find occasion of laughing at holy things, being of an order, who
found a way to poison a Pope with the host. What! did you accuse the whole
order for the fault of one particular person? says the Jacobin: and you, good
Sir, have you not spoke it too against the whole order of Carmelites? and you
Carmelites, replied the Jacobin, are very pleasant fellows to take upon you the
Title of Brother to the Virgin, and to make us believe you are descended from
Elias, as if we were ignorant that Almerick, Patriarch of Antioch, and Legate to
the Pope, came to mount Carmel the year 1160, and did there assemble some
Hermites, who had neither institution, nor rule, but lived after their own
fancy about that mountain; and that he did reduce them to a body, to whom the
said Patriarch did give a Waldensis to be superior over them, named
Bartholdus: that before it was no religious and monastic order, but only some
solitary persons that were wandering here and there, who being reduced to a
body, are but abortive, as Polydore Virgil calls them; neither did they take
the figure of any religious order, till under Innocent the third, who lived
about 480 years since. And you! whence come you, says the Carmelite, you are
come from the Humiliati, who were pitiful miserable slaves, which the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa had brought from Lombardy into Germany, whom being come to
prostrate themselves at his feet, he took pity on, and discharged them, and
afterward they wore white Clothes, just as you do; and it is from those
people that St. Dominicus made up his Militia. The Barefooted Augustine
intermedling in the quarrel, said to the Carmelite, I wonder Father, that you
have made no mention of the Cloak striped with white and red, which you
heretofore did wear, and which might serve to mark and blazon your antiquity.
Dare you prate of antiquity, replied briskly the Carmelite? You, whose order
has not been on the face of the earth above this fourscore years; pitiful
Posthumes of a Father, who dyed 1300 years before your appearing in the world.
Alas! Father, says the Capuchin, who as yet had not spoke a syllable, ought
there to be so much wrath and fierceness under the Virgins clothing? The
Carmelite, seeing that he likewise was for a touch of railery: and what habit
had you, said he angerly? Will you not say it is the habit of St. Francis, which
you wear? and that you are his Children? as if it were not well enough known,
that it is one Matheus Basky, who gave you birth, and that you are only
Basquees, etc. This quarrel had in all probability lasted longer, if there had
not been a necessity of quelling that of the Brother Apothecaries, who were
scolding at one another, as if they would immediately have gone to Fisty-cuffs:
I heard them say, thou art a pretty Rogue for a Friar of St. Eloy; ay, and thou
as pretty a Champion of St. Come, and St. Damien. Troth thou art a precious bit
to give a Glister to our blindcheeks; yes, and you too a pure stick of wood, to
apyly a plaster to the Navel of Mrs. R. waiting woman. I was sorry they were
disturbed, for they were in the way of discovering pleasant rogueries --


F. Ay, that would have been as good as a farce.


P. I could tell you likewise of a pleasant quarrel which the Minimes were the
cause of.


F. How! the Minimes? Are those fellows known there?


P. Yes, they made themselves to be very well known.


F. Pray let us by all means hear this.


P. They had for a long while observed the haunt, and watched for an
opportunity to get in among them, to accomplish their design. They accosted one
Mrs Isabell, who had been a Chambermaid in that House, and having given her the
Habit and Cord of St. Francis of Paula, they sent her, being well documentized
beforehand, to give a visit to her old Mistress: And this cunning baggage
having made her first Complements, did so manage her business, and so often
handle her Cords, that the good old Gentlewoman demanded of her what it was;
then she who waited for nothing else, told her, that it was St. Francis of
Paula his Cord, and you see, Madam, I still wear his Habit: I was very much
troubled with a pain in my Kidneys, since I lay in last, and knew not how to
get any ease, when an old Woman, (whom I beseech God to bless continually for
it, and who lives near the Minimes of Place Royal) giving me a visit, did
counsel me to take the Habit and Cord of St. Francis of Paula; and since I have
been perfectly well. Says the old Gentlewoman, you do me the greatest kindness
in the world to acquaint me with this news: Is there such a Friery of them? O
yes, Madam, and a very lovely one too. I do assure you, that I will shortly get
one to gird me withal; for I have such intolerable pains in my back that they
even distract me. The good old Gentleman, who was now pretty well recovered,
came in as we were just speaking thus: Ah! my Dear, says she, do you not see
Mrs Isbell in the Habit, and with the Cord of St. Francis of Paula? She tells
me that since she has worn it, she finds her self very much relieved of a pain
she had in her back, here, about the small; I will, an't please God, and if you
will let me, Dearest, wear that holy Habit, and be of that Friery. I am very
well contented you should, says her Husband; but it were convenient, that you
should first speak to one of those good Fathers. Sir, replies Mrs. Isabell, I
will take care of that, I know one who is a most zealously religious person;
but besides, if you please, I will cause the Tailor, who made me this Suit, to
come hither: Ay, do, with all my heart, said both the old Folks; and presently
after, the Lady tript away as cheerfully, as if she had been half cured already.


F. Ha! This went not much amiss for the first Scene. --


P. I will acquaint you with the sequel of it. The Tailor comes the next day to
make her this Habit, and the day following fails not to wait upon her, with the
principal of the Minimes of Place-Royal, a person of a very venerable aspect,
and one who had abundance of Crosses and Meddals hanging at his Girdle;
besides, he was a man that could speak rarely well, and he complemented our old
Gentleman and his Lady in a most delicate style. I remember amongst other
things, he said, That when it was told him, how that her Ladyship would be one
of the Third Order of St. Francis of Paula, the whole Friery testified a a most
incredible joy at the news; (for it immediately ran throughout the whole Order)
insomuch that it caused a public acclamation there; that it was not a greater
honor for his most happy Patriarch to have been sent for by Lewis the XI., and
to have been received at the Court of so great a King, than for himself, to
have the freedom of Ingress and Regress into so pious and devout a Family, and
to have the honor of being employed, to give her Ladyship the Habit and Cord
of his Order: That indeed both the Habit and the Cord did appear in the eyes of
the World, but as a vile and contemptible thing, and of a dark and dead Color;
but that in Gods esteem, they were precious, and not only of a Lively, but of a
Vivifying Color: That clothing ones self with that dark Habit, her Ladyship
did Cloth her self with a Cloud, but that it was of one of those whereof Job
did speak, which did enlighten; or else of that Cloud mentioned in Exodus, in
which the Lord was pleased to cause his Glory to appear, Gloria Domini apparuit
in nube; so that hereafter he did look upon her Ladyship not as a mortal
person, but like unto that Angel in the Revelations, whom St. John saw clothed
with a Cloud.


F. That Father did lift up himself very much in the Clouds: But however here
is on this Habit very much Imbroidery, both of the Old and New Testament.


P. After some other Complements and Discourse, not belonging to our business;
to prepare the Lady for the worthy receiving of this Habit and Cord, he read
unto her a Lecture of the Rule of the Third Minimetan Order, contained in a
small Book which he presented to her; how that by that Rule, the day you are
received into the Friery, you must confess your self and receive the Sacrament:
Therefore, the next day, the Lady intending to be received, did acquit her self
of all those pious duties in the Chapel of the House, Confessing her self to
that good Father, hearing Mass, receiving the Sacrament and the Habit and Cord
at his hands; but before she came to this last action, this venerable
Patriarch, seeing you term them so, could not keep himself from playing one of
his Pranks: He then acquainted this good old Lady, That although by the Rule of
the Third Order of St. Francis of Paula, Lay People were only to have the Cord
with two Knots, as it is in the 7th page of the said Rule, yet notwithstanding
to oblige her Ladyship, and to unite her to their Order by a more particular
Tie, he did bring her a Cord with five Knots; the same which these Monks wear
who are honored with the Order of the Priesthood, that by that means she might
enjoy all the Immunities, Prerogatives, Preheminences, Blessings and Unctions
belonging to the Holy Priesthood, that as it was an extraordinary favor which
as yet had not been granted to any Lay person, that the Concession might be the
more sure and authentical, he had caused the whole number of Monks to assemble
themselves, who unanimously had granted that privilege; whereof there was an
Act passed, signed by the whole Fraternity, which they would cause to be
ratified by the most Reverend Father General; which being done, the said Act
should be recorded in their Register, for a perpetual memorial.


F. Ha! here were rare flourishes indeed, as soft as your Oil of Aramont.


P. After this, he reads the Indulgences which the Popes had granted to such
who would be interred with the Habit of their Order, or should make choice of
their Church for a burying place.


F. Dear God! What did this good old Lady think?


P. He proceeded afterward gravely, and with great Ceremony, to bless the
Habit and Cord; which being done, the Lady undressed her self with the help of
the Tailor, and Mrs. Isabel, who was assistant there, and then opens her Arms
to take that Habit smoking hot with the Blessings which that Father had just
then bestowed on them; but this Minime perceiving the Leather Girdle which she
had on her Rains, begun to say, bending his brows, What do you wear there
Madam? It is, says she, St. Austins Girdle. O mercy! you must leave it off, in
case you will feel the effects of this holy Habit and sacred Cord: It Is not
that I am against this devotion, but as the mixture of two Drugs hinders the
effect of either; even so this Girdle and this Cord might hinder one another
virtue: Then I heard him, turning himself to Mrs. Isabel, whisper her in her
ear, to make her leave of that nasty Arse-piece.


F. Rascals! how they buffet one another!


P. Then returning to his Discourse, he said first, that the Cord did in it
self eminently contain the Girdles virtue, and that in this occasion, her
Ladyship was to practice the words of Isaiah, who had said, Erit pro Zona
funiculus, That the Rope should be in the room of the Girdle. This poor Woman
hearing Isaiah named, did effectually believe that that Prophet had spoken of
that Cord and Girdle; so that fearing to offend by her refusal, not only this
Friar, but also Isaiah, she left off the Leather Girdle, to put on the Cord.


F. Ha, ha, ha, Where was the Augustine?


P. Let him alone, he will appear by and by. This Ceremony being ended, they
went to Dinner, where this Father and his Companion were treated with most
dilicate marrionated Fish. The Lady to profess her devotion for her new Order,
would only eat that which had been made ready for those Religious persons.
After Dinner, Father Minime having taken his leave with all the Complements
belonging to Monks civility, it happens that the Lady, having eaten of that
marrionated Fish, found her self very ill, and was taken with a great pain in
her Stomach, with an extreme Vomiting, this caused her to go to Bed: The other
Monks, who had their Intelligencers in the House, having had notice thereof,
were immediately at her Bedside, and read such a Lecture to her, that I cannot
tell how to express.


F. Let us hear it as well as you can.


P. The Jacobin, who came first, not seeming presently angry to find the old
Lady ensnared in the Minime 's Cord, told her, That he was very much satisfied
to see her zeal for the Frieries; yet he could not approve of her being of them
all, it being impossible by that multiplicity, to be able well to acquit ones
self of each of 'em in particular; That of all the Frieries which were in the
Church, those which did most keep us to the service of the Mother of God were
doubtless the most excellent. But of all the devotions which piety had invented
for to honor that Virgin, without all peradventure that of the holy Rosary was
most agreeable to her, the most perfect, most meritorious, and the most rich.
It was the most agreeable, in as much as the Rosary is a shortened Table, where
may almost be seen represented all the Mysteries of our Religion; for those
fifteen mysteries which it contains, are, as it were, fair Images where are
perfectly beheld the Father Almighty's designs in the temporal birth of his
Son, the accidents which happened to him during his childhood, in his hidden
and unknown life, in his suffering and laborious life, in his glorious and
immortal life; and in the same are also represented to us, the chief virtues
which Mary made conspicuous during the term of her temporal life.


F. That Discourse did enlarge it self in abundance of matters.


P. More meritorious; for the practice of that devotion does oblige us to
exercise the chief and most meritorious Christian virtues, of Faith, Hope and
Charity: For the repeating the Holy Rosary, with the attention and devotion due
to it, the acts of a lively Faith are uncessantly renewed; by the Mysteries
meditated upon, the acts of a perfect hope are reiterated toward him who is
our summum bonum, chief good, whose greatness and power we then consider. You
are launched without intermission into acts of a fervent charity, by the
sentiments of Complacency, Joy, Love, Honors, Respect, and Thanksgiving
toward him who is infinitely lovely and adorable, and whose love and goodness
we do contemplate.


F. What bablings are here? he sufficiently smoothed her up.


P. More Rich, by reason of a great number of Privileges and Indulgences which
the most holy Father has granted to such who would be received into that holy
Friery, and would recite the Holy Rosary. Privileges and Indulgences, which
are in greatness and richness without example; and truly such as will consider
with attention, all the favors which the Popes have granted to several
Congregations, and Religious Companies, he will find, that what is spread
abroad, and parted between a great many, is found all together in the Company
of the Holy Rosary; neither is there almost any Indulgence granted in favor of
any work of piety and devotion, which is not also granted to those who shall
repeat the Rosary.


F. Hey day! This Brother Friar then preached a long-winded Sermon to the good
old Lady: In the hearing of so many brave sayings, who could imagine those
people to be guilty of so many horrid impieties? That they tempt Women to sin,
yea, even in the very time of Confession? That they make of their Churches,
places of Assignation? That they go into Bawdy-Houses, and are very much Pox'd
there?


P. Give me leave to make an end; So he ( proceeding) said, It seems as if the
Popes had heaped together all the treasure of the Church, casting them into the
Furnace, and so to make a Coin in favor of the Rosary, of an inestimable price
and value; and in this case may be truly said, what is set down in the Book of
Wisdom: That many Damsels have gathered together vast riches; but that you go
beyond them all.


F. This Dominican had very much reason to quote that place of Scripture, and
to compare Frieries to such Lasses as had got together great store of Riches,
for Frieries are your daughters of Religious Orders, which do enrich their
Fathers. It Is this way that Monks get Money out of the People: But what did
that Magpie say farther, for he seemed to make a mighty chattering noise?


P. He also alleged that Vrbanus 8th had granted a Bull, whereby the Banner of
the Brotherhood of the Rosary did preceed all other Banners, excepting that of
the Holy Sacrament.


F. But did he say nothing against the Habit and Cord which their old Lady had
taken?


P. Oh! yes truly he did say, the small string wherein the Holy Rosary was
threaded, being laden with fifteen Pater Nosters, and One hundred and fifty
Ave Maria's, was incomparably much more worth, and had infinitely more virtues
than the Minimes Cord, which at the highest, did not contain above Five knots,
which as to the Act of devotion was in no wise the knot of the matter: Telling
me softly, That if the Lady had a mind to take the Habit of any Order, it had
been much better for her to have taken that of St. Dominicus, and to wear a
Black Gown upon a White Petticoat, which had been much more seemly and decent,
than to wear that ugly Habit, which resembles that of a Chimney-Sweeper.


F. This Dominican was most richly revenged of the Augustine.


P. Thereupon a Lacquey came to tell her Ladyship, that the Capuchins were at
the Gate, who had a desire to kiss her hand, and to know how she did. The Lady
having given order for their admittance, the Dominican took his leave, and my
self the care of re-conducting him. In going through the Hall, we met with
those Capuchins coming in, who saluted us, without making any stop; but the
Jacobin looking earnestly upon one of them, said to me, there is a Beard which
is quickly shot out. What do you mean (said I) Father? He replied, it is not
six Months since it has been cut off. What! do Capuchins cut off their Beards?
No, but this has had an adventure, like unto that of Sampsons Hair. What!
replied I, was it cut off by the hands of some Dalila? (He smilingly answered
me, that it had been cut off at least by one of her Sex): Now although I had a
good mind to have gone to hear in what manner these Capuchins would Complement
the Lady about her distemper, and that which had been the cause thereof; -- Yet
I chose rather to hearken to this Story which the Jacobin had a mind to tell
me; I pray then, said I to him, let me understand the adventure of this Beard.
That Capuchin, replies he, whom you have there seen with that curious Beard,
was in love at Lions with a pretty young Nun, (pray pardon me for not telling
her name -- nor that of the Nunneries which she belonged to) this Damsel, who
was a very wag, and wanted no wit, at first made as if she approved of his
passion, to have the pleasure to see to what height this Satyer would push on
his pretensions. One day then being full of the good hopes he had conceived of
so prosperous a beginning, he made bold to crave a kiss of her, which she
refused, but with an Air which gave him no reason to despair his obtaining of
it another time. So then the day following returns our Lover, who causes this
Lass to be called; she hearing that it was him, goes to him fully prepared; and
the better to accomplish her design, she entreats him to go into a Parlour,
which was without any company. Our blade desired nothing more willingly, being
come into the Room with the object of his devoted affection, who for that very
purpose received him with an inexpressible kindness, he began again to require
a kiss, and to press her to grant him that pledge of her love, and to that end
did advance his musle through one of the holes of the Grates; then she
seemingly going to kiss him, took him softly by the Beard, which he had thrust
through, and at one snip, with a pair of Scissars she had in her hand, eased
him of his Brusle-bush, saying afterward, Adieu Father, this will serve me to
make clean my Combs withal.


F. Ha! that Roguish snip of the Scissars, is as much in my esteem, as the blow
which struck off Holofernes his Head; but in the mean time, take notice by this
discourse, that the greatest enemy to Monks, are Monks themselves.


P. After I had laughed sufficiently with this Dominican at the adventure of
the Beard, and was rallying upon what this unbearded Father could say at his
return to the Convent, I, etc.


F. Without doubt he did as the Fox in the Fable, who having had his Tail cut
off, did counsel his Companions to cut off theirs too.


P. We did not fail to think of that, and many other things besides; after
this, I took leave of the Dominican, in hopes still to lay hold upon something
in the Capuchins discourse with the Lady; but I came too late for that purpose,
and found the Father as he was going out, saying to his Companion, it is a
horrible thing of these Minimes! how hot they are! certainly those lighted
Torches which did appear in the House where St. Francis of Paula was conceived,
did betoken the heat which should proceed from his Children: It Is not so to be
interpreted (said I to him) they did signify the heat of Charity, wherewith
those Religious persons were to be inflamed, whereof they also bear the Motto;
it is affirmed, (replied the Capuchin) in the Saints Life, that an Angel
brought him a Scutcheon, where was writ that word Caritas; but it is more
plainly visible in the life of his Children, that that Angel has carried away
the Scutcheon after their Father's death; and if they yet pretend to bear it,
it is but with a Cross-barr, in token of Bastardize. Is it not a shameful thing,
that those people, who have Rents coming in, enjoy Priories, have Tithes,
Demeans, Castles and Lordships, should notwithstanding go to their little
tricks and devices? Would you think that the Lady straight came and told me,
that the Minime, who had given her the Habit and Cord of their Order, after he
had heard her Confession, spoke to her for the choosing her burying place in
their Church, to make a foundation for it, and to bestow something toward the
building of their Portal? I know not, said I to him, what his discourse could
be for so long time, but he kept her in talk above an hour. It was about that,
said the Capuchin, that he did entertain her; but you know those people never
intend to build a Portal, that so that might be always a pretense for their
continual craving toward it: And if it be true, that by that feigned cheat,
they have received money enough to build a hundred, were they all to be of
marble, yet this would be a small matter, if they did not (as, sub rosa,
betwixt our selves they do) make an infamous commerce together in the very
Sacrament of penance. About a year since, I was coming down to Lions by water,
with Monsieur de Lingendes Bishop of Mascon, who did me the honor of receiving
me into his Boat; being over against a Convent, which they have upon the border
of the River Saosna, in the Principality of Dombes; this Prelate was a telling
me, that that was the Church which did absolve from all crimes, giving but a
Crown to have Masses said. Those Fathers ought to have abundance to say. His
Almoner, who was with him, and who formerly had served in a neighboring
Parish, told us that they did so mightily delude the people round about there,
that there was not any body, never so little aforehand in the World, who did
not bestow something in their favor; that upon that very account, they had
above Twelve hundred Masses to say yearly; that no Will was made, in which they
had not Dozens, nay Thirty, Forty Masses to say, and annual ones also; that
besides that, there yearly happened above a Thousand Masses of Devotion for
them to say; and moreover, there was no body did confess themselves within the
said Church, to whom they did not ordain Masses for Penance; which did amount,
when they were all computed, to above Eight thousand Masses per annum; That not
being contented with this, they went into the Parishes, to suborn those Heirs
who were charged to cause prayers to be made for the deceased, aquainting them,
that they could say Masses, at least as well as Curates, and that they would
dispatch them a great deal sooner; That he, being Almoner, having one day
demanded of one of those Fathers, how it was possible for them to perform so
many Masses, there being commonly within the said place not above four or five
Priests? That Minime answered him, that the Pope had granted them the privilege
of satisfying the retributions by one only Mass.


F. Pure packers up of Masses! but you do not come to the quarrel which they
caused --


P. I must first tell you the Complement which the Carmelite made, who was
mightily Interessed, That our Lady should take up no Habit, but that of the
Virgin, and who doubtless had broke out into high complaints, had not the Lady,
seeing him coming up, uncovered her Arm, where she had his Scapulary, and not
presented him her hand to touch it, as if it were to make peace: For all this,
the Carmelite did not fail to tell her, that she must needs have but little
confidence in that holy Habit, seeing she could be easily prevailed upon to
take another; that he was apt to believe, she had committed this error only for
want of good instruction, and for not knowing truly the worth and excellency of
that Habit of the Virgin. (A little Habit of our Lady of Mount Carmel, page 9.)
Says he, If nothing be more precious than those gifts which come from Heaven,
we ought to esteem, beyond all conception, the Holy Scapulary, seeing it has
been given us by the most pure hands of the Holy Virgin, Mother of God, and
Queen of Angels, by the person of the most happy St. Simon Stock, when he was
General of his Order of Carmelites; besides, that in bestowing the same on us,
she has enriched us with all the treasure of Grace, honored us with the title
of her Children, even her Brothers, armed us against all the perils of life,
strengthened us against all the temptations of the evil one, especially at the
point of death, and given us a singular easy way, of totally freeing our
selves from the pains of Purgatory, or at least to have them soon at an end.
Afterward he told her the words which the holy Virgin had pronounced to Simon
Stock their General, when she said to him, Receive, my beloved one, this
Scapulary of thy Order, the mark of my Friery, and privilege for thy self and
for all the Carmelites, in which whosoever dies, shall not suffer eternal pain.
This is the sign of Salvation, a safety in dangers, a treaty of peace, and an
everlasting Covenant.


F. Si credere fas est, (if we may believe it) this Carmelite should have set
up a Brokers-shop; for it did belong to his Trade to sell Garments.


P. It is likely (Madam) proceeded he, that you have not known all these
Prerogatives, and that you have been most grossly abused, seeing that you,
having this honorable Habit, could resolve to take up another, which is not
more civil, neither has it any more virtue, than those Goat Skins, wherein oil
is put and carried about.


F. Wretched Hounds-feats! How they tear to pieces that holy Habit! now then
their only remains the Augustine.


P. 'Twas he who played the last act of the Comedy, but it was in scolding
severely.


F. I wish I had heard it.


P. Coming to the Lady, and enquiring after the state of her health, he did all
he could to keep in his Resentment; but at last he was fain to explain himself
thus: I have been for some time, Madam, musing at your Gate, being in doubt
where I was, whether I should come in or no, not daring to believe that you
would once so much as cast your eyes upon poor Monks, after your having put
your self under the conduct and direction of Prelates. The Lady, who knew no
more than my self, what this Augustine intended to say, answered him very
mildly, that it was a long time since she had seen any of those Gentlemen;
Madam, replied the Augustine, all those who term themselves Prelates have not a
Miter on; There are some Monks, nay of the meanest of them all, who have the
vanity to attribute to themselves that illustrious name. I do not, as yet,
comprehend your meaning, says she to him: You have not then, says the Father to
her, read the Rules of the Minimes Third Order, in which you are enrolled.
Madam, you will find there, that those people, whom their blessed Patriarch
would have termed Minimes, that is to say, the least of all, and to whom he
has given humility for a particular Character; that those people dare (I say)
be qualified with the title of Lords and Prelates, even in their Rules; in the
which at least they ought to make a seeming show of professing that virtue. We
have not seen that, replied the Lady, but we have here the Book, and it will be
easy to be satisfied therein; which Book being brought, the Augustine took it,
and caused us to see, that what he had said was the truth. I read it there my
self, and have since very often seen, that in the Seventy eighth page, they
call themselves Lords: That in another place there are these words (Rule of the
3d Order of St. Francis of Paula, p. 116. 122, and 139.) Then the Prelate
conducts the person to kiss the Altar. In another may be read, Then the
Prelate, and all other persons who are present shall fall on their knees. And
in another, Then the Prelate answers. These are, Madam, continued the
Augustine, the Prelates of whom I am speaking. What! do you think that Monks
have the vanity, nay, rather impertinence, to term themselves Prelates, under
pretense that they have the power to give a sorry woollen Cord? But is it not
yet worse, to see Hermites to have built adjoining to the Place Royal? The
Minimes, said I, interrupting him, are they Hermites? Says he to me, they have
been instituted under the name of Hermites of St. Francis of Assise, and
approved as such by Eugenius IV, and by Alexander VI, under the name of
Hermites of the Order of Minimes. Is not the Royal Place a lovely, curious,
Hermitage? And have they not the exact mien of Hermites, with their Beards at
all times shaved off? Who has ever seen Hermits frolic with Ladies in the
Church? Who has seen Anchorites make presents of Romish and Granoble Gloves to
Ladies, and to give them stately Collations? To load them with sweetmeats, and
to cause them excessively to eat, whatever is most exquisite and rare in the
Shops of the Fair of St. Germans? Have Hermits been ever seen playing the Fool
with Pistols, smoking, and carousing in Alehouses, as they do in their little
by-places? Who ever saw Anchorites lay wagers with young-women, and for a last
insolency, to show and offer them Purses full of Gold? Thus, Madam, do they
employ their Mass-Money which they impose upon people for Penance; thus is
lavished and squandred away your Money of your Stock, that of Foundations, of
Sermons, and of the Friery: and yet these very persons have had the power to
prevail with you to leave off your Girdle of St. Austin, which Elias, St. John
Baptist, nay the Virgin her self have not disdained to wear. Yes, Madam, you
have left that ancient Girdle, to take up a wretched Cord, which has neither
virtue nor recommendation; which is the off-cast of some scabby-sheep, and
whose first miracle proved the procuring of a sickness to your self. The Father
speaking these things with an extreme vehemence, made the good Lady to be
mightily troubled at it; and she told him that in truth, she had drawn some ill
omen from the discourse the Minime had made her, who had given her the Habit
and the Cord, having so extremely pressed her to make a Foundation, and to
choose her Sepulcher in their Church; and that she was angry with Mrs. Isabel,
for having been the occasion of her being of that Fraternity; and that she
would be glad if she could tell how handsomely to shake off that Habit and Cord,
in case she knew what to do with them. Madam, replies the Augustine, as for the
Habit you may give it to some poor Woman, and as for the Cord, I will make with
it a Whip, to drive out the Dogs which come to our Church.


F. Ah! he was in insolent Rascal for his pains, to profane in such a manner a
Cord, which goes beyond Blew ones.


P. 'Twas done as it was said, there was an Alms made of the Habit: the Lady
re-invested her self with the Leather-Girdle, and the Augustine carried away
the Cord with five knots to employ in the whipping of Dogs.


F. Alas poor Cord! thou art mightily disgraced! But did not the Prelates come
to make their Complaints?


P. The Porter had orders to deny them admission, and to acquaint them, that
they had no business there. So they having had notice by Mrs. Isabel of this
strange alteration, they did not appear, and resolved in a full Chapter, not to
give the Cord any more to old women; neither for the time to come, to gird any
with it but young persons.


F. As indeed they very punctually do.


P. Hereupon I had notice that my Uncle was dying, which caused me with speed
to depart, to prevail upon his good nature and tenderness, to settle me in his
Benefice; so that I left my old Gentleman and his Lady in the hands of those
people.


F. That is to say, in Hugsters hands. But had they no kindred, no friend to
inlighten their eyes, that so they might see the claws of those Harpies for the
future?


P. The Gentleman had for his friend and gossip an honest Citizen, one
Marguillier of St. Eustace, who did abhor the seeing those innocent people so
miserably ensnared in those Impostors Nets. But he durst not openly declare,
for fear the Monks should play him some slippery trick. If I was not afraid
(said he to me) of bringing those Wasps upon my self, I would freely declare my
thoughts to those people, and would easily pluck them out of the hands of those
Rake-hells; but in case they should discover that 'twas I who had dis-abused
them, they would make me to be looked upon in my Neighborhood for a vile
wretch, and for a man that had no Religion.


F. He had reason to fear it; for when Monks do take a pick against any one,
they go crying them down everywhere, blackning and bespattering them in their
Conversations, Confessions, and in the Pulpit.


P. Is it not very sad, proceeded he, that the Garden of the Church, which has
been planted by the Son of God, watered by his blood, and by that of his
Apostles, and his Martyrs, should be gnawed, and eaten up by those cursed and
base Caterpillars? That the Popes, Kings, Bishops, and Parliaments not being
ignorant of their excess, do not suppress them, and bring these disorderly and
masterless persons to the observing of their Rules. I have admired a Thousand
times, how it comes to be suffered in a well-governed State, that Sixty
thousand idle fellows, who have only the name and Habit of Monks, do live fat
and in good plight at the charge of the people, without having their crimes
punished, not acknowledging either Seccular or Ecclesiastical Justice; and not
to be subject to any for chastisement, but only to go up and down from one
Convent to another.


F. The Church will never be able to attribute to it self the Elogium which is
given her of being without Spot, as long as she shall have such Monks, which
may justly be termed the shame of the Christian world, the scandal of Religion,
and the dishonor and infamy of the Church. That it is very fit their excesses
and debauches should be known, that they ought not to be Confessors, till after
the age of threescore years; because those Villains make use of the Tribunals
of Penance, to discover Women's and Maids dispositions: That there they put to
them beastly and unchaste Interrogatories, that they solicit them, and induce
them to sin; so that Confession is not made to the salvation, but the
destruction of their Souls: And that if amongst the good Pastors, and true
Directors, Confessing is the Pool of proof, where after that the Angel had
troubled the Waters, all kind of diseases were cured; now, with most of the
Monks, it is a stinking Lake, where Souls are Poisoned, and where those Devils
fish in troubled Waters. That it is now a seat of wickedness, and that the Son
of God receives more affronts and injuries at that Tribunal, than he received
at Caiaphas's, Pilate's and Herod's hands. That those Vagabonds ought to be
Cloystered up, to prevent their running abroad; because two steps can scarce be
taken in the Streets, without meeting one Monk or other. That such Women who
spend their time in prating with them at the doors of their Convents, or in
their Churches, ought to be declared infamous; that those wretched persons who
give up themselves wholly to them, ought to be cut off, and those Rascals to be
severely chastised, when they are found in a Bawdy House; that they ought not
to be permitted to appear in processions, being a scandal to the World, with
their Noses full of Rubies, by their drunkenness and other debauches. That they
ought to be shut out of peoples doors, by reason that those Seducers enter,
only to sow divisions in Families, to corrupt Wives, Daughters and
Servant-Maids. I say moreover, that as long as we have Monks, (such as they are
at present) the Hugenots will have cause to laugh and to jear us, that they
ought to think themselves happy for being free from that Vermin; that the Hood
is a nest of Hypocrisy, that it is the mouth of Hell, the Box of Pandora, and
mark of Reprobation. That the being called to a Monastical state, is one of the
most dangerous temptations which the Devil can give a young man up to; that
it is the broad-road way to destruction, so far is it from being a state of
acquired perfection, as those Rascals affirm. Whosoever speaks of a Monk,
speaks of a Seducer of the people, a corrupter of the Feminine Sex, an Artist
of Impostures, a disguised forger of Miracles, a Sales-man of Mysteries, a
Trader of Indulgences, a Retailer of Masses, a profaner of Altars, an applauder
of Relics, an abuser of Chapels, a jingler of Meddals, a proclamer of
Holy Days, a contriver of Fraternities, an idolater of Images, a toll-taker of
dead Bodies, a scummer of Churches, and a horse-leach of the Crucifix. That a
Monk is a Bird of ill omen, a Spy, a Surpriser, a Rakeshame, a man in
Masquerade, a Devil Incarnate, an emissary of Hell, a man without Faith and
without Law, a canker in Commonwealths, a plague in Houses, an enemy to God
and men; That the Frock is a Sack of Iniquity, and that it is a glorious and
meritorious action to throw it off, not amongst Nettles, but even in a Jaques
amongst, etc.


P. You have done well to throw off yours, and to have Secularised your self:
But we have now discoursed sufficiently concerning Monks; Let Us go and eat a
bit for a repast. Adieu.


FINIS.
Some Books Printed for, and sold by Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in
Ludgate Street.
ROman-Forgeries, or a true account of false Records; discovering the
Impostures, and Counterfeit Antiquities of the Church of Rome: in Octavo.

The True Liberty, and Dominion of Conscience Vindicated, from the Usurpations
and Abuses of Opinion and Persuasion; in 8vo.

The Countermine; or a short, but true discovery of the dangerous Principles,
and secret Practices of the dissenting party; especially the Presbyterians,
showing that Religion is pretended, but Rebellion is intended: And in order
thereto, the Foundation of Monarchy in the State, and Episcopacy in the Church
are undermined.


